(...) (...).

OR A GLIMPSE OF Gospel Glory.

Together with a short but pithie Treatise of Mr. E. D. showing tha^ Peter was
never at Rome; to which (...) subjoyned as an Appendix, some pregn^^^
Collections, by that Grave and Reverend ^^vine Mr. H. Nelson, B. D. to a like
purpo^^

The First Part.

Hanc (scilicet) fallaciam scripturarum negle^^ in Christianismum body de
Antichristo intru^^ Viricus Velenus Minhoniensis. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for
Tho. Parkhurst, at the Th^^^ Crowns against the great Conduit, at the lower
end of Cheap Side. 1661.

Vere Honorabili, ac ter Reverendo Domino, Roberto Saundersono, S. S.
Theologiae Doctori, and pridem in Celeberrima Accademia Oxoniensi, Regio
Professori ornatissimo, jam vero Dioecesis Lincolniensis Episcopo Eximio,
minutae hae ab indigno authore Evangelicae Gloriae, dantor humiliterque
exhibentor scintillulae.

To the Right Honorable and very Reverend Robert Lord Bishop of Lincoln, the
Author of the ensuing Treatise, wishes all Peace and Glory, through and
according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Lord of all.
My Lord,
I Doubt not but your known worth for learning, soundness of judgment, piety,
and conscience-satisfying skill and experience has singled you out as a fit
object of eminent honor, from the public Authority of this Nation, who yet do
appear more honorable in the esteem of conscientious Christians, in regard of
that truly Christian frame of Spirit remarkeably in you, by your ready
propensity in promoting of unity, manifest by your willingness to the taking
away the hindrances thereof in these divided times; the like disposition of
mind would also be justly honorable in all of your rank, that substantial good
in Religion might more be advanced, but shaddows and seeming appearances less,
and the glory of Gospel grace above all other glories; for which, the Apostles
rule is both general and peremptory, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done to
edifying: How might truth and peace by that means soon be settled in the
Church, which ought of all men to be esteemed of far greater value, then all
their worldly interests, yea, then a man's own dearest present life: And truly
so much as I know my own heart in my most retired thoughts, I have often
offered in these distractions amongst good men, even my life as an expiation
unto God, if he would take it in any way of his faithful service upon that
account, so that I dying, truth and peace might live and flourish in this our
Israel; and yet I may happily amongst some be deemed an obstructer of both; but
as according to my measure, I have been studious of the one, so according to
your Honors ancient testimony of me, I have followed the things that make for
the other, to the utmost of my power, neither am I changed from my former
principles, though now, in sundry respects, I may not (perhaps) have the same
freedom: I confidently believe the sovereign hand of divine providence, in
special favor, (not only to my self, but to many much better deserving
persons) has in this juncture of time given you the inspection over us; the
consideration whereof, with other special favors, which you readily, and
cheerfully, aunciently vouchsafed unto me, with the observatioon of such your
Christian frame of spirit still abiding in you, whom new and eminent honor,
known learning, sound judgment, worldly interest or engagements appear not to
have made either less humble, meek, peaceable, or charitable; and that man that
is well molded up from such materials, and in his better part (as it were)
fitly compounded of four such elements, must needs be of a good constitution;
such living Christians add a glory to Gospel glory: I would my small Mite here
offered could add unto your store, yet if it do but occasion you better to
weigh and value what you already have, to the praise of him that gives us all,
it may prove some advantage to you, and then I should be well appaid, and shall
thankfully return the praise to him, by whose remarkable grace I have been
carried on therein; who as the Apostle speaks, Colos: 1. 29. striving
according to his working, who works in me mightily. Yet one thing more does
move me to this address: I have long since known you a strong Champyon of sound
truth against Popish errors; witness your ancient conditions of dispute
against Mr. Ford, well worthy of the worlds view, and profitable for such use,
which happily deterred him from proceeding: In the same general cause many
times appeared your reverend father, and my worthy friend Mr. H. Nelson, to
whom about thirty years now past, I communicated a short but pithie discourse
of Mr. E. D. a reverend person related to him, from whom I received it, and
since also to my self, which hereunto I have annexed, which your good father so
well approved of (notwithstanding all Antichristian flourishes to the contrary)
that he was pleased to write some notes of his own upon it, some of which I
transcribed into the margin, I cannot say all; and whose collections to like
purpose, as an Appendix, I have also subjoyned thereunto, which after many
years lying aside unthought of, upon my late removal, were offered to my view,
upon the perusal whereof, I considering the known gravity and piety of both the
Authors, with the worth of their works fit to antidote such weakelings (as are
liable to that danger) against the strong contagion of that popish pestilence,
by beating down the main pillar of that foundationless fabric; no wonder then
the prophetical spirit, Rev. 8. 18. 1. reitterates her ruin, Babylon the great
is fallen, is fallen, [Vt ingens pondus mole sua ruens] as an huge and mighty
pile weltring downward by its own weight, since her supposed foundation fails
her, yea is discovered to be but a lie; which I here likewise tender unto your
Lordship, but not with further expectation from your self, in respect of this
or the other to be approved, then as they will endure the trial by the
Touchstone of all saving truth, the written word of God, and consonant to sound
judgment and reason; and answerably thereunto, a blessing from his divine
Majesty thereupon, to whom (in that case) all the praise will be due; and to
whom in the mean time, his prayer shall be presented before the throne of
grace, in the behalf of your self, your dear yoakefellow, and all yours; that
he would largely display the spiritual glory of Gospel grace, in and unto all
your souls, to a greatertransformation of them into the same Image, by the
Lord the Spirit, (as follows) to the enlargement of all your eternal glory,
who is,

My Lord, Your Honors long obliged (though unworthy) servant in Christ, W.
Sherwin.
From my study, July 1661
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, and more especially to my Honored Friends and
Kinsmen, Thomas Bowls of Wallington, Esquire, and Mr Tho: Bowls his eldest
Son, with the rest of that Family, a choice and chief part of my late
Charge; and to my present more soundly intelligent or tractable hearers at my
Lecture at Baldock, grace, truth, and glory, from God the Father, through his
Beloved Son, and by the Lord the Spirit, now and for ever.
CHristian Reader, who ever thou art, I wish thee a no less affecting discovery
of Gospel glory unto thy Soul, in the reading of these Sermans, then I have
found in the preaching and transcribing of them; for these are the times
foretold, Isa: 11. 9. When the earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the sea, though men are such High-landers they care not for
coming near the banks of such waters, nor the margins of such books, which as
Conduite pipes would convey those waters to them; As unthankefull Israel of
old, they loath Gods heavenly Manna, though Angels food, falling near their
tents; be it never so strengthening, wholesome, or pleasant, their pallats being
distempered, they are not pleased with it, but they will have quails though
they have a plague to boot with them, for while the meat was in their
mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them, Psalm:
78. 30, 31. If men loath Gods delicates, and begin to surfeit of their own
superfluities, it may be expected that he come to them as a skillful Physician,
and give them a strong purge, and make the chosen or young men of Israel to
bow, (as the words signify) and well will it be with them on whom it works a
cure, to rectify their taste, and affect their souls with the bread of life:
I offer thee here but a small demensum or cantling of this bread, thou art not
like to surfeit by it; and if thy taste agree with mine, I think thou will not
loath it, it was cordial to my own soul, as made of the kidneys of Gods own
wheat (his glorious grace being the subject of it): And for you my well
beloved, and worthy friends, who formerly had by my weak hand the substance of
these delighting and inlightening truths, pointed out in some sort unto you,
happily they were not (by means of the craft of Satan) then so much regarded,
or since considered by you; and I am conscious to my self, that they were
neither, then so largely or perspicuously set before you, as here you may have
them, if God give them entrance into your souls; I hope you may say with me,
you discearne them better then you did before: And you my more late and more
soundly intelligent hearers, supposing you to be such as thirst after true
grace, and upon that account desire your share in the discovery of gospel
Glory; I must acknowledge there has been a threesold obstacle thereof in my
Late preaching of this, and other subjects to you, namely a dark pulpet, a dim
sight, and a weak memory, though all graciously supplied both then and now by
the assistance of a good God; to which I may add a fourth (perhaps the ground
too) of all the former, to wit the great imbeeilitie and weakness of my animal
spirits, and declining state of body by years and labors, with much variety of
afflictions, troubles, and vanities of this present world, much decayed and
wasted, were not my defects frequently supplied in my service, by my almighty
and heavenly father; so that I might say with our Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 10. That
when I am weak, then am I strong, (namely, through my God) for otherwise I
have unspeakeably more cause (with him) to say, though I be nothing, verse. 11.
suitable to an observation of an old disciple declared in my hearing, in the
presence of many grave, learned and religious persons, as found most
remarkable from all his long experience, namely, that God was all, and he was
nothing, which excellent lesson who so rightly learn, though they be nothing,
yet they both are and shall be the better in Gods account, because they so know
this and acknowledge it; for if God be no loser at their hands, they may be
sure they shall be no loser at his hands, who delights to put his most precious
treasure in empty vessels, filling the hungry with good things, Luke I. whilst
many wise in their own eyes, are mere fools in Gods, whilst many rich in their
own conceit, are found by Christ (as the Church of Laodicea Rev. 3.) to be
poor, naked, and miserable: But to you my more weak, but teachable hearers,
let me say a word to prevent your prejudice, perhaps you may stumble at some
passages expressed in unknown tongues to you, first let me tell you, sometimes
such expressions by such as understand them, I doubt not but will be
acknowledged as observable, or of special force; again, some are more pertinent
and occasionally delivered, the Apostle Paul disdained not to quote Heathen
Authors, recorded in the sacred Scripture in their own language, but more
especially let me inform you (if you be indeed teachable) that I have
endeavored to prevent your disadvantage thereby, by explaning usually after
them the words or sense in your native language, so that you need but pass by
those unknown expressions, and still you have the sense, and then they will be
in effect to you, as if they had not been at all: and so with my prayers for
you, and all other right Christian readers of this my weak outward endeavor to
promote the discovery of gospel Glory unto you, unto him who undertakes this
work effectually (by blessing his own means) even the Lord the Spirit (as in
the Text) that you and all they may have all the good thereby, which is
intended unto those, upon whose souls God is pleased to set home such truths
for their spiritual advantag, and godly edifying, by reducing them from error,
convincing them of truth, inciting them to good, reclaiming them from sin, for
the better information of their understandings, inflaming their affections with
what is spiritually good, conforming their wills to his revealed will,
reforming their whole conversations according to his appointment, and with, and
above all, such a transformation of their souls into the same Image (as in the
Text) that in the end, that real transformation in the state of Grace, in such
souls, may in Gods good time be perfected in the consummation of glory with
him in his everlasting kingdom, there to be rendering to him that glory which
is his due to all eternity, which will be the perfection of their happiness
there; so prays

Your souls weak (yet desirous to be their faithful) Servant in the things of
the Lord. W. Sherwin.

COurteous Reader,
be pleased to take notice that this small Treatise being about to come forth
diverse months ago, was stopped by the sudden death of the first undertaker of
the publishing thereof, by which means those into whose hands the Copy thereof
did fall, not having the directions left by the Author with the deceased party,
and another reverend and judicious friend that had promised the oversight of
the press, who upon either the omission or mistake of some now employed about
the printing, had no notice thereof, hence it comes to pass that many errors
both in the words, sentences, and manner of Printing, have thus unwarily
passed, some of the most remarkable upon a brief and short review, are here
corrected to thy hand, in the rest thy candor and prudence is requested,
either for the passing by or making up what thus falls out to be deficient.

ERRATA.

Page 6. r. of main concernment: p. 26. r. walking: p. 36. r. efficacy: p. 31.
r. (...) afterward (...) p. 32. r. (...) p. 37. r. likewise: p. 4. Jer: Cyp.
should have been in the margent, with diverse quotations in other places: p.
68. r. corruptions: p. 79. r. (...) p. 118. r. when: p. 122. add truly
graceful: p. 129. r. differ, p. 135. r. their.

A GLIMPS of Gospel Glory.
2 COR: 3. 18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord.


ALthough the holy Apostle Paul in modesty and humility seems to conceal his
rapture up into the third heaven, Chap: 12. 2, 3. yet the excellency of his
divine and heavenly doctrine, set forth in this text, and in all this Chapter,
does plainly show no less; for had he not seen such Glory he could not have
been so affected with it; had he not been so eminently affected with it, he
could not in such an excellent manner have discovered unto others the
illustrious nature and efficacy of it, as in the Text.

Our Apostle from the 14th verse of the former Chapter, celebrates the songs of
his triumph in Christ for the Great efficacy of his Gospel Ministry in every
place toward all sorts of persons; since he was the sweet savor of God in
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish, ver: 15, 16. Which
occasions him to touch upon the bad practice of many Teachers in his days,
that corrupted or dealt deceitfully with the word of God, (as is the usual
practice of such as fight for the Dragon and his Angels against Michael and
his Angels) in opposition whereof he expresses the sincerity of his own
preaching as of God in the sight of God in Christ, ver: the last.

Now in the beginning of the Chapter he prevents an objection, as if he might
seem to be vainglorious, or sought his own praise, or needed testimony from
any man, ver: 1. He declares against both from what was wrought by his Ministry
upon the Corinthians own souls, and what all men read and knew thereby, ver: 2.
And shows that to be an Epistle of Christ in his behalf written with the
Spirit of the living God in the fleshly Tables of their hearts, and that this
was his great encouragement, ver: 3, 4. And then beating down all
selfconfidence and acknowledging all his sufficiency from God, ver: 5. From
thence to my text he falls upon a large comparison of the New Testament
Ministry with the Old in many particulars, which we shall only mention briefly,
and so pass to the Text; As that the first was of the letter, the second of
the Spirit, ver: 6. The first was that that kills, the second that that
gives life, ver: 6. The first was written in Tables of stone, the second in
the fleshie Tables of the heart, ver: 3. The first of the Old Testament, ver:
14. the second of the New Testament, ver: 6. The first of that which was to be
done away, the second of that which remains, ver: 11. The first of
condemnation, the second of righteousness, ver: 9. The first less glorious
and to be done away, the second excelling in glory and to remain, ver: 9, 10,
11. The first dark and obscure, ver: 13, 14, 15. the second open and evident,
as in the Text.

So that these words are an assertion of the clearness of the Gospel
ministration and grace, in opposition to the obscure veil that was in the
ministration of Moses in the old Testament, as appears by the Adversative
particle [(...)] But we all with open face, etc. Where we have the Introduction
to this Gospel discovery, and the discovery it self: in the latter we have the
description of that discovery, and to whom it is made, in these words, We all
with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord. Secondly, the
efficaciousnesle of that discovery upon them, [ are changed into the same
image, etc.] the efficient cause both of the discovery and the said change, by
the Spirit of the Lord, or, by the Lord the Spirit.

In the first branch observe first the persons; secondly, their exercise;
thirdly, the object about which they are exercised: concerning the persons note
who they are, and how many they are, we, and we all generally. In the exercise
note the excellent way of discovery, not seeking or conjecturing, but
Beholding; where again note a twofold modification; first, of illustration,
with open face; the other of diminution or restriction, as in a glass, as the
word [(...)] signifies: thirdly, in the object again observe, first, the
excellency of the nature of it, glory; secondly, of the Author, owner, and
dispencer of it, the Lord, the glory of the Lord.

In the efficaciousnesse of the discovery, observe first the nature thereof, it
is a change; where note the restriction, not into the substance, into the same
thing, but into the transfiguration of it into the same image, as the word
(...) denotes. Secondly, the manner of the proceeding in this change, not at
once but by degrees, [(...)] from glory to glory. Concerning the efficient,
consider his dignity, power, and dominion, the Lord; Secondly, his distinction
from all other by any participation or substitution of his made to be Lords by
him or for him, as all others are but temporal, partial, and substituted
Lords under him, who is not only spituall, but in the abstract and by an
emphasis here styled the Spirit, who is originally, essentially,
incomprehensibly so, and the father of spirits, and here by an excellency and
incommunicably here called the Lord the Spirit, [(...).]

I shall now briefly (by Gods assistance) add something for the explication of
the words: and so endeavor to proceed to the most pregnant observations from
thence, and some pertinent improvement thereof.

But we all [(...)] Some Divines, as Beza and Tremelius, and others, understand
it restrictively unto the Ministers, that as Moses's face shined in the sight
of the Israelites after he had been with God in the Mount; for the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel that are acquainted with God, and are the light of the
world, should shine out in the glorious light of the Gospel into the souls of
their people: but on the other part, Calvin and some others, understand [ we
all] largely for all both Ministers and people that have this discovery made
unto them, which I conceive more consonant to the Text for these reasons [for
it is of many concernments in the Text.] First, all those that are said to
behold the glory of the Lord, are said to be changed into the same image, which
is a benefit, and ad omnes fideles Christianos pertinens licet non for san
aequaliter ac ad Ministros Evangelii, equally belonging to all faithful
Christians as well as Ministers of the Gospel, though not always in the like
way, manner or degree equally. Secondly, because it is in both respects said to
be the work of the Lord the Spirit. Thirdly, because the Apostle in the
beginning of this Chapter speaks of the Corinthians, as having such a work of
the Spirit wrought upon them; concerning which he said, ver: 4* he had such
trust through Christ to Godward, as Divines understand those words: and that
being granted it is then [ proprium quarto modo] essentially belonging to all
faithful regenerate Christians, as such being both illuminated and sanctified
by the efficacious grace of the Lord the Spirit; and therefore the note of
Universalitie in the word all, was necessary to be annexed [(...)] with open
face [(...)] a face uncovered: Whereas in Moses Ministry his face was covered,
ver: 13, 14. so that the Children of Israel could not look unto the end of
those things which are abolished. Now in Gospel times the veil is so taken
away in Christ, that the wonderful grace of God is manifest and evident unto
his people, etc. yet in reference to the metaphor, something might be
observable in reference to the several Opticall uses of several forts of
Glasses; as a Prospective to see the things of God a far off, and small
things great, or great things small; as a Multiplying Glass, showing the
manifold wisdom of God; as a Burning Glass, to kindle holy fire in the soul;
as a Spectacle or Reading Glass, to help our weak fight in discerning
spiritual things; as a Cylinder Glass, gathering and uniting the scattered
beams of glory in the Creatures into Christ their proper Center.

But yet with some restraint, for though with open face, yet they behold it but
as in a glass [(...)] as the original word [(...)] seems to denote with some
obscurity, with some mistiness: or as the Apostle, 1 Cor: 13. 12. But now we
see as through a glass darkly [(...)] in a ridle, not perfectly and fully now
as we shall hereafter, as follows in the same verse; For then we shall know
eve^ as we are known, 1 Cor: 13. 12. The glory of the Lord, not the essential
glory of God, as Exodus: 33. 18. which no mortal man can see and live, ver: 20.
Not the glorious excellency of Christ's person, only revealed or discovered in
man's nature (though that fundamentally) of which the Evangelist John speaks so
gloriously, Chap: 1. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we
beheld his Glory as the Glory of the only begotten of the father, full of grace
and truth. Whence he is called, Heb: 1. 3. (...) The brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person. But secondly, more especially in respect
of the glorious grace of God manifest through Christ; of which our Apostle in
the following Chapter shows, ver: 6. that by the Gospel God gives the light of
his own glory in the face of Jesus Christ, showing by him his infinite wisdom,
power, mercy, truth, justice, holiness, goodness, etc. But this beholding of
the glory of the Lord does not only contain Gratiam gratis datam, but also
thirdly, gratiam gratos facientem, (as the Schools distinguish) not only grace
freely given, but which makes effectually the receivers of it acceptable unto
God. And not only all these, but in the fourth place there must be likewise
added to make up this true and right Gospel discovery of this Divine glory
spoken of in the Text, The certain knowledge and sense of our particular
interest and participation of that wonderful Gospel grace, which God one time
or other, in one good measure or other, usually vouchsafes to all true
believers in this life: So that we are to understand this object of the
discovery complexive and extensive to the largest and utmost dimensions, as it
contains, First, the free and rich grace of God in himself toward his
Church; Secondly, his wonderful and most glorious grace through Christ Jesus
his only begotten Son revealed in the Gospel, as Chap: 4. 4. But also, thirdly*
his most efficacious grace, where by the Holy Spirit the Lord, as follows in
the Text, both, First, illuminateth; Secondly, sanctifies; and Thirdly,
comfort, according to his own free and gracious dispensation to every
faithful soul its own measure and proportion, to make up the fulness of the
body of Christ, as the Apostle excellently sets forth the resemblance, Col: 2.
19. Ephesians: 4. 16.

Are changed [(...)] are metamorphosed or transformed, as men and women of old
feigned to be into beasts; so contrarily by this men and women from worse to
better, from Wolves and Tygars to Lambs and Doves, yea from a depraved polluted
devilish nature, into an holy gracious Divine nature, after the same image of
the glorious Gospel, and of Christ Jesus, as the next words import.

From glory to glory: glory put for grace, as we shall show afterward, being
the effect or necessary consequent or fruit of true Gospel grace; and so though
some seem to understand it from the glory of Moses to the glory of Christ, or
as others from glory inchoate to glory consummate, or from grace to glory; yet
modern Divines more soundly, of the successive growth of the knowledge and
conformity of the image of God in such as are truly sanctified from one degree
and measure of grace to another; not as celestial glory all at once, but by
degrees, even as (...), Non similitudinem significat sed congruentiam, says
Beza, Identitatem, says another: that is this [ even as] here is to note the
same thing, namely, that it is the Spirit of God that works all this; in the
like manner (...), Joh: 1. 14. As the glory of the only begotten of the father,
that is, being indeed the glory of the only begotten of the father.

Lastly, By the Spirit of the Lord; or as Learned Beza more emphatically,
(...), from the Lord the Spirit; which Tremelius excellently renders, a Spiritu
Dominatore, denoting remarkably God the holy Ghost, the third person of the
blessed Trinity in the Unity of essence, who only, wholly, efficaciously,
inwardly and spiritually changes all his Saints truly sanctified by himself
into that same image forementioned in the Text.

And thus briefly for Explication.

Now for Observation, not to involve our selves too much with those many
foldings in some sort before hinted in the Text, but to keep to those that are
more pertinent, and more naturally held out in it.

And first, from the object of this Discovery, The Glory of the Lord,

Observe, [ That the grace of God revealed in the Gospel of his Son, and
conveyed to and conferred upon his Saints by the holy Ghost, is Emphatically
his Glory; That is the greatest manifestation of his glory in this world; or
Thus more briefly [ Gospel grace is Gods greatest glory manifest to his true
Church upon earth] None in the earth like it, to none is it discovered like as
unto them; which affords unto us our next Observation from the subjects in whom
this discovery is made, we all; namely.

(Secondly, Observe,) That all they and only they that are renewed after that
same image fore-described, have this discovery rightly made unto them.

Thirdly, from the modification of this discovery to them both ways,

Observe; That though such persons do behold this Glory of the Lord with open
face, yet it is but as in a Glass or Ridle.

Fourthly, from the Efficient cause or author of such discovery,

Observe; That in whatsoever manner or degree, all such persons do behold this
Glory of the Lord, it is all from the most powerful and gracious work of the
Lord the Spirit.

Before we come to speak of any of these, we shall first take notice of the
reference of these words to the Context, unto which we are led by the
Adversative particle [(...)] But we all, etc. Whereby what follows in the Text
is brought in by way of dissimilitude of what was found in Moses Ministration,
that whereas that was inglorious and dark in respect of this under the Gospel,
this is otherwise; whence observe;

That the discovery of the mystery of salvation under the New Testament, is a
much more excellent and clear discovery then what was under the Old Testament.
Although God even in the Ministration of the Old Testament gave then unto his
people what ever was necessary for the salvation of all the faithful, he being
no less the Author of that then of what he has since more clearly exhibited
in the New; and since the substance of the grace and salvation conferred upon
all true believers, both then and since is the same; yea and the several
ordinances (when he pleased) were aeque efficacious to the due attenders on
them, though (happily) not aequaliter; yea since the Spirit of God gives an
honor yea glory to them as such in their season, until his most Sovereign
Authority laid them aside, we may not deny it, unless (as in the case the
Apostle speaks of) they be sinistrously perverted to Eclypse the just glory of
Gospel grace; but as the account was given by the Ancients why the Jewish
Sabbath was for a time observed together with the Christian Sabbath: Quia vetus
Synagoga cum honor erat sepelienda: so of all Ordinances under the Old
Testament in their ceasing; yea the Apostle in this Chapter though he justly
ascribes a greater glory to the Ministration of the new, yet he acknowledges
the due glory that was in the former, as is evident; it was glorious, (says
he) ver: 7. yea glory in the abstract, ver: 9. was made glorious, ver: 10. Yea
Moses himself that received again the second time the Moral Law, then again
restored for the use of Gods people [after the first Sculpture thereof had (not
without mystery) been broken by his own weaknesse] to be (as the Apostles
phrase is) their Schoolmaster even then to bring them to Christ; yet then even
Moses had such an outward glory remaining upon his face, Exodus: 34. 29, 33. that
as our Apostle in the 13 ver: speaks, he put a veil, over his face for that
the Children of Israel could not steadfastly look unto the end: yea this
Minister of this Moral Law was all along glorious by eminent corruscations of
divine grace toward, in, upon, and by him; First, being wonderfully delivered
from killing and drowning, being a newborn babe; Secondly, honorably,
liberally, and learnedly educated in his youth, that as he in the old, and this
our Apostle in the new Testament, might afford some honor unto such ordinary
helps under both administrations, according to their subordinate nature and
use: But more especially in him when he was carried with zeal and confidence
to manifest himself eminently to be Gods means to bring them out of Egypt, and
so selfe-denying in such a cause, that by the strength of his faith, as the
Apostle, Heb: 11. shows, That he refused to be called the son of Pharoahs
daughter, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: And did not God do as great things by
him in Egypt, in the red Sea, and in the Wilderness, both before and in his
Legal Ministration. But I may not here particularize, but leave it to abler
pens, or more skillful Pilots to steer that Ship in its right channel, with
our Apostle here to advance true Gospel grace, though I must not forget the
honor of his divine burial after the manifestation of his humane frailty,
and that in such a compassionate and fatherly manner, admonishing and directing
to the preparation thereof; Go up to Mount Nebo and dye, (as if with David
that other man after Gods own heart) he had been only to climb up to the
usual bed of repose: But as this penman, so likewise that Law it self that he
delivered, in the delivery of it seems to have in diverse respects a Gospel
glory put upon it, to show that Gospel grace was then to make it up and perfect
it, (because otherwise it was weak by reason of sin) and it to be subservient
to Gospel grace; whence may appear that it was not a making a Covenant of
works with the faithful people of God, but an advancing of the old Covenant of
works, in what it was weak to the promoting of the perfection and excellency of
the new Covenant of grace, and this will be further manifest; First, in that
God owns his people as Abraham's, Isaac's, and Jacob's Posterity, and himself
to be the Lord their God, according to the tenor of it. Secondly, in that he
is said to deliver them out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage;
which mystically denoted the spiritual deliverance out of the spiritual
bondage of sin and Satan, that he might wonderfully conduct them through the
wilderness of this troublesome world, till he bring them to the possession of
the celestial Canaan: And together with this Evangelicall delivery of the Law,
he gave them many Ordinances holding out and conveying unto the faithful
amongst them his Gospel grace by the Messiah that was to come: beside, the
glorious manner and familiar way of delivering them such spiritual grace,
talking with Moses face to face, as a man talks with his friend; all which
may abundantly set forth (if duly weighed) the gloriousness of that grace,
even in that ministration; but if we compare it with the clearness, the
excellency, the largeness, the affecting efficacy of Gospel grace now, we may
say with our Apostle, ver: 10. That which was made glorious, had no glory in
this respect, by reason of the glory that excels. And this is further
manifest in many parts of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he treats much
of that subject, but more especially in the 9th Chapter of that Epistle,
calling that (though it had Ordinances of Divine service, yet) a worldly
Sanctuary, and passes through many particulars, whereby was mystically held
out divine and spiritual grace, from the first to the 9th verse, where he tells
them, That all this was but a figure for the time then present, until the time
of reformation, ver: 10. And thereupon takes advantage to advance the glory of
more perfect and greater Tabernacle, of which Christ was become an high Priest,
by how much the blood of Christ was above the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the
purging of the conscience from dead works to serve the living God, above those
carnal Ordinances that only sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, ver: 13,
14. And so Christ is become the Mediator of a better Testament, that by means
of death, for the redemption of transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, ver: 15. And so goes on largely to illustrate many particulars of
the glorious grace of the new Testament above the old, as is obvious to the
duly observant reader to discern both in this and the following Chapter.

Now for some further illustration of the point, let us a little take notice of
some few particulars, wherein the excellency and clearness of New Testament
Gospel grace may further appear; as if we consider, that the first was the
infancy or nonage of the Church, the second, the more grown Age thereof, I do
not say the perfect Age, as some mistaken persons fancy of themselves, unless
they mean that perfection of inward sincerity; with such perfect persons God
will (indeed) show himself perfect, Psalm: Now childish things agree best to an
infant age, as comparatively the first were till as more suitable to a more
grown estate God was pleased to put away such childish things, and constitute
others more agreeable thereunto; for his Church in this world is not of a
dwarfish nature, but always growing toward its more perfect stature. But

Secondly, The Ordinances and service of the first was much in shaddows and
types, and consequently less discernable, less satisfying, but the second
more in realitie and substance, and therefore more known and more comfortable;
for as things delightful to the eye or outward senses, do not feed the body
further then some secret nourishment may by them be conveyed unto it; so
neither do carnal and bodily resemblances profit the soul, without Gods
institution and blessing upon them; who has abundantly showed that he has
reserved the choycest of his glorious grace for more spiritual and better
things: besides the end of typical worship is in a good degree perfected in
the spiritual: but I must but touch on these things.

Thirdly, [That which depends upon the former] is in respect; the former was of
old things that were to vanish away (as the Apostle speaks) the other of
things that will remain; a rose or violet may be more delightful to the
senses than a precious stone, whereas the excellency of the one is soon gone,
but the virtue of the other will long continue, and accordingly they are prized
by men, and so it is in things that concern the soul.

Fourthly, By the first were in a great measure denoted good things that were
to come, but by the second are held out good things that are present; a little
good in possession, is better then much (many times) in reversion; Your
fathers, said our Savior, desired to see those things that ye see, and have
not seen them, and to hear those things that ye hear, and have not heard them.

Fifthly, The first consisted much in bodily exercises, which little profit the
soul in regard of any aptitude of their own, the other more of spiritual
intendments of the soul, more suitable to the divine nature and revealed will
of God.

Sixthly, The first were ordinarily less efficacious, and the spiritual grace
seemed more restrained under them, but the second have been many times more
efficacious with the powerings out of the Spirit in a more plentiful manner,
as was prophesied by Joel, Chap: 3. and promised by God, and according to both
fulfilled, Acts 2. and so along in after times.

Lastly, The ordinary tenders of grace under the Old Testament were more
restrained and circumscribed within the bounds of the Jewish Church (unless
now and then some few Proselytes came in) even our Savior sometime restrained
his Disciples, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, but go rather
unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, for they were naturally the
inheritours of the promises of Grace; until (as the Apostle speaks) they put
away the word of Eternal life from them. But when the old Synagogue was to
cease, the renders of Gospel grace were abundantly enlarged; Go Disciple ye
all Nations, Math: Preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark. Then shortly by a
great sheet (as it were) let down from heaven the Apostle Peter is taught to
call no man common or unclean, Acts 11. And whatsoever our Apostle in those
noted comparisons in the middle of this Chapter further observes to these or
such like purposes, may hither be reduced. But I hasten to Application, having
stayed longer than I intended in the entrance into my Text.

Use 1. To teach all good Christians hence to learn to praise God for all this
Gospel mercy we enjoy in this kind, above what the Church of God did under the
ministration of the Old Testament; theirs was much in the letter, ours more in
the Spirit; theirs a killing letter, ours a life-giving grace; theirs in Tables
of stone, ours in the fleshie Tables of the hearts; theirs old, ours new;
theirs to be done away, ours to remain; theirs of condemnation, ours of
righteousness; theirs less glorious, ours excelling in spiritual glory;
theirs dark and obscure, ours open and evident; theirs burdensome and
grievous, ours easy and delightful; and though in this respect the providence
of God to them was very remarkable, for according to the multitude of
sacrifices, offerings, and costlinesse of his service then, he gave them a
plentiful Land to supply them, according to the appearance of hazard in
attendance upon his worship three times in the year at Jerusalem, he gave them
security by a special promise, Exodus: 34. 33, 34. and not only from the hands,
but even from the hearts of such enemies as were round about them, [a strong
engagement to all Gods people to wait upon him in the ways of his own service
against all discouragements] again theirs was more suitable to an Infant
state, ours more agreeing to a more grown estate; theirs much in type, ours
more in substance; theirs denoted good things to come, ours good things that
are present; theirs much in bodily exercises, ours mainly in spiritual; theirs
ordinarily less efficacious, ours usually more efficacious; theirs for the
most part restrained within the narrow bounds of that Jewish Church, ours
largely extended to the utmost bounds of the true Christian Catholic Church:
Oh! did but Christians duly weigh these things, and in some good measure were
but suitably affected with them, according to the greatness and excellency of
the glorious Gospel grace in all such respects vouchsafed by the free and
abundant goodness of so glorious a God unto themselves above what he was
pleased to grant unto his ancient people the Jews; how should it raise up
their souls to large apprehensions of his goodness, and fill their hearts with
strong affections, and earnest desires and endeavors both of thankfulness and
obedience to his divine Majesty! and how should it set all the parts and powers
of the inward and outward man on work to act both diligently and faithfully
therein! how would this as a strong cord bind our souls unto the right
observance of the new Law of love given by him that has purchased this
liberty, and therefore shed it abroad into the hearts of his people, Rom: 5.
5. that none of his Commandments might be grievous unto them, Joh: 3. 5.

But secondly, let this be as an impulsive motive to us to be answerable in our
dutiful and faithful obedience unto our gracious God and heavenly father, in
reference to all that rich mercy that in this kind particularly we receive at
his hand, above many of those that lived in those dark days before us: now
that his service is more spiritual, let ours be more so too; as his is more
clear

[shaddowed and typical service being ceased] let ours be suitable to Gospel
light, and therein let us walk as children of that light; whereas the other was
more agreeing to a childish state, let us seek after that which is more
suitable to a manly state in Christ, Let us (as the Apostle exhorts, Heb: 10.
22.) draw nigh with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water: It
must be with the heart, else all seeming devotion is gross dotage, it must be
from an heart fraught with all kind of truth, a true heart, it must be in full
assurance of faith, we must be sufficiently warranted and satisfied in all that
concerns it in all our performance of it, having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience; the guilt and power of sin being taken from us by the
improvement of our faith, specially when we perform religious worship unto
God; and our bodies washed with pure water, let not there be a purifying of the
soul only, but let our outward conversation also be agreeing to the Gospel in
the sight of God and men.

Thirdly, Hence likewise may appear what great matter of deep humiliation and
bitter mourning there is in our days, that when such bright beams of Gospel
glory shines before men, there is so little enters into many of all sorts and
conditions, which may appear by the raritie of such as show they behold it, by
their right knowledge of it, high prizing of it, walk in the light and comfort
of it: improving the grace and excellency of it, and by the multitude of such
as understand it not, regard it not, own it not, improve it not, yea would it
might not be truly said, despise it, resist it, oppose it, and would substitute
any thing in the room of it, rather then what the Spirit of God in the
manifold evidences of Gospel grace clearly directs unto; but I must hasten;
therefore

Fourthly, To warn all sorts of men that live under such glorious discoveries
of Gospel grace, to beware that because the burden of Christ therein is light,
that therefore they should think lightly and slightly both of it and him; That
they should either prefer transitory things before it, or conceive they can
be happy enough in them without any true interest in it: or are not affected
with this choice mercy afforded to us above what the Church in the Old
Testament attained unto, and consequently, make not suitable improvement of it;
it is such a talent as no man may think to wrap in a Napkin, and not to be
called to an account for it: goodness will not bear neglect with equals,
friends, familiars, much less with superiors, and by how much the goodness
is greater, or the superiory the more eminent, so much the more is the neglect
thereof offensive and provoking; then how much more will the infinite, free,
rich, incompatable, yea incomprehensible goodness of the eternal Almighty
and most glorious God, being despi^ed and neglected, turn into fury against
all such vain and sinful wretches, that ungratefully shut their eyes against
such excellence and clearness of Gospel grace, and much more if they seek to
Eclipse and cloud it, or any ways to obstruct and hinder the efficaciousnesse
thereof unto the weak brethren, by casting stumbling blocks in the way. Let
them but lay to heart that terror of the Lord the Savior of such contemned
despised little ones by the men of this present world, in that most dreadful
denunciation of his, and woe annexed upon that account, Math: 18. 6, 7. Who so
shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the Sea: And v: 7. Woe unto the world because of offenses, for it must
needs be that offenses come; But woe to that man by whom the offense comes.

Lastly, Hence take notice of the wiliness of Satan, that shows himself Gods
Ape in this by seeking to promote an outward or seeming inward glory in any
false way of Religion, as God does in the true. Thus if God would work wonders
by Moses, the Egyptian sorcerers shall do so too; if God reveals secrets to
Saul by his Prophet Samuel, the Witch of Endor must do so too; if Judah have a
costly Tabernacle and Temple, Israel shall have Golden Calves to worship: yea
sometimes outward and inward too, as in the Antichristian Church of Rome, since
that golden Priests and wooden Chalices were changed into wooden Priests and
golden Chalices, with all other outward splendour in the whorish Idolatry and
superstitions, accompanied with an inward seeming humble devotion and
reverence, with multitudes of prayers and offerings frequent and macerating
penances and pilgrimages, metorious works of charity and piety: And is not
Satan his crafts-master like wise, when in Gospel times too, he will lay aside
an outward appearance of glory, to seek to delude by an appearing glory in
inward strong delusions of spiritual Enthusiasmes, Raptures and Revelations
(as a more plausible way with some under the New Testament,) and among some by
denying the lawful and comfortable use of outward good things, as meats, and
decent apparel, and civil respect, with too much insisting upon trivial matters
and scruples in some things where God makes none, though of some things it may
(happily) be said, as our Savior spoke of the tything of Mint, Annise, and
Cummin, These things ye ought to do, and not to leave the other undone; while
clear and manifest truths and duties are rejected and neglected.

Proceed we now to the Text it self, the maine subject where of is that
glorious Gospel grace so excellently many ways deciphered therein; and first
by that excellent title the Spirit of God here ascribes to it, [ The glory of
the Lord] whence after some short explication of the words premised, our First
Observation was;

Obs: 1. That Gospel grace is the greatest Glory of God manifest to his true
Church upon earth; Which first is to be understood of revealed glory, not his
essential glory, which no man can here behold and live: yet this revealed
glory is to be understood [complexive and extensive) containing all the rich,
free, wonderful grace of God through Christ communicated unto his Church by
the holy Ghost [ Et great is data et gratos faciens] as the Schools speak, both
given freely and making men acceptable. Proceed we then to the proof and
illustration of the point, which First may appear that the excellent title of
Glory is so often ascribed in holy Scripture to the grace of God, that they are
often put one for another, as by comparing this Text with others may be evident
in 40 Chap: of Isa: ver: 5. The Prophet having foretold, ver: 3. of the coming
of John Baptist, whose voice should cry in the Wilderness, prepare the way of
the Lord; he adds in this 5. ver: concerning this Gospel grace; That the glory
of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together; which
though it was in a great degree fulfilled in Christ's coming in our flesh, whose
glory was the glory of the only begotten of the Father, though as being full of
grace and truth, Joh: 1. 14. yet that that was not all the meaning, may be
evident from the words; (...) now what this seeing this Gospel glory is, our
Savior teaches, Joh: 3. 3. Except a man be borne again he cannot see the
kingdom of God, not have true faith or grace, or be in a state of salvation,
Again, all flesh shall see it together; (...) because the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, namely, that the Gentiles together as well as the Jews should
come together to see this glory at his revealing of his grace to them. Thus our
Apostle calls the Riches of Gods grace the riches of his glory, Rom: 9. 23.
that is, his grace freely given, and in like manner he speaks of his grace,
viz. that makes them acceptable, Ephesians: 3. 16. That he would grant you according
to the riches of his glory to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man: And so the other side we find grace put for glory, as 1 Pet. 3. 7.
As heirs together of the grace of life; that is, heirs of life by grace, a
phrase somewhat like to which he likewise has, Chap: 1. 7. That the trial of
your faith might be found to glory. Hence likewise it is observable that the
gracious manifestations of God, both in Old and New Testament are styled his
glory. Whence the Arc is called the glory, 1 Samuel: 4. 22. So Rom: 9. 4. To whom
belonged the adoption and the glory. The like of the Tabernacle in the Kingly
Prophet David's days, Psalm: 26. 8. Lord I have loved the habitation of thy
house: and as in the Original (...) the place of the Tabernacle of thy glory,
the manifestation of his grace being there. So again, Psalm: 63. 2. To see thy
power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Thus the gracious
manifestation of God in the Temple in Solomon's time, though it was but by a
cloud, is called the glory of the Lord, 1 Kings 8. 11. So that the Priests
could not stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of the Lord had
filled the house of the Lord; yet in the very next words before, it was said
the cloud filled the house of the Lord; so in that the cloud was a
manifestation of Gods gracious presence and acceptance, it was therefore the
glory of the Lord: and hence the pillar of the cloud by day as well as the
pillar of fire by night, were equally the glory of the Lord before the Camp of
Israel in the wilderness, because they were both manifestations of his
gracious presence with them.

Now further to demonstrate and illustrate this soul-satisfying truth in its
wayfairing condition.

First, We shall endeavor to show, that it has been the great design of God
to glorify himself by Gospel grace, from the beginning of the world, yea from
all eternity unto all eternity.

Secondly, that he has been, is, and will be more glorious in the eyes of all
his faithful people by this, then by any other or all other his glorious
works besides, whereby he has any ways discovered his glory in the world.

Thirdly, that by means of this only, men are made capable of glory, and true
glory made truly glorious in their eyes.

Fourthly, that Gospel grace and celestial glory, differ not in nature, but in
degrees, and the first shall be perfected in the other, when grace shall be
swallowed up of glory..

Lastly, that from this Gospel grace, shall be infinite cause for all glorified
Saints and Angels, to celebrate the glory of the Lord to all eternity: all
which being done, I hope it may sufficiently appear, how emphatically Gospel
grace in the Text is styled the glory of the Lord.

First, that it has been the great design of God by such Gospel grace to
glorify himself from all eternity, is not only clear from all such
Scriptures as speak any thing in reference to that grace as eternal [ a part
ante] for what is past: as that Christ's blood was shed, and that he offered
himself unto God through the eternal Spirit, Heb: 9. 14. and that the Gospel
is called the everlasting Gospel, Rev: 14. 6. But we have a full declaration of
Gods great design herein from all eternity, plainly set down by the holy
Apostle Paul, Ephesians: 3. who having minded them in the former part of the Chapter,
that the mystery of the Gospel was by revelation made known to him, and that
he should be the Minister thereof to the Gentiles; and as ver: 9. that they
might see what is the fellowship of the mystery which from the beginning of the
world had been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ, [who is the
beginning of the creation of God, Rev* 3. 18.] But ver; 10. he more explicitly
informs them, that the intent was not only that the manifold wisdom of God
should be known to the Church, but by the Church unto Angels, unto
principalities and powers in heavenly places; and ver: 11. he sets forth as
clearly, the foundation whereupon this displaying of such glory is
accomplished; according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ
Jesus our Lord; read the place, it is full to our purpose. Now that this has
been Gods design [ a part post] likewise unto all eternity, I shall need to
say little; the current of the Gospel runs directly in that channel: Christ is
the Author of eternal salvation, Heb: 5. 9. Eternal life, 1 Timothy: 12. Eternal
glory, 2 Timothy: 2. 10. Now Gods design in this is most evident, Ephesians: 1. 12. That
we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ* And
again, ver: 14. after many excellent discoveries he adds, unto the praise of
his glory: And now we have a little taken notice of the foundation and drift of
Gods great design in his Church; let us likewise a little observe, how ever
since he had a Church upon earth he has carried it on: First, as God had
decreed to make his eternal Gospel (as it were his masterpelce) to manifest
his greatest glory to all eternity, so he has wonderfully glorified himself
in the Gospel of grace ever since the world and time had a being, and as the
contemporary mystery of God was in fulfilling, as it is called, Rev: 10. 7.

So that so soon as the Arch-murtherer from the beginning, thought he had given
the dead stroke to mankind, by seducing our first parents from their
obedience to God, God himself, when there was no other preacher, ordained to
do it by an Hell-astonishing wonderful declaration of most free and rich
grace toward lost man; even whilst he denounced against the Devil his own
doom, he pronounces in those great and ungrateful transgressors own hearing,
the maine discovery of Gospel grace, viz. The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head: and though it was by a new grace whereby the efficie of that
good news must be applied, yet he had taught them such means to wait upon
him, wherein his servants should not fail to obtain grace and acceptance with
him: and this was seen in Abels offering, when though he parted from that vain
life that sin before had forfeited, yet since his person and Sacrifice were
accepted with God, through that seed of the woman promised not long before to
his immediate parents, he not only received the first fruits, but the first and
speedy possession of the benefit of that eternal Gospel, so lately declared by
the eternal God himself, and therefore obtained the honor of the Protomartyr
of the whole world, and of a true type of the Long expected Messiah, and of
that blessed seed that was to come now what a clear evidence of Gospel grace
in a short time was here set forth from the beginning, to be known and read of
all men! and did not God raise up in succession eminent persons adorned with
grace to be preachers and patterns of piety unto men, and with his Spirit move
them, until, as even wearied by their contumacy, God would not have his Spirit
strive any longer with them? and then Satan, as if he had gotten a total and
final conquest, like a wild horse with the bridle-bit between his teeth, runs
on in so full a carreire, with the world upon his back, toward Hell, that by
reason of his interest he had formetly gotten in man's nature, and had likely so
improved that the old world soon became so much his, that it could be no
longer Gods; And therefore God will rather out of the seed and family of Noah
alone, raise up to himself a new Church, and make their saving in the Arc
(even at that time of Satan's seeming prevailing power) to be an evident type
unto all the faithful, of their certain deliverance and safety in the time of
the wicked worlds worst calamities and destructions. And as the time of the
coming of the promised Seed drew nearer, God more and more caused some beams
of his glory to shine out in his Church, for the comfort of his faithful
servants. Christ is promised to Abraham, typified in Isaac, revealed in vision
to Jacob, shaddowed in Moses person, ministry, conduct, miracles, worship,
Ordinances, even in the Evangelicall restoring, penning, giving of the Law, and
what not. Oh who is able to set forth the Gospel grace of God, when by his
strong power and mighty arm he got himself the victory over Pharaoh, Satan,
and all the Cursed enemies of his Church in Egypt, in the red Sea, in the
wilderness, in their entrance and possessing of the promised Land; all which
in the substance was an actual providenciall publishing of Gospel grace. And
after good old Jacob had prophesed of the time of Shiloh's coming, Gen: 49* by
degrees, the Tribe out of which, the place where, the manner how, the person by
whom, by a Virgin conceiving a son borne, given, as the Prophet Esaias
foretells as already come, though mean and despised in his outward aspect, yet
his name was called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the Prince of
peace; so prevalent in his power and prowess, that of the increase of his
Dominion and power there should be no end; so everlastingly prevalent in his
administration, that he should sit upon the throne of David, to order it, and
stablish it from thenceforth and for ever, Psalm: 9. And when the Scepter was
departed from Judah, that he that was the Shiloh was indeed come, there was
such darkness upon the world, yea even amongst that ancient people of God the
Je^s, by reason of an expectation of some outward glory at his coming, that
when he came unto his own, his own received him not: And so by the worlds
vanity, least Herod should loose his Kingdom, Caesar his Soveraigntie, the
Rulers of the people their place and Nation; though the place of his birth was
gloriously pointed out in the Heavens by the conduct of a Star to the Magi or
Kings of the East, as Psalm: 72. 10. Celebrated and proclaimed by an heavenly
Host of Angels, rendering to God his glory, and man his consolation; though
both great men and mean men heard and saw the truth of that great wonder in the
world; though due adoration and homage was given to that heavenly and
spiritual Infant King of Kings, by those Kings of the East, as was foretold,
Psalm: 72. 10. The Kings of Tarshish and the Isles, shall bring presents, the
Kings of Sheba and Seha shall offer gifts: yet so was the glorious splendour of
the rising of this day star, yea of this Sun of righteousness with healing
in his wi^gs, by the former or the like thick mists of darkness, obscured and
clouded to the then darkened world, that they did not behold his rising, they
did not discern his glory, yea not for long time after was it in any suitable
manner taken notice of or displayed in public, till the Spirit of God in a
fourfold witness gave testimony of all these things, when after that by
doctrine, by holiness, by miracles, by sufferings, by death, and a powerful
raising of himself to life, [having slain all enmity thereby] he was
powerfully declared to be the Son of God; yea so was the light of his
appearing eclypsed in the worlds eye, that after Ages could not find out the
time or season when that his birthglory did first shine out, and therefore the
Fathers, vid: Jerome, Cyprian, upon several grounds, have anciently argued for
different seasons, as likewise later times have differed therein, divine
Oracles being particularly silent; as if, of old God by the burial of Moses
body by him, would prevent the Israelites adoring of his sepulcher, so, as some
conceive, he would conceal the season of his nativity; neither do we read in
Scripture any like celebration, but that of Herod de porcorum grege Epicurus:
Nor is the day of a Conquerors taking up Arms celebrated as glorious, but the
day of his victory and conquest; nor was the first day of the Creation
appointed by God to be observed at first for his Sabbath, but the day when his
work was finished; and by the same Law, upon Greater enforcement is the day of
the Lord his Resurrection day, as the day of his victory, conquest, and triumph
over sin, death, and hell, with all the powers of darkness, by himself
substituted as his own, for a continual Christian Sabbath, to be observed and
celebrated in his Universal Church, for the honor and glory of such their
wonderful deliverance, then accomplished by him throughout all Ages, from
Sabbath to Sabbath, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure; and herein is
the glorious mystery of God so accomplished to be admired, that the bleer-eyed
world is not able to behold the divine brightness of it, and so it has been
since in the Apostles and after Ages, as the mystery of God has been in
fulfilling, the great things of Christ have been hid from their eyes; Christ
crusified has been to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness, while to them that believe it is the power of God to salvation.
The Apostles were mean in the eyes of the Great ones of the world, when they
went on Christ's Embassy into the world, yet they went conquering and to
conquer, by preaching, praying, improvement of all spiritual grace, even in
suffering and dying, after the example of their great Sovereign, they greatly
prevailed over the powers of the world, over the strength and subtlety of sin
and Satan: And have not the two Witnesses, the contemporaries of Antichristian
tyranny done so too? and shall they not more prevail still, and maugre all
vain imaginations of any men, or counsels taken by them against Christ? Yet
will not God set his King upon his holy hill of Sion? Yea, will it not be both
the honor and happiness of the Greatest Potentates upon earth to kiss the
Son, and give the glory of their Scepters unto him, that as they reign by
him, so they may reign for him, and in his good time may likewise reign with
him in endless glory?

But what is this Historical hint, as it may be called, of this mystical manner
of gradual fulfilling of gospel Glory, somewhat observable indeed in the eyes
of the Saints, but little in the eyes of Men of the world. But if we come to
speak of the inward glory of true gospel Grace, spiritually glorious in the
souls of Gods faithful people, for the Kings daughter is all glorious within;
We may say of this as the Queen of Sheba, after she had heard in her own
Country the same of King Solomon's wisdom and magnificence, when she came to
his Court to hear and see the truth of both, that she confessed the half
thereof was not formerly showed unto her: So much more may it be said of inward
Divine glorious Grace, shining from Christ into the souls of his servants, in
his spiritual manifestations of himself unto them, the enjoyment of which
soule-chearing solace, is incomparably beyond what any Historical narration
thereof can represent it to be; and not to go about to speak of that consummate
glory belonging to them, reserved for another world, here not to be conceived,
much less competently decyphered; but only to touch upon that incoate glory
here transmitted by the holy Spirit into the souls of the faithful, as that
which is more particularly intended in our Text, and the subject now in hand,
which is so great that it may well appear to be the design of God to Glorify
himself eminently by this in his Church in this life: For should I speak but of
those resemblances in Scripture, which the Spirit of God shows, but to
shadow out unto our weak sight the radiant beams of spiritual Gospel glory,
the expressions will appear much below the matter, though in themselves they be
very high; as namely, the hidden Manna, The water of life for food; yea the fat
things and pleasures of Gods house, the marrow and fatness there, and wines on
the lees well refined, (Isa. 25. 6.) for their feasting; eye salve for medicine
to make them see, Rev. 3. 18. App'es and Flaggons to keep them from sounding;
Balm and Physicians from Gilead; Gold tried in the fire to make them rich
garments of needlework; and wrought gold with jewels to adorn them; white
raiment to make them pure; the white stone with the new name written in it,
that none can read but they that have it, to secure their interest, Rev. 2. 17.
with others of the like nature, which are spoken to the capacity of other men;
but what the inward efficacy and glory of these things is, is only rightly and
really known to such as have them: by this inward work of God upon men's Souls,
a truly glorious change is wrought in them; of Bondslaves under Sin, and
children of Satan, they are made free indeed, and the children of Abraham, yea,
the Image of God is restored in them, and they are partakers of the Divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Their Souls are made Temples of the holy One, where God
the Father vouchsafes his presence, Christ holds his Sovereignty, and the Holy
Ghost his Residence; and hereby they have Communion with the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost: by which means, great discoveries, great consolations, and
great security unto such poor Souls upon all good occasions from time to time,
are happily administered, until from strength to strength in grace here, they
be by the Almighty power and grace of God their heavenly Father, brought into
possession of the fullness of glory with himself in the highest heavens, there
with all the Celestial Angels, and perfected Saints, sing forth their
Halelujahs to the eternal praise of his infinitely great, and glorious name.

But Secondly, we have seen it has been the design of God, by Gospel grace to
glorify himself, etc. So let us now consider that he has been, is, and will
be more glorious in the eyes of all his people by this Gospel grace, then by
any other, or all other his glorious works besides, whereby he has any ways
discovered his glory in the world. Now that we may at least represent some
glimpse of this spiritual glory in some measure suitable to what it is unto men's
Souls, we shall by the gracious assistance of God endeavor to tender it in
this ensuing method. First, to offer some considerations of the glorious works
of God in Creation, Sustentation, and Gubernation of all things in the world.
Secondly, to tender some representations of the more glorious works of his
Gospel grace displayed in his Church in the world. Thirdly, to show some
respective considerations, wherein this work is more glorious then any, yea,
then all the other.

First, God has by all the three former great and glorious works preached unto
lost mankind, how great, and how good, and how powerful he is, as Ps. 19. 1,
2, 3. The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows his handy
work. Day unto day utters speech: night unto night shows knowledge. There
is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard. And though that his
preaching to them has been very clear, loud, and constant, yet usually they
have lent either a deaf or a negligent ear thereunto, they would either not
hear, or not regard it.

Concerning the first, of Creation, the Apostle Paul gives us a clear evidence,
To. 1. 20. The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead, so that they [viz. the Gentiles] are without excuse. That
his power was infinite, the nature of the work does show, since only an
infinite power can create, that is, make something, any thing, all things, out
of nothing; that he could make them without pains, labor, or trouble; and that
he could with the same facility make multitudes of worlds if he pleased, as
well as one.

That his Wisdom was wonderful therein, was manifest in the manner, order, and
quality of the work, so to command creatures to be so successively in their
order, to supply in their uses the wants of each other, so to dispose of their
nature, qualities, properties, uses, as in Storehouses to Treasure up all their
several virtues and benefits; and yet so as to have them communicable for all
their several due intendments and purposes; and yet this work so vast, so
various, yea, not only in the want of order in things before, but in want of
being of things to be ordered, does abundantly publish the wisdom of the maker
and disposer of them.

His goodness in that work is as largely evident; for they were not only good
as God first made them, and his word witnessed of them, but even he filled (as
the Psalmist says) with his goodness every living thing, and to make them in
their several courses as so many conduit pipes of goodness to all sorts of
creatures in the world, and by all these ways, and in what ever respect else
the world was capable, to have discovered his wonderful glory unto it, in a
work of Creation.

Now Secondly, for the work of Sustentation, whereof the Apostle Heb. 1. 3.
declares, he upholds all things by the word of his power; that is in him, no
less great, no less wonderful and glorious then the other: All Creatures had no
more power to preserve themselves of others in the State God has made them, or
preserved them, then they had to make themselves at first, or one another, did
not he as well communicate a support to them in their Being, comfort and
operations continually, as well as at their first subsistence: Creatures may by
his order add an accidental form to Gods matter, but God by his glorious work
of Sustentation, by the same efficatiousness wherewith at first he made all
Creatures in their kinds, keeps all, both their matter and essential forms
together; to which purpose, the Apostle in that excellent discourse of his (
Acts. 17. 24.) of all these temporal works of God, brings in this forcible
reason, ver. 28. in some sort acknowledged by very heathens: in him we live,
and move, and have our being. If God should but withhold his powerful
sustentation from any or all Creatures in the world, they would suddenly be
resolved into their first nothing. For what is the order, or course, or
strength of nature in all sorts of Creatures, but what God first assigned to
them, and ever since at his pleasure preserves in them, but alters when he
pleases; the Soul must needs guide and act the body, as God appoints it,
while it stays therein, because a natural agent, but God as a free and
voluntary agent, can withdraw his support and actings from the Creatures, or
stop them as he pleases; But now to consider, that in an ordinary way of
support, God has held up the whole Creation for now almost 6000. years in the
whole, and all the main substantial parts of it, and that in so strangly
different manners and ways. The great Ball of the Earth, to our understanding,
hangs upon nothing, poysed with its own weight; the Psalmist tells us that God
has founded it upon the floods. Ps. 24. 2. Yea, but the waters and the earth
are two heavy bodies, that now make up one Globe; and there is nothing
contiguous to them but the thin adflitting penetrable air, wherewith they are
encompassed round about: and yet this Globe stands so firmly, that it cannot be
moved, Psalm. 93. 1. and 96. 10. In both which places, the Holy Spirit would
have men know from this, that God reigns: yet the principles moveable, the
parts moveable, all things in it and upon it continual changeable, and
moveable, and have been for so many thousand years, and yet the foundation
remains immovable, not of its own nature* but at the pleasure of him that
upholds it; and that after all the transactings, concussions, successions,
intercourses and changings upon the earth, since the first Creation of it, yet
those foundations are never the more shaking, never the more tottering, worn
or decayed* yet all this time the upper part of this world, the material
heavens, are upheld in a contrary course, in a strange unconceiveable seemingly
violent circumvolution and turning about, wonderfully continued, even for the
preservation, use and benefit of all sorts of Creatures in the inferior Orb,
which I can now only hint at, (being not my direct business in hand) yet those
heavens are as much unworn with their motion, though so quick, so constant; so
fracil as much unwearied or unweakned with their work and influence, so great,
so efficarious, so long continued; as much undecayed in their beauty, in their
glory, in their as primarie excellency, though they have been as long invected
with it: So that by this little touch of this matter we may see that there is a
wonderful glory in Gods work of Sustentation and upholding the world.

His third glorious work in the world, which is no less wonderful and powerful,
namely, his Gubernation and ruling thereof; concerning which, if we had but
eyes to see, and understandings to conceive aright, wisdom to discern,
memories to retain, and faith to believe as we ought to do, what God has done
in his most Sovereign Administrations in the world, ever since it had a being;
not in smaller things, but in the greatest; not in some things, but in all
things; not at sometime only, but at all times most powerfully fulfilling his
own word, even in the most unsteadie things, as Ps. 148. 8. Fire and hail, snow
and vapor, stormy wind, they all fulfill his word, most irresistably
acaccomplishing his own purpose, most infallibly fulfilling his own counsel,
most unchangeably establishing all his decrees, in all things, fully,
perfectly, irresistably fulfilling all his own pleasure in all things past,
present, or to come, ordinary or extraordinary, whatsoever they be, whether
natural or supernatural, voluntary or unwilling, reasonable or unreasonable,
they are all his subordinate, constituted, regulated, actuated, instruments,
and inferior agents by themselves, with, under, or from others, in what way
soever they work, or by what means soever they are acted, it is all to fulfill
his holy, just, wise, and good pleasure, and that infallibly through all the
world; though some self-will adorers, and Reason-admirers, either for the want
of true faith, or at least the due improvement of it, (as is to be feared) to
their own prejudice, and others insnarement, do not fully acknowledge all this,
because by their own principles they cannot reach it; but why should little
Cives expect to contain the whole Ocean? the works of Gods glorious
Gubernation, are a great altitude, never sufficiently to be attained by humane
capacity; they are a great deep, no reach of understanding creatures can
fathom them; his paths are every where, as the Psalmist faith; in the seas,
in the air, in the heavens, in the earth, amongst men, and amongst devils;
and yet his footsteps are not known, as the Psalmist goes on: how glorious then
would this work of God (being duly weighed) appear likewise, for we must not
now enlarge upon it, but proceed to our main work, which is the second thing we
mentioned to be done under this head, viz. To tender some glimpses of Gods more
glorious work of Gospel grace displayed in his Church in the world, though all
the other are very glorious in their kind and order, such as are agreeing to
the wonderful excellency of the infinite and most glorious God, yet in the
glory of Gospel grace, it shines out more eminently then in all the other: some
may by the view of a weak sighted discoverer, be pointed out to see much more,
then otherwise, that undiscovered to them, they might have observed, and being
in the way may discover much more; children and weak persons where they know
the way, may sometimes well direct strong and skilful travelers advantageously
in their journey.

Should we proceed to speak of this Glory of the Lord, it is the wonder of
wonders, the miracle of miracles, the greatest astonishment of men and angels,
in the greatest perfection of their understanding and capacity, in which, for
which, and by which, God will everlastingly be admired, adored, and magnified
by all of them, that shall be blessed to all eternity; you heard before, it was
not only Gods design, through all time, but likewise his eternal purpose before
time was, and when time shall cease to be; in reference unto this, not only a
counsel of the blessed Trinity of persons, in the Unity of of the divine
essence, is, not only called, but most wonderfully, gloriously, powerfully
manifested, exercised more and more, so that never any thing in the world
appeared comparable to it. It is for ordinary persons to make a useful medicine
of wholesome and good ingredients, but it shows the skill of an expert and
learned Physician, out of most dangerous poisons and minerals, and the like, to
compound a forcible restorative in a seemingly desperate cure; so it was
consonant to created capacities, to conceive excellent things of the outward
works of God; but how to conceive of such a work of restoration, much more to
contrive it, and most of all to accomplish it, was unspeakably above them. When
man that was made little lower then the Angels, and crowned with glory and
worship, and all things put in subjection under his feet, as the Psalmist
excellently, Ps. 8. When God had put him into possession of a whole world, and
allowed him the comfortable use of all good things, given him dominion over all
the creatures in it, had Gods Image upon him, might have near communion with
him, and had his favor toward him, which would have been the very life of his
then living Soul; that then such a person at the instigation of such an enemy,
upon such slight solicitation, for a purpose so vain and booteless, in a case
that might appear so desperately dangerous, and of which he was most certainly
forewarned by God himself, and forearmed against it by a terrible threatening,
which was wretchedly and woefully turned into a most sad prophecy; and all this
to the great dishonor of so gracious a Creator, so bountiful a God and Father:
Now had not God in this case wrought salvation himself; none would, none could,
none durst, none knew how to go about the work: now therefore there is a way
for a glorious Trinity, in a unity of essence, most wonderfully and gloriously
to manifest it self before the face, and in the behalf of all creatures, men
and Angels; when the Almighty God had been so robbed of all that glory due to
him, by that great and good work of his Creation, he will now take occasion
more wonderfully, and more graciously, yea, most wonderfully and most
graciously to discover himself unto his formerly, so excellent, and so happy,
but now so vile and so miserable depraved creature, as a Father, not only
unthought of, but also altogether unsought for, by a most powerful work of
redemption, and restoration; and in this, each of the three most glorious
persons, in the most holy and most blessed Trinity, does manifest himself in
his own peculiar, most powerful, gracious, and most glorious work: God the
Father reveals himself in a way of relation to his natural and only begotten
Son, that by a free grace then revealed, but long after to be accomplished by
him, he might, to man his now lost creature, again become his Father through
grace: The son of God as a mediator betwixt God and man, is a middle person,
betwixt both, and having on him the natures both of God and man, that he might
remove those partition walls of the infinite wrath of God on the one side, and
the stayn and guilt and power of the sin of lost man on the other hand, he
offers himself as a propitiatory sacrifice for man, to appease thereby his
Fathers wrath against him, and restore him into a State of grace: And that such
his goodness might not be cast away, as that before conferred by Creation upon
him was, God the Father, and the Son will send the holy Spirit, who proceeds
from both, by whose all-powerful efficacious grace, that most glorious
manifestation of God the Fathers incomprehensible goodness toward lost man,
and that most gracious manifestation of God, the sons most tender love and
compassion toward lost man, this work of salvation should be irresistably and
most effectually carried on, by informing the mind, reforming the will,
conforming his heart and soul to the will of God, and confirming the whole man
in his reformed condition, and all this by bringing home this gospel discovery
of the Glory of the Lord, spoken of in the Text, and by that his peculiar work
and undertaking, as we shall endeavor by the assistance of the said Lord the
spirit, in due time to show from the last words of the Text.

Now according to this threefold manifestation of the glory of the Lord, from
the beginning have all the most glorious dispensations of the grace of God the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, ever since been derived, revealed,
communicated, applied, preserved, conserved, rewarded in the souls and persons
of all Gods faithful servants in all Ages, and so will be to the end of the
world: and was but men's Religion settled upon this foundation of Gods own
laying, and steered in a right course to his own end, that as all grace is from
himself, so the glory thereof might be given to him alone; how might the
Church of God be settled in truth and peace? But let us a little view the most
radiant beams of this incomprehensible love, this supernatural grace, this
divine Glory of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as from time to time
they are darted out of Heaven, and powerfully sent home into the souls of poor
sinners upon earth, together with the reflections of those radiant beams in and
upon those poor sinners souls; for I speak not here of those close stopped
bottles, that will suffer no good liquor to fall into them, though much fall
upon them; yea, though cast into a sea of water, yet none can enter, because
they are close stopped up; or such dark Lanthorns that receive no light, though
they be set in the bright Sunshine at noonday: but of such, as like burning or
looking glasies, in the beholding of this glory, as in the Text, receive from
the Sun of Righteousness that shines most gloriously in their Hemisphere
only, as the light of old did in Goshen, when thick darkness was in Egypt;
receive (I say) from him both light and heat and brightness, and are
transformed into the same Image. Where should I begin to speak of the glory of
their transfiguration? or when should I make an end? Look upon their birth, it
is celestial, it is divine, it is [(...)] it is from above, it is from God, so
they are not only a truly noble or Royal, which the vain world is apt too
much to prize alone, but they are also a real divine Race, 2 Pet. 1. 4. But
this glory of theirs being that of the Queens Daughter, is mainly within, this
spiritual life of theirs is hid with Christ in God, Col. With this new birth
and life is conveyed a divine and spiritual illumination into their souls, with
this is inseparably conjoined a particular spiritual application of every
sacred truth, by that illumination discovered out of the word of God, by any
means, whereby God sets it before them; from this application proceeds love,
which labors to manifest it self in an affectionate constant endeavor of all
due thankfulness and obedience to his divine Majesty, in the improvement of
all grace received, and all gracious dispositions and affections, and in the
performance of all duties toward God and man; and so when the holy Spirit has
taken possession, Christ sits regent in all their souls, where he has a
spiritual and invincible Kingdom, of which there shall be no end; whose
Subjects shall never be traitors, nor revolters from his Divine Majesty;
bribes shall not allure them, terrors shall not fray them, they are sworn
feodaries to him, and will approve themselves his liedg Subjects; their Rule
and Law is Gods word, their Strength is his grace and joy, their Teacher and
counselor and comforter is his sacred Spirit, their Tower of defense and rock
is the rock of Ages, their Guard the holy Angels, their Annuitie or portion
the good of the earth, the air, the Seas, here in their nonage; their present
inheritance, the grace of God, the favor of God, the peculiar providence of
God, the promises of God, the Covenant of God, with all the benefits of
redemption purchased for them by that infinite ransom of the blood of Christ,
needful for them in their pilgrimage here on earth, till they enter the
possession of the heavenly and eternal Kingdom of Glory.

And this constant course of glorious Gospel grace, God the Father, Son, and
holy Spirit, have manifested and magnified themselves by, to the true and
invisible Church, throughout all generations to this very day, (though in
different manners and degrees) and still will do so to the end of the world;
and this glory of the Lord is so great in the eyes of true believers, that if
all the excellency of temporal glory, not only of the Kings and Kingdoms of the
world, but the Glory of the Sun Moon and Stars, were united into one, it
would seem to them obscure and contemptible in comparison of this: and so full
of sound comfort is their interest in this glorious grace, that were they
offered the wealth, the pleasure, the honor, the favor of men, the confluence
of all the seeming worth of the world, without this they would (in their right
temper) refuse and reject them all, as an incompetent offer; yea faithful
Moses, and all the Martyrs in their times, would rather choose to suffer
affliction with the people of God to enjoy this, than to have the pleasures of
sin for a season; for oh the pearless worth of their secret, but certain
enjoyment of the favor of God, their secured interest in Christ, the guidance,
the teaching, the comfort of the holy Ghost, his lifegiving grace, his
grace-working Ordinances, the spiritual pleasures of his house, their communion
with himself, the satisfaction, the security, the soul-ravishments of his
love, with the reflections thereof, their love again to his Divine Majesty,
that twofold righteousness of Christ's imputed, and theirs endeavored, that
peace of conscience that passes understanding, that joy in the holy Ghost
unspeakeable and glorious, in which the Kingdom of Heaven does consist, as the
Apostle witnesses, Rom: 14. 17. The Glory indeed of this Kingdom is not
discerned, but by the spiritual eye of faith; the happinesle thereof is not
enjoyed, but in the particular application of a truly believing soul; herein
Christ shows wonders among the dead, as himself so strongly asserteth, Joh: 5.
25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is, that the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.
Hereby Christ gains a soveraigntie above all that is called God, as the Father
promised, Psalm: 2. 8. He has the heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession; neither can he be deprived of
his Subjects, the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them; no not of the
weakest by the strongest, none shall be able to pull any one sheep from his
fold; for hereby the soul of a converted sinner is inseparably united unto him.
By this Gospel grace the taste and discerning of divine and spiritual things,
is made truly cordial and comfortable unto believing souls; Hereby God is set
up in the highest place in the soul, in all he reveals himself to be; Hereby
he is sought unto for all, acknowledged in all, what ever means or instruments
he uses, believed in all he says, honored in all he does, in prosperity or
adversity, in particular or in general, to themselves or others, praise
returned unto him for all mercies, how or what way so ever conferred, feared
above all, rejoiced in and delighted in above all that can be conceived of
creatures, incomparably: This makes them measure all Glory by Gods Standard,
and weigh all comfort in Gods Balance, and try all treasure by Gods
Touchstone, and none of these will be approved by them, but what has his
allowance: Hereby God overcomes darkness with light, corruption with
sanctification, trouble with comfort, disquiet with peace, sorrow with joy,
opposition with support, weakness with strength, assaults with victory, danger
with security, sufferings with rescue, death with life, and this not only once
but often, not sometime only but at all times, not in some respects only but in
all, not against some evils only but against all, not for some continuance
only but unto the end; for though every way many be the troubles of the
righteous, yet the Lord delivers them out of them all, Psalm: 34. 19. And all
this grace, in all the variety of the glorious manifestations thereof, is in
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, Chap: 4. ver: 4. And in the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, v: 6.

And now in the third place, for the further illustration of this greatest
glory of the Lord, manifest to his Church in this world, let us come to those
respective considerations, wherein it will be yet more evident, that this
Gospel glory is the greatest glory of all that in the world God has, or does,
or will manifest, yea or any living in it can behold.

Now for manifestation of the many more glorious excellencies of Gospel grace,
above all the other glorious works of the most blessed God, wherein he has
discovered his wonderful excellencies in, and for his true Church upon earth,
as revealed, carried on, to be accomplished here, and fully perfected in heaven.

We shall further endeavor by his most gracious assistance, to display the
transcendent glory of this work above all the other, in these ensuing
particulars.

First, In respect of the more glorious nature of the work.

Secondly, In respect of the more glorious matter of the work.

Thirdly, In respect of the many ways considerably more excellent foundation
of the work.

Fourthly, In respect of the most glorious structure, form, and frame of the
work.

Fifthly, In regard of the long continued time for the raising of the work.

Sixthly, In regard of the way of the raising of this work, by the constant
shining out of the wonderful glory of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all
the time it is in raising.

Seventhly, In respect of the subordinate means of raising up this work.

Eighthly, In respect of the object for which, and in reference to whom, it is
immediately contrived and raised.

Ninthly, In regard of the ends wherefore it is contrived, carried on, raised,
and to be perfected in reference both to God and Man.

Tenthly, In respect of the many excellent uses to be made by all men here, of
the contriving, carrying on, and raising of this work, and what will be made of
it by glorified Saints and Angels hereafter in heaven.

Eleventhly, In respect of the effect of all that concerns the manifestation of
all the gloriousness of this work to good and bad men, and Angels, here and
hereafter: And if the Lord the Spirit shall be graciously pleased, to carry us
along in any competent manner, but to hint or point out unto any Arts of men,
the manifold transcendent glory of this Gospel glory of the Lord, I hope some
men, by his blessing, may have the transforming glory thereof, if not
altogether wrought, yet in some measure increased in them by the same Spirit,
by whose guidance as we endeavor to do it, so we shall endeavor to pray unto
him for it.

First therefore; of the first, viz. the respective consideration of the more
glorious nature of the work, above the nature of the works of Creation,
Sustentation, and Gubernation or Providence; which though they be the Works of
the All-glorious God, in their kind and degree suitable to the Author, yet is
this more excellent work of his in its own nature eminently many ways much
more glorious, and particularly in these Considerations following.

First, In that the Creation, Sustentation, and Gubernation of the world, are
of corruptible principles and materials in continual transmutations and
changes, generations and irruptions, increases and decreases, all in
successions, nothing in continuance or stability, excepting Angels, and the
souls of men, which though they be in the world, yet they are not of the world,
as Christ said his Kingdom was not of, which in great part they are; but the
great work of Gospel grace is of a spiritual and incorruptible nature, suitable
to the Author of it; and as the nature of a thing is nearer to him, the more
perfect it is.

Secondly, All the former great works of God respect inferior creatures, and
the outward being and welfare of man, and directly reach no further; but
this respects the inward and spiritual welfare of man, and tends directly to
the advancing of that; now as the use and improvement of a thing is more
excellent and glorious, much more is that which is the cause of it.

Thirdly, As the first works consisted of corruptible principles, so their
continuance and use will be but for a time, and shall have their periods and
cessations; but this divine Gospel grace is of an eternal being, and will
remain in its use and excellency to all eternity.

Secondly, And as in respect of the nature of the work, so this Gospel grace is
more glorious than all the other in respect of the matter of the work. Base and
mean materials do obscure, and not illustrate the glory of a work; Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? says Job, not one. God put at first a
living soul into a body made of clay, but the body did not thereby become of
the same excellency with the living soul: but this work of Gospel grace has
such a matter, as is of a divine wonderful and incomprehensible excellency,
which we must not understand [ Materiam ex qua, as in worldly things, but circa
quam] not corporeal, but notional and intellectual, not matter subjective but
objective, as the Schools distinguish; that is to say, the matter of this work
is so conceived, rather in respect of our understanding, than the realitie of
the thing, which is beyond measure glorious.

Thirdly, But to come to the third respect, wherein it is more glorious than
all the other forenamed works, and that is in the many ways considerably more
excellent foundation of this work: the more wisely, advantageously, and surely,
any great undertaking has its foundation laid, the more excellency it adds
to it; and if this be not provided duly for, the greater the undertaking the
more hazard, the more cost and labor, the greater disappointment and loss;
Hence because war is a great undertaking by men, therefore says One, With
good advice make war. Now the gloriousness of Gods laying the foundation of
this work, will appear greater than of all the other, in these particulars
following.

First, The foundation of this is more profound, and more deeply laid than of
all the other.

Secondly, That it is more secretly and hiddenly laid, than of all the other.

Thirdly, That it was a more difficult foundation to be laid in several
respects, than of all the other.

Fourthly, In that it is a foundation more surely laid, than of all the other.

First, The commendation of the profoundnesse of a foundation, is, as it is
laid in the due proportion to the greatness of the work undertaken, whereof it
is the foundation; now the greatness of Gods work in decreeing, revealing,
carrying on, and accomplishing his glorious work of grace, is infinitely
excellent in all dimensions, intensive, extensive, yea beyond all dimensions,
mental or real, eternally infinite, which cannot be said of any or all his
other works, as may thus be evidenced.

First, In that this most glorious work was not undertaken for them, but
contrarily, they were all undertaken and are carried on for this, they were and
are but the Substrata for this, and it is their greatest excellency, that their
being is in reference unto this.

Secondly, In that this most glorious work is not subservient unto them, but
they all along unto it, ever since their first beginning, and must be so until
they cease to be: God makes use of all his inferior actings in the world
amongst all sorts of creatures in all times, as subservient one way or other to
this glorious Grace.

Thirdly, In that they, or any, or all of them, are not the end of this most
glorious work, but contrarily this is the very end, every way chiefly
considerable, wherefore they were or may be done hereafter, it is their finis
operis and operantis, it is their finis intentionis and durationis, that is,
this is the end they were done for, the end why God did them, he purposed them
for this, and no longer to continue but for this, viz. till this great mystery
of God should be finished, as in Rev:

Secondly, The next particular considerable, which we named in the excellency
of Gods laying the foundation of this most glorious work, is the secrecy of it,
it is an hidden foundation; this follows in some sort from the other, yet all
foundations that are deep are not secret, they may be searched out, they may be
discovered, they may be revealed, they may be enlightened; but this was a
secret hidden in Gods own counsel alone, when all the other foundations were
open to men and Angels; yea this was not nor could be known, till himself
made it known, nor any further, then as he was pleased from time to time to
cause it to be further known by men or Angels, and only rightly known to those
good men, to whom he himself and his holy Spirit are pleased to reveal it, and
make it known unto: and it is not only in general in that respect of the great
mystery of God, but in respect of particular persons; all men know not in this
sense the great mystery of Godliness, nor the mystery of the kingdom of
Heaven, though they often hear it and hear of it, but they only to whom it is
given, Mar: 4. 11. Yea to all others the mystery of God, and the mystery of
Godliness, are mysteries indeed, hidden from their eyes: And hence things
peculiar to the faithful are said thus to be hidden, they have an hidden life
with Christ in God, the hidden Manna, the name in the white stone, that none
can read but he that has it, Rev: 2. 17. Hidden waters of life, drawn by the
secret hand of faith out of the Rock Christ; they have the hidden man of the
heart, which is acceptable unto God, 1. Pet: 3. 4. And yet all these, though
they be hidden from the world, are well known to them: and herein God
wonderfully glorifies himself in his most wise counsels, that the secret
issues of them cannot be discovered by any enemies, though he sees all their
secret and foolish counsels to the contrary, and laughs them to scorn in all
things, for he has determined to disappoint them all in all they mainly drive
at; and what ever devices are in their hearts, his and only his counsel shall
stand, Pro:

Thirdly, The next particular we shall consider, in the laying of this most
glorious foundation, is, that it was a more difficult work to lay it, in
several respects, then any of the other; not more hard in respect of God, for
to his power and wisdom all things are alike easy, the greatest as well as
the least; but in regard, first of the nature of the work, secondly of the
opposition that was, and is, and will be made against it while the world
stands, all which time, Michael and his Angels fight with the Dragon, and his
Angels.

First, The laying the foundation of this work was hard, in regard of the
wonderful excellency which was therein to be showed, and infinite wisdom,
power, mercy, justice, holiness, goodness, faithfulness and truth; and so
transcendently, that nothing in the whole world in any of these respects is to
be found like it, nothing to be compared with it; (...) is a received position,
that excellent things are hard; here then being the greatest excelency, must
needs be the greatest difficulty.

Secondly, Hard, by reason of the great and strong opposition, that would ever
be made against any appearance of any thing of this work in the world; when God
laid the foundation of it, he perfectly knew what would be the hatred,
violence, subtilty of the devil to oppose it at every turn in the world; he
perfectly knew the interest the devil would have there, to be for a time, by
usurpation the God of the world, Ephesians. he knew what great and how many subjects
he would have there, how loyal they would be to him their Liege Lord, resolving
to forsake all others to cleave to his service, to be subject to his commands,
to his pleasure, to the Scepter of his Kingdom; and he knew well long before,
how many great and hypocritical nations in a great p^^t, Satan would have,
though sometimes more and sometimes less, under such his Dominion, that with
the whore in the Proverbs would say, they have done no evil, while their eyes,
their hearts, their lives are full of adulteries in Gods sight; yea, he sees
when they pretend most love to his dear son Christ Jesus, they mean to murder
him in his living members, and so [ sub nomine Christi militant contra
Christum] under the name of Christ they fight against Christ ( manibus
pedibusque) as we say, with all their might; and no marvail, for all that
while, heart and hand, tooth and nail, they are for the devil. Abundant
discovery might be made of this difficulty, that God fully knew, and in every
particular fully discovers every moment, in every place, in every person of
every rank, in every thing. Oh would all sorts of such persons, but seriously
weigh, how foolishly they go about to make Gods great design difficult, of
which, notwithstanding, he has laid the foundation most sure, as we shall
endeavor to show; But yet here is not all, for thirdly, when God laid this
foundation, he saw a greater difficulty then all these from the devil, or the
world; he saw (in respect of them for whom that great undertaking immediately
was) there was not only incapacitas, but repuguantia objecti, not only an
uncapableness, but a resistance by such as should receive the benefit: If a
most noble and virtuous Prince have his royal and dearly beloved consort,
carried away by malicious and most hareful enemies, this would but incite him
the more to lay out his interests for her rescue, but if when all is done, he
finds her affections so alienated, that she joins all her Interests with his
enemies, not only to avoid, but also to resist her Royal and most loving
husband; this deadens the design, makes the business much more hard; this, and
much worse, was the case when God laid the foundation of his most gracious
work, he knew we would join with our hateful enemies, and resist our greatest
good, and this difficulty therein, he most graciously provided against; in his
other works there was no such incapacity, much less resistance; when he spoke
the word, they were made, when he commanded, they were created, and ever since,
what ever the Lord pleased he has done in heaven, and in earth, in the seas,
and in all deep places, only man is the untunable string in the harmony of the
Creatures in this inferior Orb, and so foolishly wicked, he will not only
resist his God, but his own good; this was indeed exceeding hard to provide
against, and a difficulty invincible in regard of all creatures, but not too
hard for the infinite wisdom and goodness of a most gracious God to provide
against, and overcome by Gospel grace.

Fourthly, As the foundation of this work of God was harder to lay, then of any
other of his great works in the world, so likewise it is more excellent then
the rest, in that it is most surely laid above all the rest, what respected man
in the Creation, though an excellent Creature then, yet was on so unstable a
foundation, that it was suddenly lost. Now for such questions, whether man
might not have stood longer in that Estate? or how long? or what should have
become of him when the world should end? or the like, we shall not meddle with
them, being secret things belonging to God, and not revealed, which only belong
to us, and to our children; that in his greatest perfection he did not stand,
and therefore was not upon a sure foundation, while his happiness was in his
own keeping, the Scriptures plainly show, and the woeful experience of his whole
race does sadly declare, had not the infinite grace of the Almighty Jehovah,
provided a firm basis of Gospel glory, Isai. 28. 16. Behold, I lay in Zion for
a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure
foundation; a Text often recorded and expounded of Christ in the New Testament,
but very fully by the Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. 2. 6, 7, 8. who is therefore called
the Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8. 6. and the surety of a better
Testament, Heb. 7. 22. Because in that God has not left the security thereof
in any hand but his own, his arm brought salvation, upholds, applies,
salvation to his people, to whom he is gracious, because he will be gracious,
and shows compassion, because he will show compassion, in giving to them the
sure mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3. Which the same holy Kingly Prophet David in
his high rapture resolves us, (...) because he has put or set for me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, 2 Samuel 23. 5. And this is Gods sure mercies to
him, and if it was possible to make it more sure God adds his oath to it, Psalm.
110. 4. Concerning him that was to be the Mediator of it, The Lord has sworn,
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec, which is specially applied to this Gospel glory of the Lord, Heb.
7. 22. even through him who was after the power of an endless life, v. 16.
(...) of a life not to be loosed: And our Apostle, to declare the sure laying
and remaining too of this everlasting, all-ordered, sure covenant of God to
David, and sworn to Christ, adds the seal thereof, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and plainly
assures us, That this foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the
Lord knows them that are his. And thus at present, of that many ways
considerable foundation, of this most excellent and glorious work.

We come now in the fourth place, a little to take a view of the more glorious
structure, frame and form of this work; now though the frame and form of the
world, as it is Gods Creature made, upheld and ordered by him, has a great
glory in it, yet that glory, as the Apostle in somewhat a like case speaks,
is not glory compared with this, for as the nature and the matter of this did
exceed the other, so the form, as we shall endeavor to show, will appear to
exceed theirs much more, even as much as an essential form exceeds an
outward shape or figure obvious to the eye; for as the Philosophers say of the
Soul, it is, tota in toto and tota in qualibet part, so we may say of the form
of this wonderful glorious work, which seems to be this [the glorious shining
forth of Gods most free and infinite grace unto men and Angels here and
hereafter] which, as our Saviors expression is, to all single-eyed beholders,
is obvious to be discerned, yea, there is no part of the foundation or fabric
of the whole work, wherein it does not wonderfully shine out to such souls (in
their better temper at least) which if it do not unto any (at least when they
are themselves) it is because they are not, as in the Text, transformed into
the same Image: if the glory shining in the work of the Creation, when that was
finished, was the reason then, wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh Day
Sabbath, and hallowed it, that his people might have a weekly opportunity to
worship and celebrate his praise, for the innumerable benefits conferred on
them by Creation; then how much more, may the glory shining much more brightly,
when Christ Jesus our Lord having finished the whole work of redemption by his
resurrection, gloriously triumphed over all adverse powers of darkness,
occasion him the Lord of the Sabbath, to put it over to the first day, and is
justly therefore by his holy spirit entitled to himself the Lords day, our
Christian Sabbath, Rev. 1. 10. even when in the highest raptures he
communicated so divinely to that beloved Disciple, the great things to be
accomplished in reference to the Church and her enemies, to the end of the
world: now as the perfected glory of the Saints hereafter, shall swallow up the
inchoate glory here, or as the glory of the Lord our redeemer, seems to
ecclypse the luster of the glory of the Lord our Creator, as the shining light
of the sun does the brightness of the Moon, when they appear both together in
our hemisphere, even so is the glorious form and beauty of this work
transcendently above the other.

Fifthly, The largeness of the time, or continuance allotted for this work,
above all the other excellent illustrations of it. First, Creatio fit in
instanti, so the Learned, Creation is done in an instant; the whole work was
finished and celebrated in a weeks space at first, sustentation is the
continuance of that for a limited time; and Gubernation here, is but while this
course of nature, or Creatures, or rather supportation in their ranks from
God, is so variously disposed of in such wonderful manner, after the good
pleasure of his will, but the time allotted for the contriving, effecting,
applying, confirming, carrying on and perfecting this most glorious work of
Gospel grace, is not only a long time, but all time, and not only time, but
eternity too, yea, all eternity in reference to the eternal and coequal Trinity
of persons, in the unity of the divine nature: Now this illustration of the
length of time, for raising a work, may more clearly appear from a threefold
evidence; First, of nature, the baser sort of creatures soon come to their
height of stature, as is observable in varieties of sorts of plants, and
beasts, and fowls. Secondly, in Reason, the more excellent the nature of a
work, and the more accurately it is to be wrought, the longer time is required
to provide for it, to accomplish it. Thirdly, in experience, both of Nature and
Art; by all which, the long continuance for the raising of this work, may be
manifest above all the rest, which is an other of its excellencies; unto which
let us now add the

Sixth, Namely, in regard of the way and manner of the raising of this work, by
the constant shining out of the wonderful glory of the Father, Son, and Holy
ghost, all the time it is in raising. Oh the unspeakeable splendour of the
wisdom and power, of the grace and goodness, of the mercy and truth, in
reference to all the holy persons in that undivided Trinity, made evident
therein, from the beginning of the world, and shall be to the end thereof, in
such glorious mnnifestations, continually, breaking forth through all
successions of Ages, as can never be sufficiently admired, nor much less
celebrated with praises both from men and Angels, in all things that concern
the way and manner of the revealing and exhibiting, as will be of the
perfecting of that most precious grace, from and by those sacred persons
derived. Whether we respect the sufficiency, the sureness, the efficacy, the
happiness in such way and manner continually held out, and communicated unto
the world; First, sufficient to make up all the Creatures wants, to answer all
their doubts. Secondly, Sure to remove all their fears, and settle all
desirable security to them. Thirdly, Effectually to carry on against all
obstacles, and to accomplish all and more then they could hope for or desire.
Fourthly, To administer what ever good they are capable of receiving, to make
them perfectly blessed; let your thoughts be enlarged upon these particulars, I
must leave them as the dry bones in Ezekiels Prophecy, till the Spirit causes
flesh to come upon them, to cover them; for I fear to be tedious, even in a
subject so precious and pleasant, to such as have interest in it, but therefore
not pleasant unto others, because they find not any to themselves, yea, they
know it not, and therefore they desire it not, yea, they are not willing to
know it, least they must loose those Idols wherein they take more pleasure: But
thus much at present, of Gods own undertaking, in the most suitable manner to
all his own most blessed purposes, respecting both himself and his creatures,
according to his own good pleasure, as we shall endeavor afterward to show,
and is evident from all passages to this purpose in holy writ, unspeakeably
above what is to be found in any other his great and glorious works, here being
a way for the magnifying of the riches of his free grace, only revealed in his
word, which is therefore magnifyed above all his name, as the Psalmist says
remarkably, Ps. 138. in such a concurrence of all Divine excellencies as is no
where else to be found, since there and there only, we have the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

Seaventhly, In regard of the subordinate means of raising up this work, [not
here to speak of the chief, the holy Spirit as proceeding from the Father and
the Son] for we shall have occasion to speak of him afterward, as the Lord the
Spirit, the prime efficient cause of the efficaciousness of all other means;
but only of his inferior means, such as Angels, men extraordinarily inspired,
ordinarily qualified, ordinances sanctified, and providence, and many other
means o^ Creatures, sometime at his pleasure blessed, to be in some sort
instrumental in this work; For sometimes to use Angels in it, was an honor to
it, but to have used them always, would have been terrible to weak and frail
Creatures, besides otherwise incommodious to them; when as to use man's ministry
is natural, familiar, affecting, as being of the same nature, and liable to the
same misery, capable of the same happiness, provided for by the same God,
tendered in the same way, concluded in the same concernments, obliged by the
same engagements, and yet at his pleasure to use other ways and instruments,
shows the freness of all that grace; any of these [ pro hio and nunc] in any
particular case, he can use at his pleasure, but [ ex instituto] by his
appointment, the preaching of the word by men, is ordinarily his means, To. 10.
14. efficaciously to work this Spiritual grace in the Soul, yet natural,
occasional, providential, morral means, he likewise sometime uses as helps
thereunto, as natural affection, good examples, good institutions, good
society, afflictions, judgments, dangers, troubles, as blessed by him to
advance the same, and besides extraordinary working by men, what he does
ordinarily by them, he does with great variety, to manifest himself a free and
voluntary agent therein, and that means cannot do it alone; and therefore
sometimes by babes and sucklings, by mean and unlikely instruments, in this
kind, he sets forth his own praise, Ps. 8. 2. An other time he will use more
eminent instruments, a Moses in the Law, an Esaias amongst the Prophets, a Paul
amongst the Apostles, learned, noble, eminent persons in gifts, in parts, in
reputation with men, as better helps, that they may the better advance the
grace or glory of this work of the Lord; and yet again, sometimes he denies the
success to them, he gives to meaner persons, because he is bound to none; the
Sacraments are likewise means to confirm and increase that grace, which yet is
neither tied to them, nor yet cannot be had without them, yet not to be
neglected, or much less contemned by men, because they are instituted and
appointed by him: Again, prayer likewise is his own ordinary general means to
be used by all persons, at all times, upon all occasions; Pray continually,
Acts 6. 4. Pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. To which thanksgiving is to be
annexed, and sometime fasting, vows, and the like; but prayer, I say, is his
general means to promote the end of all the rest, and make them useful in his
own work, the better to make all men to know and remember, that the efficacy of
all the other, is only to be expected from himself, in the humble, faithful,
and obedient useing of them all; so that all these means in their several
times and kinds, are glorious, in reference unto the end of their chief Author,
but all, and only, freely and voluntarily, according to his own good pleasure;
and as all the means are his, so the effects must ever be acknowledged his,
because they are not like other inferior means, merely natural, but altogether
voluntary to him, and all their success from his free grace.

But eighthly, for the object of this gracious work, for whom, and in reference
unto whom, immediately it is by him contrived and raised, and that is man, by
his defection corrupted in his original excellency, depraved in his miserable
condition, forlorn, helpless, hopeless, and yet regardlesse of himself (the
Epidemical disease of all his posterity) and less regarded of any or all
other creatures, who if they had regarded his miserable condition, yet
notwithstanding had been altogether insufficient for his rescue or relief; he
being a creature that had abused such precious goodness, slighted such
precious favor, so wickedly cast away such glorious excellence, foolishly lost
so great happiness both for himself and all his posterity; and what must he
then do? yea rather what must he needs in that case deservedly suffer? or
whatsoever of wrath, woe, or misery so great a sin of ingratitude,
unfaithfulness, rebellion, pride, emulation, envy, folly, yea such
accumulated wickedness against a most gracious God, and most bountiful
creator, had made him and all his posterity to all eternity justly liable to,
namely, the infinite wrath of the infinitely glorious and good Jehovah: Oh
where was then such an object of so glorious grace in the whole Creation to be
found? Angels sinned in an higher rank and station, and with a more general
and high attempt against Gods Crown and Dignity, when man that was in a lower
condition looked only to be like God in knowing good and evil, not to be
equal in dignity to him; the Angels therefore are in Justice cast down lower,
and so are become desperate damned Devils; Angels sinned without a tempter, but
man's assaults were primarily set on by Satan's malice, secretly and subtly
carried on by the Serpent and the Woman, his subordinate, or at least suborned
Instruments: Angels sinned but individually, each for himself alone, they had
no posterity; but man, the root of all his race has worthily incurred both [
Paenam Damnis and paenam sensus,] the punishment of loss, and the punishment
of sense, both for himself and all them. How was then the Justice and mercy of
the infinitely wise God, in appearance, at a great contest, which should
prevail for or against man? Justice would be satisfied upon him, mercy would
be glorified in him; Justice looks upon his sin against the infinite God, with
all the aggravations of it; mercy looks upon the forlorn helpless state of
man, with all such mittigations and extenuations of his fall, as she could
discover; here were indeed the fire and the wood, wrath and the fit object of
it, but where is the burnt offering, as Isaac once said unto his father, when
his father expecting he should be the Lamb, answered him more truly then he
knew or thought of, God shall provide himself a Lamb; and look what Abraham
and Isaac here were but mystical types and shaddows of, God had from
everlasting really decreed, and in due time fulfilled, concerning that
immaculate Lamb his only begotten Son, slain in the same decree of his
Father, before the foundations of the world were laid; In him were Mercy and
Truth so met together, Righteousness and Peace so kissed each other, Ps: 85.
10. And what from everlasting he so decreed, in fulness of time he
accordingly accomplished: The true Isaac bears the full burden of his fathers
wrath, and yet injoyes the fulness of his love, whilst that he bears it not
for himself, but others, not for any the least declining of his own, but to
finish the work his Father had sent him for into the world; not ignorantly and
unknowingly, as his type, nor with reluctance, as ^eeding to be bound, but
willingly and readily yielding himself, reckoning it even Satan's assault in a
zealous Peter, when out of seeming love he advises him against it, saying, Get
thee behind me Satan; nor was he forcibly constrained by his fathers power,
but resolved of himself to lay it down voluntarily, being in his own power;
and yet not so as to cast himself away like a desperate helpless man, but
still retained his power against all opposition to raise himself again. O
wonderfully merciful Father! O wonderfully gracious Redeemer! how are all the
discerning abilities of thy most excellent creatures swallowed up by this
bottomless depth of thy infinite grace! When thou saw there was none to
deliver, that there was no Intercessour, therefore thine own arm brought
salvation, and thy righteousness it sustained thee, Isa: 59. 16. Here, here
was an object fit only for the wisdom, power, and goodness of an infinite God
to show it self, and in a way and means suitable to the otherwise helpless
condition of such a wretched creature, who shall therefore have a wonderful
deliverer; but yet his misery at present shall not altogether be taken away,
but he shall yet continue in that world wherein he first had sinned, that shall
be to him the place of his prison, where he committed his first his late most
heinous offense, and that the more remarkably, in that his former happy Palace,
is now by his sin become a stinking Dungeon to him; his Paradise of pleasure
formerly, is now become a very Bridewell for his correction; his painlesse
exercise before, is now exchanged for painful toil, manifest by the sweat of
his brows; instead of his successful labor without weariness, he shall be
vexed with much lost labor and weariness therewith, [ Aethiopem lavabit,
magno conatu magnas nugas aget,] he shall often endeavor to no purpose, and
greatly endeavor to no purpose, and greatly endeavor to small purpose; but
yet worse than this, in his prison he shall have a Jaylour too, but the worst
of creatures by defection, and his own worst enemy, his hateful and first
murderer (at least in his hopes and purposes,) had not God then in such a case
speedily, graciously, and unexpectedly stepped in for his rescue or reprieve: But
before such deliverance particularly can come home, by reason this cursed
Jaylour, having man in some sort in his custody, endeavors to make him his
perpetual vassal, and when in this he finds he does prevail sometime, such
shall have the privilege of his prisonhouse, but only for this most wretched
end, to make them the more sworn slaves to himself, to others he will not
vouchsafe the like liberty of their prison, but holds them fast in hard
bondage, and because he would the more harden them for hell torments hereafter,
he begins to plague them with an hell upon earth, but not as men sometimes put
in Bedlam by their friends to regaine their wits, but to make them spiritually
the more mad, and eternally the more miserable; any way to engage them the most
temporally to his vassallage, and eternally to his torments, and the rather,
because that enviously and spitefully, he yet surely knows, there is a year
of Jubilee proclaimed from the most Sovereign and Almighty King, and that
there is a Deliverer Come, by whose appointment Heralds at Arms, or rather
Ambassadors of peace, are sent abroad to publish the same with the conditions
thereof, upon abundant testimony under his hand and seals with sufficient
authority and most certain evidence for man's security therein; but yet I say
upon his own terms alone. But how does the Devil their Jaylour now play his
pranks, to disappoint the purpose of such published grace, and to keep his
prisoners either from hearing (if possible) the sound of this good news, by
stopping it from their ears, or if he cannot do that, to stop their ears
against it by many diversions of hopes, or ease, or pleasure, or profit, or
else by prejudice, or danger, or reproach, or fear, or persecution, or any
thing, or all (if it may be) to hinder the same, that they may not come near
to hearken to those commissionated Heralds at Arms, or Ambassadors of peace;
but if they must needs be within the hearing of them, he will disparage their
terms, as too hard, impossible, not sure, not warrantable, or too damnifying,
or the like; he will tell them false tales of golden apples, and sweet and
pleasant grapes, which are growing for them in his Garden, when they are indeed
but apples of Sodom, and grapes of Gomorrha, ashie apples, and bitter grapes;
he will tell them much of great treasures and pleasures with him to be had,
when they are, but as men say of Witches feasts in the caves of the earth, only
fantastical, but nothing real; he will tell them of golden mountains they
shall have by his service, when there is nothing but fire and flames of
brimstone in the bowels thereof, belching forth continually beforehand their
noisome stench, with flames and smoke and ashes of Gods wrathful displeasure
against them; Yet all the Devils prisoners will hearken more to his lies, than
unto Gods Ambassadors, or his truth, all the while they are in his bondage,
and knowing nothing better than what they at present conceive they find, they
will not be persuaded that there is any thing better than what they think they
know; Neither will they believe that they shall find any thing worse
hereafter, than what they at present feel; and so what with his charms and
baits on the one hand, and what with his gyves, manacles, and chains on the
other hand, their ears are either stopped like the deaf Adders that refuse to
hear, or else bored through at his door, like voluntary slaves readily
agreeing with him for their own perpetual bondage. But here the wonder-working
God again appears, who having sealed some to the day of Redemption, and
having given those unto the Redeemer, whom likewise the Redeemer has
particularly and fully ransomed, even those he will rescue out of that bondage,
yea out of that death of sin and Satan; unto them are his Ambassadors
specially sent, but they likewise will not hear, and therefore while he sends
many times and often for a long continuance, (it may be) and importunately by
them in his own name, beseeches them to be reconciled to him for their own
good, though (happily) they may be roused a little sometimes, yet they are not
raised from that sleep, and death, till God the Father, and God the Redeemer,
by the Almighty power of the Lord the Spirit, speaks home to their souls,
what outwardly, and only outwardly, they had heard before with their ears,
many times (perhaps) only, but not regarded to retain, till he himself comes
in, and sets on the impression of his grace-revealing truth upon their hearts,
with a secret quickening spiritual life; Upon discovery or fear whereof in
any of Satan's prisoners, their former Jaylour attempts with speed to hinder (if
he can) if not to consent, yet to divert or re^ard, but (if he cannot do that)
he will still endeavor to make them drive on as heavily as may be, that, if at
all, they will receive the offers of peace, yet they may do it, as late as may
be, that they may have the less comfort, others the less benefit, and their
spiritual blessed Lord and Sovereign the less honor or advantage thereby:
But if they will, when once marked for Christ's sheep, be departing from his
Wolves and Goats, range and walk, he will help them to as much bread and water
of affliction (if he can) while they are passing on in their journey to their
new Master, as may last them all the way thither. And what mischief he is kept
any way from doing against them, he will send Herds of his graceless Wolves,
and of his filthy Goats and Swine, to do for him, and against Christ's sheep,
to destroy or defile them, or rend them for their pearls, or like his wild
Boares out of the Woods to destroy them: But whilst they are passing a painful
pilgrimage, and often fall into a Wildered condition in this world, the great
Shepherd of his sheep, that will loose none of them that are of his fould, he
readily seeks them out, not so much for the place where, (for his eye is
always toward them, and upon them) as for the condition wherein, and the fit
season of grace to be used for their advantage, they shall not then want
needful comfort, or needful support, or necessary supply, often they have all
these largely allowed them, and if they have not at present, they have a
storehouse, a full treasure of all good to go unto at need, and in their
worst times they have two good friends at hand that will not fail them then, to
wit, a good Conscience, and the holy Ghost, who has taken possession of their
souls; and these are strong helpers against the fierce and fiery assaults of
Men and Devils, yea, they have hereby more help with them, and for them, than
they many times themselves discern; Their God is a God at hand, and not a
far off, Christ Jesus stands by them, being the grand Captain of their
salvation, the Author and Finisher of their faith and patience; the holy
Angels often have a charge to keep them in all their ways, Psalm: 91. 11. The
Saints on earth assist them by their prayers, direct them by their counsels,
excite them by their examples, and encourage them by their confidence; And
though sometime they must needs forgo much, endure hard onsets, and combat
long, yet this encouragement is inwardly given them, they shall have the
victory infallibly in the issue; and so they come by degrees to know there are
more with them, than with their enemies, and that therefore they shall have
more strength to overcome, because their God is the Lord of Hosts, and commands
(when he pleases) the Armies of their Adversaries, yea, when they least think
of it, he then no less does it, and when it seems the most unlikely, he makes
them know it the most infallibly. But if from the Worlds wilderness, Christ at
any time calls any of his servants particularly, for the exercise of any
eminent grace he has sent (as a love-token) into their souls, with Peter to
walk toward Christ (when he calls them) upon a Sea of troubles, where there is
no sooting, but what faith finds; if at any time their foot of faith should
slip, or strength of grace begin to stagger, Christ is always near at hand to
stay them, to hold them up; if they be weak, he will give them strength, if
sick, he will be their Physician, if they mistake their way, or know it not
well, he will show it, he will teach them; if they labor of any want, he will
supply it; if they are liable to any danger, fall, or hurt, he will support
them, he will deliver them, if they be any ways hardly bestead in their wo^^
estate, he will rescue them, and never forsake them, even all the while he is
bringing them through a red Sea of adversity, unto their everlasting
celestial Canaan; but sometime likewise he dryes up those waters, and when
their implacable enemies pursue them most furiously and confidently, he makes
those appearing raging Seas of troubles to become water-walls for their
defense, whilst they speedily and safely pass through them unto a place of
rest, and makes them inevitable executioners of their enemies ruin; In such
tried tracts of Grace, Christ walks on secretly but securely, with the Lot of
his own inheritance, with the Camp of all his true Israel, that fight under his
Banner, as with a pillar of a cloud to guide them by day, and a pillar of fire
to enlighten their Camp in the might, all the time they are passing from Egypt
to Canaan, from Babylonian bondage, to be made free Denizens of the New
Jerusalem.

Now for such an object, in such a condition, so to receive such mercy, from
such an holy and glorious Creator, so dishonored, so disobeyed, so provoked,
in such a manner, by such a deliverer, so applied, so made effectual, and that
against such opposition, otherwise invincible, and otherwise inevitably sinking
into desperate misery, never to be ended, eased, or remedied, and this in a
settled certain course continued and made effectual through all successions of
Ages; may well be the wonder of mercy to all the world, and matter of admirable
thanksgiving and praise, to all glorified Saints and Angels, through all
eternity to render unto his great name; no object therefore of goodness like
this to be found in all Gods other works, as man so wretchedly miserable, so
gloriously delivered.

Ninthly, For the ends wherefore it is contrived, carried on, raised, and to be
perfected in reference both to God and man.

First, The chief end is glory, to the God of all glory, the original
fountain of it, the end and intendment of it, the dispencer and bestower of
it, the primary and perpetual owner of it, which whatsoever Creature assumes
without his allowance, is therein an highly sacrilegious robber of God; for no
man has any thing but what he has received from him, 1 Cor: 4. 7. Now there
is no way wherein God has manifested himself unto the world, or in any kind
in the world, comparably glorious unto this, and therefore this most excellent
supreme end of his, must necessarily in the same proportion be advanced
therein, to wit, in an higher degree by that work, than by any, or all others
besides.

Secondly, That the revealing and exhibiting the excellency and goodness of
this work, unto intelligible creatures, in this way, might afford them always
matter, and occasion, and the greatest inforcement to set forth his praise
suitably to what is discovered to them or received by them; and because the
discoveries here are sometimes so great and wonderful unto the Saints, they
are therefore strangely carried on with divine and spiritual ravishment of
soul, to magnify the soul-quickening, sanctifying, and saving grace of their
most good God and merciful Father, and that many times upon renewed returns
of his favors, after not only their troubles and afflictions, but after their
manifold failings and sins, yea, sometimes after their heinous offenses; and to
others in the increase of spiritual indowments, experiences, gracious incomes
of Spirit, heavenly communion and manifestations of Gospel glory to their
souls, to the great dimming and obscuring of the luster of all worldly glory in
their eyes, and the beautifying of a very afflicted outward condition, in any
way of the faithful service of their great and good God, and even in their
very sufferings for their most blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which
they by a gracious inward operation upon their souls, are not only enabled to
think well of, and to observe favorable aspects of Divine grace in such
seeming dark times, but much to rejoice many times and triumph in assurance of
victory aforehand, yea, to esteem it their great honor, that they are
counted by him worthy so to do him service, and suffer for his name; yea, to
esteem it a peculiar favor, and sometime to find such strange support, and
sometime to have such enlargement of comfort, to the stupifying (as it were)
the sense of pain (as some of the Martyrs in their sufferings acknowledged)
and sometime by the strong piercing sight of the eye of faith, through the
greatest and heaviest Cross of Christ to discover the Crown; and strangely to
beholders, to seem to neglect their contempt, and (with their Savior Heb. 12.
2.) to despise their shame, and even to forget their sorrows, yea, and sometime
(with Stephen, Acts 7.) to behold high and heavenly visions of glory in the
lowest ebb of their temporal sufferings, and all this, many times, not only to
the astonishment, but even to the confusion of the face of persecuting enemies,
according to that promise of our Savior, Luke 21. 15. I will give you a mouth
and wisdom, which all our adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor
resist, which is many times fulfilled by mean and contemptible instruments,
which being the foolish of the world, God chooses to confound the wise, and the
weak things of the world, to confound the things that are mighty, and base
things of the world, and things that are not, to bring to naught things that
are, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. And thus in the manifold varieties of the dispensations
of God toward his people, as they receive both good and evil at his hand
here, which they willingly with holy Job always acknowledge to be from him,
who or whatsoever be the instruments, there are continual springs and
fountains, flowing forth with new matter of praise and glory, from the poor
despised flock of Christ, in this their uncertain pilgrimage, from the manifold
strong discoveries of the Gospel glory of God, in and toward them in all his
ways, and from some comfortable apprehensions, from what a foundation of Free
grace, all such dispensations toward them are derived, and unto what ends they
tend, with frequent observations of Gods glorious appearances therein, so that
they are sometime at a stand, whether they should more wonder at such Gods
appearances, and glorious operations, or praise him for his grace therein. Oh
who is able to set forth the fathomless depth of Gods misterious mercy, in such
sort to his faithful servants in all ages, that men are ordinarily capable of
knowing in this kind? in regard of the innumerable varieties of godly men's
experiences in all times, which have been matter of such glory to God in their
own persons, or before others, through all generations in all places, of all
conditions, upon all occasions, is but the least part [as we say of all
knowledge] of that which in this kind might be known: but as the Evangelist
John, chap. the last, v. the last, speaks in those high expressions of Christ's
works upon earth: so may we say of these, the weak understandings, and
memories of all men upon earth, are not able to reach or remember them; but
when those manifold foldings of Divine wisdom, held out in so many great
Folioes of undecyphered Characters, in such his dispensations of his grace and
goodness, shall be, and before the glorified Saints and Angels fully explained,
and opened, and the enjoyments of everlasting fullness of glory in clear vision,
shall not only reveal the original spring of all such currents of flowing
mercy to all sorts of men, but shall hold out in clear manifestations, how in
all these, or what ever the like, or other, or greater actings, which have been
toward themselves, in the wonder of the mystery of that glorious grace,
revealed and exhibited in their temporal and spiritual being in the world, and
afterward in their eternal happiness in the Kingdom of heaven, was from God
the Father, through God the Son, and by God the holy Spirit, according to the
eternal Gospel, given to the Saints throughout all Ages; the wonderful
goodness whereof, and the glorious excellencies of God therein, and thereby
shining out unto them in their full glory, in that most blessed vision and
fruition of him, which all glorified creatures then shall obtain, will make
them break forth with continual and unexpressible praises, and glory to the
great God, and to the lamb, and to the Lord the Spirit, to all eternity.

And herein, according as they have been appointed and exercised by those
sovereign dispensations in the work, in the greater service, they shall be
glorified accordingly with the greater measure of happiness in the world to
come, and so much the more largely shall they discern the excellency of the
glorious, and gracious workings of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the
true Church, through all generations, and accordingly be enlarged with
rejoicing therein to the everlasting praise of his, incomprehensibly glorious
grace displayed thereby.

So that Gods ends in respect of man, is, to have his part in this great
service, and to have his portion in the other great happiness, and both
according to the measure and proportion dispensed, and conveyed in the way of
Gospel glory, and both, and all to the eternal glory of the author thereof; we
will not attempt to trace out here any of the more remarkable paths of such
mercy of God, least even in them, we loose our selves so far, as to forget that
we have here much other work to do, and eternal vision will better, yea,
perfectly discover it, and is allotted for it: but no such excellent end of any
other works, saving in reference unto this, and so the drift of Gods bounty is
advanced higher to man hereby, then otherwise it could have been, for in stead
of an earthly Paradise, he shall now be brought to the possession of an
heavenly; instead of knowing God as a Creator only, he shall now both know and
enjoy him as his Creator and Redeemer; instead of an uncertain and temporal
happiness, he shall have a most certain and eternal happiness; instead of lower
matter of praise, he shall have unspeakeably higher matter of praise, and
consequently (through this free Gospel grace) the more enlargement of glory
therewith: And hence let us pass to the (...) Tenth Respective consideration,
that is in respect of the many excellent uses, to be made here of by all men
here, but especially by Gods servants here and hereafter, above all the
consideration of any other of Gods glorious works in the world.

First, For all men that hear of such a glorious Gospel discovery in the world
above the rest.

First, to admonish them to learn in the method of young Children, directed by
their experienced Teachers, First, to know the letters and sillables, and then
put together the words to know the sense of what they from time to time may
read in any or all the books of God in this world, set forth for their
learning, wherein God sets before all sorts of men, new lessons of all kinds, if
they would not be such dullards and trewants, that they will not take them out;
look then upon the letters of Gods great folioes in the world, the Creation,
the upholding, the disposeing and ordering of it, and all things in it; Look
first to the motions illuminations and influences of the heavens, look upon the
successions of times, days and nights, winter and summer, seed time, and
harvest; but thou will say, how shall I put these together, and make sillables
and sentences of them, look unto the 19 Psalm, and there the word of God shall
be thy schoolmasters herein, it tells thee, the heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmaments shows his handiwork; and day unto day utters
speech, and night unto night shows language, that is, they hold out matter
for thy understanding, knowledge or experience to work upon such works of God
to his praise and glory: so again Genesis 8. 22. Gods word instructs us, that seed
time, and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night shall not
cease, which is another syllable to spell the truth of God by in such things,
how that he has ever since the destruction of the old world fulfilled that his
promise; in times of plenty, the Psalmist shows how he crowns the earth with
his goodness, Ps. 65. 11: when all sorts of Creatures are full of rejoicing and
comfort; the Scriptures informs us to spell out thereby, Ps. 145. 16. That God
opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of every living thing: and so to
come to thy own particular case and condition in outward things, thou may
spell out words and sentences by the help of many instructers which God allows
thee; as thy Reason, (if rightly regulated) thy own and others experience,
observations, examples of others, Gods judgments, providence, mercies, and
all sorts of outward Dispensations of God, whereby thy capacity may be raised
up toward the attainment of higher learning by degrees, upon thy well using thy
first rudiments of Divine knowledge, for they should all discover God unto
thee; and so thou may by degrees come to attain a good measure of skill in
the truly liberal sciences in the school of spiritual and heavenly grace or
glory; if the use of the former bring thee not nearer to God, they will make
thee go further from him, as it was with the Gentiles, To. 1. 21. Because when
they knew God (by his outward works) they glorified him not as God, neither
were thankful, therefore he gave them up; if such works of God discover him not
more unto thee, they will cause him the more to hide his face from thee; as is
observed of some skilful experienced Physicians, they know and see so much of
the secret operations of Nature, that by that means they become more
Atheistical, forgetting and neglecting the God of Nature; they pore so much
upon the excellencies of the Creatures, which they think they know and make use
of by their own skill and industry, for their temporal advantage, that they
therefore forget and neglect the Creator, and the glory therefore due unto him;
and does not this Atheism grow upon men for the want of spelling the words and
sentences of Gods ordinary Books in the world, by the teaching of his Word,
whilst men would choose rather to be thought great Naturalists and Politicians
in the world by others, when without that teaching they become mere naturalls,
fools, and Idiots, rather than soundly judicious persons in that which mainly
ought to be known, observed, and acknowledged by them, to the glory of the
all-working God.

Secondly, Let this direct such men as have learned to spell out Gods names in
his outward works, by the help of his Word, then to set themselves better to
read him in his word of grace, let them know the principles of his Religion,
and know the maine foundations of his divine truth; especially, let them take
notice of these two maine principles of such excellent knowledge.

First* That all glory is to be rendered unto God, as the only true Original of
all good: And

Secondly, That all emptiness is ever to be ascribed to the creature in it
self, further than God makes it any way capable of goodness, and puts such
goodness into it, or makes it communicative of that goodness unto others, or
of further enlargement or longer enjoyment of goodness from himself, even as
he pleases, unto whom the praise thereof is ever therefore to be ascribed; and
if thou will but then take up that teaching word, and use those means which
God thereby directs thee, to improve them, and continue therein, he will then
more and more discover himself unto thee; yea, when once thou art set in such
a serious seeking of him this way, it is evident thou were sought of him
before, and he has begun already to make himself known unto thee, and so
thou do and wilt seek him still, and shall find him more and more in that
way, wherein thou shall behold his glorious grace, which is the sure way for
thee to become acceptable unto him, and shall be truly blessed by him.

Thirdly, But for others who have these glorious discoveries in any good
measure already made unto them; Let them hence learn, with the most enlarged
apprehensions that may be, to behold them, and with the most earnest bent of
their affections to entertain them, and with the highest and fullest
expressions of joy in their inward, and with their outward man, to mainfest and
declare them to the everlasting praise of the Author of them; let them improve
them to his glory, and the good of others; let them more be transformed into
the image of them, that they may have the greater measure of true comfort, and
glory by them.

Again, Let men wisely hence observe the divine excellency of a truly gracious
spirit, when once a transfiguration is made in it, what an excellent, yea,
heavenly frame is put uponit, what glorious discoveries are made unto it, what
celestial Joys are put into it, what everlasting happinesle is prepared for
it: O that these things were settled upon men's souls, and that they could with
such divine meditations, and spiritual Soliloquies (by the assistance of the
Lord the Spirit) so rivet them into their own hearts, and keep them there, that
they might still soar higher and higher in such heavenly contemplations, till
they attain to the top of most glorious eternity, to receive in fulness
what here in their measure only they can but taste of.

Again, Let them hence learn to be thankful, above all things in this world,
for such gracious discoveries, in any measure or degree, by their good God
vouchsafed unto them; Let them be humbled in the sense of their unworthiness
thereof, as great, as manifold, as continual (if Divine grace manifest toward
them, did not otherwise order them some way or other) as is discernable in any
others, who have hearts all alike, as face in water answers to face, Pro: 27.
19. And there is no difference, but what God himself makes in these ways of
his grace, for who makes thee to differ from another, 1 Cor: 4. 7. Let them
walk in the light and comfort of such discoveries, which amongst many
Christians is often received in varieties of measures, and ought to be improved
to varieties of purposes; Let them long more after them than any other things
desirable; as the Spouse in Cant: 1. 2. Kiss me with the kisses of thy Mouth;
thy love is better than wine. Let them pursue after them more earnestly,
resolvedly, indefatigably, than for all things here besides, and with the due
use of all other good means besides, ^ith humble, faithful and importunate
prayer before the throne of the heavenly grace, for them; and ever to render
the more glory and praise unto his divine Majesty, in the obtaining of such
their request.

Again; Let it be a strong Argument at all times in our spiritual approaches
unto God, in the due sense and sight of such gracious discoveries, which we
have received, to worship him in a manner suitable the^eunto* As Moses, when he
had been with God upon the Mount, the glory of God appeared very bright upon
him; so in such duties let the glory of those discoveries more eminently
appear; the heavenly flames kindled in a soul, set on fire from those divine
graces of true faith and fervent love, when they are blown up as it were, by
taking up the bellows of such discoveries, will much promote the sweet odours
of spiritual insence ascending up to heaven, and be a special means, whereby
all the soul oblations, sacrifices, and services in those ways offered unto
God, become very acceptible to him in his beloved Son, as being sweetly
perfumed with his spiritual grace, upon his own special dispensations, which he
would not have neglected at any time, yea, which he would have improved at all
times, but then especially in his Divine worship, when the Soul is chiefly to
make her returns to God, for such incomes from him. How free then should the
soul be in such service, which is so various in all men's souls, and so forcing
and prevalent in many men's souls, and the chief part of acceptable service to
God, consisting much therein; yea, and he requires thereby to be sanctified, as
he instructed Moses upon a like occasion, Lev. 10. 3. But lastly, in respect of
glorified Saints and Angels in the world to come. First, for glorified Saints;
how will they by and from this glory be fully transformed into the same Image?
How shall they then be filled with the fruition of all that goodness of God,
which in such ways of his toward them in the world before, in some sort he
had discovered himself unto them by: And how triumphantly will they rejoice,
and glory in Gospel grace, in the fullness of that fruition, as being that great
current, whereby the fullness of that fruition is conveyed and continued, yea,
perpetuated unto them, so largely as no soul can sufficiently conceive of, nor
all glorified Saints shall ever be able fully to comprehend: How shall such
glorified Saints to the uttermost then apply themselves yet most delightfully
and happily to sound forth his praise, upon this most blessed advantage, to all
eternity, and that the more emergently when they come thither, in that regard;
then all former mysteries, and dark proceedings of God in the world before,
will be clearly un^oulded, all difficulties resolved, all obstacles removed,
all evil of sin, or punishment, or misery, with all the fear thereof, utterly
abolished, all mists and darkness dispelled, all interruptions abandoned, all
hoped for enjoyments perfected, and most securely possessed.

And what then by glorified Saints will be done to their best ability, will be
more amply accomplished by the glorious Angels who never sinned, who are of far
higher and greater excellency, higher in degree, and therefore more eminent
instruments of Gods praise; they have larger capacities, and therefore fit to
receive greater discoveries of his glory; they are faithful and ancient (though
secret) Ministers of the Almighty, in all such willing and active service, as
he has at any time assigned them unto, even from the beginning, through the
carrying on and perfecting of his Gospel glory; they are of long experience,
and throughout all times, have had exceeding excellent discoveries thereof:
upon all which considerations, they may then in many respects be happily
helpful to saved Saints, to afford them their better assistance, and their more
eminent examples, in doing that which is all their happiness, of which this is
but the brief comprisal [ All Glory to the God of Glory, and to the Lamb that
was slain, sitting upon the Throne, and to the most holy Lord the Spirit, for
ever and ever.] But what we can but now dimly hint at, in this Gospel
glofirying grace, believing souls shall in their season fully and perfectly find
by most happy experience accomplished: we come therefore to the last respective
consideration, and that is

Eleventhly, The blessed effects thereof above all other his works, which how
great, how various, how many, how admirable, how strong, how glorious, how
invincible, how comfortable, how delightful, how satisfying, even in this
present pilgrimage, where nothing else is either sure or satisfying, how truly
and really good in it self, where nothing is besides it, or without it, how
largely it extends its force, how infallibly it will show forth its virtue, how
prevalently it will carry on against all opposition, how most certainly it will
attain its end, because the power of God, the wisdom of God, the holy Spirit
of God, is always in the wheels of its motion, as in Ezekiels Vision, Chap: 1.
20. So that time would fail me, strength would fail me, opportunity would
fail me, (and much more able Heralds of the renown of this glorious grace) in
any competent measure to display the same. I shall only advise all sorts of
Christians at present, by the due uses (or the like) even now in some measure
pointed out unto them, to labor to find in themselves, such effects, which by
such due improvement, they may (through grace) in their times and seasons,
discover or obtain; Concerning which the holy Prophet of old, and our Apostle
here, 1 Cor: 2. 9. tells us, Eye has not seen, nor ear, heard, neither has
it entered into the heart of man, not only what God has prepared, and will
confer in another life, but what he has prepared and does confer in this
life too, according to the good pleasure of his own holy will, and likewise to
the praise of his present so excellent Gospel grace, manifest in all his
Saints, in all such varieties of the happy and glorious effects thereof. And so
without any further enlargement at present, in this so vast a field of
consideration of the manifold excellent effects of Gospel glory, in regard of
men, and Angels, good and bad, here and hereafter, (a subject well worth
weighing by the best men's best abilities) for as the contemplation thereof will
be a spring of comfort and happiness to the one sort, so the abundant
conviction and experience of the realitie of the same, will be the sting of the
misery of all the other sorts, it will so grind and gnaw and torment the
damned spirits and persons, so to find what they have lost for a shadow, for
nothing, yea, for that which is worse than nothing, even so unconceiveable
good, that it is Questioned in the Schools (and not without cause,) whether [
Paena damni or paena sensus] that is, whether the punishment of the Damned in
regard of what they have lost, or the punishment of sense and feeling, in
regard of what shall be inflicted on them in Hell, shall be (as I may say) the
greater Hell unto them hereafter: But I say at present, we shall pass from
this head to the next, namely, The third demonstration of this excellent truth,
in which, and in the rest, we purpose (if God will) to be more brief, and that
is to manifest Gospel Glory to be the great Glory of the Lord, which his people
discern in this world, in that regard it is the only and excellent, yet
general means for them all, to bring them to the real participation of true
spiritual glory here, and the fruition of eternal glory hereafter; and to
make indeed grace and glory to be both graceful and glorious to them.

Something we have spoken of this by way of comparison of its transcendent
excellency with that which was less: But here we are to take notice, that as
it is the efficacious way, and appointed by God unto that high and happy end;
so it is the only means, no other to be expected, none else to be used
directly in reference unto that end; for as there is no name given under heaven
whereby we can be saved, but by the name of Christ; so no other means to
convey that salvation to us, but by this Gospel of grace; If any would be
changed from evil to good, Gospel grace must do it; if any would be freed
from the evil One, and owned by him that is only good, Gospel grace must do
it: if any would be freed from the mischief of sin, and obtain the blessing
of Divine favor, Gospel grace must do it; If any man would ascend up to
heaven, or descend down to hell, or take the wings of the morning, and fly into
the utmost parts of the earth, as Psalm: 139. 8. Either to escape Gods wrath, or
obtain his favor any other way, it were but all in vain; If any would try
all the Mountebank Chyrurgery that Satan has used in all the Ages of the
world, all his false Religions, all the multitudes of his Hell-devised ways of
false worship, all his strong delusions, all his heartlesse, (except of seduced
deceived hearts) fruitless, bootlesse ceremonies, constitutions, beggarly
rudiments, bodily exercises, not warranted by the word of God, to cure the
festered wounds of their sin-polluted defiled consciences, and that most
industriously all their days, they would but miserably all that time, loose
their own labor, defeat their own hopes, forsake their own mercy, obstruct
their own happiness, remedilesly plunge themselves into eternal misery. So
that by this, men must be both sanctified and saved, if at all, and without
this, and besides this, there is no other means to attain the same. All Gods
brood of travelers have passed along in this road, till they came to appear
before God in the heavenly Zion; and none can otherwise possibly attain to
that only desirable issue of their pilgrimage here upon earth.

I shall not here need to speak any thing of the freeness of this now most
necessary means in regard of men, [for there is neither necessity of nature,
or of any coaction from creatures in respect of God] but only the good pleasure
of his most holy Will, is the prime original of all. I need not touch upon the
proportionablenesse of the means, this only salve or Balsome so prepared by
him, to cure the souls wounds, being every way fitted and suited for its
soars. I shall not need to insist upon the easiness, the amiablenesse, the
naturallnesse, the familiarnesse of the way of dispencing and bestowing this
Gospel grace. I shall not need to insist upon the efficaciousnesse of this most
gracious dispensation by the holy Ghost; all which tend to demonstrate this
particular, that it is the excellent and only means to bring Gods people to
the real participation both of grace and glory here and here-after; because
under the former head we have touched upon diverse things bordering upon these,
and we likewise study brevitie, though here may be large and excellent matter
for Christian meditation; Only in a word, I shall endeavor to touch upon the
other branch, namely, [that without this discovery of Gospel glory unto the
soul, grace would neither be rightly graceful, nor true glory truly glorious
in the eyes of men;] even as such men who are guided by sense, mainely live
more like beasts than men, like the mil-horse in his tract, follow the desires
of their own eyes, and are led on by every vain deludeing object, and neither
regard to know, or pursue better things, but wholly in a manner proceed to
prostitute their reasonable souls, to sensitive brutish pleasures, as if they
were capable of no greater good; and as those men, that upon a better
improvement of the like (it may be) a less, and yet again sometimes a greater
ability, are raised up to an higher attainment; as many of the ancient
Philosophers and Heathens Sages, who by study, contemplation, and industry in
the use of pertinent means, attained to the discovery of an excellency of
morality, in their kind, which they called (virtue) wherein they did sometime
seem to behold such lovelyness, that it made them not only to commend it to
others, but deemed that men could not know the beauty and comeliness of it, and
not be in love with it: The like, and much more we may say of the excellency of
Gospel grace, to such as obtain any competent discovery thereof; O how are they
inamoured with it! How do their hearts run after it! How highly do they prize
it! How earnestly do they pursue it! How unwilling are they to part with it!
yea, what high resolution do they take up, not to part with it, upon any
terms; they will buy the truth, but not sell it, as Pr. 23. 23. yea, and
rather to part with all besides, then that; but as on the other hand
Morallists, for all their discoveries and commendadations, do not, cannot
prevail with sensual brutish persons, to forsake their swinish lusts, to love
or like, much less to pursue their virtues, and yet those Sages knew the worth
thereof, to be incomparably above the other; even so it is with that much more
excellent discovery of Gospel glory, though a truly regenerate and sanctified
soul sees such beauty, such loveliness, such joy and sollace, yea, true
happiness in those Gospel gracious discoveries, that they not only like it, and
commend it, but as some Ancients, concerning some amorous persons, were wont to
phrase it, [ perdite amant alias] they love others to the looseing of
themselves: so it may be said of their loving of Gospel grace, but in a good
and necessary sense, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 10. 5. If any love Father or
Mother, Wife or Children, more then me, he is not worthy of me [ perdite amant
gloriam Evangelicam,] they destructively love Gospel glory, that they will
rather loose friends and credit, ease and possessions, liberty, life and all,
then to suffer a divorce between that and their own souls: But for all other
men, or any other man to desire it, to pursue it, upon a true Gospel account,
as believing or seeing it to be so excellent and glorious, or upon such terms
to pursue or retain it, by purchasing or suffering for it; the heathen Sages
might much more easily have prevailed with any such beasts in the shapes of
men, then any sanctified soul or Ambassador of Christ can prevail with any, to
take right notice of, or much less to be so enamoured, of that most excellent
object of soul sollacing grace, until they come to be transformed into the
same image, by the spirit of God.

Fourthly, But this will yet further appear in the next demonstration, namely;
In that such Gospel grace in the souls of the Saints, differs not in nature
from their heavenly glory, but only in degrees: A man that is in any good
measure in heaven in his spiritual part, here upon earth, shall certainly
inherit the kingdom of Heaven hereafter; and such within: whom (as our
Savior speaks Luke ^7. ^1.) the kingdom of heaven is really here seated by
Gospel grace, they shall infallibly obtain a Crown of glory, which will never
fade to all eternity; and indeed heaven would not be heaven unto them then,
when they should come to possess it, if that kingdom of heaven had not taken
possession of their souls before, to fit them for it: a blind man may as soon
be affected with the mere placeing of pleasant sights before him, or a deaf man
delighted with the sound of any music which he cannot hear, as men or women
truly rejoice in the glorified Saints and Angels happiness hereafter, if they
have not here their Celestial frame of spirit wrought upon their souls; yea,
the very society of glorified Saints, would be a kind of hell to wicked men
remaining such, if they had no other hell to suffer; for as it cannot be
expected the wolf should lie down with the Lamb, until Gospel grace have
wrought the change of nature here, as the spirit of God has foretold, Is. 11.
6, 7. 8. so until that nature be changed, yea, a contrary put into the soul of
a man, the Saints perpetual songs of praise to God, and the Lamb, and the Lord
the Spirit, would not only be unsuitable and unpleasant, but a senceless subject
to such a soul, that never had followed Christ in the regeneration, nor seen,
nor felt, nor rightly known beforehand, the Divine power of Gospel grace, the
mystery of the gospel, then the matter of the Saints everlasting rejoicing
would be, such an hidden sealed mystery, that such unbeleeving and disobedient
souls would not understand it, saving only so far as to have convinced and
self-condemned consciences thereby, little understanding what they may sometime
seem to pray or hope for here, concerning the kingdom of heaven, who in their
dispositions and depraved nature do [ toto caelo deferre] stand at the
greatest distance from it; but when that nature is once changed, that Lions are
at peace with the Lambs, and the hurtful creatures lie down with the
harmeless, Is. 11. 7. then grace shall appear glorious unto such, and as their
measure thereof shall be greater, the more it will appear so; and the more they
grow in such grace, the more they will delight in it; and the greater measure
they shall obtain of it, the more heavenly glory hereafter will be allotted to
them: It is true indeed, our heaven upon earth will have a mixture of vanity
and corruption, and weakness together with it, till that which is perfect be
come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10. I shall
not stand here to enlarge upon the many considerations, which might to this
purpose be produced, in regard of the souls incapacity of glory till it be
changed, and of its unsutableness unto such glory; besides the sense of the
want of any right, title, or interest in such glorified Saints happiness, with
their own self condemnation upon it; and the apprehension of that intolerable,
eternal, infinite, divine displeasure against them; as also the utter
detestation that perfected Saints with Angels, will have of the hateful
qualities of all devils and unsanctified souls of men or women, and even the
very heavens natural repugnancy, and antipathy against them, to the utter
expulsion of all such, as poison, out of them, since into them no unclean thing
shall enter, Rev. 21, 27. As Crystal glasses, rather then hold poison will
break asunder; even so the most pure, Chrystaline heavens would rather break,
then any devil or unsanotified persons should abide or inhabit in them. Here
indeed the Honey Be and the toad or spider have both their places and
employments, and their enjoyments too, together; the one to gather up its honey,
the other to suck up their poison, the one to lurk in the nastie corrupted or
noisome corners of the earth, the other in their sweet and pleasant hives and
honey; the one enrich themselves or feed upon their own destructive poison, the
other enrich themselves with, and feed upon their own pleasant, wholesome,
healing, and strengthening honey, which they have by diligent labor acquired:
But when that woofull, poisonous, destructive nature of such men, is in any
good measure subdued, by the prevalent power of Gospel grace, O how sweet will
the spiritual kingdom of heaven be unto such souls? how will the true Citizens
of the spiritual Zion be owned and embraced by them? How will their portion,
their delicates be desired above all others? How will grace and glory be then
longed for, sought for by them above other things, yet these [ passibus aequis
(as we may say) in their due proportions, when they are in their right frame]
not glory more then grace, but grace as the right promoter of glory; and
indeed, that which is only truly glorious in its own nature, and which will
meet with glory as the consequent, the result, the reward of it; by grace we
have the first fruits, To. 8. 33. the earnest penny, Ephesians. 1. 14. of glory and
happiness, in the enjoyment of that, we enjoy the sanctifying spirits
residence, the witness of our peace, the sealer of our redemption, the
comforter of our souls, the teacher of all our sound wisdom and knowledge, the
guider and orderer and preserver of our whole spirits, souls, and bodies in
the way of truth, peace, and glory, unto the appearing of Christ; and from
thence their preserver, in and unto eternal life, 1 These. 3. 13. So that since
grace is of such near consanguinity, yea, of such Identitie and oneness of the
same essence and nature, with glory hereafter, and glory being not only the
perfecting and consummation of grace, but the result, recompense and reward of
it too, it is no wonder it is here dignified with the most excellent title of
Glory in the text, and that as proceeding from the most excellent author and
fountain of it, the Lord, the glory of the Lord; the greatest glory he has
manifested in this world, or greater, then to all other Creatures in the world,
save his true Church therein, at least in that inward, spiritual, efficacious
manner to their transformation into the same Image; and even greater then to
his true Church under the old Testament, though transformed likewise, yet in
these gospel times, it is more clear, more excellent, (as we formerly declared)
and therefore such as now with those primative Saints spoken of in the Text,
behold it, after the like manner, must needs (happily) behold the glory of the
Lord, though but as in a glass, yet with open face. And thus much briefly of
this particular likewise.

The Fifth Demonstration is from the consideration, that it will be the
everlasting fountain, and never failing spring, continually affording matter of
the perpetual Halelujahs, blessings, and praises of the glorified Saints and
Angels, unto the Lord God Almighty, and unto the Lamb, and unto the Lord the
Spirit for ever and ever; In that perfect Estate of their happiness, all the
greatness of this glory, in the particulars we formerly set before you, besides
what ever else may most display it, I say, the greatness of it above all
others, will then be most clearly unfolded, most largely discerned, most
perfectly manifest unto them, to the infinite praise and glory of the Author,
worker, and dispenser of all grace and glory; and their own happiness and glory
will be so much the more enlarged, as they know and feel, and canperform this
most glorious work of praise; and as there are such multitudes of such
exexcellent companions and consorts in this soule-satisfying, celestial,
divine, and perfectly happy harmony; the profound depth, the misterious
secrecy, the otherwise, then by an infinite God, insuperable difficulties, the
most certain sureness, and most settled security, of the laying of that
foundation, how will it be known and admired, to the honor of him, that from
eternity had so laid it? How will the glorious nature, matter and form thereof
be in like manner displayed and improved by them? How will all that they shall
observe or discern of the time, durance and manner of raising such a glorious
structure, be celebrated by them with their due praise? How will then the
infinite wisdom, mercy, grace, compassion and riches of goodness, with the
power, truth, holiness, justice, and all the excellencies of God, so gloriously
shining out in the face of Jesus Christ, chap. 4. 6. and by the holy spirit
discovered before unto the Saints, be continually in an happy measure obvious
to the vision? How will the knowledge of such poor, yet suitable instrumental
means, that had such treasure in earthen vessels, to convey such glorious grace
unto such mean and unsuitable objects, as men in their lost Estate, so
wonderfully, powerfully, and graciously, throughout all generations in the
world, spring out unto them, with matter of continued, renewed melody, in that
most blessed, and glorious, heavenly harmony? How will the uses then observed
and improved by them to the uttermost, be completed? How will the blessed
operations and effects of this glory, then be fully known, noted, declared,
celebrated by them, with all due honor to the worker of them to all eternity?
Here Gods Saints, according to their discoveries in such contemplations; may
adore, and admire, in some poor measure, and by the eye of faith, discern such
things as God has, both so wrought, revealed, and conferred, in and by the
Gospel of his Son. But the most happy inlargements, beatifical vision, and
perfect fruition of these things, both for their own most secure and satisfying
happiness, and the infinite and eternal praise of the Almighty One, will be
then the everlasting employment of all such glorified Saints and Angels to all
eternity; then will the unspeakable excellencies of this glorious grace fully
appear unto such: O that men would therefore labor above all things, to get
their part in it here, that they may have their portion in that happy society
hereafter, everlastingly, by these means to praise God with them, and in so
doing to be perfectly blessed with them: And thus we have done with the proof
and illustration of this glorious truth: Proceed we now to add some further
improvements, then what we have formerly touched upon, and so to draw on to a
conclusion of the point.

Use. First, Let men above all turn their eyes, I mean the eyes of their
souls and minds to the beholding of Gospel glory: glorious things are
delightful things, to every discerning faculty [provided there be suitableness,
and in a due proportion thereunto.]

First, For the senses; it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to behold the Sun,
says Solomon, Ec. 11. 7.

Secondly, For Reason. The contemplation of Moral, Natural, and Metaphysical
objects, and subjects, was so pleasing unto the ancient Philosophers and Sages
amongst the Heathen, that they were so inwardly ravished with the excellency
thereof, that they conceived happiness consisted therein: but that soul that by
the eye of faith, and by the efficacious grace of the Spirit of God, comes once
to behold, in any good measure, this Gospel glory, finds by this a dim shade
cast upon all seeming glories in the world besides; as the sun shining in his
glory at noon day, upon the light of many small candles burning in the bright
beams thereof.

Qu. But thou will say, how shall I do this? Blind men cannot see pleasing
objects, and deaf men cannot here delightful music; the Scripture tells me, I
am such by nature.

Ans. And do thou believe that is true? If many others did so too, they
would be much nearer the cure, and so art thou like to be; for thou could
not rightly have acknowledged that, but by the holy Ghost: But to help the good
work forward, and to point out unto others, what course they should take, give
me leave to set down a few directions.

First, Go to Christ the true Physician of souls for his Collyrium, his
spiritual eye salve, which he makes proclamation of, Rev. 3. 18. and buy it of
him by prayer, by faith, by the use of all his means.

Secondly, To cure thy deafness, let him put his fingers into thine ears, and
say, ( Mar. 7. 33, 34.) Ephphatha, be ye opened; but it may be thou art dumb
too, and can not speak unto him, get him to touch the tied strings of thy
tongue likewise, that they may be loosed; but being blind, deaf, and dumb too,
thou will say, how shall I find him? how shall I come at him? how shall I make
any application to him for his help? Ans. Call for his ambassadors, or come to
his stewards, his messengers, make thy case known to them, take their direction
or advice, and use their help, and walk on in all the ways of Christ with them
accordingly, they will bring thee to the place where Christ keeps his Mart, for
the cure of all thy spiritual diseases and infirmities; they are thy brethren,
they have love toward thy soul; they are compassionate, they have a
fellow-feeling of thy condition; they are men that have like passions as other
men's, and therefore know how to show compassion toward their brethren; they
have had experience many times, both of the sense of thy condition, and of
their own cure; they have sometimes frequented Christ's Marts long, and perhaps
have much helped off with his commodities unto others; however, they are
willing, and ready many times, to conduct thee; and it is their office to
instruct thee in the way, and to entreat for thee, yea, and to plead for thee
too, (if need be) that Christ should either take thee in hand, or go on and
perfect his cure, begun upon thy soul; and to beseech the Lord the Spirit to
make a right, home, and effectual application of all Christ's Physic to
complete the cure; And remember that by the way, which even the better part of
men in the world, have much forgotten of late years, [That they are an
Ordinance of Christ, appointed by himself to be used, by all his people to the
end of the world] and they are many times good friends in the Court of heaven,
and may much prevail for thee, if thou will duly use them; they have
authority from Christ, and therefore they may be bold and courageous in this
work; besides the experience, they get and feel more and more of his
goodness; Yea, let me tell thee, thou have no other means, whereby thou may
expect to be helped in the business of thy souls sound cure, if thou will
neglect them, and reject them; For how can thou hear without a preacher,
Rom: 10. 14.

Object: But times and places may not happily afford such, for many may not be
qualified with gifts and graces, as such, if some have gifts, they may be
depraved in their lives, yea ordinances may be disgraced with mixtures of
heaven and earth together, of Gods and man's constitutions in the world.

Answ: The case will then indeed be hard; for as the Eunuch in the case of his
own conversion, said unto Philip, Acts 8. 31. How can I understand, except some
man guide me; yet God can in such a case (as he did to him) send such a
Messenger, one of a thousand, and indeed his grace never brings to the birth,
but he will give strength to bring forth; by what ever way or means the seed
thereof has been sown, it will surely spring up; But for Messengers
altogether unqualified, either with gifts, or graces, or both, where any such
offer themselves, they are not Gods: Men will not employ a Physician, or
Lawyer, so called, when they know they have no skill in their profession; and
surely men ought to be more choice for the health of their souls, than of
their bodily health, or the right of their outward estate: But if they be
outwardly qualified, authorized, and have suitable gifts, They sit (as our
Savior said of the Scribes and Pharisees) in Moses chair, all therefore they
say from Gods authority, hear; but if they be depraved in life, then again
do not after their works, (as he goes on) if they will bind burdens upon
men not to be borne, Mat: 23. 2. as the teachers of the Law, Luk: 11. 46. There
is a woe denounced against them by Christ himself for so doing. If there be
mixtures of Ordinances, whilst they be but of circumstantiall things, when all
the essentialls of Gods institutions stand entire, neglect not duties upon
small discouragements; but if persons, practices, Ordinances be so depraved,
that Gods rules are so infringed, his faithful servants so (justly)
scandalized, that they have cause with those in the time of the Ministration of
Elies wicked sons, to loath the offerings and services of the Lord; the
peoples condition is then very grievous, but such Teachers condition is, if not
altogether so desperate as Elies said sons, yet at least very dangerous, if
reformation be not hastened; but in this kind there will be great need many
times to seek for particular, special advise and counsel, both from God and
his faithful Ambassadors, when he affords advantage for it, wherein who so
humbly and faithfully seek unto him, are not like to be disappointed; For he
that will do the will of God, shall know the doctrine, whether it be of him,
or whether men speak of themselves, Jo: 7. 17. But when in Israel the
contemptible of the people were made Priests, and the golden Calves, upon
politic considerations, were set up in Dan and Bethel, so to busy Israel
with home-spunne worship, that they might not go into Judea or unto Jerusalem,
unto the true worship, and that they approved and practiced it, did foreshew,
and justly caused Israel to be led into captivity by the King of Assyria.

But what ever discouragements thou meetest with from men, never give over thy
humble and faithful addresses to Christ, to discover his Gospel glory unto
thee; and if men hinder or fail, thou will find he will the more help, he can
send an extraordinary Messenger, as Philip to the Eunuch; he can make a little
means help much; in mixtures he can make the good profitable, and the mixture
of men to vanish as nothing; he can speak himself unto thy soul, as to Saul in
an evil course, and send thee to an Ananias to help thee, whom thou never
knew before; in seeking to behold this Glory, God will not reject thee, as
he did Moses, in seeking to see his essential glory, Exodus: 33. 20, 23. but
seeking it earnestly and faithfully, as there is all reason thou should,
thou shall be sure to find it effectually.

Secondly, This is to discover the great condemnation of the world, that then
when such light, such glorious Gospel light is come into the world, men yet
love darkness more than light; yea they are such Moules burrowed in the
bowels of the earth, that they cannot either see or desire, neither are they
willing to see the bright beams of this light, shine they never so clearly,
yea the brighter they shine, the less they desire them, the less they
discern them; their owle-eyes cannot endure to behold the Sun, their delight
is in darkness, in the ways of darkness in the works of darkness, and for
the most part choose rather to fall (by death) into utter darkness, than to
come to this light of life; so that such as put this light from themselves, or
such as hinder, and cloud it, or hide it from others, they must needs fall into
a sad condemnation; was there not only invincible ignorance, but obstinacy
prevalent upon the souls of men? did they not willingly upon their own hearts
and consciences [ Callum inducere] draw such a brawnish hardness, even to
stand against the batteries which God many ways makes against the strong holds
of Satan therein? so that they are not only Gospel-proofe, but Lawproofe too,
so that neither the Boanerges or Barnabae, the sons of thunder, or the sons of
consolation that are sent unto them, can either pierce them, or melt them, bow
them or break them, but they will do as they have done; if they have made
cakes for the Queen of heaven, they will do so still; if they have served God
out of custom more than conscience, they will do so still; if they have added
drunkenness to thirst, they will do so still; if they sacrificed upon the
mountains, they will do so still; if they have hated such as bear the image
of God upon them, they will do so still; yea though the greatest and
forciblest of Gods Ordinances play upon the Forts of their Hell-hardened
Consciences, they remain impenetrable. What clear light has shined long in
this Nation above all her neighbors? how has God poured his Spirit
remarkably, upon many persons eminent amongst us for Divine endowments, being
greatly enlarged with the gifts and graces of Gods Spirit, and as willing as
able to improve their talents, to their Masters advantage, and the salvation of
the souls of all sorts of people! But if they come near the soars of their
souls, how do men kick and spurn against them? then they are their enemies,
because they tell them the truth; if they would take away the veil of
ignorance from before their eyes, they will answer with the Pharisees, those
blind leaders of the blind, that they see already; and therefore as our Savior
told them, so such likewise might be told, therefore your sin remains; if
they would make them sencible of their lost estate, they have good hearts and
meanings, and make many prayers, and it may be, if they were tried through the
whole Law of God, as Christ tried the young man in the Gospel, they would be
ready to plead for themselves not guilty, all these have we kept from our
youth, when their plea is as false, as mistaken by them; If Gospel grace be
never so much discovered to them, if the terms thereof be never so often and
urgently pressed upon them, they hear them not, they receive them not, they
observe them not; if Satan or men will offer any thing else, vain or foolish,
senseless, or frivolous, a little countenance from men, a little engagement in
the world will prevail for their seducement, when Divine truth has been
little regarded for a long time, in reference to their conversion, as our
Savior told the Jews, when they would not regard his heavenly counsel, If any
shall come to them in his own name, him they would hear, Joh: 5. 43. And has
not Satan varieties of designs and agents, to Eclypse, or cloud, or hide, or
even to guish (if possible) Gospel-glory, now for many years brightly shining
amongst us? holding out varieties of strong and strange delusions, sometimes
really gross and despicable to ordinary capacities, sometimes more refined,
and seemingly more spiritual, and appearing more near to perfection, and yet
still wandering from the way of truth, yea sometime to set up iniquirie by Law,
and to obstruct the most efficacious ways and means to promote the
advancement of Gospel glory? Have there not been sad experiments of these
things in our former and later Popish persecutions? And let all real and sound
Christians earnestly pray, there may not be any the like again amongst us; for
shall we Question it, That whilst with Capernaum we are lifted up unto heaven
in Christ's special approaches and intercourses amongst us, so much neglected,
and opposed too, by the generalities almost of men and women, that we shall not
be equally with her cast down into Hell? Let not any persons deceive
themselves, God is not mocked, but as each man sowes, so let him look to reap
at his hands, Mat: 6. 7. If men weave the Spiders webs, and hatch the
Cockatrice eggs, may they not justly expect that their webs should fail to
become garments, and that their eggs break forth into Vipers, to sting or
destroy themselves or others? Isa: 59. 5, 6.

Thirdly, To admonish all good Christians, as they desire to have much glory in
heaven, to labor much to behold the Gospel glory of the Lord in his Church
upon earth, and so to behold it, as to be still more and more transformed into
the same image, yea in being so exercised, heaven will more come down unto
them, and enter into their souls, there will be such a glory as will make
their souls truly delightful, comfortable, happy, such as they would not
exchange, or part with for the whole world; let them be much taken up with the
contemplation and admiration of such Gospel grace and glory, and let their
hearts and mouths be filled with the high praises of God for it, in all
respects of the shining glory of it, oh to what an height of divine excellency
will it raise their spirits! what large possession will it give the Lord the
Spirit of their souls? what earnest longings will it cause after more of the
same grace? what rejoycings and triumphings will it cause in the Lord of glory?
what resistance will it afford against worldly discouragements, intanglements,
engagements, and all obstructions and oppositions whatsoever against it? how
will it sweeten troubles, season every condition, and administer unto them the
oil of joy, even with the garments of heaviness? oh who would not drink well
of the wine of such sweet consolation, to make them in ^ good measure, to
forget their sorrow, when (by faith) in the depth of sorrow they shall so see
Christ a Savior for them, sitting gloriously and triumphantly at the right
hand of God, as Stephen did wonderfully, while he was in stoning to death, Acts
7.

Fourthly, Let this incite and stir up all such as have any true spiritual
discoveries of Gospel glory made unto their souls, hence to learn spiritually
to exult and triumph in the name of the Lord, and in the power of his might,
and in the evidence of his divine grace; for as our Savior said unto his
Disciples in another case, the like may be said unto such, Flesh and blood bath
not revealed this unto their souls, but the Lord the Spirit, who is from
heaven. Do not the Stars standing in the clear aspect of the Sun, send
forth their clear and bright shining rays in the view of the world? Does not
the earth when it receives its seasonable and sweet showers and influences from
the heavens, send forth her tender sprouts and pleasant fruits; for the use of
creatures inhabiting upon it? Do not the Valleys standing thick with Corn,
laugh and sing, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm: 65. 13. And do not all living
creatures under the material heavens, when God opens his hand, and fills them
with his goodness, sing and rejoice? and all of them materially praise the
Lord, as showing forth unto man such ample matter of his praise and glory in
all such respects, continually due unto his divine Majesty from Men and
Angels? which either do, or ought to learn, that great lesson from them? But
then above all, when that inward, secret, divine grace, and spiritual glory,
hidden from the eyes of all creatures, which none else attain to know but
those to whom such inward spiritual discovery is made, and none know their
own, but they that have it; from whence there is gladness put into the hearts
of such, as have this [(...)] prerogative to become the children of God, Joh:
1. 12. To be borne from above, Joh: 3. 3. yea to be borne of God, ver: 8. Being
effectually changed into the same image, as in the Text, by the Lord the
Spirit; not only above that when men's corn and wine and oil inoreaseth, as
Psalm: 4. 7. But as the Apostle speaks, with joy unspeak able and full of
glory; and indeed when the glory of God has once filled their souls, it is no
wonder if they triumph in the God of all glory. O how should this true sight of
the spiritual heavenly Canaan upon the top of Mount Nebo, at some distance,
make them with Moses to be willing to leave a Wildernesse-worldly condition,
and gladly to go unto that God, whose glittering beams of glory, have not
only shined upon their countenance, as visibly once on Moses, but into their
souls, so seasoning, sanctifying, sweetning, supporting, comforting them,
answerably to all that his most sovereign, divine, all-guiding and ordering
providence shall dispense unto them; That neither life nor death, Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate them from
his love, which is in Christ Jesus their Lord, Rom: 8. 38, 39. or it from them;
Yea, upon this advantage, God, Christ, spiritual and eternal joy, is really
and truly here, and perpetually and perfectly hereafter shall most infallibly
be conveyed into, and for ever be continued unto their souls, and their whole
man to all eternity: O then know thy worth, (O sanctified soul) that thou
may here in some measure suitably praise thy God, which, as such, thou can
not but desire freely to do now, and shall most certainly and most happily
perform hereafter, incessantly, unweariedly, and most delightfully; Let thy
name whereby thou may remarkably be known in the world, be [ Barachiah]
bless or praise the Lord, let his praise be ever in thy mouth, ever in thy
heart, ever endeavored after, and aimed at in thy life; so will thy name be
truly glorious, so will thy end be truly blessed, but thy portion perfect
beatitude, everlasting felicity.

Fifthly, and lastly, Let none content themselves with an outward profession of
Christ's Religion, unless with the regenerate and truly sanctified souls, they
in some good measure likewise so behold the glory of the Lord, as to be
therewithal changed into the same image, without which men may long enough
bear the name of Christ, and yet never be owned by Christ, they may eat and
drink often in his presence, and have him preached often in their streets, and
yet notwithstanding hear him say unto them, Depart from me ye cursed, I never
knew you, I never approved of you, nor your seeming service; yea, some also may
preach Christ unto others, and that in many respects well too, and yet they
themselves be mere cast-awayes, if they do not aright behold this glory of the
Lord. Were such truths well considered, owned, believed, applied, Christians
would be less in seeming, more in substance, less in formalitie, more in
realitie, less in shows, and more in truth, Satan could delude less, grace
would prevail more, the Devil should have fewer slaves, Christ would have more
servants, sin would have fewer Subjects, grace would have more favorites, hell
would have fewer everlastingly condemned prisoners, heaven would have more
eternally enfranchized Citizens, to possess or inhabit them.

Now for the better promoting of this great work, let me offer unto thee these
ensuing Considerations, amongst many others which might be added.

First, Consider that the obtaining of this Burgesship, or being so freeborn
unto it, is the first thing that ought humbly, faithfully, and constantly to be
sought for, by every Wise Virgin, and none but the foolish neglect it; It is to
be sought for, first, in order, by the direction of our best Teacher, by the
injunction of the best and infinitely greatest King; First seek the Kingdom
of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, Math: 6. 33.

First, in intention, with the converted Jaylour, What must I do to be saved?

First, in value and worth incomparable, What will it profit a man, says our
Savior, (and he knows best that it profits nothing) for a man to gain the
whole world (were it possible, as it is not) and to loose his own soul, Mark
8. 36.

First, in necessity; For except (says Christ) a man be borne again, or
borne from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God, Joh: 3. 3, 5.

First, In dignity or excellency, for it is incomparably more to be borne of
God, (as all his Saints are) then to be borne of bloods, or of the will of the
flesh, or of the will of man, Jo. 1. 13.

First, In truly comfortable fruition, without which the soul is like the
needle in the mariners compass, till it be this way pointed at God for its
rest, will always be in disturbed motion. It was not only more truly honorable
for David, that he was the truly faithful servant of the Lord, and the sweet
singer of Israel, the man after Gods own heart, then that he was the King of
Israel, the renowned Conqueror of Gods and his own enemies; but it was more
true comfort, sound satisfaction, unspeakeable and glorious joy, over and above
all the rest that he was, or did, or possessed in the world.

Secondly, Consider that this is only the really, true, and the only heaven
upon earth, whereas all others (supposed heavens) without this, are but
Fantastical conceits, vanishing delusions, sweet poisons, putative pleasures,
but intoxicating, and killing rejoycings.

Thirdly, Consider what a great advancement it is in the world, yea, above the
world, and that in respect, both of her frowns, and her favors.

First, Says the Apostle, yea are come unto the Mount Sion, and unto the City
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the first born, which are written
in heaven, and to God the judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, which speaks better things then that of Abel, Heb. 12. 22. Hence
all things were esteemed in comparrison, but dross and dung, (...) but very
loathsome garbidge.

Fourthly, Consider what an unparralleld match thy soul utterly loses the
opportunity of obtaining; if it be not thus in this life united unto Christ, in
this Gospel discovery of the glory of the Lord unto her, for she must either be
married to Christ in that way here, or else the Devil will carry her as his
captive slave to his most wicked lust, and loathsome vassallage, without any
hope of future respite, ransom or rescue: but if once it be so married unto
Christ, how will she be dignified, not only received into a Royal Estate, but
be partaker of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. happy in her own good quality,
happy in her manifold interests in the Covenant, in all the promises of this
life and a better, and thereby in Christ, in God, in Angels, in the Saints, in
the good of both worlds, present and to come, happy in the present society,
union, and communion, with any or many of these (at the present) as we showed
even now, from Heb. 12. 22. but unspeakeably more for the future; and happy
(above all persons that are void of this) in the present satisfaction, rest,
and support they will find in, and from this, above all earthly vanities, which
only by this become sweetened comforts, as the love, care, and goodness of this
spiritual bridegroom is delightfully tendered to his spouse thereby: O what
true Saints security in evil times, in all times, is there in this condition;
what health, what wealth, what honor, what pleasure, what joy, what solace,
what true contentment if such poor creatures would not unfaithfully, or
foolishly be deficient to themselves! O that Christians would suffer their poor
souls, yea, that they would by all good means afford them assistance, to make
large comments upon every particular branch here offered to them, to the
manifold advancement of their own good? I being now restrained by many
circumstances from inlargeing in these, and diverse other things, (as it were
hinted only) in this subject, yet what is said, may point out many pleasant
paths for thy soul, to expatiate and walk at large, in to her present great
refreshment in this her earthly Pilgrimage; and I dare say, if she be but once
well acquainted with them, she will never be willing to forsake them, and if
upon error at any time, she loose her way, she will never be at rest, for quiet
till she find it again. I can here only now like the Statues used in cross
paths, but point out to thee the right way: if thou be once in it, let it be
thy care to keep it, it will be thy safety, it will be thy security, it will by
thy satisfaction; thou will never repent thee of thy walking long or far
therein; yea, the further thou go, the more thou gainest and advancest thy
best designs thereby. O that men would consider these things, and improve
their time, their talents, their opportunities, their abilities to this
excellent advantage, while time and seasons of Grace continue, that God may
have the glory of his Gospel grace at their hands, their own souls and
consciences may thereby receive their sound peace and true consolation here,
and eternally by the same means obtain their perfect happiness, which he grants
of his infinite compassion to poor wandering souls, through him who has fully
paid the price of their iniquities, and purchased for them such a glorious
grace, and sent his holy spirit to make it effectual to them of his own good
pleasure; unto which undivided and most holy Trinity of persons, in the Unity
of the divine essence, be all the praise of all such grace, by all his people,
rendered and paid (as is most due) both now, henceforth, and for evermore,

Amen. (...)
AN Exemplification of a short, yet learned and pithy Treatise, written by Mr
E: D: a faithful and zealous Servant of Christ, touching St Peter's Bishopric
at Rome.
FOrasmuch as to the issue all our Controversy is come, that what right or
authority soever the Pope challenges, he makes his whole Et ^ihi et Petro;
Carrion in vita Alex.
claim from Peter; and the Papists themselves will defend him no further, but
so far as he succeeds Peter. I will speak a little of Peter's Bishopric of
Rome, so far as the Scripture shall be my warrant. Consider thou of it good
Christian Reader, and if thou see that all the glorying of Peter's being at
Rome, Roffensis Cocleus, Tho: Waldensis, and others, have wasted their wits in
this cause.
is but a facing of an impudent lie, then judge what is their other Religion.

First, Here I must forewarne thee, that as a lie cannot long agree with it
self, so in all this matter thou shall hardly find in all points, two Popish
Chronicles agree together; so that whatsoever Some write that he came to Rome
the first, some the second, some the fourth, some the thirteenth of Claudius:
in this variety it may be no opinion is true, but it cannot be that all are
true. In Christ's time Peter was neither young nor old, but of a perfect age,
Theophylact: in Joh: 21. 18.
I write as touching the exact Computation of years, there must needs be many
against me, therefore in that I will not strive, I will only write that which
is certain, and shall have (as I said) either some warrant of Scripture, or
shall be agreed on by the consent of all Ages. Our Savior Christ was crucified
for our sins the 18th year of Tiberius, as by all Histories it is manifest.
Peter is said to be put to death in Rome the last year of Nero; so Peter lived
after Christ under Tiberius 5 years: Caligula 4 years: Claudius 13 years:
Nero 13 years: in all 36 years and odd months, according to the Reign of the
said Emperors: In these 36 years and odd months, they write of Peter thus;
He was Bishop 4 years in the East parts: 7 years at Antioch: and 25 at Rome,
where at last he dyed. Here this fable does almost bewray it self; such hasty
installings, and so many translatings out of one Bishopric into another, does
not well agree with our Saviors words, That they Joh. 16. 2. 33.
should have affliction in the world: But let us search the Scriptures, and try
how these Bishoprics will stand. After that our Savior Acts 1. 12.
is ascended, they go into Acts 2. 4.
Jerusalem, all the Apostles together, they choose Matthias the Apostle, after
fifty days they receive the holy Ghost, Peter converteth many.

After certain days, Peter Acts 4. 18.
and John go up into the Temple, Acts 5. 12.
they heal the lame, they are put in prison, they are forbidden to preach any
more in the name of Jesus; then they return to the other Apostles, tarry many
days together, working many miracles among the people, insomuch that the
Cities round about resorted daily to Jerusalem, to have their sick and diseased
healed; Then again the Apostles are put in prison, and the Lord delivered
them, and many days they preach in the Temple, and in every house; after this
came a great persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, insomuch as they were
all dispersed, save Acts 8. 1. 14.
the Apostles: Then at the last, after many days, Peter is sent out of
Jerusalem into Samaria, where he preaches in diverse Towns about it. Thus far
good Reader, thou see plainly, Peter is no Bishop, nor yet in any special
authority, when as the other Apostles send him out to Acts 8. 25.
preach; then he returned again to* Jerusalem; and this is one year after the
death of our Savior Christ, as the Histories do all agree in reporting the
conversion which was now done, as appears, Acts 9. This is the year of our
Lord, 35.

In the year of our Lord, 38. he dwells in Jerusalem, Gal: 1. 18. Likewise
in the year of our Lord, 46. he is imprisoned at Jerusalem, Acts 12. 2. Again
in the year of our Lord, 48. he is at the Counsel holden at Jerusalem, Acts
15. 7. From that day forward he gives his faith unto Paul and Barnabas, that
he will be an Apostle, not to the Romans, but to the Jews, Gal: 2. 9. which
truly he accomplished even until his death, and doubtless never came to Rome.
Now Christian Reader, seeing the Scripture lies thus, that Peter's abode in
Jerusalem after the conversion of Paul, An. Dom. 35. is recorded three several
times, and after the last time, a Covenant made that he would continue amongst
the Jews: If I shall prove unto thee, that these several times are rightly
numbered according to the year of our Lord, that is, that the first time was
the 38 year, the second time the 46 year, the third time the 48 year, and
then in the mean while between the 35 year and the 38, likewise the 38 year
and the 46. and between the 46 year and the 48. that Peter was not in Rome;
last of all, that it was true of his promise, and after the 48 year came not
at Rome, then I trust thou will confess with me that Peter was never 25 years
Bishop of Rome; but all Popery as it is in it self nothing but lies, so it is
grounded wholly and altogether upon lies.

First, it is agreed upon by all, and the thing is plain in it self, Paul was
converted in the year of our Lord, 35. then Paul himself Gal: 1. 18.
writes thus; after three years I came to Jerusalem to Acts 9. 26.
see Peter, and abode in his house 15 days; so this was the 28 year of our
Lord when Peter is first in Jerusalem, when he was after imprisoned at
Jerusalem, Acts 12. 2. That it was the 46 year of our Lord, it is proved thus,
the Countries about, that Acts 12. 20.
is, Tire and Sidon were then nourished with the Kings provision, but that
provision Claudius made Suetonius in Claudio. Eusebius: Beda.
in a great famine the 4th year of his Reign, which was the year of our
Lord, 46.

Again, immediately after the Acts 12. 23.
Scripture mentions the death of Herod, but Herod was made King in the first
year of Caligula, and reigned seven years, so he dyed in the fourth year of
Claudius, and consequently as is said the 46 year of our Lord, Peter being now
in prison at Jerusalem: And thus the second time that Peter is mentioned to be
in Jerusalem is the 46 year Others number these 14 years from his first going
to Jerusalem, and so this Counsel is holden An: 51.
of Christ; afterward when the Apostles held the Counsel in Jerusalem, that
it was the 48 year of our Lord, it is proved by St Paul, who after he had
mentioned his conversion, and his first going to Jerusalem, whereof we spoke
before, he says thus; Then after 14 years I went up again to Jerusalem, so
it was the 48 year of our Lord, this being 14 years after his conversion, and
he converted in the 35 year of our Lord: Thus it is proved that in the years
of our Lord, 35, 38, 46, 48, Peter was in Jerusalem.

Now it rests to prove, that in the mean space Peter came not to Rome, that
he was not at Rome between 35 and 38 years, I have this proof; In the year
of our Lord, 37. Pilate wrote his Letters unto Tiberius the Emperor, of
Christ, and of his doctrine, and how the Jews accounted him a God, whereby the
Emperor was so moved, that he would needs make Christ a God in Rome: If Peter
had been in Rome, Pilate's Letters had not been necessary, the Emperor should
have had better instruction. Thus in these three years Peter was not in Rome,
between the 38 year, and the 46 year, they say (such is their impudency) that
Peter was Bishop all the while in Antioch; If it be so, then by their own
confession he was not at Rome: but the Scripture is plain, he was neither at
Antioch, nor yet at Rome, and how these seven years are passed, mark and thou
shall see.

In the beginning of these seven Acts 9. 32, 33. 35.
years, Peter goes forth a preaching, first into all Jewry, Galilee, and
Samaria, which would require some continuance; afterward Acts 9. 39. 43.
he goes up to the Saints at Lydda, and there tarrieth; from thence he goes
to Joppa, and there tarrieth ( dies multos) a long while; from thence he goes
to Cesarea, and there converteth Cornelius, the first Acts 10 24.
Gentile that ever he converted, as is plain by the Scriptures* Then he abides
certain days at Cesarea, all this well nigh 400. Acts 12. 2.
miles from Antioch: And now for proof, he makes no have to Antioch, he comes
home again to Jerusalem, where he is again joined to the Apostles, and now the
Apostles hear word that certain Gentiles at Antioch are converted, not by
Peter, Acts 11. 20, 22.
but by certain Disciples that fled when Stephen was stoned, Acts. 7. 60. and
8. 1. Well did the holy Ghost here name them that preached this while at
Antioch, or else here had been some color for Peter's Bishopric. But mark
further, when the Apostles hear this, to confirm the Gentiles, they send to
Antioch; But whom send they, Peter? surely they would have done, had he been
their Bishop; But Peter abides still in Jerusalem, and Barnabas is sent to
Antioch, where he abides, afterward goes into Tarsus to Acts 11. 26.
Paul, from thence they come again both to Antioch, and there tarrieth
afterward one whole year; about this time says Acts 12. 2. 4.
the Scripture, Peter was put in prison, which was, is proved, the year of our
Lord 46. and that he continued in Jerusalem ever since Barnabas was sent to
Antioch, we have this conjecture when he was delivered Acts 12. 15.
out of prison, and knocked at Mary's door, Rhoda the Maid knew him by his
voice, and so well, that the Disciples said she was mad, or else it was Peter's
Angel, yet were the thing never so incredible, she said she was sure it was
even he; this perfect knowledge of a man's voice required some continuance of
acquaintance. And thus we are come to the seventh year of his Bishopric of
Antioch, in which time he yet never came at Antioch.

Now the year of our Lord 46. the 4. of Claudius, he goes from Antioch to Rome,
and there is Bishop 25. years, 2. months and 8. days, from the 26. of
January, to the 24 of March, such account I trow they make, that tell us how
many miles to heaven; but be it so, he is gone out of the prison at Jerusalem,
2000 miles to Rome, to be made Bishop: If the story of dame Joane were so
credible as this, Mr. Harding might have with some countenance written against
it. But let us go forward.

In the year of our Lord 48. Notwithstanding this posting to Acts 15. 7.
to Rome, he is yet at Jerusalem; Orosius lib. cap. 6. Suetonius. Nauelerus.
and from henceforth that he meant not to go to Rome, but keep his promise that
he would continue amongst the Jews, we have this proof: First, this Gal. 2. 9.
Oath, where The Son of Alpbeus.
James, Peter, and John do swear to Paul and Barnabas, Acts 12. 2. 15. 13. 21.
18.
that they would execute their Apostleship amongst the Jews, which surely
Peter would not have done, if he had thought to have gone to Rome. And all the
Papists in the world, Rhemists Ibid. acknowledge the charge divided into two
parts.
shall never be able to answer it, jangle they how they will, that Peter was
Bishop of Rome, he was not, he meant it not, he kept his promise; Paul calls
him the Apostle of Circumcision; he was afterward amongst the Jews at
Antioch; he writes his Epistle to the Jews that were strangers, and scattered
Gal. 2. 8.
abroad in Asia, even as James does to the twelve Tribes Gal. 2. 11.
scattered among the nations; And John to them that had 1 Pet. 1. 1.
heard, and seen from the beginning, which were the Jews. Jam. 1. 1.
Thus did those Apostles mind their promise, though we talk of Bishoprics we
know not 1 John 2. 24.
what. But because there are yet 23 years behind, let us, as we may, examine
them by the Scriptures.

In the Acts we read that Acts 18. 2.
Priscilla and Aquilla, and all Orosius lib. 7. c. 6. Suetonius, Nauclerus and
alii.
the residue of the Jews were banished out of Rome, but this was done the 9
year of Claudius, Anno Dom. 51. when now Peter should have been more then 5
years Bishop of Rome: Thus ill may this Fable agree with the Scriptures of God.
But let us examine further: About 6 years after this, and the beginning of the
Reign of Nero, Paul writes his Epistle to Romans 15. 26.
the Romans, as appears for that he then carried up to Jerusalem, for the
poor Saints there abiding, such distribution as they of Macedonia and Achaia
had gathered, which was a little before Paul's last going to Jerusalem, as most
Writers agree, in the last year of Claudius; and for proof it was so, now all
things are quiet at Rome, Paul saluteth Priscilla and Aquilla, Acts 18. 3.
which in the 9 of Claudius were were both banished; and the Acts do specify
certain years after, in which Paul and they were together: So, now being at
Rome again, it agrees well that the Epistle to the Romans was written about
the beginning of the Reign of Nero, and the year of our Lord 56. at which time
Peter was not at Rome, as may be proved above all guesses and conjectures, out
of the word of God.

First, He saluteth diverse by Romans 16. 3.
name, and yet he speaks not of Peter, a sure proof that Peter Romans 16. 7. 1.
Romans 16. 16. Rhemenses are here very childish; it might be Paul knew Peter to
be absent, or sent to him special Letters not saluting him in this common
Epistle, or else sent this enclosed in Peter's
was not at Rome. Again he saluteth Andronicus and Junia with this especial
note [ who are notable amongst the Apostles, and were in Christ before me,] how
much more occasion had Paul thus to salute and commend Peter, whom he calls
otherwhere Gal. 2. 9.
a pillar of the Church? and who was not only before Paul, but before all men
saving Andrew his brother, called to be a Disciple: nothing may be here
answered, but that only which is true, Peter was not at Rome.

If these Reasons seem not strong enough, then good Reader look in the 15 to
the Romans, I Preached not where Christ was already preached and believed upon,
but where he was altogether unknown, least upon the preaching and faith of
others I should lay mine: Therefore the Apostle himself laid the faith, and
himself erected the walls.
20. Thou shall have another which by no means may be shifted off: thus he
writes; I enforced my self to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named,
lest I should have built upon another man's foundation, but as it is written, to
whom he was not spoken of, they shall see him, and they that hear not shall
understand him; then he added, therefore also I have been often let to come unto
you. By which words its manifest they had but weak maintenance of their faith,
and the true Disciples had no long continuance among them. But how could this
be if Peter was 25 years Bishop there?

Again he saluteth the house of Haymo Ibid.
Narcissus, who (says Ambrose) was Presbiter ejus Ecclesiae, a chief ruler in
that Church; and and how could Paul here have forgot Peter, being
Arch-Presbiter, the chief of all rulers, and Pope himself? Thus are we past 11
years of this Bishopric, and yet we cannot once find St. Peter in his The Pope
(they say) cannot be non Resident, because he is always in his charge.
Diocese.

In the year of our Lord 58. and the 2. of Nero, Paul comes to Rome, and then
Peter is not at Rome, as appears by this saying of the Scripture; where the
chief of the Jews in Rome spoke thus unto Paul; we will Acts 28. 21. 22.
hear of thee what thou think, for as concerning this Sect, we know that
every where it is spoken against; Then when Paul had preached unto them, and
some believed; and some believed not, the Text says, when he had said these
things, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning amongst themselves.

Is it possible that Peter should now have been 13 years Bishop, and yet the
chief of the Jews that were there when Paul came had soarce any understanding
of Christ? they may believe it that needs will be deceived.

Two years after this, until Acts. 28. 30.
the year of our Lord 60. the 4. of Nero, Paul abides in Rome; All which while
undoubtedly Peter came not once there, as may plainly appear, if you read the
Epistles which Paul wrote in Rome.

To the Galathians, he speaks Gal. 2.
much of Peter, as of his conversation with him about 20. years past, but of
his present being at Rome not one word, and yet he speaks of him* to this
purpose, to get the more credit unto himself; Why then does he not name him, as
now present with him?

In like case writing to the Phil. 1. 1.
Philippians, he begins his Epistle thus; Paul and Timothy; why could he not
here have begun, Paul and Peter? Nay, what folly was it to bring Peter's
testimony Gal. 2. 9.
many years past, which now might be doubted of, when he might have had his
present and most certain witness, with subscription of his own hand to
confirm his doctrine. Again, he writes thus unto the Philippians, Phil. 1.
14.
That many brethren in the Lord, were boldened through his bands, and durst
frankly speak the word; If bands would have made them faithful, no doubt Peter
had long before confirmed them, surely he would not have shrunk neither for
chains, nor prisons; It is his own doctrine, that hereunto 2 Pet. 2. 21.
we are called; he could not so soon have forgotten his own Phil. 2. 20.
good counsel. Again, Paul Haymo says, that when Paul sent that Epistle, he
had none of the perfecter sort but him. Vide Theop. in illum locum.
writes he had no man like minded as Timothy was; how could this have been, if
Peter had been there?

Again, He writes he had only Col. 4. 10, 11.
Aristarchus, his prisonfellow; sure Peter would have been in prison too, if he
had been in Rome. Again, Mark, Aristarchus, Phiiem. 23, 24.
Demas, and Luke, are only my fellow-workers; And shall we think that Peter was
now Bishop, yet would not help Great indignity to pretermit St Peter, or else a
loud lie that Peter was then at Rome Primate. Ambros. in Col. 4. Quibus solis
testimoniu^ prohibet, qui ex circumcisione adjutorio fuevint. Circa finem
vitae. Theodor. Dialog. 2. p 9. 7. 2 Timothy 4. 11.
Paul in preaching? Read over all Paul's Epistles, written in Rome, and if the
Spirit of truth be within thee, thou will say, Peter was not in Rome; Yet now
he should have been even in the flower of his Bishopric. Now are there left
only ten years behind, in which likewise it shall appear whether Peter was in
Rome.

At the latter end of this ten years, Anno Dom. 70. Neronis 14. Paul comes
again to Rome, and is again imprisoned, where he writes his 2 Epistle to
Timothy, as Jerome, and Eusebius, and diverse others do think; Then Peter is
not in Rome. Only Luke is with me, says St Paul; if this be true, where then
was Peter? Shall we think he would not once see Paul (2 Timothy 16.) a prisoner?
Again, at my first answering, no man assisted me, Peter was not now dead, and
therefore he must sustain the blot of the perfidious defection, or else loose
his title of being the Bishop of Rome. Theoph. in 2 Timothy 4. 9. Solus relictus
opus habeo praesentia tua. 2 Timothy 4. 17. De ore Leonis Neronem, intelligit
Clarius ibid. Seneca. Orosius lib: 7. cap: 7.
but all forsook me.

Unthankful wretches and deserving ill of Peter, that would now think Peter
were Bishop. But here are now nine years in the mean season, in which it is
soon proved, Peter could be no Bishop. Paul rejoiced that he had escaped out
of the hands of Nero; but what needed he, if that Peter could sit quietly
Bishop?

Seneca writes secretly Epistles unto Paul, but never a word of Peter. Nero
made a Proclamation, that no man should speak either to Christian or to Jew;
and how then could Peter be Bishop? When Nero had set the City on fire in the
ninth year of his Reign, to avoyde the envy of so great a mischief, he laid
all the fault upon the Christians; whereof Tacitus that wicked Corn^l: Tacitus
lib: 15.
Heathen writes thus; Repressa in prasens exitiabilis superstitio rursus
erumpebat, that wicked superstition that was now well repressed sprang up
again. But is it like if Peter had been then Bishop, that Charity should have
been so quenched, that no man did scarce remember it? but be it that all this
were true, that let Peter become unfaithful, let him forget to profess
Christ, and feed his flock, were he never so unthankful, yet surely he could
not be then Bishop of Rome, for in the tenth year of his Reign, Nero made such
great persecution of all Christians, that in no place they could be sure, but
every where were drawn forth unto most shameful deaths, and this persecution
continued four years, without intermission; and how was Peter then a Bishop?
they had Beast skins put upon them, and then were worried with dogs; they laid
them on heaps, and burnt them, to give light in the night time; they hung them
quick upon gibbets, they practiced all kind of exquisite cruelty against them;
and yet for all this shall we think that Peter was Bishop? I leave here to
speak 2 Pet. 1. 14.
of Peter's own Epistles, the last written, a little before his death, what time
this persecution should have been in the greatest rage, yet Peter does not so
much as once mention any such thing, the former was written Eusebius. lib. ^. c.
15.
about the twelfth year of Claud. and by express words dated from Babybon,
which thing because it is an evident token that Peter was then no Bishop of
Rome, therefore they make this gloss upon it (from Babylon) that is from Rome,
So Rhemists in Appe. 17. 5. as it was the Seat of the Emperor, not of Peter.
and what a miserable shift is this, in defense of Peter's Bishopric, to
confess Rome to be Sol. John Prophesies not only of the terrene State of the
City, but of the false Prophet and Antichrist, that is the Pope, Apoc. 1^. 16.
and 17. 1. ^ Eusebius Hieronimus Egyptus.
Babylon? but Rome as it is, it shall be Babylon, and their Religion as it is
shall be the purple whore, and the Pope as he is shall be Antechrist, rather
then they will loose this succession of Peter, and here to make the fable
perfect they shut it up with two especial lies; the one, that Paul and Peter
both died in one day; The second, Ambrose lib. 5. ^d Auxentium. and F.
Causterus understands Babylon in Egypt. Euchirid page 1. 5. 9. Acts 7. 58.
that Christ met Peter flying away, and bad him go back and suffer death: as
touching the first, we read of Paul when he was converted, he was a young man,
and when he went to Jerulem to see Peter, Athanasius says, that he went for
reverence that he bare to Peter's age, so it seems Peter was gray headed when
Paul was but young, and about twenty five years after Paul Phil. 9.
writes to Philemon, though I be as I am, even Paul an old man; then what was
Peter at these years? yet lives Paul after this 10 years, and then writes of
himself, that the time of his dissolution 2 Timothy 4. 6.
was at hand.

Paul had now finished even 2 Timothy 4. 6.
his natural course; a very probable conjecture that he outlived Peter.

Conficta historia Possenius Apparat. Livius Egysip. lib. c. 2.
But this other untruth that we speak of, is above all conjecture, shameless
and unreasonable; they say that Peter the night before he should suffer fled
away, and as he was going, Christ met him, whom when he had seen, Peter said
unto him, Domine quo vadis? Master whither go thou? then Christ made answer,
Roman iterum crucifigi, to Rome that I may be St. Peter was martyred the
Scriptures prove, but that he was crucified, or that he died at Rome cannot be
proved. Acts 3. 22. Josephus remembering such as were slain by Nero does not
mention Peter's death. Bellarmine objecteth. Acts 9. 3, 4. Sol. Acts 7. 55. 56.
and Aug. in Ps. 54. Caput in coelis clamabat pro corpore interris.
crucified again; then Peter perceived that Christ spoke of him, and so he
returned and was crucified.

As if Peter himself had never taught us that the heavens must contain and keep
Christ, until the time that all things be restored, which shall not be
accomplished until the last day; and thus ends the Fable of Peter's
Bishopric in Rome.

Hanc (scilicet) fallaciam scripturarum neglectus in Christianissimum hodie de
Antichristo intrusit: Vlricus Velenus Minhoniensis.

Quid si Episcopus, si Deaconus, si Vidua, si Virgo, si Doctor, si etiam Martyr
lapsus a regula fuerit ideo Haereses veritatem videbuntur obtinere? Ex personis
probamus fidem? an ex side personas? Tertullian de prescript. Heretic.

Si qua est Ecclesia quae fidem respuat, nec Apostolicae praedicationis
fundamentae possideat, ne quam labem possit aspergere deserenda est. Ambr. lib:
6. in Luc. cap. 9.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
FIrst, The Coherence of the words. Secondly, The Exposition of the Text. Four
Doctrines from them. Another from the Introduction, which is first handled,
which is first proved. Secondly, Illustrated by eight particulars from the
former Chapter, and six more added. Thirdly, Applied to three or four uses.
The first point observed from the Text, Gospel Glory the greatest Glory in the
World, Illustrated and proved: First, By Texts of Scripture many ways.
Secondly, Demonstrated under five Heads. First, That it was Gods great design
to glorify himself in this work above all others. Secondly, Accordingly his
glory does shine out, and ever will do, more in this, then any, or all others.
Thirdly, In that it is the only way for Gods people to obtain true and perfect
glory, and whereby grace and glory are both gracious and glorious in their
eyes. Fourthly, In that grace and glory differ not in nature, but only in
degrees. Fifthly, That hence will be the chief ground of the Saints and Angels
glorifying God for ever. The first of these considered, first, Historically;
secondly, Spiritually, in many particulars. The second compared with the great
works of Creation, Sustentation, and Gubernation of all things in the world.
Secondly, Briefly hinted at in many particulars, in the nature, use, and
effects thereof. Thirdly, By eleven respective considerations, wherein it
excells all the former works of God. First, In respect of the many ways
considerable foundation of this work, in four particulars. First, More
profound; Secondly, More Secret; Thirdly, More difficult; Fourthly, More Sure.
Secondly, In respect of the nature of this glorious work. Thirdly, The matter
of it. Fourthly, The form of it. Fifthly, The way and manner of effecting it.
Sixthly, The time for the raising and perfecting of it in a threefold
disparitie. Seventhly, The subordinate means for the publishing, promoting,
carrying on, to the perfecting of this great work, viz. Angels; Men ordinarily
qualified with eminent gifts, extraordinarily called, employed, followed with
success. Eighthly, The immediate object of it, Man in his state of defection:
How freely, wonderfully, gloriously delivered. Ninthly, The several ends in
respect of God and Man, Angels good and bad, here and hereafter. Tenthly, Uses,
for them both good and bad, here and hereafter. Eleventhly, The Effects
manifold hinted at, exceeding excellent above all other; but to be applied
profitably by Christians.
AN APPENDIX TO The Former; By Mr. H. Nelson, B. D.
Pregnant Testimonies out of the ancient Fathers, to prove that Peter was the
Apostle of the Jews, and Paul of the Gentiles, as also that Peter was not
Primate Nisi Petrus alios Apostolos, vel per so, vel per alios Episcopos
ordinasset, nulla ratio est cur Romam Ecclesiarum Matrem esse dicamus. Bell:
lib. 1. de Romans Pontif: c. 23.
in Authority, or Head over his fellow Apostles, or did consecrate any of them
to be Bishop, or settle and stablish any state Hierarchicall at Rome.

Origin in Math. Tract. 4. Peter and Paul gave right hand of fellowship the one
to the other, that Peter should go to the circumcision, to preach unto the
Jews living under the Law, as unto an Ass under the yoke, but Paul should go
to the Gentiles as unto a Colt that had never been broken; Idem in Matthew: 16.
Tract: 1. Noveram ergo non matrem esse ex his testibus clarisime constat.


Aug: in Epist: ad Gal: lib: they agreed that Paul and Barnabas should go to
the Gentiles, and themselves, James Peter and John unto the Circumcision, who
seemed contrary unto the Gentiles, Idem in Ps: 108. Tract. 50 in Jo: 12. et
124. De agone Christiano, c. 30.

Jerome Epist. ad Gal: c. 2. The Primacy of Peter cannot stand, unless the
Ordinance of the Holy Ghost, and the apponent between him and St. Paul be
violated.
One God has committed unto me the Preaching of the Gospel among the Gentiles,
and to Peter among the Jews, he sent me unto the Gentiles, and placed Peter in
Jewry; by Gods providence, one Apostle is given to the Jews, another to the
Gentiles, Idem, lib. 1. contra Jovinianum.

Chrysostom: Ibid. one thing pleased them both; Peter and his side should preach to
the Jews, and Paul and Barnabas to the Heathens: And after, speaking in the
name of Paul in the office of preaching, we have divided the world between our
selves.

Ambrose Ibid. Paul says the grace which he had received of God was allowed of
them, that he might be thought worthy to have primacy in preaching among the
Gentiles, as Peter had in preaching among the Jews.

Anselm: Ibid. These two principal Apostles were chosen to the salvation of two
peoples; Peter to the salvation of the Jews, and Paul of the Gentiles; Petro
commissa anthoritas ut predicaret Judaeis tantum, etc. Aquin: Ibid. in Gal.

Theophilact: Ibid. Yea further; In age, gifts, zeal, order, being as Chrysostom.
says, Os reliquorum.
Paul in this place shows himself to be equal with Peter.

Chrysostom. Vbi supra; Now Paul shows himself to be equal in honor unto the
rest, not only unto others but also unto ( Peter) the chief of all the short
Schoba in Jeroms name in Gal. 2. I am in nothing inferior to Peter.

Hierom Ibid: Occulta hic oritur Quaestio: Here arises a secret Question; If
Peter found any of the Gentiles, did he not train him to the faith? Or if St.
Paul had happened upon any of the Jews, did he not exhort him to be baptized?
we must say Idem in Ps. 44. Titul. Apost. ^ Aequales principio Ecelesia.
that either of them had a special commission, the one over the Jews, the
other over the Gentiles, that the Jews who defended the Law might have one to
follow, and the Gentiles who chose rather the free gift of God, and left the
Law, might likewise have a Teacher to go before them; but generally this
purpose was common to them both, that out of all Nations as well Jews as
Gentiles, they might gather a Church unto Christ.

Petrus quia prevaluit in operatione miraculorum ad predicandum Judae is missus
est, Paulus vero ad predicandum Gentilibus, quia prevaluit in profunditate
ingenii, et Torrente eloquii. ^ Hugo. Card: in Luc. 11.

Synod: Ephesians. Peter John was Survivour and belike subject to Linus, Cletus,
Clemens, etc. or else personal succession is fallen to the dust.
and John were mutually of equal dignity, for which cause they are manifested
Apostles and holy Disciples.

Cyprian de simplic: Plat. doubtless the same were the rest of the Apostles
that Peter was, endued with equal fellowship both of honor and power, but a
beginning is made of unity that the Church may appear to be one.

Ambrose in Ps. 38. What is said to Peter is said to the other Apostle.

Chnysost: in Acts 15. Now consider this also, how that Peter does all things
by the common consent of the Disciples, nothing by his own Authority, nothing
by Command.

Idem in Gal. 22. Paul had no need of Peter's voice, neither of any helps from
him, but in honor was equal to him. (I will say no more)

Theophil: in Matthew. 16. Although it was said to Peter alone, I will give it
thee, yet the Keys were granted to all the* Apostles.

Ambrose de incarnati^ue Dom: c. 4. Peter had the primacy of confession, not of
honor; Idem. 2. Cor. 12. Paulus tempore non dignitate minor.

Hillary lib. 6. de Trin. All the Apostles for the worthiness of their Faith,
acknowledging his Divinity, received the Keys of Heaven, and authority of
binding and loosing in Heaven and in Earth.

Aug: de Pasto: c. 13. The Apostles were many, and it was said to one, Feed my
Lambs; and Peter himself commended unity.

Idem de Agone Christi: c: 30. When it was said to one, it was said to all,
Love thou me? Feed my Sheep.

Origin in Matthew: Tract: 1. These things as it were spoken to Peter are common
to all.

Hierome in Gal: Paul reproved Peter which he durst not have done, unless he
had known himself not unequal.

Cyrill in Esaias lib. 4. c. 44. But why do we call them the Foundation of the
Earth? for Christ is the Foundation of all, and stay of all, keeps and
holds all things to be sure and steadfast; in him are all built a spiritual
house, compacted by his Spirit into an holy Temple and Habitation of himself,
for he dwells in our hearts by Faith; The next and nearer Foundation unto it,
may be understood the Apostles and Evangelists, being eye witnesses, and made
Ministers of the Word, for confirmation of Faith; for when we know that their
Traditions are to be followed, we shall keep a right faith, or not strange or
erring from Christ, for by him it was said to Peter because he had confessed
the Faith in him right soundly, and had said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
Living God; Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church; Calling
a Rock (as I think) the immovable Faith of the Disciple, it is also said by
the Psalmist, Her foundations are upon the Holy Hills; The Holy Apostles are
rightly to be compared to Holy Hills, the knowledge of whom is established as a
foundation to posterity, to the same effect, Lib. 5. cap. 54.

Greg. Lib: 4. Epist. 32. Peter is not called universal Apostle.

Hugo de Sancto Victore, lib. 1. de sac. c. 26.

Greg. in Rus. lib. 4. c. 4. Paul obtained the principality of the whole
Church, and was made the Head of Nations.

Primasus produces Paul speaking in his own name, I am not inferior to him
(meaning Peter) because we both are of one ordained to one Ministry.

Beda Hom: in Evang: Quem me dicunt, etc. Power of binding and loosing, though
it may seem given of the Lord only to Peter, yet without any doubt, it is to be
advertised, that it was granted also to the other Apostles.

Viz: Aug. Tract. 14. in Jo: Ideo unus per omnibus quia unit as in omnibus,
Idem Tract. 124.

Glossa in Gal. 2. I learned not of others as of my betters, but I conferred
with them as with friends and equals: Item Lyranus in Math. 16.

Lastly, To shut up all, the testimony of Jerome adversus Jovin: Lib: 1. is
irrefragable: The firm ground and establishment of the Church is laid equally
upon all the Apostles, all of them received the Keys.

These ancient worthy Fathers, and the rest, as a cloud of witnesses do verify
the parity or equality of Peter to all other the Apostles, which I have in this
place purposely recited, for that they give strength and light unto some of
mine assertions formerly set down against Dr. Kellison a mercenary Proctor for
the Pope-dome.

Let the conclusion be in the words of that eminent Preacher, and Opposer of
Popery Dr. Still, in his usual prayer, frequently mentioned by that Reverend
Mr. Nelson; God confound all hurtful errors or heresies; give victory to his
Truth, and Glory to his holy Name; whereunto I cordially with all Gods
faithful people say,

AMEN.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Sign of the three Crowns
over against the great Conduit at the lower end of Cheapside.
A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by Mr. John White, in
fol.

The humbled sinner resolved what he should do to be saved; or faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ the only way of salvation, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick, in 4.

The riches of grace displayed, in the offer and tender of salvation to poor
sinners, by the same Author, in 12.

The Fountain opened, and the water of life flowing forth, for the refreshing
of thirsty sinners, by the same Author, in 4.

Anatomy of secret sins, presumptuous sins, sins in dominion and uprightness,
on Psalm. 19. 12, 13. together with a Treatise of the sin against the Holy
Ghost, by Obadiah Sedgewick.

Hidden Manna by Mr. Fenner, in 12.

The hypocritical Nation described, with an Epistle prefixed, by Mr. Samnel
Jacomb, in 4.

The singular Actions of sanctified Christians, in several Sermons, on the 5.
of Matthew.

An Exposition on the whole book of the Canticles, by R. R.

An Exhortation of the Churches of Bohemiah, to the Churches of England,
wherein is set forth the good of unity, order, discipline, and obedience, in
Churches rightly constituted; With an Exhortation premised of the order and
discipline used in the Churches of the Brethren of Bohemiah, Dedicated to His
Most Excellent Majesty, Charles the IId. in Holland, at His departure for
England, if possibly it may be for an accommodation among the Church of Christ;
by J. Amos Comenius, the only surviving Bishop of the remains of those Churches.


