An Advertisement.
These following Atlas 's and Treatises, with the Maps, Charts and Sculptures
therein contained; with any sort of Mathematical-Books and Instruments, are
made and sold by JOHN SELLER, [Hydrographer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty] at his Shop at the Hermitage-stairs in Wapping, and in Exchange-Alley
near the Royal Exchange in London.

Atlas Terrestris; COntaining variety of choice Maps and Descriptions of all
the Empires, Monarchies, Kingdoms, Principalities, Dominions, Regions and
Countries in all the known parts of the World. Accommodated with a Geographical
Discourse of each particular Country. Atlas Magnae Britanniae, Hiberniae, and
Cambriae; Containing particular Mapps of all the Counties and Shires in the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Principality of Wales.
Accommodated with a Discourse of the Natural Rarities of each County in the
same. Also with the Maritime Charts, Draughts and Descriptions of the
Seacoasts; showing the Capes, Head-lands, Sands, Shoals, Rocks and Dangers:
The Bays, Roads, Harbors, Ports, and Rivers on the said Coasts: with the
Courses and Distances from one place to another. Atlas Maritimus; Containing
new and exact Draughts and Descriptions of the Seacoasts, Capes, Head-lands,
Soundings, Sands, Rocks and Dangers; The Bays, Roads, Harbors, Rivers and
Ports: showing the Courses and Distances from one place to another. Gathered
from the latest and best Discoveries that have been made by diverse able and
experienced Navigators of our English Nation. Accommodated with the
Hydrographical Descriptions of the Seacoasts in most of the known parts of the
World. Atlas Civitatem et Vrbium; Containing the Sight and Prospect of the most
famous Cities and Towns in the World: Accommodated with a Discourse of the
Original Rise, with the Custom, Manners, and Government of each City. Atlas
Coelestis; Containing general and particular Descriptions and Figures of each
Constellation in the Heavens: Also the Faces and Appearances of every Planet
and Representation of the three Systems of Ptolomy, Tycho, and Copernicus;
accommodated with a Discourse relating to the same. Atlas Edificiarum; OR, A
Collection of the most famous Structures and Buildings in the whole World; as,
Palaces, Lowers, Castles, Cathedrals, Monastries, Churches, Tombs, Statues,
Monuments, Mansion-Houses; with all other Ornaments and rare Pieces of
Architecture both of Ancient and Modern Builders. Atlas Effigies Imperatorum
and Regum; OR, A choice Collection of the Effigies and Portraitures of all the
Emperors, Monarchs, Kings, Princes and Potentates in the whole World. Atlas
Nobilium and Heroum; OR, A Collection of the Effigies and Portraitures of the
Nobles, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Generals, Magistrates, and other
Personages and Heroes both Men and Women, renowned either for Virtue or Valor,
both Foreign and Domestique. Atlas Clerorum; OR, A Collection of the Effigies
and Portraitures of the Popes, Cardinals, Abbots, Bishops, Prelates,
Philosophers, Clerks, and great Scholars; Judges, Counselors, Lawyers, Doctors
of Divinity and Physic, and other Persons renowned for Wisdom and Learning.
Atlas Generosorum; OR, A Collection of the Effigies and Portraitures of
Knights, Esquires, Captains, and Gentlemen of several degrees and qualities.
Atlas Publicorum and Artificicum; OR A Collection of the Effigies and
Portraitures of diverse worthy Persons and Artists of several Mysteries and
Professions, worthy of Honor and Renown; with the Fashions and Habits of Men
and Women in all Nations. Atlas Deorum Ethnicorum; OR A Collection of the
Heathen Gods and Goddesses, with other Poetical Fictions; including also
several Colosses and Wonders of the World. Atlas Mescelaniorum; Or, A
Collection of choice and curious Sculptures, of Histories, Pictures, Emblems,
Proverbs, Winds, Seasons, Times of the Day, Parts of the World, Elements,
Senses, Graces, Muses, Planets, Ships, Sea-Storms, Landskips, Compartements,
with several other Rarities. Atlas Sanctorum; Or, A Collection of the Effigies
of all the Prophets, Apostles, Saints, Martyrs and Confessors that have been in
all Ages of the World. Atlas Historiarum Sacrarum; Or, A choice Collection of
all the Stories in the Holy Scriptures. Atlas Paradiseos; Or, A choice
Collection of Beasts, Birds, Insects, Gardens, Trees, Fruits, Flowers, Hawking,
Hunting, and Fishing; with other rare and curious Sculptures. The
English-Pilot, in 4 Volumns; Describing the Seacoasts, Capes, Headlands,
Soundings, Sands, Shoals, Rocks and Dangers; The Bays, Roads, Harbors, Rivers
and Ports in most of the known parts of the World: Showing the Courses and
Distances from one place to another, setting of the Tides and Currents. Ebbing
and Flowing of the Sea; with new Tables of the Suns Declination, and an
Almanac of the Moon, and a large Tyde-Table: being also furnished with new and
exact Draughts, Charts and Descriptions. Gathered from the latest and best
Discoveries that have been made by diverse able and experienced Navigators of
our English Nation. The Coasting-Pilot; Describing the Seacoasts, with the
Sands, Shoals, Soundings, Rocks and Dangers; The Bays, Roads, Harbors,
Rivers, Ports, Channels, Buoys, Beacons and Sea-marks upon the Coasts of
England, Holland, and Flanders; showing the Courses and Distances from one
place to another, the setting of the Tides and Currents, the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea; and Tables for the Tides, and nature of the Grounds; being
furnished with large Charts, Draughts and Descriptions of the Sands and
Harbors on the said Coasts. Gathered from the Practice and Experience of
diverse able and experienced Navigators of our English Nation. Published for the
better Security of his Majesty's Ships in this present Expedition, By JOHN
SELLER, Hydrographer, etc. Practical-Navigation; or, An Introduction to the
whole Art. Containing many useful and Geometrical Definitions and Problems; The
Doctrine of plain and Spherical Triangles, Plain Mercator and Circle-Sayling;
sundry useful Problems in Astronomy; the use of Instruments; the
Azimuth-Compass, Ring-Dial, Variation-Compass, the Fore-staff, Quadrant, Plow,
Crossbow-Quadrant, Removing-Quadrant, Nocturnal and Moon-Dial; the Plain-Scale,
Gunters-Scale, Sinical-Quadrant, Plain-Chart, Mercator's-Chart, both Globes,
the Inclinatory-Needle, and the Virtues of the Loadstone; useful Tables of the
Moons-Age, of the Tide, of the Suns-Place and Declination; of the Stars
Right-Ascention and Declination; the Latitude and Longitude of Places; New
Traverse-Tables, and their use in keeping a Reckoning at Sea. The Description
and Use of the TRIANGVLAR-QVADRANT; being a particular and general Instrument,
useful at Land or Sea, both for Operation and Observation; more universally
useful, portable and convenient than any other yet discovered; with its uses in
Arithmetic, Geometry superficial and solid, Astronomy, Dia^^ng three ways,
Gaging, Navigation; in a Method not before used.

