PROPOSALS FOR THE PRINTING A GRAND ABRIDGMENT Of all the Common and Statute
LAW of England to this present Year, 1674. By W. Sheppard Esquire.
Allowed of by Authority.

THE above mentioned Author formerly published an Essay in this kind,
entitled, An Epitome, etc. which Book had so good a reception from the Learned
in the Law, that the Author had encouragement to undertake a more Comprehensive
Work of the same nature (being an Abridgment of all the Old and New Law, as
well Common as Statute to this present year 1674.) and has employed the
greatest part of his time these Fourteen years last past, in compiling this so
great and necessary a Work now finished.

And that the said Book might be of general use, it is Writ in the English
Tongue, and so methodized in an Alphabetical Order under proper Heads with
Quotations out of the Common and Statute Law, for confirmation of what is writ,
that not only the Professors of the Law, but all others, may have a Sure Guide
upon all occasions readily to find out what is in the Common or Statute Law of
England.

And whereas the said Book (now Printing at three Printing-houses) will consist
of two Volumes Printed according to the Specimen; the Charges whereof will be
very great: Therefore the Undertakers, for an invitation to all those that will
Assist in carrying on so Great and Necessary a Work, Propose as follows: 1.
That whosoever will subscribe, and pay into the hands of any one of the Persons
here undernamed, the Sum of 27 s. in manner and form following, shall be
entitled to a complete Book in Quires, viz. 10 s. in hand to be employed
toward the present Charge, and 17 s. more when the said Book shall be finished
and delivered accordingly. II. And for the Security of all persons that shall
subscribe to any of the parties here under-named, the party who shall receive
such subscription will give a Bill under his hand and seal for the delivery of
the said Book when Printed, upon payment of the said sums in manner
aforesaid. III. Note, That the said Book will not be sold for less than 40 s.
Bound to any but the Subscribers.


Henry Twyford, in Vine Court, Middle Temple. Thomas Bassett, at the George,
near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, and in Westminster Hall. William
Lee, at the Turks-Head in Fleet Street. Francis Tyton, at the Three Daggers in
Fleet Street. Thomas Parkburst, at the Three Bibles in Cheapside. Rob. Horn,
at the South-Entrance of the Royal Exchange. Henry Brom, at the Gun, West End
of St. Paul's. Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Samuel Heyrick, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn. Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head
in Cornbill. Thomas Passenger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. William
Battersby, at Thavies-Inn-Gate in Holborn. Will. Leake and Jo. Leake, at the
Crown in Fleet Street. Thomas Archer, under St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street.
Thomas Burrell, under St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet Street. Edward Berry, in
Gray's Inn. Jos. Robinson, at Lincolns-Inn-Gate. John Leet, at Chancery Lane end
next Fleet Street. Nich. Cox, over against Furnivals-Inne in Holborn



