LONDONS WELCOME TO HIS MOST ILLUSTRIOUS HIGHNESS, WILLIAM HENRY, Prince of
ORANGE.
MOst Serene Prince! may all the Power's Divine
Add to your Luster, that you may still shine
Throughout the Corners of our English Earth,
And give each drooping Spirit a new Birth:
That from your Stream of Goodness may both spring
Peace to our Nation, Safety to the KING;
And all the Clouds of Horror, Doubts, and Fear,
You ( Phoebus-like) may dissipate and clear
Welcome, Great Sir! England's Metropolis,
Greets you with Joy; may Heaven give you Bliss:
And grant, that by your Princely Power, may stand
Our true Religion, against Antichristian Band;
Free from the threatening Terrors of that Arm,
Can Murder thousands, and yet do no Harm.
Thus let us Live to love Tranquillity,
And to the Legal Power subject be:
Let Strife and Faction cease, may God defend
Our Laws and Liberties unto the end.
Defend You also, most Illustrious PRINCE,
From all the Attempts of Humane Violence;
And that our England never may want supply
From the true Royal Race and Progeny,
For to Extirpate; and exile all Hope
Of yielding our Subjection to the POPE.
So to our Princely Power we shall bow,
And pay unto our Caesar what we owe;
The Gown, the Sword, and the loud Cannon too,
Will show then their Obedience where it is due;
And with the Protestant Arm of Courage, make
The bold Opposers in the Field to quake.
Can e're that Hellish Mischief be forgot,
Which was intended by the Powder Plot?
A Horror beyond measure, to have known
A Kingdom in a moment Overthrown,
Had not the God of Goodness Mercy shown!
Even now our People might have been Surpised
With Fire, with Sword; which Torments were devised
By Rome's Infernal Engines; Popish Crew,
That think it Meritorious to Undo.
This made our Nation droop, Trading decay,
Fears, Jealousies and Threatening, drove away
The affrighted People, both by Sea and Land:
A Kingdom so Divided could not Stand.
Thanks to Your Gracious Highness, may You be
For ever Happy, and from Danger free:
As Heaven sent You hither, so we pray,
Heaven may still Protect You Night and Day.
FINIS.
By Cyprian Southaick, Gent.
Printed for M. T. in the Year, 1688.


