A True Copy of MOTHER SHIPTONS LAST PROPHESIES: As they were taken from one
JOANE WALLER, In the Year of our Lord, 1625.

Who Died in March last, 1641. being ninety four years of age.

Of whom Mother Shipton had Prophesied, that she should live to hear of Wars
within this Kingdom but not to see them.

Also predicting other wonderful events that should befall in this Clymate and
in these times.

With two other strange Prophesies thereunto Annexed.

All which were never Published before.

London, Printed for T.V. 1642.

A Prophecy found in the Alley of Saint Benedicts Abbey in Norfolk.
IF eighty eight be past, then thrive
Thou may till forty four or five.
After the Maid is dead, a Scot
Shall govern there: and if a Plot
Prevent him not, sure then his sway
Continue shall for many a day.
The Ninth shall dye, but then the First
Perhaps shall reign: but (oh) accursed
Shall be the time, when as you see
To sixteen joined thirty three:
For then the Eagle shall have help
By craft to catch the Lions whelpe,
And hurt him sore; except the same
Be cured by a Maidens name.
In July Month of the same Year
Saturn shall join with Jupiter.
Perhaps False Prophets may arise,
And Mahomet shall play his prize:
But sure much alteration
Shall happen in Religion.
Believe you this when as you see
A Spaniard a Protestant to be.
Another Prophecy.
OVt of the North shall come an host
Which shall invade the British coast:
And it shall overspread the Land,
And drive the King unto a stand,
And from the King shall take his life,
Yet shall it not offend his Wife.
For after he shall live again,
And then the tyrant shall be slain.
Out of the East shall come a Knight
Which shall Donzeldelphus height:
And he with good Rogero shield
Shall beat the Tyrant out of the Field,
And chase him out of Brittany
And drown the Tyrant in the Sea.
The Scots Prophecy.
ANglia te prodit tua Gens te qualibet odit,
Te circumfodeat Gens Scotia gallia ridit;
Wallia minatur, hiberniaque insidiatur,
Pax imulata fluit, graviorque paena paratur.
A Perfect Copy of Mother Shiptons last Prophesies.
IN Henry the eighths time the King having made Cardinal Wolsey Bishop of
York, and he purposing to come and live in the North; Mother Shipton hearing of
it replied and said, he must see York, but never come to it. King Henry and the
Cardinal heard tell of her saying, and were very angry, and sent three Lords
down to see if she would stand to her words; viz. Lord Duke, Lord Percy, and
Lord Darcy, So they and their Men came down disguised from London to Dring
Houses near York. And left there their Men, and came to York themselves to one
Master Beasleys House in Conistreet in York late at night, and knocked at his
door and asked if Master Beasley was within? who were answered, he was, and
they requested to speak with him, who forthwith came unto them, and they
whispering in his ear, told him he must go with them to Shipton Wives House,
which accordingly he did, and knocking at her Door, she said, come in Master
Beasley, and those three Honorable Lords with you; upon which words Master
Beasley would have put the Lords in first, and she said, no Master Beasley
come you in, you know the House and they do not; then said they one to another,
this is a strange thing, that she should know us and never saw us: So they came
in, and there was a fair fire prepared, Master Beasley saying, with your leave
Mother Shipton, well come, quoth she, so said all the Lords in order; and she
said, welcome my Lord Duke, welcome my Lord Percy, and welcome my Lord Darcy;
sit you here my Lord Duke, sit you here my Lord Percy, and sit you here my Lord
Darcy, and you M. Beasley sit here, for you are as one of the House, and when
they all were set down, she bad her maid fetch some Ale, and go to the Crbbert
and bring short Cakes, (for she had prepared them before hand) and she did so,
and they all did eat and drink-thereof, and were very merry; then said my Lord
Duke, Mother Shipton, if you knew what we were come about, you would not make
us thus welcome? and she said, my Lord Duke the Messenger must neither be
headed, nor hanged; but Mother Shipton, said the Duke, my Lord Cardinal says
you must be burned, for saying, he might see York, but never come into it: and
when he coms to York, he purposes to effect the same, and she answered him she
did say so, and that he should see anon whether she might be burned or no then
she took a kercher which she had on her head, that had a yard of cloth in it,
and spread it on her knee, and her head was as white as Wool, and cast it upon
the fire and let it lie thereon a great while, which not burning, she took her
staff and turned it over, and it would not burn: then took she it out of the
fire and shaked it, and put it on her head again. Then my Lord Duke asked her
what she meant by that? and she gave him answer and said, if this had burned I
might have bin burnt, but because it does not, I must not. Then said my Lord
Duke, Mother Shipton, I understand you are a Woman of knowledge and judgment,
tell me, what shall be the event of me? she answered him, my Lord, the time
shall come when you will be in as low an estate and case as I am in, and in as
mean an office, and that is both a mean one and a low one. Then required Lord
Percy of her, what should become of him? my Lord (said she) shoe your horse in
the quick, and you will do well enough, but if you do not, your body will be
buried in Cruse-Church after you be beheaded on the Pavement in York, and your
head will be stolen into France, and they laughed, and said, that will be a
great hop betwixt the head and the body. Then said my Lord Darcy (Mother
Shipton) what must I do? who answered him, you my Lord who is going for
warfare, God speed you well, you have made a great Gun, shoot it off in time,
for it will come to pass, that you will pyne many, but kill few: so they drank
and gave her money and thanks, and returned to M. Beaslyes house, and the next
morning posted to the Court, and declared their conference with her, which
several passages came to be incident to the several parties. Presently
afterward the Lord Cardinal came to Cawood Castle near York, and resided
there three days and three nights, upon the third day the Cross upon the top
of the Castle fell down, and sore hurt the Steward upon his head, Lord
Cardinal being told thereof, replied, I fear and doubt a ^reater cross than
this will follow. In the afternoon the Car^inall went up to the top of the
Castle, and many Knights with him: and when he was at the top upon the Leads
wal^ing, he demanded of them where York stood, and they showed it to him? and
he demanded how many miles it was thither? and they told him seven miles, then,
said he, that will be soon ^idden, not past two hours work, I will go thither
because yonder Witch said, I might see York but never come thither, and vowed
he would burn not only her, but also three Priests which were at Table with
her, if when he came there they lacked their vestments. The Priests hearing
tell thereof were sore affrighted, but she encouraged them, saying, content
your selves, for if need require, you shall have twenty vestments, but his
purpose will be altered. The night following, after supper, the Lord Cardinal
fearing some evil toward him to approach, charged his house-hould and all his
Officers, that no manner of person should that night more be suffered to come
in, but immediately after the charge was passed, came Lord Percy and knocked at
the Gates, importuning the Porter to let him in, who answered him, none could
that night come in, for the Cardinal had charged him to suffer none to come in
more then was in the house. Then Lord Percy changed his voice, pretending to be
a near kinsman and favorite to the Cardinal, and must needs speak with him,
so that the Porter let him in: and when the Cardinal saw Lord Percy, he cried
out, mercy Lord Percy I am no Traitor, if not said Lord Percy, yet must you
with speed go with me to London, but before he came thither, for all the haste
by the way, he ended his life, and against Mother Shipton his threats were
past. Then Mother Shipton, after the Cardinal had poisoned himself by the
way, sent to M. Beasley and said to him, M. Beasley the Cardinal builded a
goodly closet in the Minster for him to sit in, with pillars of Silver and
Gold, with Pearls and rich stones enamelled, go and pull down one or two of
them, and present them to King Henry, which accordingly he did, and was made in
recompense thereof, an officer to the King, and the rest the King caused to be
taken down.

Shortly after, Mistress Beasley in her Husbands absence, and when he was at the
Court, being desirous to hear the event of future times, seeing her former
presages came to pass, and what good success her hu^band had in following her
council, asked her, saying, Mother Shipton tell me something that is yet to
come, then she said, Mistress Beasly, it shall come to pass, that Ouzebridge
and Trinity Church shall meet, for the Bridge shall fall, and they shall build
it again on the day, and it shall fall on the night, until the highest stone
of Trinity Church be made the lowest stone of Ouzebridge.

After this you shall have a year of pennury and hunger, death without any
dread, and dearth without any need.

In process of time shall be seen
A noble King and virtuous Queen,
Out of Scotland they shall come,
And shall enjoy this Crown alone.
The first coming of the King into York shall be at Bowdon Bar, which shall be
privately, the next time when he comes to be known, he will come through
Holgate Town, and not through Holgate Lane, and when his head shall be at
London Bridge, his tail shall be at Edenbrough.

And it will come to pass that water will run over Ouzebridge (and laughing
said) every Cuckold will have an Oak tree at his ^^re, and that there should be
a Winde-Mill upon one of the Towers in York, and that day men and women will
wear great Bands and Hats like scuttles; and after that, rayles. And when
there is a Lord Mayor on the back side of the Minster in York, let him take
heed of a stab with a knife.

Also there will be two Knights that will fall out in the Castle yard at York,
which never will be kind again while they live.

Two Judges shall go twice in and out at Walme-gate-bar, And when Coulton-Hag
has born seven years Corn,
You shall not know of w^refare at night, and have it at morn.
Then in the 7th year after it will begin
And be noisome to the King.
When warfare begins at a Spring
Much care to E^gland it will bring:
Then will the North rue it wondrous sore
But the South for evermore.
Hares shall kindle upon the cold stone,
And lads shall wed ladies and bring them home
Then shall the ladies cry well away
That we were born to see this day.
The well will be they that have the least
And woe to them that have the most.
For a hill and a dale will be worth eight Oxen and a Plough, and ten pound in
Money worth ten pound Per Annum in Land.

And when it coms it will last three years before it cease.

Betwixt Calder and Air
It will be long Fair:
When all the World is alost,
It shall be called Christ-crost.
The first main battle of this shall begin
Where crook-back Richard his battle did win.
And those that goes unto the Plain.
Shall few of them return again.
At that day shall England quake,
For the voice of a dead Man shall be heard speak,
And the Dragon shall give the Bull a sneape.
After this the enemy shall advance to London, then (said she) weladay for
London, for destruction will come upon it for evermore. After that, there will
be a great battle, and they will be pacified for a while, but afterward will
return to Stockton-Moore near York, where will be a sore battle; then will the
Raven sit upon the Cross, and suck as much of the Nobilities blood as the
Comminalties; and then there will come thither a Woman with one eye, and tread
over many a Man in blood to the knee, until she come to a Man leaning upon a
rest, and shall say unto him, who art thou? and he shall say, I am the King of
the Scots, she shall wish him to ^o to her House, and he will go: and there
will be three Knights in her ^ouse, and all of them will stay three days and
three nights with her, and one shall not know of another. Soon after shall
England be won and lost twice of a day; they will cry in the forenoone, England
is lost, and in the afternoon, It is won, for Clubs and clouted shoes will
get the day. There will be against these times a Lord Mayor of York chosen out
of course: and three Knights one not knowing of another shall be in Peter-gate
in York; and a Lad borne in Pontetract with three thumbs shall hold these
three Knights Horses until the battle be won. Then will all the Noble blood
of England be gone, except one; and he will be carried to Sheriff Huttons
Castle on Horseback, and there will dye; Then will they make an Earl in the
Field, hanging their Horses on a Thorn, and ruing the time that they were
borne, to see so much blood shed: Then will they come to York and set upon it,
and it will keep them out three days and three nights: and a penny loaf
within the Bar will be at half a Crown, and without the Bar at a Penny, and
harder to get with them without, then within, for the scarcity of money. Then
will the Enemy swear, if so they will not let them in, they will blow up the
Walls and the Town, and they will be let in; and there will go to Cruse-Church
three Knights or Earls, and there shall but one come out again; and he will
make Proclamation through the City, That whosoever will take away Houses,
Manners, Towers or Bowers, to come and possess them for one and twenty years:
then for evermore in England there shall be no more warefare; then shall York
be as London.

Then shall it be, that one Woman shall say to another, come Mother I saw a Man
to day, which will be joy to a Woman to see, for for one Man there will be a
thousand Women, then will there be a White Harvest, and Corn gotten in all
with Women. Then shall an Old Man sit on Saint James Kirk hill weeping his
fill, And King or queen shall there be none. But Lords to Rule this Realm
alone. When these things are come to pass a ship shall come floting on Thames,
until it come against London, then shall the Master thereof begin to weep, and
his Men shall say, Master, why weep you and we have had so good a Voyage? for
that will he say, I have seen here the goodliest City in the World, and now I
fear there is none to give us drink for our Money.

After Nevill with the Child's voice be fled out of England, he shall kill the
Great Turk when this Child is in York you shall have a Lord Mayor dwelling at
the grate head near the pavement, he shall be forced to fly out at his back door
to save his life; and the two Sheriffs of York that shall be then, shall be
both one Sir-Nam?

FINIS.

