AN ACCOUNT OF THE Famous Siege OF ANTWERP BY Alexander Prince of Parma, In
the Year 1584.

Being the most Memorable Siege that ever was laid to any CITY.

Written in Latin by Famianus Strada: And Englished by T. L. Gent.

London, Printed for Peter Parker at the Sign of the Leg over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1672.

THE SIEGE OF ANTWERPE.
GIve me leave, (warranted by 1584. The siege of Antwerp.
Livies example) to tell you by way of preface in this part of my work, (which
in the beginning most annual writers use openly to profess,) that I am to
speak of a siege more memorable by far, then ever yet was laid to any city:
for how great.
never were rivers bridled with stronger bulwarks, nor wits armed with more
adventurous stratagems, nor by Soldiers, who in many sieges had gathered both
skill, and courage was it ever more gallantly fought. Here Castles were erected
on violent rivers, mines discovered amongst the waters, Riversoverflowing
rampires, and again, rampires outtoping the rivers: and as if the labor of
Antwerp siege only seemed but little, designs were extended by the General
into other places; And at the same time, five most strong and potent Cities
were all Antwerp. Gaunt. Dendermund, Bruxels, Mechlin. With what forces it was
begun.
at once besieged, all in a years compass subdued. These great attempts, with
what great forces, with what courages they were perfected, now I do begin not
negligently to relate.

Part of the Catholic army was drawn into the Garrisons of Cities and Forts;
part fought in Friesland under Verdugo prefect of that province and Taffius his
Lieutenant, against William of Nassau, and Martin Schench, Count Aremberg, and
Manrieque had in arms two regiments of Germans about Colen. Appi^s Manrique a
Spanyard, but borne in Germany.
de Comitibus, and Blastius Capisuccus, with some troops of horse, made
excursions into Zutphan. The Marquess of Renthi with his Regiment of
Walloones, guarded Artois, and Vaynolt, against the motions of the French.
There were four Regiments, and some companies besides, with Alexander Prince
of Parma, in Brabant and Flanders. Besides three Regiments were newly come out
of Spain, which (as before we related) King Philip, after his Navall fight at
the Tercera Islands, had sent into the Low Countries. And with these forces,
which amounted to about ten thousand foot, and one thousand seven hundred horse
(for he had contracted the seven Regiments, which as I said were but half So
Alexander writ to the King. July 15.
full into five) Alexander having first advised with his Council of war began
the siege of Antwerp.

Antwerp is situated on the river Scheldt, being almost five miles in compass,
and contains an hundred The Inhabitants of the City. Its form.
Inhabitants, besides Seafaring people^. It much resembles the form of a
bended bow, whose st^ing is the bank of the river, there being not any other
City in all the Netherlands stronglier fortified or better appointed against
Its strength.
an enemy. That side which bends into Brabant, most high walls, from which
ten strong Turrets appear, so placed as with mutual aid they may relieve
each other, environed with a great ditch of water, securely defend. The side
toward Flanders, has for a trench, the river Scheldt, capable not only of
single ships, but even of whole Navies; yea someties there have been numbered
about two thousand ships in the port and river: whence trafficking with a great
part of the world, the River plays not only the Merchant, by bringing in all
foreign commodities, but the warrior also for Auxiliary The consultation of
besieging it.
forces. But how much securer the Anwerpians were, so much the more cautious
were Alexanders Councillors. There were present at the council, besides Count
Mansfield, and the rest of the regal Senate never wont to be absent,
Mondragonius, Billius, Olivera, and Pacius, all Spaniards of Belgians, there
were Mottaevs, Goigne, and Licquius, for the rest of the Low Country men were
absent: of others, there were Camillus a Monte, George Basta, and Camillus
Capisuccus. Most of these Most are against it.
were even amazed with the greatness of the proposed design, and thought the
attempt more bold, then could be brought to a prosperous end. For said they, he
who would think of besieging Antwerp, ought seriously to consider whether he
have sufficient forces, wherewith at the same time, he may block it up by land
in Brabant, and by the river on Flanders side: For it were in vain to besiege
it by land, to which by the river, if not from above from Gaunt, at least from
below, to wit, from the Sea, both provision and relief may continually be
brought in. But the river was so broad, that it could not be blockt up by less
then two armies on either side one. Wherefore he had need of three armies, who
from Brabant, and either bank of the river Scheldt, might stop relief. But
that would not be done, by reason of his small forces. Neither had he
sufficient ships wherewith to hinder the enemies Navy about to enter the
river from the sea. To these things added Billius, that the complaints of the
Soldiers more troubled him, who being defrauded of their pay, not coming from
Spain, almost hungerstarved, and most of them half naked, verily were unfit
to be brought to a siege, of more then one months continuance. Nor did Pacius
and Montius omit, that it was seriously to be thought on, whether it were best
to begin Antwerp siege, leaving Dendermund, Gaunt, and other holds behind him
from whence the enemy with free excursions, might disturb the bringing in of
provision unto the Army, and the raising of Fortifications. Lastly, all except
Mondragonius, and Capisuccus, Two only excepted.
who committed all to Alexanders fortune, thought it unsafe and unseasonable,
to set upon so great designs with so small forces. Therefore turning from the
siege of Antwerp, to And strive to divert his mind from the siege.
besiege Alexander, they stand about him with joint prayers: and objecting the
danger of losing both his and their own honors, they endeavor to subdue his
mind in his resolution still immovable. But he But his opinion is to besiege
it.
commending their care, in the first place said that he had reflected on all
those things which they conceived to be the greatest dangers. Notwithstanding
he did not think, out that after they had heard him reason a little on the
matter, they would think better of the success. Then he began much after this
manner: That he had not the thought of invading Antwerp, before he was
encouraged by pious men, that it would be acceptable to God: and had known the
Kings mind concerning it. Neither did he doubt that human and ordinary helps
would be wanting, which for the present might persuade the expedition. For, he
certainly knew, that the enemies were never in like fear, being within few
months afflicted with so many and so great losses by the Kings Army; viz. Being
destitute of the Prince of Orange's counsels, out of hope of succor from the
French, and having lost so many Towns and Castles, nere adjoining to Antwerp.
And surely, when the walls being battered, do tremble and shake, then with
greater certainty may the assault be pursued. And from thence had he greater
encouragement to assail the affrighted enemies, even in their chiefest
fortress of war, and to carry that terror through the strong holds of
Brabant: not with vain hope, that they will for fear of losing Antwerp, either
slight other places; or, for fear of losing other places, will not be able to
defend it. Indeed he had but few forces to set upon so many things with; but,
they were skillful in war, accustomed to victory; and, which is above all,
conducted by great commanders. For, unto which of your hands here present,
might not one safely deliver the charge of an Army? FOR, by the skill of
Captains, and prowess of Soldiers, an Army is doubled. And be they never so
many, those be but few who conclude the victory. As of a spear, how long soever
the palm only of the cuspe does all the execution. GREAT forces are not always
to be wished for in war, no more then great bodies, being for the most part
subject to many infirmities, used to be more pampered, move flowlier, and are
but fairer marks to be levelled at. Nor had he cast over with himself so to
win Antwerp, that it was needful to employ many Soldiers about it; fith that
by land, a few troops of Horse, making inroades into the territories of
Antwerp, between Liere, Hochstrate, and Breda, Towns of the Kings party, might
easily hinder traffic. And by the River, toward the Ocean (from whence the
greatest force of the enemy was to be feared) he had determined, either to take
the Castles on both sides the River; or to build new ones; and from thence with
Canon shot to restrain the Ships passage, if not all, at least so much, as that
the Merchants might perceive their loss, and the City, full of Inhabitants
might be wearied out for want of provision. Nor seemed those forces which for
the present he had with him, unable to perform these things: Nor did he doubt
of their obedience in the work, having tried, that his Soldiers were more
courageous in battle, then mutinous in their quarters: But, lest they should be
discouraged, he had lately received a sum of money from the King, which he
would divide amongst his Veterans; for those that were newly come out of Spain,
had already received pay. Although it was not to be feared, but that his
Soldiers would willingly undergo the siege of Antwerp, from which so great
booty might be expected. There were many yet in the Army, who, about eight
years since, had sufficient experience of the riches of that Empory, the yet
memory whereof inciting them, they will doubtless enkindle in their fellows
the desire of like plunder. Lastly, for security of the Army, he had provided,
that provision might safely from the territories of Wasia be conveyed unto the
Camp. Nor had he so left Gaunt and Dendermund behind, that the Kings Army had
any cause to fear; for they would have enough to do, to defend themselves from
our Soldiers, placed in Castles, newly raised thereabout. Wherefore, seeing
that many things for the present invited him, no reasons appeared sufficient to
withdraw him from it; let them leave that only determination to him, and with
great and constant courages begin the Siege of Antwerp; and from whence he
forsaw the access of all Brabant would follow: And they might be confident,
that the Mother of God, patroness of Antwerp, having been wickedly banished
from her own City by Heresy, they now, refusing no peril, to restore her to
her ancient possession, would not forsake them in their so pious attempts. The
Siege of Antwerp once decreed, The Siege is decreed.
rather by Alexander's authority then his Oration, command was forthwith given
to provide things necessary for it; which by reason theywere many, and in
several places: For, Antwerp, Gaunt; Bruxells, Dendermund, and Mechlin were
all at once attempted, I thought it worth my labor to prescribe the sites of
these places.

Antwerp, by Reason of the River How Antwerp is defended by the River Scheldt.
By the Castles placed on the River banks.
Scheldt, sufficiently strong of it self, by the many Forts and Sconces placed
thereon, especially toward the Ocean, is yet far stronger, chiefly by two,
about nine miles from Antwerp; the one called Lillo, taking its name from a
neighboring Village, Mondragonius, by the Duke of Alva's appointment had
erected on the coast of Brabant: The other called Liefken^koeck, the
confederate Provinces possessed of Antwerpe, built on the other side of the
River over against Lillo; and not long after took Lillo also. By commerce of
the same River, By commerce of the same River, with Gaunt.
Antwerp is joined to Gaunt, distant about thirty miles. Dendermund with
Dendermund,
strengthens the traffic in the midway between Antwerp and Gaunt, placed also
on the River Scheldt. But nearer, about twelve miles from Antwerp, is seated
Mechlin: And by the with Mechlin,
River Dele running into the Scheldt, under the name of Rupel, gives and takes
mutual assistance. A little further distant from Antwerp is Bruxells: and with
Bruxels 24 miles.
but having opened themselves a ditch or channel fit for navigation, they can
sail into Rupel, and thence sliding into the Scheldt, enter Antwerp. Prince
Alexander well apprehending all these things, determined not with several
Armies to lay siege to every City, for that by a hundred and fifty thousand
soldiers could not be effected: but as he had begun at Gaunt, erecting Sconces
and Forts Alexander begins to cut off this intercourse.
a distance off, and blocking up the Rivers, by which the Cities had their
relief, by little and little meant to make them feel the miseries of a Siege,
without the noise of a Siege: Therefore sending Plato his Enginere, with a band
of Soldiers to Wettera, he commanded Anthony Olivera, who kept the bridge
lately built there on the Scheldt against Gaunt, to raise from Gaunt. from
Dendermund,
a new Fort toward Dendermund, thereby to cut off all hopes of commerce
between Gaunt, Antwerp, and Dendermund. He dispatched part of Igniquesius
regiment to the Village of Willebroeck, which is between Mechlin and Antwerp,
to besiege the from Mechlin,
Castle erected there on the bank of the River, and stop the passage of
Bruxells and from Bruxels.
channel, whose chiefest defense is Willebroeck. Then applying himself Then
sets upon the Siege both by land and water. He commits the land to George Basta.
unto Antwerp, he thus distributed the Siege amongst the chiefest Commanders of
his Army: He commanded George Basta, Commissarie of the Horse, a wise and
valiant man, with some troops of Epirots and Italians, to guard the country
about Antwerp in Brabant; and so to provide, that in time of need, calling for
aid from the next Forts, he might see, that no provision should be carried into
the City out of Brabant. As for the banks of the River Scheldt, The banks of
the Scheldt, Flanders side to Rubasius. That of Brabant to Mansfield.
Flanders side, where the Army then lay, he committed to Marquess Rubasius,
General of the Horse, and that of Brabant to Peter Ernest Count Mansfield,
Camp-Master-Generall. To Mansfield he added Christopher Mondragonius, and part
of the Army, viz. four thousand and five hundred foot and eight Troops of
horse. To Rubasius he joined Gasper Billius, and Peter Pacins, with three
thousand foot and four troops of Horse; and commanded, that as well they, that
stayed on this side, as those that were to pass over the Scheldt, with all
celerity should assault and take the enemies Forts and Castles, placed on both
sides the River toward the Ocean. And from thence to oppose themselves against
the enemies sailing from Holland and Zealand to Antwerp. Wherefore he commanded
Mondragonius Before whom Mondragonius goes on his side,
with his Regiment, consisting of twenty one colors, to go before Count
Mansfield, who was soon after to follow with the rest of his forces, and at
Rupelmund, and Borcht, to pass over his Soldiers into Brabant in boats: Which
he did and puts to flight the enemies shipcoming to oppose him.
prosperously execute, putting to flight hy Canon shot, the Admirall's ship of
Antwerp, which came to hinder his passage, after it had received some hurt. The
City being highly Antwerp.
offended at the negligence of the Garrison Soldiers; but when they saw the
Kings Army spread on both sides the River, and their tents so suddenly pitched,
their anger was turned into care. For now Alexander moving with his Court from
Tourney, Alexander pitcheth in a Village of Flanders. Not far from him Rubasius.
came to Bevera, a Village of Flanders, about seven miles from Antwerp, and
there fortified himself: not far from his pavillions, Rubasius, with all his
warlick Magazine, sat down in the Village of ^alloo on the Scheldt, having
first ejected the Garrison Soldiers hence. Between both, Between both Charles
Mansfield.
but nearer to Alexander, Charles Count Mansfield, son to Earnest, Master of
the Artillery, those for seat of his military Engines the Village of Melsen.
But on Brabant side, On Brabant side Mansfield the Father,
Count Mansfield Camp-master General, following Mondragonius over the Scheldt,
placed his tents in the Village of Straboeck, about four miles distant from
Lillo: which (because Alexander designed that seat for himself) he diligently
fortified. A distance off, in the Village of Berendrecht, and Mondragonius,
was the station of Mondragonius: with whom afterward, near Stanflict Camillus
a Monte, and with Montitius and Capisuccus.
Capisuccus joined theirs. As Soon as it was perceived, that Antwerp was by the
Kings Army attacqued on every side, the Antwerpians, although at first, knowing
both theirs, and the enemies forces, had jeered at the enterprise; The
Antwerpians prepare for their defense. Phil Marnixius of Mont Saint Aldegund.
yet, notwithstanding, fearing Alexanders fortune, they courageously prepared
for their defense. Aldegund governed the City as Consul, the Prince of Orange's
most intimate friend, and next after him, was out-topped in authority by none
of the States. By his advice, especial Especially on both banks of the Scheldt.
care was taken of fortifying the Castles on either side the River. The
chiefest were Lillo on Brabant side, Liesken shoeck on Flanders coast, and the
Forts standing in the Isle of Doele. Odettus Tilinius, son to Lanoy, The Isle
of Doele.
with a fresh cohort of French, took upon him to defend Lillo. John Pettin, an
old Colonel, was commanded to fortify Lieskenshoeck with a new mud-wall. The
like care was taken of the other forts. The bank at Safting and other places
being cut, and a way opened for the Scheldt to overflow the fields of Wasia,
even unto Antwerp. They sent some also to Bergen-Zom to gather Soldiers; and
others to demand aid from Zeland and Holland, and also to solicit William
Blosse de Treslong, Admiral of Zealand sea.

But now, as they had orders, And Alexander's Commanders invade both sides of
the River. Mondrag. Rubas.
Mondragonius advanced against Lillo; Rubasius against the Isle of Doele, but
with contrary success; for the one by aged caution making delay, lost
opportunity; the other burning with youthful celerity, set upon the enemy,
unprovided both of counsel and defense. The Isle of Doele, which is made by a
Rampyre or Dyke The Isle of Doele, and its Castles.
drawn about against deluges, is defended by four Castles, and there ends
the territory of Wasia. Thither Rubasius, sending before Pacius Regiment, came
sooner then could be expected; therefore the Castle of Antonia yieded it self
forthwith to The Castles of Antonia and Teruent.
Rubasius; and the Garrison of Teruent not expecting the enemy fled away: But,
it fell out far otherwise at Liefkenshoeck. It was kept by about eight
Liefkenshoeck.
hundred Soldiers, who fiercely rejected Rubasius's Trumpeter, demanding the
render of their Castle, for three days most valiantly maintained their
defense, until by Canon shot, the Rampire being beaten down in several
places, and Prince Alexander advancing from Bevera, and offering them in vain
kind conditions, he commanded Rubasius not any longer to deferr the assault,
who sending thither Hernandus de Isla, and Gasparine Lucensis, Captains of
select companies, commanded them not to admit any to mercy; who, although at
the first assault they were repulsed; yet, venturing again, they took the
Castle, put about four hundred of the enemies to the sword, drowned almost two
hundred, and Rubasius takes it,
brought away seven Colors; Pettin Governor of the Castle being slain by
Rubasius own hand, who the same night marched to Noort, the last Fort of the
Isle, situate on the Scheldt; but Fer^mius Governor of that place, having
conveyed all his Artillery into Ships, killed all his Cattle, and set fire on
the Fort, retired to Antwerp. From thence the Army retired to Safting, which
only held remained untaken, but finding it void of defendants, they began to
make up the cleft of the bank, against the waters bursting forth from the left
side of the River. And thus by Rubasius's expedition, Antwerp was and wins all
Flanders bank.
disarmed of the Forts on Flanders coast, and of all the Country of Wasia,
lying along the Scheldt; when in the interim on Brabant side, Mondragonius
marched against Lillo, Mondragonius sets upon Lillo.
knowing how strong a Castle, both by situation and fortification he was to
attempt, as having built it himself, and for that he was too cautious of the
enemies strength, as conscious of it, he gave time to admit a Garrison into
Lillo. It HELPS, to wit, sometimes not to know dangers, which if known, would
be a hinderance to victory. For two thousand soldiers under Balfurius, a
Scotch The Garrison increased.
Colonel, were received into the Castle, against part of whom, sallying out
under Tillinius, Mondragonius He fights with them, sallying out,
advanced with his Regiment, and giving them battle, it was with equal loss a
long time disputed, until the Cataracts which were within the Castle being
drawn, and the River Scheldt then swelling with the tide, let out amongst the
Spaniards, the Mondragonians not being able any longer to endure, both the
vehemence without success.
of the Canons thundering from the Castle, and the tempest of the water, and
having lost Aloysius Toletanus, and Peter Padilla, two valiant Captains, by
little and little retired, and were compelled to move their station into a
safer place; with great constancy, chiefly of the Spaniards, But with great
constancy of the Spaniards.
carrying away in the fight of the enemies their wheel-pieces on their
shoulders, and wading in the water up to the breasts. Nor were they so dismayed,
when they could not by reason of the deluge, assail the enemies on the front,
on the right side, climbing up the banks of the Scheldt (upon which the Castle
stands) they obstinately again attempted the assault, and having taken a little
Sconce, they fiercely stormed the Castle: but the Rampire being cut in many
places, hindered their entrance: Therefore being out of hope of winning the
Castle, they were by his excellency commanded Whom Alex. calls off.
to retreat to Stabroeck, and there to prohibit the excursions of the Garrison
soldiers from Lillo.

Whilst the confederates defended Lillo, they lost Herentalls. For the
Antwerpians solicitous of Lillo, called thence the Scotch Garrison, and
Herentals by Caesius means.
trusted Herentals to the Townsmen. Wherefore Caesius (the Horse being divided
between him and George Basta) making inroads into those places, did not let
slip so fit an opportunity; Count Nicol. Caes.
for, having sojourned there as a Prisoner, he had contracted great familiarity
with the chiefest Townsmen, and therefore easily persuaded them, that not
expecting the Victorious Army, they should deliver the Town to the Prince of
Parma; which was scarcely effected, when the Townsmen, having first admitted
Caesius into the Town, the Garrison Soldiers being by the Antwerpians (too late
repenting them of Submits to the Kin.
their rash counsel) commanded to return, shut their Gates, turned their
Cannons against them, and beat them off. For that service, Caesius obtained of
the Prince the Government of that place. But, Alexander for the present having
lost opportunity of taking Lillo, thought it not convenient to spend any longer
time about that siege, which if it were taken, together with Liefkenshoeck on
the opposite bank, which he already had, the enemies ships could not by them be
sufficiently prohibited from passage, by reason of the rivers breadth, and the
daring enemies in the dead of the night, waiting for the help of the tide
violently rushing in from the sea, might easily delude both Castles endeavors:
Wherefore Alexander thinks of a Bridge to block up the Scheldt.
seeing the Rivers passage could not be obstructed, unless by the
interposition of a bridge, he judged it all one, whether to erect it there,
between Lillo and Liefkenshoeck, or elsewhere, raising Castles in some other
places. Wherefore measuring (as it were) the Channel, Alexander, to whose
opinion the most ancient and skillful Mariners, with his Captains Baroccius
and Plato, easily assented, thought it best to block up the River not far from
Lillo toward Antwerp, between Calloo, a He chooses the place between ^alloo
and Ordam, for three reasons.
village of Flanders, and Ordam, a village of Brabant. The motives, as he writ
to the King, why he chiefly chose that place, were these; Because the Scheldt
there is not so very broad, and a hillock of earth, like to a bed of sand
(which they call a bank) stretching it self out from the shore, straitneth the
channel. Besides, in that place, the river bending it self a little toward
the right hand, the ships have therefore almost need of another wind, so that
they cannot so directly, and with like violence keep on their course. Lastly,
he had tried, that the earth there was full of gravel and solid, and most
commodious, both for raising and upholding the work. Moreover, He commands
Castles to be built on either side the River, at the ends of the bridge,
he had committed the charge of building the Castles on both sides the River,
which should be the heads of the bridge, viz. Flanders side to Rubasius, and
Brabant to Mondragonius. That for reverence to the Mother of God, to whom he
had dedicated the whole work from the beginning, was called Saint. Mary's; this
in the honor of the King, Saint Philips. Besides, he erected other Castles in
other places, some for defense and others elsewhere.
of his Army, others against the enemies Forts; and those that were placed
against Antwerp, were called of Saint Peter, and Saint Barbara; those against
Lillo of the Blessed Trinity.

Whilst Alexander was continually busied in earnest labors on both THE SIEGE
OF DENDERMUND.
sides the River, and was thought there to have his whole care employed;
secretly, with Pacius's Regiment, and a band of Italians, he sets upon the
Siege of Dendermund.

Dendermund is situated at the mouth of the River Dender, from Its site.
whence it takes its name, which River runs into the Scheldt; wherefore by
reason of its site and fabric, it was reckoned amongst the strongest Cities in
Flanders: and in regard it is seated in the midway between Gaunt and Antwerp,
is very commodious to them Commodious to the bordering enemies.
both. Alexander determined long since to bring it under subjection, as well to
enterpose it as a bar, to cut off all passage and commerce between both Cities,
as to exonerate himself of the trouble of dividing his forces, for he was
forc'^ continually to keep a guard in the Country about Gaunt and Dendermund.
Thither he sent before John Gamboa with Augustine Forces are sent thither
before.
Igniquesius Regiment, commanding him to take the sluices of Dender, which the
enemies with a Mill near the City had fortified, and from whence they might
easily overwhelm the places near adjacent: Which he had scarce effected, having
killed about fifty of the defendants; and put First, the sluice is taken.
the rest to flight; when from Bruxells side appeared Charles Count Mansfield,
with five troops of Horse, and some Companies of Walloones; and from the other
side at Waestmuster, Alexander with Pacius's Regiment; who forthwith setting
guards on the river Scheldt, both above and below, and environing the City,
planted his Cannons against the Fort before Bruxels gate. Mortagnus Then the
city is besieged, viz. The gate toward Bruxels. The Governor had carefully
fortified it,
with eight hundred soldiers, besides armed townsmen, instead of Rihovius
their Governor, who then was absent, commanded the City; he fortified all
places industriously but especially Bruxels fortification, strengthening it
with most of his Veterans, especially the fort before the City,
against the force of the enemy: and from thence they continually shot, and not
in vain, against the Royalists, but weakly fenced. The first terror they
struck was by the death of Peter Pacius, a Spanish Colonel who behind a
gabion, or From whence shooting they kill Pacius,
wicker basket, directing a Cannon against the enemy, was suddenly slain with a
Musquet-bullet, piercing his head. The same day, a little after, Peter Tassius,
overseer of the Army, was slain, being shot also into the and Tassius.
head with a Musquet-bullet. At the first, with great grief of the Spaniards,
especially for the loss of Peter Pacius, a man conspicuous for his piety and
valor, who, because he had a care of his soldiers necessities, as if he had
been their Father, was commonly called Peter de Pan; but afterward with so
great rage against The Spaniards are thereby incensed;
the enemy, and desire of revenge, that the Cannons having not as yet made a
sufficient breach in the Fort, they all contentiously desire the assault. ANGER
to wit, sometimes, adds more force, then loss does diminish. They have yet
another motive to whet their fury. The Garrison soldiers brought into the
especially seeing the Saints injured.
Fort with a mimick kind of state, a great Image of a Saint, and setting it
upon the battlements, after they had abused it with derisions and stripes,
furiously tumbled it down: At which spectacle, all their hearts were incensed
with indignation; yea, the Captains could scarcely contain the fury of their
soldiers, threatningly demanding the sign of the onset. Whereupon Alexander
thinking it best to make use of their heat, seeing the front of the Fort to be
beaten down, and part of the back also, Alexander gives order for the assault.
he chose three soldiers out of every Spanish company (which amounted not to
above fifty) and commanded them, being conducted by two Captains of Pacius's
Regiment, to assail the back: he also chose as many of the same Regiment, led
also by two Captains, to follow after; he attributed the front to the Italians
and Germans, and commanded the Walloones to assault the side with scaling
Ladders. Notwithstanding he deferred the assault until the next day, which was
the Eve of the assumption of our Blessed Lady, because on that Feast (as he
advertised the Captains) the Queen of heaven assisting them, he Trusting in the
help of the E. Virgin.
doubted not but to revenge the Injuries of the Saints. Nor was he deceived in
his piety. And now they begun the assault on all sides, with great animosity
and contempt of death; but especially the Spaniards. And for two hours it was
gallantly fought on both sides, but, at length the Royalists prevailed, and
with the loss of fifteen only of their soldiers, took the Fort; but, the
defendants The Fort is taken.
lost above eighty, and the rest fled into the City: which, although the
Spaniards from the higher place commanded; yet, notwithstanding the strength of
the Walls, the interior Bulwarks, and especially the Ditch, which being very
deep, and full of water, hindered their access to the Walls, seemed to retard
the conquest: Besides, the City on a sudden, by a slight occasion, but made
greater by conceit, was much animated. There were some Carriages laden
Provision sent unto the Farnesian Camp,
with provision, sent from the Village of Gaure to Alexanders Army, when about
two hundred and fifty soldiers issuing out of Gaunt, from whence Dendermund
had requested aid, and putting to flight the convoy Intercepted by these of
Gaunt;
near to Alst, joyfully brought away the booty. But short was the joy of both
Cities; for Olivera having notice thereof, drew forth from the Fort of Wettera
some troops of Horse, and meeting them not far from Gaunt, unawares set upon
the conquerors, and either killing or taking but recovered with their
overthrow, was sent back to the Army.
them prisoners, for there did not one escape by flight, sent back the
Carriages to Alexander. But the Dendermundians had yet a far greater
affliction; for, when the River was turned, and drawn another way, (which they
never expected) and thereby the Ditch, their chiefest defense drained, they
were daunted with that unheard of celerity: for, within five days, with
admirable expedition, they had seen Bridges built, Rivers blockt up, Tents
pitched, the City besieged, the Walls deprived of their Tr^nch of water, their
Fort taken, nor any rest either night or day allowed them, fearing any longer
to provoke the Conqueror, they sent a Trumpeter to demand a parley, and
Dendermund delivered to Alex. 17. Aug.
delivered up the City; the Citizens being fined in sixty thousand Florens; the
Soldiers (which were about five hundred) sent away without either horse or
arms, and the City commanded to receive what Garrison it pleased the Prince of
Parma. Wherefore three companies of Spaniards of Pacius's Regiment, and two of
Italians entered the Town, Alexander creating John de Rivas, an old Captain John
de Rivas made Governor,
of the same Regiment, for a noble act performed at that expedition, Governor
of the City. For, he committing some Carts, made ready in the nightime,
laden with Faggots, to the forwardest of his Captains, to be conveyed into the
ditch of the Fort, thereby to defend the assailants; Rivius was the first that
drove the Cart forward against the enemy; who having notice of the design, had
prepared themselves to shoot from the Fort, and he was the first, and soon
after the only man, that adventured to advance against a storm of leaden
hailstones; for two of his fellows were shot, and he also a little after
wounded in the shoulder; notwithstanding, he with a courageous spirit, and a
threatening look stood to for his gallant exploit.
his work, nor did he desist, before he had driven his Cart to the place
intended; and in defiance of his enemies, with all his might, did drive the
next Cart, forsaken by his wounded soldiers, even unto the front of the
Fortress. Then by Alexander's appointment he was carried into his Tent, and in
reward of his approved valor made Governor of the City. But Prince Alexander,
although in the beginning, the Siege of Dendermund was by Mondragonius judged
to be a tedious business, and would not (as he said) be dispatched, before the
earth was covered over with snow; yet, the eleventh day after he departed from
Bevera, the City being very strong of it self, and within short And the
expedition dispatched sooner then was expected.
time like to draw Gaunt the same way, was by his counsel, authority, help,
and especially fame, which was Alexanders chiefest favorite, brought under
subjection; and then he Returns to Antwerp.
returned to the siege of Antwerp, where the sum of his cares resided.

Alexander together with Plato and Baroccius (whose judgments next to his
Council of War he chiefly made use of) contrived of what form the work should
be to block up the River: and commanded, that He prepares timber for building
the bridge.
the longest Trees that could be found, should in the territory of Wasia,
especially near the Castle of Vorhoteus, and other places, be cut down: and
with a huge number of faggots, boughs, and other timber, be conveyed into the
Church of Calloo: a great part whereof being already brought, he, whilst some
ship-masts fetched further off were expected, began, partly to fortify the
Forts of He fortifies St. Mar. and St. Phil. and the banks of the Scheldt.
Saint Mary's and Saint Philips, partly to build new Castles on either side of
the River, and carefully to provide, that the workmen and Carpenters, ready to
set upon the groundwork of the Bridge, should not be hindered and disturbed by
the enemies Navy. But Consul Aldegund, being Aldegund jeers at it.
informed at Antwerp by his Emissaries what was in agitation, it is strange how
ridiculously he contemned it, and in the presence of many, censured it as vain
and foolish; whether deceived himself he thought so, or desired that others
should be of that opinion: For, said he, Prince Alexander, even drunk with
prosperity, thinking by the interposition of a Bridge, to bridle the liberty of
the Scheldt, does too much confide in himself; for that River will no more
brook the shackles of engines, then the free Belgians the bondage of Spaniards.
The River in that place, if he know not, is two thousand four hundred foot
broad, deep, when the tide is out of it, above sixty, and when the sea sends in
the tide, it increases at least twelve foot. And how can the Spaniards have in
readiness trees of so huge length and firmness to out-top that channel, and
appear above the water; nor could this be expected to be done by ships,
which perhaps might be in place of a Bridge, since that for the present the
besiegers had none with them, nor could any be conveyed to them, but before the
walls and part of Antwerp. But in nothing did the Prince of Parma so grossly
mistake, as in deferring the work till almost winter, when the River now
congealeth into ice, then breaks into huge pieces, even like swimming
Islands: he surely has but little knowledge of the place, if he think to make
a wooden Bridge to endure and hold out against Mountains of ice, forced and
dashed by the Tide rushing in furiously from the Sea against it: which if with
like violence should be moved against the City it self, though firmly founded,
would without doubt subvert it. And these things will certainly come to pass,
though Antwerp act nothing, but sit still as a spectatour. But what if on the
one side, viz. from Antwerp, and on the other side from Holland and Zealand,
the Bridge should at once be assailed by both our Navies, what can Alexander
interpose against the winter, the sea, and our Fleets? enemies all at once
combining against him, to protect that weake^ foundation raised in the Waters?
Thus whilst Aldegund either out of dissimulation or contempt of the danger,
gave encouragement to his Soldiers; Alexander having already begun the work,
brought the River under subjection.

Now I will following Julius Caesar's The description of the bridge.
example, who was as careful in describing, as he was in building of his
Bridge over the Rheine, exactly and distinctly deliver unto you the model of
the work, because rather by fame then knowledge it begot admiration with many:
especially I having seen the form of the same bridge, with the Castles and
Forts thereunto adjoining, in a great frame of Wood composed by a rare
Artificer of Gaunt, which Prince Alexander, together with a Table representing
also in colors the whole work sent to Rome, which then by all was much
admired. It was made after this manner: First, at St. Mary's Fort, three piles
of an equal distance from the Bank, St. Mary's Fort.
and placed about five foot one from another, were fastened into the River Its
beginning on Flanders bank on Piles thus placed.
by a wonderful and quick invention. After these, there were as many distant
from the first, eleven foot, and five foot one from another: from these about
thirteen foot off were three others: and from these succeeded three others,
eleven foot distant; and thus by course, as it were several couples, some
eleven, and some thirteen foot asunder, they were so far extended into the
middle of the River, that by reason of the depth of the Channel, and violent
course of the waters, there could not any more Trees how long soever be
fastend, twelve piles of seventy foot long being fixed in the river, almost in
a Quadrangle, to be the basis or groundwork of the Castle, finished this part
of the Pile-work, and the topps of all the Piles beforementioned joined
together by beams laid length-way, connected by overthwart-planks like
lattisses were for the Causey, or floor of the Bridge: On the outside in the
midway between every Ternall of Piles, there was a beam standing out five
foot from the said piles struck fast into the Waters: which by two other beams
as it were Arms, taking hold of two of the adverse Piles, in form of a wedge
bound fast the whole work to the opposite beams. And this was observed in
every ternall juncture on both sides the foundation. But yet more distant
outwardly, on either side there went along another row of Piles over against
those which were placed three in a rank, about twenty foot off, from the
bottom of which, to about the superficies of the Water, were raised great
props, which being put under the sharp Angles of the former work, and in the
middle meeting together cros-wise like claspes joined together the inner Piles,
and there by wonderfully strengthened the whole Machine. The work thus ordered,
boards were The way over the bridge upon beams boarded and fenced.
laid over the former Floor, to make even the passage over the Bridge, which
was securely flancked on either side against Musket Shot, with strong and
firm Plancks, five foot high, with a Parapet of two foot, with like solid
boards was the Castle, the intended station of the Soldiery in the furthest
part of the work fortifyed. The passage of the Bridge being twelve foot broad,
admitted eight Soldiers to march on breast: and the Castle forty foot broad,
and fifty two foot long, was capable of about fifty Soldiers. And whilst this
part of the Bridge on Flanders side, was built, at the same time at St.
Philips. Fort on Brabant side was the other part of the The same was observed
on Brabant side.
Bridge fabricated, after the same fashion a Castle being built also at the end
of it for the Soldiers, saving that on this side the Channel being not so
deep, the foundation was continued on far further, for it was nine hundred
The length of the steccada on both sides,
foot in length, when the other was not above two hundred. The Soldiers called
both parts of the Pile-work Steccada. The middle which was the greater half of
the River yet remained open: for it was between both Castles above one
thousand two hundred and fifty foot. In which place the Channel was of such an
immense deepnesse The breadth of the River betwixt both works, could not be
made up by Poles for the depth thereof.
and violent rapidity, that it was impossible to fasten any more Piles by what
Engine soever: Alexander therefore determined to block up that passage by the
interposition of the Ships, sending to Dunkirk, that if there were any there to
fetch them from thence, but there were not many, nor could they be conveyed
through the Scheldt but in fight of Gaunt and Antwerp. Yet he had great hopes,
that Gaunt as he was informed thence by credible persons, would ere long come
into his hands, and so he might from thence abundantly furnish himself with
ships, Mariners, and other warlike Magazine. In the interim he thought it
sufficient that the River was straightned, and the passage not only made
narrower, but by the Castles fortifyed on both sides almost unaccessible, and
thereby the hopes of Antwerp contracted. But the further it was divulged that
the besieged being hindered of navigation were at want of provision, so much the
more were many Merchants spurred on with hope of gain to carry victuals into
the City, there scarce passing any day, but some Ships expecting the
opportunity of the sea, and forced forward by the violence of the And therefore
some Auxiliary ships daily passed to Antwerp, through the open passage.
Tide, entered the City with prosperous temerity, although from every side, but
especially from the two Castles there were many both surprised, and by Cannon
cast away.

But the delivering up of Gaunt terrifyed the Antwerpians confidence, The
delivery of GAVNT. The Gandavians brought under by Famine.
and gave great advantage to Alexanders design; for they of Gaunt were not
only out of hopes of provision, both by sea and land: but daily afflicted more
and more, on the one side by Olivera, and on the other by Varambone, who
quartering in the Village of Hevergeme near the River Livia, and having joined
his Burgundians and English with Olivera's Horse, harassed and plundered all
the Country about Gaunt, on both sides the City: wherefore now their haughty
courages beginning to cool, they sent a Trumpeter to Bevera to entreat Prince
Alexander to give safe conduct to their Commissioners to come to him: who being
admitted, offered to deliver their City on the same Septem. 15. They after
submit and quest certain conditions of Alexander,
terms as those of Bridges had delivered theirs, and which then also were
offered to Gaunt. But Alexander utterly denied them those, for that when new
symptoms appear, new Physic must be prescribed; and checked them who gives no
care to them.
because they had not only with great contumacy slighted those conditions that
were heretofore offered but also by new injuries against Religion and things
sacred; and by strange punishments inflicted on those of the Royal Party, had
provoked his Majesty's just indignation: and bad them reflect on their former
trespasses, and not to expect He blames them and dismisseth them.
any other conditions then the Kings mercy. But they laid the fault on a few,
and said their City was strong and able to hold out a siege yet for many
months: and showed his Majesty's Letters of France brought They excuse
themselves but in vain.
them by Prunaeus his Ambassador, with an assured hope of his aid: And in
fine, added, that they feared, if they should return without dispatch of their
business the seditious Citizens bearing an unplacable hatred against the
Spaniard, would desperately set fire on the City, and leave nothing for the
Conquerers to triumph over but ashes. Alexander nothing moved herewith, sent
them to President Richardott: from whom hearing the unpleasant conditions which
he mentioned to be imposed on Gaunt, especially when amongst other discourse,
he said that he saw a private Letter sent from Spain, that persuaded the
Prince of Parma not to admit the Gandavians upon any other terms, then such as
his Grandfather Charles the first had done, not pardoning them til they came as
suppliants with Halters about their Necks, and half naked to submit
themselves; at which words the conditioners took such distaste that they
returned to Gaunt. But the next day in the Cities name, there They depart, but
return again.
came two chief Gentlemen, Peter Devos, and Peter Cortevilla, and for the Soul
diery three Captains, and that they might trans-act all things with greater
facility with Prince Alexander, following the ancient practice of the
Britains, who about to make And use this Art.
peace with Caesar joined with their Ambassadors, Comius of Arras Caesar's
near friend, whom a little before they had taken Prisoner: So they taking with
them out of prison Frederick Perrenot Lord of Champine, and he together They
deliver the City to Alex. and receive these conditions.
with Richardott, conferring apart in the end concluded on these conditions.
The Prince of Parma Governor of the Low Countries does in his Majesty's name
pardon and indemnify the Gandavians received into favor and protection of all
their former Delinquencies and grants all their ancient Privileges. The
punishment which was merited by all being reduced to six Citizens only, and
those six also whom he had demanded to be delivered, to receive punishment at
his pleasure, most mercifully he forgives, reserving the disposition of all
other matters to himself. He taxes the City in two hundred thousand Florens,
and commands the Citizens to reedify the Imperial Fort, and all the Churches
and Religious houses. Gives order that the Clergy be recalled, and restored to
their goods and possessions, of which in these last troubles they were
deprived. He gran teth to the Heretics leave to stay at Gaunt two years, to
set in order their affairs, and then to depart. He also permiteth the garrison
soldiers, (which were somewhat above two thousand) to march away with their
Arms, and he to substitute others in their places, of what Nation he pleased.

And having thus settled these affairs, he brought into the City three thousand
Foot and five Troops of Horse under Olivera, and created the Lord of Champine,
lately close prisoner there, and twice in danger to have lost his life Governor
of the City. The Alex. orders the state of Gaunt, both civil, and sacred.
Arch Bishop of Mechlin was also sent for to see to the Clergy of Gaunt, and to
reduce into the City the Priests and religious Families, and to reconcile to
God and true Religion the desertors of the Orthodox Faith; And after this
manner the Prince, as well as he then could, (being otherwise employed) took
care of the civil and Ecclesiastical affairs of Gaunt. And thus this City,
the greatest in all the Belgic Provinces came into his Majesty's hands being
excellently well fortifyed with Walls, Ditches, and Forts against And of the
Victory of this greatest and strongest City.
all On-sets of great Armies whatsoever and within no less strong by the
windings and enclosures of Rivers, and Channells, by which being cut into many
Islands: if the Suburbs should be taken, the Citizens may retire into those
Islands, and cutting down the Bridges may have them: Lastly, for safe refuges,
this (I say) so great and rich a City, besieged rather by the terror of
Alexanders Name, then by a few stations of Soldiers placed about it, with very
little cost to the King, no loss of soldiers was compelled to receive what
conditions it pleased the Conqueror, with so great gain of all warlick
Magazine, there being carried from thence a huge number both of Wall and field
Pieces, Military Engines, carts, Pioneers and other workmen, besides ships
and Mariners, that Prince Alexander sending a Messenger to He sent news to
the King.
to Spain with news of the Victory; to add something (as he writ) to the
solemnity, then intended as he understood, for the Nuptials of Princess
Catharine his Majesty's Married to the Duke of Savoy.
Daughter; after a relation of the Victory lastly affirmed, that he never
amongst all his prosperous success in the Low Countries, had trial of Gods
bounteous goodness at a fitter time then in this Victory over Gaunt, of it
self great, but shortly to produce a greater.

Nor was the fruit of this Victory Ships brought from Gaunt to finish the
Bridge.
long concealed: There were thirty two ships, besides some Barges, manned with
five hundred Soldiers brought from Gaunt, to be conveyed down to the Scheldt
to Caloo. But because between Gaunt and Caloo was seated Antwerp, before whose
works they were to pass, they determined thus to shun it. The Antwerpians
having opened the banks of the Scheldt at Lasling And through the fields
drowned by the enemies.
and other places, (as I said before) had overwhelmed the greatest part of the
Country, even to the Village of Borcht a little beyond Antwerp, and excepting
the Isle of Doele, Caloo, and some other Forts which were free from the Deluge,
had covered over with waters all the seacoast of Flanders. Alexander laying
hold of this opportunity, as soon as the ships were set out from Gaunt, and
safely passed Dendermund and Rupelmund, Cities now of the Kings party, and
being augmented with some Frigots Avoiding Antwerp.
and little Galleys, commanded them to leave Antwerp on their right hand, and
divert their course to Eorcht, and cutting there the banks of the River, to
break out into the fields then flowing with Waters, which they, after a short
skirmish with the And fighting with good success.
Antwerpian fleet, (which came thither to stop them) killing John Cock the
Admiral, and being guarded with a new Fort raised on purpose near Borcht
prosperously performed. Then steering toward Caloo, and breaking through the
Rampire of Blacherse at St. Francis Fort, at length at Sebastians, the banks of
the river being cut, and sliding again into the Scheldt came to Alexander with
so much the greater joy to the Army, for that Are conveyed to Alex.
it was reported, the Royal ships were scarcely passed Borcht, when a new
navy from Antwerp, under the conduct of Tilinius, flew into the help of Cock.
This Tilinius some days before, whilst the Confederates on every But Tilinius
son to Lanoy, sailing from Lillo to Antwerp,
side assailed and disturbed the workmen building the Bridge, departing in the
night from Lillo, made an escape to Antwerp, and drew with him three Spanish
Barges, but seeing Not without some booty.
the Royalists to have worsted the Antwerpians ships, and already passed the
bank of the Scheldt even to Borcht, lest that passage and port should hereafter
Iye open to any more ships coming from Gaunt, with the Fleet that came with
him, cast Anchor where the bank of the River was Raising a Castle bindered that
passage from Gaunt,
opened, and there erected and fortifyed a Castle which was called Tilinius.
Then returning to Antwerp, and consulting with Aldegunde and the chiefest
Commanders, when they had determined to call from Zutphan Count Holach, to move
Colonel Morgan to assist them with his English Regiment, and again to demand
aid from the French; He engaged himself to go to the Hollanders, and solicit
their Navy. And expecting the ebbing of the sea in an armed Galley, Afterward
sailing back to solicit the Hollanders.
having sent before one of his Barges, about midnight escaped between the
wooden bridges, but by and by falling on the Lord of Bills Galley and ships;
who by Prince Alexanders appointment, kept guard between the bridge and
Lief-kenshoeck after some dispute was overcome, taken prisoner, Is taken.
and sent to the Castle of Tourney, With great loss to the States.
with no less loss to Antwerp, deprived of a stout and hardy Captain, then
grief to his father Lanoy, with Lanoy taken before.
that captivity twice captivated. But the damage given by Tilinius, who by
placing ships near Borcht, had debard the Royalists from thence, and so
block't up the ships passage The passage from Gaunt being obstructed.
from Gaunt, was not recompensed by this defeat: Which greatly vexed Prince
Alexander, standing in need of ships, by the interposition whereof the now
finished bridge might at length block up the Scheldt, and inhibite the passage
to the enemies, who daily in despite of all danger passed that way, and
continually transported some provision to Antwerp, especially the nearer it
drew to winter, he feared every thing would grow to a worse condition,
principally the ice of the river, then which as the inhabitants threatened,
there could not happen a more certain mischief. Besides, he had need of more
ships for the defense of the bridge against the enemies attempts, invading it
either from the sea, or Antwerp, or from both sides at once. Therefore advising
but in vain, with those that were best acquainted with the Waters and places
thereabouts, he himself, either necessity urging wit, or rather, (as we writ
to the King) God inspiring it into his mind, after he had well viewed and
taken notice of the Country all about Alexander devises another else where.
the River, intended (following D^usus, and Conbulonus example, who in those
places made Ditches, he from the Rheine unto the lake of Flevus, this between
the Moss and the Rheine not far from the coast of Holland:) to make a
channel capable 14. Novem.
of ships, from Steken, a Village of Wasia, and draw it on even to Caloo. And
although a great patt of his Pioneers were elsewhere employed; yet assured of
his soldiers obedience, (for Alexander had attained, that that which
heretofore was esteemed Might and Authority, now became emulation and
customary) Himself the Architect of his own design, amongst his soldiers
and pioneers as one of them; laid his hands to the work, and a little above
Steken, whither an arm He begins the Channel.
of Moere a river of Gaunt reaches, opens the head of the ditch, and letting
Moere into it, draws on the And letting the River into it.
channel to a place, where by reason of the former inundation, the Waters were
sufficiently deep five miles distant from Steken. Thence bending its course
through the fields that were ebber of waters, to the Village of Gillis, he
brought it between Verbock, and the Fort of Devera, to Calloo, and so to the
Army, and in fine cutting the bank of the Scheldt disburdened it into the
river: and built there a Sconce called Perla, for the defense of this new Port
and Haven, which in that place he determined for his shipping. And thus though
the passage through, the Scheldt was obstructed by the enemies, yet having
opened a new and much shorter cut, into which the shipping from Gaunt, through
the River Draws it even to the camp.
Moere might enter, and so be conveyed to the Army, he sufficiently provided
plenty of Timber for the bridge, and provision for the Army with great
admiration of the enemies; seeing so huge a work, so speedily perfected: and
rejoicing of his soldiers, highly and not sparingly extolling the Prince of
Parma, to whose honor they called this new Fosse, Parma. The length of it
measuring both the dry land and the overwhelmed fields, The length of it.
was fourteen miles: and first, there came from, Gaunt that way seaventeen
Barks but afterward as the greatest The commodiousnesse of it.
Rivers of all Flanders do meet at Gaunt, so from all places of Flanders, all
kind of Merchandise began to be brought to the Camps, with no little gain to
the Towns and Villages, safely conveying thither, and uttering their vendible
commodities; with the greatest benefit to the soldiers, whom all the time of
the siege, this one channel abundantly supplied with victuals, so as they
needed not to leave their Posts and Enfignes. But the principal Ships are
brought through it to perfect the bridge.
profit of Parma then was, to bring in ships to finish the bridge: Yet by
reason of the frost they were some days retarded, for the River Scheldt, which
was almost all frozen up, being broken, huge pieces of Ice were heaped
together, which if perhaps with the violence of the Tide, had been dash't
against the bridge: doubtless had dissipated and overthrown the ships
standing in the midst of the River, where it runs with greater violence.
Certainly some huge fragments of the congealed River, forcibly being dash't
against the bridge, and sticking into the substance of the piles, almost half a
palm, were a sufficient proof, of what strength and firmness it was,
standing immovable and stable against such sharp darts, violently hurled by
the raging billows of the Ocean. But as soon as the Winter began to dissolve,
and less And the violence of the congealed River ceasing, they are made use
of. 1585.
fear of the Ice they returned to their work. The middle part of the River (as
is before signified) between the Castles lay open little less then one
thousand three hundred foot. To block up which there were thirty two Those
ships were chiefly two.
ships, of sixty six foot long a piece, and twelve foot broad interposed,
with their sides together evenly placed. Nor were they joined close together,
Thus ordered.
but distant one from another twenty two foot, and tied together in four
places, at the Fore-deck, middle, and stern by Cable-ropes, and chains.
Besides, every shipp from the Fore-deck and stern was stayed by Anchors so
cast that the river swelling up, and the Cables loosned by the Mariners help,
the rank of ships might be raised unhurt. But the distance between every ship
was made up by beams, and boarded by overthwart planks, fastened unto the
hatches: Over these the passage is made.
whereby there was made a continual bridge between the Castles, of one
thousand three hundred foot long, flancked also with battlements of firm
plancks, as was observed in both parts of the Steccada, to which, this middle
bridge was connected. To every ship for their defense were attributed thirty
soldiers, fenced with hurdles and gabions, four Mariners, and two double
Cannons: But for the Fortified with soldiers, Mariners and Cannons,
Castles there were far more defendants; and to every corner of them so many
Cannons, two whereof were placed for the defense of the Steccada, and two for
the ships. And for the For the defense of the whole work, there were 97.
Cannons.
protection of all the whole bridge, there were ninety seven great Gunns. Nor
was this work sooner perfected, but another was dispatched, which might be to
this a munition and fortification. And as before City gates A double defense
placed before the Bridge.
some Forts or bulwarks a little distant from the Walls are wont to be raised
aginst the enemies, by opposition of which they may be retarded, and dulled,
that they cannot assault the City it self, but first tired and diminished; so
this new Bulwark (as Baroccius the inventor of it, reasoned) would be a tuition
to the bridge, upon which the enemies ships must of necessity run and be
entangled, before they could freely and in full force assail the bridge. And
after this manner was the structure of this Machine. Before the Navall bridge,
but about a Of the kind of structure.
darts cast off, there were thirty three boats, placed three and three
together, their sides somewhat distant one from another, fastened together with
huge beams laid over, and ships Mafts. Then three others connected after the
same manner, but separated from the first three a little distance: so again
others, succeeded with equal distance, even unto the eleventh Ternall.
Besides, from every one of these Ternalls, stood out forty beams in a forked
order, being very long, round, and their points sharpened with iron; which like
Pike-men in the front of an Army, might terrify with their points set and
turned against the enemy, those that advanced against them. These Boats were
filled with empty Hogs-heads, left they should be swallowed up, either by the
stream or tide: these were on either side stayed with Anchors, but their
Cables long and slack, that the River rising with the tide, they might also
rise with it, therefore they called them Floates.

The one of these Engines, for there were two were placed toward Antwerp, the
other toward the Ocean, either of these being one thousand two hundred and
fifty two foot long, were so far extended into the breadth of the River, that
they might by their opposition and hinderance, defend all the Navall bridge,
and part of the Castles. Lastly, his Excellency adding a Navy of forty sail of
ships and galleys, twenty on Flanders fide, and as many on the coast of
Brabant, for the safeguard of the Bridge; after the seventh month of the
siege, brought this work to a happy end: And built a bridge over the Scheldt,
two thousand four hundred foot long, of that And the bridge 2400 foot long,
being finished.
firmness, that both horse and foot, with Carriages and Wheel-pieces might
safely pass to and fro, as occasion required between Flanders and The passage
from Antwerp to the sea, is wholly cut off.
Brabant; block't up the river, and took away all hopes of commerce between the
Sea and the Antwerpians. That day, on which the bridge and its fortifications
were finished (being That day, the work was finished, the soldiers celebrate
with great joy.
the feast of St. Matthias the Apostle, which Prince Alexander divined to be to
him, as he writ to the King, luckie for the memory of his Grandfather Charles
the fifth, to whom that day often proved fortunate) all the Army celebrated it
with military triumph. A great part of the soldiery were placed on the new
bridge, as if, having subjugated and trampled on the Scheldt, they were already
Victors: part from the Castles, and Forts built on both sides the River; some
from the ships, many from their stations and tents; all with joyful Volleys of
their Artillery and exulting shouts wished life and Victory to their noble
General the Prince of Parma. Whilst Alexander likewise gives thanks to God.
he, who knew the design to be begun by the singular Will of God, and by him
protected amongst the continual conflicts, both of the enemies, and elements,
rendering with a submissive mind, thanks and praises to the Divine Majesty,
prayed that the work might continue and be defended by his most omnipotent
hand.

But as soon as it was known at Antwerp, The Antwerpians admire to see the work
finished.
the passage of the Scheldt to be stopped by a bridge, and many afar off beheld
the Machine; it is scarce credible, with what admiration and consternation the
people were taken. Yea, there were of opinion, that this could not be invented
by humane Art, but the model of it by some demonicall inspiration demonstrated
to the Prince of Parma, and accomplished by Artificers, and Tools sent from
Pluto. Indeed Aldegund, all thought then he dissembled his fear, was mightily
dejected; and in a Book, which after the delivery of Antwerp he set forth,
affirmed to be above humane judgment, that a River of that Aldegunds judgment
of it.
nature, could by mortal hands be obstructed. And verily amongst all the
Ancients, one can hardly read of a more exquisite and rare piece of work. I
know Caesar's bridge a little beyond the Belgic bounds, built over the Rheine,
to be by Historians Compared to Caesar's Bridge.
made famous. But Caesar's bridge on the Rheine was erected on a far straiter,
and by reason of the Summer time more shallow place. Alexanders bridled a river
broader, almost by the half, hard by the Ocean, yea mixed with it, and tossed
by the fury of that Element. Besides, he had every thing Caesar.
ready brought from confederate Provinces, offering ships and Timber:
Alexand^r had few necessaries at hand, most things to fetch afar off, now
surprised by the English, then by the Hollanders, always in danger of the
enemies. And that Caesar's bridge was but for a short time to be used, to wit,
for once transporting of an army, and therefore did not need to be of that
stability, as of necessity Alexanders must, to hold out a siege of many months
continuance. Lastly, Caesar stood in no dread of enemies, who, as soon as the
bridge began to be erected, fled away, Alexander in sight of an hostile and
most potent City, erected a Bridge amongst Waters, restless by the Tide of the
restless Ocean, betwixt Antwerp and the Antwerp.
Sea, both held by the enemies, now thence, then from Antwerp, often from both
sides at once, assailed by dangerous invasions of the enemies ships. So as if
the Name of Caesar were but taken from Rheine, and added to this bridge of
Antwerp, our age, I believe, needed not to be ashamed of their Caesar's. But a
spy sent by Aldegund to the Camp, to take notice of the fabric of the Bridge,
and the enemies designs, aggravated the besieged Cities cares, who being known
and apprehended, but treated by the Prince of Parma, otherwise A Sco^t from
Antwerp taken.
then he feared, (to wit, in imitation of Scipio, who with like security of
himself, and contempt of the enemy, admitted Anniballs scouts,) was commanded
to walk about the Army, diligently to take notice of the bridge, to number the
ships, Artillery, and Forts, and then without fear to return to him. Being
returned, go quoth he to those that sent thee, and And is sent back from Alex.
with these words.
after thou have related all things thou have with thy eyes beheld, add that
Alexander Farneze, with a constant resolution has determined with himself,
not to depart from the siege, till under that (and points to the Bridge) he
bury himself, or by it force a way into the City.

But the news of the unfortunate attempt of Bolduc, was to Antwerp a The
attemps of Bolduc.
far greater terror then the relation they had from the Scout at his return.
The States confederate amongst What was decreed by the states at their meeting.
other things, agitated at their meeting at Middleburg, had thus divided their
Forces. Whilst Tresland Admiral of Zealand, was drawing his fleet to Lillo,
Count Holack should attempt Bolduck which if the Prince of Parma should
releeve, (for so they disputed) doubtless, the bridge and the Castles would be
left destitute of their accustomed defense, and so their fleet might have a
more facile access, and onset upon the bridge, but if he neglected Bolduck,
and chose rather to attend to the head of the War, it could not hold out long,
especially when some of the Citizens had promised their endeavors, and if
Bolduc were taken, they might convey succors to Antwerp by land, not needing
the sea. And now by Holacks command fifty foot soldiers Iulians charge.
under Claragius lay in ambush, before the City gate, which tends toward
Antwerp, and as soon in the morning as the Citizens opened that gate, and let
down the drawbridge, on a sudden they showed themselves, and putting to flight
the Citizens, took that gate. And forthwith three hundred horse, and seven
hundred foot not far off listening to the success, commanded by Holach
himself enter the City: and being divided, some march Holach and his forces
enter the City.
into the marketplace, some lay hand on the Magazine and Artillery, many now
as secure of the Victory, furiously Who fall to plunder.
spread themselves all over in pillaging this rich City. And a Corporal The
keeper of the gate joins himself to the plunderers.
with three soldiers appointed by Holack to look to the gate, now supposing
the City to be taken, lest he should be defrauded of the fruits of the
Victory, basely forsook his station, and joined himself to his plundering
companions. At that time by chance, Altapen newly recovered of his sickness
was at Bolduc, and hearing the noise of the enemies, armed himself, and
drawing with him forty Lanciers of Elmont his Italian Troop, who then was
Governor of the City, advanced to the Marketplace, and with his presence
greatly animated the dejected Citizens, and Altapen charges the enemies.
fiercely charged the Vanguard of the enemies. Then the Governor Elmont They
fight. By and by others also.
follows Altapens example: and with both, some Citizens join themselves:
others by their own conduct, and with mutual exhortation invade the enemies:
and taking up arms every where, it was all the City over, both in the streets
and Market, with different resolutions, but equal obstinacy on both sides
disputed. These, the love of their City, care of their wives, children and
fortunes, inflamed against the assailants, and robbers; these were encouraged
with the glory of surprising the City, and the great booties which now were in
their hands. But, whether EVERY one more carefully defends his own, then
strives to take others, or the armed crowd of Citizens increasing for, FOR THE
most part a few begin high designs, but are soon seconded by many; the
Hollachians were forced to defist from plunder, and fall to their own defense.
And were yet encouraged with hope of succors, Holach being gone to call in
more forces, which for this purpose lay privately in a Neighboring Village.
But an old man seeing the gate slighted by the Holach departs to fetch in more
forces.
Holachians, privily crept down from an adjoining Turret, cutting in sunder the
ties, and letting down the Port-cullis, shut out and deluded the enemies, being
one thousand horse and Returns with them. But the gate being shut, he is not
admitted.
two thousand foot, posting with all speed to the City, and even then at the
gates, whereby it came to pass that the Holachians now fighting with unequal
number and courage were all either shut up within the City, and miserably cut
off; or voluntarily Then following the slaughter of the Holachians.
leaping from the Walls into the Ditch, excepting a few, were swallowed up by
the Waters. At which time it is reported that many also of the Citizens, as yet
ignorant of the delivery of their City, in a precipitate flight, and with vain
fear of them, to whom they themselves were a terror, fell down headlong from
the opposite part of the City Walls, and so both the victours and conquered
were alike drowned. But it is more probable that they were not by ignorance of
the Victory, but guilty of Treason, driven to flight and that fate. Amongst the
dead, were found Ferdinand Truchsesius, brother to the deposed Imperial
Elector, and the Prince of Oranges base son, besides Count Holachs
Lieftenant, and some German Captains of Pike-men.

Thus this City already taken, was by one Corporal quitting his post lost, and
saved by the undaunted courage of Altapen. And so accordingly the Corporal
flying from the walls The keeper of the gate punished.
received his merited punishment, who by Holachs command lost his head. Altapen
and Elmont Prince Alexander highly extolling them both, were by the Kings
letters as signals of his thanks, honored, together with a Altapen rewarded.
gift sent to Altapen.

As the news of this defeat entered Bruxels besieged, is tormented with Famine.
Antwerp, at the same time almost some horse, and suddenly after foot also, the
relics of the slaughter given by George Basta Commissary General of the
horse, confusedly fled into the City. For Viluord a Town near adjoining to
Bruxels, not long before being taken by the Royalists, and Ambrose Landriano
left there to defend it, those of Bruxels were miserably tormented for lack of
provision. Wherefore the Mechlinians. and the Antwerpians, had thus agreed to
releeve them, that they should provide provision, and these a Convoy. But by
They of Mechlin and Antwerp send them provision, with a great Convoy.
chance this came to the Prince of Parma's knowledge, who appointed George
Basta from Tornhout, and Edward Lanceavech from Liere, Governor of that
Garrison, to join their forces, and about Viluord to enambush them-selves. And
now at the close of the evening, they saw nine But falling on an Ambuscado of
the Royalists.
Troops of Horse and almost thirteen ^oot companies, to march before two
hundred Carriages, and but a slender guard on the Rear. For by reason of the
vicinity of Mechlin, they suspected not any danger. Whereupon the Royalists to
make show of greater forces, with great and sudden sounding of Drums and
Trumpets, charged the Van of the enemies horse; then the foot and horse joining
themselves, whilst on both sides it was courageously fought, the Waggoneers
conveyed away the carriages, and drove most of them back to Mechlin, from Are
beaten and put to flight.
whence a little before they came: whereby the Royalists with greater fury
pursuing the fight, slew at least two hundred, and took many prisosoners, but
especially of Ragters horses, With prey to the Victours.
for they brought away above four hundred, killed and routed all the rest, and
thought it sufficient, so to have disappointed the Antwerpians design, to
their no small damage, and to have dash't all hopes of releeving Bruxels, now
in great distress for want of provision. And indeed the The famine increases
at Bruxels.
famine in that rich, famous, and most populous City, grew almost intolerable,
although oftentimes many, both men and women were sent out, thereby to ease it.
But most of them by the Kings horse were either by shot forced back into the
City, or not returning, were taken and hanged up: but they commanded the women,
having their garments cut above their knees, with that disgrace to return to be
with their fellows hunger-starved. And truly every day there, many miserably
perish't for lack of meat; yea, it is reported, that a mother of many children,
being inwardly tormented with their continual lamentations, A miserable
example.
caused them to drink poison, and afterward drunk it her self, thereby to
prevent the irksomeness of a tedious death. Then discord famines companion,
entered the City, some of the Discord increases as the famine.
Citizens being in mind to surrender the City, others still retaining their
obstinacy with hope of help from France: these with armed soldiers possess
themselves of the Palace, those with like preparation of arms took the
Marketplace and Townhouse. Til at length in despair of the French succors,
and seeing all passages on every side the City to be obstructed, Viluord lost,
and Willebroeck the head of their chief Navigation, together with the garrison
taken by Igniquesius Regiment; Templaeus Governor of the City, the soldiery,
and They send to Alex. to deliver up the City.
the Magistrates, sent their several Commissioners into the Camp to Alexander,
to render up the City to his mercy: only petitioning they might receive
conditions, not dishonorable to their City, the seat of the Belgic Princess:
adding that their constant fidelity to his mother the Duchess of Parma,
deserved something at her sons hands. Alexander after a short reprehension,
that that Faith to his mother, and the King her Lord, they By whom being
reprehended,
had rashly changed, and by a furious edict, had made him exile to his own, yet
putting them in good hopes of his Majesty's clemency, dismissed them to
President Richardott, by whose especial means they agreed on these They
receive these conditions.
Articles. The Citizens now received into his Majesty's favor: being no
otherwise charged with any fine of money, are only commanded to repair the
Churches, to restore the precious furniture of the Kings Palace, and the
sacred Ornaments of his Chapel, which they had plundered or else to pay their
worth. As for the goods they had taken from the houses of Cardinal Granuell,
Count Mansfield, and other rich men, whether they were to be restored or no,
was left to be determined afterward; Lastly, the Heretics had leave to tarry
in the City two years for the settling of their affairs: and the soldiers
(which were about one thousand five hundred foot, and four hundred horse) are
permitted to march away with their arms, bag, and baggage, but without either
banners displayed, or light matches, their drums and Trumpets silent: and
before they departed, they were sworn: the common soldiers not to bear arms
against his Majesty of Spain for four months, and the Officers for seven
months. At whose departure, Anthony Lord of Goigney, an ancient Commander,
even from the time of Charles the fifth; was by Prince Alexander Lastly, he
provides for the civil and sacred affairs.
appointed Governor of the City, with some companies of Walloones and
Spaniards. Then Richardott was sent thither, together with Garner one of the
privy Council, to be over the Council, and new Magistrates, and to regulate
the civil affairs. And in fine, the charge of the Clergy was with like care
committed to the Archbishop of Mechlin, to whose Diocese Bruxels then
belonged.

And within less then a month The render of NIEVMEGHEN.
Nievmeghen, the Metropolitan of Guelders, came into his Majesty's hands. SO
THINGS conjoined, if once disjoynted, they all suddenly go to wrack. Count
Meursius Governor of that Province, intended to have increased the garrison at
Nieumeghen (there being already for its defense four hundred foot, and two
hundred horse) thereby to terrify the faction of the Catholics in that City,
of whom he was jealous. But new garrison soldiers were both to the Catholics
and Heretics equally unwelcome, and therefore not admitted; yea, Upon a
contef^ amongft the Citizens.
the Catholics privately conspired amongst themselves to remove the old
garrison: whereof Alexander having notice, to whom not any of the enemies
designs lay concealed, forthwith Altapen privately aideth the Catholieks.
appointed Altapen, whom he had placed in Guelderland to wait on the motions
of Count Meursius, that he should diligently attend to that prize. He
thereupon consulting with the Catholic Citizens, sent secretly now and then,
some faithful and valiant men into the City to strengthen the Catholic party:
Who when they were gotten to a sufficient head, set open the gates, and
admitted Altapen And they prevailing, is admitted.
with a select force of horse into the City, who joined with them, standing
ready in arms. Whereupon the garrison soldiers affrighted with the with the
sudden surprise, without the least resistance, or delay submitted And takes the
City.
themselves, and were forthwith sent away. Whereupon the Nievmeghens sent their
chiefest Citizens to his Excellency: and obtaining what conditions they
desired, returned to their ancient loyalty and obedience. Wherefore Prince
Alexander commanded a solemn thanksgiving to the Divine goodness; with as
great joy through the Army, as mutiny at Antwerp at the sad tidings, first at
the loss of With great mutiny at Antwerp.
Bruxels the Court of Brabant, then of the surprising of Nievmeghen, in times
past the seat of Charles the Great: and by reason of the commodiousnesse of
the River, Waele of greatest importance in all Guelders. So that indeed
Aldegund with all his Rhetoric, could not have repressed the tumult of the
people, if their dejected Which upon some good news is quieted.
spirits had not been animated at the news of the vain and bloody success of
the Royalists attempting Ostend: and the recovery of Lief-kenshoeck with other
Forts.

And truly the assult of Ostend by The attempt of OSTEND.
Valentine Lord of Mott, does much resemble both for its beginning, success
and end, that of Bolduc, attempted almost at the same time (as we have before
related) by Count Holach. The Lord of Mott with some companies of Camillus
Capissuccus Italian Regiment, and drawing part of the Presidiaries out of the
adjacent garrisons, together with a Regiment of Waloones, led by Lewis
Memorancy Baron of Beury, for his Father the Lord of Berse; on the sudden slew
the watch of Ostend, placed at the Seaport: then entering the old Town (for
Mottaeus enters the City.
Ostend is divided into two parts) and killing all those that made head against
them, held it as Conqueror almost four hours. But he departing to fetch
Cannons to open a way into the new Town, in the interim most The soldiers
falling to plunder,
of his soldiers dispersed themselves greedy of plunder: an accustomed evil,
which in such unfortunate attempts will always be condemned in soldiers,
always caused by covetousness. It also happened that some of the Captains,
to whom the set And the Captains making delay.
hour of assaulting the City was prescribed, stayed beyond their limited time,
whereby the Townsmen and garrison soldiers joining both their forces in a
body, easily mastered the assailants, scattered up and down, at their pleasures
pillaging the City. Hinder the victory.
And although Memorancy having gathered many of his soldiers together, Which
whilst Memorancy urges forward,
and ordering them in a ring as well as he could, omitted nothing whereby he
might valiantly reinforce the fight; yet the enemies number increasing, he was
slain gallantly Is slain fighting.
fighting in the very front of his soldiers, and his body cast into the
Waters, whereby his children were deprived of that small comfort; but they
could not eclipse the memory of his renowned valor, which was too worthy to
be buried in the Waters. There were many slain on both sides, but far more
on the Royalists, The overthrow of the rest.
amongst whom there fell four Captains, besides the loss of two Ensigns of
the Italian Regiment, which because they were a long time stoutly defended by
their bearers, and came not into their enemies hands but by their deaths, it
was permitted by the law of Arms to display new ones in their places. The rest
of the assailants, after the death of their Commanders And flight.
fled away. Three Captains also Three Captains therefore condemned,
were by Prince Alexander condemned to lose their heads, but for the singular
valor of one of these Captains, often made proof of in the Wars But
afterward set at liberty.
they were after some days imprisonment, all set at liberty. But the fleet
from Zealand, which as we have before The Navy of zealand.
related, and fame divulged, was privately designed at the consultation of
MIddleburg, was to the Spanish Camp a far greater terror. Yet the Prince of
Parma placed great hope in the delay of Treslong, Admiral of that Navy; for
hearing that this The Admiral protracts time.
Treslong, upon some jarres between him and Adulph Meetkirk had taken distaste
at the States of Zealand, his Excellency being attentive to such like
occasions, had already courted him with kind complementall Letters, Being
courted by Alexander with many promises.
and invited him to join with the Royal party, offering him great matters,
and putting him in hope of creating him Knight of the Order of the golden
Fleece. And indeed Treslong, whether hanging in suspense or not sufficiently
provided for an assault, seemed but slowly to set forward his ships to
transport provision to Antwerp, and hinder the perfecting of the bridge: not
without the sinister reports of many, and open complaints of the States against
such The States complain of his delay, whom he sleights.
a jealous procrastination. Which he more intollerably resented, because proud
of his deserts, for surprising Brill, with the help of Lume (the first
beginning and Origin of depressing the Spanish Dominion) thought the united
Provinces to be greatly indebted to him. Wherefore following the like rash
hastiness of Lume, when he could not contain himself from menacing and
casting And as ungrateful threatens them.
out reproaches against the Zealanders; almost with the like success as Lume,
was by the Council of Zealand, degraded from his Admiralls place, and not long
after imprisoned, But is removed from his Admirals place.
there remaining, until by the Mediation of the Queen of England he was
released, and retired into Holland, where the business being again agitated
by the high Court of that Province, who took it ill, that the Council But
after set at liberty by the Hollanders.
of Zealand should act things without their knowledge, he was discharged:
whether they found him truly guiltless, and condemned only because he was
rich, and hated: and for fear, lest exasperated with the late affront, he
should desert their party, and join with the enemy. And therefore the
Hollanders advancing him to And honored.
high Dignities, retained him with them. But before all this, Treslong acting
nothing as yet, the Zealanders collected together all the ships they The
Navy of zealand, entering the Scheldt, setsupon Lief-kenshoeck.
could, and under Justin of Nassau, the Prince of Oranges base son, sent them
from the sea into the Scheldt, who setting upon Lief-kenshoeck with the help
of the ships belonging to Lillo the opposite fort, batter the Castle with so
strong an impression of their Cannons, that now the fort being beaten down in
many places, and a sufficient breach made for an ascent, after a sharp rather
then constant resistance of the Royalists, the Walloones who kept the Castle
either slain or put to chase, they not only recovered Lief-kenshoeck, but
Antonia And take it.
also its Governor not daring to fight, and almost all the Isle of Doele: With
other Castles.
with great indignation of Prince Alexander, who sending forces with all speed,
and urging forward the ships that kept centrie not far off, was yet by the
Governor of Antonia, and his soldiers over hasty flight prevented. Wherefore
his Excellency being implacably incensed, banished the Alex. punishes the
Governors,
Governor of Lief-kenshoeck, and beheaded the Governor of Antonia This
Victory, as it warranted the States free Navigation, safely to pass with
relief between their Castles on both sides the River, even from the sea to the
bridge, so it hastened their enterprise agreed on at their meeting; The
confederates design of invading the bridge.
viz. that at the same time, when the Antwerpians should with their pretended
stratagem invade, and overthrow the Bridge, the Hollanders and Zealanders
should approach with their Navy, and convey provision through the breach of
the Bridge. But lest the shipps-masts placed before the Bridge, and fastened to
boats (which as is before said, were called floates) should be an obstacle to
the Antwerpians disigne: there were Mariners appointed, to transport
themselves in First of removing the floates from before the bridge.
the dead of the night in light shallops, or by some secret invention to dive
under the Waters, and with great hooks and knives to cut the Cables, and turn
the Masts down the River against the bridge. But Barroccius having put chains
to the Anchors, in Which they attempting, were represt.
stead of ropes: and causing fires to be made along the river side, all the
night through, their intent was frustrated.

But the Antwerpians having now finished the ships, which they a long time had
prepared for the unevitable Seaventeen Antwerpian ships.
destruction of the bridge certifyed their Navy on the other side, that the
ships, which were made ready, should on the fourth day of April next ensuing
set forth from the City. And that they with their fleet and store of provision,
should without fail, that night be ready at hand, for they might pass
through the not to be doubted breach of the bridge, without danger. I will out
of Prince Alexanders letters to the King, and from a brief commentary of
Captain Tuccius concerning this design, exactly relate the invention and
effect of these ships, because in all Antiquity any thing more terrible was
never heard off. Frederick Jambell, The inventour.
an admirable Engineer, coming out of Italy into Spain, is said a long time to
have desired access to the King, that he might offer him his service, which
would be very advantageous for him in the Low Countries. But being a long time
put off, and at last slighted; as he was not brought up at Court to patience,
departed thence in a rage, and threatened erelong so to effect, that his Majesty
of Spain, should hear of the name of this despised person not without tears.
And then went to Antwerp, where he got by this occasion; as I have begun to
relate, a fit opportunity of expressing the malice of his galled mind. He built
four ships with The structure of four of them.
flat bottomes, and high sides, both of them much thicker and stronger then
ordinary: and thus invented to make Mines made in them.
mines in the Waters. First of all, in the keele of the ship, he made a wall
of lime and brick, as it were the floar, or groundwork, one foot high, and
five foot broad: and extended it the length of the Ship; then he erected walls
on each side the compass of the foundation, three foot high, and as broad,
covering them close, being first filled with Gunpowder tempered by an
exqnisite Art, known only to himself. The covering was of Gravestones,
Millstones, and other huge stones. Upon this covering he made another height
Vault-wise, of Millstones, and other huge stones also, which leaning one to
another made a ridge, that the slaughter might not only be straight forwards,
but on either side; within this higher vault he laid Iron and Marble balls,
chains, blocks, nails, knives, and whatsoever this wicked witty man thought
most damageable. Lastly, as far as lay open between the sides of the ship,
and the wall and roof of the mine, he filled up with square stones close
joined, and beams fastened with Iron. But covered, and hid all these things
with strong planks, and a brick floor, in the middle whereof he set fire to a
pyle of wood, (that the ships might seem to be set out in that order to
burn down the bridge) putting under the Wood, pitch and brimstone, not to be
extinguished, before the mine should be fired with the prepared Timber, he
framed two ways to Two ways of firing the mines
fire the Mine: In some of the ships placed matches besmeared with gunpowder,
which being privily extended through part of the keele, were stretched into the
Mine, of that length, as by a certain measure he had before tried, would
continue light, until the ships should come to the bridge. In other ships,
he used those kind of clockes, which are wont by an admirable and pleasant
Art, to be exhibited in stead of night-watchers to light lamps. And so ordered
the stratagem, that it should continue with a gentle motion of the wheels,
until the ship arrived at the bridge: and then with a sudden and violent
meeting together of the wheels, and flint, strike some sparcles, which recived
in the bruised gunpowder there scattered, taking fire, might inflame the train
there laid: and this reaching to the mouth of the Mine, might speedily convey
that creeping fire into it. Jambell having finished four ships after this
manner, added to them thirteen lesser, To these four greater, are added
thirteen lesser.
having within them nothing hurtful, but the Hatches covered with huge fires.
Nor was this preparation unseene of the Royalists, although The Royalists in
the interim solicitous.
they were ignorant of the stratagem: who imagined the fleet was in making
ready in the City, to the intent the bridge might at once be assailed on the
one side by the Antwerpians, and on the other by the Hollanders and Zealanders.
Wherefore his Excellency strengthening the Castles, and Forts with greater
guards, and calling to the bridge the chief of his soldiers, had a watchful
eye to the enemies designs: who by how much he seemed the better prepared to
divert the slaughter, was so much nearer The ships appear from the City. 8.
April.
to receive it. When behold from the City there appeared three ships brightly
shining with fire, and a little after followed others, and after those others.
Then all the noise in the Camp was arm arm, and the bridge was filled with
soldiers. The ships were carried down the river two and three together, in so
orderly a course, as if they were but to make a show; for they were then
governed by Marrlners: and the fire in every ship shined so clearly, that they
seemed not to carry Their fires made a wonderful show in the night,
fires, but verily to burn themselves, and so fire to sail, and be nourished
amongst the Waters. And truly that night was that Scene acted, which might have
been a pleasant spectacle, if the spectatours had been exempt from fear and
care. For the banks of the River, and the Castles placed thereon shined with
continual fires. The Companies of armed men ranged along As also the soldiers
along the banks.
the banks made a reflection of the shining light: the fiery ships amidst the
Scheldt hurtlesly spitting their flames, it was to be doubted, whether they
came to be a sport, or (full of deceit) a destruction. Then the aspect and pomp
of the Commanders and Soldiers shining in bright Armor, their weapons drawn,
and colors displayed all along the bridge, augmented the Pageant. Lastly, all
things composed to the uncertain pleasure of this new Theater, both struck
terror, and yet were delightful: they feared, and yet had pleasure in the
cause of their fear. And now these ships were scarcely two miles off the
bridge, when the Mariners The ships approach nearer;
that conducted them, directing their helmes, turned those four ships that
were made with Mines straight down the midst of the channel, against the
bridge, not so greatly caring for the rest and forthwith setting fire to the
match leap't into the boats to behold a far off the success. But they
wanting their Pilots, did not at all keep one course: most of the lesser The
lesser having no success.
either dash't themselves against the opposite Machines that were fenced with
sharp pykes, or running on ground stuck to the banks. But of the four that
carried within them ruin, one leaking was swallowed up in the midst of the
River, vomiting only smoke and Thunder. Two others of Nor three of the
greater.
the four toward Caloo, (the River being deeper there and running swifter)
the Wind blowing hard out of Brabant, forced on Flanders coast, and there
grounded them. Nor did the The fourth is stayed by the floates.
fourth seem to have any better fortune being almost cast on Flanders coast,
and violently driven upon the very farthest part of the floates. Therefore the
Royalists now shaking off fear especially when the fires began Then the
Royalists fear is turned to mirth.
to diminish in many of the lesser ships, and were almost extinguished,
wondered at the enemies designs, and scoffed with Military jeeres, that so
great preparation was to no purpose. Yea, they were so bold, as from Flanders
side, to board one of those ships that was gravel'd there, and try with
javelins what might be within it. When that shipp, which I spoke of last,
being greater and stronger But when it broke through the floates,
then the rest, easily escaped those sharp pointed Engines, broke down the
opposite Machine, and came on fiercely against the bridge. Then were the
soldiers renewing their shoutes, again solicitous and fearful. And They were
again solicitous.
Prince Alexander, who having his thoughts bent several ways, now had regard
to the Navy lying at Lillo, then nearer attending to the Antwerpians design,
forthwith at those Alex. hastens to divert the shipp from the Bridge.
shoutes repaired thither, where the fire-ship seemed to attempt; and commanded
some Mariners to board the ship disperse the wood, and quench the fire: others
to keep off and prevent the danger with long poles, and pikes. He himself
stood in the wooden Castle, which is the furthest part of the Pile-work from
Flanders side, to which the navall bridge is connected. There were with him
Rubasius, Cajatane, Billius, and Vastius, with other chief Commanders, besides
the guard of the place. Amongst whom a Spanish Ensign, an ancient servant to A
Spanish Ensign endeavors to remove him from the Bridge.
the Farnezes, having some knowledge insuch like Engines, was the preserver of
Prince Alexanders life. Whether he knew how excellent Jambell was in this Art,
and perhaps had heard how he had been treated in Spain: and therefore
suspected this device to be set forth out of the workhouse of this incensed
man. Or not by humane reasoning he did it, but God, who then had determined
Antwerp should be taken by so courageous and pious a General, putting it into
his mind, came to his Excellency, and most earnestly desired him, that seeing
now he had sufficiently provided what things were necessary for the present,
he would please to withdraw himself thence, and not to trust his life, on
which every soldiers life, yea, the very War it self depended, to so
perilous a place. But being rejected, he insisted in his suit twice or thrice,
and not taken notice Being rejected, he still insists;
of he prostrated himself at his knees, and said, I most humbly beseech and
entreat you most Illustrious Prince, by your life, which now I see exposed to
present hazard, once to take counsel of your servant. And saying thus, he
reverently took hold of his garment, and with a kind of commanding authority,
And almost compell's him.
besought him to follow him. Alexander interpreting the unwonted freedom of
the man, as from a higher power, at last consented, Vastius Alexander departs
from the Bridge:
and Cajatane following him. And as scarcely entered Saint Mary's Fort on
Flanders shore, when the hour of the limited time approaching, on a sudden
the fatal ship burst, with such a horrid crash, as if the very skies At the
same time the fireshipp burst,
had rent asunder, heaven and earth had charged one another, and the whole
Machine of the earth it self had quaked. For the storm of stones, chains, and
bullets, being cast out with Thunder and lightning, there The wonderful force
of it.
followed such a slaughter, as no man, but that actually it happened, could
have imagined. The Castle, on which the infernal ship fell, the pile-work of
the bridge next to Saint Mary's Fort, that part of the navall bridge next the
Castle soldiers, Mariners, Commanders, a great number of Cannons, armor, and
arms, all these this furious whirlwind swept away together, tossed in the
air, and dispersed as wind does leaves of Trees. The Scheldt prodigiously
gaping, was first seen to discover its bottom, then swelling above the banks,
was even with the Rampires, and overflowed Saint Mary's Fort above a foot. The
motion of the panting earth extended its force and fear above nine miles.
There were found stones, and that very great ones as grave stones and the like,
a mile off the River, struck into the ground, in some places four palms. But
no loss or destruction was more The slaughter various.
miserable then of men: some the hellish violence of the fires, either
forthwith consumed, or furiously and miserably dash't them together: or shot
them as it were into the air, amongst stones and wood, who straight-wayes were
bruised falling on the earth, or drowned if lighting in the River. Others were
stifled with the pestiferous vapors, not wounded otherwise: some the swelling
river long tormented with hot scalding waters: many were slain in the shoure
of falling stones, and some the grave-stones both killed, and intombed; Yet
this direful infernal fury, omitted not to make some sport in this so
lamentable a Tragedy. The Viscount of Bruxels was taken, and darted out of his
own ship by this sudden Tempest, but fell over-thwart another shipp placed a
good distance off. This devilish The several chances of others.
whirlwind carried Captain Tuccius heavy armed out of Saint Mary's Fort like
light chafe in the air, and cast him down in the midst of the River, out of
which he being well skilled in swimming loosing his armor, and protected by
the Mother of God, whose aid he implored with great confidence, escaped
without any harm. But a young man of Prince Alexanders lifeguard dispatched a
far greater journey; for snatched from the bridge a distance from Flanders
side, he was carried over a great part of the river into Brabant, being but a
little hurt in that shoulder which first light to the ground; and said, he
seemed like a bullet shot out of a piece of Ordinance, he felt behind him such
a violence forcing him forward. Indeed, The judgment of some concerning this
Engine.
there were some of opinion that survived the slaughter, that what man soever
fabricated this execrable Engine, composed that direful plague not of natural
stuff but fetch'c that terrible fire from the infernal furnaces of hell: that
without doubt he provoked that Thunder and lightning by Art magic from the
Skies: attracted the pestiferous vapors from no other place, then the black
dungeon of Pluto: and derived the very waters burning beyond measure and
custom from the Stygian lake. It is so FAMILIAR amongst men, to judge that
whatsoever is beyond their capacity, is also above humane power to effect.
Vasquius Sergeant Major of a Spanish Regiment, writes, The number of those that
were slain.
there were eight hundred slain, besides a great number that were wounded and
maimed: Nor does Tuccius speak of any fewer, who were both present at the
slaughter; Amongst whom there fell many brave soldiers, chief Officers and
leaders: But the death of Rubasius and Billius, which happened in the Castle,
from which Prince Alexander departed, amongst whom Billius,
far surpassed the loss of all the rest. Gaspar Robley a Portuguese, but by
his wife a Dutch Lady, Lord of Bill, had been Governor of Friez-land, and was
then Colonel of a German Regiment, and Captain of a Troop of horse, an
ancient and expert soldier, as ever any, a faithful Counselor, and highly
esteemed by the Prince of Parma, who giving the Regiment to one of his sons,
and the Troop of horse to another, continued the love of the Father toward his
children. But many things concurred to the honor of Robert Marquess Rubasius,
his ancient Nobility And Rubasius, His Elogium:
from the house of the Melunes: his great riches of his own, and increased by
the access of the Principality, which Prince Alexander (his brother being
proscribed) had obtained for him of the King. This great authority both at home
and in the Camp, being both Governor of Artois, and General of the horse:
which he left greater to his successors; being the first General of the horse,
to whom (Prince Alexander permitting it) the lances began to be bowed, an
honorable kind of salutation, accustomed only to the sole General of the
Army, which from that time was brought in custom: and some years after it was
allowed, that the Cornets of horse should bow down their colors to the
General of the Horse. For his military mind there was none more confident, or
fortunate: and therefore he was often by the States confederate, invited to
return to their party, for whom he had once fought against the King: In the
interim they feared him, as conscious of their counsels and strength. The love
of Prince Alexander heaped these dignities upon him, which his Excellency knew
he well deserved, for the return of Waloone Provinces, chiefly by his
example, to their allegiance: for his discovery and preventing the treacheries
plotted against him: and his incomparable care and reverence, continually
acknowledging how greatly he was obliged to the Prince of Parma, almost
adoring the very name of Alexander, though otherwise high-minded and haughty.
But the death of Rubasius, And others.
and many others, caused not only by this ship at the bridge, but by the other
that was grounded vomiting its poison not without the loss of many, (for the
third was driven to the bank, but the fire-work being extinguished by waters,
had no effect) the approach of day, not without great grief discovered for
that night amidst the pitiful groaning of wounded persons, nothing was thought
on, but each one to lament his misfortune, all struck with terror, and almost
out of their wits, being ignorant of their comrades lives, and not assured of
their own. And the fear increased Yea Alex. himself was thought to be
slain.
with the supposed death of their General Prince Alexander: because so lately
seen in the Castle, which the fire first took hold on, and consumed: often
reflecting on those words, which he spoke in the hearing of many to the
Antwerpian scout, viz. that the bridge should either be his Tomb, or a path to
the Victory. They thinking that he too truly had foretold his death, and the
place where. And verily his Excellency although a good distance off the bridge,
was never in greater peril of death; for a great stake falling on him, in His
danger.
the entrance of Saint Mary's Fort, being tossed with the whirlwind of the
disturbed air, between the Helmet and shoulder, struck him to the ground,
where he was found with his sword drawn, like to one in a trance, and Bastius
by him embracing his knees: Cajatane also lying not far off, hurt in the head
with a stone. Prince Alexander after a while coming to himself. when he saw so
many His grief at the overthrow,
dead corpse of his soldiers Iye prostrate about, heard the miserable
lamentations, with which some being fastened and hanging on the beams of the
bridge others covered with heaps of stones, or half buried under gravestones,
implored the help of their fellows: when he beheld the Steccada to be torn
in pieces, the Castle utterly destroyed, and three ships that were next to it
devoured by the River: and understood that those, that were in them, both
Mariners, soldiers, and their Captains, all to be oppressed in the same
ruin and hearing no certainty of Rubasius; he was indeed in extreme sorrow,
yet not at all dejected, although deserted by his Yet not dejected.
dear and faithful fellow soldiers, in so great a ruin of his labors; and
all being in despair, yet he alone for all this huge discomfiture took
courage, constancy, and bore himself as superior to the misfortune; and
taking to him Mondragonius, Charles Man's field, and Camillus Capisuccus,
besides others that escaped the tempest: to whom also George Basta, and Casius
with a select Troop of horse, called thither by the thunder and lightning, came
on the spurr; he went round the stations, ships, and tents: whose first and
chiefest He walks the round,
care was, to send the wounded unto the hospital of Bevera, to help every one
the best he could: to comfort Assists the wounded,
with his presence, words, and encouragement, to extenuate their opinion
Comforts all with his presence, and words,
of the misfortune; he denied not but that many were hurt, yet diverse of them
began to revive, come to themselves, and take breath, and strength: nor were
the enemies exempt from that terror, with which they had struck others, seeing
they durst not proceed forward in the darkness, being ignorant of the
overthrow, and careful of themselves. One thing was seriously to be provided
for, viz. that the day should not reveal the breach And animases them to
repair the Bridge.
of the bridge, which the night concealed from the enemies; Certainly it is
scarce credible, how much the sight of Prince Alexander elevated the dejected
spirits of his soldiers, and repressed their fear of the enemies approach.
The arivall also of Maurique with his German Regiment, whom the Prince of
Parma, after the loss of Lief-kenshoeck, with all speed had sent for out of
Guelders, fell out very opportunely. Therefore with Emulous alacrity, Prince
Alexander THE Bridge is repaired.
himself giving the first example, without distinction of Commanders, or
soldiers, they all contentiously apply themselves to repair the bridge, not
because he thought the invention and labor of many months, could be restored
in four hours: yet the breach of the bridge, by mending the Steccada, and
interposing ships, in some manner closed up, might seem in the morning to the
enemies scouts not to be impaired at all; knowing In show only to delude the
enemies.
soldiers are some times kept off, as well by mere appearances, as true
realities, being always exercised with jealousies and fears; and with that
false spectacle their eyes being deluded and terrifyed, their courages would
easily give back. And he presented them with as seemly a Pageant, as he And
did so.
could wish: for by their great dexterity in the rest of the night, the beams
which floated on the Waters, being laid in their former places, new piles
erected, poles laid over-thwart, and what else they had at hand driven into the
River, and ships linked between as they were, he so fitly repaired the
bridge, placing soldiers thereon, commanding Drumms and Trumpets continually
to be ratled and sounded; that the enemies Navy was by this imaginary species
gulled, and hindered from an assault; which, if it had advanced from Lillo,
might easily have broken through that temporary supply: but afterward the work
being daily strengthened, it was really retarded. And verily it was uncertain
whether the Prince of Parma Being thereby highly praised, especially by the
King.
had greater courage now, in repairing the bridge, or before in building it.
Indeed, the King upon this occasion, rendering him many thanks, wrote with his
own hand, That he was not provided of words, where with he might sufficiently
extol his constancy, and dexterity in that very nick of his distressed
affairs. And there wanted not some, who reflecting June 6.
on the Machine erected above the Waters at the siege of Tire, (so famous in
times past) and its destruction by the fire-ship of the enemies, The comparison
of Alexander Prince of Parma, with Alexander King of Macedon, in repairing the
Bridge,
did not absurdly, or against reason, compare Alexander Prince of Parma, with
Alexander King of Macedon: For neither could they find Antwerp to be a part any
ways inferior to Tire, nor the Scheldt to be of less breadth then the Tirian
Sea, being there four furlongs; and indeed to make a way through the Waters,
by casting huge heaps of stones, and whole woods of Trees, confusedly together
into the Sea seemed a vaster labor, and required the help of many hands: but
to bridle a River of no less greatness then that Sea, by a Bridge connected
together by Art, was far more ingenious and curious. Certainly, the Tirian
ship performing its execution with pitch and brimstone, was not worthy to be
compared to the Antwerpian, fighting with fire, stinking vapors, stones,
scalding waters, and so with all the Elements at one. And yet for all this
great overthrow, the Prince of Parma in one piece of a night repaired the
bridge, and constantly held on the siege till victorious: when Alexander of
Macedon was almost in despair, and but that the fortunate arrival of his Navy
from Cyprus stayed him, and at last was cause of his conquest, he was in mind
to have quit the siege. And truly, they may conclude their comparison of the
Prince of Parma with the King of Macedon, not to be unequal in the structure,
and reparation of this Machine: and if the excellency of the writers were
alike, they might match one another in every thing. The day following when no
enemies appeared, and news was brought back by the scout-boats, sent that
night by his Excellency toward Lillo, that the enemies fleet lay still, as
ignorant, viz. of their own victory, their minds by Gods especial providence
being diverted from the attempt; It was Alex. gives order to bury the dead
bodies.
thought fit to take care of burying the dead: but then the grief of the Army
was renewed, whilst some acknowledge and interr their neighbors, and
kins-folks, others amongst strangers found their friends, and searching met but
more objects of dis-comfort: all at the cruel and lamentable aspect of mangled
bodies, and heads torn off, their fury increasing against the enemies, they
both lamented, and yet threatened. The Corpse of Rubasius scarcely to be
discerned, being taken down from the shipp where it hung, with such solemnity
as time and place permitted, Prince Alexander himself, not without tears
interred; He himself interrs Rubasius:
which piety of his toward his soldiers, and participation of grief, was
exceeding grateful to the Army. But Billius being daily sought for, was some
months after, when the bridge Billius was found afterward.
was taken down found hanging on a pyle, being first taken notice of, by a
golden Chain, which he always wore, and honorably interred at Antwerp.

In the interim, the enemies, although Alex. prepare for the next design of
the enemies.
now not with so great hope of forcing a Way through the bridge, yet not at all
dejected, did not desist from their enterprise, but determined to attempt
another way, with greater force then ever: and if the passage through the
Scheldt was obstructed, they would seek another through the fields by slitting
the banks and letting in the River. Alexander having notice of the preparation
of Warlike ships, which with great noise of Artificers, and workmen, were
building at Antwerp, and of those which daily appeared from the sea, judge of
their intent. Wherefore preparing himself for a new conflict; First of all,
he supplied the places of those First he supplies the places of the
Commanders that were slain.
Captains and Officers which were slain: especially rewarding the Spanish
Cornett his deliverer, and though many of the Nobles stood for the place, he
created Marquess Vastius General of the Horse, until the King should declare
another in Marquess Rubasius stead. By whose death, because the Province of
Artois, and the jurisdiction of Heldin were without Governors, amongst many
competitours his Excellency earnestly requested of his Majesty, that for Count
Hermin, and this for Adrian Gomicurtius. Yet these were a long time by the King
delayed: but Vastius was forthwith confirmed General of the Horse. He also
drawing part of the Presidiaries from the neighboring Towns, and fetching
some Cannons Then he fortifies the Castles and forts, especially Covenstene
Causey.
thence, strengthened with all speed possible the Castles and Forts: and
chiefly the Rampire called Covenstene Dyke, which he feared the enemy would
attempt, for from Lillo, and a little above, even to Antwerp, the fields in
Brabant Iye very low, wherefore they are often overwhelmed with Water and mudd,
and but that, by the peoples industry, who by casting up copps, do make higher
paths, would be impassable, and these the Belgians call counter-dykes. For as
b^nks of Rivers, which are both to keep in the Waters, and to be paths for
Travelers to walk on, are by the Low Country men called Dykes; so those over
cross ways that meet these River banks, as with highways, are called
Counter-dykes. One of these from the Village of Covenstene, commonly called
Covenstene dyke, reaches from the village of Stabroeck, even unto the Scheldt,
which is above three miles: which being broken and very crasie, was by the
Prince of Parma repaired, and with great cost and labor made both higher and
broader, being very commodious for that part of the Army, that quartered at
Stabroeck to For two reasons.
pass over to the banks of the Scheldt, and from thence to the Navall bridge,
and over the bridge to the Army at Bevera, by which continual passage, the
Camps both in Brabant and Flanders were joined. There was another motive also
which urged the fortifying of this dyke or causey, viz. If the enemy intended
to sail through the fields, overwhelmed with Waters from Lillo to Antwerp,
they might be hindered by the interposition of this Covenstene Causey, which
his Excellency greatly feared the enemies would attempt. Whereupon commiting
the charge of the Navall bridge, which did belong to Rubasius, to Charles Count
Mansfield, he diligently applied himself to the causey of Covenstene, and
carefully fortifyed it, being repaired with pyles, faggots, and earth, with
some Castles placed He raises Castles on that bank.
thereon. One whereof was already begun by Mondragonius on the bank of the
Scheldt, called for its form Sancta Cruce, whither the limits of Covenstene
reach. The finishing and defense whereof Mondragonius took to himself. And
Prince Alexander commanded three more to be built on the causey. The building
and defense of the first, a mile from Mondragonius his Fort, at a house in
Covenstene belonging to a Noble Gentleman of Antwerp, he attributed to
Camillus a Monte, and named it St. James's. The second, about the same distance
from the first, was erected by Valentine Pardiaeus Lord of Mott, by his
Excellencies command, taking its name from its builder was called Mott, but for
the most part St. Georges. But afterward Valentine departing thence, it was
kept by Michael Benett, an ancient Captain of a Spanish Company, having served
in the Wars thirty five years. The third, was committed to John Gamboa, and
called because it was set on pyles without the causey Palata, but afterward
Victoria. And at Stabroeck where the Causey ends, Count Mansfield cast up a
Fort, hard by his quarters: To whom his Excellency joined Camillus Capissuccus,
whose quarters were not far off. The wonderful fortifying of this Covenstene
Causey went on apace, Castles rising in strife, from narrow and almost no
groundwork, or foundation, and as it were hanging in the air. When the bank
of the And the enemy opening the River-bank.
Scheldt being slit above, by the Antwerpians near to the City, and below at
Lillo by their auxiliary Navy, and the fields in Brabant covered with a huge
deluge of Water, like to another Let part of the River into the lower fields,
through which the ships. might be conveyed to Antwerp.
Scheldt; then the enemies design was plainly discovered of bringing their
ships against Covenstene Dyke, and with their Pioneers of cutting that Bar,
to make a Navigable passage through this new Channel to Antwerp, in despite
of the Farnezian bridge. And that the Spaniards might be dubious of this their
intent, or at least their forces distracted, and consequently less potent; The
besieged Antwerpians, promised the Hollanders and Zealanders, who came to their
relief, that at the same time when they should invade Covenstene with their
ships from the sea, and they from the City, they also would set upon the
Bridge with new stratagems; For Jambell and the rest of his Sulphurean
comrades, had sworn they would not desist, till with their various Engines,
and new battering Rams, they had utterly demolished the bridge. Therefore the
confederates as they had agreed among themselves, divided their fleet,
consisting of an At the same time the Navy appears from the sea, puts part
out into the fields against Covenstene Causey, part into the River against the
bridge, May, 7.
hundred and fifty sail into two squadrons, one under Holach set out from
L^llo, into the overwhelmed fields, where Ship-masts more fully resembled
Woods then the growing Trees had done before: the other under Justin of Nassau
tracing the Scheldt, now threatening to land on Brabant side, now on Flanders,
then fiercely alarming the bridge. And with the same practices, the Holachians
sometimes played their Artillery against the Castle of Sancta cruce, often
threatened to assault Covenstene causey then carried about the sound and terror
of the conflict in every place, the Royalists standing always ready armed, and
provided against them: Prince Alexander himself being sometimes busied at the
bridge, sometimes at the causey, not taking any rest either day or night. But
when they, especially the Holachians, had now spent some days in threatening to
attempt the Causey, and perceiving that the Royalists, either deluded with
their so often fained assayes, or wearied out with continual labor and
watching came more slowly to their colors, and seeing in the dead of the night
a fire about Antwerp, which was the sign appointed to both for the assault,
five hundred suddenly climbed They attempt Covenstene.
up the Causey, with as great silence as was possible between the Castle of
Palata and Saint Georges, in which place Benett kept his station of Spaniards,
and killing the first guard which they found half asleep, the Captain
himself being grievously wounded, At first with prosperous success of the
Hollachians.
and the Sergeant slain who stood on their own defense, and the rest flying to
the Castles, on both hands they safely possessed themselves of part of the
Causey. Whereupon more of the Holachians by their Generals appointment came
out of their ships, (for there were above two thousand soldiers in the Navy)
when Ortizius and Verdugo, two Spanish Captains, came with all speed from the
next station, and by and by Colonel Gamboa posting thither with a selec^
company of Spaniards from the Castle of Palata, and re-inforcing the figh^ not
only rejected them from the causey, but pursued them to their ships either
pierced them at hand with their But are beaten off.
swords, or shot them at distance swimming. And turning the Artillery from
Saint James's Castle against them, sunk four of the nearest ships, With their
no small loss.
and the rest struck with terror from the other Castles, retired, with no
small loss to the enemies, there being flaine of them above three hundred,
besides those, who as I said with the ships were drowned, and others, who
either not skilled in swimming, or over-loaden with their arms were devoured
by the Waters. Yet greater And greater complaints against the Antwerpians.
then the loss, was the complaint of Holach, accusing the Antwerpians, who by
hanging forth light, from a Tower, gave the sign of the assault, and yet as it
were on set purpose, came not to prosecute the Victory, which he had begun:
But they affirmed, Their reply.
they set not forth any lights as a signal of battle: but said, he was
deceived by a fire, by chance kindled in the Tolasian Sconce, and so began too
rashly to fight. Although Prince Alexander in a Letter to his Majesty,
construed the matter another way: thinking the Antwerpians not assured Not
credited by Alexander, May, 20.
that the Holachians would attempt the assault; for some time deferred the
expedition, and purposely stayed to see, what from that first success might be
expected.

But these were the first, and but The preparation of the confederates.
slight assayes of Covenstene: neither side in full strength opposing each
other. Then the enemies stiffly conspiring together, began the fight, which I
will so much the more exactly describe, because scarce at any time on Greater
then ever.
the Low Countries, in a more dangerous place, or with greater uncertainty of
the Victory on either side, or with braver testimony of daring soldiers, or
more present assistance from Heaven, was it ever more courageously disputed; on
the one side, the confederates set forth a fleet, stronger both in ships and
men, and better appointed then ever before: being the whole power and strength
in a manner, both which Antwerp, the magazine of warlike Engines, as well as of
rich Merchandises, and the Hollanders and Zealanders could raise the greatest
part of the Presid^aries, being drawn forth of their Cities and To set upon
Covenstene both from Antwerp, and the sea, May, 26.
forts, for this battle, and determined day of their public liberty appointed
to be, by the mutual consent both of the auxiliaries and besieged, the six and
twentieth of May: on which day they determined to set upon Covenstene Bar, and
breaking through it, to open a way for provision and relief to the City. On
the other side, his Excellency being assured, the whole force and trial of the
War would be at this over-crosse Causey, caused more Artillery to be carried
Nor had Alex. less care to defend it.
into the Castles placed thereon; and battlements to be raised on either side
the Causey from the Castle of Sancta Cruce, to Count Mansfields Castle, near
Stabroeck (which two Castles, are the extremes of the Causey) and a long row
of stakes to be fastened in the Waters, as it were an out-work to hinder the
access of the ships, omitting nothing in the munition of the place, whereby
for the present he might oppose the enemies designs; and, as he had so often
deluded their attempts against the Navall Bridge on the Scheldt, so by
repairing and fortifying this other Bridge placed on another Scheldt in the
fields, he by Gods assistance, might frustrate their designs, and stop the
passage of Navigation in that place also. Nor did the Antwerpians omit, as they
had The Antwerpians to divert the Royalists from Covenstene, prepare new
inventions.
before agreed to re-attempt the Navall Bridge, and to appear with new and
various Engines, thereby to divert the Royalists from Covenstene: some whereof
had a great number either of terrible javelins, or broad sharp axes fastened in
the fore-decks: many carrying fires on their hatches, had within them mines of
Thunder. Ships to assail the bridge.
But having so often trial, that these Machines, either by the bending of the
channel, or by the Wind, easily were driven to the banks, and there grounded,
there was a German, one of Jambels Amongst the rest, one way most stupendous.
impes, who took upon him, to invent a ship that would go straight down the
midst of the River, and directly fall upon the Bridge: Wherefore I think it not
amiss to relate in a word or two the structure thereof. He fastened under the
water to the sides of the prore a great linen cloth, like the sail of a
ship: which extended before the ship in the Water, like to a fish-nett, and
passing along under the keele, was by little and little so contracted, until
it was fastened about the midst of the ship on either side. So this German
quite changed the use of sails: and contrived, that as sails filled with
wind, drive on the Vessel, so his new fashioned sail, being filled with water,
might likewise move it on with this advantage, (which chiefly intended) that it
would keep a direct course, for needs must the ship set forth in the middle of
the Scheldt, not only be forced forward with the sail extended before it, and
filled with the stream, so much the more violently, by how much the River runs
with greater rapidity in the midst, especially when the tide back's into the
Ocean, but also must needs keep it from being driven from the deeper part of
the channel, by any cross gust of Wind; for the Wind, which flowing above the
waters, is accustomed to wrest the shipp aside from its right course, could not
have the like force on the under water which filled the sail, with which, the
ship besides the course of the River, and ebbing of the Sea, was drawn on as
with oars. Assuring himself, that no Machine how strong soever, was able to
endure this violent onset, but at the very first charge of this battering Ram,
would fail. And now fourteen of those other ships I spoke of, were sent
down the midst of the River The enemies Engines approach in this order.
from Antwerp about midnight: six of the greatest whereof carried destruction
privately within them, the rest openly threatened fire, which were led and
guarded by seventeene little cock-boats tide and connected together. And for
that their bottomes were boared full of holes, and water running in, they were
carried scarce a foot above the river, held up only and hindered from sinking
by empty hogs-heads. To this intent, that scarce visible, especially in the
dead of the night, they might, as lying lower and secure from danger of their
sharp beakes set upon the floates, placed before the bridge: and breaking down
that bar, might open a way for the ships to assayl the bridge, but without
success. For after the overthrow received the month before, every night some
light boats, as scouts, by his Excellencies command, traced the Scheldt, which
an English Captain, offering his service to Prince Alexander, Alex. makes
preparation against them.
for that purpose fortifyed with grapples, hooks, and anchors. At the fight of
which, the boats being affrighted, and scattered, were by their conductours
conveyed some one way, some another, whilst in the interim, the Royalists
speedily with their grapling hooks catching hold of most of the greater ships
then destitute of the lessers conduct, drew them to the banks, and there
anchored them. Where afterward, they vented their poison without any
execution. But having not time to surprise all, one of them armed with those
sharp weapons But one brake through the floats.
fell on the piled fortification that stood before the bridge, and after they
had a while goared one another with mutual wounds, at length the ship cutting
in pieces the opposite beams, and ships-masts, made a breach in the And opens
the passage for the new invented ship.
Machine it self also sorely bulked, and torn in pieces by the sharp points,
was forthwith swallowed by the River. But that which went with sails fastened
to the bottom, could not by any hooks or grapples be retarded, but with
incredible swiftness was directly conveyed through the broken floates against
the bridge. And although the soldiers forthwith took one of the ships from the
bridge, (for then the ships were so ordered, that they might be removed when
need required) and hastened to lay open Which past through not without some
hurt to the bridge.
the way to the approaching ship, yet it hitting on the ship placed next to
that which was removed, with unevitable force tore it asunder, and forthwith
sunk it. And thus hitherto prevailed the Antwerpians Engines; for some Italians
at daybreak, in emulation of the English under Captain Torell, with great
audacity boarded those lesser fireships that followed, and pulling most of
them to the banks, there anchored them. Yet three or four escaped, but the
ships being removed from the bridge, they slyded through that open way of the
Others attempt the same.
River, vomiting their pestilence a great distance off the bridge and as every
But without any effect.
one of the^e ships discharging their mines burst a far off, the soldiers on
the bridge, their fear now turned into sport, had leisure joyfully And are
scoffed at.
to vent their jeeres, and iterate their triumphant shoutes, in derision of
their enemies. Nor wanted there some, who desirous to know the inward sub^ilty,
entered with prosperous temerity And the artificial structure of them was found
out.
one of the enemies ships, and finding the match which conveyed the fire almost
entering the mine, forthwith extinguished it, and made bold to look into the
secret vault, and showed it to others, no little admiring the rarity of it:
from whose narrations especially, I received these things which before are
related.

But not long were the Royalists The last attempt of the Antwerpians.
exempt from new fear and care, to wit, from the last stratagem of the
besieged; for as yet the Antwerpian Engineers had one invention more, which
they reserved as their latest hopes. It was a Vessel of an unusual bigness,
A huge ship
and form: whose foundation being not much unlike to Wherryes, was so
connected together with cross beams, like a grate, that the places left
between those beams, might be filled with empty Hogs-heads, the better to
support the huge weight that was to be laid thereon. Moreover these beams and
barrels were covered with thick boards pitched, to make a plain even bottom of
the ship: the sides were fenced with impregnable battlements, and thick ranked
with Wall-pieces. But upon this shipp covered with strong planks, there was
raised another as it were a Castle, built almost foure-square; in which were
carried above a thousand Musketeers, besides those that appeared not, being in
the lower ship, and those that were exposed to the view in the top-Castles of
the mast, to shoot as it were a storm of leaden hailstones from the clouds.
But it is scarce credible how great confidence the Antwerpians reposed in this
ship, than which there was never any built at Antwerp, with greater industry,
or expenses: for it is reported it was seven months in building, and cost at
least one hundred thousand florens, so much were they taken with this huge
moveable Castle, and all secure of its success, that proudly they named it the
END OF THE WAR; and were willing Which they called The end of the War.
the enemies should take notice of that glorious Title they gave it, yet never
was there Engine or stratagem more vainer, or to less purpose. For launched
into the Scheldt and steered But took no effect.
through the cleft of the River-bank at Ostervele into the drowned fields the
Mariners could scarcely guide it: and no sooner came it near to Ordam which
Fort it assaulted, but it stuck fast to the ground, and was so gravel'd that
from thence it could not by any Art of Mariners, any endeavor of other
ships be drawn, or removed. So THINGS that exceed custom and measure in
greatness, are rather for sight-sake, then use and commodity, of which the
Antwerpians had a sufficient experience, who Afterward they termed it expenses
lost.
afterward with a truer Title called this their Fabric, Money cast away; and
the Spaniards after the first sight and encounter, in a military jeere called
it CARANTAMAVLA, viz. a great Bug-beare for children. But And a Bugbear for
children.
this was afterward, for then, when they heard it was set out of the Port, and
supposed it to come against the bridge, (for so the Antwerpians gave In the
interim it kept the Royalists solicitous at the bridge.
it out, to detain the Royalists on the bridge) they expressed another front,
and earnestly prepared all their forces against this new monster, which fame
had divulged.

Whilst the Royalists were by the The confederates Navy invade Covenstene
Causey:
many and sundry attempts of the enemies Engines busied at the River,
Covenstene Causey was suddenly assailed by both Navies at once, which consisted
of above two hundred sail, almost one hundred and sixty whereof were great
ships, furnished with Veterans and Cannons, and came partly from the City
under Consul Aldegund, James Jacobius Admiral Aldegund from Antwerp,
of Antwerp, with Morgan and Balfurius, two Colonells of English and Scots,
partly under Count Holach And Holach from the sea.
from the sea, to whom were joined Justin of Nassau, Haulter Governor of
Walcheren, besides the chiefest of the Hollanders, and Zealanders. The rest of
the lesser ships were, some laden with sacks of earth and wool: many with
faggots beams, hurdles, and pyles, for the speedy raising of bulwarks and
fences: Others with folded bridges for an assault, fireballs, Grenades,
Artificers, and Pioneers, besides those that were laden with store of
provision for Antwerp. Count Holach was the first, that by the help of the
tide set out from Lillo, First the Hollachians sending fireships before, and
frighting away the guards.
who sent before four ships, with pitch, brimstone, and Gunpowder, which the
Ship-men privately setting fire to, might have some resemblance of ships with
mines, and as Bowmen in the Van of an Army, might beat off and deterr the
Royalists from their eentries, which took effect. For approaching to
Covenstene, between the Castles of Saint George and the Palata, (the pyles
being cut before under the Water) as soon as they were set on fire, they went
off with a horrid, but hurtlesse noise, wherefore whilst those that kept guard
in that place, fearing a terrible storm of stones would ensue, a little
withdrew themselves, the stoutest of the enemies came out of the other ships,
and in a trice took the Causey, there being Ascend the Causey.
but few there to defend it, cut through a passage, and that gate being now
opened in half an hours space, amongst a continual storm of the Artillery
from Saint Georges Castle, not without the loss of many, about eight hundred
Holachians possess themselves of all that part of the Gausey. And although a
little after, Colonel Gamboa, and Captain Padilla, Simon Padil.
came in all speed from the next And seconded by the Aldegundians climbing up
on the other side.
Castles with most of their soldiers to hinder the enemies from fortifying
themselves; yet at the same time Aldegund, first charging with his fireships,
then with the Antwerpian fleet, and sending fresh men to assist their fellows;
the Spaniards endeavors were frustrated: for Captain Padilla and other
undaunted soldiers being The chiefest of the Spaniards being slain or wounded.
slain, Colonel Gamboa himself, and many of his men ill wounded, they
thought it best to retreat, and defend the Castles from the huge multitude
^ossess themselves of a great part of the Causey:
of the enemies. And now the enemies being masters of all the Causey, between
the Castles of Saint George, and the Palata, contentiously fortify themselves,
and speedily driving stakes into the ground, and winding them with boughs of
Trees, casting to them sackes of earth, suddenly raised a high bulwark, and
fortifyed it with select Musketeers out of the And fortifyed it,
nearest ships, committing the charge of it to Colonel Morgan. And at the
same time, almost an infinite number And withal, the Pioneers open the Causey
on either side.
of Pioneers, applying themselves to the bottom and sides of the bank, on
either side, cast down and opened so much of it, that both parts of the
overflowing waters were almost conjoined. Balfurius also with a cohort of
Scots, and the Governor of Walcheren with some select compaines of
Auxiliaries, fiercely assaulted the Castle Others assault the Castle.
of Saint George, and doubtless had taken it, for the soldiers that kept it
were most of them grievously wounded, if Camillus a Monte had not from his
Castle of Saint James with a hardy band of Italians and Wallomes opposed and
hindered the insulting enemy: although many of But are repulst.
them were cut off, by the continual tempest of bullets, without intermission
shot from the ships on both hands. But the most grievous conflick was at the
Pioneers, who that The sharpest conflict was at the Pioneers,
they might safely prosecute their work, were guarded by the Auxiliaries. And
especially the Merchants in the Corn-ships, whom it much concerned to have the
passage of Traffic laid open, earnestly urged forward the workm^n, That they
should make Who are encouraged to work.
have, and now show their strength; since that on their hands only depended the
Victory: nor permit a few handfulls of earth heaped together, in which all the
Spaniards confidence lay now included, to stand impenetrable to so many
thousand workmen, to hinder the strong Navy of the Hollanders, and And although
many of them, and the auxiliaries were slain,
liberty of Antwerp. But the Royalists with so much the more obstinacy,
endeavored to divert the enemies from their work. And as the greatest action
was at the bottom of the Causey, so there they encountered one another, wading
in the Waters even to their breasts, and now wounded, then wounding their
opposite with the points of their pikes, and swords, seldom missing their
marks mutually discolored the Water with each others blood; now the Spaniards
violently rushing into the very clefts, and breaches of the bank^ fiercely
slaughtered the workmen, and made up the gaps with their dead bodies, so that
those, who when they were alive had opened the bank, being dead closed it up.
But they could Yet they prevail,
not so oppose the workmen everwhere, being so many in number, an^ casting down
the Causey in so man^ places, that with their constant labor they had in some
places mad^ such wide scissures, that with the water rushing in, there one bark
loade^ And the Causey being opened, one ship slip^ through. And brought joyful
tidings to Antwerp, as if they were Victours.
with provision broke through also into which Count Holach himself ascending,
and drawing along wit^ him Feranta Spinula, taken prison^ a little before, who
not long after departed this life, entered Antwerp wit^ these joyful tidings,
That the Victory was now in their hands; Covenstene bar was opened, the ships
had free passage, and by and by their relief would follow; the first fruits
whereof they might in that bark behold, and by this prisoner perceive a sure
token of the victory. Whereupon the Antwerpians verily believing it, run up and
down the City, some hasten to the Port, to look for the provision; others wait
on Count Holach, asking him many questions concerning the fight, and how many
were slain, or wounded: many set forth public signalls of joy with joyful
volleyes of Artillery, and ringing of bells, little knowing what news the
evening following would bring.

But the confederates having banded at least two thousand five hundred The
Castle of Palata is in danger, Gamboa.
soldiers on Covenstene, the Catholic affairs were in a straight: especially
the Castle of Palata, its Governor being ill hurt, for that part placed on
pyles without the Causey, was battered from the ships, and the passage from
Saint Georges was stopped by the enemies fort. Nor did Count Mansfield (who was
Governor of Brabant shore) desist from sending fresh supplies of soldiers
from Stabroeck, although the way to Palata was almost blockt up. But most of
them being either slain or beaten back by the continual showers of bullets
and fireballs from the ships, he was doubtful what course to take: yet
going from the Camp to his Castle placed in the head of the Causey, he
speedily advised with some of the chiefest Commanders of Mansfield speedily
consults of relieving it.
the Army. Many did not approve that the soldiers should be exposed to
certain destruction, lying open to the enemies shot, and (the Causey being
They give several opinions.
lost) altogether unprotected. But should rather expect till night, at which
time they would both be in equal danger, AND THE darkness would even cover
the naked. On the contrary, others disputed it was no time to delay, but that
they should endeavor with all their force, by some means to convey some
Cannons to the Castle of Palata, and from thence to send forces to set upon the
enemies Fort placed near to Palata. Not a few referred the enemies boldness,
and the Royalists fear, to Prince Alexanders absence, and said, he was to be
sent for with all speed: and it was not to be doubted, but all things by his
presence would be restored. But as it is accustomed to fall out in such like
desperate affairs, MANY give Counsel, few will undergo the peril. Amongst
the rest there was present Camillus Capissuccus, Colonel of an Italian
Regiment: who, as I have heard, spoke more courageously then the rest, and
performed his magnanimous words, with as daring deeds: for reproving all their
delay, he said, What can be expected in ^arrying until night, or for the
Capissuccus offers himself, and his Regiment to relieve it.
Prince of Parma, but to give the enemies sufficient time of dividing the
Causey, and passage for their provision? which being once past, how can our
fighting remedy it? but say our soldiers daunted with the fall of their
fellows, will go more stoutly against the enemy: or if courageously, yet in
vain, and unto certain destruction. Indeed, he did not attribute to himself
and his Regiment more then to the rest, yet could he not deny but he was more
obliged and devoted to the Prince of Parma then others. And from thence had he
greater provocation to the enterprise. Therefore what others doubted and
eschewed, he earnestly desired for himself and his Regiment, viz. to set upon
the enemies, and in the front if others would follow: or if they diffided and
would leave the glory to them alone, they only would engage, and as he hoped
be Victorious. He knew his soldiers minds and courages, and therefore he
doubted not, but to be freed from ostentation and temerity. And doubted not
but what things were proudly spoken at the Table, would as gallantly be
performed in the battle. But if the dye of War should run otherwise, it would
be no disparagement to close up the many years of his soldiery in that days
adventure. But better things might be presumed by those, who so often had
trial of the Divine assistance, the sanctity of the cause, and of the name of
Alexander. There was present when His Sergeant Major Picolominy confirms the
same.
he spoke thus, Silvius Picolominy Captain and Sergeant Major of that
Regiment: (whose son Octavio Duke of Amalphi) now when I write this, the
stout and fortunate General of the Austrian forces, both in Germany and the
Low-countreyes, posterity will read, frequently mentioned in the Annalls of our
age. Who for that with no less constancy he Silvius,
affirmed the same, with Capissuccus, and boldly pawned his word for the
Regiment: was by Count Mansfield, to whom this was most grateful, and who by
the very looks of them whom Picolominy had in his company, presaged well of the
Victory, commanded with all speed to choose three hundred soldiers out of
that Regiment, and speedily to return. Six companies whereof quartered near
Stabroeck: for the rest were of the Who for this service brought his soldiers
to Capisuccus under three Captains.
guard for the bridge, from amongst these companies at Stabroeck, Picolominy
chose out three hundred of the stoutest and forwardest soldiers, and brought
them to his Colonel; led by three Captains of approved valor, viz. Mark
Magdalen, John Baptista a Prano, and Lewis Gambolo^t: and found Mansfield
strengthened with new succors, led by John de Aquila, a man of an undaunted
spirit, Colonel Aquila, a Spanish Colonel offers his assistance to Mansfield.
of the Regiment which belonged to Pacius; Who at six or seven miles distance
hearing the continual thundering of Cannons, supposed what the matter was, and
suddenly chose two hundred soldiers out of his Regiment, with Bartholomew
Toralua, Michael Cardone, and Gonsalo Castrio, ancient and stout Captains, and
courageously offered himself and his soldiers to Count Mansfield: and
demanded the leading of the Van for that expedition; Which Capissuccus and
Picolominy having already laid The contest between the Spaniards and Italans
for the Van in that assault.
claim to, desired that others coming but after, should not be preferred
before the Italians, who had first engaged for the honor. On the contrary, the
Spaniards pretended the right of the War, and preheminency of their Nation in
the Low-countreyes, and Count Mansfield rather inclining to the Spaniards. At
last Aquila exclaiming that it was not a time of The Colonels gallantly decide.
quarrelling amongst themselves, but with the enemy, laid hold of Capissuccus
right hand, and said, Come most magnanimous man, let us join our selves
together, and march against the enemies fortification: and try the valor of
our countries, by the overthrow of the rebels. Count Mansfield glad of that
military strife, and the deciding thereof, was near ready to have begun the
fight: when a far off at the other end of the Causey, he heard sudden
shoutes, and perceived the concourse from Saint Cruces Fort, to approach
nearer, and the tumult to increase, at last he understood Prince Alexander
Alex. hastens to relieve Palata in danger.
was advancing, who had been retarded at the bridge by the Antwerpian ships;
and who although he conjectured by the noise of the Cannons, that the enemies
Navy had already assailed Covenstene, yet his great care of the bridge would
not suffer him to depart thence, until the Antwerpians attempt on the Scheldt
being repressed, From the bridge now left fortified.
he now somewhat more secure, and rather anxious of his soldiers dangers at
the Causey, commanded Charles Count Mansfield to guard the bridge and Flanders
coast; then drawing with him two hundred Spaniards armed with pykes, under
Turrius Viverua an ancient Captain, with so much the more speed advanced
toward Covenstene, (which is at least three hours march from the bridge) by
how much more he was spurred forward, by the many sad tidings, which one after
another met him on the way. But when he saw so many of the enemies soldiers,
and Pioneers on the Causey: his own men, like waves of Water, sometimes to
advance, sometimes endangered by the Cannons from the ships to give back: and
heard from Camillus a Monte, the death of so many of hi^ chiefest soldiers,
the great danger o^ Saint Georges Fort, and the defenc^ of Palata almost to be
in despair; not using many words where he^ knew there was more need of deed^
commanded Montius to conve^ those Cannons, which he by the wa^ had drawn out
of the Forts of Saint Peter's, and Saint Barbara into hi^ Castle of Saint
James's, and from thence without intermission to pla^ them against the ships:
he gave also charge to Mondragonius to do the like from his Castle, de Sancta a
Cruc^ and sent Captain Viverus with pa^ of the Pikemen against those pioneers
that were opening the nearest part o^ the Causey. Then himself by his eyes and
countenance, representing the storm of discontent and fury which lodged in his
breast, with a voice like to thunder egging the ears and minds of those that
were present, he said, Let the love of honor, He exhorts his men to follow
him.
Gods, and the Kings cause, be of no price to him, that follows me not, without
any other words, he entered amongst those Spanish pike-men that remained, and
ordered the Battalia. But at those words and looks, as it were at the sound of
a Trumpet, not only the Commanders, to wit, John Maurique, the Marquess
Bentivol^o, the Counts Bevilaque, and Sfortia Prince Alexanders The chiefest of
the Commanders follow their General.
kinsman, with other daring Heroes do encompasse his Excellency, and
contentiously demand the first on-sett: but also the rest of the soldiers then
scattered, join themselves, and fiercely brandishing their weapons together:
expect both the signal of battle and Victory. Nor did Count Mansfield make
less have from Stabroeck, when he understood On the other side Mansfield
exhorts his men.
the Prince of Parma advanced from the other end, and making this short
exhortation; he said, Well my mates, all things from Gods bountiful
goodness, conspire to the Victory. Here the opportune succors of Aquila,
unexpected, by divine instinct fly into our help, at the other end the Prince
of Parma, our affairs being in greate^ extremity, comes yet in time, with his
sword to cut this Gordian kno^ The enemies are now surrounded i^ the midst, to
be assailed on bot^ hands: they will not be able t^ stand the first encounter
of our Noble General: and being by hi^ beaten and turned on us, they will be
dispatched by our arms: and s^ at last we shall be crowned wit^ the glory of
the day. Thus was the battle renewed, if ever any most bloody and remarkable,
upon a Cause^ verily not above seventeene foot i^ Many thousands fight upon
that narrow bank.
breadth, at least five thousand m^ did fight. Into this small plot of eart^
did the power of Spain, and the Belgic Provinces gather it self. And here
was that field chosen, in which the strength and forces on both sid^ opposed
each other, and lastly disp^ ted for the possession of Antwerp; and truly the
place not only necessitated the fierceness of the fight, as glad By necessity.
actours enclosed on a stage, but they, being obstinate and resolute,
determined And with a resolution of conquering or dying.
that that day should either be the first of their victory, or last of their
lives. Moreover, the Antwerpians had publicly taken a solemn oath, not to
depart from the Causey before they had rased it, and laid open a way for their
provision. And at the first their obstinacy equalled their unadvised counsel:
The confederate forces held the Causey in many places, wherefore they
encountered, not in one battle only, but divided into many parties, they fought
as it were so many several battles. And though they charged one another with
their swords and pykes, seldom missing their object; yet showed they so little
sign either of flight, or fear, that every one kept that footing which he
had once taken, nor, but by being slain and trodden on, as Walls cast down by
Alex. recovers part of the Causey.
Engines, gave they any ground to ^ictours to advance. But no force of the
enemy was able to stop the Prince of Parma, violently rusHing in with his
Spanish company of pike-men, intermingled with some Musketeers, having
recovered all that part of the Causey, which lies between the Castles of Sancta
Cruce and St. James's, not without some loss, he marched thence toward Saint
Georges, and so displayed his Army, that i^ took up as well the plain, as both
the declining sides of the Causey. And he himself having but slippery
footing, and as it were hanging on the steep descent of the bank, now with his
spear repelled the Antwerpia^ striving to ascend from their ships then in
the midst with a little Targe^ And acting wonders, both with his own hand, and
his authority.
in the one hand, and his sword in the other, (in managing whereof he ha^ a
singular dexterity) he rusht violently amongst the thickest of the enemies,
and foyned those that oppose^ him, in the very faces: and ever^ where by his
authority, valor, an^ very looks, gave encouragement t^ his own soldiers,
and struck terrou^ into the enemies; until the way t^ St. Georges Castle being
cleared, an^ the Avenue laid open from Sanct^ Cruces's, for new supplies, he
determined with like violence to invad^ the enemies Fort. But it being
excellently fenced with a mud-wall, and Then he hastens to set upon the enemies
Fort.
manned with the chiefest soldiers of the whole Army, but especially by the
ships, which on either side approached near, or continually shooting for its
defense: for his Excellency therefore durst not give the assault, until he
had caused a bul-wark to be raised before Saint Georges of sackes of These
things being first provided against it.
earth, and from thence some Cannons to be directed against their Fort: and
strengthening the Castle with a band of Musketeers, he sought to repel the
ships thence. Then being ready for the on-sett, he heard that the
Mansfieldians, having beaten the enemies Capisuc. and Aquila with their
companies joined by Mansfields command march thither.
off, had entered the Palata: and with great confidence and hope of Victory,
hastened to invade the enemies fortification. And truly that gallant contention
of the Spaniards and Italians promised no less, for the Colonel Capissuccus,
and Aquila departing from Count Mansfields Castle were closely attended, the
one by Picolominy, the other by Toralua, and their companies of Italians and
Spaniards, then mixed together not far behind: first the Spaniards, then the
Italians following their example, falling on their knees, implored the Divine
assiistance; and forthwith charged the enemies, who besieged the Castle of
Palata, who after a sharp dispute, part being slain, part put to flight, the
Royalists victoriously entered the Castle: and thereafter changed the name of
Palata, they called it Victoria. Which as soon And after a bloody skirmish they
enter Palata.
as they had fortified with Cannons, the Colonels, and those Captains, as I
said, setting their men again in rank and fyle, boldly advanced against the
Then they assault the enemies Fort.
enemies hold, and were fiercely welcomed by the adversaries, obstinately
defending that as their last hopes. And although Prince Alexander at the same
time, the Cannons from St. Georges Fort having made a sufficient breach, with
his soldiers stormed it on the other side, yet he was once, and they twice,
not without great loss repulsed. Wherefore the confederates confidence from
that success Being twice beaten off:
greatly increasing, and contentiously from the ships climbing up the causey,
the battle in a short time was in many places courageously renewed. But the
Mansfieldians making the But ventering the third time,
third assault, the enemies began to faulter. And here it appeared, what valor
provoked by disgrace, what the fear of losing honor, what desire of revenge,
and lastly what despair is able to do for the space of an hour and a half,
the dispute on both sides was dubious. When on a sudden the Regiment of the
Spaniards and Italians, spurred on with new fury, joining together their
spears, and advancing their Weapons, pulled They scale it.
down, and opened the Fort, some standing on their fellows shoulders, or
climbing on their Targets scaling the mud-walls: and now entrance being laid
open in many places, and the And the Princes soldiers pressing in on the other
side, they take it.
Princes soldiers rushing in also on the other side, whole companies bursting
in together, and making a pitiful slaughter of the enemies, they took the
place. The first that appeared on the Wall (for this honor the Spaniards and
Italians, attributed either to their own Nation) was Bartholmew Toralua and
Capisuc. thus having the first honor.
Toralua a Spanish Captain. Although almost at the same time, Colonel
Cam^llus Capissuccus himself mounted the rampire and advanced against the
enemy before Toralua, wherefore his honor may seem equal to Toralua. And for
that reason the soldier on whose shoulders he first mounted the fort, from a
common soldier he made a Sergeant. And his Excellency embracing Camillus
Capissuccus with many honorable words, referred the taking of the fort to his
valor, and concord with Aquila. And commending him and Aquila For him and
Aquila, Alex. procures patents from the King for their Colonels places.
to the King, obtained for them both commissions for their Colonells places
(for as yet they were not confirmed from Spain) with an honorable testimony
of his Majesty's affection toward them. But Toralua being grievously wounded
in many places, was by his Excellencies command carried unto his Pavilion at
Stabroeck, yea, into the Princes own bed, and there cured, and rewarded with
the garment the Prince wore the day before, he preferring his Generals
liberty before any military honor won at the assault. It is reported when
the Italians and Spaniards made their last assault, that Peter Pacius, who had
been Colonel of that Strange things of Pacius dead before.
Spanish Regiment, a most pious man, and dearly beloved of his soldiers, (and
was slain as I have said some months before at the siege of Dendermund) was
seen armed as he was accustomed, leading up his soldiers, pointing out the
fittest place for the assault, and animating his Regiment against the enemies,
with his wonted alacrity. But those who first saw him, being greatly
astonished, showed the sight to their fellows, all being amazed, they doubted
whether they saw a fantasy, or Pacius alive and really fighting: but
afterward when they were all satisfied about the same, they took it as a happy
Omen, persuading themselves that their attempts were acceptable to God, to the
prosecuting whereof the Saints came to their succors, and mixed themselves
with them. So many of them who saw this spectacle took it on their oaths to be
true, and indeed Delrius a most grave Author, and well skilled in the Belgic
affairs, affirms the same. Which man's gravity and wisdom, was a sufficient
warrant for me to note it down in this place: for as to record things upon
slight grounds, may be thought a blemish in a writer, too boldly abusing the
credulity of his Reader; so by passing over with silence to diminish the
authority of things seriously delivered and written, may be thought an^ injury,
both to those who have heretofore mentioned them, whose credits are almost
sentenced by our silence, and to those that come after, from whom the knowledge
of such things are unreasonably concealed. But the The Royalists continue their
Victory over all the Causey.
Royalists Victory did not contain it self within that Fort, but was speedily
carried all over the Causey, the enemies now beginning to faint, who a little
before had come fresh from both Navies, and frequently joining their forces,
had renewed the battle in many places. Prince Alexander Alex orderi^g and
animating them.
run amongst his soldiers, here setting these in order, relieving those with
new supplies in place of the wounded, placing further asunder, those that were
too close pressed together, with his hand and voice animating all, that they
should wound and kill that rebellious rout enclosed within the narrow precincts
of the Causey: and revenge the death of their valiant comrades; that they
should make that day the last of the Antwerpian War; they might know that bank
to be the very wall of Antwerp, and if the enemies were once excluded thence,
they had but a step into the City. As he was thus calling on his men, he
perceived the enemies ships to remove, and secretly to depart toward Lillo,
for fear lest after the backing of the Tide they should be grounded. Then
showing that to his soldiers, he said, the Victory is ours my fellow
soldiers. Their sea forsakes the impious desertours of their faith. Cut off
the passage to their ships, which only last hope remains now to the
fugitives. Nor suffer them to escape your hands, to return again By his
encouragement, they more fiercely charge the now staggering enemy.
to wage a new War: At whose words the Royalists fury increasing the fight
grew every where more bloody: and though many of the Hollanders and Zealanders
begun to waver, their eyes sometimes glancing toward their ships, sometimes
toward the enemy, their courages now no more constant then the floating
ships, yet the Antwerpians whom it nearer concerned, did not of all this time
abate any thing of their former The Antwerpians hold out longer.
obstinacy, or gave back. So long did the regard of their City, and obligation
of their Oath prevail with them, as the faith of the multitude, and mutual
respect stayed the very timorous from flight. But when a company of Hollanders,
which were hotly charged by Augustine Romanus a Spanish Captain, began to fly,
then all, as if thereby freed from disgrace, precipitately run to their ships,
the Royalists greedily pursuing them, But soon after, they and the rest also
fly to the ships.
and wounding so many more of them, as they themselves in that crowd were their
own greatest mischief, for the multitude of the fugitives meeting and
hindering one another, and the press increasing, like blind men, they tumbled
one over another: and as it falls out in such like events, EVERY ones
particular have, was a hinderance to all. But the slaughter of the enemies, was
no where greater then at the auxiliary ships: for when some were already
arrived at them, There was the greatest slaughter.
and ready to enter, they were cast down by the accurse of their fellows that
were stronger: into other ships huge multitudes entered together, and
over-loading them were drowned: some again, the passage being stop'p, rather
then to fall on the Spanish swords, although heavy armed and wearied in the
fight, cast themselves headlong into the water: and less valuing the danger of
the water, then of the enemies, they exposed themselves to the more certain
ruin. SO nothing of all is so much feared, as that from which our fear had
its first origin. Nor had the Antwerpians on the other side of the Causey a
lesser conflict; many whereof, as they had approached nearer, and with
stubborn hope had deferred their retreat the last so being forsaken by the
tide, and left moveable, were miserably scattered by Cannon shot, from the
near adjoining bank, with a huge slaughter of the Soldiers within them: to
avoid which many cast themselves into the Waters, as if by swimming they could
overtake the former ships, nor did they also prevent their fate, for some
Spaniards with no less confidence of themselves, then contempt of the enemy,
leapt also With great audacity of the Spaniards.
into the Waters, and with their swords in their teeth, swam after the flying
ships, and boarded some, carried them back with those that remained to the
Causey, the ship-men being even amazed at that daring boldness. Lastly, not a
few of the enemies to avoid the Cannon shot, approached yet nearer to the sides
of the Causey, and were there killed by the Royalists, whom they like blind men
did fly, (for fear had not only taken away the use of counsel, but of sight
also.) Notwithstanding there were some, who for that they would dye honorably,
furiously ran against the enemy, and fell not altogether unrevenged. It is said
there were slain at this Covenstene battle, which continued The number of the
confederates slain.
almost seven hours, of the Antwerpians, and Auxiliaries, but chiefly of them,
about three thousand, besides those, that were devoured in the waters. The
loss of the Veterans, and chiefest soldiers of the Army, far exceeding the
number. There were four ships cast away, The booty.
besides twenty eight taken: in which were found great brass Cannons sixty five
of Iron, and lesser ninty, besides plenty of all warlike magazine, and
abundance of provision. Of the Royalists Of the Royallists slain.
there fell at least seven hundred, and of them above four hundred Spaniards:
and about five hundred wounded. The fatal Causey thus recovered, his
Excellency first gave thanks to Almighty God for the Victory; and the next day
caused the whole Clergy at Divine service to do Thanksgiving to God.
the like: and also a Mass to be said, (as his custom was) for those that
were slain in the fight, in the presence of the Army. His next care after he
had provided for his wounded His care of the dead, of the wounded, and of the
Causey.
soldiers, was to amend the wounded Causey: which being cast down and opened
in at least thirteen places, the incensed soldiers, besides faggots, earth,
and other stuff, repaired and made up with heaps of the enemies bodies.

Alexander, that he might give The fetching away of the huge ship.
no respite to the affrighted enemies, hearing that monster of a ship to stay
as yet at Ordam, and that many Antwerpian ships repaired thither, sent
Charles Count Mansfield with five Galleyes, seven Frigots, and twenty lesser
Vessels, furnished with Cannons and soldiers. And Mansfield forthwith
Mansfield goes against (...) and other ships.
loosing from the Navall bridge, slipped through the cleft of the bank at Saint
Peter's Fort into the drowned fields, and compassed the enemy with that
scelerity, that unless an unexpected accident had happened in the very
attempt, it was thought not a ship could have escaped. For in Mansfields Who is
a little hindered by a fire which happened in his ship.
own galley, in which were carried Count Aremberge, Marquess Bontivolio,
Count Bevilacque, and diverse other chief men of Note, drawn with a desire of
seeing that Navall Monster, that Noah's Ark, as they termed it, by chance a
barrel of gunpowder being set on fire, fired also the ship: Bevilacque, who
was nearest to the barrel being blown up, and lighting in the water, by swim
ming got to the bank at Ordam almost dead: some cast themselves into the
waters, some were burned to death; Mansfield and the rest, bor^ a long time the
marks of the fire i^ their hands and faces. By this delay (for many on every
side came in to But soon after sets upon the enemy, takes some ships. Then he
comes to, the huge ship,
help them) most of the Antwerpia^ ships escaped to the City, excep^ nine
that were taken in the pursuit by the Mansfieldians: With which prey returning
Victours, they came about the great ship, admiring there appeared not one to
defend it, of the hug^ company of seamen not one, not any Which the
Antwerpians had left as useless.
inhabitant, as in a desolate forsaken City. And indeed the Antwerpians had
left it as wholly deserted: for the day before having taken most of the Cannons
out of it, when yet they could not remove it, they departed, and came again
the next day with their Navy, to fetch away the soldiers and ammunition, and
with fire to demolish that heap of wood. And the soldiers, mariners, and part
of the ammunition, they had removed into their ships, but Mansfields sudden
arrival hindered the rest. All which, though truly related by the prisoners
that were taken, yet the Mansfieldians durst not give credit The assailants
fear some treachery in it.
to them: and by how much all things seemed more quiet, and without danger, by
so much the more cautious and fearful they were, lest in that wooden Machine,
as in another Trojane horse, some treachery might be concealed. Wherefore,
they agreed to discharge a Cannon against it, to try that way what was within
it. But the bullet They try it.
was with silence received into the wool which stuffed the sides of it, and
gave it no more motion, then if a little wave had dash't against a huge Rock in
the Sea. At last one more adventurous then the rest, as if by boarding it first
he should win the glory of scaling the walls of a Castle: and by and by
others, that they might not be thought less daring, and then more in
emulation of the former, taking with them the prisoners instead of pledges,
intending to involve them in the same danger, if Some enter.
there were any, enter the ship: view the several rooms both above and below,
observe the hatches, and cabines, search all places exactly, and not finding
any sign of treachery, now exempt And secure from danger.
from fear, they advise with the Mariners how to draw it thence, and bring it
to the bridge, to the Princes view. Wherefore they took away from it what was
more loose, or fitter to be removed, and being so mangled and made lighter,
they drew it through the overwhelmed fields of They hale it into the River,
and in a military triumph they bring it to Alex.
Ordam into the Scheldt, and giving his Excellency notice thereof, steered it
toward the bridge, not without pomp. For the other captive ships haled with
ropes led the way: then followed Mansfields Navy, environning the great ship,
which came as if it had been a whole Navy it self. Then the ships that met
them from the bridge increased the triumph, and coming in Prince Alexanders
presence, they altogether discharged their Artillery, with such exceeding joy
of the Army, as if in the triumph over that one ship, Antwerp now subdued and
taken, had been led prisoner in fetters. And indeed not only the common
soldiers, who, as before at the report of this Engine, apprehended the
greatest fear, so now having it present amongst them, scoffed and jeered at
it, and scorned it as a Bugbeare for children; but the chiefest Commanders
also, yea Prince Alexander himself, admiring the vain structure of that huge
Machine, which the enemies had proudly threatened would be the end of the War;
made a truer construction of that title, that With great hope of an end of
their labo^rs;
it was the end of the War; but to the enemies (whose forces and strength were
now exhausted) utter overthrow and ruin. Nor did they judge falsely, for the
Antwerpians as soon as they perceived their overthrow at Covenstene, this their
ship taken, and so their hopes on all sides to be frustrated, exclaimed The
Antwerpians not willing to endure the inconvenience of a siege any longer,
they would not any longer be fooled by Holach, or encouraged by Aldegund with
vain hope of foreign aid. And it plainly appeared, the City being divided
into factions, would not any longer endure the incommodities of a siege. Nor
did the Are punished by the Magistrates,
punishment of some of the more seditious, prevail any thing with the
commonalty: for some cast into prison, were forcibly set at liberty by the
people: the Magistrates not daring for But in vain.
the future to oppose them. Whose counsel of expelling the Catholics, thereby
to ease the City, was not approved by Aldegunde, fearing a far greater and
more certain tumult of the multitude. Besides, the sudden flight of some of
the richest Merchants The Merchants also earnestly desire peace.
from the City; and the Embassage of the Hanse Cities, demanding that unless
peace were concluded, they should permit their Merchants with their goods
peaceably to depart the City, terrified the Magistrates of Antwerp, and
aggravated the mutiny of the people. But Aldegund had not yet spent out the
whole magazine of his shifts, of soothing up, and complying with the people, in
which kind he had a rare gift, he promised them to write to the Prince of
Parma, and soon after to go himself into the Camp, and if the Spaniards would
make peace upon indifferent terms, he would omit nothing speedily to effect it.
And he writ accordingly, that he might have audience: and being admitted,
Aldegund goes to Alex.
as soon as his Excellency had notice from Richardott, with whom Aldegund had
first conferred, that he was come to treat of peace both for Antwerp, Holland,
and Zealand: he perceived that by the conjunction of so many Provinces, which,
to wit, would be a tedious and intricate business, Aldegunds intent was to
get Who perceiving his subtilty sent him back.
time for the succors, which were daily expected out of England. Wherefore
Prince Alexander, using him otherwise with great courtesy, dismissed him to
Antwerp, who promised that receiving authority from the Magistrates and people,
he would forthwith return to treat only of the delivery of Antwerp. But he
delaying, his Excellency suspected that he craftily protracted the treaty,
that the besieged might gather the harvest which now began to be ripe from
about the Suburbs of Antwerp, and Mechlin; and And withal commands the enemies
corn to be brought to the Camp.
therefore determined to frustrate them of that hope also; and commanded
Ambrose Landriano with his garrison of Viluord, together with a company of
Boores, and Vastius with a party of horse, the one to harrasse and plunder the
suburbs of Antwerp, and the other of Mechlin: and to transport the corn, hay,
and what other thing was of any use, into the Camp. Then he himself with a
select And he himself takes the Castles about Antwerp,
company of horse and foot, marched into the Country about Antwerp, and took
Burgerhout, a strong sconce of the Antwerpians, and with the like violence took
Bercheme, and other Castles and Forts, and bereaved And takes the very Suburbs.
Antwerp of all that part of the country, even to their Orchards and gardens;
by that means shutting up both the City and famine together within Famine
forces the Citizens to mutiny:
the City. And indeed the people were ready to have broken out into open
sedition: the general clamor in the City being meat and peace. When the
Magistrates sent diverse into the streets, who in several assemblies should
divulge, that letters were newly come out of France, assuring them that relief
Yet they are encouraged with hopes of succor.
and succor was at hand from thence. Besides, some Citizens of Aldegunds
favorites, said they had certain intelligence, that the Prince of Parma would
indeed offer conditions not unreasonable, but had covertly covenanted with the
Spaniards to And fear of plundering.
give them the plunder of the City in place of their pay. Wherefore they should
not by the impatience of a little delay, both lose their reputation, and the
honor of holding the siege until that day, and all their goods, and fortunes,
besides their wives and children exposed to abuse, together with the loss of
their City and lives. But these outward voices were not heard, for the loud
barking of their hungry stomachs within: and most of the people suspected,
these French letters to be written in Antwerp, and to come only from Aldegunds
cabinett. For of the Prince of Parma they harbored a more worthy conceit. And
in the interim there happned a slight accident, but OPPORTUNITY in the least
things, is of great consequence. There was a Noble Matrone lay dangerously sick
at Antwerp, and for her recovery had present need o^ But Alexanders courtesy
upon occasion exhibited.
Asses milk, there being none to b^ found in the City, a young man therefore
offered himself courageously, t^ fetch an Ass from the Suburbs, although in
the enemies possession, an^ had already taken one, but apprehended by the
Spaniards, he was carrie^ to his Excellency, being as yet at Burgerhout. Who
understanding wha^ the matter was, used the youth wi^ great respect, and
commending hi^ charity, commanded the beast to be laden with Partridges,
Capons o^ Bruges, and other foul of that sor^ Then delivering them to the
yout^ for the sick Gentlewoman, commanded him that he should in his nam^
friendly salute her, and testify that h^ not only wished her health and
recovery of strength, but prayed al^ from his heart, for the prosperity, an^
happiness of the Senate, and people And indeed that unexpected civilit^ of the
Prince, (to whom the Antwerpians, sending a gallant Horse wit^ some juncates
and choice wine, gav^ public thanks) wonderfully reconciled (together with the
young man Altered their opinion.
relation) the Citizens good will toward him. For doubtless, THE wisest
Commanders of War, have that weapon called Courtesy laid up, in their
warlike Armory. But the delivery of Mechlin concluded the THE TAKING OF MECHLIN.
business. In that City, after the overthrow at Covenstene Causey, there rose
a contest between the Garrison The Citizens oppressed with famine, are afraid
of the garrison soldiers.
soldiers and Citizens, which after the loss of their corn increased, the
Citizens greatly fearing, lest they should plunder and forsake the City, and
then retire to Block-huse a Castle placed near to Mechlin, which they had
already fortified with Artillery and provision. Which as soon as Prince
Alexander had notice of, he thought it the most convenient time to attacque
the City. And forthwith he ordered Marquess Renthiacus, whom he made
General for that expedition, with Hicquius, and Mottaeus, to have to
Block-huse, and prevent the enemies designs, Renthiacus drawing his forces
thither, and causing the Artillery speedily to follow after, not only took
Block-huse, the Presidiaries being not yet entered, but Necherspole also,
besides other sconces places about Mechlin, and pitching his tents, demanded
the rendi^ Whereupon after the loss of their adjacent ^orts, they yield
themselves to his mercy.
on of the City it self. Which up^ agreement concluded with Famus^ Governor
thereof, was yielded t^ the Prince of Parmas's will and me^cy. The garrison
soldiers being s^ away without their colors, which were sent to his
Excellency: who having compassion of the City, by reason Receiving from him
favorable conditions.
most part of it were Catholick^ agreed with the Mechlinians, on ve^ gentle
conditions. For in place of seven hundred Presidiaries which departed the City,
he but substitute^ two hundred Walloones under Prov^ nus, commanding the
Citizens t^ have care of their City, together wit^ the Garrison: and imposing
no tribute on them, liberally in his Majesty's name, gave pardon to the City^
being glad that within few days, wit^ no loss of men, he had restored the
Archbishop of Mechlin after a long exile again into his own seat (the^ being
not any Diocese in all the Netherlands of so great esteem:) and reduced a
City, the Flower of the Belgic Cities, and with it the Seigniory of one of the
seventeene Province^ to their true and lawful Sovereign at that time when
having received letters from his Majesty, of the restitution For the
restitution of the Castle of Piazenza, he renders thanks to the King with
Mechlin.
of the Castle of Piazenza, which had been kept by a Spanish garrison, he was
in condition to render him thanks for his royal liberality, with the welcome
news of the Victory.

But ere long having at last subdued Antwerp, he sent far more acceptable
The agents treats with Alex. about the delivery of Antwerp.
tidings to the King; for Aldegund, when he saw the public affairs in
despair, thought privately to provide for himself, and hastened forward the
Commission intended to the Prince of Parma from the Magistrates and people. The
agents or commissioners were twenty one: the chief amongst whom were William
Merode Lord of Duffle, John Sconhove, And^ew Hessell, and Philip Marnixius,
Aldegund himself Con^ull of the City. Who being received by his Excellency at
Bevera, I have heard that Aldegund in the name of them all, and in the presence
of the Royal and warlike Council, spoke Aldegunds Oration.
after this manner.

We come not hither (most mighty Prince) timerously to apologize for our whole
years resistance in d^fence of our own; For who could have conceived the least
fear of the most potent City in all the Belgi^ Provinces from so few besiege^
and you your self, I presume (^ no valiant man can affect the c^ wardly,)
would rather have wished, then approved of our facilit^ and fear. We had
sufficient kno^ ledge of the number of your soldiers: the necessities of your
Ca^ were not concealed from us; yo^ Navy not considerable, complain^ rung
through your Army, and t^ mults were daily expected. Was ^ likely that you,
with ten or eleve^ thousand soldiers (for those we^ the most with which you
first a^ tempted this great design) could have continued the siege of such
(...) City, block it up by land, and sto^ passage by water: with your ho^ make
inrodes into Brabant: an^ hinder relief from neighbouri^ Cities? obstruct so
vast a River ^ bove, against the forces of Gau^ and below, against the power ^
Holland, and Zealand? invade ^ many Castles on the banks ^ Scheldt, oppose
Navy against Navy, which then you had not any: make good the bringing in of
provision unto your Army: And fill all places with Castles, guards, and
Sconces? no surely, had you had fifty thousand fighting men: nay, if every one
of your soldiers had had a hundred hands a piece, could you have been thought
of ability to attend to so many things at once, in places so distant, and
divided, in effect so difficult, in labor so continual, and in necessity so
urgent. And yet with this handful of men, you have besieged Antwerp both by
water and land, possessed your self of Flanders, and Brabant, by frequent
stations every where placed: conveyed provision, and what else was needful for
your Army at the siege, through a channel of your own making: Erected Castles
and Forts upon narrow banks, and in the overwhelmed fields: and what we only
could believe possible, because we have seen it done: coped with a River which
had the Ocean to assist it; yea, subjugated the Scheldt, or rather the Sea with
a Bridge, standing against the furies of the swelling Ocean, against the
violent encounters of the Ice, amongst continual conflicts with our Navies,
Yet we broke down the bridge, not without your great loss: yea, your animosity
thereby increasing, in a trice repaired it. We turned the Scheldt into the
fields and sought passage els-where: You following the River hither also, by a
new bridge divided it, and objected that over-crosse Causey against our Navies.
We assailed the Causey, dug it through, and opened a way there for our
shipping: yet you repulst us thence; when we thought our selves Victours, made
up the clefts and breaches, and obstructed all hope of passage: What Engines,
what stratagems have we left unattempted? What strength of navies, what fiery
wonders, what inventions of swimming Castles, can there be, we have not set
forth? as much as by wit, as much as by art, could be imagined, we have
performed. The Heavens, the Sea, hell only excepted, we have called to our
assistance, we have taken into our society: And yet with all these, we have
neither removed you from our Walls, nor struck you with the least fear, but
rather have ministered new fuel to your incensed breast; for the conquest of
other Cities, and further dilating of your arms and victories. You have
achieved most invict and illustrious Prince an enterprise; than which the past
and present Annalls cannot produce a greater. We often have read, and sometimes
beheld, that a General laying siege to an hostile City whilst he forces and
takes one, has lost another elsewhere. You, whilst with your Army you
straightly attacque Antwerp, as if secure of us, at the same time in Flanders
take Dendermund by force, subdue Gaunt by famine; In Guelders dis-arme us of
Nievmeghen; And in Brabant compel Bruxels, and Mechlin to a surrender. And so
whilst you lay siege to one City you extend your victories rising from
victories, into three several Provinces at once. As if to fight with one enemy
at once, were too small a task for your noble spirit. But the recital of all
these daily disputes betwixt the besieged, and besiegers, tends only to this,
that it may plainly appear, that we, conscious of our own forces did not
rashly undertake our defense, no^ having had trial of your fortune do cowardly
give it up. God, and your valor (O Alexander) have afforded you the glory of
subduing Antwerp: and posterity will allow us also some honor, for not
yielding too hastily: One thing as well for yours, and the King your Uncles
sake, as our own, we entreat and earnestly request; that as by conquering you
have understood how great a City you have overcome, so in taking, and
possessing it, you will diminish nothing of the majesty and strength thereof,
nothing of the monument of your Victory, nor any thing of his Majesty's
possession and tribute. But diminish them you will, if either by confining the
Citizens minds to a certain religion, or imposing a garrison of externs over
their bodies and fortunes; you change the state and Government of the City.
Antwerp, if any City in all Europe, flourishes for the present. The number of
Citizens, and strangers can scarcely be reckoned. The Scheldt as large as it
is, cannot contain the Merchants ships of all regions, when war hinders
them not. Lastly, no Empory in the whole world conjoynes and associates more
Provinces together, and wealth of countries by communion of traffic. The fame
of the place will endure, as long as solitude of Religion, threats of Castles,
and terrors of a ^arrison do not shut up this Sanctuary. SAFETY is a nurse to
commerce. But what safety can the naked Merchants expect from armed soldiers,
accustomed to pillage? Surely this City has sufficiently had a lamentable and
grievous experiment of sacking, burning and plundering. For the prevention of
which outrages, that Antwerp may have no just cause for the future to fear
your prudence (most excellent Prince) by this days conditions, for which we
are come hither to treat with you, we hope will provide. To these his
Excellency Prince Alez. answers the Agents.
in a few words made answer, that willingly he accepted of the treaty, with
Antwerp. And as he referred the valor and acts of his soldiers unto Gods
benignity, and his blessed mothers assistance; so the Antwerpians ought to
acknowledge, that all their forces, leagues with Cities and Provinces, and
succors from foreign Princes were in vain against the power, and right of the
legitimate Lord of the Low-countreyes. In stating the conditions he would bury
in oblivion the Antwerpians Delinquencies, for having waged war against God
and their lawful Sovereign: and incited others of the Low Countries, as with
an alarm from that strong hold, to defection; but would rather have respect
to his Majesty's clemency, and from thence would moderate the chiefest of their
conditions. In the interim And dismisseth them to three Presidents.
he had appointed men of understanding and wisdom, and no ways partial, with
whom they might more freely confer. Therefore they should depart to them, to
treat of the articles, and then he would deliver the Kings mind, not in the
worst sense. He had chosen for that purpose Pamaelio Richardott, and
Vandenburge, Presidents of the privy Council of Artois and Mechlin: and
committed To whom he referred all things: except the Articles of obedience to
the King and religion.
every thing to their judgment and wisdom; the Articles pertaining to
obedience due to the King and religion only excepted: which he with more then
ordinary care as he had received an express from his Majesty, reserved to
himself; for when long ago his Excellency had proposed it to the King,
(thereby to make the Antverpians more willing to surrender) whether he should
set a certain time to the Heretics, wherein to dispatch their affairs, or to
permit them so long until there might be hopes of their better disposition and
reducement; His Majesty made reply, that he The King thus expresses his mind
concerning religion.
should not grant an unlimited time, what hope or persuasion soever there was
of their reconciliation. Upon which subject, because he had often at other
times treated, I thought it best to insert one of the latest letters from
Spain, concerning this matter, part of which was written with his Majesty's
own hand. In every treaty or parley with Cities or Castles, that come into our
hands, let this be your first, and last regard, that in these places, the
Catholic religion be settled, without leave to the Heretics of professing or
exercising their sects or doctrines, in City or country; unless you grant
them some time for composing their affairs, and let that be limited:
concerning which matter, I absolutely command, that no dubious clause capable
of interpretation, or moderation be inserted, that those may assure themselves,
who desire to live in our Belgium, to make choice either of the true worship of
the ancient Roman faith, or after their prescribed time is ended, forthwith to
seek their habitation elsewhere. Which things if they be performed, I put my
confidence in the Almighty power, to whose honor and service this war has
for so many years been managed, with so great loss of blood, and expenses
that all things for the future will proceed fortunate; and that his heavenly
majesty, will our of his wonted providence, always so moderate our affairs,
that men by their happy success, may understand of what importance it is, to
put their confidence in the Divine goodness, and to prefer the service due to
him before all secular business. But if God by reason of our great offenses,
will have it otherwise, I think it better to spend all my Kingdoms for his
sake, then for any humane respect, to decline from this, if not a lucky,
doubtless a pious determination. And truly this firm purpose of his Catholic
Majesty was very apparent to be acceptable to God; for on the same day these
were written by the King, which was the seventeenth of August, on the same day
the Antwerpian agents at their meeting at Bevera, receiving their articles,
delivered up the City. When notwithstanding, when they begun to treat with the
Kings Commissioners, the business of their reconciliation seemed The Agents
treat with the Presidents, they differ about three articles.
to be very intricate, and would go but slowly on. For they insisted immoveably
on these three heads above others. That religion, as then it was, might freely
be exercised; that the Castle now half down, might not be repaired; That no
garrison of what nation soever, might be admitted into the City. Yea, when they
understood that the Commissioners were not empowered to treat about religion,
they told the Prince of Parma they would proceed no further with them, unless
they might have power for that also. And Aldegund, amongst other Aldegund
promises great matters, if liberty of conscience be granted.
conferences, one time staying with his Excellency four whole hours alone in
private discourse concerning this article stuck not to affirm, that upon that
condition of freedom in religion, Zealand and Holland, yea all the confederate
Belgica might be drawn to the Kings obedience. And would take it upon him, and
was confident, for that authority which he had with the Provinces, shortly to
produce a great benefit to both parties. But his But Prince Alex. discourse
with him was wholly to the contrary.
Excellency utterly dashing all hopes of liberty, and confusion in religion:
whereby, as he said, the Cities and Provinces divided into sects and factions,
could neither live in peace amongst themselves, nor with God, or their Princes
Gods Deputies upon earth; courteously admonished him, that they should consider
the daily decay of their forces, succors from France by reason of the troubles
there, past all hopes, the subtle delay of the English, the invincible power
of the Catholic King, not to be exhausted by any expenses, nor tired out by
war; and indirectly he insinuated some things, which might be of great
concernment for his own private interest, with hopes of favor from his
Majesty's clemency. And those things he uttered before Aldegund with such
eloquence, with such courage, and with words wholly dictated to him (as he
after writ to the King) by Almighty God, that Aldegund Aldegund is wonderfully
taken with his discourse.
admiring the vigor of his discourse, professed after his departure thence, he
had often treated with many eloquent persons, but he never met any more
efficacious, and affable then the Prince of Parma: and that with reason he
might use that of Asdruball concerning Scipio, viz. that Prince Alexander
appeared far more admirable to him in presence, then fame had set him out for
his warlike actions. And indeed whether taken with the words and civility of
the Prince of Parma or wholly hopeless of supporting the siege any longer, by
little and little he made show that his And is more forward for the surrender.
mind was altered, being more propense to treat on the surrender. Moreover in
a book, which afterward he se^ forth, when he had to the life extolled Yea in
a book which afterward he set forth, he extolleth Alexanders virtues, and the
Kings cause,
the deeds performed by Alexander Farneze, his mercy toward the conquered,
sanctity in keeping his Oath, and other virtues pertaining to a General;
amongst other things he added, that King Philips subject^ could not with a
safe conscience take up arms against their King Which confession not rashly
uttered in talk, but witnessed in writing, he being a man of great authority
among the States, and a grounded Calvinist, was a great blemish to the
confederates cause. He thenceforth daily And was therefore hated of the
confederates.
growing out of favor and hated by them, was not afterward admitted to any
Government in the Common wealth. But then the Agents, and the Kings
Commissioners often meeting together; lastly, after some debates it the Prince
of Parmas's presence, the The conditions imposed upon the City at the surrender.
article concerning religion was in the first place confirmed; one, and that
the ancient Catholic profession being appointed to the Antwerpians, They were
commanded to reedify the Churches, which they had rased, and to restore the
ejected families of religious orders into the City into their own houses and
possessions. Which Article concerning religious orders, when the Agents would
thus have penned it, that those religious orders should be reduced into the
City, which had had their residence in Antwerp, in the Emperor Charles the
fifths days; A deceit discovered in them.
His Excellency understanding by that fraud, the Fathers of the society of
Jesus, whose assistance he chiefly made use of against the Heretics, to be
excluded, utterly rejected it, and would have all orders equally included. In
repairing the Castle, and in placing a garrison of Spaniards and Italians, from
whom the Citizens desired to be free, he dealt more favorably. Yet the
Article was us: That the Prince of Parma should draw with him into the City a
garrison of well affected nations: and if the Hollanders and Zealanders were
reconciled to their Sovereign, the City should be exempt from the Castle, and
garrison for ever after; if not, he would provide for the safety of Antwerp
against the neighboring Zealanders and others. In the rest of the conditions
the Prince of Parma being very liberal, gave pardon in hi^ Majesty's name to
the Antwerpians, of the high Treason committed against their King: restored to
the ^ity its ancient privileges; granted the Heretics four years to tarry
in the City, to settle their affairs. And although he might with reason have
charged the City with the greate^ part of the huge expenses laid out a^ the
siege, yet he was contented to exact only four hundred thousand Florens,
160000. Crowns.
(nor that to be paid all at once) for his soldiers pay. It was also agreed,
that the prisoners on both sides should be released though the Royalists had
more then the enemies, unless they had already covenanted for their ransom:
Tilinius only excepted, whose case although reserved to the King his
Excellency promised, to recommend him to his Majesty: and to effect, that as
some days before he had dismissed Lanoy into France, to be exchanged with Count
Egmont, so Tilinius should ere-long follow his father.

Whilst these, and other Articles (being The articles are read in the City.
in all twenty seven) were read by the Commissioners returned to Antwerp in
presence of the Magistrates and people with great attention of all; there was
suddenly heard a huge noise of Cannons from the bridge on the Scheldt, and the
adjoining forts, which still increased, when many going out of the City, and
looking from the banks and towers, reported that a cruel battle was then
fought at the Farnezian bridge, and upon the banks and rampires of the River.
And without And it being rumoured that the English succors were arrived, and
had set upon the Royalists, the Antwerpians are at a stand about admitting the
conditions.
doubt either the French or English succors were arrived: by whom the
Spaniards being suddenly engaged, and as unprovided, would not doubtless long
subsist against the fresh, and hardy enemy. Whereupon many of the people verily
believing it, as oftentimes HOPE, and desire makes men credulous upon new
designs and encouraged by those that were against the surrender, forthwith
take arms, and constipating the Commissioners, demand a longer time to
deliberate on the conditions, until they were certified by frequent
messengers, one after another, that there appeared no aid from France, or Navy
from England: but that it was a joyful and feigned combat of the Royalists. And
Seeing themselves deluded, they return again to hear the conditions.
one of them, a witty conceipted fellow, having informed himself more fully,
affirmed that no auxiliary navy was arrived from England, but that the Grecian
fleet had brought the golden Fleece from Colchos to the The occasion of the
mistake.
Prince of Parma. But they being thus d^luded, and offended with the
incendiaries, return again with the same levity, as before they had broken
off, to hear the articles of their surrender. But not a few were drawn with a
desire The solemnity of Alexanders receiving the golden Fleece.
to see that military triumph, celebrated in the royal Army for the solemnity
of the Golden Fleece: which Chain sent by his Majesty long before, Prince
Alexander had deferred to receive until this time, that now secure of the
Antwerpian Victory, he might enter the City more graced by that dignity. And
the soldiers for The description of that celebrity.
their love, and reverence to their General, made all things more stately: for
armed companies ranged in Battalia at their posts, were extended from the Camp
at Bevera (where the Prince then resided) even to Calloo, and from thence to
the Scheldt and Bridge. The chief Commanders of the Army placed themselves on
the Bridge: the banks of the Scheldt, the Castles, Rampires and ships, all
glittered with armed Regiments. Saint Philips fort in the head of the Bridge on
Brabant shore, was chosen to augment the pomp. To which his Excellency moving
from Bevera on horseback, accompanied by the chief of the Nobility, and
entertained by the way with shows of warlike skirmishes, sometimes of horse,
sometimes of foot, when he arrived at the bridge, which resounded with the
joyful Echo of shoutes and Trumpets, he was saluted with a volley of Cannons
without intermission thundering from the Castles. Forts and ships. Having
passed the bridge and entered the chapel of Saint Philps, after Mass sung by
Lodowick Barlamont Archbishop of Cambray, he put on the collar of the Golden
fleece, received from the hands of Count Mansfield, who said, he represented
the person of Octavio Duke of Parma and Piazenza in that office, with whom
about thirty nine years before, he was preferred to that order by Charles the
fifth. Then his Excellency departing thence, returned unto the Camp at Bevera,
and again all along the river-banks the roaring of Candons, mixed with the
exulting shoute of the soldiers wishing all happiness and prosperity to their
General renewed the joy. And it was manifest to all, that this Order was never
by any Prince received with greater magnificence, viz. in the midst of his
Veterans, and so often victorious Regiments: upon the admirable structure of
the Bridge on the Scheldt: having subdued the most potent City in all the
Low-countreyes, after a siege the most memorable that ever was.

Prince Alexander was not as yet arrived at the Camp, when he was 17. August.
Alex. receives the Commissioners coming to deliver up the City.
met by the Antwerpian Commissioners, who (the Articles being accepted of) came
to render up the City, Whom his Excellency courteously receiving, stayed them
with him and sent the Prendents Richardott and Vandenburge, with the Kings
Herald into the City: to whom were joined S^nding some into the City to
confirm and proclaim the surrender.
Captain Petro a Castro, whose office was to buckle on his sword, Didacus
Escovario Sergeant Major of Mondragonius Regiment, and Propertiu^ Baroccius
chief Engineer, to ratify the conditions already agreed on, and to publish
the surrender. These had directions to view the City both within and without,
and to make all things secure against the coming of their Prince. And the
conclusion of the peace being heard at Antwerp, the With great joy of the
people, pulling down the Duke of Alenzons arms, they set up the Kings.
people entertain the Kings harbingers with great joy, they run up and down
the City, pull down the arms and pictures of the Duke of Alenzon, and set up
the King of Spaines: all things were with exquisite diligence prepared against
the Prince of Parma's arrival: all things from continual sorrow and fear,
were suddenly changed into mirth, sports, and preparation of joyful shows.
But his And Alex. coming is expected.
Excellency deferred to enter the City yet ten days. In which time it is
scarce credible, what a number of people from all parts of the Low-countreyes,
and adjacent places repaired The concourse of strangers to fee thi^ triumph,
and to view the bridge, especially of the Antwerpians.
thither. Some that they might be present at the triumph of the Conqueror at
his solemn entrance into the City: many to view the fortifications of the
Camp, and famed invention of the Farnezian bridge: some to draw out in right
and full proportion, the models or portraitures of the works, which as it was
reported, were speedily to be Coming out of the City to contemplate Alex. works.
dismantled. But none more curiously b^held these things, then the Antwerpian
Commissioners; and those, who now having their minds no less at liberty then
their gates, came forth of the City: sometimes they viewed the castles erected
on the banks, then they admired the channel Parma, and the Fort Perla: at the
fabric of the bridge, they were even amazed, and both hated, and yet praised
the wonderful rarity of the work. But on Covenstene causey, dreadful yet for
the fresh blood, scattered limbs, and relics of mangled bodies, they
acknowledging their late loss, privately lamented: and yet were contented to
behold with their eyes, what their minds detested. But Prince Alexander now
ready to enter Antwerp, in the first place removed the garrison soldiers from
the opposite Haven in the head of Flanders, as also from Tilinius fort, HIS
solemn entrance.
and lastly from An werp it self, and sent them all toward Zealand without
their arms. Then he committed the charge of the Catholic Army, who had
received orders to meet at Stab^oe^^, to Vasti^^, in place of Count Man's field,
who then was gone to look to his Regency of Lucemburge. And out of his whole
army his Excellency selected two thousand foot, divi^ed into eight companies of
Germans, and twelve of Walloones, armed with pikes, Muskets, and carbines: and
three troops of horse, one of Curaciers, and two of Lanciers. And commanded
them to stay at Bercheme 29. Aug.
a village of Brabant. He also He sent some before to guard the ways.
appointed George Basta, with three hundred horse from Burgerhout, to ride out
and survey the way he was to pass. The next day marching with his Court from
the camp at Bevera, and having past the Scheldt, he sent before part of the
foot from Berchem into the City, under Licquius, who placed some of them at
Saint Georges gate, which they also call the Emperors; And the gates and
chiefest streets of the City.
and divided the rest into several chief places of the City, that by so many
stations, lending a mutual assistance, as it were joining hands, they might
enclose Antwerp. So his Excellency would not only have the conquered City, but
the conquest it self in his own power. These things thus ordered, the ways
both within and without the City being thronged with infinite people, the rest
of his Excellencies attendance in great state marched forward, the horse and
foot, not so much for the gaudinesse of apparel The aspect of the soldiers.
or armor, as (all of them being old select soldiers) for their martial
looks, and military severity, a gallant sight. But Prince Alexander, now made
famous with the Trophies Himself the greatest spectacle.
of so many Provinces and Cities subdued, attracted all men's eyes upon him, and
as the ancients in their triumphs had Ensigns, and pictures carried before
them, so fame waited on him with his titles, and prompted the cogitations of
the spectatours: and as the noise of his famous acts had represented him to
their thoughts more then a man so sought they more greedily to satiate their
eyes now in beholding him present. He was attended by these great Nobles: the
Duke of Areschot, Cajatane Duke of Sermonett the Prince of Chimace, Count
Egmont, the Marquesses of Renthi, and Varambone, the Countess Aremberg. Charles
Mansfield, Altapen and others, especially Low Country men, for very few of the
Spaniards, and Italians were admitted, thereby to please the Antwerpians with
this retinue, and lastly with the troops of his lifeguard, whose Captains were
Leo Lazarus, Haller, and the Counts Nicelli, and Caecius: his Excellency
arrived He is received before the City gate by a Virgin.
at Saint Georges gate, where he was met by a Virgin in a habitt, and with
Ensigns representing Antwerp, as they use to shadow it. Who lighting from her
triumphant Chariot, with a company of other noble girls reverently saluted
the Prince of Parma: and delivered him a Golden key, she prayed the like
happiness to his Nephew now entering victour, as heretofore she had wished to
Charles the fifth, who made his first victorious entrance through that gate;
Alexander courteously receiving the gift, wore it before him fastened to the
chain of the Golden Fleece, and through the And is welcomed with diverse
arguments of joy through the City.
whole City he observed not without admiration, the sudden setting forth and
expressions of public joy. For on the bridge Moere he saw a beaked pillar of a
wonderful height erected, with the staua's of Alexander of Macedon, and that
Roman Alexander placed thereon: and in other places diverse sorts of Pageants,
stately arches and artificial fireworks: to compose which shows for pomp and
state only, those very same, though heretofore so often pernicious Engineers
did apply their inventions and hands: using the fragments of the Machines a
little before prepared for the War, for solemnizing of this triumph, making
their art obsequious, thereby to appease the Conqueror. Prince Alexander, after
he had a while beheld and commended these and other like preparations, with
all his attendance, hastened to the great Church of our B. Lady. And there
whilst ^e Deum laudamus He went into the Church.
with music was solemnly sung, he offered up his private devotions, and
thanksgiving, which, next And gave thanks to the B. Virgin.
to God he openly professed to the mother of God, FOR THAT THE EXPEDITION BEING
BY HER INSTINCT, UNDERTOOK, BY HER ASSISTANCE PROSPEROVSLY ACHIEVED, HE AT
LAST BE HELD HIS LADY, BY THE PIOUS AND PUISSANT ARMS OF THE CATHOLIC KING,
RESTORED TO HER OWN SEAT, FROM WHENCE SHE HAD SACRILEGIOVSLY BEFORE-TIME BEEN
BANISHED, wHOM THEREFORE HE DEVOVTLY HONORED; From thence he departed to the
Castle half down, and quite desolate: and passing through the Army, which
before the Castle was suddenly composed, as well of the soldiers sent thither
before, as of those who by his command repaired thither out of the City, he
made a little stand at the Castle gate: and calling to him the Colonels and
Captains, before Then at his entrance into the Castle he spoke thus to his
soldiers.
he dispersed them through the City, made this short speech unto them. By Gods
great bounty and your valor, O fellow soldiers, we possess Antwerp. But that
we may securely keep it, I have chosen you out of the whole Army, to whose
military discipline, but especially civility, and unoffensive conversation with
the Citizens, I might commit the safety of the City, so much the more
earnestly, as the Antwerpians were more stiff and resolved, not to admit of
garrison soldiers: for that they feared, if not open plundering (though that
also they expected;) at least continual contests and quarrels, which their
goods must daily redeem, and would daily occasion. I, that I might remove that
persuasion out of their minds, have engaged my faith. Nor as I trust will my
promise, and hope be frustrate, having made this choice of soldiers, whose
commanders I know to be men careful of their own reputations, and solicitous
of my credit. Therefore it shall be your task, to keep the soldiers within
their limits, and duties: and not to let pass injuries and abuses against the
Citizens, if any happen unpunished, but forth with chastise them: that the
Citizens may hear of the soldiers punishments, before the commanders hear of
the Citizens complaints. So shall concord, and a well grounded allegiance be
established in the City. Remember you live in the very entrance of Zealand and
Holland, whose castles may be seen, nay their very words be almost heard from
the walls of Antwerp. The Antwerpians will have an eye thither, if they
perceive themselves insolently treated at home by a foreign soldier: WHO since
always he is wont to be a grievance to cities but then especially when newly
conquered, as more near looking back on their late former condition. Wherefore
they will the more int^lerably resent injuries from the conquerers: and having
not yet laid by their acient enmities, as if the war were not yet ended, they
will with little ado, resume their hostile spirits. FOR Torches newly
extinguished, will quickly take fire: I, as much as concerns my self, will
have a diligent care, that the glorious labors of the Catholic Army be not
frustrated by the licentiousness of some. Thus premonished, he distributed
Then he sent them into several parts of the City.
them into their several appointed parts of the City: and gave orders that for
some days, as if upon service, they should not lay by their arms, until at
the next convention having removed the Heretics, he should create new
Magistrates.

Whilst thus things passed with a continued gratulation for three whole days
at Antwerp, the Spaniards, and The triumph of the Spaniards and Italians on the
bridge, in honor of their General.
Italians, when they had not admittance into the City, yet at least meant some
way to participate of the common joy, whereof themselves were chiefest authors:
they therefore conspired together with such preparation as time would permit,
to solemnize a joyful triumph for their General upon the Scheldt: and knowing
that the bridge was within three days to be dismantled, they determined to
pass over with triumph and pomp, that Machine yet standing: and in the interim
they chose S. Mary's fort at the head of the bridge, as it were for their
capitol. Wherefore with wonderful alacrity, cutting down what shrubs and trees
were at hand, they erect triumphant works and arches on the bridge: adorn the
sides and battlements with bows: strew the passage with leaves, and lastly
hang on the boughs emblems and verses, such as amongst soldiers could be
composed in praise of Prince Alexander. Then with garlands of green branches on
their heads, marching orderly over the bridge, and at every arch joyfully
discharging their Muskets they enter St. Mary's. You would think they had had
a president here of from the Macedons, the other Alexanders soldiers, who
after their victory over Nyse, on a hill near to the City, were disposed to
merriment, and crowned with wreathes of ivyes and vines lopped from the wood,
(Alexander the great first admiring, and afterward commending this their new
Not unlike to the solemnity of Alexander of Macedons soldiers.
kind of pomp, with joyful dances on the top of the hill celebrated solemn
ceremonies to the god of the wood. Yea, the General himself acting his part
also with the dancers: at the last invited his Army to a magnificent feast. Nor
was this epulary appendix wanting to the fore mentioned gratulation of the
Spaniards and Italians. For whilst they render thanks with a joyful consort of
music and voices, to the mother of the God of Hosts, in Alexander comes
thither from Antwerp
her Castle, they received unexpected tidings that Prince Alexander with a
train of the nobility was advancing from the other part of the bridge. For he
having intelligence how much his soldiers sought to honor him, being
exceedingly taken with their ingenious good will and affection toward him;
this warlike man omitted not, And the day after makes the^ a feast.
both to grace them with his presence, and the day after with a sumptuous
banquet to augment their joy. And indeed it was a spectacle worth the seeing,
to behold the Army feasting upon the Scheldt, tables all along the The banquet
on the Bridge.
bridge as far as from Brabant to Flanders sumptuously furnished: to see the
Duke of Areschott, the Marquesses of Renthi, Vastius, and Varambone serving up
meat: Charles Count Mansfield, the Prince of Chimace, Maurique, Cajatane, and
Leva, all eminent persons and chief Commanders filling them wine. When in the
mean time all rung with joyful shouts of the soldiers, wishing life and
victory to their General Prince Alexander. Thus the bridge, the day after that
solemn The taking down of the Bridge.
banquet, adorned as it was with arches of green boughs, garlands and emblems,
with joyful expressions and exultation was taken down. And it was but fit,
that the exequies of this victorious Machine over the enemies should be
performed with triumph. Most of the wood and Iron were by his The materials
were given to Baroc. and Plato.
Excellency given to the Architects of it, Baroccius and Plato. But in Spain
(for the joy of that success contained not it self within the Low Countries
only) the news of this victory was with general gratulation of the Cities
received: certainly the King, as His Majesties^ joy for the taking of Antwerp.
Granvell writes, was so transported with joy, that the ancient Courtiers, who
always had been in his company, affirmed, they never saw his Majesty, either
for the battle of St. Quintins, or for the navall fight at Lepanto, or at the
conquest at the Tersera Islands, to have expressed the like content, as at the
letters of taking Antwerp. And I have heard from a person very intima(...)t
Court, that the King, the same night he received Prince Alexanders letters,
could not contain himself, but got out of bed, and went privately to his
daughter Isabellas's chamber, whom Signified to his daughter.
he dearly loved, and knocking at the door, uttered these two wordse, ANTWERP
IS OURS, and then departed. And verily by those letters, which I have seen,
written by his Majesty's own hand, in exquisite high terms beyond his usual
custom, to express his thanks to Prince Alexander, it is very evident that
his joy was excessive. For he was of a settled opinion, that Zealand and
Holland, would at last follow the example and fate of Antwerp: and so all the
Netherlands And it was the opinion of many, that the Low Countries would turn
to the King.
would soon return to their own Princes obedience. And when Idicquesius
resident for the Low-countreyes in Spain, gave letters to Charles Coloma, a
famous warlike man, then ready to depart for the Low Countries, it is reported
that he said to him; he might go, though ere-long he would return, for no
doubt but the Lowcountreys war would soon be ended by the Prince of Parma.
But his Excellency in the mean while applied himself to settle the affairs of
Antwerp. And choosing new Magistrates, Alex. takes care of the Governnment of
the City, both civil and sacred.
he created Champine Governor of the City, and Werp of the garrison. He sent
also for the Archbishop of Mechlin, to take care of the Church and Clergy: and
the fathers of the society of Jesus to instruct the youth in learning and true
religion, shutting up the schools of the Heretics. Then having ordered some
other things for the good government of the City; his next care was to reward
his soldiers labors. Going therefore to Stabroeck, and mustering his men, he
gave them their pay, a great part of the army He gives pay to his soldiers.
having much arrears due to them. But if Captain or Officer, nay any of the
common soldiers, had performed any notable exploit, such as he thought they
had merited a greater reward, he writ into Spain, and making a particular
catalogue of their And requests of the King rewards for some of his chiefest
soldiers by name.
names, recommended them to his Majesty's liberality, to be further honored.
All their names, whose famous acts and victories Alexander proposed to the
King: with recital of how many years they had served in the wars, what and
how many wounds they had received, if I should in this part of my history
insert, it would no doubt be grateful to that warlike nation. And verily,
were it not an immense labor, those noble and military spirits deserved to
have their valor, and Alexanders affection toward them enrolled to posterity.
This I will say in brief, there was not any one of the chief Commanders, whom
the King did And prevails.
not either advance to the order of the Golden Fleece, or to some order of
Spanish Knights: or gave not some more honorable place in the Army, or else
made not Governor of some Castle in Italy, or at least did not increase his
yearly revenue. So far did he condescend to Prince Alexanders requests, that
when his Excellency had Nor permits any to be rewarded by the King under his
deserts.
taken notice, that in the donative catalogue sent into the Low Countries,
Camillus a Monte Colonel, and Nicholas Basta, Captain of a troop of horse,
were not remunerated proportionably to their deserts: and had therefore
acquainted the King of their daily and faithful service: and what for the one
his Uncle Chiapino Vitelli, and what for the other his father Demetrius had
merited, having both served in the Austrian wars forty years, his Majesty
with new and more satisfactory letters, according to Prince Alexanders desire,
honored them both according to their merits and worth. Of such consequence it
is, to be a General of an Army, who taking part with his soldiers in their
labors, can judge of their travells: as he himself is by his Prince esteemed,
for the opinion of his valor.

But this muster at Stabroeck was not without some mutiny on the other THE
Walloones do mutniy.
side the Scheldt, occasioned by the distribution of the soldiers pay, so
MONEY whether had, or wanting, is still cause of sedition. Those soldiers that
staid in the forts at Caloo on Flanders side, being most of 20. October.
them walloones, having intelligence that at Stabroeck the Spaniards and
Italians had their pay, out of the money lately come into the Camp, persuaded
themselves they should receive their debentures, for all the time they For their
pay not equally nor nor totally discharged,
had served in the Wars. But when they saw but two pays, and two coats
apiece only offered to every man; at first they were much dejected, then they
begun to despise so vile a reward. Nor wanted there incendiaries to exasperate
the seditious. And whereas And by one incendiary,
they requested but pay something proportionable to their labors was it fit at
the conquest of so rich a City, that in place of ten or twenty pays, they
should silently sit down with two only? what other victory might be expected
for soldiers, worn out with age in the wars having their bodies weakened
with wounds, in which they might yet place their latest hopes? If for pretense
of civility the soldiers were restrained from plunder of that hostile City,
having deserved it in the highest degree; why is not justice, and the right of
war supplied otherwise? To the Spaniards it was already, who having received
full pay, only felt the fruits of the victory. So it is now adays, the
Belgians fight, the Spaniards conquer: and how ever the die of war run, the
Belgians still pass for conquered. The seeds of sedition thus sown at Caloo,
furiously They are more provoked.
spread through the rest of their quarters on the bank of Scheldt: but yet no
further, then to extrude the Kings treasurers and such of the commanders as
stood averse from the fact: for neither did they choose them an Electo,
contenting themselves with the Common Council of the officers of every
company, and those that were most forward; but were also highly offended with
the Agents sent from the Yet remained their General and King.
next garrison of the Holanders, courted them to a revolt, whom they therefore
rejected not without threats; and openly professed to stand faithful to the
Prince of Parma, and the Catholic party: and that what military virtue they
had in them, as their adversaries had experience they had some, should still
stand against the enemy, as long as they had a life to lose, or sword to draw.
Which answer moved Alexander, not ignorant of it. And whereas at Whereby Alex.
being more pacified.
the first notice of that mutiny, he had intended to reduce them by famine? and
therefore had commanded some colors of foot and horse of Spaniards and
Italians, to guard the country of Wasia, that no provision should be brought
from thence into the Walloone quarters; yet he thought it not amiss to deferr
it a day or two. And using gentler remedies, he sent the Marquess of Renthi,
an ancient commander of the Walloones to Caloo: to tell them how much they were
deceived Sent to show them their mistake:
and inform them that the Spaniards had received no more pay then other
nations. And though they had, yet ought they to consider, that the money came
from Spain: and an externe soldier wants many things in a strange country,
which the inhabitants and natives have ready at home. But Renthies words were
not regarded But they were not moved.
by the raging and disagreeing soldiers destitute of a Commander. Besides
Werp, Governor of the Antwerpian garrison, certified Prince Alexander, that he
had notice that some were sent from Caloo to Antwerp, covertly to communicate
their designs with the Walloone Presidiaries: And that there were some already
heard to threaten they would not accept of pay unless they might have all
their arrears. But most as yet were free from the infection. Nevertheless it
greatly perplexed his Excellency, lest, if the Asex. fearing lest they should
conspire with Walloone soldiers at Antwerp.
soldiers should raise any tumults in the City, the Antwerpians should now
believe it for certain to be the plot they always suspected, laid beforehand
by the General. Wherefore with all expedition calling Count Arembergs German
regiment from Burgerhout to Antwerp, under color of By several inventions
provides for the Cities safety.
sending them to Calloo, appointed some Spaniards to appear before the walls;
he himself with a troop of Epirots entered the City: And gave an express, that
the walloones who were to keep guard that night in the castleyard should keep
it els-where, (for his fear was lest all the soldiers in the City meeting
there should join themselves, and presuming of the opportunity of the Castle
and artillery, should begin the mutiny. Then placing the Arembergians before
the Castle, instead of the walloones, he fitly prevented all occasion of the
ill-affected Presidiaries (who were but few) meeting together, or raising any
tumults. And in the morning without any further delay, to try their intentions,
he caused the assigned pay to be offered them. Which they, some dissembling,
And forces the seditious to return to obedience.
most of them not conscious, and all being wonderfully pacifyed accepted. Nor
had the mutiny on Flanders coast any other effect: for provision being stopped
from VVasia, and commerce with the Antwerpians cut off, the tenth day after,
having first asked and obtained pardon, they returned to their obedience and
civility. Notwithstanding Some of them being put to death.
four of the chief incendiaries, but upon some other pretended crime, which
upon inquiry was not wanting, were put to death of the Antwerpian garrison,
with whom no treaty of pardon had passed, two Or degraded.
Captains and two others, who had been sent from Calloo to sow the sedition
amongst the soldiers and these two were hanged at Antwerp, but the two
Captains, for that the crime was not totally proved against them, being
degraded from their Captains places, were sent to fight in Freezland at their
own charges.

But the Princes expedition in preventing THE repairing of Antwerp Castle.
the sedition, both gained him much love from the Antwerpian Magistrates, and
caused a greater propensnesse to his design, then in agitation. For the
garrison soldiers quartering in the Antwerpians houses, were now thought
burdensome guests and the Citizens, to exonerate themselves of that unwonted
grievance, The people desire it.
began to wish the reedifying of the Castle. But the Magistrates who regarded
the public more then every But not the Magistrates, who yet being persuaded by
Alexanders servants.
man's private interest, stood out. Yet Champine Governor of the City, and
Cosmus Count Masius, a Courtier very intimate with the Prince: and one of his
privy-Councell, very opportunely began to treat with them, and upon occasion
beginning to discourse of the Citizens desires, which if neglected, it was
doubtful, they would break out into a sedition: and also promising the
Citizens their assistance to his Excellence for the reparation of the Castle,
the Magistrates minds began somewhat to alter: until they also partly
pacifyed by the Princes late favor, and partly moved with the conference, and
fit reasons of those I spoke of, went to Alexander, and rendering him thanks for
saving the City And obliged by his benefits, referr the matter to his pleasure.
from a tumult, they did not omit to make mention of the restoration of the
Castle, wholly referring it to his wisdom. Which by much how more grateful it
was to Alexander, so much the more he slighted it; pretending and not without
just cause, the want of money, not only for that fabric, but winter now
drawing on, for repairing the banks of the Scheldt, and breaches of the
Rampires, at last they divided the charges, the City and adjacent Villages
promising their assistance to repair the River-banks and Rampires: and the
Prince of Parma reserving part of the imposed fine toward the repairing of the
Castle; so the Castle the ninth of November, the eighth year after its former
ruin, began to be repaired, Antwerp not refusing a bridle: and so great a
Bucephalus, by the strength and wisdom of The Castle is redified. 9. November.
Alexander being tamed. And indeed the work soon went on with wonderful
celerity, for both the old foundations were useful, and the near adjoining
houses, which had been built of the ruin of the defaced Castle, being pulled
down, the same stones served again for the work. His Excellence as soon as the
Castle was habitable, drew into it a garrison of Germans, A garrison of
Germans was placed in it.
not of walloones as was supposed, in pretense as displeased at their late
sedition: But in very deed that he might at last bring in the Spaniards, and
to that purpose more easily remove the Germans being Externs, then the native
Belgians. In which he also had a regard, that none of the Low Country Nobility
should be made Governor Alex, reserves the title of Governor to himself.
of the new Castle, he therefore declared himself Governor thereof, having
already with himself designed Mondragonius for that place. Whom then he made
over-seer of the work: and at his departure from Antwerp, created him his
Vice-Governour: So bringing him in by several intervalls, and as it were
degrees to that Office, and avoiding by that silent and unperceptible
progress, a Afterward by little and little, and unperceptibly he gives it to
Mondragonius, and at last brings in the Spaniards. The first designing of this
Castle.
great part of their discontent, at last he openly declared him Governor of
the Castle: and removing the Germans thence, he brought in the Spaniards, the
City not daring to contradict it, and rather inclining to Alexander; And thus
Antwerp Castle designed first by Margaret of Austria Duchess of Parma, then
built by the Duke of Alva, afterward defaced by the Prince of Grange, was at
last with the expenses of seventy thousand The building Ruin, and restitution
of it.
crowns, by Alexander son to Margaret repaired. But before the Castle was
finished (for that was some months after) his Excellency with his Court
departed to Bruxels, the ancient Alex. with hi^ Court removes to Bruxels.
seat of the Princes of Brabant, and the Governors of the Low-countreyes,
having thrice changed his abode: for setting out from Namure, he removed his
Court and Council to Mons in Haynolt, from thence to Tournay in Flanders, and
lastly to Bruxels in Brabant, still providing for himself new seats by new
Victories.

FINIS.

