TITUS, OR THE PALM OF CHRISTIAN COVRAGE: To be exhibited by the Scholars of
the Society of JESUS, at Kilkenny, Anno Domini 1644.

THE ARGUMENT.
TItus a noble Gentleman more illustrious for his Christian courage, then
parentage: was solicited by the King of Bungo, to desert his Religion by
several, most artificious infernal plots, all which he slighted and dashed
with his invincible courage, and generous Christian resolution, whereat the
King amazed, restored him to his liberty, wife and children, and granted him
the freedom of his Religion, with all his lands and possessions of which
before he was bereaved as traitor to the Crown.

This history is compendiously set down by Father Francis Solier, of the
Society of JESUS in the 18. book of his Ecclesiastical history of Iaponia,
and year of our Lord, 1620.



Printed at Waterford by Thomas Bourke, M.DC.XLIV.

THE PROLOGVE. Divine love extolleth the Iaponian's courage. Act 1. Scene 1.
Idolatry storms at her expulsion out of Iaponia, and exciteth hell to
revenge. Scene 2. The Emperor of Iaponia declares his affection toward the
Idols, and to this end commands a solemn sacrifice. Scene 3. The Bongo's
receive no answer from their gods as they were wont, hence they rage against
the Christians. Scene 4. Faith and Fortitude, implore aid of the triumphant
Church. The Interlude. A Country Clown hearing that a proclamation was to
issue against the Christians, is mighty merry, and attempts to rob a
passenger. Act 2. Scene 1. THe Emperor commands the edict against Christians to
be proclaimed. Scene 2. The edict is promulged. Scene 3. Titus perusing the
edict, deliberates, with death, judgment, hell, heaven and eternity. Scene 3.
The King of Bungo inquireth narrowly after the Christians. Scene 4. Titus is
summoned and bids adieu to wife and children. Scene 5. Idolatry triumphs
before time, and is by faith repressed. The Interlude. A Soldier fainedly
sick, calls for the Doctor, whose purse artificiously he conveyeth out of
his pocket, and hopes by a lad dreaming to get another. Act 3. Scene 2. THe
King of Bungo endevors first by threats, then by fair promises to pervert
Titus. Scene 2. Titus his wife and family voweth loyalty to God before the
Crucifix. Scene 3. The militant Church does comfort them. Scene 4. S. Francis
Xaverius appears and encourages them. Act 4. Scene 1. THe King of Bungo
menaceth death to Titus his youngest son, if the father abjure not his faith.
Scene 2. Four youngmen in vain seek to pervert the lad with the pleasures of
the world. Scene 3. Martina the daughter, bids adieu, with mother and
brother, assuring them of her constancy. Scene 4. Simon the eldest son
bewaileth for that he is left behind. Scene 5. Tidings are brought to Titus of
his daughters execution, Martina the mother of Simon is summoned. Scene 6. By
the King both are solicited to desert their faith, Simon scourged. The
Interlude. Two soldiers force a lad to discover where the mothers purse lay
hidden by whom they are deceived. Act 5. Scene 1. TItus is sent for by the
King, in whose view supposed heads of wife and children are produced. Scene 2.
They are lead from prison before him and a superficial command given to kill
them in his presence, if he persists in his constant resolution. Scene 3.
Divine providence declares Gods care of his elect, and foretells Titus his
triumph. Scene 4. The King amazed at this constancy dismisseth them, freedom
of Religion granted with their lives and estates. Epilogue. Exhorts to
imitate their courageous Christian resolution.
FINIS.

