A LETTER to the Author of the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, in REPLY to
his Reasons for the Validity of the Lay-Deprivation of the Bishops by the
Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 1.
SIR,
BEcause you seem to resent my not taking notice of your Discourse annexed to
the Defense of the Vindication, to deal plainly with you, I had so far
considered it, that I did not think it worthy of regard. You have in those
Books, in my apprehension, done like a Mercenary Advocate, who will maintain
the Cause he is retained in, as well, and as far, as he can, be it good or bad:
for you were engaged in two very different Causes; the one, very good, and that
you manage very well; and there is no standing against you: the other, very
bad, false and deceitful; and therein you are like Sampson, when his Locks were
shorn by an Harlot; you do what you can, but your Strength is departed; you can
make nothing on it, but only talk, and furnish Talk for Tatlers; or, it may be,
to amuse the Vulgar; but not to satisfy any Man of competent Judgment. This
indeed was my apprehension upon my first Inspection into them; which my farther
Perusal has only more confirmed. And therefore since you are so concerned for
a Reply to your Reasons, I am very free to serve you even beyond your desire,
and, if possible, not only to satisfy your self, but undeceive such as you may
have either misled into, or confirmed in Error; and so prevent what I can of
the Evil which from others might recurr upon your self.

You have so well asserted the Rights of the Catholic Church, and of all
Particular Churches, which are true Members of it, against the Usurpations of
the State, that you had driven your Adversaries for their last Refuge to the
meanest of all Arguments, a spiteful Argumentum ad hominem, to stop your Mouth
with that: and, in my Opinion, you had done much better to have held your hand
there, than to have disparaged so commendable an Achievement by so inexcusable
an Undertaking of so indefensible a Cause, and left that to the Management of
your defeated Adversaries, who are as much concerned to defend it as your self.
But, blessed be God, who has extorted so much Truth from such as detained it
in Unrighteousness, and, I hope, will rescue the rest, and detect the Fallacies
wherewith the common Adversary had disguised it, and deceived so many poor
Mortals of these and other Nations.

Two things are objected to you; the Oath of Supremacy, and the Deprivation of
the Bishops, by the same Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. c. 1. As to the Oath, you
labor hard to make that tolerable by Exposition, which you think intolerable
in the Expression, and employ no less than 20. pages on that Service: But when
all is done, there is no more expressly excepted out of the meaning of the Oath
by the Queen's Injunction or Admonition, than Power of Ministry of Divine
Service in the Church, which, being maliciously collected from it by some, was
the only Occasion of the Admonition; but was never practiced by her Father, or
Brother. But all manner of Jurisdiction, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, is
retained by Stat. 1 Eliz. c. 1. contained in the Oath, and all Authority
challenged and used by them, declared by Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 1. to be intended in
it, and is sufficiently expressed by the Words, Rule over all manner of
Persons, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, in the Admonition it self; and
besides all, is continued in Practice all along, as may be observed in diverse
instances besides those mentioned by you, as the This alone spoils the
Exposition, and the first of them granted immediately after the Injunctions
disproves it. v. Burnet, p. 387, 397, 400. and Record. 7 p. 350.
High Commissions, Commissions of Delegates, Calling of Synods, Authorizing
Canons, Ordering and Authorizing Public Prayers, Elections of Bishops: And
what are The first Act, to try their Disposition, an Act of Sacrilege. v.
Burnet, p. 382.
First Fruits and Tenths, but Solemnities of Recognition of Ecclesiastical
Supremacy? And when I see such Facts, what do all your Words signify? I
confess I have been deceived my self by that Injunction; which might have been
well enough till the next Parliament; but if what you conceive had been well
intended, Why was not the Form of the Oath ordered accordingly in all this
time; but so great a part of the Nation must swear one thing in Words, and be
authorized to think and intend another like their Grandfather Cranmer's
swearing to the Pope, and solemnly protesting he intended no such matter. No
wonder if after such Precedents the whole Nation be so involved in Perjury, as
there is reason to believe it is.

But our principal Business is, the two Lay-Deprivations, either both valid, or
neither valid: but if either alone be invalid, it must certainly be the first:
for they were both by Act of Parliament; but to the first, diverse of the
Bishops V. Burnet, p. 385, 386. The Bishops made Speeches against it in the
House.
actually opposing, and none consenting; so that that was a mere Lay Act: but
to the latter, diverse consenting and voting for it, and none, for ought I know,
actually opposing: so that that was not a mere Lay-Act, but a mixed Act, and as
much Ecclesiastical as some so reputed among the Ancient Christians, and diverse
anciently of this Nation. But my Business here is not to enforce your
Adversaries Argument, but a Reply to your Reasons for the Validity of that
Deprivation, which, if invalid, makes the Original of your Succession invalid
and schismatical.

And first you say, the Royal Commissions taken out by Bishop Bonner, and as
many as followed his Example, etc. will afford a sufficient Reason for the
Lay-Deprivation of those Bishops. Certainly an unhappy beginning with so gross
an act of Disingenuity, as needlessly shall I say, or maliciously, or
falaciously; but however to charge that upon Bonner for setting the Example,
which you know is by an Author you commend, and in the very page you cite
disproved, and charged upon Cranmer with good proof, whose Project it is most
Nay, most certainly, as both Form and Time clearly evince. Bonner was not so
much as Bishop when Cranmer and others took their Commissions.
likely it was. Nor more lucky is your first Reason. For those Commissions were
out of doors in Queen Mary's days: There were none who held by Commission then,
but all were in upon the old and proper Title: Nor was any one outed upon any
such pretense in Queen Elizabeth's time: So that this is a mere shift to help a
lame Cause, a mere Color, that has nothing in it. And you needed not have
insisted on it, or indeed mentioned it for no better Service to your Cause: but
since you have, it will be but just to show you the Consequence of those
Commissions, to invalidate all your Pretensions. Cranmer, you know, took a
Commission in October. 1535. Barlow was made Bishop of St. Asaph, Feb. 1535. and
Commissions being then brought in, no doubt but he And his Consecration has
been much questioned.
took one too, and he was the first promoted by Patent from Ed. 6. and Story
and Intruded into the place of Vesey frighted out. v. Harmar, p. 100, 129.
Coverdale also held by Patent from Ed. 6. These also were ordained by Cranmer,
and you know they could receive no more from him, than what he did intend
actually to give, ( c. 22. Of Schism,. 6.) and by his Commission could give.
Nor could they give more to Mat. Parker than they had received. So that all
depends upon Cranmer's presumable Intention, which is sufficiently manifest, by
his Principles, and Commission, to have been only an Authority derived from the
King and dependent upon him. His Acceptance of a Commission was an implicit
Renunciation of his former Authority, and whether not a great Sin, and
displeasing to our Lord, I leave others to judge. But their Original Authority
was by Commission, and what more was done was then looked upon but as a
Formality. It is apparent enough by the Act, 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. that no Bishops of
his time could be made or promoted but by Patent; and there were no less than
Seven of them at a dash deprived upon that account in the beginning of Queen
Mary's Reign, whatever is pretended of special favor to the Protestant
Bishops, which could be no more than to hold quam diu, instead of durante been
placito. But none held by Commission in Q. Mary's time, after she had repealed
the Acts of her Father and Brother, and restored all again to the old Posture.
And this, I hope, is a sufficient Reply to your first Reason, and something
more for you to consider.

Your next Reason is such another, that those Bishops were then notoriously of
another Communion different from the Protestants: But, 1. there were then no
Protestant Bishops in being; but those now mentioned, such as they were, and of
them one had resigned, and the other two were actually deprived, and justly
according to your former Reason. And, 2. there could therefore then be no
Communion of Protestants, but Schismatical. The Bishops then in Possession were
all complete Bishops without all question, and their Possession good and lawful
also beyond all question: Their Deprivation was by mere incompetent In both
Execution and Constitution without Spiritual Sentence.
Lay-Authority, and for an unjust and wicked Cause in them who deprived them,
but a just and glorious Cause in them who suffered, for their refusal of an Nor
of Fidelity to the Prince, but of Unfaithfulness to the Church.
Oath, which you your self cannot think tolerable in the plain sense of the
words, or without such Exposition, as with all your Skill and Pains you cannot
so prove as to satisfy a conscientious, intelligent Person, who well considers
it. And for this Cause, and by such Authority, were all the Bishops of England
and Wales, except one despicable Temporizer, besides Deans, Prebends, and other
of the Clergy, etc. deprived, and others put in their Places, by no commendable
or justifiable Election, or other Consecration than as aforesaid, and so
questionable, and questioned at that time, that 7 or 8 years after, by reason
of diverse Questions then grown upon the Making and Consecrating Archbishops
and Bishops, it was thought convenient to make a new Act to justify and
ratify the same. 8 Eiz. c. 1.
So that here was not only Schism, but It may well be questioned, whether the
Dissenters Ordinations be not as good as yours.
Ordination invalid in it self besides, in this Case. And was this such a
different Communion, as might make the Judgment of a Synod needless, and
justify the Lay-Authority in driving away (as you call it) Catholic Bishops
and Clergy? What Communion of Schismatics has ever appeared since the
Apostles more gross and notorious than this? What Persecutions of Arians, or
Donatists, or what you will, but may be thus defended, excused, and justified,
as well as this?

In what I have already said is the Sum of the Cause, and the Principles and
Grounds of all the rest that is to be said; and therefore, as I think it
needless to proceed farther in my Reply to a Man of Learning and Parts, who by
what is already said may perceive what is farther to be said; so I am willing
to spare my Pains, not only for my own sake, but for yours: for I am sorry that
you, who have deserved so well in the former Cause, should be so unhappily
engaged in this, and expose your self in Defense of what may afford matter for
Exercise of Wit and Skill, like Carneades disputing against Justice, but
nothing for Demonstration of more commendable Qualities, unless you will
generously give up the Defense, and ingenuously declare the Truth. And, in good
earnest, if you will believe me to be so much your Friend, as really I am, I
can give you no better Advice for the Recovery of your Credit and just Esteem
among Men, and for Expiation of that unhappy Fault before God, than to do so,
and save me the Labor of any farther Reply, by doing it your self, which, it is
like, will then be more accurately performed, than possibly I should have done
it. For so that Truth be promoted, I care not by what hand it be: And for that
purpose I shall here leave it to you: But if you dislike the Motion, and desire
my farther Pains, I shall be ready to serve you in it as well as I can.

Your Faithful Friend, and Humble Servant.


