PROPOSALS For the Carrying on an Actual Survey of All the Counties in the
Kingdom of ENGLAND and Principallity of WALES, in Order to the Completing a
New Book in Large Folio, to be Entitled Atlas Anglicanus.
By John Seller Hydrographer to the KING's Most Excellent Majesty, John Oliver
and Richard Palmer.
WHEREAS our former PROPOSALS has been gratefully Accepted by several of the
Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom: And we having consulted all Mapps already
Extant, and finding so great a Deficiency therein, we thereupon thought our
selves obliged to undertake this Great and Elaborate Work of an Actual Survey;
wherein shall be truly laid down the Situation of all the Cities, Market
Towns, Parish Churches, Villages, and the Residencies of all the Nobility and
Gentry, with particular Distinctions, and other Places of Note; with all the
Principal Roads, truly Delineated therein: Wherein you may find the Latitude of
any Town or Place in any of the said Mapps. And also an Exact Rule is given for
the ready finding out any place at the first fixing your Eye upon the said
Mapps, and the Distances of one Place from another, without the trouble of
Measuring.

To the Mapp of each County shall be annexed a Description of the Air, Soil,
Commodities, and Manufactures thereof; with other useful Remarques.

The whole shall be printed with a fair Character on Royal Paper: For the
better performing the same, we will improve our utmost Care and Diligence, that
nothing may be omitted in so Noble a Design; for the rendering the said Mapps
more complete and perfect; and not only larger, but much more Ornamental, and
far more useful than any hitherto published.

We do proceed herein with all convenient speed, hoping to have the whole
completed by Michaelmass Term 1681, if not before.

This being so Public and Laborious an Undertaking (and was never yet
effectually performed) by any; and in regard it requires so great an Expense in
the Surveying, Engraving, and Printing thereof, we therefore, for the more
Expeditious Carrying it on, do make these following PROPOSALS:
1. Those that will be pleased to subscribe and pay unto any of the aforesaid
Undertakers, or their Assigns, the Sum of Fifty Shillings; Twenty whereof to be
paid at the time of Subscription; for which shall be given a Receipt under the
Hand and Seal of any of the said Undertakers; Thirty Shillings more to be paid
at the Delivery of the said Book in Quires, when completed. 2. Any Gentlemen
that are desirous to have a nearer Relation to the said Work, paying the
Charges thereof, may have their Coat of Arms curiously Engraven, as Benefactors
to the same. 3. Such Persons of Honor and Quality, as shall be pleased to
grace this Worthy Design with a more nearer Relation, may have the Mapp of any
County they desire, dedicated to them: for which some convenient Encouragement
is expected. 4. Those that will be more Curious in their Books, may have them
printed on Imperial Paper, with the Mapps and Coats of Arms Illustrated in
their proper Colors; for which Fifty Shillings more is to be paid at the
Delivery of the said Book. 5. Whosoever shall procure Subscriptions for Twelve
of the said Books (upon the performance thereof) shall have One of the said
Books presented them gratis.


For the satisfaction of all Gentlemen that are Encouragers of this Design,
none of the said Books shall be sold to any Person whatsoever, except to the
Subscribers, under Three Pounds ten Shillings a piece; neither shall any Book
be delivered to any Person before the Subscribers have theirs.

And for the better satisfaction to all Gentlemen of the Reality of this
Design, there is to be seen at the House of John Seller at the Hermitage in
Wapping, and John Oliver at the Eagle and Child on Ludgate Hill; the Successive
Progress of the Survey of each County, with a Specimen of our Work, being Mapps
of one or more Counties; which is to be a Model to the rest: And all to be
performed in the same Manner and Exactness.

FOR the Advancement of the Work abovementioned, I will take and receive of
John Seller, John Oliver, and Richard Palmer, or any of their Assigns, (...) of
the said Books, and pay the Money expressed, according to the (...) Proposal.


