A Testimony concerning the Life and Death of William Sixmith, being sent with
the following Matter to London, in order to be made Public.
William Gibson;
MY very dear and well-beloved Friend, the dear Salutation of my Life salutes
thee in the most pure and dearest Love, with which at this present my Heart is
filled; and the Remembrance of thee in the Immortal Life, in and through which
I have often been refreshed by thee, and at this time have sweet Unity with
thee; and my very Soul is affected with thee in that spiritual Relation, in
which I am persuaded, that neither Heights nor Depths, Principalities nor
Powers, things present nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from
that Love of God in Christ Jesus.

And so, having a Sense upon my Spirit at this time, how the Lord God has made
thee an Instrument in his Hand by his Mighty Power, for the turning many from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, amongst whom my Son
William Sixmith was one, who was touched and made sensible of the Lord's
heavenly and blessed Power, which in thy Ministry did reach unto him, and it
was effectual, as thou may understand by these his Writings, which I have
sent to thee for to peruse; we found them scattered amongst several other
Papers in his Trunk several We^ks after his Death, and had I seen any
convenient Oppertunity, would have sent them to thee long since; for through
thy Ministry was a Door of Hope opened in him, and the Love of God was shed
abread in his Heart, in which he desired the Prosperity and Welfare of all
People; and being I find freedom in my Spirit, shall a little acquaint thee how
it was with him before this powerful and heavenly Visitation. From his
Childhood he was inclined to that which was good, and never that I know of did
he seek to cover any thing that he did amiss, by any excuse, but would readily
confess the Truth, though against himself; And I can truly say, I never knew
him tell a Lie, either directly or indirectly to the day of his Death, neither
was he given unto those Youthful Vanities that most young People are Naturally
inclined unto; and though at this time the Lords secret Arm of Power did
preserve him out of many Temptations, yet still the Vail was over his
understanding, and he was very ignorant of Gods Heavenly Power that converts
the Soul, until by the Testimony of the Spirit of Truth through thee he was
awakened, which gave such a certain sound, that it did penetrate his very
Heart, and his Soul was affected with the Virtue of Gods Heavenly Power which
did out ^^ke a Rasor, and thy Words were to the Seed that was raised as sweet
as the Honeycomb; and although his love was very dear unto all the Household of
Faith, yet did his love more abound and flow forth unto thee, then to many
others: And in the time of his Sickness thou wast often in his remembrance; and
the Night before he departed this Life he was refresht in the remembrance of
thee and spoke of thee, and of thy being with him, which in a Spiritual ense
might be; the Apostle says, (Col. 2.5.) For though I be absent in the Flesh,
yet am I with you in the Sp^^^* ^^j^ying and beholding your Order, and the
stedfastness of ^our Faith in Christ.

In the beginning of his sickness he did most cheerfully and willingly resign
up himself both Soul, Body and Spirit into the Hands of the Lord God, and would
not have any thing to do with any Physician, nor any Physic at all, but only a
little Water for his Mouth and Throat, which were very Sore, which did him
good; he sometimes saying, that He was satisfied with the Lords love, and that
he knew his Redeemer lived, which was able to restore him to his Health, if he
pleased, and if not, he was contented. And in the time of his weakness we did
perceive that the Spirit of Supplication was in his Heart, and often was his
Mouth filled with the living Praises of the God of Heaven, whom his Soul loved;
and he was very patient and quiet all the time of his Sickness, not in the
least showing any discontent, but most-what of a very cheerful Countenance, and
his Words were even as in the Time of his Health, till such time as great
Weakness came upon him, and the Pangs of Death seized on him. And a little
before he departed, I being in another Room, he desired I might be called, and
when I came unto him, he set his Eyes upon me, and with a very Innocent Look
gave me his Right Hand, and desired I would not be Troubled, with other words
which I did not understand, he speaking so weakly, the Pangs of Death being
upon him; and in a short time after he laid down his Head in Peace, upon the
Twenty Fourth Day of the Seventh-Moneth, 1677. He was Twenty One Years and
about Seven Months Old.

And in the time of his Health he was a Pattern of Piety and a good Example to
my Family, and to those that were inwardly acquainted with him he was lowly;
for indeed the Truth was precious to him, and the Company of those that truly
feared God was his Delight; for his Heart was affected with them; and indeed
many such did truly love him. And I know it was a Trouble to him if at any time
Business should so fall out to hinder him from any Meeting, where friends came
together to Worship God in the Spirit and in (...) Truth; for I know, it was
his very Heart's Delight to be in such M^^^ings; and I have good cause to
believe, that he never thought the Time either Long or Tedious that he was in
such Exercise. And I do certainly know, that nothing did bring so much Grief
and Trouble upon his Spirit, as those that did make a Profession of the Truth,
and yet walked Disorderly; and some such he did often Reprove very sharply, some
by Word of Mouth, and others by Letter, which few knew of but those it did
concern: for indeed he was a very lowly and meek-spirited Young Man, and very
Dutiful to his Parents, and would not neglect any Opportunity wherein he might
be serviceable to the Truth, and a very Tender and Affectionate Carriage to his
Brother and Sisters, and his Eye was continually over them for Good, and his
Counsel and Advice to them at all times was, to stir them up to Live in the
Fear of God. And the last Paper that he writ upon the Truth's Account, was to
John Dunbabin of Sauky, who had lent him a Book that John Cheney had written
against the Truth, so when he had read the Book, he did return the Book back
again to John Dunbabin, with the Letter, which I have also sent thee, which
thou may read over at thy leisure, and conclude with the Remembrance of my
dearest Love, which is in Deed and in Truth to thee, thy Wife and Children, and
to all that love the Truth, and walk in it,

Bruen Sixmith.
Warington, the 20th of the 1st Month, 1678.
On Man.
HOW weak and poor a thing is feeble Man!
How Nothing is he in the best he can!
How hard a Matter its for him to find
A truly solid and a serious Mind!
To feel it centred down in the true Rest,
Where nothing in the same can him Molest:
To feel it fixed and knit so close to Him,
That neven can be Overcome by Sin:
Where the Enemy no Entrance can Find,
O! there it is that I would have my Mind,
To feel it always on a daily Watch,
Where then the Enemy can make no Breach.
This is a blessed State; thrice happy They,
That have attained unto this Blessed Day.
William Sixmith.

On these Times.
O Most unhappy Time that we live In!
Not only living but pleading for Sin
For term of Life; saying, That none is Free
On this side the Grave, nor never like to Be:
Setting so much their Minds on Fading Things,
And Earthly Toys and Vanities, which Brings
Them into such a very Careless State,
They seek to purchase them at any Rate:
Their Precious Time they lose, a Thing most Sad,
And to their own Destruction they are Led;
Satan Blindsolding them, they cannot See
The Snare that is said; O most gross Vanity!
To see that almost all men should be Guiided
By the subtle Serpent, and yet be Derided
And laughed at (as it were) when they are Brought
Into his Snare, and they be surely Caught.
Ah! when the Blessed Spirit does cease Striving,
There is no Hope at the Heavenly Rest Arriving:
For there is a Time when the Spirit strives with Men;
Oh! happy will they be that answer Then
To all that it requires. forth with Obeying,
And not consult with Flesh and Blood in Saying,
O Lord, what thou commandst I cannot Do;
The Thing is hard to Reap, and not to Sow.
Oh, foolish Man! who do at randum Talk,
Charging him falsely; for thou do not Walk
According to thy Knowledge, but do Run
In thy own Way, and wilt not hear his Son,
Which does in secret Check, Reprove, Chastize,
And sweeps away the Refuge of all Lies:
For he not only shows thee what is Good,
But cl nses thee from Evil with his Blood.
O Man! consider then what thou art Doing;
Consider with thy self where thou art Going:
For as in this vain World thou now do Live,
Thou in the World to come Account must Give,
Of Actions that are done in the Body Here,
As they be Good or Bad they must Appear;
According unto them thou doom must Have,
Repent therefore before thou go to the Grave;
For as the Tree does fall, so it does Lie:
Examine well thy self therefore and Try
How it does stand betwixt thee and thy God,
And dread his Name, lest that thou feel his Rod
Here on the Earth, and in the other World,
Into Everlasting Burnings thou be Hurled;
Whenas thou have received that Sentence Past.
Of Go thou Cursed, into Hell thou must;
Where there is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth,
And out of it to thee there is no Relief:
But if that thou do walk as thee Becomes,
Thou shall be numbered amongst the Sons
Of great Jehovah when that thou do Dye,
And things that are Celestial shall Enjoy,
And sit in Heavenly Places, where there Rings
Sweet Halelujah's to the King of Kings.
W. S.
October. 16. 1674.
HOW difficult a Task it is to Find
A solid, serious and a stayed Mind!
The Enemy of Man does go About
With such cunning Device to draw it Out;
Either presenting Objects to the Eye,
And by the same seeks for to Destroy
Their very Life, so causing it to Run
So far therein that they are quite Undone:
Or else in drawing them into the Earth,
Persuading them unto a little Mirth,
Saying, They ought not always be so Sad;
For it does stupifie, and makes Mad.
O! these and such like Snares the Devil Lays,
Whereby the Panting Soul he often Betrays.
W. S.

WHO shall they call on to assist their Quill?
One of the Muses? No, let them be still
And meditate, that do desire to Sing
Praises and Halelujahs to their King,
The Righteous King, Redeemer and Creator,
The only God, the Lord, and blessed Maker.
But as they contemplate, methinks they Hear
Something in secret that says, Lend an Ear
To me, and hear the words that I do Say,
And that which I command, do thou Obey.
And except they attend unto this Word,
There Is none can sing true Praises to the Lord:
Its those that are redeemed by Sion's King;
They, they alone can living Praises Sing:
Those that in his Cause would their Life lay Down,
And seek his Glory, and not seek their Own:
Those that are taught and guided by his Spirit,
Its those can sing, Its those that do Inherit
A glorious Crown; to those he does Perform
His blessed Promises: Its those Adorn
The Gospel of the Lord; and it is Those
That fight God's Battles with them that Oppose:
Those give unto the Hungry Meat,
Of that which God gave them to Eat;
Spiritual Bread to feed the inward Man,
To nourish in there is nothing else that Can.
So the Wicked cannot sing, no let them Mourn,
And weep and wail; let them themselves Adorn
With Sackcloth and with Ashes; let them ly
Grovelling on the Earth, and know the Misery
That does attend on all in that Estate;
Let them not sleep nor slumber; let them Wait
To know a true Repentance in them Wrought,
And know that of themselves they can do naught.
And when they are Sensible of their Condition,
And on their Hearts there comes a true Contrition,
With Sighs and Groans unto the Lord, That He
Would ease them out of their Calamity:
O! then the Lord in his great Mercy Pleases
To show them Comfort, and their Minds he Eases,
In giving them the Knowledge of his Son,
Or else their Sin-sick Souls had been Undon;
Showing its he alone that works Within,
And no one else there is can cleanse from Sin:
And though that it seem little, give an Ean
To it, and it will show what is sin most Clear:
It will not only show thee what is Evil,
But as kept to may overcome the Devil.
Its they who keep to it that truly Sings
Everlasting Praises to the King of Kings.
W. S.

Opinions.
O How is Man degenerated Now!
Not only lost the Power, but Form Too,
In which the primitive Fathers were Found;
The Words of whom they call their Rule and Ground
On which they build, yet they do walk contrary,
And all their Structures much from theirs do Vary.
There Is some make Christ the Chief and Corner Stone,
And preach, None knows the Father but the Son,
And he to whom the Son does him Reveal;
What Knowledge else they have does naught Avail:
So they instruct all men to come to Him,
Who purifies and purges every Sin.
But others teach, that Revelation's Ceast,
Which does conclude, that Knowing God's Decreast;
And call the Scriptures Rule of saving Grace,
Whilst they in Wickedness to men preach Peace:
When Scripture (without Spirit) a dead Letter,
Without the same it makes no man Better:
The Letter kills, the Spirit gives Life;
This as come to redeemeth out of Strise:
This is the Supreme Rule, who walk Hereby,
Men's Meanings of the Scriptures they can Try:
For none the things of God do truly Know,
Put as his Spirit does reveal and Show.
Some would God's Love unto a few Confine,
And Reprobate the rest, and so in Fine
Quite pass them by in that most sad Condition,
Where no Recovery is, to wit, Perdition;
Soothing the other in that Confidence,
They never shall fall from Grace: O vain Pretense!
Saying, Whom God once loves, he loves Forever,
Although they sin, yet he for sakes them Never:
When God of one Blood has made all Mankind,
And he so loved the World, that he Resigned
His Son to reconcile them all. if They
Truly believe in him who is the Way.
For Christ has tasted Death for every Man.
For he through Death destroyed Death's Power for Man.
The Wicked's Death the Lord does not Desire,
But that he turn from Sin he does Require.
He that commits sin does fall from Grace;
And in committing it he breaks his Peace:
Grace joins not with him in his sinful Deed;
Grace does reprove him if he will take Heed:
Grace takes no part with Man when he does Sin;
Man disobeys it when he falls Therein:
When Man acts that which does polute the Mind,
He over-runs Grace, and leaves Grace Behind:
This is the Word behind that shows the Way,
That calls, Walk here whenas men go Astray.
Grace truly leads, its Grace that should Conduct;
This is man's Guide, and this would man Instruct:
If man Resist not and gain say the Same,
In perfect Holiness 'twould man Retain:
For as 'twas said, My Grace sufficient is,
They that obey it cannot walk amiss.
W. S.
1674.
REmember thy Creator in thy Youth,
And let thy Mind be still inclined to Truth;
Which when thou findst, be sure thou it Obey,
And 'twill conduct and guide thee in the Way:
That will thee lead unto Eternal Life,
And bring thee out of Enmity and Strife:
It Is as a Light shining in a dark place,
Until the Day dawn and Daylight Increase.
This is the chief Pearl, therefore do it Prize;
Do not this Burden, but let it Arise:
For all that is contrary Truth alone must Judge,
Which will not suffer sin in thee to Lodge:
For this will separate all Good from Evil,
And also quench the Arrows of the Devil:
When thou in Trouble art, then hither Fly,
And thou will find it a chief Remedy.
Let not time slip, but see that thou Obey
Its Counsel always, whilst thou have a Day.
Keep the Watch.
A Watchful State is the most blessed State,
To wait on him that did all Men Create;
To feel feel him working in the inward Part,
Searching and trying all things in the Heart;
Binding the Strong Man that the House did Keep,
Spoiling his Goods, casting him out, to Sweep
Each Corner, and to make the whole Heart Clean,
That none of his old Dregs therein Remain:
And then when it is purged and cleans'd from Sin;
O! then its his good will to dwell Therein:
That he may lead and guide the Soul Aright;
And then to walk therein he takes Delight.
So that, I say, it is a blessed State
To wait on him that did their Souls Create;
To feel him working in his mighty Power,
Resisting Satan in the tempting Hour.
For all that wait on him, feel his Protection,
And in the stilness feel him give Direction:
Reproving and Chastizing all that is naught,
Not in Deeds only, but in Words and Thought.
And such are those he seeks to worship Him,
That do not yield to any thing that is Sin:
But when the Tempter comes them for to Try,
Unto the blessed Spirit still they Fly:
For he is a Tower, a Shield, a Fence to Those
That wait still in his Spirit, to Oppose
The Eneny, which as a Roa^^^g Lion,
Would those devour that tra^^^^ toward Sion.
So if the Watch be kept, they cannot Stray,
Nor to the Tempter will they be a Prey!
But if the Watch be down, Temptations Com,
And by the Tempter they are Overrun.
W. S.
3d Month, 1675.
To the Sinner.
REnew thy Grief, O man, renew thy Care;
Lift up thy Voice aloud, and do not spare
For to bewail thy precious time Misspent;
O! cry, and cease not; O Lament, Lament!
O! let the Echo of thy Voice Rebound,
And let the Nations with thy Mourning Sound:
For sad's thy state, and miserable Woe
Does thee attend, although thou do not Know
How suddenly it hastens on thy Head,
Thy Heart being har^ned and thy dull Mind fed,
With airy Vanities and lustful Pleasures;
Such fading F^ncies are thy only Treasures.
Therefore Repent, whilst thou have yet a Day;
For it is ready to be past Away.
W. S.

Contemplation.
O How delectable is Contemplation!
It far surpasses all vain Recreation:
Its more delightsome far than all vain Toys,
And far excels all base worldly Joys;
For here the Soul does true Contentment Find,
Here, here alone's true Solace to the Mind:
Although it feel the Judgment poured Down,
Yet in the same there is a sight of the Crown,
That those enjoy that persevere to the End;
They in the Judgment feel the Vail to Rend,
And the Understanding so to open Clear,
Where God's great Mysteries to them Appear:
For he does purify, and does make Clean
His Children dear, and in his Way does Train
Them, in that Path which pleasant is to Him,
Whose Bodies are his Temples, cleans'd from Sin.
Its those who by true Contemplation Find
Retiring in wardly a Stay to the Mind.
W. S.

SHall Life or Death, things present or to Come
Again entangle, again Overcome
Religious Persons, who are Sojourning
After Cannan's Land, and Traveling
Heaven-wards? Or shall any fading Joy
Grasp so the Mind as it should not Rely
And fixed be on Christ their Strength and Stay?
No, no; for he is the true and living Way.
Darkness and Death subdued are by Him;
Youth's here depending overcome their Sin.
Ever blessed are they who in Christ Abide,
They happy are, and rest Unterrify'd,
W. S.
1677.
Loss of Time.
What bitter Lamentation shall I Make!
Or what Bewailing Speeches shall I Take
Now to deplore my Time I have Misspent!
O Dear Heart! why? O! why was I Content
Thus, thus to let it slip and slide Away,
Not truly it regarding day by Day?
O! how am I ensnared in Vanity,
And plunged deep into Iniquity!
For want of keeping up a daily Watch,
The Enemy away my Mind does Snatch,
Hurrying it into Terrestrial Things,
Which Anguish, Sorrow, Grief and Trouble Brings:
But as the Watch is kept, O! I feel Power,
Which does preserve me in the Tempting Hour.
Great God of Heaven and Earth, keep thou my Watch,
And then no Hurt unto my Soul can Reach.
O! thou Preserver of a panting Soul,
To thee I cry, to thee I do Condole
My miserable state, to thee its Known;
None else can help but thee, but thee Alone:
Do thou administer what thou think Good,
Also do thou preserve me from the Flood
Of the Enemy, which he does often pour Forth
Against thy Seed, to destroy the true Birth.
O great Jehovah! do thou me Preserve
In Truth and Uprightness, that I may Serve
Thee in my Day; O! keep me fresh and Green,
And purge me thoroughly; let not Remain
That thing which does thine Holiness Offend:
O! I entreat thee (Lord) be pleased to Lend
An Ear unto my Cry, that so I May
Sing Halelujah to thee in my Day.
W. S.
The 5th of the 5th Month, 1675.
For the Letter-Learned.
IN building Babel their Confusion Came,
In which unto this day they still Remain:
They built it Outwardly in days by Past,
But Inwardly they build it now as Fast:
Their Outward Language then Confused Was;
Now Inwardly they suffer greater Loss.
A Wounded Conscience who can bear?
O Dear! how grievous is a wounded Mind!
How full of Woe! most miserable Kind
Of Torment! unexpressible Condition
Of Misery! Nothing but sad Contrition
Does them attend, and woeful Lamentation
Is present with them always in that Station:
Bitter bewailing Speeches do Attend
Their deepsetcht-Sighs and Groans, which they do Send
Forth from a troubled Breast, which does Rebound,
And sometimes echo with their mournful Sound.
Q. From whence proceeds this grievous Wound of Mind?
What Is the efficient Cause that has Inclined
The Heart to Sorrow and such sad Contrition,
And has involved it in this sad Condition,
That does attend it in this dismal Station,
Whereby its forced to take up Lamentation,
And be thus entertained in Misery,
With Sighs and Groans inflead of Melody?
A. Sin is the Radix from whence does Proceed
Such Grief of Mind; it is for want of Heed
And keeping up the Watch, it enters In;
Its this alone, its this defiles Within;
Its this corrupts, its this that is the Foe,
That causes Sorrow, and that brings Woe.
And this deplorable State being Known,
How can they choose but weep, and sigh, and Groan?
Since the Devices of the Enemy
Have overwhelmed poor Man in Misery.
OH! how is Man apostatized since First
The Lord created him! And how Accursed
Is Man become in disobeying Him,
Who did create him pure and without Sin!
For in his own Image he Man did Make,
And then to do him good Delight did Take:
Also in Paradise he did him Place,
And to him Wisdom daily did Increase:
But the subtle Serpent with his fair Pretense,
The Mind going out, on him got Influence;
Drawing it more out from the great Creator;
And with enticing words began to Flatter,
Under a color he should be more Wise
Than God had made him; even thus with Lies
He lost the Image of his Lord and Maker,
And of the Devil Likeness' came Partaker.
Meditation.
OH! What does all the World Avail,
Or all the Toys Therein?
Nothing at all; for they do Seal
And fould up man in Sin.
What Troubles do attend this Life,
What Grief, what Care, what Toils!
And little else there is but Strife
With them that in Earth Moils;
Their Minds and Thoughts being Employed
In such Terrestrial Things,
Which ought not so to be Enjoyed,
Being it Trouble Brings.
But he that would released Be
From this Sorrow and Pain,
Must know himself from Sin set Free,
And know it daily Slain:
But he that this does come to Know,
Must know it wrought Within:
For all that is good, from Christ does Flow;
None else can cleanse from Sin.
Besides, the Scripture does Record,
That he his Grace would Send;
And other Writings do Accord,
That he does put an End
To Sin, in all those that are Led
And guided by his Spirit;
They by his gracious Word are Fed,
So true Riches Inherit.
W. S.

MOst heavenly and thrice blessed happy State
Is that in which the Lord did Man Create;
Lovely it was, lovely it does Appear;
Longed for it is, Love shines in it so Clear;
Even the Lord's great Love flowed forth to Him
Continually, until the Man of Sin
Ensnared him with a Pretense, a Lie;
Night then came over, he to Truth did Dye.
Though God made man so Pure, so Chaste, so Clean,
In Sin he is plunged, he is defiled and Slain.
O that our God should still such Pity Take!
He yet loves Man, Man whom he did Create:
Nothing's too dear, he sent his only Son,
So to redeem lost Man, that was Undon.
O! blessed are they who in Christ Believe,
Not letting down their Watch, them he Relieves.
W. S.

An Epistle.
SISTER;
MY Love salutes thee in the precious Truth,
Desiring thou adorned may be in Youth
Therewith; for it is the best Ornament;
Perfumes by far have not so sweet a Scent;
Of which the Lord has given thee a Measure,
Which far transcendeth all Terrestrial Treasure:
To which sink down, for it is placed Within,
And never does consent to any Sin:
No Snare nor Trap the Enemy can Hide,
But thou wilt it see, whilst thou do here Abide.
Stand steadfast here, and let it be thy Station,
And in his Power thou wilt overcome Temptation.
With this let all thy Actions seasoned Be;
For in the same there is true Felicity.
And above all things see thou keep thy Watch,
That so the Enemy may make no Breach:
But if the Watch be down, thou art Overcome
By all Temptations, and have lost the Sum
And Substance of all Good; therefore take Heed
And wait therein, if that thou would be Freed
From the Entanglements of the Enemy;
For truly else he may thee much Annoy.
So at this time I do bid thee Farewell,
Desiring that we both in Truth may Dwell.
W. S.

Another Epistle.
SISTER;
ALthough that we so far assunder Are,
Yet of my Love thou truly have a Share:
For it is my Desire thou may Enjoy
Both inward and outward Prosperity;
But of the two its better that thou Know,
Not outwardly but inwardly to Grow,
And feel a springing up to Life Eternal,
So will thy Mind be kept from things External:
To know which Growth thou must inward Retire
To that which checks thee when thou do Aspire:
O! there know thou a Center and a Stay;
For truly its the New and Living Way,
In which the Just Man walks; O there Abide,
To feel it separate, and to Divide
All Good from Bad; for it does Purify
And purge the Heart from all Iniquity:
Its this alone that makes the Heart Clean,
Refining it from every Spot and Stain:
This therefore do thou follow and Obey;
For as kept to thou can not go Astray:
To which I thee commend, as to a Tower,
To fly unto in every Tempting Hour.
So I conclude, desiring that we Both
In it may lay up Treasure from the Moth:
William Sixmith.
1677.
NOthing more rare in this vain World I Find,
As for to know a solid serious M^nd:
Its difficult to keep it centered Down,
In that which does bring Honor and Renown:
To have it stayed and fi^t in the true Joy,
Its after this my panting Soul does Cry;
To have it gathered out of Earthly Things,
And have it placed in that where true Contentment Springs.
My Eye beholds the place where I would Be,
I would enjoy the same as well as See:
But I this Scripture do witness Fulfilling,
The Flesh is Weak, but ah! the Spirit's Willing;
Which makes me breath unto the Lord that I
May conquer that which does me so Annoy,
That I might with the Apostle Paul thus Say,
Not I that live, but Christ that lives in Me.
Here is the perfect holy Christian's State,
In which the Lord did Adam first Create:
For he created was to live to Him,
Not to the Flesh, but to live without Sin:
O! if that he had kept that holy Station,
In which the Lord placed him in the Creation,
He had partook of that great Mystery,
In which consists true Felicity.
W. S.

A Letter of William Sixmith to J. D.
John Dunbabin;
I Do acknowledge thy Kindness in lending me John Cheyney's Book; for when I
heard of it, I had a desire of reading it; but they were kept so close, that I
could not procure one of Ten Days after they came down; and when I got one it
was but for two or three Hours, and that on the Market day; but ^ now have
perused most of it, especially the Praemonition to the Reader, and the
Inspection, etc. as he calls them. It has been my Desire to try all things,
and hold fast that which is good: So the Truth in his Book I assent to; but by
his Writings I perceive a Spirit of Persecution to lodge in his Heart,
incensing the Civil Magistrate against us; Grudging our Prosperity, even
striving to Besmeer us, which manifests him to be no Minister of Christ;
neither ruled nor guided by his Spirit: and from an Envious, Lying Spirit do
his Works proceed; and he beholds us with an Evil, Prejudicial Eye, which
always looks asquint. As for his Praemonition, its stuffed with seven Notorious
Falsehoods, which he can never prove; more properly belonging to himself, than
to the Quakers, from which I believe he cannot easily clear himself: His other
Work being chiefly to speak Evil of the Light of Christ Jesus, even the
Illumination of God's holy Spirit, calling it Dagon, an Idol, a Blind and
Deceitful Guide; making it guilty of all sins, of Omission and Commission;
comparing it to a Drunken Coachman, saying, There is never a Soul in Hell, but
may blame the Light within; with a great deal more Wicked, Ungodly Speeches;
though in Contradiction of the same, he says, in his Book called, Two Sermons
of Hypocrisy, etc. page 233. where thou may read him praising the Light,
calling it, The Excellency of the Man; saying, The vilest man by reason of this
is of more price than all the World; which makes the Soul of man Superlatively
precious; by this it is capable to live Everlastingly in Heaven or in Hell: To
speak against this Light simply as such, is to speak against God, the Author of
it, and to undermine all Religion.

Now let any moderate Person seriously consider, whether he has not Indicted
himself, and is found guilty of Blasphemy (for Blasphemy signifies to Reproach,
Revile or speak Evil of) And is it not before apparent, that he has
Reproached, Reviled and spoken Evil of the Light; and so is condemned out of
his own Mouth to have spoken against God, the Author of it, and to undermine
all Religion?

In page 100. of the same Book, he gives a very large Testimony for us, saying,
There is that in your Bosoms, more than Ten Thousand Witnesses: Now by the
Mouth of two or three Witnesses every thing is confirmed; but this he
confesses more than Ten Thousand: Surely this then may be believed and
approved. In these same two pages before quoted, he has said that which
Overthrows all his Works: And in this page 100. bears a very large Testimony
to the Quakers Doctrine, which for bevity I transcribe not, but desire thee
seriously to peruse it.

In his Advice to the Quakers, page 218. he entreats them To be earnest in
Prayer, and not to tarry till the Spirit move to Prayer, but when we have time
and place convenient to provoke themselves to Prayer, etc. So he would have
them take his Advice, contrary to the Apostle's Exhortation, Praying always
with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Also, its
absolutely contrary to that positive Assertion of the holy Man in Romans 8.26. We
know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
Intercession for us.

So its not in him that wills, nor in him that runs; for the Lord hears his
own Spirit, and another Spirit he will not hear; Not that I thus write, that I
disown Prayer; for the Prayers of the Faithful avail much; and they know the
Lord preparing the Evening and Morning Sacrifice; and so in his own time offer
it up unto him, which he does hear and answer; and these Prayers are amongst us
both in public and in private, though he wickedly says contrary.

And though he insinuates in page 241. That this Light was never intended to be
sufficient of it self to Salvation; yet the Scripture says, that which was
given for a Light, was given for Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, Isa 49.6.
Mat. 13.47.

As for his asserting, The Light goes down with the Soul into Hell, and being
turned into a Self-tormenting Light; he can bring no Scripture to prove it; for
we read, that the Talent the sloathful Servant had given him, was commanded to
be taken from him before that dismal Sentence [Cast him into utter Darkness]
was pronounced against him, Mat. 25.8.

He owns this Light within should be man's Guide, and is charged to watch over
the Soul, but does not; see his Book, Skirmish, page 13, etc. Now where in
Scripture does any read that God gives any other Guide, any other Leader to
Mankind universally but Christ Jesus? Oh, that he would consider what he has
belched forth against the Son of God! For this I am certain of that the Quakers
preach no other Light then Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, John 8.1^. no
other Spirit then the Spirit of God, a Measure or Manifestation of which is
given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. no other Grace then that
which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1 and has appeared to all men, Tit. 2.11.
He has not brought one Scripture that will favor these gross ^ssertions of
his before cited; he thinks Mat. 6.22, 23. makes something to his purpose,
which I shall transcribe; The Light of the Body is the Eye; if therefore thy
Eye be single, thy whole Body shall be full of Light; but if thine Eye be Evil,
thy whole Body shall be full of Darkness: if therefore the Light that is in
thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? From this Scripture he cannot
make the Illumination of God's Spirit Darkness; for Christ here speaks of the
Single Eye and the Evil Eye: for as it is written in Eccless. 2.14. The Wise
Man's Eyes are in his Head, etc. but the Fool's are in the Ends of the Earth,
Prove. 17.24. There is a Single Eye, the Wise Man's Eye, which is in Christ, the
Head; and the Evil Eye, the Fool's Eye, which is Darkness, and is in the Ends
of the Earth: So there is a Distinction to be made betwixt the Eye, and that
which opens or illuminates the Eye, which is the Spirit of God; and that which
darkens and blinds the Eye, which is the Spirit of this World. But J* C. is in
Confusion and call Evil Good, and Good Evil; Light Darkness, and Darkness,
Light; and plainly appears to be one of Babel's Builders, who know: not
Scripture-Expressions, or else quarrels with them because the Quakers use them;
witness his Cavil at the word [Measure] saying, God cannot be cut into
Measures, Shreds or Pieces; when its a word the Apostle Paul much uses, look
Ephesians. 4.7, 13. But unto us is given Grace according to the Measure of the Gif^
of Christ. Till we all come in the Vn^ty of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the
Fullness of Christ. Also John the Baptist speaking of Christ, says, God gives
not the Spirit by Measure unto him, John 3.3^. plainly implying, that to others
be gives his Spirit by Measure, 2 Cor. 10.13, 14, 15. Ephesians. 4.16. And J. C.
must either confess, that he has not the Spirit of God, or that he has it by
Measure, or else in Fullness, which we read of none but Christ that had; which
if he affirm, he makes himself equal with Christ: if he has not the Spirit, he
is none of his: if ^e owns it by Measure, ^e owns the Quakers Doctrine: So
under some of these censures he must needs fall; Read Romans 13.3. with the other
Scriptures, which I forbear writing at large.

J. C. i^to be pitied, if what he has written be through ignorance and blind
zeal, and I wish that he has not gone contrary to Knowledge, and that the Lord
may open his Understanding, and of all that are simply led astray by him; for
it is my Belief, that what he has written against the Light will be more heavy
than a Millstone in the Day the Lord calls him to an Account: O! that he could
Repent and consider: For its the Life of God, which is the Light of men, which
shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not, John 1.4, 5.

This is the Stone which J. C. rejects, which is become the Head of our Corner:
This is the Stone of Stumbling, and Rock of Offense to J. C. which is become to
us Elect and Precious, and the very Rock of Salvation. Is he not in the Saints
the Hope of Glory, a Comforter, a Savior? And in the Wicked a Judge, a
Condemner? I cannot but Admire that he should withstand such Sound Doctrine,
which the holy Scriptures do so fully declare.

But no We^pon that is formed can prosper against them that have on the Armor
of Light.

William Sixmith.
Warrington, the 23d of the 1st Month, 1677.
THE END.
Swarthmore Hall FRIENDS HISTORICAL LIBRARY and SWARTHMORE COLLEGE PENNSYLVANIA
bookplate of Swarthmore College Library


