A DESCRIPTION OF THE NATURAL CONDITION OF Being in the flesh. A SERMON
Preached by NICHOLAS SMYTH Mr of Arts and Preacher of Gods Word. And published
at the request of some private friends for the public good.

Prove. 23. ver. 23. Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, instruction,
and understanding.

Job 19. ver. 28. But ye should say; why persecute we him, seeing the root of
the matter is found in him?

Printed by J. Owsley, for Rich. Knowls, 1657.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, it is well known unto the world, that the Church of Rome
has a long time arrogated to her self to be the outward visible Church, out of
which there is no salvation: and has excluded all others which will not hold
of her, and acknowledge her to be the mother Church, from all hopes of heaven
and happiness. And diverse moderate and temperate Christians of all Churches,
yiedling a possibility of salvation to many ignorant seduced Christians, who
live in that Church, or hold of her: and not being willing to usurp upon Gods
prerogative to judge either the Church in general to be no Church, or any
particular members of the same to be no Christians: they make use of their
adversaries charity, and by the glorious name of the Church out of which there
is no salvation (which they restrain only to themselves) deceive multitudes.
We have a long time expected a blessed reformation, and have with sighs, and
prayers and tears desired of God that a general assembly of Divines might be
called, wherein the errors of the Church of Rome, and more particularly this
dangerous and pernicious error of theirs in casting all out of the Church
which will not comply with them in their errors and gross absurdities, might
have been condemned. But instead thereof there are risen up in this land diverse
Sectaries who appropriate salvation to themselves and their own companies, and
exclude all others from the Kingdom of heaven. I shall name none of them, but
leave them to the judgment of God and the verdict of their own consciences.
But diverse Sectaries there be who make the world believe that they are the
Elect of God: or the companies wherein the Elect lie hid. And our charity being
the like to them that it is to the Church of Rome: we conceiving that there are
among them some ignorantly seduced Christians, who are the true Elect of God:
and not daring to usurp upon Gods prerogative to judge any of them. They make
advantage of our charity, and make the world believe that there can be no
safety for any that look for salvation, but by flying to them and their
companies. So that by this means the Church of God is miserably distracted,
there scarce seems to be any face of a Church. So that Mr. Pl^dell in a
speech in Parliament, made Feb. the 8. 1641.
as a worthy member of the honorable Assembly of Parliament, (of the great
Parliament, at its first sitting) did fear it would come to pass, we see it is
come to pass. We have rather changed our Pilot then our condition, and (if we
be come out of Rome) have only shifted places to find our ruin. But yet we
hope that God will in due time deliver us from all those men, and companies of
men that disturb the quiet and peace of the Church and Commonwealth: Though our
charity be never so great toward them, and we will not judge them: yet if they
be guilty they cannot escape the judgment of God, nor the verdict of their own
consciences. I have here in a plain Sermon described the natural condition of
being in in the flesh, so that all that read the Sermon, if they be not
willingly ignorant or wilfully sinful, may know whether they themselves be in
Christ or whether they be in the flesh: and I am persuaded that all that read
this Sermon, if they be truly regenerate, spiritual not carnal, they will
abstain from all rash censuring of the present condition, and from all
uncharitable and unchristian judging of the future and the final condition of
their brethren. It is my request to thee Christian Reader, that thou would
not be carried away with the sway of the times, rashly to censure or
uncharitably to judge others, but that thou would in all humility of heart
judge thy self: and if in this Sermon thou find any new lights, yet if they
be true lights, acknowledge (as the author does) that they come from above,
from the Father of lights, who is pleased in dark times by the light of his
word, and by the light of his holy spirit to inlighten his Church, Read then
the Sermon without prejudice: and if thou reapest any benefit by it, give God
the praise, and pray for the increase of knowledge and grace in him, who is and
will remain,

Thine in the work of Grace NICHOLAS SMYTH.

A DESCRIPTION of the NATURAL CONDITION OF Being in the Fesh.
Romans 8. ver. 8. So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
THat hereditary stain and original corruption which we all drew from the loins
of our first parents, (Christian and beloved brethren) it sticks fast and
close unto us: and so long as we carry about us this body of clay, this burden
of flesh, we can never be perfectly rid of it. And the weight and burden of sin
does so press and weigh down a true Christian, that it causes him to cry out
almost dispairingly with the Apostle S. Paul, O miserable man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of sin? But as we say in Philosophy, elementa
in suo loco neque gravant neque levant, the elements in their proper place they
are neither light nor heavy. So is it with sins, when they are in their proper
place, the hearts of wicked men, they weigh nothing there: and whether they be
light sins or heavy, they are insensible of the burden of them: and if
hypocrites complain of sin in others, and true Christians of sin in themselves,
they that are fleshly minded mere natural men, as they know not what sin is, so
they feel not the burden of it. And if they be not over curious to see sin in
others, they are not over careful to see or amend it in themselves: and
therefore they think themselves of all others in a happy condition, who neither
trouble them selves with others sins, nor yet with their own. Whereas in truth
there is no peace promised but to the troubled conscience, no quiet nor rest
but to the burdened soul: those that are weary and heavy laden with the burden
of their sins. While therefore these men are pleasing themselves with this vain
fantasy and thinking that they of all others have right to heaven and to
earth too: The Spirit of God in the Scripture meets with them, and shows
them that they may please themselves, but they cannot, they do not please God,
while they remain in their natural condition without purging sin out of their
hearts. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. The text it is a
conclusion drawn from foregoing premises. The Apostle having in the sixth ver.
laid down what a miserable condition it is to be carnally minded, and what a
happy condition it is to be spiritually minded: to be carnally minded is death:
but to be spiritually minded, is life and peace: In the seventh ver. he lays
down the incompetibility between these two conditions, and shows that the
natural man is not, (and the impossibility that he should be) subject to the
law of God, the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be. And then from hence he does infer this
necessary Conclusion, So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God. In
which words the Apostle does note three things unto us;

1. He does (...) imply that some may be involved in this natural condition
here described and set forth unto us: they may be in the flesh.

2. He does grant that a great many are involved in this condition: ye see it
is set forth in the plural number, They that are in the flesh; and

3. There is the inferrence that the Apostle does infer, or the conclusion
that he draws from thence, They cannot please God.

First, then I will speak of that which the Apostle implies here, which is,
that some may be involved in this natural condition here described, and be in
the flesh. I purpose not to lay down all the acceptions of the word Flesh in
Scripture, but to propound only so many as may make for the necessary
explication of the meaning of the holy Ghost in this place, where he says,
They that are in the flesh cannot please God. Flesh then it is taken for the
body, as it consists of bones, sinews, ligaments, blood, arteries, all that
material massy fleshly lump which we carry about us: and for this body
informed with a living soul, and so it is taken in the 1 Cor. 15. chap. the 50.
verse where the Apostle says, flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
heaven: and so it is taken, 1 Pet. 3. chap. 18. verse where the Apostle
speaks of our Savior, that he was put to death in the flesh. And in this
sense are the Apostles words to be understood, 1 Phil. the 24. verse where he
tells the Philippians, that for him to abide in the flesh was more needful
for them: that is for him to continue in the body and live upon the earth was
better for them. Or else flesh may be taken for the remainder of natural
corruption in the regenerate. So it is taken in the 5. of the Gal. 17. ver. the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. And so to
be in the flesh it is to live in this frail body encompassed about with sins
and infirmities, and so the Apostles words may be understood 2 Cor. 10. chap.
3. ver. Though we walk in the flesh yet we do not war after the flesh. Or
lastly flesh is taken for natural corruption, for the pravity of our nature,
for the proneness and propensity of the heart to evil, and the indisposition
thereof to do good: when the evil desires and motions of the flesh reign and
bear sway and rule in the heart: and so the Apostles words are to be understood
in the 7. Romans 5. ver. where he lays down, that when we were in the flesh,
the motions of sins which were by the Law, did work in our members to bring
forth fruit unto death. Properly in the Apostles meaning they are not said to
be in the flesh in this place, who live in the body, for so we are all in the
flesh. Neither are they said properly to be in the flesh according to the
Apostles meaning in this place, in whom the relics of natural corruption do
remain: For so likewise we are all in the flesh, and the relics of sin they
will still remain in us, so long as we live in the flesh, until such time as we
put off the flesh, and this mortal put on immortality. But according to the
true meaning of the Apostles words in Romans 6. 12.
this place they are said to be in the flesh, who suffer sin to reign in their
mortal bodies, that they should obey it in the lusts thereof. And so the
Apostle describes the natural condition of all the sons of Adam, and of all
sanctified and regenerate persons before their conversion the 2 of the
Ephesians 3. ver. we all had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of
the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by
nature the children of wrath. This is the condition that all have been in, and
some must needs acknowledge themselves to be still in. They have no knowledge
of of Christ or of God, their understanding is not enlightened with the saving
doctrine of Christ and his kingdom, Christ crucified is a stumbling block unto
them, they esteem it foolishness when they hear it preached, they mock at the
resurrection of the dead, and the principles of Christian Religion are so
absurd to their natural sense and reason, that they will not down with them by
any means. Sin^^ they know not what it is, they have no sight of it: or if they
have, they have no sense nor feeling of the hainousness of it, and for the
inward corruption of the heart they suffer it to lie there without mortifying
it: and it is the constraint of the laws of the land that restrains them from
the actual commission of sin, for otherwise they give full sway and swinge to
their crooked and corrupt affections, free scope and liberty to themselves in
sin, and run their full career in wickedness: and if they can but extricate
themselves out of the briers so that the laws of the land should not lay hold
of them, they care not to commit all manner of iniquity and impiety. Yea though
they hear that the law of God is spiritual, and requires the obedience of the
inward man, and that God looks more to the heart then to the outward actions,
and that a little sin such a sin as it is a question among a great many whether
it be a sin, is exceeding heinous in the sight of God if men's hearts be set
upon it, so that they will not part with it: Though they hear out of the
Scripture that God will call men to account for idle 2 Mat. 36. ver. 5 Mat. 28
ver. Pet. 2 chapter 14 ver. 5 Matthew. 22 ver. 3 Genesis 42. 20 Exodus 17 ver.
words, for wanton looks, for lascivious gestures, for spleeny passions, and
revengeful meditations, for but purposes to enrich themselves by the gain of
oppression: yet they suffer these evil motions of their corrupt mind, these
desires of the flesh, to domineer and bear sway, and reign and rule in their
hearts. And as for the works of the flesh which the Apostle reckons up in the 5
of the Galatians, 19 and 20 verses; The works of the flesh are manifest which
are these, adultery, fornication, laciviousness, uncleanness, Idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditious heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings and such like: they are exceedingly
in love with these, and spare not to commit them so far forth as they come not
within the compass of men's laws to be punished: yea and many times they leap
over the laws of God and the land, wallow in swinish pleasures and sinful
surfeting, follow their brutish appetites, their sinful and sensual desires,
give no law to their unbridled passions, to their loose carriages, to their
dissolute behaviors, to their unjust practices: the restraint neither of Gods
laws nor of men's can keep them within bounds, but they break both, and pursue
their evil courses with all vehemence and violence. And are such as the
Scripture speaks of the unjust Judge; They neither fear God nor 18 Luke 4 ver.
regard man, but oppress the poor, grind their faces, undo the fatherless and
widows, against all law and equity: and yet they have no sense nor feeling of
their sins, they are touched with no remorse for them. The terror of the law
which doometh death and damnation to the breach of the least of Gods
Commandments, the horror of their own guilty consciences, when they see their
sins laid before them in their own ugly plight, shape, and form: does not make
them so to groan under the burden of their sins, that they should see what a
sweet thing it is to have a Savior, what a happiness it is to be a Christian.
They are not so wearied with the heavy load and burden of their sins that they
should seek and find rest in Christ Jesus: But they 5 Wis. 7 and 8 ver.
weary themselves in the way of wickedness, and never say, what has pride
profited us? Or what good has riches with our vanting brought us? till they
groan out this in hell, where they are never like to have part in God or
inheritance in Christ. These now are the wicked, and such as these they are in
the flesh, and fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the mind: and sure some
such men as these the Apostle yields and grants that there may be. They
have not their understanding informed, nor their reason rectified. Their talk
is of bullocks, and they know (...) how to give the kine fodder: or their
discourse is of their wares and their merchandise, and they know how to buy and
sell and get gain. But they are strangers in Israel, unacquainted with the
mysteries of Christ and his kingdom: That Christ came down from heaven, and 13
Act. 23 ver.
was enclosed in the virgins womb, that he was born of the seed of David, and
took flesh for our redemption: his Priestly, his Princely, his Prophetical
office: his being God, his being Man, the necessity of his being both for our
redemption. His humiliation, his exaltation: his humility, that he humbled
himself and became obedient to death even the death of the Cross: his
exaltation, his rising again from the dead: his glorification, his leading
captivity captive. These are things that they have small knowledge of; or if
they have some confused knowledge of the fall of Adam, of the corrupt state and
condition of all mankind since the fall, of the impossibility of keeping Gods
Laws and Commandments, and of the necessity of a Savior to free us from the
curse of sin, which is death, and from the punishment of the breach of Gods
Laws, which is damnation: have they now a lively 5 Gal. 6 ver.
faith that works by love to purge their consciences from dead works to serve
the living Lord? Do they believe in Jesus Christ and him crucified? yet they
believe that there is one God and one Mediator between 2 Timothy 2 c. 5 ver.
God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Yea S. James tells them that the 2 Jam.
19 ver.
devils believe and tremble. But do they believe that Christ died for their
sins, and rose again for their 4 Romans 8 ver.
justification? yea they believe that Christ died for the sins of the whole
world, and more particularly for 1 Timothy 4 c. 10 ver.
theirs: and they are ready at any time when they are weary and heavy laden
with the burden of their sins, to apply Christ and his merits to themselves for
the remission of them: and therefore they make no question but they are truly
engraffed into Christ, and made lively members of his body: yea they weary
Christ with the load and burden of their sins, and make him their pack-horse to
bear their iniquities, and as God speaks by his Prophet, He is pressed under
them as a cart is pressed that 2 Amos 13 ver.
as full of sheaves. But do they so groan under the burden of their sins, that
they desire to be rid of them, and to purge them out of their hearts? Does
their faith in Christ for the remission of their sins increase their hatred of
2 Cor. 7 c. 1 ver.
sin, and their desire to cleanse themselves from all filthiness both of flesh
and spirit? Hereby they shall know whether they be in Christ or no: They that
are Christ's the Apostle tells us, have crucified the flesh with the
affections 5 Gal. 24 ver.
and lusts. Unless therefore men crucify the flesh, and mortify their earthly
members: fornication uncleanness, immoderate affection, evil concupiscence,
covetousness and the like: they are not in Christ but are still in the flesh,
and whatsoever right or title they may plead to Christ, they are carnally, they
are earthly minded. Let not sin reign in your mortal 6 Romans 12 ver.
bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. If then men's hearts and
consciences tell them, that they are not renewed in the spirit of their 4 Ephesians.
23.
mind, their hearts are set upon evil, the thoughts of their hearts are evil,
and 6 Genesis 5 ver.
that continually: the evil desires of the flesh they swarm there, and the
carnal desires of the mind they nourish and cherish them, please themselves in
them, take a great deal of delight to suffer their minds to wander after vain
pleasures and sinful delights: and as for the inward corruption of the heart,
they give no stay nor stop to it. For the proneness and propensity of the heart
to evil, and the indisposition thereof to do good, they see it not: or if they
do they love it with all their heart: and desire to live and die in this
polluted estate, this corrupted condition, over run with sin and iniquity.
Their heart is corrupt, their conscience defiled, and yet they are touched with
no remorse for the inward pollution of their souls, for the outward defilement
of their bodies, but make sin their solace, and iniquity their pastime: and if
God do so work by his word, by the good motions of his Spirit, by his mercies,
by his judgments, as to restrain them from some open enormious crimes: If
there be some few virtues that they love, and some few vices that they hate,
and their corruption does not show it self in the commission of them, yet when
they hear of an inward change of the whole mind, of the whole man, of a
general hatred of sin, and a general love of goodness, that so God might accept
of their imperfect obedience for Christ's sake, and entitle them to heaven and
salvation, this they cannot endure. To fear all their ways with the holy man
Job: and to refrain their feet 1 Job. 5 ver. 119 Psalm. 101 ver.
from every evil path with the Psalmist, this they will not admit of. They have
not only one, but many sins reigning in them: and many virtues there be which
Gods Ministers have made appear to their understanding are exceeding lovely,
and yet they will not practice them. Their heart is not whole within them, the
mass of corruption lies there still; The old leaven is not 1 Cor. 5 c. 7 ver.
purged out, that so it may be a new lump. There is the same proneness and
propensity of the heart to evil, and the same indisposition to do good. And
excepting that the restraining grace of Gods Spirit does restrain them from the
commission of some sins, and enable them to do some good; their practice for
the general it is to do evil, and not to do good. Such as these there are, and
such as these they are in the flesh and make 3 Romans 14 ver.
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. And thus I leave the
first thing implied in the words that some may be involved in this natural 2
Doctrine.
condition and be in the flesh. As the Apostle yields that some may be in
this condition, so he further grants that a great many are in this condition,
it is set forth in the plural number, they that are in the flesh. And so I
proceed to prove that which is plainly expressed and come in the second place
to show that there are numbers and multitudes that are in the flesh: our
Savior in the seventh of S. Matthews Gospel tells us that wide is the gate,
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat. And every where in Scripture we have the multitude of wicked men
described and set forth unto us. S. Paul lays it down in his Epistle to the
Romans, as the Psalmist had before set it down, and the wiseman in his
Proverbs, 3 Romans the 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 verses; They are all gone out
of the way, they are together become unprofitable, there is none that does
good, no not one: their throat is an open sepulcher, With their tongues they
have used deceit, the poison of aspes is under their lips: whose mouth is full
of cursing and and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction
and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known; there
is no fear of God before their eyes. And the Psalmist brings in God wondering
at the multitude of wicked men; Have they no knowledge that they 14 Psalm. 4 ver.
are all such workers of mischief eating up my people as it were bread, and
call not upon God? Nos numerus sumus, and fruges consumere nati, we were all of
us so in our natural condition, and no doubt but there are still a number, a
multitude of Epicurean people, who think they are born only to eat and to
drink 12 Joh. 19 ver.
and to enjoy the sinful pleasures of of this life. Though the world went 6
Joh. 26 ver.
after Christ and the multitudes followed him, yet it was but for loaves, for
carnal and by respects, and he had but few true disciples and they were not
many in whom the word of God did take place. They were not all Israelites that
were of Israel. Neither are they now all truly converted, that live in the
bosom of the Church. Though the number of the children of Israel be as the
sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved. They are but a remnant, a few, a
small company that have saving grace whereby the soul should be converted. Many
are called, but few 20 Matthew, 16 ver. 2 Timothy ^ c. 21 ver.
are chosen to be vessels of honor sanctified and meet for the masters use.
The many, the number, the multitude, they have not felt the inward 31 Jerm. 33
ver.
Covenant, the circumcision of the heart, whereby God should put his law in
their hearts and write it in their inward parts, there is no truth in their
inward parts, their inward parts are very wickedness. They say, 5 Psalm. 9 ver.
as it is in Job; Depart from us we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. 21
Job 14 ver.
God would have healed them, but they would not. They love to lie in this
polluted estate, this sinful condition: And as for the inward corruption of the
heart, they do not desire that it should be abolished: they will not purge it
out, yea and many multitudes there are of such kind of men. They go by
companies into 23 Prove. 20 ver. 5 Jer. 7. ver. 64 Psalm. 5. ver.
the Taverns: they assemble themselves by troops into the harlots houses: they
meet together and commune of laying snares: they encourage one another in
unjust practices: and their only care is to buy 5 Jam. 13 ver. 1 These. 4 c. 6
ver.
and sell and get gain, and go beyond their neighbors in bargaining: but among
these multidudes of evil men; there are but a few godly Christians, a few good
men. A world of sinners there were in the days of Noah but one Noah a preacher
of righteousness. A great many of filthy and unclean Sodomites, but one
righteous Lot whose soul was vexed with the filthy Conversation of the unclean
Sodomites. And S. Peter reckoning up the multitude of sinners that were in the
days of Noah, and in the days of Lot shows that there should be the like
multitude of sinners in the world unto the worlds end. And as Gods vengeance
did not sleep against the multitude of sinners that were in the days of Noah
and in the days of Lot, so neither should it sleep against the multitude of
sinners that shloud be in the world unto the worlds end. But chiefly Gods
vengeance should show it self against those who walk after the flesh, in the
lusts of uncleanness presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to
speak evil 2 Pet. 2 c. 10 ver.
of dignities. Wilful sinners then there are who walk after the flesh, and
commit all uncleanness with greediness. And many such evil disposed persons
there are who make a sport of sin, and pastime of iniquity: and who is there
almost that his heart should stand affected as the Psalmist speaks, that he
should 9 Psalm. 6 ver.
have respect to all Gods commandments? and hate sin indifferently, his own
sins as well as other men's, and his hatred should show it self especially
against those sins to which he sees the greatest proneness and propensity in
his own heart. They are very few but they have their hearts set upon some sins
or other, they suffer them to lie and roust there, they will not part with them
or purge them out. The bent of their affections is not set against sin, is not
set upon good: their heart meditateth mischief and they stir up strife and
contension all the day long. They may blear the eyes of the world with dawbing
policies, and skin over their corruptions: but their heart is not right neither
toward God nor toward their neighbor. Indoluit orbis Christianus factum se
videns Arianum. The whole Christian world was overspread with Arianisme, and
Scismes and Heresies they abound in every place, and multitudes of men there
are that cause sects and divisions: sins and surfetings they increase and
multiply continually, and sinners they thronge in the streets, All tables 28
Isaiah ^ ver.
are full of vomit and filthiness, from the least of them unto the greatest of
them, every one is given to covetousness, and from the Prophet unto the 6 Jer.
13 ver.
Priest every one deals falsely. Some few only excepted as S. John has it,
the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5 c. 9 ver.
tumbleth and walloweth in this sinful condition; their hearts are uncleansed,
unsanctified, unreformed, even sinkes of sin: and the spreading contagion of
sin and iniquity it overrunneth all places and persons, and few there be that
are not infected with this plague and leprosy of sin. Some have it in their
forehead, and it rises up as it did in Uzziah his. 2 Cor. 26 c. 9 ver. 3
Isaiah 9 ver.
They declare their sin as Sodom they hide it not. Others have it in their
heart, their sore rankleth and festereth inwardly, and their wound is in
curable: others, their loins are filled 38 Psalm. 7 ver.
with a loathsome disease and there is no whole part in their flesh: others,
their feet are swift to shed blood: others, 1 Prove. 16 ver. 49 Genesis 5 ver. 55
Psalm. 20 ver. 69 Psalm. 23 ver.
their hands are instruments of cruelty: others, their eyes are blinded that
they see not; they have the eyes of their understanding darkened so that they
know not what sin is, and how should they then amend it? Many, too many there
be, who have not one but many sins reigning in them, who walk and war after the
flesh, and fulfill the desires of their evil and corrupt minds: so that it is
no marvel though the Apostle sets it forth in the plural number, They that
are in the flesh. Having thus described the Natural Condition of being in the
flesh, and having showed what it is to be in the flesh and having made it plain
that there are numbers and multitudes of men who live and lie in this sinful
condition, overrun with iniquity, and drowned as I may say in the lusts of the
flesh. It remains that I come to show what it is that makes this condition
so miserable and so deplorable a condition: It may seem to be a happy
condition, and no marvel if there be multitudes that are in love with sin, and
the greatest part please themselves in their natural condition, and have some
sin or other which they propound unto themselves as their chiefest happiness,
felicity, and contentment in this life: for sin it is sweet and the task of
repentance it is tedious bitter and irksome: and the childbearing pangs of a
woman in travail are not so painful and laborious, as are the travailing pains
of those that are born again, in whom new birth is wrought. A troubled
conscience and a mind disquieted with the burden of sin, it is above all the
troubles and tribulations that can happen to a man in this life. Seeing then
sin is so sweet, and the task of repentance so bitter, tedious and irksome: not
to strive against sin, but to enjoy the pleasures and profits of this life,
there is no misery at all in this condition, but a great deal of happiness: and
if it were not for that which follows in this text of Scripture, who might
not wish to remain still in his natural condition, without purging sin out of
his heart. So then that which makes this condition so miserable a condition it
is this, that men while they are in love with this supposed happiness, they
lose that which is their true happiness, their summum bonum, and their chief
felicitv: Gods favorable countenance. Nothing can content the soul but God,
nothing can satisfy the heart but the Trinity, and while men remain in this
condition without purging sin out of their hearts, they are deprived of this
felicity they are debarred of this happiness. So then this condition of being
out of the state of grace, makes men miserable, because those that are out of
the state of grace and not truly regenerate cannot please God.

And so I pass to the third thing the 3 Doctrine.
inference that the Apostle does infer, and the conclusion that he gathers
to set forth the misery of those that are in their natural condition, They
cannot please God. The Apostles meaning when he says, those that are in the
flesh cannot please God. Is not, that it is all one whether they do good or
whether they do evil, their vices and their virtues find the like acceptance
at Gods hands, their gloriousest virtues are but glittering sins, their best
actions are abominable, they are in the flesh out of Christ, and whatsoever
they do they cannot please God. These are the exceptions that the Sectaries of
these times make, not only against the actions of those who are mere natural
men, unreconciled, unconverted, but against the actions of those that are
spiritual, and more truly engraffed into Christ then themselves. And these
Sectaries they do dilate and spread themselves every where, and where there are
fewest of them there are two many of them. Yet for my part I am and ever shall
be so charitable as to believe that there are among them, some ignorantly
seduced Christians, who desire above all things to fear God and to serve him,
and for the elects sake that are among them, shall speak unto them all as unto
Saints, and unto brethren, and all that I shall at this time say is but this;
If these men cannot be persuaded to have a little more charity, it were to be
wished that they would be persuaded to have a little more humility: if says
Job, I wash myself with snow water, 9 Job 30, 31 ver
and make my hands never so clean: yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and
mine own clothes shall abhor me. And the holy Father S. Augustine shows how
imperfect the actions of the best are, that none can be found innocent if God
should deal with them according to the rigor of his justice. Vae August.
confess.
laudabili vitae hominum si remota miserecordia discutias eam. Woe unto the most
praiseworthy life of men, if God shall examine it without mercy. And so
Arnobius, Arno. in Psalm.
Vae nobis si quod debeamus exegerit vel quod debet rediderit. Woe unto us all
if God should exact of us what we owe or are indebted unto him: or return unto
us according to our deserts. I beseech you beloved brethren whosoever you are,
can you do any thing to please God? have you any righteousness that is not
stained? survay your own best actions, and abhor your selves in dust and ashes,
your most lovely virtues, your goodliest actions, they receive such a tincture
from the corrupt channel from whence they proceed, that you must needs see
nothing but a menstruous cloth, have you any thing to glory of before God? take
heed least he enter into judgment with you, you will find that all flesh has
corrupted it self before God, and that you have nothing but what others have
imperfect goodness. But yet goodness it is Gods gift and the effect of our
Saviors sufferings, and though it be imperfect in all, in regard we are not
subjects capable of perfect goodness, yet God as he wroketh it in all, so he
loves it, and is pleased with it in all that he works it. And whether he
works it by restraining grace in those that are in their natural condition,
or by saving grace in those that are in their spiritual condition, he is
pleased with it, accepts it, will reward it for Christ's sake. Some good works
that are wrought by restraining grace, they are as lovely in the sight of men,
and as pleasing in the sight of God, as are those that are wrought by saving
grace. And God as he works, so he is pleased with, and accepts of goodness
in every body. It was Gods speech to Cain, if thou do well shall thou not be
accepted? He accepts of every body when they do well, he will reward his own
works and will be no man's debtor for goodness. He has rewarded you, he will
reward you, he does reward you, for works of piety, for deeds of charity, for
any thing that is good. So then this is not the meaning of the words (howsoever
some please to descant and paraphrase upon them) that those that are in the
flesh, their best actions are abominable, their goodness imperfect and they
cannot please God: for so are the actions of the best Saints living and some
actions that are wrought by restraining grace are as perfect as those that are
wrought by saving grace, though both of them are imperfect: and God is pleased
to accept of imperfect goodness for Christ's sake and reward it. Only herein is
the difference: those good deeds that proceed from restraining grace, they have
the promise only of a temporary reward, but those good deeds that proceed from
saving grace they entitle men to heaven and salvation. So then the meaning of
the Apostles words, (as it may appear plainly to those that are not minded
wilfully to pervert the Scritures) is this: They that are unreconciled,
unconverted, unrenewed in the spirit of their minds, they cannot so please
God, that he should accept of their imperfect obedience and entitle them to
heaven, and deliver them from hell. This then is the miserable condition of all
those who have not felt the inward Covenant, the circumcision of the heart, in
whom restraining grace has wrought only a hatred of some few sins, and a love
of some few virtues, and the saving grace of Gods Spirit has not enlightened
the understanding with the knowledge of all sins which by the search of reason
can be found to be sins: nor reformed the will that there should be a hatred of
all sins nor rectified the affections, that so this hatred of sin should
increase more and more. But they do good by fits and by starts, as they are
taught by custom and example of others, as they are induced unto it by Gods
mercies and his judgments, or as it pleases him sometimes to work
extraordinarily in their hearts by his word and the good motions of his Spirit.
Such as these they are in the flesh and cannot please God: that is they are out
of Gods favor, the wrath of God abides upon them; they have no hopes of
heaven nor of happiness after this life. And what more miserable condition can
there be then this? It is a life no life, when Gods frowning and ireful
countenance is toward men: When men have no assurance of heaven, no hopes in
their death: their consciences tell them that they have lived so, that they
shall never see God nor enjoy the company nor presence of the blessed Angels:
but shall have their portion 20 Revel. 10 ver.
in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone with the devil and his
angels. Sure the wrath of God for sin it causes men to pine and languish away
in despair. When thou with rebukes 39 Psalm. 11 ver.
do chasten a man for sin, thou causest his beauty to consume away like a
moth fretting a garment: and who can 76 Psalm. 7 ver.
stand when thou art angry says the Psalmist? If God please to hide away his
face from his Saints from his servants, for a moment in a little 54 Isaiah 6
ver.
wrath, nothing can afford them comfort. And when he teareth the wicked in his
wrath for the multitude of their transgressions, (as some time his hand is
heavy upon them here for their sins) his wrath is a burden unsupportable. Let
then their own experience of the heaviness of Gods wrath when he afflicts
them for a short time for their sins in his wrath, teach them what a miserable
condion it is to be such men with whom God will be angry for ever. If so be
then that God be pleased with men's good works, with their hearty sighs and
earnest groans, their weeping and howling and their repentance for sin: If God
see these things, and be pleased with them: yet if he be not so pleased with
them, that he should accept of men's good works, of their repentance for sin,
that so they should be delivered from his wrath, and have hopes of heaven and
happiness, what are they the better? And yet unless men be inwardly renewed in
the spirit of their minds, and have felt a change of the whole mind, of the
whole man, they shall not be entitled to heaven, they shall not be delivered
from hell. This then is the misery of those who remain unreconciled,
unconverted, whose hearts are unchanged unaltered: they are liable to Gods
curse and eternal damnation. Heaven they have no part nor portion in it.
Christian Reader, whosoever thou art, think now, think I say, (if it be
possible for thee to conceive the greatness of this misery) what a miserable
condition it is when men shall perish everlastingly, and shall never see God,
nor possess the joys of the celestial Paradise. It were a thousand times
better for men that they had never been born, then that they should live and
die in this defiled condition, this polluted estate. The brute beasts and
juments are happier then they, for when they die, their miseries are ended: but
there are unspeakable miseries everlasting sorrows appointed to such after
death. What creatures are there so loathsome but men might wish to be them and
be happy in the change unless they be changed inwardly, and renewed in the
spirit of their minds. All other creatures their miseries they end in death,
but theirs will but then begin. Those that believe not as it is in S. John's
gospel, are condenned already: and when death comes how frightful will the
presence of the angry judge be? and when the great day of his wrath is come
they will creep into the holes and cliffes of the rocks, and say to the
mountains fall on us, and to the hills cover us. God is pleased with men's good
works, and there is none of them forgotten before him. When men repent of there
sins he sees their repentance, and he can, he will lighten his hand of them.
God is pleased with goodness in every body, and there is no man's repentance
that shall be in vain and to no purpose. But unless men's repentance be true and
unfeined, unless their sorrow for sin increase every day more and more, and
there be a settled purpose to weed all sins out of their hearts, they have no
hopes to enjoy heaven to escape hell. I beseech you therefore Christian men and
women whosoever ye be that read this: as you look to stand in the day of our
Lord Jesus, when he shall come in flames of fire to render vengeance to them
that know him not, and to them that obey not the Gospel of Christ: seek unto
God and desire of him that he would sanctify you throughout, and season your
hearts with grace, that so your souls and bodies may be safe in the day of our
Lord Jesus. Never rest till you find in your hearts a general hatred of sin,
and a general love of goodness and a constant progress in this general hatred
of sin and love of goodness, which may entitle you to heaven, and deliver you
from hell. If God should hear you at every call, and when you are overborn with
grief, upon your repentance for two or three sins to which your hearts are
exceedingly prone (which you suspect to be the cause of your misery) deliver
you from evil that it should not vex you. If upon your performance of two or
three good works, and your charity and humility in the performance of them, he
should load you with his earthly favors and his temporal blessings, (as he
will be no man's debtor for goodness so he will reward his own gifts in every
body) yet if he be not so pleased with your good works, as to accept of them
and reward them with heaven and happiness hereafter, what have you gained? how
are you advantaged? What will it 18 Matthew. 26 ver.
profit a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own soul? or what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul? If God should give you all that the world
can afford, heap upon you his earthly favors, and his temporal blessings; if
your conscience upon your deathbed should tell you that you are unreconciled,
unconverted, that you have received the reward of your good deeds here, and God
should answer you when you cry for mercy as Abraham did Dives and say son, 16
Luke 24 ver.
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things, and therefore seeing in your life time you received the
reward of your good deeds, therefore there are t^rments everlasting appointed
for you, and joys unspeakable appointed for others. Sure now (when you lay in
this case) if God would hear you and grant that you might begin your life
again, you would choose with Moses to suffer affliction with the children of
God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: And the conceit
that Gods over liberal rewarding you with his temporal mercies for your good
deeds here, had excluded you from all hopes that he would reward you with his
everlasting mercies hereafter, would pierce your hearts with a thousand
sorrows: labor then so to please God, that whatsoever reward you receive for
your good deeds here, you may have assurance that he will not forget your
patience and your labor of love hereafter. To die in Gods displeasure it is a
misery above all the miseries than can be conceived and imagined: and if you
cannot so please God, that he would entitle you to heaven and deliver you from
hell when you die: though you have all that the earth can afford you while you
live, you will be never the better. And so ye see the greatness of their misery
that are in the flesh, they cannot so please God as to have hopes of heaven and
happiness.

The conclusion.
Having run over this Text of Scripture and having at large described the
Natural condition of being in the flesh; I shall shut up all with a charitable
conclusion to all you whosoever you are that shall read what is here written.
The natural condition of being in the flesh, it has been described unto you,
and it has been likewise made plain unto you that some there be that are in
the flesh, yea a great many, multitudes there are that live and lie in this
sinful condition, and few there be (God knows) who have their consciences
purged from dead works to serve the living 9 Heb. 14 ver.
Lord, who have felt the powerful and effectual operation of Gods Spirit in
their hearts, and excepting only this little flock, this few of Christ's sheep,
the number, the multitude, 12 Luke 32 ver.
the whole world lies in wickedness; walloweth and tumbleth in this sinful
condition, in this polluted estate, they are dead in sin, dead 2 Ephesians. 2 ver.
8 Matthew. 22 ver. 3 John 18 ver.
for sin, condemned already as the Scripture speaks, and if they live and die
in this sinful condition, hell fire it shall be their portion, and they cannot
so please God here that they should have hopes of heaven and happiness
hereafter. But yet, though there be milions and multitudes that are
unreconciled, unconverted, who live and lie in sin without remorse: yet we can
know but few, yea we cannot know any of whom we may say these are unconverted,
in the state of condemnation, you may know concerning your selves whether you
be in Christ, or whether you be in the flesh. Examine your selves, prove 2 Cor.
13 c 5 ver.
your own selves, know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you
expcept ye be reprobates? ye may know concerning your selves whether ye be
reconciled unto God, and he be become a gracious father unto you in Christ
Jesus: is your hatred of sin general? your love of goodness universal? do you
increase and grow every day more and more in grace and goodness? in your hatred
and opposition of sin? Have you a care of the inward man as well as of the
outward? and do you look more to the heart then to the outward actions, is not
there some secret darling bosom and beloved sin upon which your heart is set,
which you defend and maintain, against all that Gods Ministers can say against
it, and will not be convinced in conscience of it, or acknowledge it to be a
sin? do you not call your pride decency? your lust love? your drunkenness
goodfellowship? your malice zeal? your covetousness thrift? Or is there not
some secret sin like Herod his incest, which you defend to be lawful? ye may
know concerning your selves, in what terms you stand with God, whether you be
in Christ or whether you be in the flesh: unless ye be ignorant persons and
know not what the desires of the flesh mean. But yet though it be an easy
matter to know this concerning your selves, yet it is the hardest matter of a
thousand to know this concerning others, whether they be in the faith or no.
Restraining grace it may work as perfect a hatred of some sins, and as perfect
a love of some graces and virtues as saving grace. They who outwardly appear
very wicked men, they may hate some vices with as perfect a hatred as it is
possible for men to do, who carry about them a body of flesh: and love some
virtues with as perfect a love, as it is possible for men to do who live since
the fall of Adam, yea restraining grace may work such a reformation of the
outward man and of the inward man too that there may not be many sins in the
heart unpurged out. We read of Herod how he reformed himself in many things at
John's preaching, and he had not many sins with which he was greatly in love
beside his incest. And Iehu beside his state policy he had not many sins upon
which his heart was set. And whether it be constraint of laws restraint of
shame, custom and example of others that teaches men to do well, whether God
work by his mercies or by his judgments, by his word or by the good motions of
his Spirit, by fits and by starts extraordinarily. Or whether there be a
constant and a continued work of the spirit: whether there be a general hatred
of sin, whether men's obedience to Gods laws and commandments be total or
partial: Whether there be many sins reigning in men or one darling sin upon
which their heart is set unpurged out: These are secrets known only to God who
searches the heart and tries the reins. This men must see (unless they will
shut their eyes against a known truth) that there is in all men living a hatred
of some vices, and a love of some virtues, and though it be restraining grace
that works in the most, yet for ought we know or ought to judge, it is saving
grace that works in all. And that there should be in a Christian
Commonwealth this distinction of the godly and the wicked, for my part I see
no reason for it: Charity thinks no evil, but is easily persuaded to believe
that all the congregation of the Lord is holy. This is a certain truth we
cannot certainly know, and ought not peremtorily to judge of any men or company
of men, that they are in the whole tenor of their lives wicked men or profane
persons; or that they are in the whole tenor of their lives hypocrites or false
christians. But if men may probably conjecture of a great many that they are
sinners or hypocrites, know them by their fruits because it outwardly appears
to the world that many sins reign in them. What use should they make of their
knowledge? Let them abstain from their company and not partake with them in
their sins, If necessity or some occasion of business force them into their
company, let them soberly admonish them of their faults that they may amend,
let them reprove and rebuke them sharply if they do not amend: let them
inform against them that they may be reformed if their sins be capital or
scandalous, punishable by the laws of the land: let them mourn in secret
because they do pray in private that they may not continually dishonor God by
their unlawful deeds their open profanes and their secret hypocrisy these
things are good and acceptable in the sight of God, If beside these you can
think of any lawful means to reduce men from their sins, their open profaness
and their secret hypocrisy on God his name use it. But as for all slandring
and traducing men for sin, all casting out their names and evil all rash
censuring of their present condition; all uncharitable and unchristian judging
of their future as final condition, let not these things be once named among
you as becomes saints. For my part I know no man so flagitiously sinful that I
dare determine of him that he is in the state of condemnation, though I see him
in the acts of impiety, for I know there is a salve for this sore, his
repentant tears. And if I say that such a one is a saint in the state of grace,
and has right to the kingdom of heaven when he does well I say no more then
charity binds me to speak, when I see a man that is suspected to have sinned
the sin against the holy Ghost. I may peradventure think that there is small
hopes of remission for such a one, because he cannot repent; yet I shall be
sparing to term such an one a reprobate when I fee him sin and shall be bold
to say he is a saint when he does well. Be charitable, and judge of no man's
final condition: ye cannot certainly know and therefore ought not to say of any
men lining though they be never so hainously sinful that they are in the state
of condemnation. And yet still there are a number, a multitude, the whole world
lies in wickedness, walloweth and tumbleth in this sinful condition, in this
polluted estate, their conscience is defiled their heart is corrupt, set upon
sin, they have no sense nor feeling of their sins, they are touched with no
remorse for them they will not weed them out of their hearts, and though others
may not, and we dare not judge them any otherwise then as God judges them: yet
unless they will judge and condemn them selves and endeavor to purge, sin out
of their hearts we must leave them where we found them in the flesh, insuch a
condition wherein they cannot please God, nor have right to the kingdom of
heaven but are liable to God his curse and eternal damnation: for so they see
the scripture speaks so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.
But I shall rather 3 Ephesians. 16, 17, 18. 19 ver.
pray for such as are in the flesh, that God would grant them according to the
riches if his glory to be strengthened with might by his spirit according to the
inner man, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, that they being
rooted and grounded in love may be able to comprehend with all saints what is
the breadth. And length, and depth and height: and know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge that they may be 1 Pet. 10. 4 ver.
filled with the fullness of God, and have right to an inheritance
incorruptible, immortal, undefiled, not fading away, reserved in the heavens
for them. Amen.

FINIS.

