TO THE MOST HIHGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE JAMES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF GREAT
Britanie, etc.
1. IF saint Paul (most gracious sovereign) being accused of the whole
Synagogue of the Jews, by their Orator Tertullus, of diverse heinous crimes,
both against Gods and the Princes laws, found notwithstanding such equity in
the Heathen President Festus, as he answered his adversaries, that is was not
the custom of the Acts 25.
Romans, to condemn any man before he have his accusers present, and place to
make his answer: and also such favor at the Acts 26.
Jewish King Agrippa, as he both licensed him to speak for himself, and
afforded him favorable audience: much more cause have your Majesty's Catholic
subjects, being accused of Ministers by their hired spokesman Bell, to expect
the like yea greater favor and equity at your Graces hands. For if Romans,
though heathens, thought it injustice to condemn a particular man at the
clamours of a whole Nation, before his accusers were present, and his defense
were heard: and if Agrippa, albeit a Jew, and enemy to Christians, deemed it
notwithstanding a Princes part, to give audience to one accused of that
religion, which he both hated and persecuted, how much more will a Christian
Prince forbear to condemn the universal cause of his Catholic subjects, for
the slanders and outcries of Ministers, and one hired Proctor, before their
Accusers be brought face to face, and they have time and place granted to
answer for themselves? Wherein we shall account our selves more happy then
Saint Paul, because we shall plead our cause, not before a Heathen or Jewish
Prince, but before a Christian King, and such a one, as better knows the
questions and customs of Christians, then King Agrippa did of the Jews.

2. Wherefore, seeing of late one Th. Bell, (a fugitive once from the Protestant
religion, as he is now from Catholic) has not only accused, but also
maliciously slandered the universal Catholic cause, in a book, which he has
dedicated to your Majesty, and termed it the Downfall of Popery, and withal
challenges, dares, and adjureth (in which case our Blessed Savior, though
Math. 26.
whith manifest danger of his life, made answer) al Seminary Priests, al
English Jesuits, and (as he speaks) Iesuited Papists, to answer him, I have
presumed upon your gracious favor to accept his challenge, and am ready to
perform it hand to hand, if your Majesty grant license, and in the mean time
to dedicate to your Name, this my Confutation of his arguments, and slanders,
wherein I speak not for my self, as did Saint Paul before King Agrippa, but
for the religion of your own Progenitors, and Predecessors, for the faith of
your forefathers, for the cause of all Catholics, and for the good, (I dare
say) of your own Majesty's person and Kingdoms. For though Bell calumniate
Christian Kings and Emperors, with opening a window to all Antichristian
tyranny, and Catholics generally, with thinking Christ to be killed a
thousand times a day, and such like, yet especially he slandereth the Popes,
with usurping power proper to God, and to depose Princes, and dispose of their
Kingdoms at his pleasure, for to alienate your mind thereby, from the sea
Apostolic: wherein he not only abuses your patience with telling you palpable
untruths, but also greatly harmeth and endammageth your person and realm, by
endeavoring by his false slanders, to auert your mind from the Popes, who have
been the most ancient, most assured, and most beneficial friends, which the
Kings and realms of great Britanie have ever had. Which thing that I may make
manifest unto your Majesty, I humbly beseech you give me leave to set down
some particular examples, of the mutual amity, and kind offices, which have
been betwixt the Popes and the Princes of this land. Wherein, if I be somewhat
longer, then men use to be in Epistles, I hope the variety and profit of the
mattaer will make requital.

3. Not long after the sea Apostolic S. PETER P.
was settled in Rome, Saint Peter, the first Pope about the sixty third year of
Lippoman 29. Iunij tomo 5.
CHRIST, came (says a Simeon Metaphrastes, a Grecian writer about 800. years
ago) into Britanie, where having stayed long time, and converted many nations
unto Christ, he saw an Angel, who told him, that the time of his departure was
at hand, and therefore he should return to Rome, where being crucified, he
should receive the reward of justice. When therefore he had glorified God, and
given thanks, and stayed some days with the Britans, settled Churches, and
ordered Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, in the twelft year of the Emperor Nero,
he returned to Metaphrast. lived. Ann. 859. Baron. ibidem.
Rome. Thus much Metaphrastes: all which he professes to have taken out of
ancient monuments, and to have been publicly related. And withal adds; that
Eusebius. Pamphili (the ancientest Ecclesiastical Historiographer) reports, that
Peter was twelve years in the East, and twenty three years in Rome, and in
Britanie, and in the cities of the West. So that, not only Metaphrastes, but
also Eusebius testifies, that Saint Peter came into Britannie. Neither
hinders it, that this testimony of Eusebius is not found in any of his books
now extant. For (as S. Hierom. says) he wrote innumerable volumes, which now
are perished, in some whereof might be this testimony. For it is no way
likely, that Metaphrastes should feign it; both because he is accounted a
saint, and honored of the Grecians as such, and cited in the Council of
Florence, as a man of great authority; as also, because there was no cause to
move him to feign it; and lastly because he might be justly laughed at for
feiging a thing wherein he might be easily disprooued. And that saint Peter
came into Britanie, not only English Catholics, as Harpesfield lib. 1. histor.
cap. 2. Grecians, Italians, French, Spaniards, Germans, Polonians, Scots,
English, say Saint Peter was in Britanie.
Broughton lib. 1. cap. 24, and others do affirm, but also strangers, as
Iulianus Petri in Aduersariis,. 495. Baronius Anno 46. and his Epitomizers,
Spondanus, Bzouius, Bisiola, Bernardus Iunius in Chronico Morali anno 46.
Biuarrus in Chronico Dextri Anno 46. Ciaconus in vita Sancti Petri,
Guillimannus in suis Habpurgicis lib. 2. cap. 1. Eiseingrenius Centuria 7. par.
7. dis. 8. Chesneus in hist. Angl. l. 3. Posseuinus in apparatu tom. 3. Lesleus
in Paraenesi ad Scotos: And also learned Protestants confess the same. For
thus Cambden Protestants confesso it.
in his Britanie p. 52. Of the credit of Simeon Metaphrastes, Cambden.
and the Greeks Meneologie, our Ecclesiastical writers report, that Peter came
hither, and spread the light of the Gospel. And in his Remains page 4. The true
Christian religion was planted here by Joseph of Arimathia, Simon Zelotes,
Aristobulus, yea by saint Peter and saint Paul, as may be proved by Dorotheus,
Theodoretus, Sophronius. Speed lib. 6. cap. 9. Speed.
Some ad, that S. Peter the Apostle preached the word of life in this Island, as
to others Gentiles he did, for whom God had chosen him, that from his mouth
they might hear the Gospel, and believe, and that he here founded Churches,
and ordained Priests, and Deacons, which is reported by Simeon Metaphrastes,
out the Greek Antiquities. The like has Usher in his Antiquities Usher.
of Britanie c. 1. and 16. And also Baker in his history of Baker.
England page 3. Who adds, that this and more is reported by Authors of good
credit. And I ad that no grave Author denies it; nor can any sufficient reason
be brought, why it should not be believed. So that, mere inctedulitie or
obstinacy can be opposed against it, which may be opposed against any
historical writing whatsoever; and so all historical belieef overthrown. For
who believe in histories, what they will, and what they will not, believe not,
do not believe histories, but themselves.

4. Neither was this love of S. Peter to our country extinguished 2. Petri 1.
by his death, but as himself promised to some, he had it in mind also after
his departure, and miraculously assisted it in great necessities. So that truly
wrote Malmesbury lib. 1. Pontificum p. 209.
S. Sergius first Pope, one thousand years ago, to our English Kings, that S.
Peter was mindful of them. And Pope Eugubin de Donat. Constan.
Alexander II. to King William the Conqueror, and Pope S. Peter Protector of
Enhland.
Alexander III. to King Henry the second, that England was under saint Peter's
protection, ever since Christ's name was glorified there. And Pope Bid lib. 2.
cap. 10. Huntington lib. 3. p. 317.
Boniface I. writing to King Edwin, calls S. Peter, his Protector. For when
our country (about the year of Christ 611.) began to revolt from the faith of
Christ, and some Bishops had forsaken the land, and S. Laurence Archbishop of
Canterbury was minded to follow them, Saint Peter appearing S. Peter committed
Englishmen to S. Laurence.
to him, and scourging him with sharp stripes, a great while in the close
night, challenged with Apostolical authority, and asked him, why he would
forsake the flock which he himself had committed to him, and to what
shepherd running now away, he would leave the sheep of JESUS CHRIST, beset in
the midst of so many woulues. By these stripes of saint Peter, and with these
exhortations, Laurence, being stirred up and encouraged, came boldly to the
king early in the morning, and loosing his garment showed him how sore he was
beaten, and how pitifully his flesh was torn. The King, as soon as he heard
that for his own salvation the Bishop had suffered such grievous beatings, yea
and that of the Apostle of CHRIST, he feared much, and afterward abandoning all
worship of Idols, he embraced the Faith of CHRIST, and being baptized,
endeavored to keep and maintain the estate of the Church in all points to the
uttermost of his power. Thus S. Bid lib. 2. c. 6. who lived in the same age,
in which this happened; and the same testifies the king himself, in his
Reiner. in Apost.
charter yet extant. Also Alcuin in Epist. 97. and our best Historiographers,
as William Malmesburie lib. 1. Regum Angliae cap. 1. Henry of Huntington lib.
3. page 326. Marianus in Chronic. ann. 617. Florentius Anno 616,
Westmonasteriensis anno 616. And the Protestants confess it.
same is confessed by Protestants, as by Bishop Godwin, in the life of S.
Laurence, Holinshed lib. 5. histor cap. 24. Isacson ann. 616. Weuer in his
monuments page 245. who also ibid. page 246. rehearses the Epitaphe upon the
tomb of saint Laurence, in which the same is affirmed, and lastly, the
Magdeburgensian Centuriatours Centuria 7. cap. 10.

5. Not long before this, when S. Peter consecrated Westminster Church.
Sebareth, King of the East Saxons, had built a Church in honor of S. Peter, in
the place where now Westmonasterie stands, saint Peter came from Heaven, and
himself dedicated the Church, and confirmed his dedication by a miracle, which
long after continued. Authors of this, are two ancient and holy kings Edgar,
Witness, two English Kings, and grave Authors.
and S. Edward the Confessor, in their Charters made to that Monastery, as may
be seen in Bishop Usher in his book de Primordiis Eccl. Britannicae cap. 16.
page 741, 742, and in vveuer in his Monuments page 450. Whereof I will rehearse
the words of S. Edwards Charter, taken (as weuer says) outof the records of
the Toure. The Church of S. Peter in Westminster, was anciently builded under
Mellit, first Bishop of London, fellow and of the same time with Saint Austin
first Archbishop of Canterbury, and by blessed Peter himself, with service of
Angels, dedicated with the imprinting of the holy Cross, and unction of the
holy Trinity. And king Edgar, as Bishop Usher relates, in his Charter
avouches, that in the year 604, it was dedicated, not of any other, but of S.
Peter himself Prince of the Apostles, to his own honor. The same certify saint
Ealred, a most grave Author, (says Spelman) in the life of saint Edward, the
Author of saint Dunstans life, William of Malmesburie lib. 1. Regum, and lib.
2. Pontificum, Capgraue in life of S. Edward, Otterburn, Walsingam an. 1378,
page 213. and 214. Baronius an. 610. And are not two ancient and holy kings,
and so many grave authors worthy to be believed? S. Peter restored the royal
English blood, to the crown.
Likewise, when the Danes had oppressed England, usurped the crown, and driven
all the royal English blood out of England, Saint Peter appeared in a vision,
to Brithwold, a holy Bishop of Wilton, or (as some say) of Winchester, anointed
saint Edward king of England, and foretold the years of his reign, and the
end of the fury of the Danes, adding these most confortable words: The Our
best Authors testify it.
kingdom of England, is the kingdom of God. Authors of this, are the
aforesaid Malmesburie lib. 2. Regum cap. 13. and lib. 2. Pontif. page 249.
Ealred in life of saint Edward. Westmonasteriensis anno 1056, Capgraue in life
of S. Edward, Polidor. lib. 8, Harpesfeld saec. 11. cap. 19. Baronius an. 1043.
And it is confessed Protestants confess it.
by Protestants, as by Bishop Parker in vita Stigandi, by Bishop Godwin in vita
Brithwoldi, by Cambden in his Remains page 5, Holinshed lib. 7. cap. 15, by
Isaakson anno 909. and others.

6. Neither was the singular affection toward our country, peculiar to saint
Peter, but (as from a fountain) descended to his successors. For when the sweet
sound of the Gospel here preached by him, had in time increased, and come to
the ears of Lucius, then king here, he sending to Rome for Preachers, P.
ELEVTHERIVS
Pope Eleutherius the fourteenth Pope after Saint Peter, about the year Gordo^
188
186, P Eleutherius Legates convert Britanie.
sent hither saint Fugatius and Damian, who instructed, and baptized the King,
Queen, and most of the people, whereby our country became the first, which
publicly professed the faith of CHRIST, as testifies the learned Pamelius, in
his notes upon Tertullian against the Jews, and the same says Leslcus, lib.
3. c. 27.
Sabellicus Enneade 7. lib. 5, and thsrefore justly deserves the title of
Primogenita Ecclesiae. This testify Damasus in Pontific. Harpesfield saec. 1.
cap. 3.
saint Bede lib. 1. cap. 4, the Roman Martyrologe 26. Maij, and the Breuiarie
on the same day, Marianus in Chronico, Huntington lib. 1. page 304, Ethelwerd
an ancient writer of the blood royal, lib. 1. Westmonasteriensis anno 188, and
it is confessed by Protestants, Protestants confess it.
as by Bale Centuria 1. cap. 22, Cambden page 628, Cooper anno 180, Godwin in
life of saint Austin, Stow anno 179, Parker in Archiepiscopis P. VICT. I. P.
Victor I. Legatt converted Scotland.
page 4. The like charitable office performed Pope Victor I. unto Scotland,
sending thither his Legates at the request of king Donaldus, who baptized the
King, Queen, and his nobility, as testify Boeth lib. 6. hist. Scotiae fol.
86. Genebrardus in Chronico, Holinshed in the history of Scotland page 72, and
others. And about the year 324. Pope Siluester, having P. SILVESTER anno 324.
perfectly instructed our great Emperor Constantin, baptized him, and cured him
of his leprosy, as the same Emperor in his edict, and many Monolog. Graec.
Call. Iun. Acta Liberi vita Siluestri Huntington l. 1. page 306. Elerentius anno
506.
others testify. Likewise about the year of CHRIST 400, Ninian, being taugth
at Rome (says S. Bid lib. 3. cap. 4.) truly the faith, and mysteries of
truth, was Capgraue in his life. S. Ninian Legate of the P. converted the Picts.
thence sent to convert the south Picts, who then inhabited the best part of
Scotland. And about the year 429, Pope Celestin consecrated Palladius, P.
CELESTIN I.
Bishop, and sent him into Scotland, where as yet was no Bishop; nor forgetful
of Ireland, sent thither that great saint Patrik S. Patrik, Legate of P.
Celestin, converted Ireland.
who converted that Island to the true Catholic Faith, and is therefore justly
termed even of Cambden in Hibernia 760. Bale Centur. 1. cap. 44. S. Germrn
Legate of
Protestants, the Apostle of Ireland. And whereas, at the same time, the
Britons began to be infected with the heresy of Pelagius, the same Celestin
suppressed Pelagian. in Britan. p Prosper in Chro. Baro. anno 429.
Pope sent saint German, and saint Lupus, to confute, and suppress that
heresy, which they performed, both with disputations and miracles. Thus
continued the exceeding love of the sea Apostolic unto great Britanie, all the
time, that the Britons possessed it al, or the greatest part thereof.

7. But toward our English Nation, after it had conquered that part of great
Britanie, which now is called England, it appeared far greater. For whereas,
not only the Bid lib. 2. cap. 2.
Britons refused, but also al neighbor nations S. Gregory ^ib. 5. Epis 58. 59.
neglected, to preach the Chtistian faith to our English ancestors, who ever
before had been Pagans, and bondslaues (says saint Bede) of Idols, only Rome
lib. 2. cap. 1.
put forth her helping hand to draw them out of darkness P. GREGORIEI. anno 599.
and slavery of Idols. For no sooner, that blessed and holy Father, S.
Gregory, (as Bishop In life of saint Austin p. 3.
God win calls him) understood, that the Bid lib. 2. cap. 1. Joan. Diacon.
in vita Creg.
Angles, or English (whom for their beutie he termed Angels) were Pagans, but
forth with he went to the Pope of that time, and beseeched him to send
Preachers into England, offering himself to be one. And obtaining license
thereof came on his voyage three days iournay toward England; but was
recalled at the great importunity of the Romans, who were unwilling to want so
worthy a man. But nevertheless he forgot not his holy entreprise. For as soon
(says saint Bede lib. 2. cap. 1.) as he was Bishop over the whole world, he
made our nation the Church of CHRIST, which had been ever until that time, the
bondslaue of Idols. And in the year 596. sent hither S. Austin, with almost
forty Monks more to preach; who being entertained by king Ethelbert, in short
time converted both him, and his whole country. And that they preached the
true faith of CHRIST, appeared by the miracles which they wrought in testimony
thereof, which were so many, and so great, as it seemed (says saint
Gregory) that they imitated the virtues of the Apostoles by the miracles which
they wrought; and they are so certain and undoubted, as they are not only
testified by the said S. l. 9 epist. 56. 58.
Gregory, S. lib. 1. c. 32. lib. 2. c. 1. 2.
Bid, and other ancient Authors, but confessed even by the most earnest Fox in
Acts p. 105. Godvvin in life of saint Austin. Stow in Chro. p. 65. Holinshed
lib. 5. cap. 19. 21. 20. Spelman in Council. p 93. Cambden p. 104.
Prostants. Again, in the year 601, he sent more Preachers, and with them, al
things necessary for the ornament and service of the Church, as holy
vessels, (says saint Bede lib. 1. cap. 29.) altar clothes apparel for
Priests and Clerks, Reliks of holy Apostles and Martyrs, and many books: S.
Gregor. sent. a Pall for Mass.
and a Pall to S. Austin to use only, (says S. Gregory) at Mass, appointed
him to be over all the Bishops and Priests of Britanie, and gave him license to
institute two Archbishopricks, and 24, Bishoprics. Besiids, he sent rich
presents of diverse kinds to the King and Queen, and also sent order into
France to buy Greg. lib. 5. epist. 10.
such English youths, as were there slaves, and to send them up to Rome, there
to be brought up in wertue and learning; wherein he gave the example of the
English Seminary, which not long aftet our English kings founded in Rome. Such
was the exceeding love of this blessed Pope toward our nation, whom we may
well, and must (says Saint Bede lib. 2. cap. 15.) call our Apostle, and may
lawfully pronounce of him, that saying of the Apostle: Although he were not an
Apostle to others, yet he was to us, for the sign of his Apostleship, we are
in our Lord.

8. Neither was this great good, so happily begun, and planted in our nation by
saint Gregory and his Legates, neglected by the Popes his successors, but
rather diligently watered and furthered by them, as appears by the letters
and messages of diverse of them sent unto our Princes, and Bishops to that
purpose; as of Pope Boniface in the year 618. of Pope Honorius P. HONORIVS I.
anno 635.
in 633, of Pope Agatho 679, Pope Zachary 746, Pope Adrian 789, an others. But
most of all it was increased by Pope Bid l. 3. cap. 7. Godvvin in vita Birini.
Parker in Antiquit. cap. 10. Cooper an. 636. Ball centur. 13. cap. 4. P.
VITALIAN anno 668.
Honorius his sending hither in the year 635, that Apostolical man S. Birin who
converted the West Saxons; and by Pope Bid l. 4. cap. 1. Godvvin in vita
Theodori. Parker in vita Theod.
Vitalian, who in 668, sent hither those holy and great learned men Saints
Theodore and Adrian, by whose teaching, Englishmen, in short time, became the
best learned of rhat age, and were the beginners of the Gordon anno 791
Genebrard. ^ib 3. saec 8. S. Antonin. ^ib. 14. c. 4. Palmerius anno 791.
Spondanus anno 1334. Bossius l. 21. ^ap. 6. P. LEO III ^nno 808. Amoinus ^ib.
4. c. 94. Regino in Chron. Baronius anno 808.
University of Paris, and consequently the chiefest fountain of learning which
since has been in the West. After this, Eardulf, king of the North beiond
Humber, being driven out of his kingdom and country, Pope Leo III. in the
year 808. sent Cardinal Adulf his Legate into England, who by the help of
Charles the gteat his Ambassadors, restored him peacebly, P. LEO IV an. 847.
or Gregor. 4. anno 817.
into his kingdom. Not long after, Pope Leo IV. Malmesb. ^ 2. Pontif. ^. 242.
Baronius anno 847.
dispensed with King Ethelwoulph, for to marry, which he (being a subdeacon)
could not otherwise do lawfully. And at the same Kings request, crowned his
son Asserius in vita Alfredi Ethelvverd lib. 3. cap. 3. Malmesbur. l. 2. Reg.
c. 2. Stow p. 99.
Alfred king, adopting him for his son; who afterward, for his most worthy
acts, both in war, and peace, was surnamed the great, and for all things, became
the rarest Prince, P. MARTIN I. anno 883. Florentius anno 884. VVestmon. anno
883. Godvvin in vita Plegmundi p. 17.
that England, (and perhaps Christendom) ever had. Likewise, Pope Martin, at
the suit of the same King Alfred, released the tribute, which the English
Seminary then in Rome paid, and sent to the King many gifts, amongst which,
was a good piece of the holy cross.

9. In the year 990, when Richard Marquis of Normandy, had purposed to invade
England, and make war upon king Ethelred, Pope Ihon xv. anno 990. g Malmesb.
lib. 2. Reg. cap. 10. p. 64. Baronius anno 990.
Ihon XV. sent his Nunce, and letters to take up the matter, who happily
brought them to aggreement. And about the year 1059. P. NICOLAS II. anno 1059
Pope Nicolas II. granted to king Edward the Confessor, and to his successors
the Surius in vita sancti Edvvardi Bale Cent. 2. cap. 52. Capgraue in vita
sa^cti Edvvardi. P. URBAN II. anno 1094.
aduousion and protection of the Churches in England. And in the year 1094.
Pope Urban II. in a council at Bari, appointed, that S. Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury, and his successors, should sit in Councels beside the Archdeacon
of Rome, who sits before the Pope, adding this most honorable speech: let
Malmesbur. lib. 2. Pontif. p. 223. Godvvin in vita Anselm, latin.
us include in our compass this man, as Pope of an other world: whereas before
it was vnkown (says Malmesburie) what place belonged to our Archbishop. And
the same place did Pope Paschal P. PASCHAL II. anno 1102. Malmeshur. lib. 1.
Pont. p. 224.
II. confirm in a Council at Rome, about the year 1102. And besides this,
diverse others dignities, and privileges have been granted to the sea of
Canterbury, by the Popes, as to be Primats of al Britanie, Legat^ born, and
the like.

10. Moreover, in the year 1098. the Scots obtained of P. URBAN II. anno 1098.
Genebrard. in Chron.
Pope Vrbain II. for their Prince, that he might have the name, title, and
anointment of a King, as the Baronius anno 1000. Bale Cent. 2. part. 145.
Hungarians and Polonians had obtained for their Princes, about the year 1000.
whereupon King Edgar was then first anointed King of Scotland. And about the
year 1107, Pope Paschal II. Malmesb. lib. 5. Reg. p. 163. Gordn anno 1101.
Boeth lib. 2. fol. 261.
writing to king Henry I. amongst other things, promises so to favor him and
his son, as what (says he) hurts you or him, may seem to hurt the Church
of Rome. And in the year 1152. when king P. EVGENIVS III. anno 1152. Stow anno
1152. Godvvin in vita Theobald. P. ADRIAN IV. anno 1160. Par. an. 1155 Bale
Cent. 2. Giraldus Cambrens. in Hibern. lib. 2. cap. 6. Io. Sarisbur. lib. 4. c.
42. Stow anno 1160. Cambden in Hibern. p. 762. Parker in vita S. Tho. P.
ALEXANDER 3. anno 1171. Houeden lib. 2. p. 528. P. LUCIUS III. anno 1183.
Houeden lib. 2. p. 628.
Stephn, having usurped the crown of England, endeavored to cause the Bishop
to crown his son Eustace, thereby to exclude for ever the lawful heyr,
Henry II. Pope Eugenius III. sent commandment to the Clergy, not to meddle in
that matter; whereby it was hindered. In the year 1106, Pope Adrian IV. gave
unto King Henry II, the dominion and government of Ireland, and sent unto him
the Bull of his grant, with a ring of gold in token of the inuestiture. Which
grant, at the request of the said king, Pope Alexander III. confirmed to him
and his heirs. And as for Pope Lucius III, his good will appears by the great
praise, which he gives to the said king Henry's ancestors, whom he affirms
to have far exceded the rest of christian Princes, in warlik power, and
noblenes of mind. Which affection continued also in his successor Pope Urban
III. of whom P VRBIN III. anno 1185. Houeden lib. 2. p. 631. Stow anno 1185.
the said king Henry the second obtained many things, whereof one was, that
he might crown which of his sons he would, King of Ireland; which he
confirmed by a Bull, and in token of his good will and grant, sent him a crown.
And lastly when not only the King of France, but also his own sons, and
nobles, had conspired against the said king Henry II, and had invaded his
dominions withfar greater power, then he P. CLEMENT III. anno 1189. Houeden
lib. 2. p. 652. VVestmon. anno 1189.
was able to resist, Pope Clement III, in the year 1189, sent a Cardinal to
procure peace, who excommunicated the hinderers of peace, and threatened to
interdict the kingdom of France, unless the king made peace with England.

11. Likewise in the year 1193, when king Richard I. was taken prisoner, as he
came from the holy land, by the Duke of Austria, P. CELESTIN III. anno 1193.
VVestmon. anno 1193. Houeden p 773. Polid. l. 14. Paris anno 1195. Stow anno
1195.
Pope Celestin III, at the said kings request, excomunicated the Duke, and
enjoined him to release the covenants, which he had compelled the king to
make, and to send home the pledges: Who not obeying the Pope, he soon dyed
miserably, and was left unburied until his son had sent home the pledges, and
sworn to stand to the judgment of the Church. And in the year P. INNOCENT III
anno 1207. Paris anno 1207. Stow anno 1207.
1207, Pope Innocent III. sent to king Ihon an eloquent Epistle, and diverse
precious jewels: And in the year 1215, when the Barons had extorted from the
said king, certain Paris ann. 1216. Polidor. l. 15. Stow anno 1215. Godvvin in
vita Steph. Lang. Bale Cent. 3. p. 260.
charters, and liberties, the same Pope, at the kings request, disannulled
those charters, and excommunicated the Barons, who had rebelled against him.
And when the said Barons had called in Lewis the Prince of France, King Ihon
put al his hope in the Popes Legate. Paris anno p. 377.
chosen him their king, and yielded the chiefest cities and holds into his
hands, so that England was in manifest danger to be lost, the said Pope sent
his Legate to assist king John, and to forbid the French upon pain of
excommunication, to enter into England, which he stoutly performed, and was a
great means of saueing England. In the year P. INNOCENT IV anno 1258. Paris
anno 1254. Stouv anno 1254.
1258, Pope Innocent IV. bestowed the royal title of the kingdoms of Naples
and Sicilie, upon Edmund son to king Henry III, and by a Cardinal, sent to
him the inuestiture P. ALEXANDER IV. anno 1257. VVestmon. anno 1254. Bale Cent.
4 p 290. Paris anno 1254.
thereof. And in the year 1257, Pope Alexander IV. sent messengers to Richard
Duke of Cornwall, brother to the said king Henry, for to go into Germany to
receive it, which he did, and was crowned at Aquisgran. And in the year 1292,
when the Barons had wrested from the said King Henry 3, certain liberties,
Pope Urban IV, at the said kings request, P. URBAN IV. anno 1292. Stow anno
1262. Bale Ce^t. 4. p 293. 326. Paris p. 1322
sent a Legate to accurse those Barons, who had rebelled in defense of those
liberties.

12. In the year 1272, at the petition of king Edward I. Pope Gregory X.
excommunicated P. GREGORY X anno 1272. VVestmon. anno 1272. Polidor. l. 17
VValsinga^ Ypodig. anno 1273.
Guy of Montfort, for killing the kings cousin germain in his return from the
holy land, condemned him of wilful and privy murder, of sacriledg and
treason; declared him to be infamous and incapable of any office in the
commonwealth, disinherited his posterity to the fourth generation, and
excommunicated al those, who entertained him, and interdicted their dominions.
And in the same Kings time, was Camden in Cantabrig p 435.
Cambridge, of a schole, made on university by the Pope. And under Edward II.
Pope Clement V. appointed, that in Oxford should be read two Lectures Clement
tit. de Magistris cap. 1.
of the Hebrew, Arabic, and Chaldaick tongues, and authorized it for one of
the four famousest Universities in Christendom. Also in the year 1316. Pope
Ihon XXII. at the P. IHON XXII. anno 1316. Polidor l 17 Stow anno 1316.
VValsingam. anno 1312. 1317.
said king Edward II. his request, sent two Legates to make peace betwixt
England and Scotland, and to reconcile Thomas Earl of Lancaster to the king;
who excommunicated the Scots, because they would not aggree to peace, And in
the same year, at the same kings petition, the Pope confirmed all the ancient
privileges of the University of Cambridg, which of long time they had
enjoined, by the benefit (says Anno 1317.
Stow) of the Popes predecessors.

13. Moreover in the year 1489, Pope Innocent VIII. P. INNOCENT VIII. anno
1489. Godvvin in Episc. Bathon. n. 42.
sent a Nunce to appease the the dissension betwixt the king of Scotland and
his people, but before his arriual, the king was slain. And about the year
1504. when there arose a contention betwixt king Henry VII. and Ferdinand king
of Spain, about precedence of their Ambassadors P. JULIUS II. anno 1504.
Spondanus anno 1433. Volateran. Comin ventura. Stow 1505 Bacon. in Henry 7.
with the Pope, Pope Julius II. having heard both Ambassadors, gave sentence
in favor of the king of England. And in the year 1505. sent to the king, a
sword and cap of maintenance, as to a defender of the Church. But as no king of
England deserved better of the sea Apostolic, then King Henry VIII. did for
long time, so none received more honor from thence then he. For he received not
only from Stavv anno 1514.
Pope Julius II, in the year 1514. a sword and cap of maintenance, for
defending him against the king of France, but also of P. LEO X. anno 1521.
Stow in Chron. Onuphrius in Chron.
Pope Leo X, in the yeat 1521, the most honorable title of DEFENDFR OF THE
FAITH, for his writing against Luther. Which title, as it is more honorable
then the title of most Christian, or Catholic, given by Popes to the kings of
France and Spain, so was it ever most highly esteemed by king Henry, and Stow
anno 1547.
engraven on his tomb, where is left out the title of his supremacy.

14. And though Queen Elizabeth had utterly cast of the Popes freindship, yet
he forsook not her. For Pope Pius P. PIUS IV. anno 1560.
IV. supposing, that she had revolted from that sea, rather for fear that her
title to the crown might be called in question, because one Pope before had
declared her birth to be unlawful, then for dislike of the religion, which in
her fathers and sisters days, she had professed, sent a Nunce to promise her al
favor touching her title to the crown, and 1562.
soon after, an other to request her to send her Deuines to the Council of
Trente, with promise of al security and liberty. Neither P. CLEMENT VIII.
anno 603.
may I leave your Majesty out of the number of the Princes of this land, who
have tasted the love of the sea Apostolic, because out of your own grateful
mind, you have Procla^at. anno ^egni. 1.
publicly professed your self beholden unto Pope Clement VIII, for his
temporal carriage and diverse kind offices toward you. Besides, he has (as is
reported) censured al such, as shall molest your grace, and has often times
professed, that he would willingly give his life for the eternal good of your
country, which is the greatest love, that one can bear, (as our Savior
testifies) to his friend. Oh how great enemies are they unto England, who seek
by falls slanders, to make such friends odious unto us.

14. By this which has been said, (omitting much more for brevity) your
Majesty clearly sees, how greatly, and how continually, the sea Apostolic
has ever favored the Christian Princes of this land: how many, and how great
benefits, both spititual and temporal, Popes have bestowed upon them, and in
their dangers and distresses, according to their power, assisted them, Popes
have more benefited Engl. then al Christde^ome has done.
Weigh (I beseech your grace) in the balance of your princely wisdom, the
foresaid benefits, with such, as your self or ancestors have received from the
rest of Christendom, and you shall find, that the sea Apostolic alone, has
more benefited England, then al Christendom besides, and consequently, that the
forsaking the Popes freindship, has more endammaged your realm, then if it had
forsaken the rest of Christendom. But especially (I humbly beseech your
Majesty) weigh them with such, as Bell or any Minister can show you to have
received from their two seats of pestilence, in Wittenberg and Geneua. What
kingdoms have they bestowed upon you? unto what Imperial or Royal dignity have
they exalted you? from what Paganism have they converted you? what enemies
have they appeased? what assistance have they afforded you in any need? what
good, little or great, have they brought to this land? Nay what mischief have
they not brought? That one Apostata and firebrand of sedition, Knox, sent from
Geneua, brought more mischief to your grandmother, your B. Mother, to your
Father, and Kingdom of Scotland, then I can rehearse, or your Majesty without
great grief can remember. Ministers pretend the love of the Gospel, as the
cause of persuading you from freindship with the Pope: but yet dissuade not
from Cenference at Hampion court p. 80. 81.
freindship with the Turk. They pretend also your Graces security; but the
true cause indeed, your Majesty descried and discovered in Knox, to wit, their
own security and aduanceme^t, which they fear would be endangered, if you kept
your ancient and surest friend, and therefore with your loss (as your Majesty
perceived in your Grandmothers case) they work their own wealth and
security. And thus much of the Popes.

15. As for the Christian Princes of this land, though they have been of four
different, and most opposite nations, to wit, Britons, English, Danes, and
Normans: yet have they al aggreed in keeping the league of freindship with the
Pope, being officious unto him, and accounting him their especial friend. Of
the British kings of K. LUCIUS.
this land, first is king Beda lib. 1. cap. 1.
Lucius, whose particular affection toward the sea Apostolic, is evident by
that, he neglecting other Christian Churches near CONSTANTIN the Great.
unto him, he sent so far as to Rome for preachers. As for Constantin the great
(the immortal glory of the British kings) his extraordinary love and
affection unto the sea of Rome is more notorious, then I need rehearse. For he
not only gave unto the Pope, the government of Rome, and of a good part of the
West, (as besides In edicto. Eugubin dc Donat. Constant. Genebrard. in Chron.
Ciaconus in S. luest. 1. Victorellus in notis ad Ciac.
himself and Latin Histriographers, both Photius in Nomocan.
Greecks, and Abraham Abben Efra.
Jews professed enemies to the Pope do testify) but also served him as a
lackey, holding his stirrup, and leading his horse by the bridle. Cad wallader
also the last British king in England K. CADVALADER ann. 652.
having left his country went no whether but to Rome, and there ended his
days. And if the histories of those ancient times were more perfect, or the
Britons had reigned longer in this Island, no doubt but we should have more
examples of their devotion to the sea Apostolic, as appears by Solomon K.
SOLOMON. Argentreus hist. Britan. lib 2. c. 27. Baron. anno 869.
their king in little Britanie, after they had been driven hence by the Saxons,
who writing to Pope Adrian II. begins his letter thus. Domino ac beatissimo
Apostol. sedis Romans Hadriano, Solomon Britannorum rex, flexis genibus,
inclinatoque capite. And sends him his statua in gold with diverse rich gifts
and money, promises a yearly pension, and acknowledges his Royal title to
have been given to him by Popes. This was the love of the British king unto the
sea Apostolic.

16. To the British kings succeeded the Saxons or English as well in their love
and reverence to the sea of Rome as in their K. ETHELBERT anno 597.
Kingdom. For king Ethlebert, at the very first, received saint Gregory his
Legates very courteously, provided them of al things necessary and freely
licensed them to preach, using these gracious words, worthy to be imitated of
your Majesty, For so much as you are come so far to impart unto us such
knowledge, as you take to be true, we will not trouble you, but rather withal
courtesy receive you. After him, king Osuin, having perfectly K. OSVIN anno
665.
learned, that the Church of Rome (says saint Bede) lib. 3. cap. 1.
was the Catholiek and Apostolic Church, sent thither in the year 665 a Priest
to be consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury. And in a conference about the
observation of Easter, hearing, that the keys of heaven were given to S.
Peter, concluded thus: I will not gainsay such a ^^b. 3. cap. 25. ^aronius ^nno
664.
Porter, as this is, but as far as I know, and am able, I will covet in all
points to obey his ordonnance. And in the year 670. He bare (says S. Bid)
such love and affection to the Apostolic sea of Rome, as if he might have
escaped his sickness, he purposed to go to Rome, and to end his life in those
holy places there.

17. But what he could not through death perform the valiant ^ CED^ALLA ^^no 6;
9.
Prince Cedwalla did in the very flour of his age, and prosperity. For in the
year 689, Forsaking his kingdom (says saint Bede) he went to Rome thinking
it to be a singular glory, and renoune for him to be regenerated with the
Sacrement of Baptism, at the sea Apostolic: and withal conceived hope, that
as soon as by baptism he was cleansed from sin he should depart from this
world to immortal joy: Which by Gods providence was performed, and he honorably
buried, by the Pope in S. Peter's Church. Not long after him to wit in the year
709. two English kings, Coenred, and Offa, forsook their K. Coenred 3706. K.
Offa.
kingdoms, went to Rome, and there became Monks, continuing (says saint Bede)
at the Apostles lib. 5. cap. 10 K. Ina ann 726.
tombs, in praying, fasting, and dealing alms until their dying lib. 5. cap.
ij Baronius anno 729. Ethelvverd lib. 2. cap. 13. Malmesbur. lib. 1. Reg. cap.
2. Polidor l. 4. Stow in Ina. p. 96.
day. Ina, alias Hun, successor to king Cedwal in his kingdom, succeeded him
also in his devotion to the sea Apostolic. For after he had reigned (says
Bid) 37. years, he gave over his kingdom, and went himself to the tombs and
monuments of the Apostles in Rome, as in those days many English, both of the
Nobility, and Commons, spiritual and temporal, men and women, were wont to do
with great emulation. Neither went he only to Rome, but became there a Monk,
and was the first, that paid the Peter pence, appointing that every
householder of K. Ina gave the Peter pence.
his kingdom, who had thirty penny worth of cattle of one sort, should pay
yearly one penny to Rome. Which money, English Seminary in Rome 900 years
since VVestmon. anno 727. 764.
was partly for the Popes use partly for maintenance of an English schole or
Seminary, which he then built in Rome, for bringing up of English youths there
in virtue and learning.

18. Not long after, about the year 750, saint Richard king K. RICHARD anno
750. Surius to. 1. Baronius anno 750.
forsook his kingdom, and leaving his two sons in Germany, with saint
Boniface an Englisman, the Popes Legate there, went himself in pilgrimage to
Rome, but dying in the way at Luca, is there honorably buried. And the year
775, king K. Offa anno 775. Malmesbur. lib. 2. Reg. cap. 4. VVestmon. anno 194.
Polidor l. 4. Fox p. 101.
Offa, though a warlick Prince, went to Rome, and imitating the example of king
Ina, increased the English Seminary begun by him, and imposed the like pension
of Peter pence, upon his kingdom of Mercia: as Charles the great, about the
same time, imposed upon France the like tribute to be paid to Rome. The love
and affection of king Kenulph, a worthy K. KENVLPH anno 808. Malmesbur. l. 1.
Keg. c. 4. Baronius anno 828.
Prince, and successor to king Offa, appears by his redeeming the Popes
Legate, taken of Pirates, in the year 808. and by his submissiue letter to the
Pope, wherein he humbly craves his blessing, as al his Predecessors had,
desires to be adopted for his son, as I (says the king) love you like a
father, and embrace you with all obedience. And protested to be willing to spend
his life for the Pope. K. ETELVVOLPH anno 855.


19. After him king Ethelwolph, in the year 857. went to Rome, took with him
his best beloved son Alfred, to be instructed (says Westmonaster) of the
VVestmon. anno 854. Ethelvverd lib. 3. cap. 3. Stow anno 839. Ingulfus Bale
Cent. 2 p. 113. Asserius in vita afredi.
Pope in manners and Religion where he abode a whole year, and procured his
son to be crowned of the Pope, and adopted of him for his son: he also
notably repaired the Englith Seminary at Rome, which had been burnt a little
before, and confirming the gifts of king Malmesbur. lib. 2. Reg. cap. 2. Stow
anno 839. Fox p. 136.
Ina and Offa, imposed the pension of Peter pence upon al England, which was
afterward paid until the later end of King Henry VIII. About the same K.
BVRDRED Ethelvverd lib. 4 cap. 3. Malmesbur. lib. 1. cap. 4. Stow anno 875.
time king Burdred leaving his kingdom went to Rome, and was there buried in
the English schole. Neither would King Canute, though a Dane, be K. CANVTE anno
1032. Florent. anno 1031. Matmesbur. lib. 2. c. 11. Ingulfus. Huntington lib.
6. Marian. anno 1033, Stow in Canute.
found ungrateful to the sea Apostolic, but went to Rome, in the year 1032,
confirmed the payment of the Peter pence, gave great gifts of gold and silver,
and precious things to saint Peter, and obtained of Pope John immunitie for the
English Seminary. And finally, King Edward Confessor, last but one, of the
Saxon blood, would have K. EDWARD sonfessor. Ealred in vita Edvvardi. Baronius
anno 1060.
gone to Rome in pilgrimage, had not his people upon fear of the Danes
invasion, hindered him; yet sent he Ambassadors to Rome, with great presents,
and confirmed all the duties and customs belonging thereto in England. And thus
continued the English Kings, all the time of their reign, in singular affection
and devotion to the sea Apostolic.

20. To whom, as the Norman K WILLIAM Conquer. anno 1066. Malmesbur. lib. 3.
Reg. Ingulfus p. 900. Stow in Harald. p. 131.
Princes succeeded, so they followed them in their piety and religion. For
besides, that they paid the Peter pence, in particular Willam the Conqueror,
having subdued and slain king Harald in the year 1066, sent K. HENRY I.
Malmesbur. lib. 1. Pontif. page 226. K. HENRY II. anno 1180. Rob. Montensis.
Genebrard. anno 1180. Sigebertus anno 1163. Neubrigens. lib. 2. c. 14. Bale
Cent. 2 cap. 94. Holinshed anno 1163. Baronius anno 1162.
straight his standard to the Pope as to his particular friend. And king Henry
I. professed by his Ambassador to Pope Paschal II. that England was a peculiar
province of the Church of Rome, and paid unto her yearly tribute. King Henry
II. about the year 1180, together with Lewis king of France led Pope Alexanders
horse, and with great pomp co^ducted him through the city Tociacum. King
Richard, Coeur K. RICHARD I Polid. l. 14. Genebrard. ^n Chron. Stow. ^ale
Cent. 2 ^. 104. Houeden ^. 609.
de Lion, at the exhortation of the Pope, went in person to the holy land with
an army of thirty thousand foot, and five thousand horse: in which voyage he
conquered the kingdom of Ciprus, and city of Ptolemais, and overthrew the
Souldan in a great battle; and the like enterprise afterward took king Edward
I. in the year 1241. King K. HENRY III. ^tovv anno ^241.
Henry III. placed the Popes Legate in the most honorable room of the table at
a public banquet in Christmas betwixt himself and the Archbishop of York: and
afterward with great pomp (says Stow) and innumerable company of nobles, and
trumpets sounding before brought him to the sea. How devout king Richard II.
and Englishmen K. RICHARD II. Stow anno 1407.
in his time were to the sea of Rome, appears by their building an hospital
there for receipt of English Pilgrims, instead of the foresaid Seminary, which
(as it seems) was destroyed in that great burning of Rome in the year 1084.)
in the place whereof S. Thomas of Canterbury had before built a Chapel in
honor of the blessed Trinity. This Hospital was afterward, in the reign of
king Henry VI, and Henry VII reedified, and much increased, and lastly in the
year 1570 was much bewtified, and augmented both in buildings and reuenews by
Pope Gregory XIII, and by him converted to the ancient use of a Seminary,
retaining still the obligation of an Hospital.

21. The affection of King K. HENRY IV. Stow anno 1409.
Henry IV. appears by his letter to the Pope in the year 1409, which he
begins thus: Most holy Father, our recommendations in humble wise premised.
And afterward; Having taken with our said son, and also with our Prelates and
Nobles, mature deliberation, we beseech with all humility, and require your
clemency (whose state and honor upon diverse causes, as a devout son of the
Church, so far as we might with God, we have ever embraced, and do embrace) by
the express and whole assent of the estates aforesaid, etc. And as for king
Henry K. HENRY V.
V, he in the year 1416 sent his Ambassadors to the General Council at
Constance, at whose procurement it was there ordained (says Stowe) that
England Stow 1416
should obtain the name of a Nation, and be one of the five Nations, that owe
their devotion to the Church of Rome, which thing until that time, men of other
Nations for envy had Note this.
let. Behold, what an honor, king Henry V, the Alexander of England, and
Conqueror of France, in his most flourishing and triumphant time, accounted it
to owe devotion to the Church of Rome; which now Ministers would account so
dishonorable. And for king Henry K. HENRY VII. Bacon. in Henr. 7.
VII, your Majesty's great grandfather; his affection is evident by the sword
and cap of maintenance sent to him from the Pope, anno 1505.

22. But none of the kings of K. HENRY VIII.
the Norman blood, ever showed so great signs of love and affection to the sea
Apostolic, as king Henry VIII, did for a long time. For first in the year
1511, he wrote to the French king, to desist from molesting Pope Julius II, and
in the next year, sent an army of ten thousand men into Onuphr. in Iulio 2.
Stow anno 1511. 1512. 1513.
France for the Popes defense. And in the year 1513, he went himself in person,
with a royal army, and conquered Turwin, and Tournay. And not content to
defend the Pope with his sword, in the year 1521, wrote an excellent book in
his defense against Luther. And again, in the year 1527, when Pope Clement was
taken prisoner by the Emperors soldiers, he gave monthly 60 thousand Angels, to
the maintenance of an army, for the Popes delivery. And in this singular
affection toward the sea Apostolic, continued he until the 22 year of his
reign anno 1530, when not upon any injury offered by the Pope, or dislike of
his religion, which (except the matter of supremacy) he defended to his death,
and persecuted the Protestants, but only upon occasion of delay (says Stow)
made by the Stow anno 1530. and seq.
Pope in his controversy of deuorcement, and through displeasure of such
reports, as he heard had been made of him to the court of Rome, and thirdly
pricked forward by such Councellers to follow the example of the Germans, he
first forbad the procurement of any thing from Rome, and soon after prohibited
al payme^ts, and appeals to Rome, and lastly, took upon him that supremacy,
which al his Christian predecessors had acknowledged to be in the Pope.

23. Thus your Majesty sees, how long, how honorably, and how profitably also
unto both parties, has the mutual amity and league of freindship betwixt the
sea Apostolic, and the Princes of all the four Nations, that have swayed the
Scepter of England, continued and flourished: and how of late it was broken by
one Prince, upon mere passion, contrary to the example of al his predecessors,
and successors also, except one child, and a woeman. What dangers and troubles,
he and his kingdom incurred thereby, and how his progeny (according as Friar
Paeto, and House anno 1533.
Elston did then foretell him) is now consumed, and his crown translated to an
other royal line, against which in his time he Hungtinton lib. 6. p. 359.
made very sharp war, I need not here declare. Only I will say, that himself,
being after more free from passion, labored to be reconciled to the sea
Apostolic, and employed therein Bishop Gardener, (as he professed in a sermon
at Paul's Cross) and had easily obtained it, if he would have acknowledged his
fault, and done penance. What remains for me to conclude this long Epistle,
but prostrat at your Majesty's feet, humbly to beseech you, for your own good,
and in the name of the foresaid Christian Princes, as you are the head of the 5
nation, which (according Hungtinton supra.
to Gods providence, foretold by a holy man many years ago) has attained to
the rule of the land, so you would continue that most ancient, honorable, and
profitable league of freindship, which was betwixt them al, and the sea
Apostolic. Who (I beseech your grace) will give you more faithful council,
then your own Progenitors and forefathers? Who can give more safe and secure
direction in government of your Kingdom, then your own predecessors, who so
happily, and so long time governed it? who are so worthy to give you example,
or whom can you with so much honor imitate, as so many, so valiant, so prudent
Princes? And yet they al, with one voice, counsel and request you to follow in
this so important a matter, not so much themselves, as the counsel of the
wisest king, rhat ever was, yea of God himself, in these words: Thine own
friend, Proverb. cap 27.
and thy fathers friend, see thou forsake not; especially such a one, as has
ever been, not only your own friend, and particularly your blessed Mothers
friend, but of al your Christian forefathers, who as they have left unto your
grace their crown and kingdom, so have they also bequeathed their faith,
religion, and freindship with the sea Apostolic, as no small portion and stay
of their inheritance. We esteem your public acknowledging of Rome to be the
Mother Church; and your Speech in the Rarlament
self to be beholding to Pope Clement VIII, for his temporal carriage, and kind
offices, as sparks of a greater fire of love in kindled Proclamat. An 1. regni.
in your princely heart toward that sea, which we beseech Almighty God so to
increase, as it may one day burst forth to your own good, and the universal joy
of Christendom: Our Lord JESUS long preserve your Majesty, with all grace,
health, and prosperity.

Your Majesty's dutiful subject and daily Orator R. S.


