blazon of the Commonwealth The liberty of the Deane and Chapter of St. Paul's.
depiction of St. Paul's Cathedral blazon of the diocese of London
An Abstract of St. Paul's late DEANERY.
See Hen. 3. Ed. 1. Edw. 4. Hen. 7. and Hen. 8.
THE Bayliwicke and Liberty of the late Deane and Chapter of St. Paul's is a
special Liberty, and a distinct Jurisdiction, and is Granted and Confirmed to
them by special Letters Patents and Charters of Confirmation by several
Kings, in these very words, viz.

The Return, and the Execution of all Writs whatsoever.
THat the Deane and Chapter, and their Successors for ever, shall have the
Execution and the Return of all Writs. Precepts, and Mandates, whatsoever, as
well Pleas of the Forest, as to all Common Pleas, and Pleas of the Crown.

No Officer may enter or incroach upon the Inhabitants, or infringe their
liberties.
SO as no Sheriff, Bayliffe, or Minister of our Lord the King, may enter or
incroach upon their Freedoms, Lands, or Tenements.

The great Charter.
AND this is the first Charter and Grant in Magna Charta, viz. to have all their
Rights and Freedoms inviolable, to the^ and their Successors for ever.

All these Charters, grants, and freedoms are confirmed by the late Parliament.
ALL which Letters Patents, Charters, Grants, and Freedoms, are confirmed by
the late Parliament, as fully as the then Deane and Chapter did hold an^ ^njoy
the same.

AND is sithence contracted for and purchased by EDMUND THOROVV GOOD, Bayliffe.


To keep our pretended Officers, Intruders, and Bum^.
THose Bayliffes that belong to this Liberty, shall have their names Printed in
their Warrants, or fayrely written, without interlining, and the Chief
Bayliffes name, and the figure of St. Paul's Church, as above, in the margent of
their VVarrant.

Who will assume that they are Officers, and are not, etc.
TO this end that all the Inhabitants may know them to be Officers belonging to
this Liberty, and where they may call for Return of their Warrants, and of
whom.

Not to part with their money for nothing.
THus they shall have full satisfaction of the doing and dispatching of their
Business, and may know what Bail is taken for them.

Sworn Officers.
AND also that they may know of whom to complain, and where, for the not
performing of their Office according to their Oath.

A Clerk at the chief Bailiffs house to attend the business of the Bailiwick,
etc to take Order etc.
THose that have Business to be done in this Liberty, may come to the Chief
Bailiffs House, where there shall be Order taken for the dispatching of their
Business forthwith, and there they may know what is done therein.

The Tenants and Inhabitants not to pay toll. See the Inrolment of Patents in
the Tower, Ed. 4. Ed. 5. etc.
ALL the Inhabitants dwelling within the late Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's
aforesaid, are acquitted of all Tolls, Passage, and Carriage, in all places
throughout the Nation, as well by land as by water, in all Fayres and Markets,
to them and their successors for ever, as by the several Letters Patents,
Charters, Grants, and Confirmations aforesaid, does appear.

IF any of the Inhabitants are or hereafter shall be Arested by foreign
Officers, not belonging to this Liberty, do forthwith send to the Chief
Bayliffe, (or in his absence to his Officers) order shall be presently taken
for such intruders as do introach upon the Inhabitants to infringe their
Liberty.


