PROPOSALS For Compiling and Publishing a Book to be Entitled, Pietas
Anglicana: Or, An Historical Account of all the Works of Piety, Charity, and
other Acts of Beneficence, done in England since the Reformation, with respect
to Religion, Learning, and Provision for all sorts of Poor; Collected from
Histories, Records, Wills, Monuments, and other Authentic Evidence.
WHereas the Enemies of our Reformation have invidiously suggested the want of
Charity in Protestants, and have frequently made great Ostentation of the Pious
and Charitable Deeds performed by Members of the Roman Church, as if Good Works
were a distinguishing Note of their Communion; and, Whereas the Public Works
of Piety and Charity done in England since that blessed Period, though great and
numerous, lie scattered and dispersed in Private Memorials, and have not yet
been collected together into one View, for the Knowledge and Satisfaction of
the World; and, Whereas the representing them in due Method and Order will very
much conduce to the Glory of Almighty God, the Propagation of Christianity, the
Honor of this Church and Nation, the Vindication of the Protestant Religion,
the doing Justice to the Memories of past Benefactors, and raising up more
shining Examples in future Generations: To answer these and some other laudable
Designs, This Work is undertaken, (on a just prospect of Encuragement and
Assistance from Persons of Character in Church and State) and some progress
already made in it by the Reverend Mr. Philip Stubs, Rector of St. Alphage,
London; who hereby humbly desires all others, of what Quality soever, who are
Able and Willing to promote so useful a Design, to communicate to him all
proper Informations that may fall under the Heads hereafter specified,

I. Piety.
I. Churches and Chapels, and therein, 1 The Fabric, under which is to be
considered, 1 Building, 2 Maintenance of Repairs, 3 Ornaments.
2 The Divine Service performed there, as 1 Prayers, 2 Monthly Sacraments, 3
Stated Lectures, 4 Catechetic Courses, 5 Occasional Sermons.
3 Their Endowments, such are 1 Donations of Glebe, 2 Erection and improvement
of Manse, 3 Restoration of Tithe, 4 Stipends of Augmentation.

II. Clergy, as 1 Their Persons, 2 Their Families.
III. Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, with what has been done, in 1
Plantations, by 1 Sending Missionaries, 2 Building Churches and Endowing them,
3 Erecting Schools and Libraries.
2 Factories.
IV. Other Ways and Means taken for the propagation of Christian Knowledge and
Practice at Home, etc.
II. Learning. With a particular regard to
I. Charity Schools for Children. II. Grammar Schools for Youth. III.
Universities for Men; in these 1 Public Libraries, 2 Professorships, 3
Lectures, 4 Schools and Theater, 5 Colleges and Halls, in them 1 Their
Foundational Endowments, 2 Additional Benefactions;

IV. Colleges; In other parts of England. V. Libraries; In other parts of
England. VI. Public Lectures; In other parts of England. VII. Honorary
Stipends; In other parts of England.
III. Charity.
I. Hospitals 1 For Children, 2 Impotent Aged persons, 3 Widows, 4 Lunaticks, 5
Sick and Wounded, 6 Seamen, 7 Soldiers.
II. Workhouses 1 For poor Children at large, 2 Parochial Children, 3 Vagrants
and Lewd people.
III. Gifts and Legacies, etc. to Cities, Corporations, Towns and Parishes, for
1 Clothing poor people, 2 Apprenticing Children, 3 Disposing young Maidens in
Marriage, 4 Setting up young Tradesmen, 5 Support of decayed Housekeepers,
Widows, or Orphans, 6 Relief or Redemption of Prisoners and Captives, 7 Aid of
poor Parishioners from payments of Subsidies, setting out Soldiers, and other
Taxes, 8 Entertainment of Pilgrims and Strangers, 9 Repair of Bridges, etc. and
setting up Mercuries in Highways, etc.

To which will be added, under each general Head, some Proposals relating to
Charities, and Acts of Beneficence yet wanting among us, such are, Retirements
for superanuuate or crazed Clergymen; Lending Libraries in Market Towns;
Encouragements for New Converts from Error or Debauchery; provision for
Incurables, penitent Strumpets, bashful Poor, etc. by Combinations or
Societies, Banks of Loan, Dispensaries, with other Ways and Means.


