To all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Ministers,
Constables, Churchwardens, Headbourroughs, and to all other Officers, and well
disposed People whatsoever.
THese are to certefie that the Bearers hereof Andrew Dalton Gentleman with his
wife, sister, and children, by means of the late horrid rebellion in Ireland
were deprived of a full estate in the County of Waterford, and Province of
Munster to the value of 200l per annum, besides their personal estates,
amounting to the value of 900l and upward, as is well known by the attestation
of many Honorable personages and Gentlemen of quality, through which
disasters they are brought by the providence of God to utter misery, no way
able to subsist, having a great charge of children in a miserable condition.
But petitioning to the late Parliament for redress could yet procure little or
no relief.

In tender consideration whereof, we whose names are subscribed do request the
Venerable Clergy to publish this their sad condition to their respective
Congregations, and to animate the hearts of their people (under God) to this
most pious work, verily beleiving that they are fit objects of a general
compassion.

We also desire the assistance of all Constables, Church wardens, and other
Officers whatsoever to be so ingenious as to afford them necessary
accommodation fit for travel and repose to people of their rank and quality,
allowing them competent lodging in due time to avoid the danger of the law,
desiring all Officers now under, his Highness the Lord Protector to suffer
them to pass without molestation, and so to repair to Ireland within eight
months and no longer,

Dated at Westminster February 23. 1653.
THe Premises have been examined is allowed of by us Commissioners for the
Irish affairs, being appointed by his Highness the Lord Protector, and the
Right Honorable the Council of State, and is commended unto your charity, and
allowed to travel to their friends, Eight months from the date hereof, and no
longer; then to take shipping for Ireland the former place of their habitations.

Given under our Hands at Westminster, this 20 day of Feb: 1653. James
Armachanus. Alex. Ranelaugh John Ward. Rob. Forbe. Will. Cole. Tho. Hammond.



