To the Kings most Excellent Majesty: The humble Petition of John Brookbank,
Gilbert Dean, John Ash, and John King, Ministers of Gods Word,
Most humbly shows,
THat Your Petitioners persecuted in Your Highness Kingdom of Ireland by the
barbarous Rebels, for Religion and Loyalty, and more especially in respect of
their Function, were thereby deprived of their whole Estates; And being forced
into this Kingdom, are so destitute of all help and hope of livelihood, that
their present Necessities enforce them to prostrate themselves at the feet of
Your Royal Clemency, most humbly supplicating Your Sacred Majesty, That in
regard these unhappy Distractions are a bar unto other provisions for them
here, and that they are resolved to take the first opportunity which (through
Gods mercy) shall be offered, to return safely unto their Country and Pastoral
Charges:

It might therefore please Your Majesty, out of Your Princely compassion of
Your distressed Subjects of that bleeding and dying Kingdom, to commiserate
Your Petitioners heavy Sufferings, and even perishing condition; and to grant
Your Royal leave and permission, that they may crave the Christian endeavors of
Ministers in their Congregations, and receive such bounty and support of Your
charitable Subjects, as may preserve life and being in them and their Families,
Thirty three persons in number, languishing at present under extreme want and
misery. And they and theirs (as in duty bound) shall ever pray, etc.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
THese are humbly to certify, That John Brookbank, Gilbert Dean, John Ash, and
John King, Ministers of the Word of God in Your Kingdom of Ireland, in the time
of Peace, lived in a plentiful condition, and by the Providence of God, and
their own endeavors, they acquired very considerable estates; And that for the
Protestant Profession and Loyalty to Your Majesty, they and their Families were
by the Rebels expelled, and enforced to come over into England to seek relief,
where patiently they have undergone the burden of want and misery, and (by
reason of these continued Distractions) hitherto have had no support in their
suffering condition, in which they cannot longer continue, without sudden
perishing: And I do conceive them (in all humility) more then ordinary objects
of Pity and Compassion; And readily and humbly do Subscribe my Hand in
Testimony of my knowledge hereof.

Kingston, this 16 of September. 1647. ORMOND.

CHARLES R.

Upon perusal and consideration of the humble Petition of John Brookbank,
Gilbert Dean, John Ash, and John King, Ministers of Gods Word, and of the
Testimony of of the Marquis of Ormond thereunto annexed, We do much commiserate
the Sufferings of the Petitioners, who being such objects of Pity and
Compassion, We do wish they may, and do not doubt, but they will find a
charitable relief from well disposed persons.

Given at Hampton Court the 23. of September, 1647.
Imprinted at London by John Field. 1647.


