A COAT OF DIVERSE COLOVRS FIT FOR JOSEPH. OR, PIETY in VARIETY.

By Jos. W. Gentleman.

Psalm. 139. ver. 23.24. Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know
my thoughts:

And see if there be any wicked way in me: and lead me in the way everlasting.

Printed for J. W. 1656.

To the READER.
When in the Night I muster up my wits,
and does attend an holy Meditation,
A godly pleasure it in me begits,
that far exceeds a common estimation;
But I must take the Motion strong or weak,
for in a Moment they will be to seek.
Of late in Bed it came into my Mind,
how that I had Composed a little Book,
Which to declare in part I am combind,
to bide the censure I have undertook;
Let Momus mutter, and Pan play on his Pipe
my mounting Muze above finds most delight
I David- like, do think on Time that is spent,
and communes with my heart, Psalm. 4.4.
and finds it sad,
Because I cannot, as I would, Repent,
for no Man living has, or ever had,
Power to Repent, or Grace to gain by Merit,
Man's work is weak, I find it by my spirit.
Its God alone, that Heavenly God of Power,
that Gilliads Balm does give to his elect,
Drops in their hearts of saving grace a shower
which in the way of bliss does them direct
To heaven of heavens, where Saints and Angels store
with glory sings their songs for evermore.
Go now my Book, be not ashamed, nor blush,
let all men read thy weak unlearned lines,
And fear no Sects, for either heart or crush,
thou have a Guard, that He, or his Assigns
Will make thee help, when thou in need shall stand
so I commend thee to his helping hand.
I. W.

The Crowing of the Cock.
When Cock does Crow, Luke 22.61.
me thinks to me appears
How Jesus looked on Peter, Peter shedding tears.
O blessed Savior, when thy pleasure is,
Look upon me, and mend what is amiss; Psalm. 119.132.

And give me grace, not only Faith alone,
But Heart, Words, Thoughts, and Prayers all in one
May cry aloud in Christ my Strength and Rock, Psalm. 71.3. Mat. 7.8.

Have mercy Lord, and hear thy Servant knock.
I thank the Bird, that touzed me from sleep,
To sighe for sin, which caused St. Mark 14.92. Mat. 26.75.
Peter weep
So bitterly, that it is thought by some,
His Cheeks was gutterd with the Tears that run:
God grant me grace, with Peter to Repent,
And godly groans, cause godly tears be spent.
Christ is the Ladder, by which I do ascend, Genesis 28.12.

As well as Angels; for I on Christ depend
To Heaven, where Christ my Cause does pleat, Romans 8.26

And tells his Father, that his bloody swear
Upon the Cross, did pacify his wrath,
And cleans'd my sins through true effectual Faith. Romans 3.25

Christ is the Truth, the Life, and eke the Way, John 14.6

My Hope, my Help, my Comfort and my Stay;
Thus sixth on Christ, in Christ my Faith I lock,
Made, through his Merits, one of the blessed Flock.
All Honor, 1 Ep. John 5.7.
Praise, and thanks I give to thee,
O holy, blessed, glorious Trinity.
This is my Faith, The Authors faub.
if you believe it true,
God of his mercy grant the same to you;
It is a Bulworke built with such a Hand,
That Hell, nor Devil, has Power for to with-stand.
Then let us all the Lord of Lords give praise
For this firm Faith in these old doting days.
Read, and observe these Lines aright,
They Will make you Pray upon the Night.
The Souls Desire.
Tell me (O thou whom my Soul loves) where thou feedest, Cant. 1.7.
where thou make thy flock to rest at noone.

There is four sorts of Faith Required, to find whom the Soul loves.

1. TEll me my heart if thou do love the Lord? Psalm. 119.1.

My heart to me this Answer did afford:
I love the Lord, and wish my love more strong
For to repulse my Enemies that throng,
To quench desire, and draw me from my love,
To my great grief, they do my patience prove:
But fervent Faith is fixed so in my breast,
I Will spare no pains to take my Love at rest, A strong faith.

In shady VVoods at Noone time of the Day,
Fast Sleeping with his Flocks there find I may.
2. Being thus perplexed, at length I chanced to hear
A sweet soft voice, which called, Come, draw near,
commanding me to mark what he did say,
And gave me charge I should his words obey;
Fly Vice, hate Sin, incline thine Ear to me, Psalm. 116.1.2. An obedient
faith.

And love the Lord, because he loved thee.
With Heart and Soul I freely gave consent,
And Vowed to him to be obedient.
3. My Love and I was thus with Joy united,
My former Follies I presently invited,
And could them plainly, I had found a Love,
That mounts my joys from Earth to Heaven above, Col. 3.2.

Bids them be gone, and seek another Master,
I to my Heart had laid an Heavenly Plaster, Psalm. 119.2

That killed Sin, and made my Conscience clear,
To love my God, and keep my Heart sincere. A sincere faith.

4. Thus did my Heart declare it self at length,
And could me truth, it had but little strength;
But what in strength it found to be decaying,
It would make good by duitfull obeying,
And strive to live a life in godly fear,
With Heart upright, and with a Soul sincere,
Strong, obedient, sincere in Prayer and Fasting,
I love the Lord, he me for Everlasting. Everlasting faith;

The Lepers Complaint.
LOrd look upon my Leprosy, Mat. 8.2.3. The lepers petitiou.

not on the outward blaine,
But on the inward Malladie
that fills every Vain:
It runs, and spreads it self abroad
in every joint and Linam,
I feel it is a filthy Load
this Leprosy of sin.
My fad complaints as sharp as thorns,
my earnest long desire,
For cutting out these painful Corns,
and throw them in the Fire.
My crying sins, my sins of shame,
my sins that near was seen,
Thou can, Mark 1.40.
by calling of thy Name,
if that thou will, make Clean.
In thy Compassion pity me,
I kneel, I beg, I crave,
None can me help, but only thee,
thou know what I would have.
Be faithful then, and courage take,
be not as thou have been; Ver. 21

Do all thy former sins forsake,
I will; then be thou Clean,
A Zealous desire.
O God, my God, give Grace and Might,
with Prayers sincere to Pray to thee,
That I may see that glorious Light
that shines in all Eternity:
This my Desire, I humbly crave,
my God fast in my Heart to knit,
That it my silly Soul may save,
from the vast deep infarnall Pit.
No Condemnation then I fear, Romans 8.1

all fleshly Lusts I hate and fly;
Thy Word makes mine Election clear,
that I shall live Eternally;
A lively Faith within my breast,
thy holy Spirit does inspire,
And bids me set my Heart at rest,
the God of gods grant my desire.
A Watch over the Soul.
REst now my Soul, have care to kill
the power of Satan every day;
With fear work thy Salvation still,
trembling, sobbing, Phila. 2.12.
sighing Pray
To keep thee from that wicked thought,
for now the Devil begins to rore;
That sins no fin, a thing of naught, 1 Ep. Pet. 5.8. Heb. 10.26.

and man once called, can sin no more.
Thus David must confirm a Lie,
and Paul to write that is not true, 1 Ep. Ioh. 1.8. Psalm. 51.3 Romans 5.12 Romans
3.9, 10. Luke 22, 62. 2 Cor. 10.18.

Sure sin did cause Saint Peter cry,
these men they were as good as you:
Audatious woeful wretched Sect,
this Devilish Doctrine to maintain,
You cannot cosen Gods Elect,
Lament, Repent, and Blush for shame.
Psalm. 118.28.
The God of Heaven I ser^^ alone, Ps. 118, 28.

he is a God of Majesty^
My God sits on a glorious Throne,
this God I serve, and none but He:
I thank this God that gives me grace,
to call upon him Night and Day,
I hope to see him Face to Face,
that gives me grace in Faith to Pray.
Upon a Crack of Thunder.
I Know, O Lord, when thou do speak,
Thy Voice makes all the Clouds to break:
Lord grant me Grace when I do Pray,
My Prayers may pierce to Heaven a Way,
And from that Place, an answer bring,
Thy Prayers are heard, Rejoice and Sing,
All Honor, Praise, and Thanks to thee,
One Glorious God, in Persons three.
Paul's Determination.
For I Determine not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2.

A Godly Preacher gave a touch,
A man may sin in knowing much;
The Devil did wink, gave Eve a Nod,
And told her, They should be as God.
But Eat one Apple of that Tree, Genesis 3.5.

And you shall know as much as he:
This Knowledge was the fatal fall
Of Adam, Original knowledge.
Eve, Mankind and all.
Philosophers all things (...) know, Natural knowledge.

That Naturally on Earth do Grow,
As Herbs, and Treet of every kind,
By Knowledge they their Virtues find:
But gods for God, 1 Cor. 8.4.
they fondly feign,
Doting on phaneies idle brain;
Against the God of gods they sin. Ver. 5.6.

Gives Nature that, that is due to him.
There is that knowledge does affect, 1 Cor. 3, 2

And seems to know like Gods Elect;
They sin, and feed themselves with hope,
And give their Conscience too much scope. A general knowledge.

A general Faith they hope is good,
That Christ for all did spend his blood;
But know poor Soul what ere thou be, John 11.26.27.

Thou must believe he dyed for thee.
Some use their Knowledge for to gain,
That being got, they find but vain; Romans 14, 1.

Some bend their knowledge to Dispute,
So Vice seems sin for to Confute:
Some use their knowledge to find Grace, John 17.3. Romans 3, 24. Effectual
faith.

That dare look sin into the Face;
So some there is that knowledge have,
Effectually their Soul to save.
Its deep to know the Mystery,
That Is Writ in holy History;
A Son borne of a Virgin pure, Isay 7, 14.

That Balm of Gillead all will Cure;
It is deep knowledge for to know, Deep knowledge.

That God and Man should live below
Upon the Earth, yet had no sin,
No fraud, nor guile was found in him. 1 Ep. Pet. 2.22.

Will thou have knowledge that shall last,
Then fix thy Faith on Christ so fast
As he was nayl'd upon the Tree, Lasting knowledge.

So fast thy Faith one him shall be,
That mortal Death shall not thee dant,
Nor Fire of Hell shall make thee pant,
For Christ his Death, by Faith I know,
The power of sin does overthrow.
All this knowledge Paul rejects,
Christ Crucified, that he affects.
Paul's Desire.
CHrist Crucified on the Cross, Mat. 27.25. Rom, 5, 1.

by Faith I have in him,
Does clear me from the Law and Curse,
that is due to me for sin:
Thy suffering Lord shall mortify
my Flesh that is frail and vain;
Thy burial it does testify, Mat. 27, ^0.

that thou, as Man, was slain,
Thou did Descend, yet by thy power,
did Rise, Mat. 28, 6.
and then Ascend
Into that heavenly glorious tower,
where joys shall never end:
There thou on Gods right hand does sit, Heb. 10.12. ^ Ep. Pet. 2, 5.

and pleads for thine Elect,
That they with thee a place may git
a glorious prospect.
This is the knowledge that I crave,
all other shadows be;
This fixed knowledge I would have,
Christ Crucified for me.
A Spiritual King.
For he must reign till he has put all his Enemies under his feet, 1 Cor.
15.25.

A Glorious King does sit in Heaven, Acts 7.5^

which is the King that I affect,
Seen upon Earth by holy Stoven,
and dwells on Earth with his Elect; John 6.50

Yet not in Pomp, nor State at all,
but Spiritually Majesticall.
To his Disciples he gave Power
on Earth, to Teach, Preach, and Baptize; Mat. 10.7. Acts 2.38

That still remains, until this hour,
to them he calls, and rightly rise,
With Hands laid on by holy Order,
confirmed, approved by Heavens Recorder.
This King has Laws for to observe,
which all his Subjects must obey;
His little Flock he will preserve,
from either Wolf, or Lions Prey:
Sin and Vice, Death, Devil and Hell, 1 Cor. 13.55.56.

he in a moment will expel:
Reign he shall, and Reign he must,
Until his Foes be trod to dust.
Another of the same.
THe King of Kings in Heaven does sit in State, The kings foes.

He hates his Foes, his Foes him deadly hate;
The Devil as Chief, his kingdom to advance, 1 The Devil. 1 Peter 3.8.9.

Keeps Carnal men in simple ignorance;
Makes them believe, because they cannot Read,
They neither hope, not help of Scripture need;
Rome, Rome, beware, that close this sin does smother,
Makes Ignorance to be Devotions Mother. Ignorance 2 Ep. Pet. 3.5.8.

The Devil has yet a keen sharpe-headed Arrow,
To pierce the bones, and stick fast in the Marrow;
He tells youth, he may Repent in time,
And spend in pleasure all his years of prime,
Make Drink thy darling, let loose the reigns of Lust,
Gods made of Mercy, Prolonging repentance.
he never tells he is Just:
When scores of years does turn thy Hairs Gray,
Its time enough for to Repent and Pray:
And having brought him in this sad Condition,
Death shoots his Dart, and ends the Devils Commission.
And now an Enemy of great power does spring,
Draws many Subjects from this Heavenly King;
The VVorke-mans work against him does rebel, The world.

He made the World, and it draws Souls to Hell:
God made it good, but now it is abused
By wicked men, that (...) their God refused.
The Gold of Ophir makes Worldlings to offend,
And Silver Minds will never make them mend;
When Honor pricks Ambition to the Heart,
It makes him Cart-horse to vaine-glories Cart;
He pulls and sweats, it turns on Fortunes Wheels,
And sneaking Envy, runs at honors heels:
At length it mounts upon the Mount Parnasses,
Then brought down headlong with a Teame of Asser.
O wretched man, The Use.
the Devil he is too cunning,
He never tells thee that thy Glass is running,
That Ignorance, is no excuse at all,
Delaying time, often proves thy fatal fall.
The World a VVitch, draws men into a Maze,
That still he runs, until he run his days:
Turn back betime Repent, and Cry for Grace,
When Christ appears, sin has an ugly Face.
Now last of all, grim Death must yield his Power,
This glorious King will make that Tyrant cower:
Death, Devil, and Sin, must all be forced to yield,
And King of Kings have Glory in the Field.
Thus all his Foes being trodden under Feet,
He sits triumphing in a glorious Seat.
An Admonition for Children.
LOve and obey thy Parents in thy heart, Prove. 6.20.21.22, 23.

where ere thou go, they will lead thee on thy way;
When thou do sleep, they will not from thee part,
and when thou wakes, they will move thee for to Pray,
That God will bless them, and increase their store,
That is the way to make thy blessing more.
Fear their Commands, they are a lamp so clear,
that they will make thee virtuously to live;
Thy Fathers Care, and Mothers Love is dear,
and good Instructions they are bound to give;
Which being followed, mittigates all strife,
And brings the Child into the way of Life.
Luke 1.60.
Blessed be the God that is Isreal's Lord,
for his kind Visitation,
Who sent to us his Divine Word,
that wrought our Souls Salvation:
From David's Loins, and Jesses Root,
a Vine did spring upright,
That spread all Israel about,
a glorious Lamp of Light,
Thy holy Prophets did declare,
that we should saved be,
To keep that Promise that thou Swear,
thy Covenant to free,
Us to deliver from the hand,
and fear of all our Foes,
In holiness, upright to stand,
till Death our Days enclose.
And thou, O Child, and Prophet Great,
prepare the way thou must,
Through sorrows sad, and bloody sweat,
for to Redeem the just:
Through tender mercy, God gave Grace,
from Darkness, Day to bring;
And made our way to perfect Peace,
from Jess^^ Root to Spring. 2 Ep. Tim. 2.8.

Meditations of Saint Steven.
POndring with Admitation,
how Paul was wrapped to Meaven,
I had a Meditation,
upon the Death of Itoven:
All faithful Martyrs may,
by Faith, see all things fitting,
Heaven open more clear then Day,
and Christ ia Glory sitting: Acts 7.^5.

This Martyr was the first,
that see from Earth to Heaven,
A Comfort to the rest,
that sheds their blood like Steven.
The Glory of the Trinity.
SAint John came poor, had neither Gold nor Money,
but yet he had the Spirit of Elias;
His Meat was Locust, and a little Honny: Mat. 3.4.

he Preached Repentance, and Cured Hezekiah.
I never Read, he ever Preached of Merit,
or works of men could Heavenly joys inherit.
In Jerdans Flood, John did Baptize indeed, Ver. 17.

and thither did our blessed Savior come;
From Heaven a Dove descended on his Head, ver. 16.17.

a Voice was heard, this is my loved Son:
Blessed Eyes and Ears, that there did hear and see,
without dispute, the blessed Trinity.
Herod that Fox, accuses John the just, Mat. 14.3.

for speaking truth; to Prison he must go,
A Dancing Damsel, and unlawful Lust, ver. 6.

joined jointly both, poor John to overthrow,
A damned Beldame of a cursed Seed, ver. ^ and 10.

betraide poor John, and made him lose his Head.
The Guides to Heaven.
Vainglory, Honor, Pleasure, Pride, Psalm. 45.10.11.

Idolatry, and Lust,
When Pharaohs Daughter is a Bride,
She must lay in the Dust;
Then Marry her to Canaans King,
She will content his mind,
Such virtuous Beauty for to bring,
leaves Egypts sins behind.
Even so my Sovle, thou Christ shall take,
thy Husband for to be,
And all thy former sins forsake,
and make thy Conscience free;
Not giving way to any one,
for one thy Soul may kill,
But give to Christ thy Soul alone,
who will all joys fulfill.
Though Flesh be frail, Fight, do not yield,
give no Consent be sure,
Unfaigned Faith must be thy Shield,
it shall thy Soul secure:
True Charity must be thy Guide,
hold Hope fast by the hand,
Thy holy Angel Guards thy side,
so walk to Canaans Land.
Paul's Counsel to the Gentiles.
SAint Paul was Called the Gentiles for to Call, 1 Cor. 11.18.

And to Convert them to the Christian Faith;
He Preached with Power, to Comfort them with all,
And gave them Counsel, as the Scripture says;
First try themselves by true Examination,
And then to take the Signs of their Salvation.
Forget, forgive, and make thy Conscience clear,
Thy Darling Sin pull up and throw away;
A Contrite Heart, joined with a godly fear,
Will work this Faith, that Christ thy debts did pay
Upon the Cross; have but this strong belief,
This saving Faith redeems thee from thy grief.
Sin was the Cause thy sorrows are so great;
Let godly sorrow drive away thy sin,
It is but folly for to chafe and fret,
Rely on Christ, and put thy trust in him;
Repent in Heart, and Christ thy Soul shall feed
With Angels Food, in Signs of Wine and Bread.
Holy Advice.
BY holy Writ, I heard it proved at large,
That we our selves to God should reconcile; 2 Cor. 5.20.

Not to delay the time, was given in charge,
But to Repent, and drive sin to Exile:
For Christ, our Christ, for sin has borne the smart,
The Nails his Flesh, the Spear did pierce his Heart. John 19.34. Ver. 21.

He had no sin, for me he was made sin,
Christ, only Christ must pacify Gods wrath;
Angel nor Man, nor any thing, but him,
This to believe is true effectual Faith:
Lord I believe, help thou my unbeleefe,
Make strong my Faith like to the dying Thief. Luke 23.43.

A true Faith.
TAke time before, for he is bald behind,
Stretch forth thy hand, and take him by the lock;
Be strong in Faith, and thou shall Comfort find,
Gates being shut, it is too late to knock: Mat. 25.10.12.

Christ loved me so, when I was at a loss,
To gain my Soul, he Dyed upon the Cross.
Thus he the Just, for me unjust was slain,
The Righteous, for the unrighteous, Dyed;
The way to Heaven a fixed Faith makes plain,
If that thy Faith be the right way applied:
I do believe that Christ did Dye for me;
Do thou the like, and then he Dyed for thee.
A holy Desire.
SEarch thou, Psalm. 139.23.24.
O Lord, my heart at ground,
and rip it up in every Vain,
All wickedness that may be found,
pull up by roots, I fear no pain.
And if I harbor any thought,
that is contrary to thy will;
Grant me that grace to count it naught,
and banish it for being ill.
Lord let me see my wicked ways,
and grace for to abhor the same,
All Glory, Honor, Laud, and Praise
ascribe I will unto thy Name:
With Angels I will then rejoice,
in time of all Eternity,
When thou admits my Soul and Voice
to Sing, and see the Trinity.
A Conscience quiet, not good.
LOrd keep me from a Conscience free from grief,
That ever lived in joy, and worldly pleasure;
But never sorrow felt, until the Death,
To sighe for sin, he never took the leisure:
Yet he presumes Gods mercy is so great,
He shall be saved, though he do not entreat.
A Conscience never quiet, yet good.
LOrd look upon a Soul that sighs for sin,
And mournes in secret, with a heart sincere,
That Satan seeks to catch within his Ginne,
But has no power to quench his godly fear:
He grieves, and waits, when God will comfort send,
And so at length, obtaines his wished end.
A Conscience neither good, nor quiet.
OWofull wretch, whose Soul is never quiet,
Whose Conscience fryes him in a fiery Flame;
Yet drinks, and drabs, swears, and feasts with riot,
Till Deaths dart strike him in a mortal vain:
Then cries, and cries, will this pain last for ever?
When will it end? A Voice does Answer, Never.
A Conscience quiet, and good.
O Happy he, whose Conscience tells him,
That goodly mones, has wrought effectual Faith.
Believes Christ's blood has washed away his sin,
That his deep wound appeased his Fathers wrath,
And does desire, and Pray, and Pray again,
That never sin have power in him to reign.
God guard, and watch my thoughts from steps and falls,
For sinners feet stand often one tottering balls.
No help in Man.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee; and there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee, Psalm. 73.25.
When I collect all faculties I have,
I can find naught, but worthles worth in man,
No power at all he has himself to save,
his Birth is painful, and his Life a span,
As frail as Grass, let him do what he can:
Who puts his trust in any Man at all,
Leanes on a Reed, and's sure to catch a fall.
Take Man alone, as merely he is Man
for help, and counsel, he is far to seek;
In his Conceit, he thinks now and than,
that every words a sentence he does speak,
And to excel, he often his brains does break:
Great Counsels now, that has the ratest wits,
Their witty wisdom, proves but foolish fits.
Now Man, I leave thee, for thou art but vain,
unless a Power from Heaven do thee direct,
For by that Power, thou knowledge may obtain,
to know thy self, and God for to affect,
To him alone give love and true respect:
Whom have I then in Heaven and Earth, but thee,
For all things else are frail and vanity.
The Vanity of the World.
THree things there are that's counted faults in men,
And worldlings hates them to the very Death;
Honor offered, Honor. Wrongs. Fashions.
and refused again;
And Wrongs received, yet cannot urge the breath,
Counts worldly Fashions like an Aspen Leaf:
Whom these affect, the worldling holds as Fools,
And fit to live obscurely, like to Owls.
The first they hold a baseness in the Spirit;
The second sencolesse, a food, or stupid humor;
The third, a scorn to time, deserves no merit,
And thus, poor Souls, they bide the worlds rumor:
Thus worldlings love that is the worlds consumer:
Thou Wretch, thou (...), thou (...), have lost thy sight,
Thou art so blind, thou knows not Day from Night.
The first does hold, with God a true content;
The second has a care to live secure;
The third holds Fashions, vain and follies vent,
For Fashions are for sickle fools a lure,
Fools, and Fashions are tied together sure:
Observe these signs, you shall perceive it plain,
These three things good, it is the world that's vain.
My Lent Labor, or Prayers, or Meditations.
O Lord set thou my heart upright, Psalm. 119.52.

and let my Meditations be,
To Pray to thee both Day and Night,
for to obtain Eternity;
And that with Christ I may ascend, Io. 20.17.

Into those joys that never end.
Teach me, O Lord, in Faith to Pray, Psalm. 86.11.

with holy fear, and godly groans,
That my poor soul may find the way,
with sighs, and sobbs, and mourning moanes,
My glorious Fathers Face to see, Psalm. 17.15.

And sing Songs with felicity.
Dear loving Father, do not frown, Psalm. 30.7.

but in thy mercy look on me,
Least my sad sins do sink me down,
and so I lose Eternity:
But still in Christ I put my trust, Ioh. 3.26.

That he will place me with the just.
It was my (...) Death,
It was my sins that made him Dye;
It was my sins that stopped his breath,
It was my sins, that cruelly
Did put the Lord of Life to pain,
But I was saved, 1 Pet. 2.2.
when he was slain.
It was his Love, Ioh. 15.13.
not my deseart,
It was his Love that set me free;
For this his Love, I give my heart,
It was his own, he gave it me:
My heart, Prove. 23.26. P^ 15.28. Job. 19.30.
O Lord, thou do require,
Accept it then, whole and entire.
I thank the Lord for this thy Death,
I thank the Lord, that thus did Dye;
I thank the Lord, that lost thy breath,
I thank the Lord, Luke 23.46. Psalm. 31.4.5.
that patiently
Upon the Cross did pay my debt,
And broak the Coards of Satan's Net.
Thus for my Soul Lord I do pleat,
Now for my Body I entreat,
My wants, good God, for to supply,
And Cure thy servants mallady:
I need not tell, Mat. 6.11.
thou knows my need,
Give me, my God, my Daily Bread.
Cherish no Sin.
IF Pagan Princes, Heb. 12.1.
for their Olympian sports
did spare no cost, vainglory to obtain,
By Running, Tilting, and Games of diverse sorts,
feeding the fancies of a frantic brain,
Found ought, they thought their foolish fits would hinder,
Though never so rich, would burn it to a Sinder.
If these, from whom was hid all saving grace,
would burn to naught, all that their pleasures crossed,
What must we leave that runs a godly Race,
but all our sins fast tied to a Post,
Let none be lost, no, not in thy desire,
But freely throw them Post and all in th'fire.
O thou my Soul, a blessed Race to run,
throw every weight away that troubles thee;
If fleshly Lusts seek thee to overcome, 1 Ep. ^^^. 2.11.

bid it avoyde, I hate thy company;
Thou art a weight that I must throw away,
God give me grace to make it good, I Pray.
Still I am bound to make all speed I can,
to run my Course with patience to the end,
More stops I find, so vain a thing is Man,
lusts of my Eyes, my Conscience does offend,
They spy strange objects, that sets my heart a flote,
For to desire things far above my lot.
And now my heart begins to mount aloft,
the world is all too little to content it,
It feeds on dainties, lies on pillowes soft,
thus wealth breeds woe, unless a man repent it:
Though all these lusts I find in me too rife,
Good Lord defend me from the pride of life.
Lord hear my Prayer, take fleshly lusts away, 1 Ep. Pet. 1.2.

and give my Eyes no power to lust at all,
But on such things, as lawfully I may
use, for to make the pride of lise to fall:
Quit of all these, take heart, be of good cheer,
Run forth thy Race, Psalm. 37.1.
be patient, do not fear.
Christ's Love to Man.
THe true Elect, Heb. 12.2.
by true effectual Faith,
believes that Christ by death has them redeemed,
A Prophet, Priest, and King, all three he has
performed in Office, so dear he us esteemed,
That nothing should be wanting for our good,
His Fathers wrath he has appeased with blood.
Dare mortal man be bold as to desire,
but that the God of gods has it revealed,
His working spirits makes mortals to admire,
that our Salvation should not be concealed:
For wretched man had near thought to have sought it,
Had not Gods love, and Christ with blood have bought it.
This blessed Jesus, the Author of our Faith,
with Heavenly joy did guide the way before,
And finish all; for so the Scripture says,
that on the Cross, with shame, he cleared our score;
For he does fit upon a glorious Sear, 1 Ep. Pet. 3.22.

One Gods right hand, for our poor Souls to pleat.
An Article of our Faith. He suffered under Pontius Pilate.
Mourn mortal man in dolor of thy heart,
with sorrows sad, and sighs lament thy sin,
Christ Heaven forsakes, Isay 53.4. He suffered.
to bear a hellish smart,
and took our base infirmities of him,
And for a time he made the Earth his stage,
To free us mortals from his Fathers rage.
Tiberius then in Rome did bear the sway,
and had the Jews obedient to his power; Under Pontius Pilate.

Sent Pontinus Pilate his Debuty away.
whose strict commands made all the Jews to lowre:
Yet for to please his Conscience, did Condemn,
unjustly judging, led by wicked men. Ioh. 19.16.

The Lord of Life he did condemn to dye, 1 Cor. 2.8

by providence, he judged unto Death,
That no Death else, but that, could testify, Was cruc^fied.

the Lamb of God deprived of his breath:
All former Types and Prophesies of him,
He did fulfill, and cleared the Just of sin.
For to make good his Death, he buried was, Dead and bur^ed. Ioh. 19.41

within a Tomb where never none was laid;
To make it safe, a Guard on it did pass,
a jealious fear, did make the Jews afraid,
That his Disciples his body should convay, Mat. 27.64.

And on the Night should steal his Corpse away.
But by his Power, for he himself was Power, Ioh. 10.18. The grave is
sometimes taken for Hell. Mat. 28.6 Act. 2.24. Ps^. 16.10. H^ ^e^cended into
hell, not locally. Hos. 13.14

he from the Grave did powerfully arise;
Man's Enemy, grim Death, he made to lowre,
triumphingly, the Grave he did despise:
For none but Christ, he had the power alone,
Free from Corruption was this holy one.
Then it is said, to Hell he did descend;
by Hellish pains, he must work man's salvation,
Not locally, for then I should offend,
among the damned, doomed unto damnation,
As man, being there, be never could return,
But evermore in fiery torments burn.
Where shall we find that Christ performed his Passion?
not with the Damned, Christ in his passion
neither in the Grave;
But Praying in the Garden, as it was his fashion,
pain pricked his heart, sweat blood, and there to have
The pains of Hell, Gods wrath within a Cup,
Which could not pass, before he drunk it up.
This was not all, much more then this must be,
mocked, Endured the shame, despised the cross. All is finished. Mat. 27.46.
Psalm. 22.7. Rev. 5.1. Genesis 49.9. Rev. 5.5.
and arraigned, condemned his Life to lose,
Most shamefully be nayl'd unto a Tree,
and Crucified upon a wooden Cross;
There finished all that he did undertake,
When he did cry, My God does me forsake.
This crying Lamb, he undertook
Seven Seals to open, and the book;
Of Judahs Tribe, this was the Lion,
That brought all joy and peace to Syon;
This holy Lamb, Ioh. 19 16.
our souls to gain,
Was by the Jews, and Pilate slain:
Gods only dear, beloved Son,
Sin, Devil, and Death did overcome;
Look on him Lord, yet bleeding see,
It is his blood that saves me;
I thank my God, Ephesians. 3.6.
this Faith I hold,
Thy promise Lord does make me bold.
A Heaven on Earth.
REading an Author that I will not name,
who says, the Elect begins Heaven on Earth;
And for my part I will believe the same,
for joys are great that's found in a new birth.
When God grants grace to rule and guide the heart,
There is no fear, true Faith will do his part.
What comfort more, when Saints by Faith do hold
that God in glory fills the heavens with light,
No Summers heat to fear, nor VVinters cold,
the Son of Sons is ever in their sight:
There joys and days are endless in their length,
Seen of all Saints, but not with equal strength.
God in his mercy will our works regard,
but for our merits they are nothing worth;
Cold water in a Cup, he will reward,
and Martyrs blood by Tyrants powered forth;
They both shall be content to their desire,
But for desert, they nothing can require.
Strive then on Earth, in Heaven to have a place,
effectual Faith, and Grace, will guide the way;
Let hope thee help, be sure in any case,
and love of God will force thee for to Pray:
Then Pray in Faith, it will thy soul prepare,
The world to scorn, in Heaven to have a share.
The Souls Complaint.
O Lord, when I do summon up my sins,
they mount to be in number numberless, Psalm. 50.17. Isay 57.15. Psalm. 50.1

Then godly sorrow in my soul begins,
and cries for mercy in my great distress:
For mercy Lord, for mercy I entreat,
Thy mercy far exceeds my Sins, though great.
Look on the wounds before thy face that bleeds,
it was my sins that made those mortal wounds
Thy heavenly food, my soul with comfort feeds,
thy blessed Promises in all my senses sounds, Joh. 6.47.

My sins are pardoned, for I trust in him,
Whose bleeding wounds does wash away my sin.
And now my soul, prepare thy self to take
those sacred signs that Christ has Instituted;
Receive by Faith, they will thee joyful make,
his righteousness be to thy self imputed:
That is the Robe that makes us Rich in Grace,
And shine like Saints before his glorious Face.
The Souls request toGod before the Communion.
TRy Heart, Mat. 5.8.
and Reigns, without, within,
Lord cleanse them clean, and make them pure;
Pluck up by Roots all sorts of sin,
thy blood, Isay 53.5. Isay 43 4
O Lord, my wounds must cure,
And being cured Lord by thee,
My soul shall live eternally.
As sure as I do Eat the Bread, My inward thoughts at the Communion. Ioh.
6.51.

and in my stomach it disgeast,
By Faith upon Christ's Flesh I feed,
a mystical and holy Feast.
And when I do receive the Cup,
and Drink the Wine, my Heart does say,
It is Christ's blood, by Faith drink't up,
then I give thanks, and thus I Pray.
Now then in me, and I in thee, I^h. ^.56. My Prayer after the Communion.

Joined fast in Faith, knit one in one,
Lord let us never parted be,
Till heaven take soul, and earth the bone,
And both at Resurrection Rise, Ioh 19.27.

By Gods great power made one again,
Then I shall see thee with these Eyes,
And ever praise thy holy Name.
All Glory be to God above,
That fills my heart with joy and love.
A Friendly Admonition to the Quakers.
O Lord my God, give grace to guide my Pen,
To write the truth of these vild wicked men,
Which doting, drives into the Hunters snares,
To breathe out Curses, when they should use Prayers:
Confound their Pillars, or convert their Rocks,
Mis-leading Leaders, cursed Nayler, Fox;
False Zeal and Spirits, makes them boast and crack,
For Gilpin said, they have both White and Black:
These men take pleasure on the Sabbath Day,
To trouble some, almost as bad as they.
Those that dare Preach, not Called by holy order, Mat. 7.15.

With Hands laid on, approved by Heavens Recorder.
Does run themselves in danger of their Maker,
For to be punished equal with the Quaker.
These hold, that they once called, can sin no more,
Though Thief, or Robber, Traitor, or a Whore;
Against all truth and Conscience, they aspire,
To guard damned Doctrine, and make truth a liar; Ioh. 1.8.

That cries we are damned, in every Town and Street,
This bids Repent, I hold that Doctrine sweet,
But both are led with such a subtle guide,
That shoots the strait, Mat. 7.13
and runs the way that's wide;
Lord clear their Eyes, that they may see the evil,
And save their souls from running to the Devil.
They say, the day of Judgment is at hand;
That I believe, for I do understand,
That Christ himself foretold of such a Sect,
That should deceive, but never his Elect.
This Sect lay close six hundred fifty Year,
One thousand more, yet never known here.
Audatious Rebels, that wrongs our Heavenly King,
Assumes that Honor that is due to him.
You say you are, the Life, the Truth, the Way,
What have you left? to whom are we to Pray?
What, do you think we take you to be gods?
Presuming thus, there is but little odds:
O wretched wretches, know you are but men,
And dye you shall, take heed of Judgment then.
Christ is the Life, which life he freely gave,
His faithful servants, and Elect to save:
Christ is the Truth, you dare it not deny,
He led the Way, when he was plea'd to dye,
Was Buried, Rose, Assend, then seen no more,
Be faithful, follow, the way is made before:
Stand still, and study, and blush you are amiss,
And cry for mercy, while there mercy is:
Love not that Spirit, that makes all this strife,
Confess you are, no way, no truth, no life.
FINIS.

