THE MYSTERY OF THE TWO IVNTOS PRESBYTERIAN and INDEPENDENT.

OR, THE SERPENT IN THE BOSOM, UNFOLDED.

PETRON. ARBITER. Omnes nobiscum aut Corvi qui Lacerant, aut Cadavera quae
lacerantur. Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the un-byassed Reader.
YOu that are biased with self-respects I write not to, you have your aims;
and your ends before you are aware, like shot not feared, till felt) will come
upon you. To the upright in heart, though mis led in judgment I speak. Consider
how by a prevaricating number of Grandees, our first Principles are altered;
our Religion into Schism, and Hypocritical profanenes; Insomuch that the
Lords Supper is now almost every where discontinued, for want of (I know not
what) imaginary Vtopian holiness. The Creed Lords Prayer, and Ten
Commandments, (the instruments of Faith, Hope, Charity, teaching Omnia
credenda, speranda, and facienda) left out of the Directory. Thus much for
Religion.

Our known Laws (being the second Principle held out to the People by the
National Covenant, and many Declarations) are turned into Arbitrary, emergent,
and upstart Orders and Ordinances of Parliament: every day rising, and every
day withering like Mushromes. So that we are now governed Jure vago and
incerto, by a leaden Lesbian rule, to which we cannot square our obedience and
actions, but must stay till the Grandees that guide the Legislative power of
Parliament make application of them to our actions. A great misery.

The third Principle is our Liberties. What is become of them, this little
Treatise will tell you, as also of our Properties. But stay! me thinks I hear
men say that the clamor and danger mutining at the Parliament door these two
last weeks, has humbled our Grandees, and made them seek the Lord with Fasting
and Prayer. I answer, let me tell you what succeeded in the House of Commons,
when a Letter and Declaration from the Army being tendered to be read, some of
the Grandees answered, That if they should read those demands, they might
chance to find them of that nature, as they can neither with justice deny them,
nor with honor grant them, because it was not honorable for them to do their
duty upon admonition of their Army, being but their servants, and would savor
of compulsion. To prevent this, they resolved to take into confideration freely
and of their own accord the Grievances which scandalized the people. They went
therefore upon 3. Heads: The Self-denying Ordinance. Upon which they Voted (as
they said by a Preparatory Vote only) That all Members holding any Offices,
Grants, or Places by concession of the Parliament, shall account for, and pay
in the profits thereof to the Grand Committee of Accounts. This I conceive
under favor of the Grandees, who possess those places, and contrived this
Vote (to be a mere delusory Order, For who can believe that such self-seeking
men, as all men know them to be, will execute these offices for nothing, and
pay in to the use of the State their profits. Besides, it is apparent how
subservient to these Grandees, their own creatures, the Committee of Accounts
are.

2. They Voted, That no money hereafter should be given to any Member in
compensation or recompense of his losses, until the Public Debts be paid.
Here the Grandees were in earnest, because their own turns are already
served, and the loss and inconvenience of this Vote falls only upon the much
contemned Middle or Moderate Members.

3. They appointed a Committee to consider how to take off the Grievance
arising from such Members as abusing the Privilege of Parliament refuse to pay
their debts.

Proh Superi, quantum mortalia pectora caecae
Noctis habent; Ipse sceleris molimine Tereus
Creditur esse pius; laudemque a crimine sumit.
Let not the Grandees be offended, that I discover those sicknesses which they
labor to cover; Antea morbos, necesse est, cognitos esse, quam remedia eorum.
God only can be the Aesculapius and cure them. But I am afraid they desire
rather a slight suppurating, then a perfect cure; and that they pray rather to
hide, then help their evils.

Da fallere, da justum, sanctumque videri
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.
If this be their condition, quos perdere vult Jupiter, hos dementat; quos
tueri vult, suscitat. I have done my duty, even in this generation, quando
dicere quod nolo miserum, quod volo and debeo periculosum. I leave the success
to God, resting,

Thine,

THEODORUS VERAX.

The Mystery of the two Iuntos, Presbyterian and Independent.
THe Kingdom being overgrowne with Prerogative, and Superstition (the fruits
of a long and lazy peace) by a long discontinuance of Parliaments; At last by
Providence his Majesty was necessitated to call a Parliament the only
College of Physicians to purge the much distempered body of the Commonwealth.

In this Parliament a contest between the Kings Prerogative and the peoples
laws and liberties begat a war. Divines on both sides out of their pulpits
sounding Alarm thereto: and not only Sermons; but Declarations of Parliament,
and the National Covenant, (holding forth to the people the defense of
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and properties) inflamed the people to the rage of
battle, as the Elephant is enraged at the sight of Red. This war occasioned
extraordinary Taxes and leavies of money, such as was never heard of by our
Ancestors, and were Irritamenta malorum, the nurse of our Corruptions.

This incentive working upon the humane frailty of the speaking and leading
members of the Houses, 3. Grandees.
caused them first to interweave their particular interests and ambitions with
the public, and lastly to prefer them before the public.

Wherefore the said Leading men or Grandees (for that is now Parliament
language. 4. Factions.
) First divided themselves into two factions or Junto's: Presbyterians, and
Independents: seeming to look only upon the Church, but (Religion having the
strongest operation upon the spirit of man) involved the interests of the
Commonwealth.

The Common people of the two houses following (with an implicit faith and
blind obedience) the example of their leaders, man's judgment to the opinion of
another man is but a silly trust and confidence) studied the to holding of
their parties with earnestness; whilst the Grandees of each party in private
close together for their own advancement, serving one another turn.

Grandees (in all public debates) seem as real in their reciprocal
oppositions, as those silly ones who are in earnest, whereby they cherish the
zeal of their respective parties, keep them still divided, ( Divide and impera
is the devils rule) and so amuse them, and take them off from looking after
other interests, in which (were they conjoined) they might share with the
Grandees themselves: and for the better contentment of such their Confidents as
look too intentively after their own gain, the Grandees of each Junto confer
something of advantage upon those that are subservient to them, as five pounds
a week, or some petty employment.



8 Monopolizing Profits and preferments,
Thus the leading men or Bell-wethers have seemingly divided themselves, and
having really divided the Houses: and captivated their respective parties
judgment, teaching them by an Implicit faith Jurare in verba Magistri, to
pin their opinions upon their sleeves; They begin to advance their Projects
of Monopolizing the profits, preferments and Power of the Kingdom in
themselves. To which purpose, though the leaders of each party seem to maintain
a hot opposition, yet when any profit or preferment is to be reached at; It is
observed that a powerful Independent especially moves for a Presbyterian: or a
leading Presbiterian for an Independent: and seldom does one oppose or speak
against another (in such cases) unless something of particular spleen or
Competition come between, which causes them to break the common Rule. By this
means the Grandees of each faction seldom miss their mark, since an
Independent moving for a Presbyterian, his reputation carries the business
clear with the Independent party: and the Presbyterians will not oppose a
leading man of their own side. By this artifice the Grandees of each side share
the Common wealth between them: And are now become proud, domineering Rehoboams
(even over the rest of their follow members* contrary to the liberty of Parl.
which consists in an equality) that were formerly fawning ambitious Absoloms.

There has been lately given away to members openly (besides innumerable and
inestimable private cheates mutually connived at) at least 300000 l. in money;
besides rich offices, Isaelites under these Egyptian taskmasters, and lost
their estates, are left to sterve, until they can find relief in that empty
bag, called by fools fides publica, by wise men fides punica. And are now
looked upon in the House superciliously, like unwelcome guests (for it is known
how malignantly and how juglingly writs for new elections were granted and
executed) and called younger brothers, and like younger brothers they are used:
their elder brothers having slipped into the world before them, and anticipated
the inheritance; They have broken first into the common field, and shut the
door to prevent after comers even from gleaning after their full harvest. For
the better effecting whereof they have now morgaged (in effect) all the means
they have to raise money, unto the City. And being themselves fat and full with
the public Treasure (to express rather their scorn then care.) There are
making an Ordinance that no more money shall be given to their members: And yet
to show how careful they are of all such as have cheated the Commonwealth
under them (I will not say for them) They have taken advantage of the petition
of the Army: wherein they desired Indemnity for all acts done in relation to
the war. And have passed an Ordinance of Indemnity for all such, as have
acted by authority, and for the service of the Parliament, wherein (under great
penalties, and with an app^ale at last from the Judges of the Law, to a
Comittee of Parliament) such as have gone beyond the authority given by
Parliament, and sequestered men unjustly and so withheld their goods under
pretense thereof, and such as have leavied taxes three or four times over, are
quit from private actions: and the benefit of Law and Justice taken from the
Oppressed, to secure country Committees, Sequestrators, and others, (not
Prerogative, but Legislative) Thieves; contrary to Magna Charta, which says,,
nulli negabimus, nulli differemus justitiam, aut rectum; We will deny, or
defer justice and right to no man. Oh prodigious acts! and of greater tyranny
then any King ever durst adventure upon. What is become of our National Cov.
and the Parliament many Declarations for defense of Laws and Liberty? Or have
we fought our liberty into slavery? By these devises the honest middle men of
the House (whose consciences will not let them join in any faction to rend the
Commonwealth in sunder) are out of all possibility of repair, and made
contemptible as well by their own want, as the pride of the Grandees: and in
the end, their poverty will enforce them to leave the sole possession of the
house to these thriving Junto men, who do beleaguer them therein, making them
(for farther addition to their losses) pay all taxes from which the thriving
men go free: so that the poorer part of the house pays tribute to the richer.
Nay it is further whispered, that at last the Junto men will quit the
Parliament Privilege of not being sued, purposely to leave these younger
Brothers to the mercy of their Creditors, and disable them to sit in their
House.

An other ambitious aim of those Junto men is their devise of referring all
businesses of moment to Committees. 10. Committees of the Houses.
For the active speaking men by mutual agreement, naming one another of every
Committee (or at least their confident Ministers) do thereby fore-stall and
intercept the businesses of the house, and under color of examining and
preparing matters, they report them to the house with what glosses, additions,
detractions, and advantages they please; whereby the House (judging according
to their report) oftentimes mis-judgeth, and if it be a business they are
willing to smoother, the Committees have infinite artificial delays to put it
off, and keep it from a hearing, or at least from reporting. By this means the
remaining part of the House are but ciphers to value, and Suffragans to ratify
what is fore-judged by the said Committees. This usurpation of theirs is much
helped by keeping the doors of their Committee rooms shut, and dispatching all
affairs privately and in the dark. Whereas Justice delights in the light, and
ought to be as public as the common air, it being against its nature to be
chambred up and kept from the observation of eye, and ear witnesses.

Parts of this project we may well call the Multiplicity of money Committees,
as Goldsmiths hall, Haberdashers hall, 11. Money Committees.
the Committee of the Kings revenues, Committee of the Army, etc. Where every
man's profit and power is according to his cunning and conscience. Hereby they
draw a general dependency after them, for he that commands the money, commands
the men: These Committee Men are so powerful that they overawe and overpower
their fellow members, contrary to the nature of a free Parliament: wherein the
equallity of the members must maintain the freedom and integrity thereof, and
suppress factions.

The like may be said of such members as (in scorn of the self-denying
Ordinances) hold offices by gift or connivence of the Parliament: either openly
in their own name, 12. Members holding offices, etc.
or Secretly in the name of some friend. Their offices inabling them to do
courtesies and discourtises. And although there has bin a Committee appointed
to certify all pensions, Sequestrations, offices, employments of advantage and
profits conferred by the Parliament upon any their members, in which Committee
M. Sands holds the chair; yet is this merely a formallitie to blind the eyes
of the world, and fool the expectation of some losing members, who were then
resolute to know who had already received satisfaction for their losses, and
how far they had outrunne their fellow members therein. Yet this Committee is
now let fall, no reports demanded of M. Sand: and when any is to be made; they
are not unprovided of a means to make it fruitless, by putting every
particular to debate: well knowing that no man will be willing to argue against
the particular persons and merits of his fellow members, and thereby heap
envy upon his own head; besides the delay of a particular debate.

How frequently the country Committees act contrary to the Laws of the Land:
13. Country Committees.
how they trample Magna Charta under their feet, how boldly and avowedly they
transgress all orders and Ordinances of Parliament, and break our solemn
League and Covenant, how they ordinarily turn well affected men out of their
free-holds and goods, imprison and beat their Persons without any known charge,
accuser, or witness against them. How frequently they leavie one tax three or
four times over and continue their leavyes after the Ordinances expire. How
cruelly they raise the twentieth and fifth part upon the well affected;
exercising, an Illegal arbitrary tyrannical power over their fellow subjects
far higher then ever Strafford or Canterbury durst advise the King to. How
ignorantly and unjustly they exercise a power to hear and determine (or rather
to determine without hearing, or hear without understanding) private
controversies of Meum* and Tuum, for debts, trespasses, nay title and
possession of lands without either formality or knowledge of the Law, not
having wit, manners nor breeding enough (as being chosen for the greatest part,
out o^ the basest of the people for base ends) to satisfy men with an outside,
or Complement of justice: Insomuch that nothing is now more Common, then an
accusation without an Accuser, a sentence without a Judge, and a condemnation
without a hearing. If any man, I say, be so deaf as not to hear the loud
universal outcrying of the people; so great a stranger in our Israel as not to
know this truth, let him peruse M. Edward Kings discovery of the arbitrarie
actions of the Com. of Lincoln printed 1647. where he may see these things
briesty Epitomized: but to historise them at large would require a volume as
big as the book of Martyrs. These Committees are excellent spunges to suck
money from the people, and to serve not only their own, but also the
Covetous, Malicious, Ambitious ends of those that raked them out of the
dunghill for that employment, and do defend them in their oppressions. Who is
so blind as not to see that these men have their protectors? Their Daemones to
whom they offer up part of their rapins; to whom they sacrifice.

Occulta spolia, and plures de pace Triumphos. If there be any intention to
restore our laws and liberties, and free us from arbitrary Government: it is
fit these Committees and all associations be laid down, having no enemy to
associate against, and that the old form of Government by Sheriffs, Justices
of the Peace etc. be re-established; and the Militia in each County settled as
before, in Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, or in Commissioners.

Nor is it a small artifice to raise money by so many several and confused
Taxes. Whereas one or two ways orderly used and well husbanded, would have
done the work. 1. Royal Subsidy of 400000 l. 2. Pole-mony. 3 the free Loans
and contributions upon the public Faith amounted to a vast incredible sum,
in money, Plate, horse, Arms, etc. 4. The Irish adventure for sale of Lands the
first and second time. 5. The Weekly Meal. 6. the City Loan after the rate of
50 Subsidies. 7. The Assessement for bringing in the Scots. 8. the 5. and 20
part, 9. The Weekly assessement for my L. Generals Army. 10. The weekly (or
Monthly Assessement for Sir Tho. Fairfax Army. 11. The weekly Assessement for
the Scottish Army. 12. The weekly Assessement for the british Army in Ireland.
13 The Weekly Assessement for my L. of Manchesters Army. 14. Freequarter (at
least) connived at by the State, because the Soldiers having for a time
subsistence that way, are the less craving for their pay: whereby their
arrears growing stale, will at last either be frustrated by a tedious Committee
of Accounts, or forgotten. In the mean time, the grand Committee of accounts
discount it out of the Commanders arrears, whereby the State saves it. 15. The
Kings Revenue. 16. Sequestrations and plunder by Committee^, which if well
answered to the State would have carried on the work: which thus I demonstrate,
One half of all the goods and chattells, and at least one half of all the
Lands, Rents, and Revenues of the Kingdom have been sequestered. And who can
imagine that one half of the profits and goods of the Land will not maintain
any Forces that can be kept and fed in England, for the defense thereof? 17.
Excise upon all things. This alone if well managed would maintain the War.
The Low Countries make it almost their only support. 18. Fortification money,
etc. By these several ways and Taxes about 40 millions in money and money
worth have been milked from the People: and the Parliament as (the Pope did
once) may call England, Puteum inexhaustum; yet is now almost drawn day. A vast
Treasury, and so excessive, as nothing but a long peace could import: and
nothing but much fraud and many follies could dissipate. And we ought not to
wonder if it be accounted ^nter arcana novissimi imperii to be always making,
yet never finishing an account thereof.

15. Accounts.
And as they have artificially confounded the accounts by laying on multiplicity
of Taxes; so (so for the same reason) they let the money run in so many muddy,
obscure channells, through so many Committees and Officers fingers, both for
collecting, receiving, issuing and paying it forth, that it is impossible to
make or balance any public account thereof: and at the least one half thereof
is known to be devoured by Committees and officers and those that for lucre
protect them. By these means as they make many men partners with them in the
public spoils, so they much strengthen and increase their party, whereby
multitude peccantium tollit paenam.

Accounts again.
If these things were not purposely done, 1. our Taxes would be fewer in number,
and more in effect. 2. They would be put to run in one channel, under the
fingering of fewer Harpies, and perspicuous and true Entries made of all
receipts and disbursements which would be public to common view and
examination. The Exchequer way of Accounts is the exactest, ancientest, and
best known way of account of England, and most free from deceit, which is
almost confessed de facto, when (to make the Kings Revenue more obnoxious to
their desires) they took it out of the exchequer way (contrary to the
fundamental Laws of the Land; for both the higher and lower Exchequer are as
ancient and fundamental as any Court in England) and put it under, a Committee
which (as all other Committees do) will render an account of their stewardship
at the latter day. In the mean time diverse of that Committee buy in old
sleeping Pensions which thee pay themselves from the first of their arrears:
yet other men that have disbursed money out of their purses for the Kings
Service, can receive no pay for any money laid forth before Michaelmas Term,
1643. because (forfooth) then the Committee first took charge of the Revenue.
In the mean time the Kings Tenants and debtours are deprived of the benefit of
the Laws and Liberties of the Subject which before they enjoyed: all Debts and
Moneys being now raised by the terror of the Purfuivants and Messengers, whose
Commissions are only to distrain and levy, etc. whereas formerly the Exchequer
sent out legal Process, and the Tenant or Debtor had liberty to plead to it in
his own defense, if he thought himself wronged; but now New Lords, new
Laws,, and to countenance their doings, the Committee have gotten an addition
of some Lords to them. 3. If there were fair play above board, so many Members
of both Houses would not be ambitious of the trouble and clamor that attends
Taskmasters, Publicans, and such sinners as fit at the receipt of Custom,
being no part of the business for which the write summons, or the people
choose or trust them and whereby they are diverted from the business of the
House: but would leave that employment to other men, who not having the
character and privilege of Parliament upon them, will be less able to protect
themselves and their agents from giving pub^ike accounts of their receips and
disbursements, and from putting affronts and delays upon the Committee of
Accounts as (it is well known) some of them have done. Lastly it is scandalous
that the same men should be continued so long in their money employments
because Diuturnitas and solitudo corrumpunt Imperia; and by long continuance
and experience they grow so hardened, so cunning in their way, and so backward
with dependencies, that it is almost impossible to trace them. And although
(when we look upon the many persons employed) we cannot say there is solitudo
personarum; yet when we consider that by a long partnership in their
employments they are allied together in one common interest; they are to be
esteemed but as one man, for a Corporation of men is but many men joined
together as one man, and with one mind pursuing one and the same end or
interest.

And though we have a general Committee of Accounts, 16. Committee of Accounts.
yet they were nominated by those Members that ought to give Accounts: and it
must needs be suspicious for an Accomptant to choose those persons before whom
he shall account. And we see (after so long a time of their sitting) no fruit
thereof. Whereas the people did hope, that after so much money spent, and such
great debts and arreares left to pay, (whereby they are threatened with
continuance of their Taxes) That a full and exact general account of all
Receipts and Disbursements would have been published in Print, for their
satisfaction, as is usually done in the Low Countries, and as was once done by
this Parliament, Anno 1642. by a Declaration of the accounts of the Kingdom.

17. Wants of the Parl. and how occasioned.
By these exorbitant courses, though they have drayned 40. Millions from the
people, yet (as Philip of Macedon was said to be Inter quotidianus rapinas
semper inops) they are fallen to such ridiculous want and beggerie, that they
have lately pawned almost all the security they have for 200000.l. to disband
the Army, and enter upon the Irish employment. They have slit Goldsmiths Hall
in sunder, and given one side thereof to the City, and kept the other half
thereof to themselves, and that already charged with 200000.l. at least. So
that if any sudden occasion happen, they have put their purse into the hands of
the uncircumcised Jews of the City, and cannot raise one penny but by new taxes
upon the people. It was worth observing to see how officiously some of the old
Stagers took leave of the Public purse, before it came into Hucksters hands.
Alderman Pennington had a debt of 3000. l. he owed to Sir John Pennington
forgiven him, (he never asked forgiveness of his sins so heartily) and 3000.l.
more given him out of Goldsmiths Hall in course. The reason of this bounty was
forked or twofold:

1. Because he had got enough before.

2. To comfort his heart, for being left out of the City Militia. But the most
observable thing was, to see this old Parliament like a young Prodigal, take
up money upon difficult terms, and entangle all they had for a security.

1. They gave way to the City to hedge in an old debt, being a loan of money
after the rate of Subsidyes: and other old debts.

2. Whereas 200000. l. only was the sum to be borrowed; the City enjoined
them to take up 230000. l. whereof the the odd 30000. l. to be bestowed for
relief of decayed occupiers of the City: So, that (upon the matter) the
Parliament pays 30000. l. Broakage.

3. That the City may not trust the greatest unthrifts of Christendom, with
laying out their own money; they put upon them two Treasurers of the City to
retain and disburse it for the service for which it was borrowed. So ye see
they have now neither credit, money, nor a purse to put it in.

So that the modest Members who have been more forward to help their Country
then themselves, 18. Modest and middle members.
are left in the lurch for their losses, and exposed to the laughter of their
elder brothers, the old Junto men, and factious leaders of the house; all being
now morgaged to the Lombards of the City. The thriving Members hope their
younger brothers will continue as modest, as they have been, and digest all
with patience. But others (and those neither fools nor knaves) hope all the
modest and middle men of the houses (such as are engaged in no faction) will be
provoked hereby to draw into a third party or Junto to moderate the excesses of
the other two, when any thing prejudicial to the Commonwealth is agitated: and
to call the old Junto men those land Pirates to account, making them cast up
what they have swallowed, and bring it to a common dividend. Nor let them be
discouraged with the supposed difficulty hereof, since 20. or 30. men holding
together, and observing the cross debates, and different sway of each party,
may easily make themselves moderators of their differences, and turn the scales
for the best advantage of the common, which way they please to cast in their
votes, since it is very rare to have any question carried by more then eight or
ten voices.

Most of these Grandees have for their retreat, 19. Grandees provision to save
themselves.
houses in the Low Countries richly furnished with sequestered Plate, Linen and
Stuff: and great store of money in bank for their shelter, against such
storms as their Rapine, Tyranny and Ignorance may happily raise here amongst
us. In those their retirements, these Authors of our miseries will enjoy their
sins, and our spoils in security, attending an opportunity to purchase their
peace at last, and betray our Safeties and Liberties to the enraged Prince and
People. This is called robbing the Egyptians. And truly these ambitious
state-Mountebanks have brought us into a darkness, worse then Egyptian. The
text faith, the Egyptians rose not from their places in three days: They yet
knew where they were: which is more then we do, every man being out of his
place and rank. The Servant in place of his Master, the Beggar in place of the
King, the Fool in place of the Counselor, the Theife in place of the Judge,
the Cheater in place of the Treasurer, the Clown in place of the Gentleman;
none but God alone can play Daedalus part, and give us a Clue to lead us out of
this labyrinth, into which these unpolitique Hocas Pocasses have brought us:
These unskilful workmen that have built up Babel, and pulled down Sion.
Others are said to prepare Foreign Plantations for Retreat; To people which,
children are ravished from their parents arms, and Shipped away; an
abomination not known in England before, and therefore no competent Law made
against it; no more then in ancient Rome against Parricides.

20. Grandees their several intrests and designs and strengths.
By what has been already said, you see what the several, and what the
conjoined interests of these two Juntos or Factions Presbyterian and
Independent are. Let us now consider where their several strength lies. The
Independent groundeth his strength upon the Army, which if he can keep up, he
hopes to give the Law to all; and to produce that great Chymaera, Liberty of
Conscience: not considering that the confusion and licentiousness of such a
liberty will destroy it self, Libertas Liberate perit. The Presbyterians have
three pillars to support them. 1. The City is their chief foundation, with
which they keep a strict correspondencie, and daily communication of
Counsels. Upon this consideration they have lately put the Parliament Purse
into the Cities Pocket as aforesaid; settled and enlarged the City Militia.
Whereas all the Countries of England (being more obnoxious to injuries then the
City) suffer much for want of settling their Militia; the Parliament not
trusting them with arms, so much as for their own defense: An evident sign,
there is a farther design then disbanding this Army. And because the City
Militia, can only keep in awe the adjacent South and East Counties of the
Kingdom; therefore to suppress the remoter parts, and enforce them to
obedience, they keep up some inland Garrisons, and have General Poyntz
supernumerarie forces for the North. And in the West (under color of sending
men for Ireland) they keep upon free quarter and pay of the country many
supernumerarie Regiments and Troops most Cavaliers; at least five times as many
as they really intend to transport. These are always going, but never gone:
Like Saint George, always in his saddle, never on his way. Something ever is
and shall be wanting until Sir Thomas Fayrfax's Army be disbanded; and then
(it is thought) the disguise will fall off; and these supernumeraries shall
appear a new modelled Army under Presbyterian Commanders, you may be sure:
and such whose consciences shall not befoole their wits where any matter of
gain appears. If this be not their aim, Why did they not disband these lewd
Supernumeraries before last winter, since they might have raised as many men
the spring following for half the charge their very free quarters cost? And
most of these swear they will not go for Ireland, vowing they will cut the
throats of the Roundheads.

The Country is amazed, fearing these Cavaliers are kept on free quarter by a
Cavaleerish party for some Cavaleerish Design. Secondly, why did they not
rather divide Sir Thomas Fayrfax Army into two parts, one to go for Ireland,
the other to stay in England; being already modelled, excellently disciplined,
and having the visible marks of Gods favor upon their actions? But to take a
few for Ireland, a few for England, and leave a Coare in the middle to be
plucked forth and disbanded, was the way to discontent them, and put them into
mutiny: and thereby necessitate the Parliament to disband them all, and give an
opportunity to them that seek it, to new model another army out of the
aforesaid Supernumeraries, more pliable to the desires of the Presbyterian
Iuncto: Add hereunto the causeless exasperating Speeches and aspersions cast
upon most of the army purposely, as moderate men think, to discontent them.
Thirdly, If they have no intent to keep up an Army upon the people, why have
they continued the military charge for another year; and enlarge it from 52000
l. to 60000 l. a month?

Thus the City, Inland Garrisons, 21. Presbytersi
and Supernumerarie forces new modelled are like to prove the three stringed
whips wherewith the Presbyterian Phaetons will drive their triumphant Chariot
if they prevail; To which may be added the Presbytors themselves, who by
over-awing men's Consciences with their Doctrine, will subdue and work men's
minds like wax to receive any impression of bondage that tyranny and
oppression can set upon them, as they do in Scotland: The Clergy in all times
and places have ever held with the mightyt as the Jacco hunts still with the
Lion to partake of his prey.

23. Quaeries upon the premises.
The premises considered, I shall propound these ensuing Quaeries to those that
are of better Judgment then my self.

1 Quere, Why the Title and punishment of Malignants is translated from the
Cavaliers, who fought for Regal Tyranny against the Parl. and laid upon those
that fought against Regal Tyranny for the Parliament? Is it not because those
Cavaliers that have fought for one Tyranny, will not be scrupulous to fight
for another? and such well affected as have opposed Tyranny in one kind, will
not admit of it in another? Why is it now accounted a note of malignity and
disaffection to endeavor the putting down of Arbitrary Government, and
re-establishing our laws, liberties and properties; whereto the Parliament by
their many Declarations and their National Covenant are bound? Lay this to
heart and consider whether they have not changed these their first principles,
and consequently whether they are not desirous to change their old friends who
resolutely adhere to the said principles.

2. If the King grant the Propositions; or if he deny them, and the predominant
Juncto (for both Juncto's joined in one (for this is probable) to drive on one
common interest) establish the military and civil power without him, according
to their desires, and in order to their aims. Quaere whether the said leading
men settled in their postures with their confident Guards about them, may not
draw after them so many of their party, as upon an implicit faith will follow
them, and lick up the crumbs of the public spoils under their Tables:
expelling or disabling (as aforesaid) the dis-ingaged members, and by this
policy make themselves perpetual Dictators, incorporating and engrossing to
themselves both the Consultive, Directive and Ministerial power of the
Kingdom in all causes Civil and Military, setting up an Oligarchy or popular
Tyranny in stead of a Regal: As the thirty Tyrants of Athens did. In order
whereto they already declare, 1. That an Ordinance of Parliament without the
Kings Royal assent is equal to an Act of Parliament. 2. That an Ordinance is
above a Law by virtue of their Legislative power: upon which presuming in their
Ordinance of Indemnity they have granted an Appeal from the Judges of the Law
to a Committee of Parliament. See the Ordinance May 21. 1647. 3. That they are
the Irrevocable Trustees of the peoples laws, liberties and properties,
without account: with other principles preparative to Tyranny.

3. Quaere, Why Arbitrary and Barbarous Government by Co^mittees and other
Illegal proceedings (which in time of war were used upon Real or pretended
necessity, and were then only excusable, because necessitas tollit Legem) are
still continued upon us now in time of peace, no enemies troubling our quiet,
and without any further pretense of necessity, Contrary to their National
Covenant, and all their Declarations? Is it not, to inure the People to
servitude, and ever use their patience?

4. Quaere, Whether the Prodigious oppressions of Committees, Sequestrators,
etc. and of free Quarter be not purposely countenanced to necessitate the
people to rise in tumults, that thence occasion may be taken to keep inland
Garrisons and Armies?

5. Quaere, Whether our laws, liberties, and properties are not now as liable
to an Invasion from the Legis-lative power, as formerly, from the Prerogative?
Considering that those who like ambitious Absalom courted and wooed the people
in the beginning of troubles, now like haughty Rehoboams, care not though the
people complain: Their little finger is heavier then the loins of the King,
the controversy between the two Juncto's being no more, then whose slaves we
shall be.

If the middle and dis-ingaged men in the House do not speedily unite
themselves into a party or Juncto, as the Factious have done, 23. Middle and
Moderate members again.
and communicate their counsels; they will be arena sine calce, loose sand
dissipated by every breath: and neither serviceable for themselves nor their
Country. Whereas if they unite, twenty or thirty may become Moderators and
Umpeers between both parties; (as has been already said) Let the moderate men
but consider how sad and dishonorable a thing it is to see nothing almost of
great and public concernment come into the House, but what has bin before
hand contrived, debated, and digested in one or both of the two Juncto's at
their private meetings: and put into so resolved and prejudicate a way and
method of dispatch, that every man is appointed his part or Cue beforehand:
One man to move it, and set it on foot, another to second him: One man to
speak to one part of the argument, another to another part: another to keep
himself to the last for a reserve, and speak to the question, which he is
provided to qualify with a distinction, or vary it, if he find it difficult to
pass. Thus all public businesses are measured by private respects; whereby it
appears, that as frequent Parl. are good physic: so continual Parl. are bad
food; and the people may complain, that, qui medice vivit, misere vivit.
Parliaments are Bona peritura; they cannot keep long without Corruption. Their
perpetuity emboldens the members, by taking from them all fear of being
called to account: Especially if they get their sons into the House as well
as themselves (as many have done this Parliament: and more endeavor to do)
whereby they have an estate in their places for two or three lives: Moreover by
long sitting they become so familiar with one another persons and designs, as
to serve one another turns, to join interest, and to draw into Factions,
Hodie mihi, cras tibi. If you and your party will help me to day, I and my
friend will help you to morrow.

24. Conclusion with some complaints.
Miserima Resp. ubi majestas Imperii, and salus populi discordibus
conflictantur studiis. What shall we say?

En quo discordia tetra -- perduxit miseros? Shall we complain to God? God
has a controversy with us. Of whom shall we complain? of our selves? we must
first reform our selves: we that take upon us to reform Church and
Commonwealth. Shall we complain of our sins? ask the grace of repentance
first; and so ask that we may obtain. Shall we complain of our punishments?
let us first repent, and amend our sins that caused them. Let us first pluck
off the mask of hypocrisy, God will see through such a fantastical garment
of Figleaves. Let us no longer make Religion a stalking-horse; God who is all
Wisdom, and all Truth, will not be deceived. If we talk like Christians, and
live like Turks, Christ will not own us. To fast for a day, and hang our heads
like bulrushes, will not reconcile us. We must fast from public spoils,
rapines and oppression, and not drink the tears of the poor and needy. Shall
we complain with the Prophet, That our Princes are become Thieves? that was
heretofore our complaint, now we must invert it, and cry, That our Thieves
(mean and base people) are become Princes. We are sick, very sick,
intemperately sick; and God has given us a Physician in his wrath, a Leper as
white as snow, fitter to infect then cure us. What Physic does he prescribe?
Poison. What diet? Stones instead of bread, Scorpions instead of fishes, hard
fare for them that formerly fed so daintily. Before I conclude, let me give you
the pedigree of our Miseries, and of their Remedies. A long peace begat Plenty,
Plenty begat Pride, and her sister Riot; Pride begot Ambition, Ambition begot
Faction, Faction begot Civil War: And (if our eviils be not incurable, if we
be not fallen in id temporis quo nec vitia nostra, nec little remedia far
possumus) our War will beget Poverty, Poverty Humility, Humility Peace again,
Sic rerum revertentibus vicibus annulus vertitur Politicus. The declining
spoake of the Wheel will rise again. But we are not yet sufficiently Humbled;
we have not repented with Nineveh. We wear Silks and Velvets instead of
sackcloth and ashes (even the meanest upstart has his thefts writ upon his
back by his Tailor in proud Characters of Gold-lace) we have not watered our
Couch with our Tears, but with adulterous sweat. Look to it therefore ye state
Incubi, that by an incestuous copulation have begot plenty upon War, and
filled your houses with the spoil and plunder of your dear Country; an
inundation of blood, and of the tears of the oppressed will wash away the
foundation of your houses: And peace will be far from you in this world, but
especially that peace which the world cannot give: And because Salamander-like
you delight in the fire of contention; an unquenchable fire will be your lot
hereafter. And though you escape all accounts here, yet upon the great day of
account when you shall receive your sentence of condemnation, those your
children for whose preferment you fell your souls, your God for gold, shall
not show so much thankfulness or pity toward you, as to say, alas our
father! But your hearts are hardened with Pharaoh, I leave you therefore to
Pharaoh's destiny, to be drowned in your own Red Sea, as he was in his.

Thus far I adventured to vindicate our Religion, Laws, 25. Resolution and
scope o^ the Author.
and Liberties with my pen; in discharge of my Conscience, and pursuance of our
National Covenant which obliges us to defend them against whosoever to our
power; neither knowing nor caring whether in so wicked an age (wherein vice is
honored, and virtue contemned) I may be thought worthy of punishment for being
more righteous then my superiors. I know an honest man is wondered at like a
monster, and the innocence of his life and conversation suspected as a Libell
against the State, yet if I perish I perish; and pereundum in licitis. Nor am I
less provided of a safe retreat then our Grandees. My grave is open for me,
and one foot in it already. Contempsit omnes ille qui mortem prius. He that
contemnes death, scorns both Hope and Fear; which are the only affections
that make Knaves, Fools and Cowards of all the world. The world is a goodly
Theater, we the Actors, God is both Poet and chief spectator. We must not
choose our own parts, that is at Gods appointment. One man he appoints to play
the King, another the Beggar, one a Comic, another a Tragic part: Whatsoever
part God has appointed for me in this remainder of my life, I will have a care
to personate it ingenuously and aptly: Not doubting but my Exit shall be
accompained with an applause into my tyring Room, my Tomb; nor will I refuse
the meanest part that may draw a plaudit from so excellent a spectator, but
will prepare my self for the worst of evils, in this worst of times; and pray
to God to reform our Reformers. Amen.

THE END.

