A TRIP TO JAMAICA: With a True CHARACTER OF THE People and Island.

By the Author of Sot's Paradise.

The Fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1699.

TO THE READER.
THE Condition of an Author is much like that of a Strumpet, both exposing our
Reputations to supply our Necessities, till at last we contract such an ill
habit, through our Practices, that we are equally troubled with an Itch to be
always Doing; and if the Reason be required Why we betake our selves to so
Scandalous a Profession as Whoring or Pamphleteering, the same Excusive Answer
will serve us both, viz. That the unhappy circumstances of a Narrow Fortune,
has forced us to do that for our Subsistence, which we are much ashamed of.

The chiefest and most commendable Talent, admired in either, is the knack of
pleasing; and He or She amongst us that happily arives to a Perfection in that
sort of Witchcraft, may in a little time (to their great Honor) enjoy the
Pleasure of being Celebrated by all the Coxcombs in the Nation.

The only difference between us is, in this particular, where in the Jilt has
the Advantage, we do our Business First, and stand to the Courtesy of our
Benefactors to Reward us after; whilst the other, for her security, makes her
Rider pay for his Journey, before he mounts the Saddle.

It is necessary I should say something in relation to the following Matter: I
do not therein present you with a formal Journal of my Voyage, or Geographical
Description of the Island of Jamaica, for that has been already done by Persons
better Quallified for such a Task. I only Entertain you with what I intend for
your Diversion, not Instruction; Digested into such a Style as might move your
Laughter; not merit your Esteem. I question not but the Jamaica Coffee-House
will be much affronted at my Character of their Sweating Chaos; and if I was
but as well assured of Pleasing every body else, as I am of Displeasing those
who have an Interest in that Country, I should not question but the Printer
would gain his End, which are the Wishes of the Author.

A TRIP TO JAMAICA:
IN the times of Adversity, when Poverty was held no Shame, and Piety no
Virtue; When Honesty in a Tradesman's Conscience, and Money in his
Counting House, were as scarce as Health in an Hospital, or Charity in a
Clergyman. The Sword being advanced, and the Pen silenced; Printers being too
Poor to pay down Copy-Money, and Authors too Poor to Trust 'em: Fools getting
more by hazarding their Carcasses, than Ingenious Men by employing their Wits;
which was well enough observed by a Gentleman, in these following Lines.

When Pens were valued less than Swords,
And Blows got Money more than Words;
When Amorous Beaux and Campaign Bully,
Thrived by their Fighting and their Folly;
Whilst Men of Parts as Poor as Rats,
With Mourning Swords and Flapping Hats,
Appear by Night, like Owls and Bats;
With Hungry haste pursuing way,
To Sir John Lend or 'Squire Pay.
Till Wit in Rags or Fool in Feather,
Were joined by Providence together.
The one over Bottle breaks his Jest,
Like Country Parson at a Feast;
For which he is Treated and Exalted,
By his dear Friend Sir Looby Dolthead.
Unhappy Age! which so in Vice surpasses,
That Men of Worth must Worship Golden Asses.
I being influenced by my Stars, with an unhappy propensity, to the
Conversation of those unlucky kind of Fortune-Hunters, till at last, though I had
no more Wit to boast of than another Man, yet I shared the Fate of those that
had; and to bear them Company, stragled so far from the Paths of Profit and
Preferment, into a Wilderness of Pleasure and Enjoyment, that I had like to
have been stuck fast in a Thicket of Brambles, before I knew whereabouts I was;
to clear my self of which, I bustled like a Fox in a Gin, or a Hare in a
Partridge-Net: But before I could free my self from this Entanglement, I had so
wounded my Feet, and stuck so many Thorns in my Side, that I halted homewards
like a Gouty Puritan to an Election, or a Lame Beggar to a Misers Funeral.

These little Afflictions moved me to reflect upon my Misspent Time; and like
a Thief in a Goal, or a Whore in a Flux, I Resolved for the future to Reform my
Life, change my Measures, and push my self upon something that might recover
those lost Moments, I had hitherto converted to the use of others, and not my
self. I now began to peep into the Business of the World, and changed the
Company of those who had nothing to do but Spend Money, for the Conversation of
such whose Practice was to Get it.

But I, through Inadvertency, neglecting to consult Doctor Trotter, or some other
Infallible Predicting Wise-aker, began my Reformation in an unfortunate Minute,
when Usurers were unbinding their Fettered Trunks, and breaking up their
Deified Bags and Consecrated Sums, for the security of Religion, and the
further establishment of Liberty of Conscience, without which [Liberty] joined,
Conscience to them would be of no use. Tradesmen grumbling at the Taxes,
Merchants at their Losses, most Men complaining for want of Business, and all
Men in Business, for want of Money: Every Man upon Change looking with as
peevish a Countenance, as if he had unluckily stumbled upon his Wife's
Failings, and unhappily become a witness to his own Cuckoldome. These I thought
but slender Encouragements to a New Reformist, who had forsaken Liberty for
Restraint, Ease for Trouble, Laziness for Industry, Wine for Coffee, and the
Pleasures of Witty Conversation, for the Plague, of a Muddy-Brain'd Society,
who could talk of nothing but Prime Cost and Profit, the Good Humor of their
Wives, the Wittiness of their Children, and the Vnluckiness of their Prentices;
and knew no more how Handsomely to Spend their Money, than Honestly to Get it.

The Complaints of those Philodenarians, the Declination of Trade, and the
Scarcity of Money, gave me no more hopes of mending my Condition, by pursuing
my intended measures, than a Good Husband has of mending a Bad Wife by winking
at her Vices. I now found my self in great danger of a Relapse, to prevent
which, after two or three Gallons of Darby-Ale had one day sent my Wits a
Wooll-gathering, and generated as many Maggots in my Brains, as there are
Crotchets in the Head of a Musician, or Fools in the Million Lotttry, I even
took up a Resolution to Travel, and Court the Blinking Gipsy Fortune in another
Country. I then began to Consider what Climate might best suit with my
Constitution, and what part of the World with my Circumstances; and upon mature
Deliberation, found a Warm Latitude would best agree with Thin Apparel, and a
Moneyed Country with a Narrow Fortune; and having often heard such extravagant
Encomiums of that Blessed Paradise Jamaica, where Gold is more plentiful than
Ice, Silver than Snow, Pearl than Hailstones, I at last determined to make a
trial of my Stars in that Island, and see whether they had the same Unlucky
Influence upon me there, as they had, hitherto, in the Land of my Nativity.

In order to proceed on my Voyage, I took a Passage in the good Ship the
Andalucia; and about the latter end of January, 1697. Upon the dissolution of
the hard Frost, I passed, with many others, by the Night Tide, in a Wherry to
Gravesend, where our Floating Receptacle lay ready to take in Goods and
Passengers; but our Lady Thames being put into a Passion, by the rude Kisses of
an Easterly Wind, drew her Smooth Face into so many Wrinckles, that her
illfavour'd Aspect and Murmurings, were to me as Terrible as the Noise of
Thieves to a Miser, or Bailiffs to a Bankrupt: and being pent up with my Limbs,
in an awkward Posture, lying Heads and Tails, like Essex Calves in a Rumford
Wagon, I was forced to endure the Insolence of every Wave, till I was become
as Wet as a New Pumped Kidnapper.

In this Condition I Embarked about Two a Clock in the Morning, where the chief
Mate, as Master of the Ceremonies, conducted me to a welcome Collation of
Cheese and Biscuit, and presented me with a Magnificent Can of Sovereign Flip,
prepared with as much Art as an Apothecary can well show in the mixing of a
Cordial. After this refreshment, I betook my self to a Cabin, which fitted me
so well, it sat as tite as a Jacket to a Dutchman, where I Slept till Morning,
as close as a Snail in a Shell, or a Maggot in an Apple-Kernel. Then Rising,
and after I had surveyed our Wooden Territories, I began to Contemplate upon
things worthy of a serious Consideration, which stirred up in me that Malignant
Spirit of Poetry, with which I am often times unhappily possessed: And what my
Muse dictated to me, her Amanuensis, I here, present unto the Reader.

A Farewell to ENGLAND.
I.
FArewell my Country and my Friends,
My Mistress, and my Muse;
In distant Regions, different Ends
My Genius now pursues.
Those Blessings which I held most dear,
Are by my stubborn Destiny,
(That uncontrolled Necessity)
Abandoned from me, and no more appear.
II.
Despair of Fortune makes me bold,
I can in Tempests Sleep;
And fearless of my Fate, behold
The Dangers of the Deep.
No Covetous Desire of Life,
Can now my Careless Thoughts employ,
Banished from Friendship, Love, and Joy,
To view the Waves and Winds at equal Strife.
III.
Over threatening Billows can I fly,
And, unconcerned, conceive,
It Is here less difficult to Die,
Than 'twas on Land to Live:
To me it is equal, Swim or Sink;
I smiling to my Fate can bow,
Bereft of Joy, I think it now
No more to Drown, than 'twas before to Drink.
IV.
Dear Friends with Patience bear the Load
Of Troubles, still to come,
You Pity us who range Abroad,
We Pity you at Home.
Let no Oppression, Fears, or Cares
Make us our Loyalty Disband,
Which, like a well built Arch, should stand
The more secure, the greater Weight it bears.
V.
Farewell Applause, that vain Delight
The Witty fondly seek;
He Is Blessed who like a Dunce may Write,
Or like a Fool may Speak:
What ever Praise we gain to day,
Whether deservedly or no,
We to the Worlds Opinion owe,
Who does as often Mis-take the same away.
VI.
Something there is, which touches near,
I scarce can bid Adieu;
It Is all my Hope, my Care, my Fear,
And all that I pursue:
It Is what I Love, yet what I Fly,
But what I dare not, must not Name,
Angels Protect the Sacred Frame,
Till I to England shall Return, or Die.
Toward the Evening the Captain came on Board, with the rest of our
Fellow-Travellers, who, when we were altogether patched up as pretty a Society,
as a Man under my Circumstances would desire to tumble into: There was Three of
the Troublesome Sex, as some call them, (though I never thought 'em so) whose
Courteous Affabillity, and Complaisance of Temper, admitted of no other
Emulation, but to strive who (within the bounds of Modesty) should be most
Obliging. One Unfortunate Lady was in pursuit of a Strayed, Husband, who in
Jamaica, had Feloniously taken to Wife (for the sake of a Plantation) a
Lacker-Fac'd Creolean, to the great dissatisfaction of his Original Spouse, who
had often declared (through the Sweetness of her Disposition) That if he had
Married another Handsomer than her self, it would never hav'd vexed her; but to
be Rivaled by a Gipsy, a Tawny Faced Moletto Strumpet, a Pumpkin colored
Whore, no, her Honor would not suffer her to bear with patience so coroding an
Indignity. The other Two were a pretty Maid, and a Comely Widow; so that in
these three, we had every Honorable State of the whole Sex: One in the State
of Innocence, another of Frution, the third of Deprivation; and if we'd had but
one in the State of Corruption, a Man might have pleased himself as well in our
Little World, as you Libertines can do in the Great One.

I shall be too tedious if I at large Particularize the whole Company, I shall
therefore Hustle them together, as a Moorfields Sweetner does Luck in a Bag,
and then you may Wink and Choose, for the Devil a Barrel the better Herring
amongs us. We had one (as I told you before) Cherubimical Lass, who, I fear,
had Lost her Self, two more of the same Gender, who had lost their Husbands;
two Parsons who had lost their Livings; three Broken Tradesmen, who had lost
their Credit; and several, like me, that had lost their Wits; a Craeoland
Captain, a Superanuated Mariner, an Independent Merchant, an Irish Kidnapper,
and a Monmothean Sythe-man, all going with one Design, to patch up their
Decayed Fortunes.

Every thing being in order for Sailing, the Pilot came on Board who put on
such a Commanding Countenance, that he looked as Stern as a Sarazins Head; and
the Sins of his Youth having crept into his Pedestals, he Limp'd about the
Quater-Deck, like a Cripple in Forma Pauperis upon a Mountebanks Stage, making
as great a Noise in his Tarpaulin Cant, as a Young Council in a Bad Cause, or a
Butcher at a Bear-Garden. As soon as we had weighed Anchor, under the doleful
Cry and hard Service of Haul Cat haul, there was nothing heard till we reached
the Downs, but About Ship my Lads, bring your Fore Tack on Board, haul
Fore-Sail haul, Brace about the Main Yard, and the Devil to do, That I was more
Amazed than a Mouse at a Throsters Mill, or the Russian Ambassador, at a Clap
of Thunder.

By the help of Providence, the Pilot's Care, and Seamens Industry, we passed
safe to Deal, where we Anchored three or four Days for a fair Wind. In which
interim, the Prince of the Air had puffed up an unwelcome Blast in the Night,
which forced a Vessel upon the Goodwin. The next Morning the Salvages Manned out
a Fleet of their Deal Skimming-Dishes, and made such unmerciful work with the
poor distressed Bark, that a Gang of Bailiffs with an Excecution, or a Kennel
of Hounds upon a Dead Horse, could not have appeared more Ravenous. From thence
with a prosperous Gale, we made the best of our way into the wide Ocean, which
Mariners say, is of such Profundity, that, like a Misers Conscience, or a
Woman's Concupiscence it is never to be Fathomed.

'Twas in the midst of Winter, and very Cold Weather, when we set out; but in a
Fortnights time we were got into a comfortable Climat, which yielded us so
pleasant a warmth, that a Man might pluck off his Shirt upon Deck, and commit
Murthor upon his own Flesh and Blood till he was weary, without the danger of
an Ague.

I happened one Morning to hear two Tar-Jackets in a very high Dispute; I went
to them, and asked the reason of their Difference. Why Sir, says one, I Will tell
you, there was my Master Whistlebooby, an old Boatswain in one of his Majesty's
Ships, who was Superhanded, and past his Labor and the Ambaralitie Divorced
him from his Ship, and the King allowed him a Suspension, and this Lubberly
Whelp here says I talk like a Fool; and sure I have not used the Sea this
Thirty Years, but I can Argufie any thing as proper as he can.

The chief Sports we had on Board, to pass away the tedious Hours, were Hob,
Spy the Market, Shove the Slipper, Dilly Dally, and Back-Gammon; the Latter of
which proved as serviceable to me, as a Book of Heraldy to a Gentleman Mumper,
or a Pass to a Penniless Vagabond: For (like the Whore who boasted of her
Industry) I used to make my Days Labor worth Two Shillings, or Half a Crown,
at Two Pence, or a Groat a Bout. The most powerful Adversary I engaged with,
was a Parson, who, when the Bell Rung to Prayers, would start up in the middle
of a Hit, desire my Patience whilst he stepped into the Great Cabin, and gave
his Sinful Congregation a Dram of Evangelical Comfort, and he would wait upon
me presently. But that Recreation in which we took a more peculiar delight, was
the Harmony we made by the assistance of the two Heaven-drivers, in Lyricking
over some Antiquated Sonnets, and for varieties sake, now and then a Psalm,
which our Canonical Vice-Whippers Sung with as Penitential a grace, as a
Sorrowful Offender in his Last Nightcap.

To please my self at a Spare-Hour, I had taken with me a Flute, and there
being on Board a Spanniel Dog, who (Seaman-like) had no great kindness for
Wind-Musick, for when ever he heard me Tooting, he would be Howling, which,
together made a Noise so surprising, that it frighted away a Quotidean Ague,
from a Young Fellow who had been three Weeks under the hands of our Doctor.

One Night after we had well Moistened our Drouthy Carcasses with an
Exhilerating Dose of Right Honorable Punch, there arose a Storm, for which I
had often wished, that I might not be a stranger to any Surprising Accident the
Angry Elements, when at Variance, might afford me. The Heavens all round us (in
as little time as a Girl might loose her Maidenhead) had put on such a
Malignant Aspect, as if it threatened our Destruction; And Aeolus gave such
unmerciful Puffs, and Whiffs, that I was fearful to stand upon the Quarter
Deck, lest, before my time, I should be snatched up to Heaven in a Whirlwind.
From all the Corners of the Sky there darted forth such Beams of Lightning,
that I Vow and Protest the Fireworks in St. James's- Square, were no more to
be compared to it, than a Gloworms Arse to a Cotton Candle, which were Instantly
succeeded with such Vollys of Thunder, from every side, that you would have
thought the Clouds had been fortified with Whole Cannon, and weary of being
tossed about with every Wind, were Fighting their way into a Calmer Region, to
enjoy their Rest, Then fell such an excessive Rain, that as we had one Sea
under us, we feared another had been tumbling upon our Heads; for my part, I
feared the very Falling of the Sky, and thought of nothing but Catching of
Larks. My Spirits being a little deprest, by the apprehensions of the Danger we
were under, I went down into the Gun-room, to consult my Brandy-Cask about
taking of a Dram; where one of our Ladies, through want of better Accommodation,
was forced to be Content with a Cradle, in which she was Praying, with as much
Sincerity, for Fair Weather, as a Farmer for a Kind Harvest, or an Old Maid for
a Good Husband: And I being greatly pleased at her most Importunate
Solicitations, have given you a Repetition of one part, viz. And if Thou have
Decreed, that we shall Perish in this Tempest, I most humbly beseech Thee to
Punish with Pox, Barrenness, and Dry-Belly-Ach, that Adulterous Strumpet, who,
by Robbing me of my Husband, has been a means of bringing me to this Untimely
End; may her whole. Life be a continued course of Sin without a moments
Repentance, that she may Die without Forgiveness, and be Damned without Mercy.
In which Interim, a Sea washed over our Fore-Castle, run Aft, and came down the
Whip-scuttle, she concluding we were going to the Bottom, Shreek'd out, and
fell into a Fit; whilst I, through my Fear, together with my Modesty, scorned to
take the Advantage of so fair an Opportunity.

In a doubtful Condition, between this World and the next, we labored till
near Morning, about which time the Storm abated; But as soon as Daylight
appeared and the serenity of the Weather had turned our Frightful Apprehensions
into a little Alacrity, some of the Men, from Aloft, Spied a Sail bearing after
us with all Expedition; and being no great distance from the Coast of Sally, a
jealousy arose amongst our Officers, of her being a Man of War belonging to
that Country, they having upon the Conclusion of the late Peace with France,
Proclaimed a War with England; so that we thought our selves now in as great
danger of being knocked on the Head, or made Slaves, as we were before of being
Drowned. This Alaram kindled up amongst us new fears of approaching Danger,
more Terrible than the former we had so happily survived.

Command was given by our Captain, to prepare for a Fight; down Chests, up
Hammocks, bring the small Arms upon the Quarter, an every Man directed to his
Post, by orders fixed upon the Mizzen-mast in the Steerage; the Bulkhead and
Cabins nock'd down, the Deck cleared Fore and Aft, for every Man to have free
access to his Business. When all things were in readiness to receive an Enemy,
I took a walk on purpose to look about me, and was so animated which the
Seamens Activity and Industry, together with the smell of Sweat, Match, and
Gunpowder, that like 'Squire Witherington in Chevy Chase, I could have Fought
upon my Stumps. By this time our supposed Enemy was almost come up with us,
under English Colors, but his keeping close upon our Quarter, and not bearing
off, gave us still reasons to mistrust him; but seeing him a small Ship, and
ours a Vessel of 400 Tuns, 28 Guns, and about 50 Men, we Furled our Main-Sail
with all our Hands at once, as a stratagem to seem well Manned; put our
Top-Sailes aback, and lay by, to let 'em see we were no more Afraid than Hurt.
We had on Board an Irishman going over a Servant, who I suppose was Kidnap'd;
I observed this Fellow, being quartered at a Gun, looked as pale as a
Pickpocket new taken: I asked him why he put on such a Cowardly look; and told
him 'twas a shame for a Man to show so much Fear in his Countenance. Indeed Sir
(said he) I cannot halp et, I love the bate of a Drum, the Pop of a Pistol, or
the Bounch of a Mushket wall enough, but, by my Shoul, the Roaring of a Great
Gun always makesh me start. I asked him whose Servant he was. By my Fait, said
he, I cannot tell; I wash upon Change looking for a good Mashter, and a brave
Gentleman came to me and asked me who I wash; and I told him I wash mine nowm
shelf, and he gave me some good Wine and good Ale, and brought me on Board, and
I have not sheen him sinch. By this time our Adversary was come within hearing,
and upon our Hailing of him, proved a little ship bound to Guinea, which put an
end to our Fears, and made us fly to the Punch-Bowle with as much Joy as the
Mob to a Bonfire upon a State- Holyday.

After we had chased away the remembrance of our past Dangers, with a reviving
draught of our Infallible Elixir, we began to be Merry as so many Beggars (and
indeed were before as Poor) beginning to turn that into Ridicule, which so
lately had changed our Jollitry into Fear and Sadness. When we had thus
refreshed our Bodies, and strengthened our Spirits, by passing round a Health
to our Noble Selves, etc. 'twas thought high time by our Reverend Pastors, to
return Thanks for our great Deliverance from the hands of our Enemies, though we
had none near us, which was accordingly performed with all the Solemnity a
parcel of Merry Juvenal Wags could compose themselves to observe.

By this time we were got into so warm a Latitude, that (God be thanked) a
Louse would not live in it: We now began to thin our Dress, and, had not
Decency forbid it, could have gladly gone Naked, as our first Parents. Kissing
here grew out of Fashion; there is no joining of Lips, but your Noses would drop
Sweat in your Mouths. The Sea, and other Elements, began now to entertain us
with Curiosities in Nature worth observing, as Grampos, Sharks, Porpus,
Flying-Fish, Albacores Bonetta's, Dolphin, Bottle-noses, Turtle, Blubber,
Stingrays, Sea-Adders, and the Devil and all of Monsters without Names, and
some without Shape. As for Birds, Noddys, Boobies, Shearwaters, Shags,
Pitternells, Men of War, Tropic Birds, Pellicans, etc. I shall not undertake
here to describe these Creatures, because some of them are so Frightfully Ugly,
that if any Friends Wife with Child should long for the Reading of my Book, it
should chance to make her Miscarry. But that which I thought most worthy of
Observation, were the Clouds, whose various Forms, and beauteous Colors, were
Inimitable by the Pencil of the greatest Artist in the Universe, Cities,
Palaces, Groves, Fields, and Gardens, Monuments, Castles, Armies, Bulls, Bears,
and Dragons, etc. as if the Air above us had been Frozen into a Looking-Glass,
and showed us by Reflection, all the Rarities in Nature.

By this time we had gained the Tropic, and come into a Trade-Wind; the
greatest of our fears being now a Calm, which is fine weather to please fearful
Tempers; but it brings us more in danger of being Starved, than a Storm does of
being Drowned: Though it was our Fortune in a few Days after, to make the
Leward-Islands, and put us past the dread of so terrible a Catastrophe, those
we passed in sight of, were, Descado, a rare place for a Bird-catcher to be
Governor of, Birds being the only Creatures by which it is inhabited; Montserat
Antego, Mevis, possessed by the English; St. Christophers, by half English half
French; Rodunday, an uninhabitable high Rock. From amongst these Caribbee
Islands, in a few days, we got to Hispaniola, without any thing remarkable; and
from thence, in 24 Hours, with a fresh Gale, within sight of Jamaica, which
(without Malice or Partiallity) I shall proceed to give you some Account of.

A Character of JAMAICA.
THE Dunghill of the Universe, the Refuse of the whole Creation, the Clippings
of the Elements, a shapeless pile of Rubbish confusedly jumbl'd into an Emblem
of the Chaos, neglectect by Omnipotence when he formed the World into its
admirable Order. The Nursery of Heavens Judgments, where the Malignant Seeds of
all Pestilence were first gathered and scattered through the Regions of the
Earth, to Punnish Mankind for their Offenses. The Place where Pandora filled
her Box, where Vulcan Forged Joves Thunderbolts, and that Phaeton, by his rash
misguidance of the Sun, scorched into a Cinder. The Receptacle of Vagabonds,
the Sanctuary of Bankrupts, and a Close-stool for the Purges of our Prisons. As
Sickly as an Hospital, as Dangerous as the Plague, as Hot as Hell, and as
Wicked as the Devil. Subject to Turnadoes, Hurricans, and Earthquakes, as if
the Island, like the People, were troubled with the Dry Belly-Ach.

Of their Provisions.
THE chiefest of their Provisions is Sea Turtle, or a Toad in a shell, stewed
in its own Gravy; its Lean is as White as a Green Sickness Girl, its Fat of a
Calves-turd Color; and is excellently good to put a stranger into a Flux, and
purge out part of those ill Humors it infallibly creates. The Belly is called
Callipee, the Back Callipach; and is served up to the Table in its own Shell,
instead of a Platter. They have Guana's, Hikceries, and Crabs; the first being
an Amphibeous Serpent, shaped like a Lizard, but black and larger, the second a
Land-Tortoise, the last needs no Description, but are as numerous as Frogs in
England, and Borrough in the Ground like Rabbets, so that the whole Island may
be justly called, A Crabb-Warren. They are Fattest near the Pallasadoes, where
they will make a Skelleton of a Corpse in as little time as a Tanner will Flea a
Colt, or a Hound after Hunting devour a Shoulder of Mutton. They have Beef
without Fat, Lean Mutton without Gravy, and Fowls as dry as the Udder of an
Old Woman, and as tough as a Stake from the Haunches of a Superanuated
Car-Horse.

Milk is so plenty, you may buy it for Fifteen Pence a Quart; but Cream so very
scarce, that a Firkin of Butter, of their own making, would be so costly a
Jewel, that the Richest Man in the Island would be unable to purchase it. They
value themselves greatly upon the sweetness of their Pork, which is indeed
lushious, but as flabby as the Flesh of one just risen from a Flux, and ought
to be forbid in all hot Countries (as amongst the Jews) for the prevention of
Leprosy, Scurvy, and other Distempers, of which it is a great occasion.

There is very little Veal, and that Lean; for in England you may Nurse four
Children much cheaper than you can one Calf in Jamaica. They have course Teal,
almost as big as English Ducks; and Moscovy Ducks as big as Geese; But as for
their Geese, they may be all Swans, for I never saw one in the Island.

There are sundry sorts of Fish, under Indian Names, without Scales, and of a
Serpentine Complexion; they Eat as dry as a Shad, and much stronger than stale
Herrings or Old Ling; with Oiled Butter to the Sauce as rank as Goose-Grease,
improved with the palatable Relish of a stinking Anchovie.

They make a rare Soop they call Pepper-pot; it is an excellent Breakfast. for a
Salamander, or a good preparative for a Mountebanks Agent, who Eats Fire one
day, that he may get better Victuals the next. Three Spoonfuls so Inflamed my
Mouth, that had I devoured a Peck of Horseradish, and Drank after it a Gallon
of Brandy and Gunpowder, ( Dives like) I could not have been more importunate
for a Drop of Water to cool my Tongue.

They greatly abound in a Beautiful Fruit, called a Cussue, not unlike an
Apple, but longer; it is soft and very Juicy, but so great an Acid, and of a
Nature so Restringent, that by Eating of one, it drew up my Mouth like a Hens
Fundament, and made my Pallat as Rough, and Tongue as Sore as if I had been
Gargling it with Allom-Water: From whence I conjecture, they are a much sitter
Fruit to recover Lost Maidenheads, properly applied, than to be Eaten. Of
Water-Mellons and Mus-Mellons they have plenty; the former is of as cold a
quality as a Cucumber, and will dissolve in your Mouth like Ice in a hot
Drying Pan, being as Pleasant to the Eater (and, I believe, as Wholesome) as a
Cup of Rock-Water to a Man in a Hectic Feavour: The latter are large and
lushious, but much too watery to be good.

Coco-Nuts, and Physick-Nuts are in great esteem amongst the Inhabitants; the
former they reckon Meat, Drink, and Cloth, but the Eatable part is secured
within so strong a Magazine, that it requires a Lusty Carpenter, well Armed
with Ax and Handsaw, to hew a passage to the Kernel, and when he has done, it
will not recompense his Labor. The latter is big as a Filbert, but (like a
Beautiful Woman well Dressed, and Infectious) if you venture to Taste, is of ill
consequence: Their Shell is Black, and Japan'd by Nature, exceeding Art; the
Kernel White, and extreme Pleasant to the Palate, but of so powerful an
Operation, that by taking two, my Guts were Swept as clean, as ever Tom-T --
d-man made a Vault, or any of the Black Fraternity a Chimney.

They have Oranges, Lemonds, Limes, and several other Fruits, as Sharp and
Crabbed as themselves, not given them as a Blessing, but a Curse; for Eating so
many sower things, Generates a Corroding Slime in the Bowels, and is one great
occasion of that Fatal and Intolerable Distemper, The Dry Belly-Ach; which in a
Fortnight, or Three Weeks, takes away the use of their Limbs, that they are
forced to be led about by Negro's. A Man under this Misery, may be said to be
the 'Scutchion of the Island, the Complexion of the Patient being the Field,
bearing Or, Charged with all the Emblems of Destruction, proper; supported by
Two Devils, Sable; and Death the Crest Argent. Many other Fruits there are,
that are neither worth Eating, Naming, or Describing: Some that are never
tasted but in a Drouth, others in a Famine.

Of Port Royal.
IT is an Island distinct from the Main of Jamaica, though before the Earthquake,
it joined by a Neck of Land to the Palisados, but was separated by the violence
of an Inundation (through Gods Mercy) to prevent the Wickedness of their
Metropolis diffusing it self, by Communication, over all the Parts of the
Country, and so call that Judgment upon the Whole, which fell more particularly
upon the Sinfulest part.

From a Spacious fine Built Town (according to Report) it is now reduced, by
the encroachments of the Sea, to a little above a quarter of a Mile in Length,
and about half so much the Breadth, having so few remains left of its former
splendor, I could think no otherwise but that every Traveller who had given
its Description, made large use of his License. The Houses are low, little, and
irregular; and if I compare the best of their Streets in Port Royal, to the
Fag-End of Kentstreet, where the Broom-men Live, I do them more than Justice.

About ten a Clock in the Morning, their Nostrils are saluted with a
Land-Breeze, which blowing over the Island, searches the Bowels of the
Mountains (being always cracked and full of vents, by reason of excessive Heat)
bringing along with it such Sulphurous Favors, that I have feared the whole
Island would have burst out into a flaming Aetna, or have stifled us with
Suffocating Fumes, like that of melted Minerals and Brimstone.

In the afternoon, about Four a Clock, they might have the refreshment of a
Sea-Breeze, but suffering the Negro's to carry all their Nastiness to Windward
of the Town, that the Nauseous Efluvia's which arise from their stinking
Dungills, are blown in upon them; thus what they might enjoy as a Blessing,
they Ingratefully pervert by their own ill management.

They have a Church, it is true, but built rather like a Market-House; and when
the Flock are in their Pens, and the Pastor Exalted to overlook his Sheep, I
took, a Survey round me, and saw more variety of Scare-Crows than ever was seen
at the Feast of Vgly-Faces.

Every thing is very Dear, and an Ingenious or an Honest Man may meet with this
Encouragement, To spend a Hundred Pounds before he shall get a Penny.
Madera-Wine and Bottle-Beer are Fifteen Pence the Bottle; nasty Claret, half a
Crown; Rhennish, Five Shillings; and their best Canary, Ten Bits, or Six and
Three Pence. They have this Pleasure in Drinking, That what they put into their
Bellies, they may soon stroke out of their Fingers-Ends; for instead of
Exonerating they Fart, and Sweat instead of Pissing.

Of the PEOPLE.
THE generality of the Men look as if they had just nock'd off their Fetters,
and by an unexpected Providence, escaped the danger of a near Misfortune, the
dread of which, has imprinted that in their Looks, which they can no more
alter than an Ethiopian can his Color.

They are all Colonels, Majors, Captains, Lieutenants, and Ensigns, the two
last being held in such disdain, that they are looked upon as a Bungling Diver
amongst a Gang of Expert Pick-pockets; Pride being their Greatness, and
Impudence their Virtue.

They regard nothing but Money, and value not how they get it, there being no
other Felicity to be enjoyed but purely Riches. They are very Civil to
Strangers who bring over considerable Effects; and will try a great many ways
to Kill him fairly, for the lucre of his Cargo: And many have been made Rich by
such Windfalls*

A Broken Apothecary will make there a Topping Physician; a Barbers Prentice, a
good Surgeon; a Bailiffs Follower, a passable Lawyer; and an English Knave, a
very Honest Fellow.

They have so great a veneration for Religion, That Bibles and Common Prayer
Books are as good a Commodity amongst them, as Muffs and Warming-Pans.

A little Reputation among the Women, goes a great way; and if their Actions be
answerable to their Looks, they may vie Wickedness with the Devil: An Impudent
Air, being the only Charms of their Countenance; and a Lewd Carriage, the
Studied Grace of their Deportment. They are such who have been Scandalous in
England to the utmost degree, either Transported by the State, or led by their
Vicious Inclination; where they may be Wicked, without Shame; and Whore on,
without Punishment.

They are Stigmatized with Nicknames, which they bear, not with Patience only,
but with Pride,as Unconscionable Nan, Salt-Beef Peg, Buttock-de-Clink Jenny,
etc. Swearing, Drinking, and Obscene Talk, are the principal Qualifications
that render them acceptable to Male Conversation; and she that wants a
perfection in these admirable Acquirements, shall be as much Ridiculed for her
Modesty, as a Plain-dealing Man amongst a Gang of Knaves, for his Honesty.

In short, Virtue is so Despised, and all sorts of Vice Encouraged, by both
Sexes, that the Town of Port Royal is the very Sodom of the Universe.

FINIS.

