The Frontispeice of the Chronological Automaton or Self-moving EPHEMERIS of ye
Celestial Motions, etc Representing ye phenomenon at Noon March 30: 1691
Jnvented and made by SAMUEL WATSON of Coventry Watch-Maker
depiction of a chronological automaton, a self-moving ephemeris of the
celestial movements dial on the automaton dial on the automaton dial on the
automaton dial on the automaton dial on the automaton

A Brief Explication of the parts of the first table
aThe center with a little Ball Representing ye globe of ye Earth.

bb etc The orbs of the Respective planets haueing their Epicycles afixt in them

cc etc Shaded lines Representing the Epicycles of ye. Several planets

dd etc The centers of the Epicycles Showing their Middle Motion Show what
planets the Asterisks to which they are affixt Represent, and ye Asterisks
themselv's Show the apparent place of their respective planets in the Zodiake
by a line from the Center to the Asterisk continued to the sign and degree of
the Zodiake, as. 28D. of.. 20D. of 28D. of. the near 20D of... 3D of.. 26D.
of. and the Moon. 6D. of when they are direct Swift or Slow Stationary or
Retrograde may be Known by obserueing in what part of the Epicycle the planet
is or more Mechanically by Seeing the motions of the work.

The Apogaeons perigaeons and aspects and the Elongations of and etc. are
suffitiently evident to the intelligent Spectator by observing in what part of
their Epicycle they are in and how far distant from each other as aproaching
near his perigaeon in his Apogaeon and drawing toward her Elongation etc.

ee The 12 Celestial Sign's as computed from the first Star of Aries with the
most Remarkable fixed Stars in and about the Zodiak haueing a proper Motion of
about one degree in a 100 years etc.

fff etc The Signs of the Zodiak with ye Number of their degrees rekoned from
the Vernall Equinox

gg etc The 24 hours of ye Natural Day Serving for ye observation of the
horary distance between planets of different Longitude, or planets or other
Stars etc

hh etc The degrees of terestiall Longitude adapted to the Longitude of London
Serving for the Knowledge of ye Southing etc of any of the planets or other
Star's to that or any place of Known Longitude etc

ii The Lamina on the Eastern and Western sides of the table with the
Characters of the 12 signs of the Eccliptick Fitted for the Latitude of London
Showing the length and Shortness of the Day, And the exact Riseing and Setting
of the Signs of the Zodiac with the Stars and planets in them, each Sign
then Riseing when it comes over against its Correspondent Sign in the Eastern
Lamina and setting when it comes to the like on the other side, And the arch
above or below these Show (and with the Circle of hours) the Space of time
which they make above or below the Horizon

The Explication of the: 2d: Table
a The center Representing the Earth

kk etc The orb of the Moon

ll etc The center of her Epicycle Showing her middle Motion

mm etc The Moon in her Epicycle Showing her apparent place in ye Zodiak her
Apogaeon and perigaeon haueing the Hemisphere next the Sun always Illuminated
Serving to Show her Various phases etc

nn etc.
Two Circles one Representing the Eccliptick the other the Orbit of the moon
with figures enclosed to show the degrees of her Latitude N
The North Node S
The South Node
haueing their proper Motion

oo etc The Sun placed here the better to show his Aspects with ye Moon and
Ecclipses;

The Ecclipses, their quantity, Duration and the parts of the earth which they
are Visible in etc. are to be known by considering the Latitude of the Moon in
her conjunction and opposition with the Sun and the Longitude and Latitude of
the Respective places; the Rules for which are here for brevity Sake omited;

pp etc Remarkable Stars in their proper Longitudes which are more Remote from
the Eccliptick then those in the former table;

The other parts of this table are Sufficiently Explaind in the Former

The 3 Table
qq etc The innermost Circle by figures from 1. to 28. tells the Cycle of the
Sun; The second shows the Dominical Letter; the next shows the months, and the
4 Circles Surrounding it, tells the day of the Month, to be acounted on the
inermost the first year after Bissextile; and So Succesively to the outermost;
which Serves for leap year

The 4th Table
rr The innermost Circle shows the Indiction; the middle the golden Number; the
outermost the Epact:

The Middle Table
S.M.T.W.T.F.S. are the first Letters of the days of the week with their
primary planet and in the Circle encompasing them is showed the hours of the
Day computed from 12 to 12:

SS A hole for a Key whereby the whole Machine as depending on one Axis) may be
moved for any Number of Days months or years either backward or forward
presenting to the eye the forementioned phaenomenae happening in that space of
time, and then being returned to the present year Month Day and hour Keeps
the time for the future, So that upon occasion of any neglect in drawing up the
weight which moves the long pendulum (which need be done but once in Eight
Days) the whole is set right;

OXFORD Printed at the THEATER. And sold by Ra. Simpson Booksel. in St. Paul's
Churchyard London. And at Coventry by the Booksel. And Author.


