THE REFORMATION OF THE CHURCH OF IRELAND, IN THE Life and Death of GEORGE
BROWN Some time ARCHBISHOP OF DUBLIN, BEING The First of the Romish Clergy
that adhered here in Ireland, to the Reformation of the Protestant Church of
England; being then Reformed within this Realm of Ireland. Anno 1551.

Dublin, Printed by Jos. Ray, at College-green, for Jos. Howes Bookseller, at
the Kings Arms in Castle-street. 1681.

TO THE READER.
BEholding and taking into Consideration the Condition of the Protestant
Religion at present, it caused me to recollect, and unite so many Collections
as I could find amongst my Manuscripts for this purpose. Chiefly to set forth
this small Narrative of the Reformation of the Protestant Faith, first
established within this Realm of Ireland; entituling the same, The Life and
Death of GEORGE BROWN, sometime Archbishop of Dublin; as he was the first of
the Clergy here in this Nation that adhered thereunto. Also to set forth Romes
Contrivances, how she and her Emissaries endeavored to oppose both God and
Majestrate, purposely to darken the Glorious Beams of the holy Gospel, which at
that time was but newly (like a Plant) sprouting out of the Earth, recovering
of its strength, after a hard and tedious winter season, having met with many
sharp Nips; yet, through Gods Providence, how it gathered strength, and has
hitherto flourished in spite of all evil Oppositions whatsoever, contrived by
Rome and her Adherents, to depress the same. The Narrative will speak for it
self, not bringing forth Railing Accusations, which too many do either in
Pulpits or in Libels in these days, which does but open a Gap for Satan and his
Imps to divide Protestants, but plainly laying before you History and Records,
collected by wise and judicious men, whose Memorials to future Ages, give a
second Breathing, though dead, yet by their Works still living.

The Reformation of the CHURCH of IRELAND, in the Life and Death of GEORGE
BROWN, sometime Archbishop of Dublin, etc.
GEORGE BROWN, Geo. Brown his first Function, and when he was Consecrated
Archbishop of Dublin.
by Birth an Englishman and of the Order of St. Augustine in London, who by
space of time became Provincial of the Friars of the same Order in England,
being a man of a meek and peaceable Spirit, upon the sad Accident that befell
John Allen his Predecessor, who had been Archbishop of Dublin, a Description of
whom may at large be read not only in the Crhonicle called The Second Addition
to Giraldus Cambrensis of Ireland, but also in Sir James Wares Book titled De
Praesulibus Hiberniae, Vid. James Ware de Praesulibus Hiberniae, page 119. and
Annals ejus, page 193.
page 118 and 119. to whom we refer the Reader, where he may find that this
George was preferred to the Archiepiscopal See of Dublin by King Henry the
Eighth, and consecrated before his Arrival into Ireland, by Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury, two other Bishops assisting him, viz. John then Bishop of
Rochester and Nicholas then Bishop of Sarisbury, on the 19th of March, Anno
1535. Still. Angl.

The Reverend James Usher late Primate of Armagh, Primate Usher his description
of this George Brown.
amongst his Memorials of Ireland, gives this holy Father this Description;
George Brown a man of a cheerful Countenance, in his Acts and Deeds plain down
right, to the Poor merciful and compassionate, pitying the state and condition
of the Souls of the people, advising them, when he was Provincial of the
Augustine Order in England, to make their applications soly to Christ, which
Advice coming to the Ears of Henry the 8th. he became a Favorite, who upon the
decease of John Allen late Archbishop of Dublin became his Successor; within
five years after that he had enjoyed that See, he (much about the time that
King Henry the 8th. began to demolish the Priorys, Abbeys and Monasterys
formerly built by the Romish Clergy within these his Majesty's Dominions of
England and Ireland) caused all Superstitious Relics and Images to be removed
out of the two Cathedrals in Dublin, and out of the rest of the Churches within
his Diocese, he caused the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer and the Creed to
be placed, being gilded and in Frames about the Altar in the Cathedral of
Christ Church in Dublin, he was the first that turned from the Romish Religion
of the Clergy here in Ireland, to embrace the Reformation of the Church of
England; for which Fact he was by Queen Mary laid aside, and his Temporality
taken from him, yet he patiently endured Affliction for the Truth to the end.

Upon the Reformation of King Henry 8th. in England, and at his Renouncing the
Papal Power or Supremacy of Rome, his Chief the Lord Thomas Cromwell then Lord
Privy Seal wrote unto George Brown then Archbishop of Dublin, signifying from
His Highness the King, (then terming the King by that Title) he was fallen
absolutely from Rome in Spiritual matters within his Dominion of England, and
how it was his Royal Will and Pleasure to have his Subjects there in Ireland to
obey his Commands as in England, nominating the said George Brown Archbishop
one of his Commissiners for the Execution thereof, who in a short space of time
wrote to the Lord Privy Seal, as follows: My most Honored Lord,
YOur humble Servant receiving your Mandate, as one of His Highness's
Commissioners, George Cromer then Archbishop of Armagh.

Against the Supremacy of K. H. the 8th.

Geo. Brown desires a Parliament to be in Ireland to confirm the Kings
Supremacy.

Geo. Brownes complaint of the Irish Clergies Ignorance.

The zeal of the Commonalty of Ireland.

O Neale of the Irish Papists, a great Stickler for the Pope against the King.


has endeavored almost to the danger and hazard of this temporal Life, to
procure the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation to due Obedience, in owning of
his Highness their Supreme Head as well Spiritual as Temporal, and do find much
oppugning therein, especially by my Brother Armagh, who has been the main
oppugner; and so has withdrawn most of his Suffragans and Clergy within his
See and Jurisdiction, he made a Speech to them, laying a Curse on the people
whosoever should own his Highness Supremacy; saying, that this Isle, as it is
in their Irish Chronicles, Insula sacra, belongs to none but to the Bishop of
Rome, and that it was the Bishop of Romes Predecessors gave it to the Kings
Ancestors. There be two Messengers by the Priests of Armagh, and by that
Archbishop, now lately sent to the Bishop of Rome. Your Lordship may inform His
Highness, that it is convenient to call a Parliament in this Nation, to pass
the Supremacy by Act; for they do not much matter His Highness's Commission
which your Lordship sent us over. This Island has been for a long time held in
Ignorance by the Romish Orders; and as for their Secular Orders, they be in a
manner as ignorant as the people, being not able to say Mass, or pronounce the
Words, they not knowing what they themselves say in the Roman Tongue: the
Common people of this Isle are more zealous in their Blindness than the Saints
and Martyrs were in the Truth at the beginning of the Gospel. I send to you my
very good Lord these things, that your Lordship and His Highness may consult
what is to be done. It is feared O Neal will be ordered by the Bishop of Rome
to oppose your Lordships Order from the Kings Highness; for the Natives are
much in Numbers within his Powers. I do pray the Lord Christ to defend your
Lordship from your Enemies.

Dublin 4. Kalend. Septembris, 1535.



The Year following a Parliament was called in Ireland, the Lord Leonard Gray
being then King Henry's Viceroy of that Nation, in which George Brown, then
being not many Months above a Year in his Archiepiscopal Chair in Dublin, stood
up and made this short Speech following: My Lords and Gentry of this His
Majesty's Realm of Ireland,
BEhold, Geo. Brown the Archbishop of Dublin his Speech.
your Obedience to your King is the Observing of your God and Savior Christ;
for He, that High Priest of our Souls, paid Tribute to Caesar (though no
Christian;) greater Honor then surely is due to your Prince His Highness the
King, and a Christian one: Rome and her Bishops in the Fathers days
acknowledged Emperors, Kings and Princes to be Supreme over their Dominions,
nay Christ's own Vicars: And it is much to the Bishop of Romes shame, to deny
what their precedent Bishops owned; therefore His Highness claims but what he
can justify: The Bishop Elutherius gave to St. Lucius the first Christian King
of the Britains; so that I shall without scrupling vote His Highness King Henry
my Supreme over Ecclesiastic matters as well as Temporal, and Head thereof,
even of both Isles England and Ireland, and that without Guilt of Conscience or
Sin to God; and he who will not pass this Act, as I do, is no true Subject to
His Highness.



This Speech of George Brown startled the other Bishops and Lords so, that at
last through great difficulty it passed, upon which Speech Justice Brabazon
seconded him, as appears by his Letter to the Lord Thomas Cromwell then Lord
Privy Seal of England, which original is in that famous Library of Sir Robert
Cotton, out of which Sir James Ware, that learned Antiquary, transcribed the
same.

Within few years after that the Act of Supremacy had past in Ireland, Justice
Brabazon seconded George Brown.
we do find by a Letter written by George Brown to the Lord Cromwell,
complaining of the Clergy and how they fall off from what had past, and how the
Bishop of Rome and Ireland had contrived matters against the then Reformation:
Collected by Sir James Ware, out of an old Registry some time in the custody of
Adam Loftus, Hugh Corwins Successor, and also Archbishop of Dublin.

Right Honorable and my singular good Lord,
Geo. Brown his complaint to the Lord Privy Seal of the Unstedfastness of the
then Irish Clergy.
I Acknowledge my bounden Duty to your Lordships Good will to me, next to my
Savior Christ's, for the Place I now possess; I pray God give me his Grace to
execute the same to his Glory and His Highness Honor, with your Lordships
Instructions. The People of this Nation be zealous, yet blind and unknowing;
most of the Clergy, as your Lordship has had from me before, being ignorant,
and not able to speak right Words in the Mass or Liturgy, as being not skilled
in the Latin Grammar; so that a Bird may be taught to speak with as much sense
as several of them do in this Country. These sorts, though not Scholars, yet
crafty to cozen the poor Common people, and to dissuade them from following His
Highness Orders: George my Brother of Armagh does underhand occasion Quarrels,
and is not active to execute His Highness's Orders in his Diocese.

His Complaint of Images and Relics.
I have observed your Lordships Letter of Commission, and do find several of my
Pupils leave me for so doing. I will not put others in their Livings till I do
know your Lordships Pleasure; for it is meet I acquaint you first, the Romish
Relics and Images of both my Cathedrals in Dublin, of the Holy Trinity and of
St. Patricks, took off the Common people from the true Worship, but the Prior
and the Dean find them so sweet for their Gain, that they heed not my Words:
therefore send in your Lordships next to me an Order more full, and a Chide to
them and their Canons, that they might be removed. His Complaint of the Prior
of the Holy Trinity and Dean of St. Patricks in Dublin, and how the Irish hate
the Lord Privy Seal.
Let the Order be, that the Chief Governors may assist me in it. The Prior and
Dean have written to Rome to be encouraged, and if it be not hindered before
they have a Mandate from the Bishop of Rome, the People will be bold, and then
tugg long before His Highness can submit them to His Graces Orders. The Country
Folk here much hate your Lordship, and despitefully call you in their Irish
Tongue the Blacksmiths Son.

The Duke of Norfolk is by Armagh, The Duke of Norfolk and the Irish combine
together
and that Clergy desired to assist them not to suffer his Highness to alter
Church Rules here in Ireland: as a Friend I desire your Lordship to look to
your Noble Person; for Rome has a great kindness for that Duke (for it is so
talked here) and will reward him and his Children. Rome has great Favors for
this Nation, purposely to oppose His Highness; and so have got, Rome's
Indulgence to Rebel in Ireland.
since the Act passed, great Indulgences for Rebellion, therefore my hopes is
lost, yet my Zeal is to do according to your Lordships Orders. God keep your
Lordship from your Enemies here and in England. Dublin the 3d. Kalends of
April. 1538.

Your Lordships at Commandment, George Brown.

To the Lord Privy Seal his Honorable good Lordships Ex Antographo.

Soon after this Letter had been written, A Bull from Rome, excommunicating
those who owned the Kings Supremacy.
News came to the Castle of Dublin, that the Bishop of Rome had sent over a
Bull of Excomunication of all those who had or shall own the Kings Supremacy
within the Irish Nation; which Caused the Archbishop to write accordingly.

Right Honorable,
MY Duty premised, it may please your Lordship to be advertised, sithence my
last there has come to Armagh and his Clergy a private Commission from the
Bishop of Rome, prohibiting His Gracious Highness's people here in this Nation
to own his Royal Supremacy, and joining a Curse to all them and theirs who
shall not within forty days, confess to their Confessors, (after the publishing
of it to them) that they have done amiss in so doing: the substance, as our
Secretary has translated the same in to English, is thus.

I AB. from this present hour forward in the presence of the holy Trinity of
the Blessed Virgin Mother of God / of St. Peter, The form of their Confession
to their Popish Priest
of the holy Apostles / Archangels / Angels / Saints and of all the holy Host
of Heaven / shall and will be always obedient to the holy See of St. Peter of
Rome / and to my holy Lord the Pope of Rome and his Successors / in all things
as well spiritual as temporal / not consenting in the least that his Holiness
shall lose the least Title or Dignity belonging to the Papacy of our Mother
Church of Rome, or to the Regality of St. Peter.

I do vow and swear to maintain / help and assist the just Laws / Liberties and
Rights of the Mother Church of Rome.

I do likewise promise to confer / defend and promote / if not personally / yet
willingly / as in ability able / either by Advice / Skill / Estate / Money or
otherwise / the Church of Rome and her Laws against all whatsoever resisting
the same.

I further vow to oppugn all Heretics / either in making or setting forth
Edicts or Commands contrary to the Mother Church of Rome, and in case any such
to be moved or composed / to resist it to the uttermost of my power / with the
first convenience and opportunity I can possible.

I count and value all Acts made or to be made by Heretical Powers of no force
or worth / or to be practiced or obeyed by my self / or by any other Son of the
Mother Church of Rome.

I do further declare him or her / Father or Mother / Brother or Sister / Son
or Daughter / Husband or Wife / Uncle or Aunt / Nephew or Niece / Kinsman or
Kinswoman / Master or Mistress and all others / nearest or dearest Relations /
Friend or Acquaintance whatsoever accursed / that either do or shall hold for
the time to come / any Ecclesiastical or Civil / above the Authority of the
Mother Church / or that do or shall obey / for the time to come / any of her
the Mother Churches Opposers or Enemies / or contrary to the same / of which I
have here sworn unto: so God / the Blessed Virgin / St. Peter, St. Paul, and
the holy Evangelists help / etc.

The condition of Ireland ^n Anno 1538. ^ow the Na^ives begged ^oreign Powers
against K. Henry.
His Highness Viceroy of this Nation is of little or no Power with the old
Natives, therefore your Lordship will expect of me no more than I am able: This
Nation is poor in Wealth, and not sufficient now at present to oppose them: It
is observed, that ever since His Highness's Ancestors had this Nation in
possession, the old Natives have been craving Foreign Powers to Assist and Rule
them; and now both English Race and Irish begin to oppose your Lordships
Orders, and do lay aside their National old Quarrels, which I fear will, if any
thing will, cause a Foreigner to invade this Nation, that will: I pray God I
may be a false Prophet, yet your good Lordship must pardon mine opinion, for I
write it to your Lordship as a Warning.

Dublin May 1538. Your humble and true Servant George Brown.

To the Lord Privy Seal with speed.

Upon the Feast of St. John Baptist following the said George Brown seized on
one Thady o Birne, one of the Order of St. Francis, A Letter found in a Friars
Pocket.
who had Papers from Rome, as follows, being sent to the Lord Privy Seal by a
Special Messenger.

My Son o Neal,
THou and thy Fathers were all along faithful to the Mother Church of Rome, His
Holiness Paul now Pope, The Bishop of Metts Letter to stir up O Neal.
and the Council of the holy Fathers there, have lately found out a Prophecy,
there remaining, of one St. Laserianus an Irish Bishop of Cashell; wherein he
says, That the Mother Church of Rome falls when in Ireland the Catholic
Faith is overcome: Therefore for the Glory of the Mother Church, the Honor of
St. Peter, and your own Secureness, suppress Heresy and his Holiness's
Enemies; for when the Roman Faith there perishes, the Sea of Rome falls
also: therefore the Council of Cardinals have thought fit to encourage your
Country of Ireland, (as a sacred Island) being certified, whilst the Mother
Church has a Son of worth as your self, and of those that shall succor you,
and join therein, As much as to say, England not safe whilst Popery is admitte^
in Ireland.
that she will never fall, but have more or less a holding in Britain, in
spite of fate. Thus having obeyed the Order of the most sacred Council, we
recommend your Princely Person to the holy Trinity of the Blessed Virgin, of
St. Peter, St. Paul, and of all the heavenly Host of Heaven. Amen.

Romae 4 Kalend. May 1538. Episcopus Metensis.


Upon further Examinations and searches made, The Friar his punishment, and how
he died before his execution.
this Thady o Birne was pillar'd, and confined a prisoner until His Highness's
further Order for his Trial; but News coming over, that he must be Hanged, he
made himself away in the Castle of Dublin; on the Eve of the Feast of St.
James; yet his dead Corpse was carried to the Gallows Green and hanged up, and
after there buried: but it was said, by the Regester of St. Francis Monastry of
Dublin, that they brought him from thence and, buried him in that Monastry.

Anno 1541. K. H. 8th. turns the Priory of the Blessed Trinity into a Deanery.
George Brown having enjoyed the Sea of Dublin seven years or thereabouts, King
Henry the 8th, upon the Dissolution of the Abbeys, Priorys and Monastrys here
in Ireland, changed the Priory of the Blessed Trinity of Dublin into a Deanery
and Chapters, since which Mutation, it has generally bore the Name of Christ
Church.

Upon this Alteration, as it appears upon Record, this Cathedral consisted of a
Dean and Chapters, The alterations upon this mutation of K. H. 8th. vid. James
Ware ^e Antiqui^atibus and de Praesulibus Hiberniae.
a Chanter, a Treasurer, six Vicars, Chorals, and two Singing Boys, allowing to
them two 45 l. 6 s. 8 d. English, (durante been placito) which Sum his Daughter
Queen Mary confirmed for ever, having confirmed the Deanery, yet with
Alterations, as she was a Romanist.

This Cathedral continued after this said form (though not in Popery) even
until King James his days, who then altered all what King Henry and his
Daughter had done, and upon this second Alteration he constituted a Dean, a
Chanter, a Chancellor, a Treasurer, three Prebends, six Vicars, Chorals and
four Singing Boys, What altera^ions King ^ames made ^n this Cathedral.
ordering likewise that the Archdeacon of Dublin should have a Place in the
Quire and a Vote in the Chapters. As for a further Description of this
Cathedral, we shall omit it; having reserved the same for a large Narrative of
the said Cathedral, in a Book which is ready for the Press, entitled, The
Antiquities of the City of Dublin, which wants only the Liberality of Lovers
of Antiquities and Learning to contribute to the Cuts which are intended for
the same.

When the Liturgy of ^he Church ^f England ^as first read (...) Dublin.
King Henry the 8th deceasing, and his hopeful Offspring King Edward the 6th
succeeding within a short space after his Royal Fathers Death, that hopeful
Prince (by the Advice of his Privy Council) began to consider what good Effects
the Translation of the holy Bible had done, also how much it had enlightened
the Understanding of his Subjects, they altered the Liturgy Book from what King
Henry had formerly printed and established, causing the same to be printed in
English, commanding the same to be read and sing in the several Cathedrals and
Parish Churches of England, for the common Benefit of the Nobility, Gentry and
Commonalty; and that his Subjects of Ireland might likewise participate of the
same Sweetness, he sent over Orders to his Vice Roy Sir Anthony St. Ledger, then
being Lord Deputy of that Nation, that the same be forthwith there in Ireland
observed within their several Bishoprics, Cathedrals and Parish Churches;
which was first observed in Christ Church at Dublin, on the Feast of Easter
1551. before the said Sir Anthony, George Brown, and before the Mayor and
Bailiffs of Dublin, John Lockwood being then Dean of the said Cathedral.

The Translation of the Copy of the Order for the Liturgy of the Church of
England to be read in Ireland runs as follows.
EDWARD by the Grace of God, etc. K. Edward's Order for the Liturgy of the
Church of England to be read in Ireland.

WHereas our Gracious Father / King Henry the 8th. of happy memory / taking
into consideration the Bondage and heavy Yoke that his true and faithful
Subjects sustained under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, as also the
Ignorance the Commonalty were in / how several fabulous Stories and lying
Wonders misled our Subjects in both our Realms of England and Ireland, grasping
thereby the means thereof into their hands / also dispensing with the Sins of
our Nations by their Indulgences and Pardons for Gain / purposely to cherish
all evil Vices / as Robberies / Rebellions / Thefts / Whoredoms / Blasphemy /
Idolatry / etc. He / our Gracious Father King Henry of happy memory / hereupon
dissolved all Priorys / Monastrys / Abbeys / and other pretended Religious
Houses / as being but Nurseries for Vice and Luxury / more then for sacred
Learning; He therefore / that it might more plainly appear to the World / that
those Orders had kept the light of the Gospel from his People / He thought it
most fit and convenient for the Preservation of their Souls and Bodies / that
the holy Scriptures should be Translated / Printed and placed in all Parish
Churches within his Dominions for his faithful Subjeccts to increase their
Knowledge of God and of our Savior Jesus Christ. We therefore / for the
general Benefit of our well-beloved Subjects Understandings / when ever
assembled or met together in the said several Parish Churches / either to pray
or to hear Prayers read / that they may the better join therein / in Unity /
Hearts and Voice / have caused the Liturgy and Prayers of the Church to be
translated into our Mother Tongue of this Realm of England, according to the
Assembly of Divines lately met within the same for that purpose. We therefore
Will and Command / as also Authorize you Sir Anthony St. Ledger Knight / our
Viceroy of that our Kingdom of Ireland, to give special notice to all our
Clergy / as well Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, as other our Secular
Parish Priests within that our said Kingdom of Ireland, to perfect / execute
and obey this our Royal Will and Pleasure accordingly.

Given at our Manor of Greenwich Febr. 6. in the Fifth year of our Reign. E. R.

To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Anth. St. Ledger Knt. our Chief Governor of
our Kingdom of Ireland,
Several Collections from Anthony Martin, formerly Bishop of Mead.
An Assembly called on this Order of King Edwards.
BEfore Proclamations were issued out, Sir Anthony St. Ledger, upon His Order,
called an Assembly of the Archbishops and Bishops, together with other of the
then Clergy of Ireland, in which Assembly he signified unto them as well His
Majesty's Order aforesaid, as also the Opinions of those Bishops and Clergy of
England, who had adhered unto the Order, saying, that it was His Majesty's Will
and Pleasure, consenting unto their serious Considerations and Opinions, then
acted and agreed on in England as to Ecclesiastical matters, that the same be
in Ireland so likewise celebrated and performed. Sir Anthony St. Ledger his
Arguments with George Dowdall, Armachanus.


Sir Anthony St. Ledger having spoken to this effect, George Dowdall, who
succeeded George Cromer in the Primacy of Armagh, stood up, who (through his
Romish Zeal to the Pope) labored with all his power and force to oppose the
Liturgy of the Church, that it might not be read or sung in the Church; saying,
then shall every illiterate fellow read Service (or Mass) as he in those days
termed the word Service.

Sir Anthony his reply to George Dowdall.
To this Saying of the Archbishops, Sir Anthony replied, No, your Grace is
mistaken, for we have two many illiterate Priests amongst us already, who
neither can pronounce the Latin, nor know what it means, no more than the
Common people that hear them; but when the people hear the Liturgy in English,
they and the Priest will then understand what they pray for.

Gerge Dowdall to Sir Anthony
Upon this Reply, George Dowdall bade Sir Anthony beware of the Clergies Curse.

Sir Anthony to Geo. Dovvdall.
Sir Anthony made answer, I fear no strange Curse, so long as I have the
Blessing of that Church which I believe to be the true one.

The Archbishop again said, Can there be a truer Church than the Church of
Saint Peter, George Dovvdall's Reply.
the Mother Church of Rome.

Sir Anthony's Return.
Sir Anthony returned this answer, I thought we had been all of the Church of
Christ; for he calls all true Believers in him his Church, and himself the Head
thereof.

George Dovvdall.
The Archbishop replied, and is not St. Peter's the Church of Christ.

Sir Anthony.
Sir Anthony returned this Answer, St. Peter was a Member of Christ Church, but
the Church was not St. Peter's, neither was St. Peter but Christ the Head
thereof.

Then George Dowdall the Primate of Armagh rose up, George Dovvdall leaves the
Assembly.
and several of the Suffragan Bishops under his Jurisdiction, saving only
Edward Staples then Bishop of Mead, who tarried with the rest of the Clergy
then assembled, on the Kalends of March according to the old style, 1551. but
if we reason as from the Annunciation of our Lady, which was the 25th of March,
it was 1550.

Sir Anthony then took up the Order, Geo. Brown his Speech upon King Edw.
Order.
and held it forth to George Brown Archbishop of Dublin, who (standing up)
received it, saying; This Order, good Brethren, is from our Gracious King, and
from the rest of our Brethren, the Fathers and Clergy of England, who have
consulted herein, and compared the holy Scriptures with what they have done;
unto whom I submit, as Jesus did to Caesar, in all things just and lawful, Geo.
Brovvne's Speech wrought on several of the Irish Bishops and Clergy to adhere
to Protestanism Vid. Plura cum Ja. Waraeo in Praesul. Hib. Sir Anthony
recalled, and Sir James Crofts made Lord Deputy of Ireland. George Dovvdall
deprived of the Title of Primacy of all Ireland, and George Brown, though
Archbishop of Dublin, enjoying that Title A president showing how it lies in
Kings to expulse and to Constitute Archbishops or Bishops.
making no question why or wherefore, as We own Him our true and lawful King.

After this several of the meeker or most moderate of the Bishops and Clergy of
Ireland cohered with George Brown the Archbishop of Dublin, amongst whom
Edward Staples Bishop of Mead, who was put out from his Bishopric, for so
doing, in Queen Mary's days, on the 29th of June 1554. John Bale, who on the
second of February 1552. was Consecrated Bishop of Ossory for his fidelity, and
afterward by Queen Mary expulsed. Also Thomas Lancaster Bishop of Kildare, who
was at the same time put from his Bishopric, with several others of the
Clergy, being all expulsed upon Queen Mary's coming to the Crown.

When these passages had passed, Sir Anthony was in a short time after recalled
for England, and Sir James Crofts of Herefordshire Knight, placed Chief in his
stead; who began his Government from the 29th of April, 1551.

Sir James Crofts, upon his coming over, endeavored much for the persuading of
George Dowdall to adhere to the Order aforesaid; but Dowdall being obstinate,
his Majesty and the Learned Privy Council then of England, (for his
perverseness) upon the 20th. of October following, took away the Title of
Primate of all Ireland from him, and conferred the same on George Brown then
Archbishop of Dublin, and to his Successors, by reason that he was the first of
the Irish Bishops who embraced the Order for Establishing of the English
Liturgy and Reformation in Ireland; which place he enjoyed during the remainder
of King Edward's Reign, and for a certain time after; as you shall know further
in it due course and place.

Alterations following one after another, (even upon this Reformation of the
Church of England) and the Title of Primacy being disposed of, as we have
already mentioned, unto George Brown aforesaid; some Writers saying that George
Dowdall was banished, others that he was not, but went voluntary of his own
will; yet, not to dispute the case, another Archbishop was consecrated in lieu
of him, though then living; by which it was then held lawful: as also that
constituting of Archbishops and Bishops was in the power of Kings, and not in
the power of Popes, or of the Bishop of Rome, which would be much to the
Abasement of the Powers of the Crown of England ever to resign, or to
acknowledge to the contrary.

Hugh Goodacre consecrated Archbishop of Armagh, though George Dovvdall was
living.
Hugh Goodacre Bachelour of Divinity was consecrated Archbishop of Armagh by
the said George Brown, together with John Bale Bishop of Ossory, (already
mentioned) in Christ Church in Dublin, on the second of February, Anno 1552.
Thomas Bishop of Kildare and Eugenius Bishop of Down and Connor assisting him;
yet notwithstanding Hugh Goodacres Consecration, George Brown then held the
Title of Primacy of all Ireland.

K. Edvvard's Death alters what has been done before.
This Reformation and Alteration having not time to settle, or to take root, it
was soon quashed and pulled down, by that lamentable loss of that hopeful
Prince King Edward the Sixth, who died at Greenwich the 6th of June, 1553.

The Lady Jane Gray and Q. Mary contend for the Crown.
Upon King Edward's Decease, the Council having met to consult together upon the
Affairs of these Dominions, as also how they might confirm and establish what
they had already ordered and enacted, as well in Ecclesiastical matters as
Temporal, a Division soon sprung up, some being for the Choice of the Lady Jane
Gray, others for Queen Mary, at last upon conclusion Mary the Kings Sister was
voted Queen, upon the Proposals and Promises which she made to the Council, to
confirm all that had been perfected by her Father King Henry the 8th. and her
Brother King Edward and his Honored Council.

Q. Mary recalls what K. H. and K. E. had done.
After she had been crowned and enthroned, she, for the space of three or four
months, seemed moderate to the Protestant Reformers, yet all that while
combining with Rome and her Emissaries; but having accomplished her Designs,
she revoked her fair Promises, (which with Papists is a Rule) esteeming it no
sin to break Contracts or Covenants with Heretics and Protestants, numbered
with such sort of people, especially with Papists these promises vanished; and
then began the Romish Church not only to undo what King Henry and his Son King
Edward had reformed, but to prosecute the Reformers and Reformed with Fire and
Faggot.

Sir James Crofts recalled and G. Dovvdall restored.
But to our purpose, upon the 11th of November Anno 1553. she recalled Sir James
Crofts, and sent over Sir Anthony St. Ledger Lord Deputy into Ireland. This Sir
Anthony had not been half a year Chief Governor of Ireland, before Queen Mary
revoked the Title of Primacy from George Brown, expulsing Hugh Goodacre out of
the Archbishopric of Armagh and recalling George Dowdall to his See, and
restoring him to the Primacy of all Ireland, as formerly, which Title has ever
since stood firm in Armagh without any Revocation, either by Queen Elizabeth,
or by any of her Successors.

George Brown, upon this Revocation, was by George Dowdall expulsed, George
Brown by George Dowdall expulsed.
and not thought fit to continue in his See of Dublin, as being a married man,
and it is thought, had he not been married he had been expulsed, having
appeared so much for the Reformation, in both these former Kings days, upon the
expulsing of this George Brown, all the Temporalities belonging to the
Archbishopric were disposed of unto Thomas Lockwood then Dean of Christ Church
in Dublin. It having been an ancient Custom ever upon the Translation or Death
of any of those Archbishops, to deposite the Temporalities into the hands of
the Priors formerly of that Cathedral, when it was a Priory, and called by the
name of the Cathedral of the Blessed Trinity. And it is observable, the last
Prior became the first Dean upon the alteration as aforesaid.

The Sea of Dublin after this Expulsion lay vacant for two years or
thereabouts, until Hugh Corrin alias Corwine was placed therein: Hugh Corwine
succeeded G. Brown in the Archbishopric of Dublin
This Hugh was borne in Westmorland, a Doctor of the Law, being formerly
Archdeacon of Oxford and Dean of Hereford, he was consecrated Archbishop of
Dublin in the Cathedral of St. Paul's in London on the 8th. of September, Anno
1555. He after, upon the 13th. of the same Month, was by Queen Mary made
Chancellor of Ireland, and upon the 25th. of the said September, he received
this Letter from the Queen, directed to Thomas Lockwood the Dean of Christ
Church, it being an ancient custom formerly to recommend the Archbishop,
whenever constituted for that See, to the Prior of that said Cathedral.

Queen Mary's Letter to the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church in Dublin, to
receive the Archbishop of Dublin honorably and with due respect. Copia vera,
ex Libro nigro Sanctae Trinitatis Dublinii.
MARY the Queen.
TRusty and wellbeloved, We greet you well; and forasmuch as the Right
Reverend Father in God, our Right trusty and wellbeloved Counselor the
Archbishop of Dublin, being lately chosen for that See, repaireth speedily to
that our Realm of Ireland, as well to reside upon the Cure of his Bishopric,
which now of long time has been destitute of a Catholic Bishop, as also to
occupy the Office of our High Chancellor of that our Realm; albeit we have good
hopes ye will in all things of your selves carry your selves toward him as
becomes you, yet to the intent he might the better govern the Charge committed
unto him, to the Honor of Almighty God, and for the remain of our Service, We
have thought fit to require and charge you, that for your part ye do reverently
receive him, honor and humbly obey him in all things, as appertains to your
Duties, tending to Gods Glory, our Honor, and the Common weal of that your
Realm; whereby ye shall please God and do us acceptable Service.

Given under our Signet at our Manor of Greenwich the 25th of September, in
the second and third years of our Reign.
To our trusty and well beloved the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral of Christ
Church within our Realm of Ireland.

I have here inserted this Letter, upon two accounts, first as being a Record
remaining in the Cathedral; This decides the Controversy between the Dean and
the Archbishop lately set on foot.
secondly, because there has been some discourse of late, whether the
Archbishop of Dublin had power herein, or whether it was upon King Henrys
Mutation made a Denery as Whitehall Chapel is, and no Chathedral; but by this
Letter it shows it is both still a Cathedral, and subject to the Archbishop of
Dublin.

George Brown lived not long after the Consecration of this Hugh Corwine, yet
I have amongst my Manuscripts a Writing of a Papist, who would fain have
persuaded the world, Geo. Brovvne's Death, and a Popish aspersion wiped off.
that this George Brown dyed through Joy, having had a Bull from the Pope to
be restored to his See of Dublin, which must needs be false, upon this account
of Sir James Wares, who writes these very words of him, in his Book titled De
Praesulibus Hiberniae, page 120. 1554. Circa id tempus Georgius Browneus (quod
conjugatus esset) per Dowdallum Archiepiscopum Armachanum and alios Delegatos
ex Authoritatus est: otherwise the Pope, if he had granted such a Bull, must
likewise have dispensed with his Marriage, it being contrary to the Romish
Tenants for Bishops to marry. Having related thus much of George Brown, and of
Ecclesiastical matters during his life, we shall proceed a little further
concerning a short Sermon of his, preached unto the people in Christ Church,
upon the first Sunday after Easter, anno 1551. being a Copy of the same given
to Sir James Ware Knight, by Anthony Martin late Bishop of Mead, who formerly
was Tutor to the said Sir James Ware, when he was a Student in Trinity College
Dublin.

The TEXT, Psalm. 119. Ver. 18. Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of
thy Law.
THe wonders of the Lord God have for a long time been hid from the children of
Men, Let the Reader consider the old manner of Preaching, and compare it to
these days. Geo. Brown shows how Rome has absconded the truth of the holy
Gospel from the people.

How Rome will have false Teachers to delude us.

This Prophecy is fulfilled by the Sectaries that are now in the Church amongst
us.


wihich has happened by Rome's not permitting the common people to read the holy
Scriptures, for to prevent you, that you might not know the comfort of your
Salvation, but to depend wholly on the Church of Rome, they will not permit it
to be in any tongue but in the Latin, saying that Latin was the Roman tongue:
But the wonderful God inspired the holy Apostles with the knowledge of all
Languages, that they might teach all people in their proper Tongue and
Language, which caused our wise King Kenry, before his death, to have the holy
Scriptures transcribed into the English Tongue, for the good of his Subjects,
that their eyes may be opened to behold the wondrous things out of the Law of
the Lord. But there are false Prophets at this instant, and will be to the end
of the World, that shall deceive you with false Doctrines, expounding this
Text, or that, purposely to confound your understandings, and to lead you
captive into a wilderness of Confusion, whom you shall take as your friends,
but they shall be your greatest enemies; speaking against the Tenants of Rome,
and yet be set on by Rome; these shall be a rigid people full of fury and envy.

But to prevent these things that are to come, observe Christ and his Apostles;
Let all things be done with decency, with mildness, and in order, fervently
crying unto God, Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold the wondrous things out
of thy Law, then should ye rightly keep the Law and the Prophets. It is the
part of a Prince to be wise, K. Hen. 8th. his providence to provide for his Son
Edward before his death.
for he has a great Charge to Rule and Govern a Nation: Your late King
foreseeing Rome and her Pope's intentions, how that he intended to enslave his
Subjects, and to keep them in the state of ignorance, consulted with the
Learned of his Realm, knowing that Youth might quickly be wrought on, therefore
he prepared before his death a wise and Learned sort of Counselors for his
Sons Overseers, not trusting to one or two, but to several, that he might the
better Rule his people, whose eyes the Lord God Almighty has opened betimes,
to behold his wondrous works.

By the word eyes, is meant our understanding.
Though the words of my Text be plainly thus (Open thou mine eyes) the meanest
of you that hear me have eyes, but the true meaning of the words is, Endue us
with understanding; for a Fool has eyes, and sees men, women, beasts, birds,
and other things, but yet wants understanding: So when we say, Open thou our
eyes, we desire the Lord God to instruct and teach us the knowledge of his Laws.

How the Papists eyes be blinded in worshipping Images.
When you were lately led in blindness, your eyes beheld the Images that then
stood in several of the Monasteries and Churches until they were removed; yet
all this while were your understandings blinded, because ye believed in them,
and placed your trust in them.

The follies of such as put confidence in them.
Suppose an Artist or Workman make an Image either of Man or Woman, and at last
a Clergyman of Rome give it such a name, calling it St. Peter, or St. Paul, or
St. Mary, or St. Anne; must not that man, though he behold his own handiwork,
and knows in his heart that it was his own work, be blind, and void of reason
and understanding of the Law of God, and of the wondrous things that are
contained in the Law of the Lord? Yes, surely he must be blind, and void of
Reason, and of the true Faith, that would worship the same.

A good Argument to confute Image-worshipers.
The Workman carved the Eyes, but these Eyes see not; he likewise carved the
Ears, but they hear not; the Nose, and it smells not; the Mouth, and it neither
breaths or speaks; the Hands, they feel not; the Feet, but they stand stock
still.

Another good Argument.
How therefore can your Prayers be acceptable unto this Image that sees you not
approaching toward it, that hears you not when you pray to it, that smells not
the sweet smells, be they of Myrrh or Frankincense burning before it? How can
it absolve you, when the mouth is notable to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee?
And if you place a certain sum of Money in the palm of the hand of that Image;
come you again to morrow, the Money, it is true, shall find a customer, but the
Image never the wiser, who took it; and if you desire to have it come unto you,
it cannot without help; therefore the Workman that made this Image, is as
blind, as deaf, as dumb, and as void of sense as the Image it self, and so be
ye all that do put your trusts in them.

Therefore of late new Artificers, Pretty cheats to delude poor Souls. Viz. the
Image of our Lady Lauretta.
by springs have made artificial ones, which for a certain time shall move, and
ye shall believe it to be real and certain: But beware good people, for they be
but lying wonders, purposely that ye may break the Law of God. And thus has
the Devil devised a lying wonder, that ye may be deluded to break the Law of
the Lord, which is, Thou shall not make unto thy self any Graven Image. O Lord
open thou our Eyes, our Ears, and our Understanding, that we may behold the
wondrous things that are in thy Law. The Law of God is an undefiled Law. Oh! A
Prophecy of the Jesuits, how all Schisms shall come from, and by their means.

This Prophecy is fulfilled in the story of Heth, and Faithful Commine.


why should we be so wicked then as to defile that Law, which the Almighty God
has made so pure without blemish. Jesus came to fulfill the Law, and not to
abolish the Law. But there are a new fraternity of late sprung up, who call
themselves Jesuits, which will deceive many, who are much after the Scribes and
Pharisees manner: Amongst the Jews they shall strive to abolish the truth, and
shall come very near to do it; for these sorts will turn themselves into
several forms, with the Heathen, an Heathenist; with Atheists, an Atheist; with
the Jews, a Jew; and with the Reformers, a Reformade, purposely to know your
intentions, your minds, your hearts, and your inclinations, and thereby bring
you at last to be like the fool that said in his heart there was no God. These
shall spread over the whole World, shall be admitted into the Council of
Princes, and they never the wiser; Charming of them, yea, making your Princes
reveal their hearts, and the secrets therein unto them, and yet they not
perceive it, which will happen from falling from the Law of God, by neglect of
fulfilling of the Law of God, and by winking at their sins; yet, in the end,
God to justify his Law, shall suddenly cut off this Society even by the hands
of those who have most succored them, and made use of them; so that at the end
they shall become odious to all Nations: They shall be worse then Jews, having,
no resting place upon the Earth, and then shall a Jew have more favor then a
Jesuit. Now, to arm you all good Christians against these things that are to
come, lest ye be led into temptation; Cry unto the Lord your God, and heartily
pray that he would be so merciful unto you as to open the eyes of your
understanding, that you may behold the wonders and pleasantness that is in his
Law. Which God of his mercy grant that you may all do.

Thus concluding with the Acts and Deeds of this Reverend Father, we shall end
with Queen Mary's Designs, how she intended to have persecuted the Protestants
in Ireland; but by Providence prevented; as you shall further know by this
following Relation, being averred by several sufficient persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil.

How miraculously God preserved the Protestants in Ireland from persecution in
her days.
Queen Mary having dealt severely with the Protestants in England, about the
latter end of her Reign, signed a Commission for to take the fame course with
them in Ireland, and to execute the same with greater force, she nominates
Doctor Cole one of the Commissioners, sending the Commission by this Doctor,
who in his Journey coming to Chester, the Mayor of that City hearing that Her
Majesty was sending a Messenger into Ireland, and he being a Churchman waited
on the Doctor, who in discourse with the Mayor takes out of a Cloak-bag a
Leather Box, saying unto him, Here is a Commission that shall lash the
Heretics of Ireland, calling the Protestants by that title; The good Woman of
the House being well affected to the Protestant Religion, and and also having a
Brother named John Edmonds of the same, then a Citizen in Dublin, was much
troubled at the Doctors words; but watching her convenient time, whilst the
Mayor took his leave, and the Doctor complementing him down the stairs, she
opens the Box and takes the Commission out, placing in lieu thereof a Sheet of
paper with a Pack of Cards, the Knave of Clubs faced uppermost, wrapped up. The
Doctor coming up to his Chamber, suspecting nothing of what had been done, put
up the Box as formerly. The next day, going to the Waterside, wind and weather
serving him, he sails toward Ireland, and landed on the Seventh of October,
1558. at Dublin; then coming to the Castle, the Lord Fitz Walters being Lord
Deputy sent for him to come before him and the Privy Council, who coming in,
after he had made a Speech relating upon what account he came over, he presents
the Box unto the Lord Deputy, who causing it to be opened, that the Secretary
might read the Commission, there was nothing save a pack of Cards with the
Knave of Clubs uppermost, which not only startled the Lord Deputy and Council,
but the Doctor, who assured them he had a Commission, but knew not how it was
gone; then the Lord Deputy made answer, Let us have another Commission, and we
will shuffle the Cards in the mean while; The Doctor being troubled in his mind
went away, and returned into England; and coming to the Court obtained another
Commission; but staying for a wind at the Waterside, news came unto him, that
the Queen was dead, and thus God preserved the Protestants in Ireland.

This being a Copy of Richard Earl of Cork his Memorials, as also of Henry
Usher sometime Lord Primate of Armagh, being also entered amongst Sir James
Wares Manuscripts, who has often heard the late James Usher, Nephew to the
said Henry, and also Primate of Armagh, averr the same, and wondered that Mr.
Fox had not inserted it in his Acts and Monuments; there is yet living a
reverend Father of the Church, Henry now Lord Bishop of Mead, who can affirm
this Relation from the said James Usher late Lord Primate of all Ireland.

Upon the recalling of the Lord Fitz Walters into England, the Queen Elizabeth
by the Grace of God etc. succeeding, discoursing with the said Lord concerning
several passages here in Ireland, amongst other discourses he related the
aforesaid passage that had happened in Ireland, which so delighted the Queen,
that Her Majesty sent for the good Woman, named Elizabeth Edmonds, by her
Husband named Mattershad, and gave her a Pention of Forty pound durante vita,
for saving her Protestant Subjects of Ireland.

FINIS.

