A VINDICATION Of her GRACE Mary Duchess of Norfolk. Being a true Account of
the PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE House of Lords, (From Jan. 7th. 1691. to Febr. 17th.
following) Upon his GRACE The DUKE of Norfolk's BILL, ENTITLED, An Act to
Dissolve the MARRIAGE, etc. OCCASIONED, By several Libellous PAMPHLETS lately
Published, and Dispersed, under the same Pretense and Title.

Published by the Direction of her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk,

The Second EDITION Corrected.

LONDON (...)

The PREFACE.
THere have been lately printed, and made public, Two scandalous Pamphlets;
the one under the Title of [ The Proceedings before the House of Lords, between
the Duke and Duchess of Norfolk:] The other is called [ The farther
Depositions and Proceedings in the House of Lords, in the Affair of the Duke
and Duchess of Norfolk; with the Bill of Divorce.] Now these Two Papers are so
far from a faithful Narrative of the said Proceedings, that what with
confounding the Order of the Transaction, and disguising the Truth of Things,
by industrious Omissious, gross Imperfections, and wilful Mistakes. This
pretended Account has made it absolutely necessary, even for the sake of common
Justice, to set the World right in the Story: To which end the entire Series of
this Affair is here set forth, from Point to Point, just as it passed before
their Lordships, and stands upon their Journal; with such Notes upon the
Evidence on both sides as the Nature of the Case requires, and as the reason of
it will fairly bear.

The Reader will observe here, upon this Relation, that the two Principal
Witnesses produced against the Duchess of Norfolk, are Row. Owen and Marg.
Elwood, for they Swear positively to the stress of the Question, whereas all
the rest is but Circumstantial and made use of only for Aggravation, Prejudice,
and Clamor: So that upon invalidating their Testimony, the main Cause falls
effectually to the Ground, saving only the unavoidable Misfortune of many an
Innocent Person that suffers under the Impossibility of proving a Negative;
there being no Pence against uncharitable Presumptions. Now taking this for
granted, (as it is not to be demed) the Reader is only desired to lay seriously
to Hear the Improbability of the Fact that is sworn against the Duchess, in
some Cases, and the utter Impos^bility of it to be true in others: The
Tampering and Practice that has been used, the Inconsistency of the Witnesses
with themselves, their Character, and Credit, etc. (one of them, Ann Burton,
being trapt in a false Oath, out of her own Mouth, upon the very place of
Examination.)

The Reader will also take notice, that of 26 Witnesses produced in Favor of
the Duke, one half of them are Principals, and the other only Seconds. Peter
Scriber, Andrew Anderson, Robert Hemming, John Reynolds, and Margaret Foster,
are Five of the former Number; but speaking little or nothing to the Merits of
the Question, it was not thought worth the while to offer Exceptions to their
Testimony; though to the other Eight, that is to say, Owen, Elwood, Hudson,
Burton, Varelst, Tho. Foster, Lloyd and Wadsworth, there were several Witnesses
on the behalf of the Duchess to invalidate their Credit, (viz.) Two to the
First, Six to the Second, Two to the Third, Four to the Fourth, One to the
Fifth, Two to the Sixth, Two to the Seventh, and Six to the last. It is very
remarkable also, after all these Exceptions to every one of the Duke's
principal Witnesses, that the Testimony of the Dutchesses Witnesses passed
current without any contradiction, saving only that Henry Dagley and John
Hoskins were examined against the Credit of John Hall, in the Case of Jane
Wadsworth (leaving four Witnesses more in the same Case untouched;) and Edith
Sawbridge, against the Testimony of Mrs. Judith Stourton, which Depositions the
Reader will find to be of little or no moment, as to the matter in hand. This
puts it past Dispute, that they had nothing more to say against the Witnesses
for the Duchess, but stopped at these Three for want of farther Pretense. The
Result in short is this, That all the material Witnesses to the Charge are
Impeached, and the Evidence on the other side stands Untainted. To say nothing
of the unanswerable Reasons that prevailed with the Lords finally to Reject the
Bill, especially considering the Solemnity of the Proceedings: For (...) Cause
was kept up on from the 7th. of January to the 17th. of February following. All
the Lords (...) and about the Town being summoned, by an Order of the House
bearing date Die Veneris Feb. 1^. 1691. to attend at Twelve of the Clock on the
Tuesday following. And the Officers that summone^^ them to give an Account of
what Lords they summoned; pursuant to which Order their Lordships met according
to the Appointment: and after some previous Debates, Adjourned till the next
Day, when the Depositions on both sides were read at the Table by the Clerk, as
will be seen more at large upon the following Journal. And after a long and
solemn Debate, The Question being put, Whether the Bill, entitled, An Act to
Dissolve the Marriage of Henry Duke of Norfolk, Ear Marshal of England, with
the Lady Mary Mordant, and to enable the said Duke to Marry again, shall be
read a second time. It was resolved in the Negative.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Account of the Proceedings before the House of Lords by the Duke of
Norfolk against the Duchess, with her Defense, was designed to have been
Published soon after the Determination of the Cause in February, 1691. But that
there might be no Offense given to the Duke, It was thought advisable to
suspend it.

But since that, albeit the Duchess did take such care not to give the Duke
any manner o^ Offense; yet he thought fit to bring his Action against Mr.
Jermaine (in hopes of a new Foundation to prosecute the Duchess) and did
obtain a Verdict in the Court of King's Bench in November last, and a 100 Marks
Damages: In which Action the Duchess was no Party, nor could any Defense be
made for her there.

Now in this Cause, the Witnesses produced by the Duke were the same that were
examined before the Lords when the Bill was first Rejected, and the Duchess
Acquitted, and particularly Owen, Elwood, Burton, and Hudson, who spoke to
Matters in 1685. But the most Material of the Dutchesses Witnesses, who could
have confronted them, were not produced at the Trial; because those Witnesses
of the Duke did speak of things not in Issue, and therefore those of the
Dutchesses ^ere thought unnecessary in that Cause, speaking to things out of
that time to which the Duke ^ad confined himself by his own Declaration: And
though there were two or three new Witnesse^ ^roduc'd by the Duke at the Trial,
yet nothing of Fact pretended to be was proved. And though it was impossible to
speak any thing to the Discredit of those Witnesses then, yet by Enquiry since*
they are found to be of no better Reputation than the first, (as in due time
may appear.) And particularly as to Bowtell (to say no more at present) he
stands upon the Journal of the House of Commons to have given an untrue
Information against Captain Motley, and upon it was Or dered to be taken into
Custody, who afterward petitioned to be discharged, and being brought t^ the
Bar, and owni^g his Fault, had a Reprimand by the Speaker, and at length
discharged paying his Fees.

Now upon the Reputation of this Verdict, though the Duchess was no Party, nor
her Witnesses examined as aforesaid, yet the Duke was pleased to offer a new
Bill to the Lords the 22th of Decemb^^ last, for Dissolving the Marriage, etc.
But the Dehate for Receiving or not Receiving it u^ Adjourned to the 29th
following, and from thence to the 31th, and from thence to the second January,
when after a long and serious Debate, The Bill was again Rejected: So that now
it (...) not be thought Impertinent for this true Account to appear to the
World.

A Vindication of her Grace MARY Duchess of NORFOLK, etc.
THE 7th. of January the said Bill was lodged in the House of Lords.

The 8th. of January the Duchess of Norfolk, having received Intimation, that
the Duke of Norfolk was this Day offering a Bill to the House of Lords, for
Dissolving the Marriage between them, and that the same was under De^at^ bef^^^
their Lordships; She was advised to present the following Petition.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled,
The Humble Petition of Mary Duchess of Norfolk.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner being informed, that the Duke of Norfolk is at this time
offering a Bill to your Lordships, for Dissolving the Marriage between him and
your Petitioner,

Your Petitioner Humbly prays she may be heard by Your Lordships, before such
Bill be received. And Your Petitioner will ever pray, etc. M. Norfolk.

Upon which Petition their Lordships were pleased to make the following Order,
(viz.)

Die Vineris 8 Januarii, 1691.
A Bill having been offered to this House, on the behalf of the Duke of
Norfolk, to dissolve the Marriage between the said Duke and his Duchess; It
was ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, that
Her Grace shall have notice thereof, and may be heard, by her Counsel, at the
Bar of this House, on Tuesday next at 12 of the Clock; what she has to object
against the receiving the said Bill; at which time the said Duke may also be
heard by his Counsel, for the said Bill, if he shall think fit.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parlimentor'.

Die Martis 12 Januarii, 1691.
AFter hearing Counsel this day, at the Bar, what they could object for her
Grace the Duchess of Norfolk, against the receiving of a Bill offered by his
Grace the Duke of Norfolk, to dissolve the Marriage between him and his
Duchess: As also the Counsel of his Grace the Duke of Norfolk for receiving
the said Bill. And after Consideration of what was offered by Counsel, on
either side, and a long Debate thereupon:

This Question was put.

Whether the Duke of Norfolk's Bill should be received? It was Resolved in the
Affirmative.

Which Bill is as follows.

An Act to Dissolve the Marriage of Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of
England, with the Lady Mary Mordant, and to enable the said Duke to Marry again.
FOrasmuch as Henry Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England, having been
Married to the Lady Mary Mordant, has made full proof that his said Wife is
guilty of, and has committed Adultery on her part: And forasmuch as the said
Henry Duke of Norfolk has no Issue, nor can have any probable expectation of
Posterity to succeed him in his Honors, Dignities and Estate, unless the said
Marriage be declared void, by Authority of Parliament, and the said Duke be
enabled to Marry any other Woman. The King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's,
upon the Humble Petition of the said Henry Duke of Norfolk, having taken the
Premises into their Royal Consideration, for diverse weighty Reasons, are
pleased that it be Enacted; And be it Enacted, by the King and Queens Most
Excellent Majesty's, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, That the said Marriage between the said Henry
Duke of Norfolk, and the said Lady Mary his Wife, shall from henceforth be null
and void; and is by Authority of this present Parliament Declared, Adjudged,
and Enacted to be null, and void, to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes,
whatsoever. And that it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said Henry Duke
of Norfolk, at any time, or times, hereafter, to Contract Matrimony, and to
Marry (as well in the Lifetime of the said Lady Mary, as if she were naturally
dead) with any other Woman, or Women, with whom he might lawfully Marry, in
case the said Lady Mary was not living: And that such Matrimony, when had and
celebrated, shall be a good, just, and lawful Marriage, and so shall be
adjudged, deemed and taken, to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes. And
that all and every Children, and Child; born in such Matrimony, shall be
deemed, adjudged and taken, to be born in lawful Wedlock, and to be Legitimate
and Inheritable, and shall Inherit the said Dukedom of Norfolk, Office of Earl
Marshal of England, and all other Earldoms, Dignities, Baronies, Honors, and
Titles of Honor, Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments, from, and by,
their Fathers, Mothers, and other Ancestors, in like manner and form, as any
other Child, or Children, born in lawful Matrimony, shall or may inherit, or be
inheritable, according to the Course of Inheritances used in this Realm: And to
have and enjoy all Privileges, Preheminencies, Benefits, Advantages, Claims and
Demands, as any other Child, or Children, born in lawful Wedlock, may have, or
claim, by the Laws or Customs of this Kingdom. And be it farther Enacted, That
the said Henry Duke of Norfolk shall he Entitled to be Tenant, by Courtesy,
of the Lands and Inheritance of such Wife, whom he shall hereafter marry: And
such Wife as he shall so marry, shall be Entitled to a Dower of the Lands and
Tenements of the said Henry Duke of Norfolk, and of such Estate whereof she
shall be Dowable, as any other Husband, or Wife, may, or might claim, have, or
enjoy: And the Child, or Children, born in such Marriage shall, and may, derive
and make Title, by Descent or otherwise, to, and from any their Ancestors, as
any other Child, or Children may do, any Law, Statute, Restraint, Prohibition,
Ordinance, Canon, Constitution, Prescription or Custom, had, made, exercised,
or used to the contrary of the Premises, or any of them, in any wise
notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That
the said Lady Mary shall be, and is hereby barred and excluded of, and from all
Dower and Thirds, and of, and from, all Right and Title of Dower, and Thirds,
unto, or out of any the Honors, Manors, Lands or Hereditaments of the said
Duke. And that all Conveyances, Jointures, Settlements, Limitations and
Creations of Uses and Trusts, of, into, or out of, any Honors, Manors, Lands
or Hereditaments, at any time heretofore made by the said Duke, or any of his
said Ancestors, or Trustees, unto, or upon, or for the use or benefit of the
said Lady Mary, or any the Issue of her Body, or for raising, discharging, or
countersecuring any the Manors, Lands or Hereditaments of the said Lady Mary,
or any of her Ancestors, shall be from henceforth utterly void, and of none
effect: And all and every the said Honors, Manors, Lands or Hereditaments of
the said Duke, or any of his Ancestors, or Trustees, shall from henceforth
remain, and be to, and for, the use and benefit of the said Duke, and such
other Person, or Persons, and for such Estates and Interests, and in such
manner and form, as if the said Lady Mary was now naturally dead, without any
Issue of her Body. And also, That all Limitations and Creations, of any Use,
Estate, Power or Trust, made by any of the Ancestors of the said Lady Mary,
unto, or for the use or benefit of the said Duke, his Heirs or Assigns, out of
any the Manors, Lands or Hereditaments, of any of the Ancestors of the said
Lady Mary, shall be from henceforth void and of none effect.

13 Januarii, 1691.
THE Duke of Norfolk's Bill aforesaid, having been yesterday received and read.
The Duchess of Norfolk presented the following Petition to Their Lordships
this Day.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled,
The Humble Petition of Mary Duchess of Norfolk,
Shows,
THat your Petitioner being Married to the Duke of Norfolk fourteen Years and
upwards, never had, or received, from her Husband, any Intimation of a
Misdemeanor, on her part, against him; which, joined to her Innocence of the
Crime mentioned in the Bill, makes this Proceeding before your Lordships very
surprising to her: Her Person, Estate, and Honor, which is more dear to her
than her Life, being now brought in question.

Your Petitioner humbly prays she may have a Copy of the particular Charge
against her, with the Names of the Witnesses, and reasonable time allowed her
to answer the same, before any farther Proceedings upon the Bill.

Mary Norfolk.

Upon which Petition the following Order was made.

Die Mercurii 13 Januarii, 1691.
UPon reading the Petition of Mary Duchess of Norfolk, It is Ordered by the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That Sir Richard Reins,
Sir Charles Hedges, and Dr. Oxenden, do attend this House to Morrow at ten of
the Clock in the Forenoon.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

14 Januarii, 1691. After having heard the Civil Lawyers, the following Order
was made.
Die Jovis 14 Januarii, 1691.
AFter hearing this day the Civil Lawyers, pursuant to the Order Yesterday,
upon reading the Duchess of Norfolk's Petition, It is Ordered by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled, That his Grace the Duke of
Norfolk shall being in the Charge against his Duchess, and particularly to the
Person, Time and Place, by Saturday next, at twelve of the Clock.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

16 Januarii, 1691.
This Day the Duke of Norfolk brought in the following Charge against his
Duchess.

The Charge which Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, does exhibit
against his Wife Mary Duchess of Norfolk, before the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament assembled, pursuant to their Lordships Order of the
14th. of January, 1691. is for the Crime of Adultery.
THE Person charged to commit the said Crime with the said Duchess is John
Jermaine, of the Parish of S. Margaret's, in the Liberty of Westminster.

The Times when the said Crime was committed, were between the Months of June
and December, 1685. and several times since.

The Places where the said Crime was committed, are at Whitehall, Windsor, and
within the Parishes of S. Margaret's Westminster, S. Martin's in the Fields, S.
James's, S. Ann's within the Liberty of Westminster: And in the Parish of
Lambeth, in the County of Surrey.

Norfolk, and Marshal.

Upon which the following Order was made.

Die Sabbati, 16 Januarii, 1691.
UPon reading this Day the Charge which Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of
England, has exhibited against his Wife, Mary Duchess of Norfolk, for the
Crime of Adultery. It is Ordered, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament assembled, That her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk do attend this
House on Monday next, or some Person on her behalf, then to receive a Copy of
the Charge against her.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

19 Januarii, 1691.
The Answer of Mary Duchess of Norfolk, to the Charge exhibited against her by
the Duke of Norfolk, before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled.
THis Respondent is advised, that the Charge exhibited by the Duke of Norfolk,
into this Honorable House against her, as to Time and Place, is too general,
and is not pursuant, nor does answer the end of your Lordships Order of the
14th. instant, made upon the humble Petition of this Respondent. Wherefore she
does humbly hope, and pray, your Lordships will not oblige her to make any
further Answer, till the Duke shall bring in a particular, and certain Charge,
as to Time, and Place, against her.

And this Respondent does the rather humbly insist, That your Lordships would
please to require the Duke to be particular, and certain, in these material
Circumstances of his Charge against her; for that it appears, by his own
showing therein, that the supposed Crimes objected to her, and alleged to be
committed, were above six Years before the Bill was offered to this Honorable
House: during most of which time, at the advice, and by the approbation of the
Duke, was, and continued beyond the Seas, to ease him in his Charge, and Part;
He frequently declaring, that when he should be more easy in his Fortune, they
should live together.

M. Norfolk.

Upon which Answer the following Order was made. And the Duke's Second Charge
delivered in the same Day.

Die Martis, 19 Januarii, 1691.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled,
That her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk shall have a Copy of the Duke's Charge
delivered this day against her: And that she, or Sir Thomas Pinfold, do attend
this House, to Morrow at 11 of the Clock in the Forenoon, to answer to the said
Charge.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

Which Copy is as follows.

The Charge which Henry Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, does exhibit
against his Wife Mary Duchess of Norfolk, before the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament assembled, pursuant to Their Lordships Order of the 14th
of January, 1691, is for the Crime of Adultery.
THE Person charged to commit the said Crime with the said Duchess, is one
John Jermaine, of the Parish of St. Margaret's Westminster.

The Times, and Places, when the said Crime was committed, were at Whitehall,
in the Months of June, July, August, some, or one of them, in the Year 1685. At
Windser in the Months of July, August, or September, some, or one of them, in
the said Year 1685. In the Parish of St. Margaret's Westminster, March, April,
May, June, some, or one of them, in the Year of our Lord 1690. And in the said
Parish of St. Margaret's Westminster, in the Months of July or August 1690. In
the Parish of Lambeth, in the County of Surrey, in the Months of May, June,
July, August; some, or one of them, in the Year 1691.

Norfolk, and Marshal.

Upon which, the next Day (viz.) the 20th of January, 1691, the Duchess of
Norfolk presented the following Petition.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled,
The Humble Petition of Mary Duchess of Norfolk.
Shows,
THat your Petitioner was served with an Order of this Honorable House, late
last Night, to attend your Lordships this Day, by Eleven of the Clock, either
in Person, or by Sir Thomas Pinfold, to answer to a new Charge brought in
against her, by her Husband the Duke of Norfolk.

Your Petitioner is advised, That, for her just Defense, it is necessary to
allege in her Answer several special Matters relating both to the Duke and her
self.

That in this short time appointed by Your Lordships, your Petitioner finds it
impossible to instruct Counsel, to prepare such an Answer as she is advised is
necessary to put in.

Wherefore Your Petitioner Humbly prays Your Lordships, she may have convenient
time to put in her Answer to the said Charge.

And Your Petitioner will ever pray, etc.

M. Norfolk.

Upon which the following Order was made.

Die Mercurii 20 Januarii, 1691.
UPon reading the Petition of Mary Duchess of Norfolk, praying that She may
have convenient time for answering to the Charge put in against her, by his
Grace the Duke of Norfolk, Yesterday. It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament assembled, That her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk shall
peremptorily answer, by her Self, or Proctor, to the said Charge, to Morrow at
Eleven of the Clock in the Forenoon.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

Accordingly, January the 21st.

The Duchess of Norfolk delivered in the following Answer.

I Mary Duchess of Norfolk, under Protestation, That the pretended Charge of
Adultery given against me, in the Honorable House of Peers, was, and is,
general, insufficient, and such as, I humbly conceive, I am not bound by Law to
give answer unto. Yet knowing my own Innocence, and that I am not guilty of the
pretended Crime, this Protestation being Sacred to me, I shall, and do, under
the Matters and Qualifications hereafter mentioned, answer, and say, hereby
affirming, That having been married to his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, for near
15 Years, he never did (till this pretended Charge given against me) in the
least pretend, or intimate, unto me, that I had ever injured his Bed; but did
always treat me with great Kindness and Respect. And about the Year 1685, at
his request, and desire, I did go with him from London to France, and there
continued with him for some time; where his Grace, being under an Indisposition
and continuing so for some time, He showed such Affection to me, and put so
great Trust and Confidence in me, that all such things that were administered to
him, in order to his Recovery, He did not, nor would receive any of them but
what came from my Hands; and I did with great care attend him: And being
recovered, He told me his Occasions required him to go for England, but he
would return to me in France within some short time, and bring Me home to
England; and at his parting with Me, he showed great Affection to Me, and in
great Passion of Love, with Tears in his Eyes, said, He had Ten Thousand
Pardons to ask Me, desiring my Patience, and that I should return into England
to him in some short time. And after his Grace's return into England, he having
notice from me, that my Lodgings was inconvenient, and desiring his leave to
change the same, He wrote me word very ^ffectionately, that God forbid he
should constrain me to any Inconveniency, and left me to my Liberty therein.
And before his parting with me, in France, as a Testimony of his Love and
Affection to me, He ordered 400 l. yearly to be paid unto me, out of his own
Estate, by Quarterly Payments, over and above the separate Maintenance settled
upon me, by my Father, upon my Marriage with him. And that after his Arrival in
England, he made several Visits to my Mother, the Countess of Peterborow; and
with great Observance, and Respect, asked her Blessing, and told her, he had
left me well, and safe, in France; and said, that his own Debts were pressing
upon him; but if her Daughter (mean my Self) would consent that the Manor of
Drayton, and other places, should be settled upon him, and his Heirs, he should
thereby be made a happy Man. And I coming into England, his Grace having put
off Housekeeping, and dwelling in the Countess of Peterborow's Lodgings, in
St. James's, for about 2 Years; and I suing him for Alimony (the said 400 l. a
Year not being paid unto me) He did not, during that Suit, object any Crime
against me, which had been proper for him to have done, to avoid Alimony, if I
had been guilty. And I, the said Mary Duchess of Norfolk, being at Drayton in
Northamptonshire, his Grace did write very affectionately to me. And that
Disturbances happening in those parts, in Nov. 1688, I left Drayton; and, with
the consent of the Duke, went beyond Seas, and there continued till sent for by
my Father and Mother, and then returned; which was in or about October. 1691.
with the Duke's consent. And then Applications being made to me by the Duke my
Hu^band, to join with him in the Sale of Castle-Rising, and other Estates: But
I being advised this must be injurious to me, could not join therein, which I
humbly apprehend to be the true Cause and Occasion of this proceeding against
my Honor, on the Duke my Husband's part.

And I the said Mary Duchess of Norfolk, adhering to my Protestation of my
Innocence, and denying that I am guilty of the pretended Crime charged against
me, and being unwilling to Impeach my Husband of any Crime whatsoever; yet
being advised, That, by the Laws of the Land, a Husband suing a Divorce for the
Adultery of his Wife, he ought not to obtain any Sentence of Divorce, if he be
proved Guilty of the same.

Wherefore this Respondent does aver, and is ready to prove, that the Duke her
Husband was, and is guilty of Adultery, and has continued in the Course of
Adultery for these ten Years last past, and does so continue.

My Lords.

IT is my Misfortune to be thus accused; I had rather stand charch'd for
High Treason before your Lordships, than with this ignominious Crime. In the
Charge for High Treason, the manner of Trials, and the ways of Proceedings, are
known; so is the Punishment in this Case against me.

Your Lordships are now creating new ways of Proceeding against me, and a new
Law to punish me; and this for a Crime supposed, and alleged to be committed
seven Years past, in another Reign, after public Indemnities in the Sessions
of Parliaments, many Sittings of Parliaments, and Dissolutions of others,
without mentioning this Crime against me. My Counsels are to seek how to advise
my Defense in the Proceeding, being altogether strange, and without President,
or Example.

I find my Prosecution now to be very violent, and my Proceeding to be very
swift upon me, having had but one Night to prepare my Answer to this general
Charge. I do in this Place publicly declare, I am innocent of what is objected
to me, and am not guilty of defiling my Husband's Bed: I am not guilty of the
Crime charged against me. I hope (being thus accused) I may, without Vanity and
Vainglory, say, what is well known, That I am not only the Duke of Norfolk's
Wife, but also born and descended from Parents and Ancestors of the Ancient
Nobility; That your Lordship's Ancestors, and my Ancestors, who sat in this
House, knew no such Proceeding: It is with regret that I bring this Answer for
my Self, and against my Husband; but it being my Defense, I hope you will
excuse me.

And if your Lordships shall, in your great Wisdom, proceed farther in this
matter, I hope, and do most heartily pray, that I may hereafter have convenient
time to make my Proofs, and full Defense; and then I doubt not of your
Lordship's Justice to me, as well as for my Husband, who Sits and Votes with
your Lordships.

M. Norfolk.

Upon the delivering the said Answer, the next Day the following Order was made.

Die Veneris, 22 Januarii, 1691.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament assembled,
That His Grace the Duke of Norfolk shall produce his Witnesses, to Morrow at
Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon to be sworn. And that her Grace the Duchess
of Norfolk do attend this House, by her self, or Proctor, at the same time; and
may have Orders for Witnesses if she pleases.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

Accordingly, 23 Januarii, 1691, the Duke's Witnesses were produced; and whose
Names are as follows.

Margaret Ellwood Ann Burton Rowland Owen Thomas Hudson Simon Varelst Peter
Scriber John Reynolds Thomas Lloyd Andrew Anderson Thomas Foster Margaret
Foster Jane Wadsworth Mary Boil Rice Jones Ann Jones John Hoskins John Hall
Mary Hall William Barley John Wood Richard Owen Henry Dagley William Miles John
Colvin.
After these several Witnesses were produced, on behalf (...) the Duke of
Norfolk, and had given in their several Places (...) Abode, etc. The following
Oath was administered to them.

YOU shall true Answer make to all such Questions as sh^^ be asked you by this
Honorable House, in relation to t^^ Charge of Adultery, brought in by the Duke
of Norfolk, against the Duchess of Norfolk, with John German; you shall
declar^ your whole Knowledge of this Matter, and shall speak the Truth the
whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, as well upon the matter you shall be
examined on behalf of his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, as upon such
Interrogatories as shall be exhibited on behalf of the Duchess of Norfolk,
without Favor or Affection to either Party.

So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

After the Oath administered, as aforesaid, the following Oder was made.

Die Sabbati, 23 Januarii, 1691.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Par^^ment assembled, That
the Duchess of Norfolk's Proctor sh^^^ have a Copy of what was taken upon
Swearing the Duke of Norfolk's Witnesses at the Bar; and that the Duke's
Witnesses sh^^ give in their Evidence at the Bar, on Tuesday next, at Ten of
th^^ Clock in the Forenoon: and that the Duchess of Norfolk, (...) her self,
Proctor and Council, shall attend, together with (...) Duke's Proctor and
Council, at the same time.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliament

After Examination of Witnesses on behalf of the Duke, (...) following Order
was made.

Die Martis, 26 Januarii, 1691.
AFter hearing this day, the Witnesses on the behalf of (...) Grace the Duke of
Norfolk; it is Ordered by the Lo^^ Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, That Fri^^^ next, at Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, shall be,
an^^ hereby appointed, for her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk (...) make her
Defense, by her Proctor, or Council; and that (...) Grace the Duke of Norfolk's
Council and Proctor be then (...) sent, and the Witnesses who this day
delivered their Eviden (...) or Oaths, on his Grace's behalf: And that the
Duchess man have an Order for such Witnesses, as she shall think fit to man
use of, on her Grace's behalf.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliament

Upon which Order, the Duchess was advised to present the ^ollowing Petition.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled.
The Humble Petition of Mary Duchess of Norfolk.
Shows,
THat since the Examination of Witnesses before your Lordships, against your
Petitioner, upon Tuesday last, the utmost Endeavor and Diligence has been
used, to prepare for ^er Defense against the time appointed by your Lordships.

That your Petitioner is very much concerned, that, for the ^^cessary Defense
of her self, she should be forced to lie under ^he Charge sworn against her,
one moment beyond the time ^iven her by your Lordships.

But, upon a Consultation with her Council and Solicitor, ^^st Night, she is
advised, that it is absolutely necessary for her (...) Address to your
Lordships for Time, till Monday next, to ^ring in her Defense, some of her most
material Witnesses be^^g remote from London; and though she has sent for them,
and ^sed all means possible to get them ready by the time appointed, (...)
cannot be able to have them here before Monday next.

Wherefore Your Petitioner humbly prays your Lordships (it being a Case of the
highest Concern, and utmost Importance, to your Petitioner) to give her Time,
till Monday next, to bring in her Defense.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. M. Norfolk.

Upon which Petition, the following Order was made.

Die Veneris, 29 Januarii, 1691.
WHereas this Day was appointed for her Grace the Duchess of Forfolk to make
her Defense; upon reading the Petition of her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk,
praying (it being a Case of the highest Concern, and utmost Importance to her)
to give her time, till Monday next, to bring in her Defense; after hearing her
Council at the Bar, and upon Oath made, that some of the Dutchess's material
Witnesses are out of Town, It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament assembled, That her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk has hereby Time
given her for making her Defense, until Monday the First Day of February next,
at Eleven of the Clock in the Forenoon.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

Accordingly, the Duchess of Norfolk began her Defense: And the following
Order was made.

Die Lunae, 1. Februarii, 1691.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled,
That on Wednesday next, at Eleven of the ^ock in the Forenoon, the House shall
proceed in hearing the Duchess of Norfolk's Evidence; and that all the
Witnesses that have been sworn on either Side, do then attend the House.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

Which they did; and the following Order was made.

Die Mercurii, 3 Februarii, 1691.
AFter having this Day heard several Witnesses on behalf of her Grace the
Duchess of Norfolk, as also for his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, It is Ordered
by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled, That her Grace
the Duchess of Norfolk's Council shall proceed in her Grace's Defense, on
Saturday next, at Twelve of the Clock.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

They proceeded accordingly; and the following Order was made.

Die Sabbati, 6 Februarii, 1691.
AFter having this Day heard several Witnesses on the behalf of the Duchess of
Norfolk, It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, That the Council for his Grace the Duke of Norfolk shall proceed to
examine Witnesses on Tuesday next, at Twelve of the Clock.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

Which accordingly they did; and the following Order was made.

Die Martis, 9 Februarii, 1691.
AFter hearing some Witnesses this Day, on the behalf of his Grace the Duke of
Norfolk, It is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament
assembled, That the Council for his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, as also the
Council for her Grace the Duchess of Norfolk, shall be heard on Thursday next,
at Twelve of the Clock, to sum up the Evidence on either side; and that Mrs.
Sawbridge and Mrs. Stourton do then attend, to be heard.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

The Council attended accordingly, but not heard; and their Lordships were
pleased to make the following Order.

Die Jovis, 11 Februarii, 1691.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parl^^ment assembled,
That the Council for his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, as also the Council for her
Grace the Duchess of Norfolk, shall be heard to Morrow, at One of the Clock in
the Afternoon, to sum up the Evidence on either side; and that Mrs. Sawbridge
and Mrs. Stourton do then attend to be heard.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

After Evidence summed up, this following Order was made.

Die Veneris, 12 Februarii, 1691.
AFter hearing this Day the Counsel, and a Civilian, for his Grace the Duke of
Norfolk; and also Counsel, and a Civil Lawyer, for her Grace the Duchess of
Norfolk, who summed up the Evidence for their Graces severally, It is Ordered
by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in Parliament assembled, That on Tuesday
next, at Twelve of the Clock, this House shall proceed on the debate of this
Business; and that then no other Business whatsoever shall intervene: And that
all the Lords in and about the Town shall be summonned then to attend; and that
the Officers that summon them give the House an account of what Lords they
summon

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

The Matter was accordingly entered upon; and after some previous Debates by
their Lordships, they were pleased to apjourn till the next Day, when they
proceeded, (viz.)

Die Mercurii, 17 Februarii, 1691.
THe Depositions taken at several Times before, on the behalf of his Grace the
Duke of Norfolk, as also those taken on the behalf of her Grace the Duchess of
Norfolk, were read at the Table, by the Clerk.

After long Debate thereon, The Question was put.

Whether the Bill Entitled, An Act to Dissolve the Marriage of Henry Duke of
Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, with the Lady Mary Mordant, and to enable the
said Duke to Marry again, Shall be Read a Second Time?

It was Resolved in the Negative,

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'.

The Proceedings of the LORDS upon the Evidence.
Rowland Owen Examined on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the
Duchess of Norfolk.
ROwland Owen says that Mr. Keyner, about Six Years since, being the Duke of
Norfolk's Butler, ordered him to carry the things out; the Lodgings being open,
he saw Mr. German in Bed with the Duchess of Norfolk, the Duchess leaped
out of the Bed, and put on a Morning Gown, and German hid himself in Bed;
this was between five and six a Clock in the Evening, about a Fortnight before
Bartholomew Day; he did not tell the Duke: he is sure it was German; he saw
him often, twice or thrice a day; the outward door of the Lodgnigs was shut,
but he opened it with a Key he had,

Rowland Owen examined a second time, says he never ha^ the Key of the
Lodgings but once, that Mr. Keymer g^v^ him the Key, when he went as (as he
told him) to the Blew Posts in the Haymarket, to bespeak the Dutchess's Supper;
he says he saw not Francis Knight then in the Lodgings nor any other Woman but
the Duchess of Norfolk; he says h^^^ has seen Keymer often open the outward
Door of the Lodgings, when he has been by, without calling Francis Knight
(...) he says that he himself opened the first Door with the Key; the Second
Door was not close shut, and the third Door was open: he says two of the Doors
are straight forward, and the third turns a little on the right Hand; he says
he was gon^ in at the third Door when the Duchess leapt out of Bed.

Witnesses produced to the Credit of Rowland Owen.
EDward Silvester says he has known Rowland Owen three or four Years, and he
has trusted him in Business, and he has ever been very faithful; he has
trusted him in Stores to the King, and he might have imbezell'd, but ever found
him honest; and he has had three or four Thousand Pounds worth of Goods that
he might have imbezell'd, and has had opportunities of doing ill things, but
never did: he has trusted him with every thing he has; he has had more than
20 l. imbezell'd by others, but he never imbezell'd a half penny: H^ knows not
well who recommended him to him; he has a^^ hundred Men now, and he knows not
that three of them were recommended: He has trusted him with Goods an hundre^
and an hunded times that he might have imbezell'd; and other that he has so
trusted have cozened him, and he has l^^ 20 l. in a Months time by them; He
works at our wo^^ and that better than twenty that he has had, and he is (...)
Porter; he says he knows not Mr. Negus, nor was not (...) quainted with him
till Yesterday.

John Jones says he has known Rowland Owen above the Years, and that he is a
very honest Man, and that he ever for him faithful; that he lodged in his
House, and that he m^^^ have done him injuries if he would, and he has been
(...) ployed else where, and he never heard ill of him; he beli^^ he is a Man of
a better Principle than to take a false Oath

Thomas Cook says that he has known Rowland O^ five Years, and knows not but
that he is an honest Man, (...) says that he maintains his Family by his
Labor; he i^ 01 Neighbor, and never heard him taxed with any Misdemean^

Witnesses Sworn on behalf of the Duchess, for inv^ dating the Testimony of
Rowland Owen. (v^^^
FRancis Knight says she knows Rowland Owen, as he (...) a Fellow Servants in
the Duke of Norfolk's House; (...) has known him a Year, he was running
Porter, to carry Co^^ and Wood; he was not trusted with any Keys; she (...)
trusted with the Keys to the Lodgings, and she always k^^ the Key to the
outward Door to the Lodgings, and there (...) no other Key; and she never
delivered it to any Body, (...) sometimes left it with the Lady Peterborough's
House-ke^^ she never let this Owen have that Key, or any other Key t^ ^odgings,
it was below her to do it; he never went into the ^^ner Rooms, no farther than
the Steps to the Outward Room; ^e's a pityful beggarly Fellow; he laid the
Stewar'ds Cloth, and had no other Livelihood; she lived with my Lady six ^^ars
and upwards, and all the while had the Key to the outward Door; she says you
must first come into the Room cal^ed the Footmens waiting Room, then into the
Dining Room, ^hen into the Bedchamber; the Doors are sideways: she made the
Dutchess's Bed constantly; she locked the Door, and ^^ept the Key in her
pocket; she had the Key of the Rooms ^ill the Countess of Westmoreland had the
Lodgings, which was ^ill the Duke and Duchess left them, which was ten or
twelve days before Bartholomewtide, six Years ago,

Henry Kemer says that he knew Rowland Owen Street-Por^er; he says that he
(this witness) could never get into the Lodgings, but when he had the Key from
Francis Knight; he says Owen never came into the Lodgings, but had a Key to a
House where the empty Bottles were, which was without the Lodgings; and he
himself could not get into the Lodgings but by Frances Knight; he never had the
Key in his own Pos^ession; he never saw Owen farther than the Passage-Room; he
says that the Doors are not opposite to one another; he says Francis Knight
never gave him the Key; he always found her there to open the Doors, or in the
Room; he never had any Key that would open the Lodgings: Owen never told him
that he caught the Duchess in the manner as is said; he knows ^ot of any
Livelihood he had, beside laying the Steward's Cloth: Owen had Wages from the
Duke, and lodged at the ^uke's House in St. James's; he sent Bottles,
Pewter-Plates, Forks and Spoons, Bread, and Linen sometimes by him, from the
Duke's House to the Lodgings in White Hall: When he was not there to receive
them himself, he gave him directions to deliver them to Francis Knight, or gave
him the Key of the Cupboard. Being asked whether he has ever gone by another
Name than Keymer, de desired to be excused, and refused to answer; he refused
also to answer whether he had known any Lady go by the name of Bateman:
Afterward he said he did know one to do so; he says she went by the Name of
the Duchess of Norfolk; he says it was the Duchess of Norfolk that went by
the Name of Bateman, and she went so he believes for a Year; it was at Lambeth,
but he knows not at whose House there; he never saw German there; it was a
Year, or half a Year since, he knows not certainly; the House is called by the
Name of Scriber's House, a Dyer; he never saw Mr. German at Scriber's with
the Lady Bateman; he says he himself went by the Name of Goodman when he lived
with this Lady Bateman; he says that he knows not that German was ever at
Lambeth, by that name or any other; he says he never paid any Rent for the
House at Lambeth, nor knows that German paid any for it; but he says he was
a Servant to the Duchess at Lambeth, but knows not what Office he was in, but
she paid him his Wages.

Henry Keymer, examined to what Rowland Owen said at his second Examination,
says he never gave him the Key of the Lodgings, and says he never had the Key
of the Lodgings.

Observations upon the foregoing Evidence.
^E^er in the first place to consider, and compare the Evidence on both sides
Secondly, to examine the Credit of the Witnesses, Thirdly. The reasonable
Probability of the Matters Sworn, according to the common Course and Practice
of the World.

Owen Swears' That being sent by Henry Keymer, the Duke's Butler, to carry the
things out, and the Lodgings being open, he saw Mr. German and the Duchess
in Bed; and to countenance the Story, he says that two of the Doors are
straight forward, giving to understand that the Doors being open and one aginst
another, a body may see the Bed out of the first Room intot the hird; that
Keymer gave him the Key of the outward Door and upon the unlocking of it he
made this Discovery.

Frances Knight encounters this Evidence with a Deposition, that she kept the
Key of the outward Door, her self, and delivered it to no body, but now and
then to my Lady Peterborow's Housekeeper: That Owen never went into any of the
Inner Rooms, and that the Doors are sideways.

Henry Keymer says also, that he himself could not get into the Lodgings, but
by Frances Knight; that he never gave Owen the Key; nor ever had it in his
Possession; that he never saw Owen beyond the Passage-Room; nay that Frances
Knight never gave him the Key, but that he still went to her to open the Door,
and that he never had any Key to the Lodgings; that whenever he sent Owen with
Plates, Spoons, and the like, from Duke's House to the Lodgings in Whitehall,
he was either there himself to receive them, or directed Owen to deliver them
to Francis Knight*

Now if these two Witnesss speak Truth, Owen was never in the inner Rooms at
all; he never had the Key of the outward Door, and the Doors are not straight
forward as Owen Swears they are, which is a Matter of Fact easily cleared.

As to the Credit of Rowland Owen, Edward Silvester, John Jones, and Edward
Cook are produced in his Favor. The first swears he never knew him steal or
cozen, as if the case were Pilfery. The second that Owen might have done him
wrong, and did not, and thence infers that he would not take a False Oath. The
third, that he knows nothing to the contrary of his being an honest Man. So
that here are three Surmises for the Reputation of Owen, which are just nothing
to the purpose, on the one hand: and two point blank Proofs, upon Oath, against
him on the other; and not one Syllable all this while to disparage the
Testimony of either Knight or Keymer; though there are several pinching
Passages in the Evidence, that, if they were false, might be detected by
Hundreds of Witnesses. And for an Instance of Keymer's Tenderness of an Oath,
he has owned some things, upon the close of his Examination, to the seeming
Prejudice of the Duchess her self. This is meant of their going by borrowed
Names: but as things stood at that time with many Persons of Honor, under her
Grace's Circumstance, it was no Scandal to conceal either their Names or their
Aboads. But as to the true Reason of the Dutchess's Retirement and living in a
manner so Incognito; The Earl of Peterborow falling desperately sick in the
Tower, her Grace came over upon it, from beyond the Seas, to be within distance
in case the Sickness should have proved Mortal. ^he Duchess had at that time
nothing to live upon, but an Exhibition from her Father, and one half of that
was made over too for the Payment of her Debts; so that not being in condition
to appear answerable to her Quality, she thought (...) honor, Prudence and
Justice to retrench her Expenses, which she could not better do than by such a
Retreat.

It is in the next place to be observed, how Owen interferes with himself; the
Lodgings, he says, being open, he saw Mr. German in Bed with the Duchess of
Norfolk, the Duchess leaped out of the Bed, etc. This must naturally be
understood upon the opening of the first Door; and, to the end it should be
taken so, he says, that the two first doors were straight forward, and that the
third turns a little. Now if so, how could he see the Bed out of the first Room
into the third? And then he forgets himself again, in saying that the second
door was not close shut, and the third open; so that he has now doubled the
difficulty: there was no seeing into the Bedchamber, both because the second
door was almost close, and because the third was sideways. It is to be noted
also, that the Bed stands quite out of sight of the Bed chamber door, which is
sufficient of it self alone to overthrow Owen's Testimony. But upon second
thoughts, he takes himself tripping, and instead of mending the Matter makes it
worse; it comes into his Head by this time, that there was no seeing them in
Bed out of the first Room, and so thinks to help it out with a Flam at the
wrong End of his Information, that indeed he was in at the third door when the
Duchess leaped out of her Bed. Now to take the Tale his own way, can any Body
imagine that Owen should unlock the outward door, lay down his Lumber, pass
these two Rooms into the third, the Duchess and Mr. German both awake too,
and all this Noise not give them the Alarm?

To come now to the Probability of the thing, Keymer gave him the Key, he says,
only for once it seems, for he never had it either before or since. Has not
this the Face now of a Contrivance calculated for a particular turn? Is it not
highly improbable again, that a pitiful drudging Fellow that earned his Bread,
by doing Porters work for the Family, should have the Dutchess's Bedchamber
laid open to him? And so for the Morning-Gown, and Germaine's hiding himself in
the Bed, had they no other Clothes or Garments lying by them, that Owen should
have the luck to see just this and nothing else. But his Lesson was to swear
Nudus cum Nuda, and Solus cum Sola, to bring the Proofs up to the straitness of
the Law, and that was the part he had to play. Or, to take the Case yet another
way. If Owen had seen them out of the first Room, can any Body think he would
have ventured after that into the Bedchamber? Or, if he did not see them in
the first Room, what had he to do in the other Room at all? But over and above
all the rest, for an Amor of this Quality, to be carried on thus in the Face
of the Sun, the doors and the Curtains open; let any Man ask his own Conscience
if he does not look upon it as an Imposture, without a President from the
Creation to this day.

Margaret Ellwood Examined on the Behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the
Duchess.
MArgaret Ellwood says she had a Company to see the Lodgings at Windsor, in
the First Year of King James's Reign, about three or four of the Clock in the
Afternoon; a Woman told her that my Lady was not there, but she opening the
door saw my Lady upon the Stools in an ill posture; Mr. Germaine's Britches
were down; he pulled them up, an^ (...) Hand on his Sword, saying, God Dam you
for a Whore, (...) have you the impudence to come here? My Lady bid him ki^^^
me down. He scattered some Concerns. that is, Man's Natu^^^ on the Boards: She
saw no Nakedness but her Knee, or a li^^^ above. Another time after she found
Germaine's Handk^^^ chief and Ruffles in my Lady's Bed; my Lady's Woman (...)
there was Germaine's Name upon them. Another time, (...) saw Mr. Cornwall let
Mr. German out of my Lady's Close (...) She saw Germaine's Legs within hers
when she came the fir^^ time into the Room, and his Breeches were about his
Heel^^ The first time was in Bartholomew-Fair time. Mrs. Knifet^^ told her it
was Germaine's Linen.

Witnesses produced to the Credit of Marg. Ellwood.
CAptain Charles Potts says, he has known Margaret Ellwood six or seven
Years, and that she was Servant to the Duke of Norfolk, and that she behaved
her self well and prudently there; her Husband was a Soldier in his Company,
and was, as he has heard, a Shoemaker.

John Faucet says, He knew Margaret Ellwood, while she was the Duke of
Norfolk's Servant about two or three Years: He never heard any Scandal or
Disgrace of the Woman, but that she carried her self civilly: He knows not
whether she kept an Alehouse in Windsor.

Lawrence Parnell says, he knows Margaret Ellwood; she lived in his House in
Brook-Market, next Easter will be tw^ Years: He knows nothing amiss of her; she
took care f^^ her Living; he never knew her keep ill Hours; she took (...) Room
in his House, some of the Rent is behind, he thin^ (...) thirty two Shillings,
her Husband and the Woman gave hi^ a Bond for it.

Witnesses Sworn on the behalf of the Duchess, f^^ invalidating the Testimony
of Margaret Ellwoo^
MIchael Haddon says, he has been acquainted with M^^garet Ellwood four,
five, six or seven Years. When (...) first knew her, her Husband was a Soldier
in the Duke's Company, and she was, as he has heard, an Under House-keep^^ He
believes she was turned out of the Duke's Service. ^^terwards she sold Drink in
a House of his at Windsor, and we^^ away in his Debt by Night, without paying
him; she took (...) Goods with her; this was in 1689.

Joyce Heath says, she knows Margaret Ellwood; she liv^^ in a Cellar of hers,
and in a back House of hers, but not (...) the same time, three Quarters of a
Year in Brook-Market, about Michaelmas lost; she paid the Landlady but Eleve^
Shillings Six Pence. Her Course of Life was not good; sh^^ was in an inferior
Condition; her Husband was a Cobbler in (...) Stall, and she had five Children.

Mary Tervis says, she has but a slender Acquaintance with Margaret Ellwood;
but the said Ellwood sent to borrow a Scarf of her the Sunday after Christmas
last, and says, that going the next Day for her Scarf, she the said Ellwood
desired it for a longer time, for it might be 5 l. in her way, for she was
(...) Witness for the Duke of Norfolk, who was to be divorced ^^^m his
Duchess; and that the Duke sent his Chariot for her. (...) ^old her, there
could be no Separation in Marriage, except ^^ultery could be proved: And that I
could not think it rea^^^able to believe, that so mean a Servant* as she could
be a ^^ectator to so ill an Action as that was. She said, she thought ^^e could
do the Duke no Kindness in going; for she never ^^w other harm by the Duchess,
than that she saw Gentlemen ^ome to and fro to the House: But the Duke had sent
for her, and she must go.

Mary Jones says, She knows Margaret Ellwood; who she ^eard say, the Lady
Duchess sent for her a little before Christmas last, and said, Margaret, I
desire you to speak the truth; (...) would not have you disoblige my Lord in
the least. Margaret Ellwood said, she never knew no harm by her Grace. The
Duchess demanded the Keys of her, and she gave them her; and the Duchess gave
them to her the said Ellwood again, the next Morning. The discourse was a few
days before Christmas last.

Ann Ross says, She knows Margaret Ellwood; who came to her House, and told
her, about two Months since, that the Duke of Norfolk sent for her to witness;
for there would be a Divorce between the Duke and Duchess: And I asking her
what she could say? She answered, she could say but little, but that she knew
no ill by the Duchess; but that she was a good generous spirited Lady, and she
never knew any ill Action by her in her Life. I bid her have a care what she
went about, for that would do the Duke but little kindness. The Duchess, ^he
said, called for the Keys of her Lodgings, but gave her them back next Morning.
She says, That last Week she went to her to demand a Debt; and she promised to
come and pay it her: She says, she went to the Porter, at the Duke's, to ask
for her; but the Porter said, she was not within; but meeting with her Child
there, she said, she was within; and brought her, the Witness, to her, in the
Duke's House; and she made her very welcome, and sent her Husband with her, the
Witness, to see her Children's Lodging, in the Green-Meuse, near the Duke's
House. She says, Ellwood's Husband told her, upon asking how the Cause went,
that his Wife was to have 30 l. per Annum settled on her, and to go to Windsor
to live, and to have the showing the Castle. She says, that upon her going to
see the Children, and commending their Lodgings, that Ellwood's Maid, or Woman,
told her, they paid 4 s. a Week for their Lodging She says, the Children were
well clothed, with good Frocks and Top knots, and they used to be ragged; and
that her Husband used to allow her but six Pence a day for her and her
Children. She says, that Margaret Ellwood told her, she had been with the
Duchess; and that her Grace bid her do nothing to disoblige her Lord, but
speak the Truth.

Mary Ross says, She knows Margaret Ellwood: She says, she heard Ellwood's
Husband say, that the Duke of Norfolk had taken care of his Wife and Children,
and settled 30 l. per Annum on them, and her Habitation was to be at
Windsor-Castle; and said, that my Lord Duke would be divorced, for he was to
have a great Fortune of Twenty Thousand Pounds a Year. This Discourse was the
last Week, and her Father was present, and her Mother was just gone out.

Observations upon the foregoing Evidence.
Here is a foul and a suspicious. Story in this Deposition of Margaret Ellwood,
wherein she stands singly upon the Credit of her own Testimony, without any
Color, or Corroborating Evidence to support it: Only Captain Charles Potts,
John Faucet, and Lawrence Parnell, are produced to speak to her personal
Reputation. The first says, she behaved her self well and prudently in the
Duke's House; the Second and Third, that they knew no ill by her.

There were produced on the behalf of the Duchess, and to invalidate the
Testimony of Margaret Ellwood, these six Witnesses, Michael Haddon, Joyce
Heath, Mary Trevis, Mary Jones, Ann Ross, and Mary Ross. Mary Trevis, Mary
Jones, and Ann Ross, do all depose, that about Christmas last, speaking of the
Duchess and Mr. German, Margaret Ellwood told each of these Witnesses
respectively, that she never saw or knew any thing of ill by the said Duchess;
and yet Ellwood's Accusation bears date in the first Year of King James. Mary
Trevis swears farther, that upon the next Sunday after Christmas last, Ellwood
told her, upon borrowing a Scarf of her, that it might be 5 l. in her way; for
the Duke was to be divorced from his Duchess, and he had sent his Chariot for
her, and she was to be a Witness. Ann Ross speaks also to the same effect, how
Ellwood told her there would be a Divorce, and the Duke had sent for her to be
a Witness: And likewise says, that Ellwood's Husband told her, that his Wife
was to have 30 l. per Annum settled upon her, and live at Windsor, and have the
showing of the Castle. Mary Ross speaks to the same purpose also, with the
Witness above, as to what Ellwood's Husband said of Windsor, the Settlement,
and the Divorce; adding also, that the Duke was to have a great Fortune,
(according to the common Rumor then about the Town:) Mary Ross's Father was
by, and heard all this: It was about a Week before the date of this
Information, that this Discourse had passed.

Nay, the Duchess was so clear in the matter, that she sent for Ellwood a
little before Christmas last, and bid her speak the truth; as Ellwood her self
owned to Mary Jones and Ann Ross.

To come now to the Quality and Credit of Margaret Ellwood. Haddon says, she
was his Tenant to an Alehouse in Windsor, in 1689, carried off her Goods by
Night, and went away in his Debt.

Heath says, she lived in a Cellar, led an ill Course of Life, her Husband was
a Cobbler in a Stall.

Ann Ross says, that she had five Children, and that she had but Six Pence a
Day Maintenance for her self and them.

This was her Condition till near Christmas last, when all on a sudden, as Ann
Ross deposes, she was taken into the Duke's House, the Children new clothed,
and trickt up with good Frocks and Top knots, (which were, till then, all in
Rags;) Lodgings provided for them at Four Shillings a Week, and a Maid to look
to them; and no visible means of doing all this. But, in fine, the Change was
not wrought by Miracle, and leans much toward the D^scourse beforementioned,
that Ann and Mary Ross had with Ellwood's Husband.

The Question, at last, is briefly this: Whether is to be believed, a Woman
under so many scandalous Circumstances, and one that swears for her self too;
or six Witnesses against her of so unquestionable Probity, that not so much as
one of them could be impeached by the other Party?

To pass now to the palpable unlikelyhood of the Story barely in it self:
Ellwood was carrying Company, she says, to see the Lodgings at Windsor; and
opening the Door, she saw and heard, as in her Deposition. How came it now,
that none of this Company should be produced, or so much as named, to second
Ellwood? For it is to be presumed, they must needs hear and see what passed upon
this Adventure, as much as she her self did; or if she had but named the Woman,
who, she says, told her my Lady was not there, it might have served as a
Collateral Inducement, for the giving of some sort of Credit to it. But in a
Matter of this Importance, to have so many Witnesses within reach of being
found out, and none to appear, looks very ill on their part, that were so much
concerned to produce them: And so for Germain's threatening her, and the
Dutchess's bidding him kick her down; no People in their right Wits, but would
have tried to stop her Mouth with fair Words, and a good Bribe, in such a Case
as this, rather than provoke her by Menaces and ill Language, to run open Mouth
to the Duke with the Story, in Revenge, when she had the Dutchess's Honor and
Estate so absolutely at her Mercy.

As to the business of Mr. Germain's Handkerchief and Ruffles, and his being
let out of the Closet, the Contrivance is all of the same piece with the rest;
for why were not the Persons named in her Deposition, produced to prove the
Particulars therein mentioned, as well as Ellwood's? It is most certain, that
the Prosecutors could easily have done it, and that it was properly their
Business and Interest so to do; for what signifies Ellwood's single Testimony,
under her Circumstances, without Corroborating Proofs? She tells us a Tale, of
Company to see the Lodgings, a Woman that told her so and so, and another Woman
and a Gentleman that said and did this and that; and yet not one Creature at
last to second her Deposition, nor any pretense of an Exception to the Evidence
on the other side.

Thomas Hudson Examined, on behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the Duchess.
THomas Hudson says, That the Duke of Norfolk being at Portsmouth, he was
Butler at Windsor, when German, and the Duchess, and Cornwall went to play;
German sent his Footman for clean Linen, which he brought the next Morning.
Mrs. Gwin said to the Duchess, The Dog would have lain with me; but she would
not lay the Dog where the Deer laid, for she knew the Lady Duchess would
accept of him; after that, he saw a Shirt and Wastcoat in the Closet, which my
Lady's Woman and Ann Burton took away. My Lord being absent we murmured among
our selves, that my Lord was wronged. I told my Lord: Whereupon my Master Cragg
had me to my Lord Peterborough's Lodging, and threatened me, that he would
prefer me to his Brother Richards, who turned me off in Germany. This was, as
he thinks, in December or September, 1685. Mrs. Gwin spoke this in the Green
Room; and he was in a Closet hard by, and the Door open, and so heard it.

Witness sworn on the behalf of the Duchess, for invalidating the Testimony of
Thomas Hudson.
WIlliam Purchase says, That he knows Thomas Hudson; who, he says, was never
Butler to the Duke of Norfolk, either at Windsor, or any other place: He, the
(...) was Under-Butler himself; Keymer was Butler (...) and the Witness was
Under Butler. He says, Hudson (...) on the Gentleman of the Horse, and the
Steward; he (...) the Duke's Servant, nor waited at the Table, that he know
(...) he was never suffered to come into the Room when the (...) or Duchess
was at Play. He says, He, the Witness, was at Windsor at the time when the
Duke of Norfolk was at Po^^^mouth; but he was sent to Drayton, in
Northamptonshire, (...) was then the Duke's Servant, as Under-Butler; he knows
(...) where Keymer was; he says he is now Servant to the Lord ^^terborough.

Col. Jacob Richards says, That he knows Thomas Hudso^ he was his Servant; he
was recommended to him by Mr. Crag^ he was his Footman; he believes he was in
his Service fo^^ Months; he parted with him, because he found him a tricki^^
Fellow: He told him, his Brother Cragg was to be killed (...) one Curry, and
another Irishman: He, the Witness, writ to (...) Brother Cragg, and he advised
the Witness to part with hi^ for he did not think him fit to be trusted in his
Travels; when upon he paid him his Wages, and gave him Money to bear (...)
Charges to England, and sent a Trunk by him. One Mr. N^gus traveled with the
Witness; and his Father who then a^^ now lives with the Duke of Norfolk, writ
to us, That he d^^ not think it fit for us to keep such a Servant, for he was a
dang^rous Fellow, or to that effect. Hudson never owned any thi^^ of the
Adultery to the Witness, but positively declared to hi^^ he knew nothing of it:
This was in January, 1685. (...) says, that Cragg writ him Word, That Hudson
must needs (...) a Tricking Knave. He negligently told the Witness this of
(...) Adultery; Curiosity made him ask it of him; for he had (...) with the
Duke and Duchess, and it was natural for him, (...) Witness, to ask such a
Question. He says, he believes Hu^^^^ saw some of his Letters: He says, there
were Printed Pa^^^^ in the Trunk he sent, but nothing of any considerable va^^^
He says, Hudson never cheated him of any thing that he k^^^^ of; he has
trusted him with a 100 l. at a time: The T^^^^ was delivered in England, and he
believes he knew (...) was in it: He says, that asking Hudson whether he knew
(...) thing of the Adultery charged on the Duchess of Nor^^^^ Hudson said, he
knew nothing of it: He, the Witness told (...) that it was said, that it was he
that had betrayed the Dutc^^^^ (...) He said it was a false Accusation, for he
knew nothing of (...)

Observations upon the foregoing Evidence.
HVdson swears himself the Duke's Butler at Wi^^^^^ William Purchase swears
that Hudson was never (...) Duke's Butler.

Hudson says, that they went to Play, and that he (...) heard Mrs. Gwin out of
a Closet, saying as in the Evid^^^ Mrs. Gwin is a dead Witness, and Hudson but
a Closet ^^^^ness, which is little better. Now Purchase says again, T^^^ Hudson
was never suffered to come into the Room where (...) Duke or Duchess was at
Play.

Hudson says likewise, That the Servants murmured amo^^^^ themselves, That my
Lord was wronged, and that he told (...) Lord of it. Colonel Jacob Richards
deposes, That he him^^^^ (...) ^^ng of a Noise of the Adultery; Hudson made
Answer, (...) it was a false Accusation, and he knew nothing of it.

^ow as to Hudson's Credit, he was Colonel Richard's Foot^^; who turned him
off, as a Tricking Fellow, and not fit ^e trusted. Mr. Negus, the Duke's
Servant, both then and (...), was of the same Opinion too; and advised, by
Letter, (...) putting of him away, as a dangerous Fellow.

This Story, of Mr. Germain's sending his Man for clean Lin^^ over Night, and
the bringing it next Morning, has little ^^t, even supposing the Fact to be
true. First, The Order ^is given barefaced, and consequently no Mystery in it.
Se^^ndly, There was a Set Company at Play, and that was not (...) opportunity
for a Love-Intreague. Thirdly, it is no new ^^ng for People to Sit-up all Night
at Play, and change their ^^nnen next Morning, without any offense to Honesty,
or ^^ood Manners, where they may have a Privacy so to do it. And (...) my
Lady's Woman, and Ann Burton, took away the Shirt ^^d Wastcoat, as he says they
did, there is no great hurt in that neither; though it is much to have Three such
Confidents to such Secret, an Under-Footman privy to the Intreague of
Ger^^ain's Man going and coming, and raking in the Women's Clo^^, among the
Linen.

But still the only proper Witnesses are kept behind the Cur^^n. Ann Burton
indeed is produced, and we shall see what and of Evidence she proves her self
in the next place.

^nn Burton Examined, on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the
Duchess.
ANN BVRTON says, she was a Servant to the Duke and Duchess of Norfolk. When
the Duke was gone to Portsmouth, she was at Windsor when my Lady went to London
with German. When my Lady came home, after Supper, she was in great haste to
go to bed; when she was undrest, ^he said she would lock us out, because she
would not be disturbed before Eleven a Clock the next Morning, though the King
and Queen should come. Hudson told her German was still in the House;
whereupon we laid Chairs on the Back-Stairs, that we might hear him if he came
down; the Chairs were not removed the next Morning: When Germaine's Man came
with his Linen, he said his Master was there. My Lady ordered a Fire to be
made in my Lord's Room; where when she was come, Mrs. Nelly Gwin came in, and
asked her how she liked her Night's Rest? And being asked for German, she
said she knew nothing of him. My Lady complaining of her Hair being out of
order, Nelly answered, It was a hot Night with her, enough to put her Hair out
of Powder and Curl too. Quickly after Cornwall came in and asked for German;
and my Lady saying she knew nothing of him, Nelly Gwin said, I question not but
he will come out by and by like a drownded Rat. With that, while I was cleaning
the Dining Room, Mrs. Knifton called me, and showed me in a Closet Germaine's
Shirt and Wastcoat; and afterward making my Lady's Bed, saw there were Two
Prints where Two had laid. The Shirt and Wastcoat were sent by the Duke to the
Lord Peterborough; she says she is a single Woman, and was never married. This
was about Bartholomewtide Six Years since; she supposes the Bed was Stained
both by a Man and a Woman.

Witnesses Sworn on the behalf of the Duchess for the invalidating the
Testimony of Ann Burton.
ANn Burton against her self; upon seeing several Witnesses comes in, to prove
her to be a Married Woman, (though she had sworn the contrary) was called to the
Bar of the Lords, and there says, she was not Married when she was at Windsor,
since that she has been Married. Ann Burton was her Maiden Name, her Husband's
Name was Benskin.

Susan Wheat-Croft says, that she knows Ann Burton, and that she Lodged in her
House Sixteen Weeks, with her Husband Robert Benskin, and she said she should
have a parcel of Money to be a Witness for the Duke of Norfolk against his
Duchess; this was about March two Years since; her Husband said he should have
a Commission from the Duke of Norfolk, and he should have a great deal more
from him, for his Wife is to be a material Witness against his Duchess. They
did nor pay her, the Witness, when they went away, nor since, they owed her
Seven Pounds Fifteen Shillings; she has been seeking after them, and could not
find them; she left a Trunk with Rags in it, and went away privately, carrying
away her Good's by Parcels.

Mary Sheriff says, that she lives next Door to Warwick-House in Holbourn, and
has kept House there near Seven Years, and has known Ann Burton two Years;
she lived with my Lord Clare; while she was there a Soldier, courted her; they
used to come every day for a Fortnight or three Weeks to her House to drink;
she owed her about 3 l. she has told her several times since, that she was to
be a Witness, for the Duke of Norfolk against his Duchess, and she was to have
Money for speaking: She heard Mrs. Tod bid her always keep in a Story, and she
would do well. She, the Witness heard them talk of 30 or 40 l. Mrs. Burton
should get by being a Witness; she is not paid the 3 l. nor knows not whether
she shall be paid; but last Winter she found her in Henriettastreet, and she
desired her, the Witness, not to take notice of her Name, nor what she said to
her, for she, the Witness, should have her Money in a short time, when the Trial
was over; she told her the same a little before that, when she lived at Major
Wildman's; she takes it to be in this Winter was Twelve month; she thinks it
was the Duke of Norfolk's Trial; she, the Witness, keeps a Coffee-house, called
Joe's Coffee House.

William Purchase says, that he knows Ann Burton; she declared to him about a
Year and a half after the Duchess was charged with lying with German, that
she knew nothing of it, and that the Duchess was wronged as much as ever any
Woman was, and that she hoped to see those punished that were the Cause of the
Accusation: He says, he went to see her as a Fellow Servants, and he was not
sent by any one; and going to drink together, they fell into this Discourse: He
has talked of this matter several Times (particularly to Mr. Welborne) since
this Business was spoken of, having heard she was to be a Witness against the
Duchess.

Observations upon the foregoing Evidence.
ANN Burton has the Story over again of the Shirt and Wastcoat, and of Mrs.
Gwyn's Discourse, to which enough is said already, and more needs not be said
upon the Evidence of a Person so manifestly forsworn. In her first Oath, she
swears her self a single Woman, and that she was never married; but upon
Witnesses appearing to prove the contrary, she was called to the Bar again, and
owned her self to be Married, and that her Husbands Name was Benskin.

This Ann Burton had been a Lodger sixteen Weeks to Susan Wheatcroft, as
appears by Wheatcroft's Deposition; she conveyed her Goods privately out of the
House by Parcels, and slipped away seven pound fifteen Shillings in her Debt; she
told Wheatcroft that she was to be a Witness against the Duchess, and that she
should have Money; her Husband saying also, that his Wife was to be a material
Witness against the Duchess, and he himself should have a Commission, and more
than that too.

Mary Sheriff says, that pressing Ann Burton for three Pound she owed her; her
Answer was, that she was to be a Witness for the Duke against the Duchess, and
that in a short time she should have Money, and then she would pay her.

William Purchase swears, that about a Year and half after the Report
concerning the Duchess and Mr. German, Ann Burton told him, the Duchess was
wronged, and she hoped to see her Accusers punished: and that he himself has
often spoke of this passage to several, and particularly to Mr. Welborne. Take
notice, that these Depositions for the Duchess, as well as the former, have
passed without any contradiction: That Germaine's Man is neither produced, nor
named; the Linen (if any) brought as openly as it was sent for. No Mrs.
Knifton appears, and the whole Deposition rests upon the credit of a forsworn
Woman.

Simon Varelst examined on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the
Duchess.
SImon Varelst says, that he was at Windsor, to draw the Duchess of Norfolk's
Picture, about six Years since, and had the Duke's Closet to put the Pictures
in; when he had done and had been at home two or three days, German came to
him much concerned, and said, you can do the Duchess an extraordinary
kindness, and you will oblige the Lord and Lady Peterborow in the highest
degree; then he showed me a Letter of the Duchess to me, and read it to me,
before that he told me there was a Shirt and Wastcoat, and they are known to be
his; he said, I desire you to save the Dutchess's Honor, I desire that you
will be so much a Gentleman as to own them to be yours, and that you left them
there; I answered, I was much concerned there should be such a trouble, but I
desired to be excused, I could not do it without prejudice. He told me, the
Lord and Lady Peterborow had discoursed the Duke of Norfolk upon it, and if it
were but my Linen, their ^iscourse had wrought so much upon him, that if there
came any Evidence to assist him, he would leave off the pursuit; I ^efused
still, he offered me a Purse of Gold, and told me I should make my Fortune by
it; but I refusing, Mr. German ^vent away very much discontented; my Wife
being in the next Room, overheard the discourse between German and me, a^^
told it, and spoke of it, or else I had not been here now.

John Rothmell, Sworn a Witness on the behalf of the Duchess of Norfolk, for
Invalidating the Testimony of Simon Varelst.
JOhn Rothmell says, that he lives in Crown Court in Covent Garden, and is a
Tailor: He says, he knows Simon Varelst, and that he, the Witness, married his
half Sister; he says, that about a quarter of a year after the business of the
Duchess happened at Windsor, he was at Varelst's House about eleven of the
clock in the night, and Varelst locked the Door, and told him, he had
disparaged him by marrying his Sister, and said he would be his Death; and drew
his Sword, and commanded him to strip, that he might slash him at pleasure; and
the said Witness did strip for fear of his Life, knowing his Frenzy; and he
struck the Witness above a dozen times with his Sword, and threatened still to
have his Life, if he, the Witness did not fetch his Wife down that night, which
was about Twelve a Clock, and which was about Six Weeks after she lay in; and
he was to bring her to be Whipped, and to bring six Rods with him; upon his, the
Witnesses Promise to do this, he let him go, and he has not seen him since,
but in the street. He had half a year before that been distracted for six
weeks, and he, the Witness, fetched Dr. Tenison to him once, and the Doctor
came several times afterward to him. One night in that Sickness, he got from
the Woman that watched him, and run about two hours in his Shirt and Wastcoat,
in a frosty night, and cut his Feer, and was brought home by the Watch; he
says, his, the Witness's Wife, was to have been here this day, as a Witness,
and was here, but not having an hour to reckon, and being ill, is gone home
with her Midwife: He says, he never durst go near Varelst since he abused him.
He says, that Mrs. Varelst, after she came from Windsor, said, that the
Duchess had ill people about her, and that she believed her to be much
wronged, and said, she could clear her about the scandal of the Linen that was
found; for whether it was or was not Mr. Varelst's Linen, she could do it; and
said, supposing I had brought my Husbands Linen down to be washed, and the
Landress fetching of it, she might take it up, and leave some of it behind.

Observations on the foregoing Evidence.
THere needs no more to the overthrowing of Varelst's Evidence, whatever it is,
than the Testimony of John Rothmell, to prove him Non Compos; witness his
Outrage upon Rothmell, the fantastical freak of sending at Midnight for six
Rods to whip his Sister-in law; and another fit, for a matter of six weeks,
when Dr. Tenison made him several Visits to compose him, his Frenzy being so
violent upon him, that he broke loose from his Keepers in a frosty night, and
ran up and down the streets in his Shirt, till he was taken up by the Watch:
This is the sum of Rothmell's Testimony, and not one word opposed either to the
Credit of the Witness, or the truth of the Depositions. But it may not be
amiss, after all this, yet to speak a few words to the likelihood of what
Varelst has here deposed.

Mr. German came to him, he says, with a Letter from the Duchess, which he
read to him, and in the name of the Lord and Lady Peterborow, desired him to
say, the Shirt and Wastcoat were his: but not one word all this while of the
Contents of the Dutchesses Letter. He says again, that the Shirt and Wastcoat
were known to be his; now if they were known to be Mr. Germaine's, what good
could Varelst do by taking the matter upon himself; when he saw fair words
would not do, there was a Purse of Gold offered him, and that would not work
neither. The Duchess and Mr. German were wonderfully altered, sure, in this
case, from what they were in the business of Owen and Ellwood; there was no
Purse of Gold, or Dutchesses Letter to smother the matter; but on the contrary,
Ellwood was threatened, provoked, and defied, instead of cajoling her. And what
was all this for at last, but only to remove a Jealousy, and most
ridiculously, at the same time, to condemn themselves by a Confession out of
their own Mouths, and improve the Suspicion into a Certainty: Can any body
imagine that they would not have done more to have suppressed Owen's and
Ellwood's evidence, than Ann Burton's, or Simon Varelst's; who swears farther,
that his Wife heard all this discourse betwixt German and himself in the next
Room, and told of it. Why was she not produced then, or the persons to whom she
told it? But Rothmell swears, that Mrs. Varelst said, the Duchess had ill
people about her, and was much wronged, and that she herself could clear her
about the scandal of the Linen; so that it is plain, Mrs. Varelst was not an
Evidence for the present Turn.

Thomas Foster Examined on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the
Duchess.
THomas Foster says, that he was Coachman to Mr. German, and carried the
Duchess of Norfolk often, about two years since in his Coach, and brought her
home, and the Footmen have had four Half-Crowns given them; and Marting a
Dutchman, his helper, called it Hush-Money; it was by right, against a Light,
that he saw her Face in the Coach; it was about Seven or Eight a Clock at Night
about this time a hear; he has seen her Face once in the day time, she looking
out of a Sash-Window, two Stories high, in Mr. Germaine's House in Park-street;
he knows her Face well enough; he has seen her before, and since she was
Married.

Witnesses Sworn on the behalf of the Duchess of Norfolk, for Invalidating the
Testimony of Thomas Foster.
JOhn Hall says, that he lives at the Coffin in Tuttle-street, and is a
Joiner; he says, he has known Thomas Foster two years; and that about three
weeks since, they being drinking together, and talking about the Duke and
Duchess of Norfolk; he said, Mr. German had done ill things by him, in
turning him off in Ireland, and in turning him off here, and he was resolved to
be revenged of him.

Hosea Grimsley says, he lives with Mr. German, and that he has known
Thomas Foster above a year and three months, in Mr. Germaine's Service; he
heard him say, in the last week of December last, in Mr. Cook's House, about
three days before he was turned away, that he thought it no more sin to Murder
his Master, than it was to kill a Louse; he says, he has lived with Mr.
German about a year and half; and that he never saw the Duchess of Norfolk
with him; and that he has ever since he came to him, lived with him in the
place where he now lives; he says, he never saw Mr. German with a Woman,
that was called the Lady Bateman, nor knows any such Name or Person.

Observations upon the foregoing Evidence.
THere is not one word in Foster's Evidence, true or false, that is worth the
hearing, only it is levelled upon the main, at the Duchess of Norfolk and Mr.
German; and John Hall gives the reason of it; for this same Foster, he says,
was Mr. Germaine's Coach man, who he said, would turn him off, and he would be
revenged of him. Hosea Grimsly testifies also, that some three days before
Foster was turned away, he said, he thought it no more sin to kill his Master,
than to kill a Louse. So, that the Evidence he gives, was grounded on the
malice he bore his Master, for turning him off.

Thomas Lloyd Examined on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the
Duchess.
THomas Lloyd says, he knows one that went by the Name of the Lady Bateman, at
her House at Fox-hall; one German, a Wine-Merchant, took the House, she came
thither about Midsummer, 1689. She was off and on there till last Michaelmas.
He has seen the Person that went by the Name of the Lady Bateman; and it is
the Duchess of Norfolk. Goodman was her chief Man, and his real name is
Keymer. Her Brother, as was pretended, which he has heard was Mr. German,
was the chief man that came there, sometimes he came once or twice a Week,
sometimes oftener; he is certain, as the Servants said, it was Captain German
that came there, every body said it was he: He knows him not by his Name, but
by Hearsay; if he could see him now he could tell whether it was he; he has
not seen him since the Lady went away; he believes German was there every
month in both the last Summers; he cannot say that Goodman was ever there, when
German was there he saw him several times there in May, June, July, and
August, 1691. Germaine's own Hair was then pretty long: He cannot positively
swear he was Captain German; he supposes if he saw him now he could know him.

Witnesses sworn on behalf of the Duchess of Norfolk, for invalidating the
Testimony of Thomas Lloyd.
ALexander Herman says, that he served Mr. German; he has left his Service
a year and a half, about eight Weeks after he came from Ireland with the King;
h^ served him a Year and half: Mr. German was in Ireland with the King, in
the Summer, in the Year 1690. He went to Ireland two days before the King that
Summer, he continued there four Months: he believes he went the last of May, or
the first of June; he came back with the King. He the Witness serve^ him all
that while in Ireland, and saw him every Hour an^ every Day, and never stirred
from him; he came from Ireland in the same Ship with the Lord Villers, the Earl
of Manchest^^ and Mr. Felton; and he went to Ireland in the Monmouth Yard with
the Envoys of Holland and Brandenburgh, and the Marquess Mompavillon: He says
Mr. German was at Brussels May last, he saw him there, and spoke with him
there (...) ^aw the Lord Villers and the Lord Lumley there with him; he lodged
in the same Tavern there with him, for four Days, and saw him not after: He the
Witness, coming then for England, left him there. He never knew him wear his
own Hair; his own Hair is dark brown: He never knew him appear abroad without a
Wigg; his Hair is about half a Finger long; he wore a fair Perriwigg. He says
he, the Witness, was quartered in a little Tent behind him in Ireland; he could
not stir but he heard him; he says that four weeks after he saw him in
Brussels, he saw him walking in St. James's Park.

Anthony Moree says, he was Barber to Mr. German; the first time he shaved
him was about five or six years since; his own Hair is brown; he shaved his
head very often; he shaved him before he went to Holland, and since he came
home; he never saw his Hair long enough to cover his Ears; nor saw he him ever
wear his own Hair, but a Perriwigg: he shaved him for a year and half before
and since he went for Ireland; he shaved him always at his own house near the
Park: he or his man shaved him ever since he came from Holland to this day: he
or his man shaved him the night before the King went for Holland: he says that
Mr. German; when he went away, said it would be a Month or two before he
should come back, but he knows not how long it was: This was at his House next
door to the Cockpit; he shaved him generally since the King came into England.
he says the Campaign was almost done when he first shaved him, after he came
from Flanders.

Observations upon the foregoing Evidence.
LLoyd's Deposition is nothing at all to the purpose, or if it were never so
pertinent, the Falsities in it are sufficient to spoil it; for in truth his
Evidence, as to Mr. Germaine's being at Fox Hall, is only grounded upon
Hearsay and Report: And yet he ventures to swear him to be there every Month
in both the last Summers; and particularly, that he was several times there in
May, June, July, and August, 1690. Whereas Alexander Herman swears, that Mr.
German went to Ireland in the Summer 1690, on the last of May, or on the
first of June, where he stayed about four Months, and that himself saw and
served him there; and says farther, that he was at Brussels in May last.
Anthony Moree says also, being Barber to Mr. German, that he went beyond
Seas, and the Campaign was almost over when he first shaved him after he came
back from Flanders, which is a flat Contradiction to Lloyd's Evidence.

The next Witnesses produced by the Duke of Norfolk, were Peter Scriber, Andrew
Anderson, Robert Hemming, John Reynolds, and Margaret Foster.
PEter Scriber says that he let an House, at Fox Hall, to Mr. Daniel German,
Mid-Summer was two years, (viz) 1689, at Twenty four Pound per Annum. He told
him that ^wo Ladies that were to come from Holland were to live there; one was
Mrs. Bryan, the other the Lady Bateman; they ^ent by the Name of Daniel
Germaine's and Captain Germaine's Sisters. The Ladies came to the House about
ten days after ^t was let; one Goodman, that attended them, was off and on
there all the time that the Lady Bateman lived there, which was off and on till
September last. This Goodman is the same Man that was heard here the other day,
as Henry Keymer he remembers nor, nor can be positive that he has seen Captain
German there at any time, he cannot say he knows him; he has not seen him in
seven or eight years. He says, he, the Witness, is generally absent in the
Daytime; Goodman he says came off and on to the Lady Bateman's from the time
she came thither till the time she went away.

Andrew Anderson says, he knew one that went by the Name of the Lady Bateman a
year and half ago, at Fox-Hall, from last Spring was Twelve-months till near
last Michaelmas, but has not seen her since; he knew one that went by the Name
of Goodman that used the House; and that Goodman is Keymer; he knew a Geatleman
that lived by the Cockpit, that went by the Name of my Lady Bateman's Brother,
which he used to take into his Boat at Channel-Row, and carry to Mr. Scriber's
House at Fox-hall. He carried him several times backwards and forwards; since
mid-summer he has carr ed him twice; he used to carry him to the back Stairs
of Scriber's House: The same day he fetched him, in the Forenoon, from the
Parliament-Stairs, or Channel-Row, he carried him back in the Afternoon; he had
a light Wigg. He, the Witness, has carried Wood from Scriber's House, from the
Person that went by the Name of the Lady Bateman, to the House by the Cockpit;
one Nicola used to receive it into Carts, at the Wool-Stable: This Nicola was,
he supposes, Servant to the Gentleman that lives in that House on the other
side the Cock Pit; he has been at the Door but never in the House; he says he
bought the Wood of the Bargemen, by the Persons Order that was called the Lady
Bateman.

Robert Hemming says, he knew one that lived near the Dyehouse in Fox-hall,
that went by the Name of Lady Bateman; he says, he was Gardner to the House
near two Years since, after Midsummer next will be three Years; he knows not
the Lady otherwise than by the name of Lady Bateman; he has seen Gentlemen
come there, but he knows not their Names; he knew her Servant Goodman; Mr
Knolles, that waited on the Lady, and was chief Gardner, paid him his wages; he
knew Goodman by no other Name.

John Reynolds says, that he saw the Lady that went by the name of Madam
Bateman several times walking in her Garden, living concealed; that is, she
lived privately, and had but little Conversation amongst her Neighbors. The
sixth of November last, being invited to dine at a Friends at Westminster, he
met between the Lord Peterborough's and the Ferry, a Lady whom he believed was
the same Lady Bateman; and because he would not be under a mistake, he inquired
of one that followed her, and he told him, it was the Duchess of Norfolk; his
business is at the next door to Scriber's house; he has seen a Gentleman walk
with the Lady in the Garden, that his, the Witnesses Servants have told him,
was Mr. German, he has known the Lady live in that place above two Years and
half. He knew Goodman, that lived there, who now goes by the Name of Keymer.

Margaret Foster says, she knows one Nichola, he is Mr. Germaine's Gentleman,
that lives next house to the Cockpit. Mr German has lived there two Years;
her Husband was his Coachman; it is the Royal Cock pit in Park-street, or
Cartret-street; Mr. German sent for her on Sunday Fortnight, to enquire for
her Husband, who, he told her, was a Witness against him; and his Brother (who
was present) told her, that his Brother did not send for her to bribe her, but
to tell her Husband he should not forswear himself, for there was a Pillory.

Observations upon the Depositions of Peter Scriber, Andrew Anderson, Robert
Hemming, John Reynolds, and Margaret Foster.
THese Testimonies are all Foreign to the Charge against the Duchess; her
Graces being at Fox-hall, and the going under borrowed Names, is all
acknowledged, and the Reasons already given; besides the mistakes in them are
so few and trivial, that it is not worth the while to detect them.

Jane Wadsworth Examined on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the
Duchess.
JAne Wadsworth says, that she sold drink, and going into Mr. Germane's House,
a little before the King went into Ireland, for a Pint Pot, she saw a Dutch
Woman, who bid her go up Stairs for it; and going up for it, she met the
Duchess of Norfolk in a Nightgown, one side lapt over the other side-with
Flanders-lac'd Night-Cloaths on her Head, without a Hood on: About two Hours
after, Herman, Footman to German, came into her House and she saying to him,
you have got the Duchess of Norfolk at your House, he said, no Duchess of
Norfolk: I said it was she, for I had seen her some Hundreds of times: He said,
it was his Master's Lady, and his Master's Duchess, no Duchess of Norfolk;
why should not my Master have a Duchess as well at the Duke of Norfolk? She
has known Mr. German three Years next Midsummer, having lived there so long.
Herman enquiring where I saw her, I said upon the Stairs: he told me, I should
not have gone up the Stairs; I told him, the Dutch-Woman bid me go up, It was
about Eleven a Clock in the day time that she saw her: He bid me say no more of
it, for if his Master knew it, he would kill the Dutch-woman. She saw Welsh
Frank, about two Months since, deliver a Letter to Mr. German, and she has
seen her go to the House often; she has known the Duchess ever since, and
before she was married.

Frances Knight (examined before for the Duchess) being called in, the Witness
says, this is the Woman that was called Welsh Frank, whom she has often seen
at Mr. Germaine's; she saw her, about the time the King came home from
Flanders, give another Letter to Mr. Nicola, Mr. Germaine's Gentleman.

Witnesses produced by the Duke of Norfolk, to speak to the Credit of Jane
Wadsworth.
JOhn Prince says, he has known Jane Wadsworth Twelve Years, to be a go^d
honest poor Woman, and of good Reputation to the best of his Knowledge; and
that she takes care to maintain her Family; he believes her to be an honest
Woman, and that she would not take a false Oath; he knew her at the
Horse-ferry, and in Cartret-street.

Emery Arguies says, that he has known Jane Wadsworth 13 or 14 years, he
never knew her but of as good Reputation as any in the Parish; she is Poor, but
he believes, she would not take a false Oath.

Robert Elmes says, that he has known Jane Wadsworth 12 or 13 years, he
thinks her a very honest Woman, he never heard but she was an honest Poor
Woman, that endeavored to live, and maintain her Family, she is of good
Reputation.

Charles Read says, he has known Jane Wadsworth 12 years and something
better, he never knew her do an ill thing, (...) was always a careful
industrious Woman; he has known (...) married all that time, and she never was
a Servant in the time.

Henry Dagley Senior says, that he has known Jane Wadsworth 16 or 17 years,
she was always a very Civil Woman, and he never heard other by her.

Witnesses Sworn on the behalf of the Duchess of Norfolk, to the Invalidating
the Testimony of Jane Wad^ worth.
GRace Cook says, that she knows Jane Wadsworth, she has lived near her Four
Years; she came into the Witness House with a Paper in her Hand, and asked
her, who let it, saying, she knew no hing of it; she said, that she had said
that she had seen the Duchess of Norfolk in Mr. Germaine's House, but she had
not seen her a great while, and now that she had seen her, she was satisfied,
that it was not her; and she wished, that she might burn in the Fire, and never
go hom^ to her Children, if she would take her Oath of it. The Pape^ was to
warn her to this House; it was the first Night the Papers came out, that she
said this, Hosea Grimsly, John Hal^ and Margaret Coudy were present when she
said this; she says, she lives next Door but one to Jane Wadsworth.

John Hall says, that he has known Jane Wadsworth above a year; about a
Fort-night since she came into Mrs. Gook's, with an Order in her hand, but knew
not who left it; and said, she could say nothing to it, Mrs. Cook saying
again, you must say something to it, else you had not had this Order from the
House; then she said, she had been at the Duke of Norfolk's and had told the
Duke, that she chanced to go into Captain Germaine's House for a Pint Pot, and
she chanced to see the Duchess of Norfolk; but she said she might be mistaken,
for she had not seen her in seven years before, but she had seen her once or
twice since she came out of France, and that was none of the Duchess of
Norfolk which she saw on Captain Germaine's Stairs; whereupon Hosea Grimsly
asking her, if she were sure is was not she, she said, she was sure it was not
she wishing that she might burn, and never go home to he Children, if she would
swear it, for she could not swear it Hosea Grimsly, Grace Cook, and two other
Women, were present in Grace Cook's House, when this discourse happened, which
was the very Night the Order came out: He says, he wrough^ in Mr. Germaine's
House, he saw twice or thrice Ladies ther^ in Masks; one of the Ladies in the
Mask, gave Order to tak^ down a Partition; she was reported to be Captain
German Sister.

Margaret Coudy says, she knows Jane Wadsworth, who cam^ into Mrs. Cook's the
first time she was subpoena'd, and asked who left the Paper in her Hand for
her; she said, she we^^ to Mr. Germaine's for a Pot, and she thought she saw
the Duchess of Norfolk there; but she saw her since her coming from France,
and was satisfied it was not her, and wished she mig^^ never see her Children,
and burn, if ever she saw her there.

Alexander Herman says, that he knows Jane [Wads^^^ well, he never had any
Discourse with her concerning (...) Duchess of Norfolks being in Mr.
Germaine's House; he sa^ he has drank often at Wadsworth's House, but he never
ha^ny Discourse with her concerning the Duchess of Norfolk, (...) (...) this
Woman in his Masters House in all his life: He (...) his Master at Table, and
in his Chamber, all the (...) of his Service, which was a Year and half; he
never saw (...) ^^dy in a Mask in his Masters House.

Mary Pennington says, that she knows Jane Wadsworth, she was her Servant, but
not long, for she was not honest. She, the Witness, being gone out, at her
return, she met her going away with her, the Witness's Linen and her Husbands,
bundled up; this is about Eleven Years since.

Frances Knight says, that she knows not Jane Wadsworth, nor never discoursed
with her, nor never saw her at Mr. Germaine's House, nor did the Witness ever
carry any Letters thither.

Witnesses examined on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, against the Credit of
John Hall.
HEnry Dagley, Jun. says, that he knows John Hall, he was a Workman at Mr.
Germaine's, when he, the Witness, wrought there; and Hall has often said to
him, that he believed it was the Duchess of Norfolk that was there in the
mask, and that gave him Directions in his Work there; this was at Mr.
Germaine's House in Park-street: He could not affirm it to be true, because she
was masked, but really believed it.

John Hoskins says, that John Hall was employed by Mr. German, and a Lady
that was masked; the Lady was the first that ever showed him his work, what he
was to do: And the first work he did was to take do^^ (...) talking amongst our
selves, that it was the Dutc^^^ (...); John Hall has said that that Lady was
the Duchess of (...), not that he could say so of his own Knowledge, but that
^^^^ath been often told it was so; he says that Hall told him, the day he, the
said Hall, was examined here, that if he had been asked more he could have said
more.

Observations upon the foregoing Evidence.
JAne Wadsworth swears, she saw the Duchess at Mr. Germaine's, and what
Discourse she had afterward with Herman, Mr. Germaine's Footman, and that a
Dutch-woman sent her up Stairs for a Pint Pot, by which Accident she saw the
Duchess; she says also, that she saw Welsh Frank deliver a Letter to Mr.
German; Frances Knight being produced Wadsworth swears that is the Woman that
was called Welsh Frank, and that she saw her give another Letter once to Mr.
Nichola, Mr. Germans Gentleman; there are also four Witnesses produced for
her Credit, that say they know no Ill by her.

But then Grace Cook on the other hand swears, that Jane Wadsworth told her,
that she thought she had seen the Duchess at Mr. Germans, but was now
satisfied that it was not she, and cursed her self, and her Children, if she
would take her Oath that it was the Duchess: This was upon her receiving a
Subpoena, to appear and give Evidence; Hosea Grimsley, John ^all and Margaret
Condy were present at this discourse.

John Hall swears, that she said that she saw the Duchess ^f Norfolk at
Captain Germans, but upon a further sight of (...), she finds she was
mistaken.

Hosea Grimsly swears to the discourse, the very words of (...) Curse, and the
Persons that were in Company; all agreeing with the Depositions of Grace Cook:
Margaret Condy swears (...) the very same Particulars.

Alexander Herman deposes, that he never saw Wadswo^^ his Masters House, nor
ever had any Discourse with her (...) ^^cerning the Duchess; and he being a
Person turned away (...) disgrace from his Master, would have made no scruple
to pu^^lish any Secret of that kind, at least to swear the truth wh^^ upon his
Oath.

Mary Pennington says, that Jane Wadsworth was her Servant a while, but was not
honest, and that she had filched some of hers and her Husbands Linen, and was
going away with it.

Frances Knight denies the Knowledge of Wadsworth, or any discourse with her;
she never saw her at Mr. Germans, nor ever carried any Letters thither.

But here are two Witnesses brought in now to Arraign the Credit of John Hall,
which is as much as to say that they had no Exceptions to any of the rest, or,
which is all one, to the truth of the matter; for John Halls Evidence is by
them confirmed over and over: And what is it that these two Witnesses have to
say at last? Henry Dagler says, that he believed it was the Duchess he saw at
Mr. Germaine's, but could not affirm it. And John Hoskins says, that they said
it was the Duchess, but he could not speak it of his own Knowledge, which
amounts to no more than a bare Hearsay.

Witnesses Sworn on the behalf of the Duchess of Norfolk, intimating a seeming
Reconciliation.
MRs. Judith Stourton says, that she was Servant to the Duchess of Norfolk,
when the Report was of the Duchess and Mr. German, which was about a week
before the Duke and Duchess went to France; she was asked by the Lord
Peterborow in the presence of the Duke of Norsolk, in the Dukes House in St.
James's Square (where they shut the door) as she would Answer it to the Face of
Almighty God, if she did know whether his daughter was an Adultress: Her Answer
was, that as she hoped to see God in Heaven, the Duchess was as Virtuous as
any Woman alive, for ought she knew; she says, that what she then said, is
true; and if she should pretend to say more, she should wrong her: She says,
that no one was present besides the Lord Peterborow and the Duke, when they
examined her; and that she saw no Shirt or Wastcoat at that time; and that she
does not remember, she said to Mrs. Webb any thing concerning the Duchess and
Mr. German, and thinks she never spoke with Mrs. Webb; and she was not at
Windsor when the Duke was at Portsmouth; she says, there was a Report of
Scandals which she was sorry for.

Edith Sawbridge and Webb, produced on the behalf of the Duke of Norfolk, to
discredit the Testimony of Mrs. Stourton.
EDith Sawbridge says, that the Tuesday following, this unhappy Discourse
concerning the Duchess of Norfolk; Mrs. Stourton came into her Chamber, and
she telling her what had happened at Windsor, Mrs. Stourton replied, this is
nothing but what she expected before now; the Witness replied, that if she the
Witness had been as near the Duchess, as the said Mrs. Stourton, she would
have prevented all this, to which Mrs. Stourton answered would you have had me
whipped at the Carts-^^^^. The discourse we had was, that Mrs. Knifton told her
^^en I came from London on Friday Night, that she told me ^^e was glad I was
come, for she expected her Throat to be (...) ^very Night, since my Lord Duke*
went to Portsmouth; I (...) her the Reason of her fear, she answered, German
had (...) with my Lady Duchess, ever since my Lord Duke ^^nt to Portsmouth;
that when he came home he would hear of it, and he would kick her for a Baud;
and if she should tell my Lord, German would cut her Throat; I bid her have a
care what she said, for these were dangerous words; how can you prove this? she
said, it was very true; the Witness asking her (Mrs. Knifton) how she knew
this? she said, German, instead of going home, went into the Closet: The
Witness cannot say, that she said all this to Mrs. Stourton, but the greatest
part she did say, Mrs. Stourton said, this was nothing but what she expected
before: This was the Tuesday after my Lord Duke came from Portsmouth; this was
about Bartholomewtide, in the first year of King James's Reign.

Mrs. Stourton called in, to confront this Edith Sawbride, and Examined.
MRs. Judith Stourton says, that she saw Mrs. Sawbridge once in the Dukes
House in St. James's Square, and they talked of the Slander of German and the
Duchess of Norfolk; she says, she the Witness, never heard Mrs. ^awbridge
say, that Mrs. Knifton should say, that German lay with the Duchess every
night at Windsor; she denies, that she said to Mrs. Sawbridge, that she
expected to hear that before now; she never said to Mrs. Sawbridge, Would you
have me whipped at the Carts-arse; she says, she remembers not that Mrs.
Sawbridge told her, that Mrs. Knifton said, that she was afraid that her Throat
would have been cut, when the Duke was at Portsmouth; she remembers not, that
she asked Mrs. Sawbridge the reason of Mrs. Kniftons fear, or that she told her
any thing of Mrs. Kniftons saying, that German had lain with my Lady every
night at Windsor; she saw Mrs. Sawbridge, and discoursed with her, but she
cannot say what discourse she had with her.

Mrs. Eliz. Camel says, that she went with the Duke and Duchess of Norfolk
into France; they went together very lovingly, and parted so; she thinks the
Duke staid with her about a fortnight; the Dukes Eye was ill, and my Lady went
often to him; and when she did so, we retired; my Lady dressed his Eye, they eat
and drank together every day, they did not lodge together that she knows; my
Lord told her at parting at the Grate in the Monastery, that he would fetch her
away suddenly, and they parted kindly; Mrs. Lawson was in the Monastery with
the Duchess; the Witness continued there about seventeen months; my Lord
expressed a great deal of kindness to my Lady in going, and while he was there;
there were Tears on both sides at parting: When my Lord and Lady were together
in the House called L'Hotel de Terrau at Paris, we used to withdraw, not
knowing what they had to say together.

Mr. Matthew Scott says, that he paid several Sums to the Duchess, from the
Duke; in May 1688. he paid 125 l. for the Duchess, to Mr. Cragg; he paid 2 or
300 l. in France, when the Duke and Duchess were there; he cannot say, that he
remitted any money into France, after the Duke came home; he knows not that any
money (...) paid to Mr. (...) ^^dy by the Dukes Order.

Mr. Robert Welborne says, that about the middle (...) ^^^^ber last, the Duke
of Norfolk sent for him by Mr. S^ot, (...) his Grace in his Room, by the Lords
House, which acc^^^ingly he did; his Grace told him, there had been some
me^^^ges and proposals, by Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir Robert H^war^* but he
looked on them both to be men of great Business, and could not attend on such
Matters, and therefore he sent for him, knowing him to be willing, to do any
Services between them. The first thing his Grace desired, was to acquaint his
Wife, and the Lady Peterborow, and he thinks he Named the Lord Peterborow, that
he expected to be Indemnified from the Dutchess's Equipage; for, says he, I
hear she is setting up for a great Equipage, and I desire to be free from being
obliged to pay for any of that; he told his Grace, that he thought he was
misinformed, for all the Equipage he saw, was a Coach, Coachman, two Footmen,
a pair of Horses, and two or three more Servants; but, says his Grace, I
formerly paid Money for her, to one Mourton, and should be unwilling to do so
again; I presume my Lord Duke, said he, that was a Debt contracted, while your
Grace and the Duchess lived together; but says his Grace, pray do you acquaint
them of it, for this is what I expect.

Next, says his Grace, my Wife has some pretensions upon Castle-Rising, which I
could Sell without her Consent, by losing Two Thousand, or Two Thousand Five
Hundred Pounds; and besides, I find she has also a pretention upon Billing,
which I never knew till very lately, when I was upon selling of that Reversion;
but, I should have been an ill man, to pretend to do that if I had known of any
such Encumbrance. Therefore, I would have you tell my Wife, that if she will
consent to the Sale of those Estates, and make me easy in that particular; let
her consider, wherein I may make her easy, and I shall do it: I know she was a
great Lover of Drayton, and I suppose is so still; and she did once offer me a
considerable Sum of Money for my Life in it; therefore let her consider of this
matter, and if she can propose any thing for her ease and quiet, on these
Terms, I shall comply with her.

I do not say to threaten her: But I am told, that for the Reason of there
being either One and Twenty, or Two and Twenty Catholic Heirs of my Family
before One Protestant One; if I would bring in a Bill of Divorce, I should
obtain it on that account; he told his Grace he should be sorry to hear of any
such thing: But in Obedience to his Grace's Commands, he would acquaint the
Duchess with it; accordingly he did, the same day, and Lady Peterborow both:
her Grace was very angry at the message, especially at that part that mentioned
a Divorce; and he was sent the next morning to Mr. Scott, to desire him to
acquaint the Duke, that as he was my Lord Peterborow's Servant, it was not fit
for him to receive nor bring such messages. But if his Grace had any thing to
say, it was most proper, by a Servant of his own, or to send for one of hers. I
carried the message the next morning to Mr. Scott, and at my return home, the
Duchess showed me a Letter she had Writ to the Duke, to the same purpose, and
which was sent to his Grace, but not by him; the Duchess did declare, when he
proposed the Sale of Castle-Rising and Billing, as the Duke had desired, that
she would never Consent to it. By any of this Discourse it di^ not appear to
him, that the Duke showed any Inclinations to live with the Duchess, nor did
he understand it so.

(...) Judith Stour^^^ (...) Sawbridge, ^^^^^beth Camel, Mr. ^^thew Scott, and
Mr. Robert Welborne.
THE Reader will find this Discourse about Mr. German and the Duchess, to be
a Scandal of a matter of, Six ^ears standing; Hudson, a Cast Footman, has sworn
to the Shirt and Wastcoat, and that he immediately told my Lord of ^t. Ann
Burton swears likewise (with another false Oath beween her Teeth) that this
Shirt and Wastecoat were sent by ^he Duke to the Lord Peterborows. It follows
now to be noted, what course has been taken from the First to the Last, for a
thorough Discovering of the Truth of this matter, and how it comes to pass that
the Thunderbolt should hang in the Air, so many Years, after the Breaking of
the Cloud.

Mrs. Stourton is here upon her double Oath, first under the Shrift of the Duke
and my Lord Peterborow, who took her privately and Adjured her, as ever she
hoped to see God in Heaven, to declare what she knew as to the Duchess being
an Adultress, she purged her self upon her hopes of Salvation, that the
Duchess was as Virtuous as any Woman alive for ought she knew; she swore the
same thing over again at the Bar of the House of Lords; and being Interrogated
about the Shirt and Wastcoat before spoken of, she swore likewise, that she saw
no Shirt or Wastcoat at that time.

Edith Sawbridge was now produced against the Credit of Mrs. Judith Stourton,
and lays the stress of her Evidence upon what Mrs. Knifton said, which has been
the very Pinch of the Question throughout the whole Cause, and the Prosecution
has still been at a Fault when it came to any material Point; that is to say,
only the Hearsay Witnesses are produced, and those that can speak upon
knowledge, and positively to the Fact, are withdrawn, or concealed, contrary to
the Practice and Reason of all Judicial Proceedings.

Mrs. Stourton is called in again to confront Edith Sawbridge, and denies every
Article in her Deposition, one by one, that is of any moment; but at the same
time there appears no Exception, on the other hand, to the Credit of Mrs.
Stourton: Neither is it to be imagined, that any woman should dare to swear
false, in a Case where two such Witnesses should be privy to the Perjury.

It follows now to be noted, what Course has been taken for a thorough
Discovery of this Intrigue, according to the usual Methods of Honor and
Justice. The Examination of Mrs. Stourton by the Duke and my Lord Peterborow,
was as solemn, strict and private as the Case required; and it was while the
Clamor was fresh too: So that there was no time lost when they entered upon
the Scrutiny. It will be seen in that which follows, by what degrees the Heat
of this Calumny cooled, and what brought it on again.

The Duke and Duchess went for France together, about a Week after the
Breaking out of this Clamor, and Elizabeth Camel waited upon the Duchess; who
swears, that they went lovingly together, and parted with Tears on both sides;
my Lord telling her Grace at Parting, that he would fetch her away suddenly.
They eat and drunk together every Day, and were frequently together in private;
but she cannot say they ^odg'd together. So that thus far, in all outward
Appearance, the Misunderstanding ^e^^ed in some measure to be com^^^^^

Mr. Scot speaks only to the matter of Moneys, and Accoun^^ which is little or
nothing to the purpose in this place, except only as to the One Hundred Twenty
and Five Pounds, mentioned to be paid by him, for the Dutchess's use; which was
a Quarterly Payment out of Five Hundred Pounds per Annum, adjudged and ordered
by the High Commission Court to be paid to her, in lieu of Almony.

But Mr. Robert Welborne comes to the very Merits of the Cause, and the present
State of the Question. He deposes, that in November last the Duke sent for him,
and told him (among other things by the by) that the Duchess had some
Pretentions upon Castle-Rising, and also upon Billing; and thereupon ordered
the Witness to give her Grace to understand, that if she would consent to the
Sale of those Estates, and make the Duke easy in that particular, let her but
consider wherein he himself might make the Duchess easy too, and upon those
Terms he would do it.

His Grace told the Witness farther, that here being One or Two and Twenty
Catholic Heirs to the Family, before one Protestant Heir, if (says his Grace)
I would bring a Bill of Divorce, (I do not say it to threaten her) I could
obtain it on that Account. The Witness acquainted both the Duchess and the
Lady Peterborow, the very same day with the substance of this message, her
Grace taking it very heinously to be told of a divorce; and the next day the
Duchess showed the Witness a Letter she wrote to the Duke upon this Occasion;
declaring, that for Castle-Rising and Billing, she would never part with them.

It appears from hence, that upon the Examination of ^rs. Stourton, and other
necessary Enquiries into the ground of this Scandal, the violence of the first
Impression was so far taken off, that according to the Evidence of Elizabeth
Camel, m^ Lord was pleased to treat the Duchess with all Instances of
Tenderness and Respect, both upon their passage into France, and upon the
Places there, those of the Bed only excepted. In this state matters have
continued some five or six Years now, without any Speech or Thought of a
Divorce, that ever the Duchess heard of till Mid- November last, in a message
by Mr. Wellborne from the Duke, and that was but upon a certain condition
neither, however it was improved afterward into a Bi^l, that upon the seventh
of January following was formally brought into the Lords House.

The Reader will need no other Light to a true understanding of the strait her
Grace was in, upon this Surprise, and the disadvantages she was exposed to,
than what he has here before him, in the Order of the Journal it self: Where he
will find the Duchess so scanted for time to produce Witnesses, and prepare
her defense, that it was a wonderful Pro idence she should do so much as she
did. Though in the mean while, her Grace has lost the benefit of several
considerable Witnesses, for want of time to find them out, and bring them
together. Now as for Mr. Wellborne's Deposition, it carries the Countenance
rather of a Treaty than an Accusation; the Duke's part is only a calm
deliberate discourse, consulting the Reciprocal Ease both of himself and of the
Duchess. Terms are proposed and promised, and not one Word or Glance of
Reproach from one end to the other of it. Mr. Welborne (upon the Duke's asking
him, at the Lords Bar, if by his discourse he understood an Inclination to live
with the Duchess) it is true, did not gather from his words, as if he had any
thought of living with her; the only hard thing sai^* ^^s t^a^ about his
Catholic Heirs, which seemed to turn the ^^se of Adultery into a Case of
Religion. Let any Creature judge now, whether the Duchess durst to have stood
it out thus, if she had been guilty of so foul a Crime, when she might have
been safe and free, as appears by the Proposal, upon Terms so much more easy.

To make a short Summary now of the Whole, a Word first to the Character and
Quality of the Witnesses.

There is Owen, a Street-Porter, brought in as a Witness to the Privacies of
the Dutchess's Bedchamber, besides several unanswerable Exceptions to the
Particulars of his Evidence. There is Ellwood, a Cobler's Wife, and a Jilting
little Slut, that is as palpably detected of Falsity, as the other. Hudson, a
poor Roguy, Tricking Footman, that was turned off for his ill Bahavior. Burton,
a beggarly Wench, that cheated her Landlady, and forswore her self in this
Cause at the Lords Bar: Varelst, a Painter, and by Intervals, a Madman: Foster,
a Coachman that was turned off by his Master, and swore to be revenged of him.
Lloyd, under several manifest mistakes, but nothing to the main Cause. Scriber,
Anderson, Hemming, Reynolds, and Margaret Foster, say not one word to the
purpose: Wadsworth, a pilfering Servant, that robbed her Mistress, and her
Evidence most notoriously exposed.

Now, (...) these (...) of their own Cre^^^ (...) ^^ny'd to have a fa^^ (...)
very extraordinary, (...) their Deposition^ (...) the Prosecutors (...) second
the swear^ng ^^idence: Though it is sufficiently (...) they could have sound them
if they would have ve^^^^ (...) Cause upon that stress. It is to be considered
once m^^^ (...) a difference there has been, betwixt the demeanor of the (...)
side and the other, toward the Evidence. What Promi^^^ ^^^^teries, and
engaging Obligations on the one hand, and not (...) as one word or deed,
directly or indirectly, that looked like (...) ^^^ctice or Prepossession on the
other part of the Duchess.

Let this be taken in the softest sense, for it is a great ^^^^^^tune, when
officious Instruments that, are foreward to (...) Scandals, meet with easy and
good natured Disposition^* that are too open perhaps to receive them. This
(...) in same measure, to remove the prejudice of those that (...) wilfully
Deaf and Blind; and for the rest, it is left to (...) and Providence to bring
the Truth to light in its du^ (...) and to vindicate the Cause of the Innocent
and Oppressed.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THat famous Powder, called Arcanum Magnum, formerly prepared by the Learned
Riverius, P^^sician Regent to the French King, and approved by most Persons of
Quality in Christendom, (...) preserving and beautifying the Face; it takes
away all Heat Pimples, Sunburned, and M^^phew. In short, it adds more Luster
and Beauty, than any Powder or Wash known, as many Person^ (...) Quality can
testify, who daily use it with the greatest Approbation; it is prepared only
by J. H. Do^^^ in Physic, in Great Knight Riders-street, near Doctors Commons
gate, a Blew Ball being over the Do^^ where it may be had for 2 s. 6 d. the
Paper, with Directions for the Use.


