A Letter from the Eminent and Learned Monsieur Claude, to the Author.
Monsieur,
I Received your Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles, you were pleased to
send me, and give you a thousand thanks for this share you are so kind as to
afford me in your Remembrance; which I have entertained not only with all due
acknowledgment, but also with much joy, as coming from a Person who is and ever
shall be very dear to me, and for whom I have a most peculiar Esteem. I have
perused your Commentary, tho it came but very lately to my hands, and have
found therein, as in all your other Works, the marks of a Copious Reading,
abundance of Sense, Right Reason, and just and exact Understanding, and I do
not doubt but that this Commentary will be kindly received by the I earned, and
prove very useful to all those who apply themselves to understand the
Scripture. This shows you Monsieur, not idle, and that you manage well the
Talents God has been pleased to bestow upon you. The Public will be very much
obliged to you, if you continue, (as I hope you will, and which I take the
freedom to exhort you to) making it such like Presents. For my own part I find
therein a very great Edification, and with with all my heart it lay in my power
to manifest it to you by effectual services. I beseech you to be persuaded of
this truth, and that you would preserve me the honor of your friendship, which
I shall ever look upon as very much to my advantage. I take my leave, praying
God he would continue to pour upon you his holy Benedictions, and assuring you
that I am,

Monsieur, Paris, April. 15. 1684 Your most humble and most obedient Servant,
CLAUDE.
These for Monsieur Du Veil D.D. Lo^d^^.



A Literal EXPLANATION OF THE ACTS OF THE Holy Apostles.

Written in Latin by C. M. Du Veil, D.D.

Now Translated into English out of a Copy carefully reviewed and corrected by
the Author.

To which is added A Translation of a Learned Dissertation about Baptism for
the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.29. Written in Latin by the Famous Fridericus Spanhemius
Filius.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures.

Theodoret on Ezekiel 16. We must search the Scripture Idioms, else we cannot
attain its scope.

Photius in Biblioth. Cod. 177. Whatsoever it consonant to Right Reason, and
plainly delivered in the Holy Scriptures, that alone is to be approved of.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Malthus at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1685.

The Authors Preface to the Reader.
SAint Luke gives an Account of the most considerable Actions of the Apostles,
especially of Peter and Paul, in that Golden Book of his, which by the Greeks
is commonly called (...), the Acts of the Apostles, by Epiphanius Haer. 30.
(...), the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, Can. 16. Conc. in Trul. (...), the
Books of the Acts of the Apostles, by the Latins (if ye except only Hilarious,
who citing this Book in his Annotations on Matthew, retained the Greek word) it
is called the Acts and Deeds of the Apostles. There is scarce any Book that
treats of the Christian Religion, which so clearly explains the Doctrine of
Truth by Examples that cannot be spoke against, and Truth of History attending
it. And truly there is no other Book save the Apostolic Epistles, that
intermingles these two.

Courteous Reader, I here present thee with a Commentary on this most excellent
Book of Lukes, which plainly unfolds the meaning that is wrapped up in the words,
and that agreeable to the Letter. In composing whereof I have made use of both
what I could find in the Sacred Fountains of the Scriptures, and what I have
taken notice of in searching out those Monuments, which the Hebrew Rabbis and
Fathers of the Churches have left behind them, and what I have observed in
reading over, and carefully examining many and several Writers, as well Ancient
as Modern, and what Talent of Prudence and Knowledge God the Donor of all good
things has bestowed upon me.

In this my Commentary, as in those which I formerly published on Matthew,
Mark, Solomon's Song, Ecclesiastes, and the 12 lesser Prophets, I for the most
part use the Ancient Latin Version of the Scriptures, as being that which I am
best acquainted with: But I always diligently remark what it differs from the
Original Texts, the Hebrew and Greek. I vindicate those places which Heretics
abuse with some pretense, especially Papists, from their abuse and corruption.
I likewise briefly make several profitable Observations out of Philology,
History, Geography and Grammar, where I see it necessary either for the
Confirmation or Explication of this Sacred History of the Acts of the Apostles.
Courteous Reader, if thou meetest with any thing in these my Observations, that
is skilfully spoken; ascribe that, not to me, but to God the Fountain of all
goodness; to me only what my hand has not well penned, and what my mind has not
well conceived. Moreover, if I have erred in any place, as in such cases may
easily happen, I neither stubbornly refuse to profess my Error, nor to be
better instructed. I desire to learn what I am ignorant of, and willingly offer
my self to be a Scholar to any, provided (to use Jeroms phrase) that he
instruct, and do not detract; for there is nothing so easy as for anidle and
lazy person to carp at other men's Labors and Watchings. In the mean while,
Candid Reader, peruse my Writings, such as they are, and join your earnest
prayers to God with mine, that he may make them profitable to his Church; which
when I shall see performed, I shall never repent of my Labors and Studies.

Farewell.
Augustine in his 137 Epistle, otherwise Third, to Volusianus, Proconsul of
Africa, Uncle to Melania the Younger, Numb. 3.
SUch is the depth of the Christian Scripture, that therein I could reap new
advantage every day, if I had given my self over to the study of it alone, from
my very first Childhood even to decrepit Old Age, with the greatest leisure,
earnestest study, and a more happy Genius; not that it is so difficult to
attain to the knowledge of those things that are necessary to Salvation; but
after every man holds his Faith there, without which he cannot live godly and
righteously; there are so many things wrapped up in such multiplicity of Vails,
that are to be understood by Proficients, and there is such depth of Wisdom
couched, not only in the words whereby these things are expressed, but also in
the things that are to be understood, that it fares with the most Aged, the
most Acute, and those that are most desirous of Learning, as the same Scripture
has in a certain place, When a man has done, then he begins.

The same Augustine in the same place, Numb. 18.
THE manner of speaking, whereby the Holy Scripture is connected, how
accessible is it to all, though it be penetrable by very few? Those things
which it contains that are manifest, it speaks as a familiar friend without
sophistication to the hearts of the Unlearned and Learned. And those things
that it hides in Mysteries, it does not raise them up beyond our Capacities by
loftiness of style, so as a Dull and Illiterate Mind dare not approach, as one
that is poor to a Rich person; but it invites all by its low style, whom it may
not only feed by manifest Truth, but also exercise with hidden, having the same
things in what is manifest as in what is hid. But that the things being plain,
might not be loathed, the same things being again hidden, are desired, being
defired, they are in some manner renewed, being renewed, they are delightfully
received. By these both depraved Minds are wholesomly amended, the mean are
nourished, and the great delighted. He only is an Enemy to this Learning, who
either by reason of his mistakes, is ignorant of its soundness, or by reason of
his distemper has an aversation to Medicine.

The Golden Saying of St. Prosper.
REader, tho in the Sacred Books thou long'st to know,
Many things are concealed and hid thee fro;
Yet watch, and still pursue thy good intent,
Gifts that are ^stai'd for move thy Mind, if bent;
That Fruit's more grate which hope drawn out brings forth,
Things easily attained are nothing worth.
Even hidden Mysteries solace the Mind,
Who gave to ask, will further give to find.
THE ACTS OF THE Holy Apostles Literally Explained.
THE Authority of this Book, which is entitled the Acts of the Holy Apostles,
has been denied by Cerinthus, Har. 36.
who lived in those Primitive Times, as Philastrius records; Eas^^. Hist. l. 4.
c. 29.
as also by Tatianus and Severus in the Reign of Marcus Aurelius. For whatever
Book of the New Testament the Heretics thought to be opposite to their own mad
Inventions, that they presently condemned. Hence it was that the Manichaeans
likewise refused to give credit to this Book, because the Author of it writes,
that the Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth promised by Christ, did descend
upon the day of Pentecost, long before Manes, who presumed to call himself the
Holy Ghost promised by Christ, was born. But seeing this Book, Lib. de util.
cr^^. c. 3.
as St. Austin well observes, does contain so many things like those which the
Manichaeans themselves take for granted, and believe to be parts of the Holy
Scriptures, it seems a very great folly, that they do not also believe and
allow its Authority. St. Luke declares himself to be the Author of this Book in
his Proem to the same Theophilus, to whom he makes his Address at the beginning
of his Gospel, and intimates that he had before that time committed to writing
the several Acts of Christ. Epist. ad Faul^^.
Surpassingly well therefore says St. Hierom, The Acts of the Apostles seem to
represent a bare History, and to set forth the Infancy of the growing Church;
but if once we know St. Luke the Physician (whose praise is in the Gospel) to
be the Writer thereof, we shall also find all his words to be the Thysick of a
Languishing Soul. Philostratus, who flourished under Severus Augustus, affords
us a singular Testimony of the Antiquity not only of the Evangelical History in
general, but in particular of the Gospel of St. Luke, and of the Acts of the
Apostles by him written. For he has transcrib^d into his Apollonius many
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles so manifestly out of those Books, that he
has not forborne to make use of the very words themselves, as the most famous
Huetius apparently makes out. Demonstrat. E^ing. Prop. non. c. 147. n^m. 4.
Josephus by Birth a Jew, honored with the Dignity of an Earl, as Epiphanius
witnesses, Haer. 30. which is of the Ebionites, In B^^^oth^e. Sanct.
three hundred and seventy years after Christ's Nativity, as Sixtus Senensis
reports, found at Scythopolis in a private Treasury of the Jews, this Book
which records the most remarkable Acts of the Apostles, translated out of Greek
into Hebrew, together with the Gospel of St. Matthew, written with his own hand
in the Hebrew Language, and the Gospel of St. John translated likewise out of
Greek into the same Language.

This Golden Book quite through displays the singular Providence of God in
gathering together to himself, and preserving his Church. It opens and explains
what was the Beginning and Rise of the Christian Religion, after what manner
the Apostles began the Preaching of the Gospel; how strenuously and
courageously a few obscure, unarmed and contemptible persons opposed by the
power of the whole World, while all the Potentates of those Ages employed their
Forces to oppress the Gospel, relying only upon the Assistance of the Spirit
and Truth, indefatigably defended the Faith of Christ, refusing no Labors, nor
Dangers, but combating with an unshaken constancy against all opposition, till
at length they became Victors, and the Power of God magnificently triumphed
over all the Pride of the Earth, under the Ignominy of the Cross. The Chapters
of this Book are twenty eight; the principal parts are four. The first of which
in the first eight Chapters, sets down the Original and Progress of the New
Testament-Church among the Jews. The next from the ninth to the sixteenth,
declares how greatly the Church was multiplied and propagated among the
Gentiles. The third part from the sixteenth to the twentieth, relates the
several Travels and Voyages of St. Paul, to his very last Journey to Jerusalem.
The last, from the twentieth to the end, gives an account with what
perseverance St. Paul endured a thousand Troubles, Hardships and Indignities;
with what patience he surmounted the raging Floods of Persecution; and lastly,
how mildly, and with what an equal temper he carried himself in the midst of
all manner of Calumnies and Reproaches, and all sorts of Miseries.

CHAP. I.
1. THE Former. The Evangelist St. Luke makes this Introduction as he passes
from the History of the Gospel, comprehending the Sayings and Acts of Christ,
to the Acts of the Apostles. Now, whereas the Vulgar Latin Interpreter
rendering here the Positive (...), has used the Superlative First, instead of
the Comparative Former, the words having relation to Lukes former Book which he
had published before: he has been therein followed by Beza, who justifies
himself by the Authority of Cicero, who in his second Book of Invention, citing
his former, calls it his first. c. 1. v. 15. and 30 c. 15. v. 18. and Epist. 1.
c. 4. v. 19.
You shall also find the Prositive, (...) used for the Comparative, former, by
St. John in his Gospel.

Discourse have I made. This is a Graecism; as much as to say, The former Book
have I made. Thus in Lucian, The first Discourse of the true History, is the
first Book. And Galen calls his seventh Book his seventh Discourse.

Of all. But not setting down all things. For though a person might discourse
of the Works and Doctrine of Christ to a considerable extent, yet to set down
the whole series of what he said and did, so as to make a full Narration, was
an undertaking of that prodigious Labor, that St. John in his Gospel tells us,
cap. 21. v. 25.
the World would not contain the Books.

O Theophilus. This Theophilus to whom St. Luke dedicates his Gospel also,
seems to many to have been a person in high Dignity. Luke 1.3.
For the Title attributed to him of most Excellent, not wont to be given but
only to Princes, and Persons in great Authority, does plainly demonstrate, as
they allege, that it was the proper name of some Noble Personage. The Author
of the Books of Recognitions under the name of Clement the first of that name
Bishop of Rome, says, l 10 near the end.
that this Theophilus was one of the principal Men of Antiochia, who being
converted by St. Peter to the Faith of Christ, Argum. in Luc.
set apart his Houses for the public and solemn Meetings of the Church.
Theophylactus calls this Theophilus, a Consular Person, and perhaps a Prince.
In prolog. in Matt. q. 21.
A certain author cited by Abulensis, conjectures this Theophilus Prince of
Antiochia, to have been, after the departure of Peter, Bishop of that City; and
that upon his persuasion and encouragement, both the Gospel, and the Acts of
the Apostles were written by St. Luke. Grotius believes him to have been the
chief Magistrate of some City in Achaia, and baptized by Luke. But though the
Additional most Excellent, which by several Writers is frequently given to
persons in high Authority; as for example, c. 23. v. 26. etc. 26. v. 25 in fin.
vit. su^e
by Paul to both the Procurators or Vice-Governours of Judaea, Felix and
Festus; and by Josephus to Epaphroditus, to whom he dedicates the History of
his Life, and by Justin Martyr to Diognetus to whom he writes a Compendium of
the Christian Religion; yet it does not seem to be a Note of Dignity in
Theophilus, in regard it does not appear likely that St. Luke would have
omitted to have given the same Addition to Theophilus, while he recommends to
him his Acts of the Apostles, had it been a Title of Dignity. Ho^. 1. in Luc.
Ia Luc. 1. Haer. 51.
Origin therefore, St. Ambrose and Epiphanius believe it more probable, that
Theophilus was an Appellative made use of by St. Luke, In Luc. 1.
as belonging to all that professed the Christian Religion out of a sincere
love of God. Nor ought it, says Camero, to be thought a thing out of practice,
seeing that Athanasius uses the same sort of Compellation. For in his Book of
the Incarnation, he gives the Titles of Happy, and Friend of Christ, and
sometimes both together, without distinction, to every pious and true Christian.

Which Jesus began to do and teach. That is, which make to the whole of our
Salvation from the beginning of the Works and Doctrine of Christ. Learnedly the
Greek Scholiast observes, that Luke wrote of all things from the beginning,
till Jesus was translated into Heaven. Of which St. Chrysostom takes notice
also, where he says that Luke wrote, not simply of all things, but of all
things from the beginning to the end. And this is that which St. v. 3.
Luke himself says in the Preface to his Gospel, That be had perfect
understanding of all things from the very beginning: That is, what Christ,
powerful both in deed and word, both taught and acted most remarkable while he
conversed upon Earth. Others will have these words, Which Jesus began to do and
teach, to be understood according to an usual Hebrew phrase, which Jesus did
and taught. Most excellently therefore Calvin, Now, says he, we see the sum of
the Gospel contained in these two parts, the Doctrine and deeds of Christ. For
as much as he not only performed the duty of that Embassy, for which he was
sent by the Father to Men, but effectually discharged whatever could be
required from the Messiah. He laid the Foundations of his Kingdom, he atton'd
the wrath of God by offering himself, he expiated the sins of men with his own
Blood, he overcame Death and the Devil; he restored us to our true Liberty and
acquired for us Justice and Life Eternal. And that every thing that he said or
did, might be ratified among Mankind, he proved himself to be the Son of God by
his Miracles.

2. Until the day. That is, until the 14th day of our May, according to Bishop
Usher.

In which time giving commandment. As if he had said, Upon which day, after he
had dictated to his Apostles by him elected, lest they should deliver any thing
but what was truly Divine, through the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, what they
should Teach and Preach, he was taken up into Heaven. The Apostles, says the
Learned John Lightfoot, had cast out Devils, and had healed the Sick, by the
Assistance of the Spirit, but it is to be doubted, whether they had taught any
thing which they had not heard verbatim from the lips of their Master. He had
promised 'em that they should bind and let loose the Law of Moses; he had told
em that there were several things to be revealed to 'em, which they could not
bear, in which they should be instructed by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.
Therefore when he arose, and had breathed upon their faces, saying, John 20.22.
Receive the Holy Ghost, then they were inspired with the Holy Spirit, like the
Prophets of old, who dictated to them what they should Preach, what they should
require, and what they should enjoy^. And now they wanted nothing but the gift
of Tongues, that they might be able to deliver what was dictated to them in the
proper Languages of those to whom they should speak.

Which he had chosen. That is, whom he created his Messengers, to publish the
Doctrine of the Gospel two years before he suffered, over all Judaea, and after
his Resurrection, over all the world. Luke 6.13.
These Messengers Christ called his Apostles, or Envoys. Thus formerly the
Emperors of the East, and Popes, called their Legate; Envoys, as is frequently
apparent from Anastasius the Bibliothecarian, and others.

He was taken up. That is, by the Interposition of a Cloud he was taken from
the sight of men, as is said below, v. 9.

3. To whom, etc. As if he had said, And that the Apostles might be most
credible and substantial Witnesses of the Resurrection of Christ, upon the
Truth of which is founded all the Majesty of the Gospel, he being restored from
the Grave, by most solid and uncontrovertible Arguments proved himself to be
truly risen from the dead, as often as he showed himself visible to his
Apostles, during the forty days, between his Resurrection and Ascension; and
discoursed with them concerning the Kingdom of God.

He showed himself alive. That is, ocularly proved himself to be risen.

After his Passion. That is, after he had been put to a most ignominious Death,
for the sake of our Salvation.

By many Proofs. An Hebraism; that is, by many evident signs, that had the
force of a most powerful and irresistible Proof. The Greek calls Theses proofs,
(...), which word signifies, says Beza, as Quintilian affirms out of
Aristotle, l. 5. c. 9.
signs necessary and indubitable, as these actions, speaking, walking, eating,
drinking, are undoubted signs of life; To appear publicly in sight, and to be
felt by the Hands, are certain signs of a real natural Body. Also the wounds of
the hands, feet and side, were indubitable signs that the same Body rose, that
was crucified and Pierced with the Lance. The Blood and Water flowing from his
wounded side, was for a certainty a sign of the parts about the heart being
wounded, and of Death. These were therefore the signs by which St. Luke affirms
that Christ confirmed his Resurrection; of which he treats more fully in his
Gospel.

Being seen. Often and long together. For it was but necessary that Christ, in
regard of the infirmity of his Disciples, should converse with them both
frequently, and for a good while together, to the end they might have a full
assurance of his Resurrection. For we know how difficultly they were induced to
believe it; and how at first, when he appeared to them, they thought it only a
delusion of the sight, and that it had been only some Apparition, that deceived
them.

And speaking of the Kingdom of God. That is, of the Spiritual Kingdom, the
possession of which Christ was to take upon his ascent into Heaven. The
Apostles were as yet but ignorant in many points of Faith, which before the
suffering of Christ, being blinded by their own prejudices, they could not
sufficiently apprehend, tho they had frequently heard them from his mouth.
Therefore after his Resurrection, he delayed his Ascension forty days, and took
in that Interval as much time, as he thought to be sufficient to instruct his
Disciples in what was necessary for them to know, to the end they might the
more faithfully perform the Function which they were to undertake.

4. And being assembled together. The Greek word is, using one common Table, or
eating the same Salt and Meat together. Whence the Proverb, To have eaten many
Bushels of Salt with any one, is the same thing as to have had long converse
with any one. In his Critica Sacra.
Says the most Learned Sir Edward Leigh, There are some that endeavor to prove
by Examples, that the Greek word signifies properly the rallying of Soldiers
dispersed in pursuit after a Battle won: Or as when a Shepherd gathers his
scattered Sheep into one Fold. Which significations agree very exactly to the
sense of this place, because Christ does recollect his Disciples dispersed like
scattered Sheep, and gave them Instructions for the Spiritual Warfare which
they were to undergo. The same Author in the same place affirms the Greek word
to be a Military word, and to signify the pitching of the Victor Captain in
the Field of Battle. The most Learned Lightfoot deduces the word (...), not
from Hals, which signifies Salt, but from Halia, which signifies an Assembled
Congregation. But whereas Christ after his Resurrection never appeared to his
Disciples, but of a sudden, and when he was least expected, Mat. 28.6.
but only upon the Mountain of Galilee, where he had appointed a meeting, that
most learned man refers this verse to that meeting, as if this were the sense
of the words; Jesus a little before his ascent into Heaven being met in an
Assembly of five hundred of the Brethren upon the Mountain of Galilee according
to his own appointment, 1. Cor. 15.6.
finding his Disciples not willing to return to Jerusalem, still as it were
reaking with his Blood, without his express order, he commanded them to repair
thither forthwith, and not to stir from thence, until they had received the
Holy Ghost according to his promise.

They should wait for the promise of the Father. Esa. 44.3. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
and Jod. 2.28.
Thus he calls both here and Luc. 24.49. the gift of the Holy Ghost promised by
the Father to all Believers.

Which, says he, ye have heard from my mouth. As if he had said, The
performance of which promise, I have told you that I will make good to you.
Luc. 24.49.
A passing like to this, from an Oblique to a Direct Speech, is frequent in
History.

5. Because John, etc. As if he had said, Because within a few days ye shall
find by experience, how truly my Forerunner John said formerly, that he
Baptized indeed with Water, but that I would Baptize with the Holy Ghost. See
our Literal Explication on Mat. 3.11.

Shall be Baptized. The Greek word (...), says Casaubon, is to dip or plunge,
as if it were to dye Color. In which Sense the Apostles may be truly said to
have been Baptized. For the House in which this was done, was filled with the
Holy Ghost. So that the Apostles may seem to have been plunged into it, as into
a large Fish Pond. Hence Oecumenius upon Act. 2. v. 2. A Wind filled the whole
House, that it seemed like a Fish Pond; because it was promised to the
Apostles, that they should be Baptized with the Holy Ghost.

Not many days hence. Christ seems as it were to point out with his Finger
those few days between the time wherein he had charged his Disciples not to
stir out of Jerusalem, and the approaching Pentecost.

6. When they therefore were all met. That is, All the Apostles at Jerusalem.

They asked him. When he appeared to them upon the very day of his ascent into
Heaven, as appears out of the 1 Cor. 15.7. Luke 24.50, and 51. compared
together.

Will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom of Israel? That is, Now thou
art again risen from the dead, will thou reign over the Israelites after the
manner of other Kings, and free them from the Yoke of the Heathens? Christ had
really proposed to restore the Kingdom of Israel, but not the Earthly and
Worldly Kingdom, as both now and at other times the Apostles imagined, but by
recalling that People from their incredulity to the knowledge of himself, that
he might rule in the midst of them by the power of his Gospel; Romans 11.25, etc.
which St. Paul foretells shall be; but by reason their minds were clouded with
worldly thoughts, they could not yet understand this Mystery. Christ therefore
contenting himself to restrain their Curiosity as to the point of time, when it
should come to pass, and which it nothing concerned them to know, adds to his
answer, But you shall receive the Power of the Holy Ghost upon you. As if he
had said, That Heavenly Doctor, whom I shall send to you, shall instruct you as
to that which now ye seek from me; that is to say, what that future Restitution
of the Kingdom of Israel shall be, which you expect. Tho as to the time, that
is a secret, which my Father thinks not proper as yet to reveal to you, in
regard that without that Knowledge you may perform the work committed to your
charge. Some are of opinion, that the Kingdom of Israel was then restored by
Christ, when the Church of Christ, which is the Spiritual Israel, began to be
governed by Christian Kings and Princes; such as were three hundred years after
the Birth of Christ Constantine the Great, and several other Emperors; but the
first Interpretation seems to me the best. For tho under those Princes, the
Church rested from Persecution, yet Ambition, Covetousness, and many other
evils got footing in it, so that the Kingdom could not be then truly said
restored to Israel.

It is not your bu^^^ss to know ^^^s, etc. As if he had said, it is not proper
nor expedient for you, acc^^^ing to the common English Version, It is not for
you. (...) thing permitted for you to know to what poin^ (...) Time the
stestoration of the Kingdom of Israel is (...) in record this is one of those
Mysteries which the H^^^^ly Father will have lie hid, and to be at his diposal
to act as he pleases, otherwise than men look for, and beyond the reach of
Humane Capacity. Mat. 20. v. 23. Mark 13.32.
It is the custom of Christ, says Grotius, to refer secret Dispensations to
the Father. See our Literal Expositions upon those places.

8. But ye shall receive, etc. As if he had said, But I will supply that power,
which I know you want at present from Heaven; and will fill your Breasts with
the Celestial Spirit; that you may learn with patience to expect the promised
Restoration of Isreal's Kingdom, not the Earthly, as you vainly now dream; but
the Spiritual Dominion of the Jews; and in the mean time be zealous to publish
to all the world the Doctrine of the Gospel, and by your Testimony to confirm
my Resurrection, which not being believed, the whole Gospel falls.

And ye shall be witnesses unto me, Epist. 199. N. 49. novae edit. Parisiensis.
etc. St. Austin says, it was not so said to the Apostles, ye shall be
witnesses unto me, etc. as if they alone, to whom the words were spoken, were
to fulfill so great a trust, but as he seems to have spoken to them alone that
other saying of his, Behold I am with you to the end of the World, etc. Which
nevertheless, who does not understand to have been promised to the whole
Church, which, while some die, others are born, shall remain to the end of
Time; As he speaks again to them what does not at all concern them, and yet is
so spoken to them, as if it concerned no body else: When ye behold all these
things, know ye that it is at the Doors. For whom does this concern unless our
selves who shall be then in the Flesh, when all those things come to be
fulfilled? How much more that, in doing of which they were to bear a great
share, tho the same Act was also to be continued by their Successors?

In Jerusalem. It behooved the Apostles to begin the preaching of the Gospel in
Jerusalem, that the Prophesies might be fulfilled. Es. 2.2, 3. Mich. 4.1, 2.
See what we have said upon the Word Jerusalem, Mat. 2.3.

And in all Judaea. The word Judaea is here used in the Dilated Sense; which,
when Christ was upon the Earth, was divided into six parts; to wit, into
Galilee, Samaria, and Judaea, strictly taken, which lay on this side Jordan,
and reached to the Mediterranean Sea; and into Trachonitis, Ituraea, or Peraea,
and Idumaea, that lie beyond Jordan, and are seated in the Midland Country.
Christ therefore would have the Jews enjoy their Privileges, till they
themselves through their Impiety and Perverseness forfeited, and lost them. For
he does not indulge the preaching of the Gospel either to the Samaritans or
Gentiles, before it was offered to the Nation of the Jews; for that he was sent
by the Father Minister of the Circumcision, to perform those promises which
were formerly made to the Patriarchs of the Jews. Romans 15.8.
See our Literal Explication upon Mat. 10.5.

And Samaria. As if he had said, Out of all Judaea taken in the dilated
signification, I do not except Samaria, Mat. 10.5.
as formerly: But in express words I enjoin you to preach the Gospel as well in
Samaria, as in the other Provinces of Judaea. Philip the Deacon, in obedience
to this command, was the first who Preached up Jesus in Samaria, which was
approved by the Apostles sending to the Samaritans Peter and John, who by
imposition of Hands communicated the Holy Ghost to the believing Samaritans.
Infra c. 8. v. 17.
Now Samaria is a Province of ^alestine, lying between Judaea strictly taken to
the South, and Galilee to the North, comprehending the Tribes of Ephraim and
Manass^h on this side Jordan, so called from the Metropolitan City of the whole
Country, deriving its name from a Mountain, as the Mountain took its name from
one Somer or Shemer, 1 Kin. 16.24.
who was Lord of it. In this City of Samaria, built by Amri or Omni King of
Israel, the Kings who ruled the ten Tribes that were rent from the House of
David, kept their seat, till Shalmaneser King of Assyria carried away Captive
their last King Hoshea, and with him, having taken the City of Samaria it self
after three years Siege, all the ten Tribes, and then dispersed them over
Media, to prevent their revolting. Some years after that, Asarhaddon, the
Nephew of Shalmaneser, who is also called Asnappar the great and noble by Ezra,
as also Asbazareth; Ezra. 4.10. 3 Ez. 15.69.
by Ptolomy Assaradin, and by Josephus Asseradoch, the youngest Son of
Sennacherib, who succeeded his Father slain by his elder Sons, gathered a
confused multitude of Inhabitants together out of the Provinces of the
Cuthaeans, Babylonians, Chamathaeans, Sepharvaimites, and Chavaeans, and sent
them to re-people the Country which his Grandfather had emptied of the
Israelites, to possess henceforth Samaria as their own Inheritance, and dwell
in the Cities thereof, 2 Kings 17.24. Ezra 4.2. and 10. 3 Ez. 5.69. These new
Inhabitants were by the Greeks called Samarites, not because the Assyrians in
their Language call Keepers or Guardians Samarites, as affirms Sulpitius
Severus; but because they inhabited Samaria; and Cuthaeans by the Hebrews,
because the chiefest part of them came out of Cuth, a Province of Persia, An.
l. 9. c. 14.
so called from the River Cuthah, upon which it borders, as Josephus testifies.
These Cuthaeans, when they first inhabited Samaria, did not worship the God of
Israel, but each of them adored the Idol of his own Country; but many of them
having been therefore destroyed by Lions, Asarhaddon took care to send to the
remnant one of the Priests which his Grandfather Shalmaneser had carried away
captive. This Priest residing at Bethel, taught the Inhabitants the Worship of
God after the manner of Jeroboam. Of the Samaritans thus adoring their Ancient
Idols together with their New Calf, it is said, 2 Kings 17.25, 33 and 41. They
feared the Lord, and they feared not the Lord; there being a a small difference
between adoring many Gods, and no God at all. They had a Temple built them at
length by Saballnat upon Mount Gerizim, Deuteronomy. 11.29.
where the Ble^ssigs were pronounced, in imitation of the Temple of Jerusalem;
which Temple Hircan the High Priest of the Jews afterward destroyed, 200 years
after it had been built, Antiq. l. 13. c. 17.
as Josephus reports. However, though the Temple were destroyed, the Samaritans
continued their Divine Worship upon the same Mountain still; John 4.20.
having not by any Scripture Rule, as the Jews had for worshipping upon Mount
Sion, Genesis 12.6, 7. Genesis 33.18, 20.
but by the Example of the Patriarchs, designed that place for the Public
Worship of God. Thus Abraham and Jacob are said to have built an Altar near to
Sichem, threescore furlongs distant from the City of Samaria. Judges 9.7.
Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 8.
But seeing that the Mount Gerizim overlooked Sichem, and that the Patriarchs
made choice of Mountains for the building of Altars, Genesis 22.2. 2 Samuel 24.18. 2 Chronicles. 1.3.
it is probably conjectured, that the Patriarchs Abraham and Jacob did rear an
Altar to God upon Mount Gerizim. Now says Thomas de Pinedo the Portuguez, The
Samaritans only believed the Pentateuch of the Omniscient Moses, and thence
arose the hatred between them and the Hebrews. For as sin entered the World by
the Law, so hatred invades particular Societies through diversity of Religion;
with which distemper men of obscure birth, and illiterate, labor; the Noble
and Learned hate the vices, not the men, because they follow this or that
Religion. Whence it was, that the Samaritans traduced the High Priest Eli, as a
Magician, for that he translated the Sacrifices, and the Worship of God, out of
a Schismatical boldness, to Shilo contrary to the command of God. They also
condemned Samuel the Prophet for a Magician, as appears by the Samaritan
Chronic^es; c. 41.
the ^pitome of which is set forth by Hottinger in his Antimorinian
Exercitations upon the Samaritan Pentateuch. Nor were the Jews behind hand with
the Samaritans. For Aben Ezra, the most Learned of the Hebrews upon the Book of
Esther; The Cuthaeans, says he, instead of those words of Genesis, In the
beginning God created, have put, In the Beginning Asima created; which Asima
was an Idol in the shape of a Goat. Benjamin Tudelensis in his Itinerary
reports, that the Samaritans wanted the three Hebrew Guttural Letters, He,
Cheth, and Ain; both which are false, for that neither are those Guttural
Letters wanting in any of the Samaritan Pentateuchs. Neither was Asima, 2 King.
17.30.
but Nergal the Idol of the Cuthaeans, of whom consisted the greatest number of
the Samaritans. Many other such stories the Jews invented in hatred of the
Samaritans; as how they worshipped a Dove, and were circumcised in veneration of
that creature; and that they worshipped the Images that were brought by Jacob
out of Assyria, and lay buried behind Shechem, under a Turpentine Tree. To this
the Learned Pinedo, I make no doubt, says he, but that they worshipped the
Image of a Dove, in regard they were subject to the Empire of the Assyrians:
For that the Kings of Assyria always bare in their Ensigns the figure of a
Dove, ever since the Reign of Semiramis. To which Jeremy alludes, where, c. 25.
v. 38.
from the face of the anger of the Dove, is no more than from the face of the
anger of the Kings of Assyria; in regard the Kings of Assyria carry the figure
of a Dove in their Standards, as now the Kings of Spain and the Emperor bear
the Lion and the Eagle. But the Samarites abolished all worship of Idols from
the time that Sanballat built them a Temple upon Mount Gerizim, after leave
obtained from Alexander the Great, and made Manasseh his Son-in-law, and
Brother of Jaddi the first High Priest to officiate therein. And whereas
Epiphanius affirms, that the Samarites celebrated the Feast of Pentecost, and
the Paschal Feast in Autumn, so Scaliger asserts it to be untrue. But this is
certain, that when the Jews lived in prosperity, the Samaritans affirmed
themselves to be Jews, descended from the Grandchildren of Joseph, Ephraim and
Manasseh; but when the Jews were in adversity, then they would neither
acknowledge themselves to be Jews, nor to be allied to them by any tie of Blood
or Relation whatsoever.

And unto the uttermost part of the Earth. To the intent that the Doctrine of
Salvation might be published to all the Corners of the World. Thus was
fulfilled that Prophecy of Isaiah, c. 49. v. 6.
with others of the same nature, That Christ was given as a Light to the
Gentiles, and to be the Salvation of God unto the ends of the Earth.

9 -- And when he had spoken these things. Supply out of L. 24.50 and 51. He
led out his Apostles as far as Bethany, a Village belonging to Mary and Martha,
the Sisters of Lazarus, John 11.18.
about fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem, and stretching forth his supplicating
hands, he blessed them. Upon Luke 24.50.
The Ceremony of Benediction, says Grotius, was wont to be solemnized with the
Imposition of hands, Genesis 27.4, 7, 12, 19, 21, 22. Genesis 48, 9, 14, 15, etc.
as we find by the story of Isaac and Jacob. But when the Blessing was to be
given to many, then for the more quicker dispatch, only the stretching forth,
or lifting up of the hands was used toward them that were to be blessed: Thus
Aaron lifted up his hand toward the the people, Levit. 9.22.
and blessed them; that is, prayed for their prosperity and success.

While they beheld. He did not disappear, nor became invisible, privately or
remote from company, as Luke 24.31. but by degrees; while the Disciples beheld
the action, he was by the Divine Power raised, or drawn up to a Cloud, which
soon received him, and conveyed him out of their sight. But as Christ after his
Resurrection would not be promiscuously seen by all; so did he not admit every
one to be Witnesses of his Ascension, as designing that Mystery of Faith to be
rather known by the Preaching of the Gospel, than by ocular Testimony. This
shows the vigor of great Minds, says Leo, this the true Light of faithful
Souls, Sermon. 2. de Asce^s.
undoubtedly to believe what they do not behold with the corporeal Eye and
there to six their desire, where they cannot reach with their most piercing
sight. Which Piety, how should it breed in our hearts, should our Salvation
consist only in those things which are obvious to the sense? Tract. 68. in
Johan.
Thus St. Austin, The Faith of those who will see God, while they are in their
Pilgrimage, and cleaning their hearts, believes what it sees not. The Merit
accrews by Believing; the Reward is seeing afterward. Let the Lord go and
prepare a place; Let him go, that he may not be seen; let him be concealed that
he may be believed: For then the place will be prepared, when our life is
according to Faith. Let us desire him, in whom we believe, that being desired,
he may be enjoyed. The desire out of love, is the preparation of the Mansion.

He was lifted up. Supply out of Luke, 24.51.
While he blessed them. Thus Plautus uses the word, Take this Stone, says he,
L 2. Hist. Sa^.
and lift it up. Sulpitius Severus has these words; This is wonderful, says
he, that the place whereon Christ set his last footsteps, when he was taken up
in a Cloud into Heaven, should still continue marked out, and could not be
paved with the rest of the place about it. For whatsoever else was applied, the
Earth disdaining Humane Workmanship refused, while the stones flew in the faces
of them that attempted it. Yea it is such a lasting Monument of the Dust being
trampled by Divine feet, that the impression of the footsteps still remain. And
though the multitude of Believers every day carry away some parcels of the
place where our Lord set his feet, yet the Sand is not diminished, and the
Earth that received the mark of the footsteps, still preserves the same form.
That men have endeavored in vain from time to time to cover or pave the place,
still preserving the footsteps of our Lord, Lib. de loc. Act. Apost.
Pseudo-Jerom, In Ep. ad Sever.
Paulinus and Beda, De Loc. Sanct. c. 7.
have delivered in their Writings. But in regard there is no mention made of
any such Miracle either by Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomenus, or
Nicephorus, we may thence conjecture the Liberty which former Ages took to
frame little stories of their own, merely to impose upon the ignorant people.
Neither do the Mythologists agree in this Fable. For Baronius following
Burchardus, A. D. 34.11.232.
will have these footsteps imprinted in Stone, Paulinus in the green Truf,
Sulpitius Severus in Dust or Sand, Pseudo-Jerom and Beda upon the Ground in the
Earth it self. Which of these must we believe? Certainly none of them. Nor does
Pseudo-Jerom affirm that he ever saw these imprinted footsteps; but only says,
as is reported. But one Eyewitness is better than ten hearsay Testimonies.
Hornius believes this Fable arose from the words of Eusebius misunderstood. L.
3. de Vit. Constable. c. 41.
For he speaking of Helena's arrival in Judaea, Then, says he, she gave decent
Reverence to the places where the steps of our Savior had trod. Which was not
spoken particularly of Mount Olivet, but in general of all Judaea, where Christ
as man was born, Optat. M^levit. l. 6. contra Parmen.
where he set his sacred footsteps, where walked his adorable feet, where so
many and so great miracles were wrought by him.

A Cloud received him out of their sight. Not that the Cloud, which having
received Christ, took him from the sight of the Apostles, was to him any
assistance in his Ascension; for a Cloud is no solid body that can afford any
such help; besides, that the highest Clouds do not arise above a Mile or two
above the Earth, as being only nourished by the Exhalations of the Land and
Water; but it was for state and grandeur. Thus it is said of God himself, Psalm.
104.3.
Who makes the Clouds his Chariot. And that other, Psalm. 18.11.
He makes darkness his secret place. For obscurity and gloominess gets
devotion and reverence to sacred things.

10. And while they looked. That is, with more eager Eyes, and diligent marking.

As he went up. That is, into Heaven, as appears by the following verse.

Behold two men. That is to say, Angels in Humane shape.

In white Apparel. White of all colors is the most pure and spotless; it
admits no defilement, and borrows nothing from any other mixture: Therefore is
it the most proper Emblem of candor of Mind, Justice and Sanctity. Matthew.
28.3. Mark 16.5. John 20.12. Rev. 3.4. and 5, c. 4. v. 4.6.11.7.3. and 13. l.
2. de Vest. Sac. Heb. c. 26. n. 34.
Thus the Angels both here and in other places, as also the Martyrs, and all
the Saints in Heaven, where there is nothing of contamination to be found, are
said to be clothed in white Garments. And indeed, says the most Learned
Brannius, the Hebrews themselves confessed, that White was a symbol of
Cleanness and Sanctity, and consequently of Justice and Integrity. For whoever
among the Priests was polluted by the Law, was bound immediately to put off his
white Garments, as being unworthy to wear them, and after he had put on black,
to depart out of the Temple. To which that of St. Rev. 3.4.
John seems to have relation, where he says, They who have not defiled their
Garments shall walk in white, because they are worthy. And for that reason the
white color in the Garments of the High Priest signified the Innocence, Rev.
19.8.
Justice and Sanctity of Christ. Therefore white Linen is called the
Righteousness of the Saints. And though the holy Garments were mixed with
Scarlet and Purple, yet there was also a mixture of white, and some of the
Garments were white altogether. So that although Christ were laden with our
sins, Isa. 1.18.
which were signified by the Scarlet color, and sprinkled for our sins with
blood, which was signified by the Purple, yet was he most holy and just.

11. Ye men of Galilee. The Disciples of Christ are called Galilaeans, as being
Natives of Galilee; though all the Christians were generally so called by the
Jews and Ethnicks, Matthew. 2.22.
as we have observed upon these words of St. Matthew, into the parts of
Galilee. Julian the Apostate in an Epistle says, That the Religion of the
Galilaeans increased by their kindness to strangers.

Why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? That is, in vain do ye now expect the
return of Christ with your Eyes fixed upon Heaven. L. 2. Quaest. Evang. 38.^.9.
Says St. Austin, The Angels by those words, Why stand ye gazing up into
Heaven? What did they mean else, but to infer, That it was impossible for
humane Eyes to penetrate into that secret place whither Christ went, when he
was carried up to Heaven in the sight of his Disciples.

This same Jesus, etc. The Particle, This same, is Emphatical, and denotes,
that the Angels pointed with their fingers toward the Lord Jesus. Cease
therefore to doubt, Ep. 187. alias 57. ad Dardan. n. 10.
says St. Austin, that the man Christ Jesus is now there, from whence he shall
come; but diligently get by heart, and faithfully retain the Christian
Confession, that Christ rose from the dead, ascended into Heaven, sits at the
right Hand of the Father, and that he shall come from thence, and from no other
place, to judge the quick and the dead; And so shall he come, according to the
Testimony of that Angelic Voice, as he was seen to ascend into Heaven; that is,
in the same form and substance of the Flesh; to which he gave immortality, but
took away nothing of its nature. Yet he is not to be thought to be every where
diffused, according to that form. For we must be careful, that we do not so
uphold the Divinity of this man, as to take away the reality of his Body. For
it is not consequential, that what is in God, should be every where as God. For
the most true Scripture speaks also of us, that we live, move, and have our
being in God, yet are we not every where as he is. But that man is after
another manner in God, and that God is after another manner in man, after a
manner both singular and proper. For God and Man is one Person, and one Christ
Jesus is both. Every where as he is God, but only in Heaven as he is Man.
Again, as Leo well observes, The Ascension of Christ is our Advancement, Sermon.
1. de Ascens.
and whither the glory of the Head is gone before, thither also is the hope of
the body called.

12. Then. That is to say, when the Majesty of Christ was apparently known, the
Apostles adored him as the King of Glory, and Judge of the world, and he being
adored, as appears out of Luke 24.52. they return to Jerusalem, rejoicing in
their hearts, as now having attained to understand that wonderful mean, by
which the Redemption of Mankind was procured, and full of expectation of the
descent of the Holy Ghost from Heaven upon them, now approaching, and at hand.

From the Mount called Olivet. That is, from the farther side of Mount Olivet,
to which the Village of Bethany adjoined, distant from Jerusalem about fifteen
furlongs. John 11.18. Antiq. l. 20. c. 6.
Whereas the beginning or foot of the Mount was distant not above a Sabbath
days Journey, or five furlongs, as we find in Josephus. Moreover, lest we
should extend the length or latitude of Mount Olivet too far, the most famous
Ludovicus de Dieu, gives us this caution, that St. John may be understood of
the Jewish furlongs, whereas Josephus is to be understood of the Grecian
furlongs: And so, says he, Bethany situated in the farther side of this
Mountain, will be no farther distant from the foot of the Mountain, then the
foot of the same Mountain from Jerusalem. For since five Grecian furlongs make
seven Jewish furlongs and a half, that number doubled, will make fifteen
Jewish, or ten Grecian furlongs, which make exactly two Jewish miles, or a
double Sabbath Days Journey. In which sense may be taken that of St. Jerome. De
loc. Heb.
Bethany, a Town two miles from Aelia, upon the side of Mount Olivet. Now if
Bethany did not join close to Mount Olivet, but were seated beyond it, as
Adrichomius will have it; or some furlongs distant from it, as it is in the
Jewish Map, set forth by the Jews at Amsterdam, then the words were to be
translated, and they returned by Mount Olivet, and from the Mount, seems to
denote, that the Mountain Olive^ lay between the Fields of Bethany, whither
Christ carry d his Disciples, being to ascend into Heaven, and the City of
Jerusalem, which they were of necessity to pass over, before they could come to
Jerusalem. As Bethany, says de Dieu, is said in the Greek Text to have been
near to Jerusalem from almost fifteen furlongs; Jo. 11.18.
the from signifies the fifteen furlongs lying between, which are of necessity
to be passed over from Bethany to Jerusalem. Thus, Rev. 14.20. And the blood
came out of the Wine Press unto the Horse-bridles, from the space of a thousand
six hundred furlongs; The vulgar Translation rendering the Adverb from, per or
by, a thousand six hundred furlongs; and that rightly, for, from, signifies the
adjoining space lying between. Thus Acts 14.24. They coming from Perga, the
vulgar version translates, they coming by Perga. Whence it would follow that
Christ did not ascend into Heaven from Mount Olivet, which nevertheless St.
Jerome frequently affirms, and which has always hitherto been believed, as
conjectured from Acts 1.12. Luc. 24.50, 51.
where however Luke does not aver it, but from the Fields of Bethany, which the
Gospel sufficiently declares; from which Fields of Bethany, the Apostles went
to Mount Olivet, and took the shortest way over that Hill to Jerusalem.

Which is a Sabbath Days Journey. That is, the space between the City, and the
foot of the Hill, was a Sabbath Days Journey. See our literal Explication upon
Mat. 24.20. Says the lately commended de Dieu, The learned easily reconcile
this difference with Josephus, asserting the Mountain to be five furlongs
distant from the City. For a Sabbath Days Journey consisted of two thousand
Cubits, which extent of ground the Hebrews called a mile, as is manifest out of
their writings. But a furlong among the Greeks contained a hundred paces, a
pace six foot, or four Cubits, as appears from the words of Herodotus, a
hundred just paces are one furlong of six Acres, l. 2.
but a Pace is the measure of six foot, or four Cubits. One Foot contains the
breadth of four hands, and a Cubit six hands breadth. Thus far Herodotus. You
see he measures the Cubit to be a foot and a half. Therefore six hundred foot,
which made a furlong, amount to four hundred Cubits; and consequently five
furlongs two thousand Cubits. But how this agrees with the Syrian Interpreter,
who will have a Sabbathdays Journey to be about seven furlongs, the Learned do
not so easily resolve. For our parts we affirm, that the Syrian spoke not of
the Grecian, but the Hebrew furlongs, of which seven and a half make a mile, or
Sabbathdays journey. See Baal Aruch upon the word (...), Rus. See the Jewish
Mapp set forth at Amsterdam; where seven furlongs and a half make an Hebrew
short mile: and four short miles a long one called Parsa.

13. And when they were come in. That is, into the City of Jerusalem.

They went up into an upper Room. The Greek has it, into the upper part of the
House. But whose House this was, is a thing very much controverted among the
learned, l. 1. Hist. c. 28. A. D. 34. n. 236.
Nicephorus, out of one Euodius, affirms it to have been the House of St. John
the Evangelist, the Son of Zebedeus. Baro^ius and Beda assert it to have been
the House of that Mary, who was the Mother of John, Sirnam'd Mark, of whom Luke
makes mention in some Chapters lower. Theophylactus believes it to have been
the House of Simon the Leper. in Mat. 26.
Others will have it to have been the House of Nicodemus, or Joseph of
Arimathea. For my part I am apt to believe, that this House was the Temple of
Jerusalem it self, according to the testimony of Luke himself in his Gospel.
And they returned to Jerusalem with great joy; c. 24. v. 52, 53.
and were continually in the Temple, praising and blessing God. Observe, that
it is there said, they were there continually, which is here said, they were
remaining together, which being the same in signification, you shall never
reconcile the two places, if they remained in any other place than in the
Temple. Neither is this Opinion obstructed, says the famous Lewis de Dieu, by
this, that they are said to have ascended into an upper Room, or according to
the Syrian Interpreter, into a Dining Room, for that the Temple had several
upper Rooms built round about the outside of it, is apparent from the first of
Chron. the 28.11. and 2 Chronicles. 3.9. As also Chambers and Apartments, such as
was the Chamber of Gemariah, where Baruch read the Book of Jeremiah in the
House of the Lord. And Baruch read in the Book, Jer. 36.10.
the words of Jeremiah in the House of the Lord, in the House of Gemarias,
according to the Septuagint; where we are also to observe that the Temple is
not only called a House, but also that the Chamber is also translated a House,
both there, and v. 12. 20 and 21. as likewise c. 35. v. 4. just as the upper
Chamber where the Apostles were, Acts 1.13. is called a House, Acts 2.2. for
those Chambers, and Dining Rooms, served not only for the Keepers and Ministers
of the Temple, the Priests and Levites, and for the preservation of the Holy
things, but also for the assembling of Devout People to attend to Religious
Exercises. Hence it was that Baruch read the Book of Jeremiah in the Chamber of
Gemariah. In such a Chamber it is probable that the devout women met, and were
defiled by the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.22.
who are said to have had their Lodgings at the door of the Tabernacle. Some
such place had Anna the Prophetess to stay in, Luke 2.37.
who departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fastings, and Prayers
night and day. Nor is it to be questioned but that the Apostles chose to
themselves such a place, Luke 24.53
while they are said to have been continually in the Temple praising and
blessing God. Acts 1.13.
St. Luke describes the Place, that is to say, that it was an upper Room where
they remained together, and continued with one accord in Prayer and
Supplication. And this adds much to the luster of that illustrious descent of
the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, whereof in the following Chapter, if we agree
it to have fallen out in the Temple, where formerly the Majestical shadow of
God inhabited, but was withdrawn ever since the Babylonish Captivity, and the
loss of the Ark: to the end that laying aside that Allegorical Type of Gods
presence, they might aspire to the enjoyment of that real presence which God
was shortly to impart to them, in that very place where his presence was only
figuratively represented before: And as the Cloud is said to have filled the
House, 1 King. 8.10. Acts 2. v. 2.
by Solomon dedicated and Consecrated; so the wind of the Holy Ghost filled the
same House, not that from thence forward they should remain fixed to that
House, but that being driven by the same wind, they might fill the whole world
with the gales of Evangelick Grace: Paraph. ad Act. 2.
And thus the Law went truly out of Sion. Wherefore Erasmus places this upper
Room in Mount Sion. For comparing this place with that where the Law was given
of Old: In both, says he, there is height of place; but in this there is
nothing but a Mountain, which the people also are forbid to approach, that is,
the dull and Earthly, not capable of Spiritual things; here there is a House
upon the Mountain itself, to let thee understand the Concord of the Church.
There was Mountain Sina proper for the promulgation of the Law, which by the
multitude of its Precepts curbs a Rebellious People; for it is called Sina from
Precept. Here is Mount Sion, which in the Hebrew Language signifies a
Watchtower, from whence all Earthly things are looked on with disdain. Neither
does it make against where it is said that the wind filled the House, and not
the Temple. For it is known that the Temple of Solomon was called the first
House, and the Temple of Zerobabel the second House. To all this we may add
that noted place: Hag. 2.7, 9.
And I will fill this House with glory. The glory of the latter House shall be
greater then of the former. Which Prophecy was fulfilled upon the feast of
Pentecost, when the Holy Spirit, with which the first Temple was adorned, but
of which the second Temple was deprived, according to the Confession of the
Hebrews, as also of the Ark, the Vrim and Thummim, the perpetual fire, and the
Typical presence of the Divine Majesty, filled that Temple with the sacred
Blast, and the Apostles with those gifts, which struck all Nations into
Admiration. So that from that time the Holy Spirit alone supplied the absence
of the Ark, the Vrim and Thummim, and the perpetual fire, and converting Type
into verity, granted to us the Majesty of God every where present with his
Church.

Abode. In the Greek, were remaining, or did remain together.

Peter, etc. See our Explication upon Mat. 10.2, 3.

James. Supply, the Son of Alpheus. This Alpheus is thought to be called
Cleophas, or Cleopas. Luke 24.18.
For that she who is called Mary the Mother of James the lesser, Mark 15.40.
Jo. 19.25.
and Joses, is called Mary the Wife of Cleopas, or Cleophas.

And Judas. Supply, James, as he This per.
the Brother of calls himself in his own Epistle General. son, that he might be
the more truly distinguished from Judas Iscariot, John 12.4. Matt. 10.3.
the Son of Simon, is by St. Matthew Surnamed Thaddaeus; and from Lebba, l. 5.
c. 19.
a Sea Town of Galilee, of which Pliny makes mention, called also Lebbeus, as
Lightfoot conjectures in his Hebraick Hours upon Mat. 10.3. Although in the
Hackian Edition of Pliny, in the place cited by Lightfoot, the Town is not
called Lebba, but Jebba.

14. These all continued with one accord in Prayer: This St. Luke expresses by
other words in his Gospel, c. 24.53.
And they were continually in the Temple, praising and blessing God. The words,
with one accord, denote, that they did not only agree with hearts and minds
among themselves, and cohabit together without strife or contention, but also
acted and desired the same thing, chiefly in matters of Religion, and more
particularly in the duty of Prayer.

In Prayer. According to the Greek, in Prayer and Supplication. c. 24. v. 53. 1
Cor. 14.4, etc.
This Luke in his Gospel expresses in these words, praising and blessing God.
Thus St. Paul makes Prayer, blessing, and giving Thanks to be all one. Philip.
1.4.
Thus Supplication seems also to be taken for giving Thanks. Nevertheless
sometimes Supplication is distinguished from Prayer, and then it is taken for
Deprecation, or Prayer to remove or repel some evil. Hence Junius upon this
place: The Disciples, says he, besought as well the sending of the Holy Ghost,
as to be freed from all the present Evils with which they were encompassed.

With the Women. Meaning those Women of which mention is made, Mat. 27.55. and
with them the Wives of the Apostles. For, says the famous Beza, as it is well
observed by others, it was requisite, that the Wives of the Apostles should be
confirmed, whom it behoved either to be the Companions of their Travels, or
patiently at home to endure their absence. An ancient Book of mine adds also,
And with their Children.

And Mary the Mother of Jesus. Mary is exempted from the common sort of Women,
as the most excellent of Women. According to this Phrase, David in the Title of
the 18th Psalm, is said to be delivered out of the hand of his Enemies, and out
of the hand of Saul, as being the most potent of his Adversaries. And in the
Hebrew Bibles Reches, a most excellent sort of Horses, is particularly
distinguished from all other Horses in general: 1 Kings 4.28.
And they brought forth Barley and Straw for the Horses and the Reches.

15. In those days. That is, when the Apostles and the rest of the Disciples
abode together, expecting the coming of the Holy Ghost.

Peter standing up. To whom the Priority of degree was given, in regard of his
Seniority, according to St. Jerome, Cassian, and several others of the Fathers.

The number of Men. Some ancient Latin Exemplars, together with the Greek, read
Names, as it is in the English version. But by Names, is to be understood Men.
Infra c. 4. v. 12.
Thus the name of Christ is taken for Christ himself. The name of God is used
for God himself, Psalm. 5.12. and in other places. Thus in Ciceropro Archia.
Thou demandest of us, why we are so delighted with this Name, i. e. this man.
Tibullus. Nor is Woman a faithful Name.

Near a hundred and twenty. So that there were present at this most Noble and
Holy College, besides the Eleven Apostles, and Seventy Disciples, Thirty seven
others, who together with them, made up the number of a hundred and twenty.

16. The Scripture must needs have been fulfilled. That is, according to the
Interpretation of Christ, from whose lips all the Disciples, who were then
present, had a little before understood the mystical sense intended by the Holy
Ghost from the mouth of David, Luc. 24.44, 45.
when he interpreted the Scriptures after his Resurrection.

Concerning Judas. The Rival in wickedness with the Impious Enemies of David.

Who. In the malice of his Heart.

Was guide to them. Those bloody Murderers, of whom, John 18.3.

17. Who, etc. In the Gr. because, instead of the adversative particle,
although. As if he had said, Who seduced by the Devil soared to that height of
Impiety, that he most shamefully betrayed the Lord Christ, although among many
other benefits, he also attained this, to be enrolled into our number, and
Apostolic College.

Lot. That is, Ministry or Function. That Lot is taken for Office or
Employment, is apparent out of Livy, and the Lexicon Writers. Kleros in Greek,
and sors in Latin, Lot, is said in the first place to be any thing cast into a
little Vessel, and then drawn forth again. infra v. 26. and Prove. 16.33.
In the next place the same words are taken for that portion or property, Deuteronomy.
3.6.
which is gained by the Lot cast. Lastly, they are taken in a diffusive sense
for that proportion of any thing which falls to any man by the allottment or
appointment of any one, or by any other accident, and it is said not only of
hereditary goods, whether they be obtained by gift, or labor, but also of
Offices or Functions, as here, says Brenius* Moreover the word Kleros, is by
long use made proper to those who are in the Ecclesiastical Ministry. However,
in Scripture the Pastors of the Church are never, the Flocks but once
charactered under this Title, 1 Pet. 5.3. where Peter the Apostle joining
himself to the Presbyters, as a fellow Presbyter, admonishes them not to
domineer over the Lotts. By Lotts, says the forementioned Daniel Brenius upon
this place of St. Peter, he understands the assemblies of the faithful
congregated out of the Jews and Gentiles, to whom, through Christ, their Lot
is fallen among the People of God, who being his peculiar, and not the property
of the Bishops; they are therefore to act not according to their will and
pleasure, but according as they are prescribed. Allusion being made to the
allottments of the Tribes, who had their Divisions in the Land of Canaan by
Lotts: but chiefly for this reason, that Israel is said to be the Portion and
Inheritance of God.

Of this Ministry. In the Greek, of this Deaconry. Deaconry signifies the
exercise of any Office or Function; but below, where the word Apostleship is
added, v. 25.
there it is restrained only to the Apostolic Function.

18. And this man possessed a field. Not as his own possession, but as an
Eternal Monument of Infamy. For still the people cried, as they passed by, This
is the Field bought with the thirty pieces of silver, which Judas took as the
price and hire of his detestable Treason. And it may probably be conjectured,
that Judas himself was buried in that field appointed for the Interment of
strangers; for so the sense of the words, And this man possessed a field with
the hire of iniquity, will be the same as if we should say; And this man out of
his covetousness of shameful gain, delivered the Author of Salvation into the
hands of the Jews, and suddenly snatched away by a severe death, got nothing by
such a detestable and inhumane Crime, but a small pittance of Earth for the
burial of his Body in that field, which the Priests jointly bought with the
restored hire which they had given to Judas. For Luke, as Heinsius notes, did
not say, He possessed the little field, in reference to the whole field, but a
little field, that is, he possessed a little part of the field. For when he
comes to speak of the whole field, or the field it self, he does not only say,
the little field, but that little field. What then, says Heinsius, means that
word a little field? A part of the Earth, or place sufficient to contain the
body of the dead.

And being hanged. In the Greek, and being headlong; For the Greek word, says
Leigh in his Sacred Critics, does not properly signify hanged, but prone,
headlong, and with the head downward, and signifies the posture of a person
suffocated with a halter, with the face hanging toward the Earth, as Erasmus
observes. Others render the Greek, and being cast down headlong, or as the
common English Translation has, And falling headlong. But that this Version
may be reconciled with that of Matthew, saying, c. 27.5.
And departing, he went and hanged himself, as the Ancient Latin Interpreter
renders the Greek words; some turn it thus, And departing, he was consumed with
anguish of mind. For the Greek word used there, if we may credit Heinsius,
Grotius, and Brenius, is to be tormented with grief and sadness, and stoppage
of the breath, whether the person die of those torments or no. So that Matthew
does not speak of the death of Judas, which happened after the same manner here
by St. Luke related, but of the unsupportable torment of an exulcerated
Conscience. Hom. 22. ad Antiochen.
Which Chrysostom calls, to be strangled with Conscience, that is, to be
oppressed with the guilt of his Crimes. Lightfoot renders the Greek word in St.
Matthew, he was strangled. And so he believes the death of Judas happened. For
now, says he, after he had thrown back the price of his Treason, when Judas was
departed with an intention to return to his own Family, the Devil, who dwelt in
him, snatching him up into the Air, strangled him, and threw him down headlong,
so that dashing against the Earth, he burst in two in the middle, his guts
tumbling forth, after which horrible Exit the Devil left him. But whereas the
most Ancient Author of the Epistle to the Philippians under the name of
Ignatius the Martyr, ascertains hanging to be the death of Judas; De locis
Sanctis.
and Juvencus affirms that he hanged himself upon a Fig Tree; and Beda
testifies that the same was to be seen in his time near Jerusalen; The Vulgar
Latin Version of St. Matthew seems to be preferred before the rest, which
though it seems to vary something from the Relation of Peter concerning his
casting down headlong, yet does it carry no contradiction to it. Matthew gives
an account of the beginning of the Action, Peter of the End, supplying by
divine Inspiration what was wanting in the Relation of Matthew. Judas fits the
Halter to his neck, and springs downward with the greater violence, to the end
he might the sooner choke himself. But that the Vengeance of God might more
eminently appear in the horrid and immature death of the infamous Traitor, by
an unexpected accident the Rope broke, so that Judas fell headlong upon some
craggy stone, or sharp pointed stump of a Tree, so that his bursten belly let
forth all his bowels. Thus Casaubon. Concerning the ten thousand Idumeans
thrown headlong by the Jews from a Rock, who all of them burst their guts; 2 Chronicles. 25.12.
the story still is exstant. Papias, who, as Eusebius declares, was a Writer of
little worth, and one that feigned trifles from false Interpretation,
confounding the Greek word signifying headlong, with another Greek word
signifying swollen up, and thence erecting his own dreams, relates that the
body of Judas was swelled to that immensity, that so much ground as was
sufficient to drive a Cart through, could not contain it; and that thereupon the
Cart went over him and squeez d out his guts. In like manner the Authors of
another Fable, when they read that Judas possessed or purchased a field with
the hire of iniquity, affirmed, that that same field, in regard that Judas died
in it, by reason of the horrid stench which he left behind, remain d barren and
untilled.

19. And it was known to all the Dwellers at Jerusalem. That is to say, that
horrid sort of death, which ended the ignominious life of the Sacrilegious
betrayer of Christ.

Insomuch as that field is called. That is to say, that field which was
purchased with the hire of Treachery, and infamous for the burial, and perhaps
the death of the Traitor. For many are persuaded that Judas deservedly perished
in that field; and that by this Event the Priests were the rather instigated to
desire the purchase of that field.

In their proper Tongue. The Greek has it, in their proper Dialect, that is to
say, which was used by the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. This Peter speaks as a
Galilean, and speaking to the Disciples of Christ, who were for the most part
Galileans. Now the Galileans had a distinct Dialect from those of Jerusalem. As
appears from the History of Christ's Passion, where Peter's Tongue betrayed him.

Hakeldama, The field of Blood. Says the most Learned Lightfoot, as well
because it was purchased with the price of blood, as water^d with the blood of
the Traitor.

20. For it is written. Now Peter alleges the Scripture, which before v. 16.
he had said was to be fulfilled; that is to say, according to the Mystical
sense intended by the Holy Ghost: as the Disciples had learnt it from the lips
of Christ, explaining the Scripture, Luke 24.44.

In the Book of Psalms. That work which the Hebrews are wont to call the Book
of Hymns, because the chief part of it celebrates the praises of God, the
Greeks and Latins call it the Psalter, from the name of the Instrument to
which those Hymns were sung. They are in all a hundred and fifty in the Hebrew
Copies. For the hundred fifty first which is added in the Greek is fictitious,
rejected not only by the Hebrews, but by the Council of Laodicea. Theodoret and
many others, as well Ancient as Modern affirm David to be the only Author of
all the Psalms. H^^. 126.
Philastrius also accounts them to be Heretics who think otherwise. l. 17. de
Civ. Dei, c. 14.
But St. Austin wavers, sometimes ascribing the whole work to David alone,
sometimes allowing him to have composed no more than only nine; affirming, the
rest to have been made by the four Singers, of whom he made choice for that
purpose. In (...) a^ In. p^^i Ps^^i.
But it is apparent from the Arguments of the Psalms, wherein their Authors are
discovered, or from the express words and subjects of the Psalms. by which the
time of their composure may be conjectured, that all the Psalms were not the
work of David only, but of several Authors. Deservedly therefore Hilarious in
his Preface to the Psalm^, concludes the whole composure to be called not the
Psalms of David, but the Book of Psalms; as here it is called by Peter, and by
Christ himself, Luke 20.42. The Author of the Synopsis attributed to
Athanasius, and Hilarious say, that the Psalms were reduced into one Volume by
Esdras, and digested into that order as now they are extant. Pr^^. in Psalm.
Es^i. ad S^p^^^ and C^p.
As for that division of the Psalms into five parts, which Hilarious and Jerome
affirm to have been used by the Hebrews, and is at this day observed in their
Book, I believe to be no antienter than the Times of the Maccabees, says a
person among the Eloquent, most highly Learned, and among the Learned
surpassingly Eloquent Peter Daniel Huetius. D^^^^^. Evarg. Pr^p. 4.


Let his habitation. What David out of his Zeal to Justice, and the Honor of
God, imprecating upon his Enemies, had prophesied, that the Holy Ghost also,
speaking by the mouth of David, would have foretold concerning the persecutors
of Christ typifi'd by David. And thus Peter being taught the sense of the holy
Scriptures by Christ, deservedly applys to Judas, the Leader of the Persecutors
of Christ, Psalm. ^^.25.
the miserable destruction foretold of his Persecutors in general.

And, His Bishopric let another take. To the end that another Testimony of
Scripture may be the better understood to be cited, in imitation of Bev^, I put
a Comma after the copulative And, so that the sense is the same as if Peter had
said, The same Spirit which Psalm. 69.25. had foretold the death of Judas, and
thereby the vacancy of his Function, Psalm. 109.8.
foretold also that another was to be substituted in his place, upon whom the
honor of the Bishopric, of which Judas was depriv^d, should be conferred.
Where, says Bez^, he (...) the Bish^pric^ a Ministry or Function, Numb. 3.32.
as much as to say Inspection. The Hebrews for the same reason called it an
Oversight; which word we have retained willingly, for that St. Peter here
discourses concerning an Ecclesiastical, and that particularly an Apostolical
Function; whereas David wrote this properly against Doeg the Overseer of the
Kings Herds. However, the Appellations of Pastors of Sheep, and of the Flock,
are frequently attributed to Ecclesiastical Administration. In the Charter of
Ina King of the West Saxons set forth by Spelman among the Councils, An. 725.
one Daniel subscribing, calls himself Overseer of the Flock of God.

21. Therefore must one, etc. As if he had said, Seeing God is pleased to make
use of our diligence to choose another into the place of Judas deceased, and
that we are assured of the pleasure of God, it is not lawful for us to delay,
but strenuously to execute whatever the duty of our Ministry requires.

Went in and out among us. That is, performed the Office of Preaching enjoined
him by the Father. To go in and go out, denotes in Scripture the laborious
discharge of a duty, Numb. 27.17, 21. Deu. 31.2. 1 Samuel 18.13, 16.29.6. 1 Samuel
18.13, 16.29.6. 2 Samuel 3.5. 1 King. 1.3, 7, 8, 9. 1 Chronicles. 27.1. 2 Chronicles. 1.10.
when it is spoken of those who are entrusted with any eminent Charge.

22. Beginning from the Baptism of John. That is, according to the
Interpretation of Grotius, from the time that Christ was baptized by John; for
that was the beginning of his taking his Function upon him.

He was taken up from us. That is, when ascending into Heaven, he was withdrawn
in a Cloud from our sight.

To be ordained with us a Witness of his Resurrection. That is to say, in an
Apostolic Degree and Order. Here is required by Peter an Eyewitness, such as
John the Baptist bespeaks himself to have been. Where he says, John 1.34.
And I also have seen and have given Testimony. For this did not meanly avail
toward the strengthening of Belief. In the mean while Peter strictly binds
himself and his companions to the necessity of Preaching the Gospel, while he
ordains new Proclaimers of the Resurrection of Christ, which is preferred
before all other Doctrines of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15.17.
as being the chief Head and Foundation of it, as St. Paul teaches.

23. And they appointed two. That is to say, the Disciples not daring to do
more than what they knew to be their Office and Duty, and commanded them by the
Lord, publicly, and by the suffrages of the whole College, put up two of the
most eminent persons among them, that God might choose to himself which he
thought fittest for the Exercise of the Apostolic Function, Gal. 1.1.
and to the end the party so chosen, might boast with Paul, that he was not
made an Apostle neither by men, nor of men.

Joseph who was called Barsabas. This person some will have to be the same with
him who is called Joses, c. 4.36.
and by the Apostles surnamed Barnabas. And certainly, says Glassius, there is
but little difference in the declension and pronunciation of these names, which
is a small alteration of a letter in each name.

Who was surnamed the Just. That is, if we may believe Drusius, by the Jews
following the Greek Idiom, who write (...). Otherwise in the Hebrew Language
Tsaddic signifies Just, which was the surname of Simon the High Priest, who
attended upon Alexander, whom others call Jadduas. The Author also of the
Thalmudic Lexicon Rabbi Nathan, is surnamed Tsaddie, or the Just.

And Matthias. Strom. 4.
Clemens Alexandrinus believes this person to have been Zacheus, of whom Luke
c. 19. of his Gospel. The name of Matthias is the same however with that other
name which is written more at large Mattathias, as Drusius observes.

24. And they prayed. Induced thereto by the promise of Christ. Mark 11.24.
What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive them,
and ye shall have them.

And said. That is, they prayed about this manner. Neither does Luke set down
their words, contenting himself only to recite the sum of their Prayer.

Thou Lord. As much as to say: Whereas it belongs only to thee O Lord, rightly
to judge of the hearts and minds of men, and for what Ministry or Function
every one is most fit; be pleased to declare which of these two, conspicuous
for their uncorrupted Conversation, and Integrity of life, thou art pleased to
substitute into the place of Judas; since, which is most worthy to be
preferred, cannot be discerned by human Judgment.

25. To take a place. The now extant printed Greek Copies have, to take a lot,
that is, to be made partaker.

Of this Ministry and Apostleship. That is, of this Apostolic Function.

From which Judas by transgression fell. The Greek has it, from which Judas
declined, or turned aside. But, says Beza, the genuine Interpretation of these
words is to be collected from the following Coherences. For the Vocation of
every man, is as it were the way and Road where every one is to Journey, if he
intend to attain to the end of his Stage. From this way therefore, that is,
from the Apostleship, Judas is said to have deviated, or turned aside, or
rather leaving it altogether, to have taken a quite contrary path. Epiphanius
reads the Article from which, in the Masculine Gender, referring it to the
Masculine Greek word signifying Lot, though without any alteration of the
sense.

That he might go to his own place. That is, that he might go whither his
deserts called him, to shame and perdition, in search of death, and an
ignominious halter, as the remedy of his despair through the guilt of his
Conscience. The most learned Knatchbull would have the Greek words translated,
That he may enter upon his place. As if the sense were, that the person whom
thou shall choose, may succeed into the place of him that has deserted it, that
is, into the Apostleship of Judas, and that his own may be taken for his, the
same worthy Author proves out of Oecumenius; as Budaeus affirms the Pronoun
Suum to be frequently used instead of Ejus by Cicero, in imitation of the
Greeks. So that to go to his place is the same thing, as in the English Law
phrase, to enter upon, or to take upon one the Inheritance. And this
Interpretation, adds the same Author, seems to me more agreeable to reason,
than that of those who understand the words as spoken of Judas; as if Luke
would say, that Judas went into his place, that is, into Hell. Nor can I
believe that ever any such thing entered into the thoughts of the Evangelist.
But I admire with Chrysostom the prudence of the Evangelist, who does not
reproach nor insult over any person. Which argues, that Chrysostom did not
believe that St. Luke had adjudged Judas to Hell. For what more reproachful
could Luke have said, than that he was gone to his place, if he meant Hell?
Neither was it for an Historian or an Evangelist to give his own Judgment so
severe, but to have left Judas to the condemnation of God. It was enough for
him to relate matter of fact, as he promised in the beginning of his Gospel; as
they delivered them to us, who from the beginning were Eyewitnesses. But who
was an Eyewitness of Judas 's being in Hell? Thus far the most accomplished,
with all manner of Learning Sir Norton Knatchbull, Knight and Baronet.

26. And they gave forth their Lots. That is, according to the Interpretation
of Grotius, they put their names together into an Vrn, and into another Vrn, a
small Roll of Paper having the word Apostle wrote within it; together with
another Blank; then out of both Vrns they equally drew two Rolls, as in the
Division of the Land. Of this way of casting Lots in the choice of a King,
whose Election God would have to depend upon himself, there is a notable
example to be found, 1 Samuel Josh. 7.13, etc.
10.20. Likewise for the discovery of Achan. See our Annotations upon the 11th
verse of the Prophet Obadiah.

And the Lot fell upon Matthias. That is, Divine Providence so disposing the
Lots; the name of Matthias with the word Apostle, came forth. See our Literal
Explanation upon Jonah, c. 1. v. 7.

He was numbered. The Greek word implys, that this Event of the Lot was
approved by the common consent of all the rest; as they who from thence were
certainly assured, that it was the Will of God, that Matthias should succeed in
Judas's room, and from thenceforth was to be called not by the common Name of
Disciple, but to be dignified with the noble Title of Apostle.

CHAP. II.
1. AND when the day of Pentecost was fully come. According to the Greek, in
the fulfilling the day, that is, the time of the Quinquagesima. The space of
fifty days from the Paschal day, to the Festival day it self, which the
Christians vulgarly called Pentecost, is by the Greek and Latin Writers
generally called Pentecost, or the time of Pentecost. By Ferrand the Deacon, as
also by Cassian it is called Quinquagesim^. c. 214. l. 2. de Caenob. Instit. c.
(...)
By Rabanus and l. 1. de Instit^t. Cler. c. 41. and 43. l. 3. genesis Anim. c. 148.
Honorius of Augustodunum, Quinquagesima Paschalis, to distinguish it from the
other Quinquagesima, which is before the Quadragesima, Lent. The sense
therefore of Luke is the same, as if he had said, When the day came, or
Presently after it was past, wherein the Paschal Quinquagesima was completed.
For the words of Luke admit either of the two Interpretations, as we have
observed in our Annotations upon Matthew. 21.1.

They were all. That is, those hundred and twenty, of which that most noble and
most holy College of Disciples of Christ at that time consisted; as is said
before, c. 1. v. 15.

With one accord. The Greek word by Beza is rendered with one accord, as in the
English; but by the Latin Vulgar Interpreter here, c. 1. v. 14.
together, above, unanimously. Nevertheless we must confess, that the self-same
word is often made use of by the Greek Interpreters of the Scripture, to
express the simple meaning of the word, together, even where cannot be any
agreement of mind.

In the same place. That is, in the same Diningroom or Upper-chamber, c. 1.13.
into which the Disciples ascended upon their return from Mount Olivet to
Jerusalem. See what we have said upon the same place.

2. And there came. That is, upon the first day of the week, the fiftieth from
the Resurrection of Christ, and the tenth from his Ascent into Heaven, which
that year, according to Vshers Chronology, fell upon the 24th of May. This day
by the Christians is called, from the Greek word Pentecost; c. 29.
but by the first Council of Orleans, c. 17.
and by the second of Tours, Quinquagesima.

Suddenly. The Ears are the more surpised with a sudden and unexpected noise.

A sound from Heaven. In Greek, a sound reverberated, or resounding. As if he
had said, The Sky by the divine power resounded with a sudden noise, as if a
violent Wind had suddenly began to blow with unusual violence. But as the four
Evangelists, neither of them say that a Dove descended upon Christ at his
Baptism; so it is not here said, that there was heard the sound of a vehement
Wind, but, as it were, of a vehement Wind. In the same manner, in the following
Verse, the Tongues that were seen, were said to be seen as it were like fire;
to the end that we may understand that all these things were only visional,
Sermon. 1. de Pentecoste.
which St Chrysostom observes, and as we from him have noted upon Mat. 3.16.

And filled, etc. See what we have already said upon c. 1.5, and 13.

Where they were sitting. That is, where they remained together, or where, in a
quiet and sedate posture, Luke 24.49. and Acts 1.24.
by the command of Christ they expected from him the gift of the Holy Ghost,
promised by the Father to all Believers.

3. And there appeared unto them cloven Tongues like as of fire. Isa. 5.24.
The Tongue is liken'd to Fire and Flame, by reason of its resemblance to the
shape; for the aspiring flame of Fire is like the Tongue put out of the mouth;
and next, because of its resemblance in action; for that as the creatures take
hold of, and lick in their food with the Tongue; so the Fire casting forth its
flame, is said to devour the combustible matter.

And it sat, etc. That is, and this Fire resembling cloven Tongues, visibly
rested upon every one of the hundred and twenty, who with conjoined hearts, and
unanimous wishes, expected the Holy Ghost, which was to be sent by Christ.

4. And they were all filled. The Women also who were then present in the same
place, as appears v. 17, and 18.

With the Holy Ghost. That is, with the most excellent gifts of the Holy Ghost,
who being promised by Christ, made it undoubted to the hearing by the noise of
the Wind, and visible to the sight by means of the Fire resembling the cloven
Tongues, that he was now come. Those visible gifts, Upon John 7.30.
says Beza, which in the beginning of the growing Church, so vigorously
flourished, as Joel had foretold, are metonymically understood, under the
denomination of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12, etc. Acts 19.2, etc.
as being his peculiar effects, according to the Doctrine of St. Paul.

And they began to speak in various Tongues. The Greek has it, in other
Tongues, according to the English Version. That is, in other Tongues than they
knew before, according to the promise of Christ, Mark 16.17. They shall speak
with new Tongues.

As the Spirit gave them utterance. That is, the Holy Ghost governing and
directing their Tongues, to the end they might speak persuasively and awfully
the great things performed in Christ, and through Christ, either in this or
that, in more or fewer Languages. But it appears out of 1 Cor. 12.10, 28,
30.14.2, 4, 5, etc. that they are under a mistake, who assert that there was
any Miracle wrought in the Ears of the Auditory, as if that though the
Disciples of Christ spoke only one sort of Language, yet that their speech was
understood by all, as if they had spoken distinctly in their several Idioms.

Utterance. In Midul. Evang.
The Greek word is interpreted by Tarnovius, so to utter a speech, that there
should be a great Efficacy in every word, and much wisdom contained in every
period. Paul opposes the same word to those, who after the manner of Fanatics,
Acts 26.25.
talk much, but vainly, and to little purpose. Beza says also, that they are
properly said to utter a speech according to the signification of the Greek
word, who speak things sententious and enlivening, such as were those which St.
Luke soon after calls the wonderful works of God. As also such as spoke not
their own thoughts, 2 Pet. 1.21.
but by the Impulse of Divine Inspiration; as it is written of the Prophets;
which was that which Luke altogether purposed to express here by this Greek
word; and the Latins use to declare by Fari a more significant word then
Loqui; though this distinction is not always observed.

5. But there were dwelling in Jerusalem. According to the Greek, inhabiting.
That is to say, as the Learned Mede expounds it, sojourning together; including
those who resorted together from other Countries to celebrate the Feasts of the
Paschal Lamb and Pentecost; for which purpose they took up their Lodgings in
the City, as is apparent by what follows. It Is true that the Greek words denote
a fixed and durable habitation. But among the Hellenists, whose Dialect the
Writers of the New Testament imitate, they are indifferently made use of for a
longer or shorter abiding in one place; that is, as well for sojourning, as for
inhabiting; as the two following Examples plainly prove from the Translation of
the Septuagint. The first is Genesis 27.44. where the Greek word Oikein, and the
Latin word Habitare in the Vulgar Version signify only to tarry a few days.
The latter Example is in 1 Kings 17.20. where Elias speaking of the Widow where
he was wont to Lodge, uses the word Katoikein for sojourning, with whom I
sojourn. Both the forementioned Greek words answering to the Hebrew Jashab,
which signifies any sort of abiding or tarrying in any place.

Jews. That is to say, by Religion and Birth, descended from the Seed of
Abraham, as appears from verse 22, 23, and 39. For certain it is that Cornelius
the Centurion, was the first of the Gentiles that was converted to the
Christian Faith.

Devout men. So were they called, who not at all deterred by distance of place,
or difficulty of traveling, came to Jerusalem to worship God in the Temple,
according to the command of the Law.

Out of every Nation under Heaven. That is, out of all Nations where the Jews
lived up and down dispersed. For there is no Nation in the universal Orb, where
some of our people do not inhabit, De bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 16.
says Agrippa the younger, King of the Jews, in Josephus. The scattering and
Captivity of the Jews was threefold before the destruction of Jerusalem, and
the burning of the Temple by Titus. The first was of the ten Tribes under
Shalmaneser, which, says Jerome upon Joel, c. 3.6.
even at this day inhabit in the Cities and Mountains of the Medes. Of these
were the Jews, in the following verse 9. called Parthians, Medes and Elamites.
The second scattering was of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin under
Nebuchadnezzar, a great part of which did not return to Jerusalem, when it was
restored together with the Temple, by Zerobabel. From these descended those
Jews, who are said to have inhabited Mesopotamia. v. 9.
The third dissipation of the Jews was under Ptolomy Lagus, who having
destroyed Jerusalem, carried away a vast number of Jews into Egypt, who were
called Hellenists. The Jews by this threefold Captivity dispersed and scattered
among the Assyrians, Babylonians and Egyptians, fled of their own accords to
other places and Kingdoms; so that wheresoever the Apostles traveled to Preach
the Gospel, they found in every City of the Gentiles a Synagogue of the Jews.
And St. James directs his general Epistle to those of the twelve Tribes who
were dissipated and dispersed through almost all the Regions of the World.

6. But now report being made of this. That is, the fame of this Miracle being
spread abroad. Numb. 16.34. 1 Kings 1.40, etc.
The Greek word Phone, voice, is not only here, but also elsewhere used for
fame.

The multitude gathered together. That the diversity of Languages might appear,
by comparing them one with another.

And were confounded, etc. As if he had said, The Foreiners stood astonished,
when they heard the ignorant and illiterate Galileans, that had never traveled
out of their Country, to learn Foreign Languages, dispute with so much gravity
and profoundness concerning such Divine Mysteries in their own several native
Dialects and Tongues.

7. And they were all amazed. Here the principal Effect of the Miracle is
expressed, for that being astonished at the novelty and the wonder together,
they began to enquire the more into it. And indeed, says Calvin, so it behooves
us ever with astonishment to admire the works of God, that from thence may
proceed both consideration, and a desire of understanding.

Our Language. That is, speaking in the Language and Dialect proper to our
selves.

9. Parthians. That is, the Jews, who dwelt under the Dominion of the
Parthians. That many of the Jews lived under the Empire of the Parthians, is
apparent out of Josephus, Prologue to his Book of the Wars of Jews. l. 2. de
Bello, Jud. c. 16. Gr. 28.
and the abovecited Oration of Agrippa the younger, set down by the same
Josephus. The Parthians, or Parthyaeans, whose Country is called Parthyaea, and
Parthyene, were a people, who in a search of new Seats, fled out of Scythia
into Media. For, says Trogus, l. 41. c. 1.
Exiles in the Scythian Language are called Parthi. Nevertheless, it is more
proper to think that the Scythians themselves, and not their fugitives, l. 6.
c. 2.
laid the foundations of the Parthian people, as Quintus Curtius reports. This
Parthia is bounded to the West by Media, to the North by Hyrcania, to the East
by Aria, l. 6. c. 15.
and to the South by Caramania the Desert, as the Cosmographer writes. The
Metropolis of Parthia, was called Hecatompylos, and is thought to have stood in
the same place where now stands Ispahan, the Seat of the Persian Kings. Their
Kings were surnamed Arsacae from Arsaces, either a Scythian, or a Bactrian, who
was the first that took upon him the Dominion of the Parthians, as the
Geographer asserts. l. 15.
They wintered at Ctesiphon, but spent the Summer in Hyrcania, and at
Echatanae, l. 16. c. 1.
according to Strabo, whom the Learned call, by way of excellency, l. 2.
the Geographer. The same Author testifies that the Parthians in his time
possessed so large and spacious a Territory, and ruled over so many Nations,
that by reason of the vastness of their Empire, they were almost equal in power
to the Romans. The first among the Romans that triumphed over them, was
Ventidius Bassus, according to Gellius. Noct. Attic. l. 15. c. 4.
Extraordinary was their manner of fight, thereforefamous among the Poets, for
they fought flying. See Vir. Geor. 3. v. 30. Ovid. de ar. am. v. 211. Parthos
or Parthus, is also the name of an Illyrian City, whose Inhabitants are called
Partheni. But Parthis was a Province of Macedonia, whose Inhabitants, according
to Ptolomy, l. 3. c. 13.
called by the Critics the Cosmographer, l. 3. c. 23.
are famed by the name of Parthyai; and according to Pliny, by the name of
Parthini, whose single City Eriboea is celebrated by Ptolomy.

Medes. That is, the Jews, who Inhabited in Media. See what has been already
said, v. 5. Media, and the Medes, Genesis 11.2. Joseph. Ant. 1.5. l. 7. c. 62.
were so called from Madai the third Son of Japhet. However, Herodotus asserts,
that they were first called Arians, before they were called Medes. Media is
bounded to the East by Hyrcania and Parthia, and separated from it by the
Caspian Mountain. To the West lies the greater Armenia and Assyria; to the
South lies Persia; and to the North the Caspian Sea. This Media is for the most
part mountainous and cold, and altogether barren, unless that part of the
Country which adjoyns to the Caspian Streights, which is fruitful of all things
necessary for humane support, unless Oil. And therefore called Happy, and most
fertile by the Geographer, and by Virgil the most Opulent. l. 11. Georg. 2.136.
Formerly the Medes were subject to the Assyrians, till Arbaces Viceroy of
Media revolted from Sardanapalus; and having destroyed Nineveh, erected the
Monarchy of the Medes, which afterward lasted under nine Kings, 259 years, and
was then translated from Astyages, the last King of the Medes, to the Persians,
by Cyrus, his Grandchild by the Daughters side. Thomas de Pinedo observes, that
the Parthians, Medes and Persians, are oftentimes indifferently taken one for
another by Ancient Writers.

Elamites. The Syrian Interpreter calls them Elanaeans, or Elanites, not the
Inhabitants of Elane near Hesiongaber upon the Red Sea, which belongs to Arabia
the stony, but of another Province of the same name, which Benjamin Tudelensis
in his Itinerary Printed at Leyden, p. ^^. Genesis 10.22.
places between Persia, Choresan, Mesopetamia, and Armenia. From Elam the Son
of Shem takes its name Elimae, a Province of the Assyrians joining to Persia,
near Susiann, the chief City of which was Elymais, wherein stood the Temple of
Diana, opulent in Silver and Gold, and rich Presents, many of which were given
by Alexander the Macedonian King. 1 Mac. 6.
This City Antiochus Epiphanes would have sacked for the Riches of the Temple;
for which reason he was struck from Heaven with sudden death, says Polybius the
Megalopolite, Antiq. l. 12. c. 13.
mentioned by Josephus. Though Josephus relates, that it was more probable that
that Accident befell him, because he would have plundered the Temple of
Jerusalem. In like manner Menander, an Ancient Historian, cited by Josephus,
attributes the cause of those Rains, Antiq. 8.7.
which Sacred History relates to have fallen upon the Prayers of Elijah the
Prophet, 1 Kings 18.
to the Supplications of Ithobalus King of the Tyrians. 2 Mac. 9.
The same Antiochus endeavored to take Persepolis, and to have robbed its
Temples; for Gold and Silver are no where safe. Whether Persepolis and Elymais
be the same, I know not. The Inhabitants of the Province of Elymae called by
Luke Elamites, by the Syrian Interpreter, Elanaeans, or Elanites, by Strabo and
other Elymaeans, and are described to be fierce and warlike Bow-men by Isaiah,
Jeremy, and Ezekiel, lived upon the spoil, and were the only neighboring
people that durst make Head against the Parthians, and are said by Strabo lib.
11. to have exacted Tribute from the Kings of Persia. These Elymaeans were
always subject to their own proper Kings, of whom Jeremy and Strabo make
mention. Two of these are upon Record, Genesis 14.1. Judith 1.6.
Codorlaomer is one, the other is Arioch. However, though Strabo rightly
distinguishes the Flymaeans from the Susians, whom Eustathius and Eusebius
derive from Shelach, or Sela, the Son of Arphaxad, and from the Persians, whom
Bochart and Heidegger deduce from Sabtha, the Son of Cush; yet Elam is often
taken not only strictly for Elymais, but also for all the Neighboring Nations
lying upon the River Eulaeus, as the Gabians, Carbians, Massabiticks, whose
Provinces the Geographer attributes to the Elymeans, and the Susians; for
Benjamin Tudelensis in his Itinerary takes Cuzestan, or the Province of Susia,
to be the same with Elam. The Arabian Interpreter newly Printed at Paris
renders Elam by Churestan, Genesis 10.20. c. 8.2.
which is the same with Chuzestan. Hence Daniel places Shushan the Metropolis
of Susia, in the Province of Elam; and Ptolomy, Pliny, and Marcian, seat the
Elymaeans not far from the mouth of the River Eulaeus. 1 Autiq. 6.
And from hence lastly it is that Josephus makes the Elynaeans to have been the
first Ancestors of the Persians were called by the name of the Neighboring
People Elymaeans. But after Cyrus's time, though they often occur under that
name, especially in Sacred History, yet commonly Persia is not called by the
name of Elam, but of Paras, which signifies a Horse, because the Persians, of
Footmen, were made to fight on Horseback by the appointment of Cyrus, as
Xenophon relates.

And who dwell in Mesopotamia. Luke proceeds in a direct Order from East to
West, in the recital of these People. But in regard the Inhabitants of
Mesopotamia, Judaea, Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, are comprehended in the
former words, v. 5. that dwell in Jerusalem, plain it is, that by Inhabitants
or Dwellers, is not meant they who had settled Abodes, but they who sojourned
for some time in Jerusalem. See the former Annot. upon v. 5. By Stephen of
Byzantium, the Inhabitants of Mesopotamia are called Mesopotamites; by Vopiscus
in the Life of Aurelius Mesopotamians. See our Notes upon Hosea 12.12.

Judaea. Strictly so taken, from whose Dialect that of the Galilaeans was much
different, as appears by Peter's being betrayed by his Tongue. See our Literal
Explication upon Matthew. 3.5.

Cappadocia. This to the West is bounded by Galatia, to the South by Cilicia,
to the East by Armenia, to the North by part of the Euxine Sea, l. 5. c. 6.
according to Ptolomy. The Cappadocians inhabitants of this Country were
formerly called Leucosyrians, as Pliny testifies, lib. 6. c. 3. and Syrians, as
Herod. witnesses. l. 1. c. 72.
Before the Enlargement of the Roman Emp. they were first under the Persians,
and afterward governed by themselves in the Reign of Ariaratha, after whom
Reigned Archelaus, whose Daughter Glaphyra married to Alexander the Son of
Herod the Great, l. 1. Them. 2. l. 12.
by the relation of Constantine Porphyrogennet. The Geographer relates this
Story somewhat otherwise. That when the Royal Line failed, the Romans, in
regard of the common League of Friendship between both Nations, permitted them
to live under their own Laws, but that the Cappadocians, sending their
Ambassadors, refused their Liberty, and desired to have a King imposed upon
them. The Romans therefore, admiring the Humor of the People, that were out of
love with Liberty, sent them a free permission to choose a King among
themselves, who thereupon chose Arivbarzanes, whom Forphyrogenneta calls
Ariaratha; whose Line failing also after the third Descent, Archelaus was
imposed upon them by Antonius, no way related to Ariobarzanes. Formerly the
Nation of the Cappadocians was infamous for wickedness and fraudulency, as also
the Cilicians and Cretes, which gave rise to the Proverb, Three Kappas or K's
the worst, which was afterward applied to the three Cornelius's, Sylla, Cinna,
and Lentulus, whose proper names were Cornelius. Nevertheless, there is no
Country so bad, which does not produce some excellent persons. Thus Cappadocia
gave to the World three most renowned Bishops, Gregory, Sirnam'd the
Wonderworker, of Neocesarea, Basil the Great of Caesarea, and Gregory
Nazianzene. Formerly it produced Pausanias, who from the place of his Nativity
is called Caesariensis, from his Country Cappadocian and Syrian; in regard that
some comprehend Cappadocia under Syria. The often praised Geographer Strabo was
also born in a Town of Cappadocia, called Amasia.

Pontus. The Country of Asia the less, famous for the Renowned Mithridates, and
Aquila, that exquisite Inpreter of the Old Testament. This Region is bounded to
the West by the River Halys, to the East by the Country of Colchis, to the
South by the lesser Armenia, and to the North by the Euxin Sea, according to
Strabo. Ptosomy varying in his limits. Pontus, lib. 5.
says he, is bounded to the West by the mouth of the Propontis, and the
Thracian Bosphorus, to the South by that Country, which is properly called
Asia, and to the North by part of the Euxin Sea.

Asia. Meaning the Proconsular Asia, which was under the Proconsul, and chief
of the seven Provinces, which constituted the Asian Diocese. The Romans, Strab.
l. 13.
says Frederick Spanheim the Son, called that particularly Asia, which
comprehended the Country belonging to the Pergamen Kings, which lies between
the Hellespont, Lydia, and Caria, and comprehends a part of Mysia, with the
Country named Aeolis, extending itself on the one side to the Adramytick Gulf,
on the other side to the Fountains of the River Meander. Of this Province,
which wasmore strictly called Asia, the Metropolis was Ephesus, the Seat of the
Proconsuls of Asia. The next to Ephesus, in the time of the Apostles, was
Smyrna; the same City being also a Metropolis: after that, Pergamus, the Seat
of the famous King Attalus, as the most learned Spanheim relates in his
Introduction to Geography.

Phrygia. In the Asian Diocese, which was subject to the Asiatick Vicar; there
was a twofold Phrygia, of which the one was called the greater, and Pacatian,
the other the lesser, and the healthful. The first was bounded to the North by
Bithynia, and Galalia; to the East by the healthful Phrygia, and Pisidia; to
the South, by Lydia, Caria, and Lycia: to the West by the Proconsular Asia. The
Metropolis of this Country was Laodicea, upon the River Lycus. Phrygia the
wholesome was conterminous Northward to the greater, toward Galatia and
Bithynia. The Metropolis of which was Synnada in the ancient Jonia, a Colony of
the Dorians, originally descended from the Macedonians, as appears by the
ancient Coins, according to the relation of the forecited Spanhemius.

Pamphylia. This Province was the utmost limit of the Asian Diocese to the
South, toward the Seashore, from thence called the Pamphilian Sea. It is
bounded to the East by Cilicia, and part of Cappadocia, to the West by Lycia,
to the North by Galatia. Formerly, says Spanheim, comprehending Pisidia, and
Isauria, it was under one and the same Governor with Lycia, in the Reign of
Constantine the Great; but at length made Consular under Theodosius the
Younger, and divided into two parts, the first part, whose Metropolis was Sida,
and the second, whose chief City was Perga. Moreover, although that in
Pamphilia, and the rest of the Provinces already mentioned, the Greek Language
was frequently used, yet there was another Dialect proper to every Country, and
dinering from that of the adjoining Provinces. Therefore Strabo affirms, that
the Cibyrates made use of four Dialects, the Pisidic, Grecian, Lydean, and
Solomon. The Syrians also spoke two Languages at that time, as also the Jews,
for they used both the Greek and Syriac. Nay, they might be said to make use of
three Languages, in regard the Latin was also spoken among them, as the learned
Salmasius observes.

Egypt. Of Egypt, thus the learned Michael Baudrand. Egypt is a most famous
Country of Africa, not of Asia, under the Dominion of the Turks ever since the
year 1517. It extends in length from the Mediterranean Sea to Syene. The River
Nile runs through the middle of it, whose inundations make it fertile. To its
East lies the deserts of Arabia, to the West Lybia, to the South Aethiopia, and
to the North the Mediterranean Sea.

And the parts of Lybia round about Cyrene. The upper Lybia was called
Pentapolitan, from the number of her Cities, of which the names were Berenice,
Arsinoe, Ptolemais, Apollonia, and the most famous of all, Cyrene, from which
all the upper Lybia is sometimes called Cyrenaic. The bounds of this Cyrenaic
Lybia, says Spanheim, were the greater Syrtis to the West; the Country of the
Psylli, and the desert Lybia to the South, and Marmarick Lybia to the East. See
our Annotations upon Amos 9.7. Mat. 27.33.

And Strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselytes. That is, such of the Romans as
sojourned in Judaea, as well Jews by birth as Proselytes. At Rome, says
Grotius, there were many Jews, as Cicero, and Horace tell us. Also many Women,
and Freed Men joined themselves to them, as Tibullus, Ovid, and Philo witness.

11. Cretes. Says the abovementioned Spanheim, Crete, seated between the
Lybic, and Egean Sea, to the South of the Peloponnesus, and to the East of the
Island Carpathus, was one of the first that were illuminated with the light of
the Gospel by the Preaching of St. Peter, Act. 2.
and the great pains of Paul and Titus. In disquis. Chorograph. set before his
Notes upon St. John's Gospel.
But the most learned Lightfoot believes, that by Cretes, are understood here,
the inhabitants of that Region of Palestine, which we have already observed to
be called Creth by the Syrians, in our Notes upon Sophonia 2.5. because the
Cretes are here joined with the Arabians, who are contiguous to the land of
Palestine.

Arabians. Arabia is a Country of Asia, Neighboring upon Africa, Bounded to
the North by Syria, and the River Euphrates, to the East by the Persian Golph,
to the West by the Arabian Golph, and to the South by the Arabian Sea, or part
of the Indian Ocean. It is threefold; the Desert Arabia, where the Israelites
abode forty years; the Happy, or Spice-bearing; and the Stony, famous for the
City of Krac, or Harach, which in Scripture is called Petra of the Wilderness;
and for Mount Sinai, where God promulgated the Law by Moses; which Mountain by
Ethnic Writers is called Casius. Wherefore Solinus calls the Arabians, c. 46.
a People famous for the Mountain Casius, where was the Temple of Jupiter, who
from thence was entitled Casius. There also lay Interred the Body of Pompey the
Great, whose Monument was sumptuously built by Adrian, as Aelius Spartianus
records in the life of Adrian; moved thereto perhaps by that famous distich,
for Adrian was a learned Person, Licinius Tomb is large; but Cato's small;
Pompey has none; believe me Gods at all?
There was also another Mount Casius in Syria, which is the reason of some
confusion among Writers. They who desire more of Arabia, may read Strabo,
Ptolomy, and Pliny.

We have heard. In the Greek, we do hear, as in the English version; that is to
say, with our own ears.

Speaking in our Tongues. Not that when one voice was uttered, many other as it
were Eccho's dispersed themselves, but that the Disciples of Christ spoke in
the proper languages of them that heard.

The wonderful works of God. Which God had prepared before the foundations of
the world, to be given to the faithful by Christ. Those wonderful works are
called Glorious Things, Psalm. 87.3.

12. What means this? That is, to what intent is all this?

13. Others mocking. In the Greek, Cavilling. Learn from these Cavillers, that
there is no miracle so great, but scurrilous, and impious loquacity will find a
quarrel to reproach it.

They are full of Must. These things being done upon the day of Pentecost, at
what time there is no new Wine or Must, properly so called; Must seems here to
be taken for any sweet Wine, or Wine boiled out of the Must.

14. But Peter standing up with the Eleven. Armed with Boldness, and trusting
in the assistance of the newly received Holy Ghost.

Lift up his voice. That he might be heard by all, in such a numerous Assembly
of Auditors.

Ye men of Judaea. Peter being about to preach forth Christ to the mutinous
multitude, does not presently begin from the Prophecy of Joel, but first
removes the false report spread by some, that they who spoke in various
languages, were in the extravagancies of their Wine. And presently by the
pleasing Address of, Ye men of Judaea, courts the good will of the Auditory.
For it was an appellation plausible to those who professed the Jewish Religion;
Ye men of Judaea; in regard that they excelled all other Nations for many
reasons; to wit, in regard of the Law given from Heaven, the Honor of the
Prophets, and the Worship of the true God.

And all you that live in Jerusalem. He addresses himself to these dwellers in
Jerusalem, particularly, because they were both in greater number, and of
greater quality then the rest.

Be this known unto you; As if he had said, Attend with heed to what I am about
to say.

15. Seeing it is but the third Hour of the day. Tho such be the shame of
Drunkenness, that it abhors the Light, and that they who are drunk, are drunk
in the night; 1 These. 5.7.
yet there are not a few who like Swine, as soon as they rise, do make haste
from their Beds to their Cups. Against whom the Prophet darts his Woe be to
you. Isa. 5.11.
Woe be to you that rise betimes in the morning to follow strong drink. In vit.
sua.
And though Josephus relates that the Jews upon Festival days, were never wont
to dine till the sixth hour, that is, noon, yet that Custom was not observed by
all; there being many breakers of the Commandments of God, and violaters of
human Customs, such as lived in Isaiah's time: Chiefly upon Festival days, upon
which the Jews were commanded to rejoice before the Lord. Levit. 23.40.
The words of Peter are therefore to be understood, as if he had said, that
they were more pious and devout then to be drunk by nine a clock in the
morning, at what time there is no man, but moderately temperate, who is not
fasting. The Chaldee Paraphrase upon Ecclesiastes 10.16. After they have
offered the usual Sacrifice, let them eat bread at the fourth hour; which with
us is at ten in the morning. In gloss. ad fol. 83. tract. Talmud Baba Metsia.
Rabbi Solomon Jarchi, at the fourth hour, says he, which is the hour of
eating, at what time all people retire to take their meals.

16. But this, etc. As if he had said, But it happens to these persons, what
Joel had foretold by the Spirit of Prophecy. In the same manner the Jews refer
it to the times of the Messiah, as R. Saadia testifies. lib. Emounoth cap. 8.
Then shall remain a gift of Prophecy among our people, so that our Sons, and
our Servants shall Prophecy, according to that of Joel; And afterward I will
pour forth my Spirit, etc.

17. In the last days. That is, in the times of the Messiah, which were the
last days of Jerusalem, and the Jewish Government. Luke follows in the Citation
of this place, and some others, the Hellenist Interpreters, though not exactly,
the words being sometimes changed, and transposed. Which Moses does also,
reciting the Decalogue in Deuteronomy. Moreover by this Prophecy of Joel, and
by others of the same nature, God promised that he would endue those that
believed in him, with a larger proportion of Divine Knowledge under the New
Testament, then he had done under the Old. But he did not signify, that he
would do it alone, and without any other means; and that there would be no
farther use of the Holy Scripture. But that on the contrary, that extraordinary
help, the infusion of the Holy Spirit, Dreams and Visions should chiefly all
tend to that, that the mind of God speaking in the Scripture, might be the
sooner understood. To the end, that no Person who should with attentive
devotion search them, and implore the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, should
stand in much need of the instruction of another, to understand those things
which are necessary to be known for Salvation.

Upon all flesh. That is, upon all Conditions and Sexes believing in Christ;
and ready to lead their lives according to his Precepts. Wherefore, Infra c.
5.30.
says Peter, The Lord has given his holy Spirit to those that obey him.

Shall prophecy. As c. 21. the four Daughters of Philip the Evangelist, and
Agabus.

Shall see Visions. That is to say, caused from above, as did Ananias and
Peter, c. 9.10.10.11. Says Macrobius upon Scipio's Dream; There are five
principal diversities and names of things, which people seem to see in their
sleep. For either it is a Dream, or a Vision, or an Oracle, or an Inspiration,
or a Phantasm, which Cicero calls Visum, as often as he needed make use of this
word. See our litteral explanation upon Joel 2.28.

18. And I, etc. See our Annot. Joel 2.29.

19. And will show wonders. Such were the Signs fore-running the Extirpation of
the Jews, which they suffered under the Romans, for rejecting Jesus the Doctor
of perfect Justice, and contemning the Doctrine of the Apostles inspired with
his Spirit, and inviting them to Repentance. Such were Comets hovering over
Jerusalem like flaming Swords, Chariots and Armies rushing together in the Air;
with like events upon the Earth, as Slaughters, burning of Towns, and Cities,
and other calamities that befell the Jews in Galilee and Judea, which use first
to portend, and then to bring a peoples utter destruction. See what we have
already said upon Joel 2.30.

20. The Sun shall be turned, etc. See our litteral explication upon Joel 2.31.

The great day of the Lord. That is, the great and terrible Judgment of God
upon the Refractory Jews. In the first sense, says Brenius, Joel spoke this of
the destruction by Nebuchadnezzar, but mystically of the destruction by the
Romans; which is called by way of super-eminency the day of the Lord. Thus also
says Beza, These things I refer to the Nation of the Jews, whose utter
destruction being shortly to fall upon the obstinate contemners of the Gospel,
is foretold, as Christ also positively declares, Mat. 24. however joining them
with that last day, when the same calamity which formerly befell Jerusalem,
shall be the ruin of the whole world, guilty of the same great and outrageous
obstinacy. Moreover the destruction of the Jews by the Romans is called the
great and terrible day of the Lord, as Lightfoot observes in his Annotations
upon Mark 9.1. It is described as the end of the World. Acts 2.20. 2 These.
2.2.3. Jer. 4.24. etc. Mat. 24.29. etc. Isa. 2.2. Acts 2.17. 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Pet.
3.3. Isa. 65.17. 2 Pet. 3.13. Jo. 22.21. Heb. 10.37. Rev. 1.7. Matt. 19.28.
Luke 22.30.
By Periphrase it is called the last days, or latter times, that is, the last
times of the continuance of this City, and Government. From that time begins
the New World. It is also described as the coming of Christ. His coming in the
Clouds, in glory with the Angels; and then again as the Inthroning of Christ
and his twelve Apostles judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Thus far Lightfoot.

And notable. In the Greek is Epiphanes, by which word the Septuagint use to
render the Hebrew word Hanora, that signifies Terrible. Nor is it to be
questioned, says Ludovicus De Dieu, but that from thence that cruel Tyrant
Antiochus was called Epiphanes, Terrible, rather than Illustrious. This
Antiochus is called by Polybius, Epimanes, that is to say, Furious, or Raging
Mad.

21. And it shall come to pass, that all, etc. As if he had said, that
whosoever shall in word and deed religiously worship Christ sent by God, shall
be delivered from the grievous calamity prepared for the Jews. Romans 10.12, 13.
Genesis 12.8.13.4.26.25. 1 Chr. 13.6. Psalm 79.6. Isa. 41.25. Jer. 10.25. Acts
9.14, 21. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.22.
Thus Paul adapts this Prophesy to Christ our Savior. But as the Invocation of
God is not only taken for prayer directed to him, but frequently for any act of
Divine Worship; so is also the Invocation of Christ, or of his name taken in
the same sense. Now that the Christians were freed from the common calamitys of
the Jews in the destruction of Jerusalem, 3. Hist. 5.
we find in Eusebius. But whereas the whole Commonalty and Body of Believers at
the Church of Jerusalem, by Oracular foresight inspired into some devout and
holy persons, were admonished to depart the City before the War, and seat
themselves in a Town beyond Jordan, called by the name of Pella. And now all
those that believed in Christ, having translated themselves from the forsaken
Jerusalem to Pella; and then it was that the Royal City, and Capital Seat of
the Nation, being deserted by the holy people was overwhelmed by Divine
Vengeance, for so many crimes committed both against Christ and his Apostles,
so that the whole race of those wicked people perished. See my Annotations upon
Joel 2.32.

Jesus of Nazareth. In the Greek, Jesus the Nazarean, who being conceived,
educated, and leading the most part of his life in Nazareth of Galilee,
according to the predictions of the Prophets, might well be called Nazarean.
See our Literal Explanation, Mat. 2.23.

Approved of God. As if he had said, The person whom God by most powerful, and
not to be contradicted, proofs had demonstrated to be by him to you sent,
seeing that he wrought so many and such great Miracles in your sight, which no
man could have effected but by a Divine Power. The same also Nicodemus
acknowledged. Master, John 3.2.
said that great Senator of the Sanedrim, We know that thou come from. God,
for no man can work those Miracles which thou do, unless God were with him.

Among you. An Hebraisin, for, to you, that is to say, to be by him sent to you.

By Miracles, Wonders, and Signs. A Synonymy, which Figure we make use of, when
we think one word not sufficient to explain the dignity and value of the thing.
But why Miracles are called both Miracles, Wonders, and Signs, we have already
declared upon Mat. 24.24.

In the midst of you. That is, Jo. 12.37.
before your Eyes. But when he had wrought so many Signs before them, they
believed not in him.

23. This, etc. This Jesus by the Decree of the Father to whom he in all things
voluntarily obeyed, being surrendered into your power, with an incredible
importunity you forced the Romans to nail him to the Cross.

By the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God delivered. In the Greek,
yielded up. They are said to be yielded up, says Grotius, who are delivered up
to their Enemies. Therefore Christ by the determinate decree of God was given
up into the power and disposal of his Enemies, whose hostile and inhumane rage
God did not predestinate, as the Divines do speak, but only foreknew. De
Predest. SS. c. 10.
Predestination, says St. Austin, cannot be without foreknowledge, but
foreknowledge may be without predestination. For by predestination God foreknew
those things which he was to act; but he may foreknow those things which he
himself does not do; as all manner of sins. For though there are some which are
in such a manner sins, as to be the punishment of sins; Romans 1.28.
Hence it is said, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
which are not convenient: yet there is no sin in what is attributed to God, but
Judgment. Thus far St. Austin.

And by the hands of the wicked. In the Greek, of the Lawless. The Jews called
those Lawless and Sinners, which are vulgarly called Pagans. But here Peter
means the Roman Soldiers, who are called Sinners, Matt. 26.45. Mark 14.41.
Luke 24.7. See 1 Cor. 9.15.

Ye slew. He that is the Author and Abettor of Murder is said to commit the
Murder.

24. Sermon. 8. de Verb. Dom.
Whom God has raised up. Most excellently St. Austin: No dead person is the
raiser of himself. He could raise himself, who was not dead tho his Flesh were
dead. For he raised that which was dead; he raised himself who lived in
himself, but was dead in the flesh that was to be raised. For the Father alone
did not raise the Son, of whom it is said by the Apostles, For which God raised
him, but also the Lord raised himself, that is, his own body; therefore said
he, Destroy this body, Jo. 2.19.
and in three days I will raise it. But who is so mad, says the same St.
Austin, Contra Ser. Ar. c. 15.
as to say that the Holy Spirit did not operate in the Resurrection of Christ,
seeing that he operated the man Christ himself?

Having loosed the pains of Hell. The Greek has, of Death, as in the English
Version, that is, having loosed the bands of the Sepulcher, or, which is the
same thing, having broken the strong Cords of Death, with which Christ had
surrendered himself to be bound, laying down his Soul that he might reassume
it, John 10.17. alluding to the swathings of the Dead; or to the Cords with
which Malefactors are bound, when led to Execution, to prevent their crafty
means to escape. From these Bands God set Christ at Liberty, recalling him to a
life never to be ended. The Hebrew word Chebel, says Sir Edward Leigh, In
Supplent t. Crit c. Sac.
signify's two things, a Cord or a Fetter, or the Torments or pangs, more
especially of a Childbearing Woman. Hence this word occurring to the Seventy
Interpreters, Psalm. 18.2.
where it certainly signifies Cords or Bonds, they turn the word, Sharp pains;
and so in other places. 1 Kings 20.31, etc.
And here St. Luke following their example uses the words, the pains of Death,
or as some of the Ancients, with the Syriack Interpreter, have read, of Hell.
Where both additions of the words Loosing and Holding show Bonds or Cords to be
here denoted by Pains.

It was impossible, etc. As if he had said, He might be bound with the Cords of
Death, but he could not be detained bound by those Bonds, tho never so strong,
who had power to lay down his life, and power to resume it, John 10.17, 18.
and only laid it down that he might resume it.

Of it. That is, either of Death, or of Hell; In whose bonds being held and
bound, he was free to break the Cords. For Hell in this verse is taken either
for the Grave, or for the common receptacle of all Souls separated by Death
from the Body; which most of the Ancient Interpreters both Jews and Christians
believe to be signified in Scripture by the word Hell. Hence that of Hilarious,
in Psalm. 138.
This is the Law of Human necessity, that the bodies being buried, the Souls
descend to Hell, which descent, to the full finishing of all what belonged to a
true man, the Lord himself did not refuse. Moreover this word Hell, taken for
the common place of separated Souls, the Hebrews call Sheol, the Greeks Hades,
and both divide the place into two parts, of which, the Hebrews call the one
Paradise, the Greeks Elysium; the other is by the Greeks called Tartarus, by
the Hebrews Gehenna. Therefore Christ, says Ja. Windet, was in Paradise, and
by the same way in Hell. Therefore St. Austin labored in vain, and might have
spared himself the trouble, which he spends upon that question propounded in
his Epistle to Dardanus, and elsewhere. And when we believe, according to the
Creed in Christ descending into Hell, those are deceived, who believe the
meaning to be, that he descended into the place of Torment, commonly called
Hell.

25. For David speaks concerning him. As if he had said, For the Holy Ghost,
who spoke by the mouth of David, representing the person of Christ, looking
upon Christ as being dead, spoke these words, Psalm. 16.8, etc.

I foresaw the Lord always before my face. That is, the Majesty of God
represented it self before my Eyes day and night, that I might submit my self
wholly to his power and disposal.

For he is on my right hand that I should not be moved. As if he had said, By
his help and assistance, I overcome most difficult Labors. To be at the right
hand, says Genebrard, is to be prepared and ready to assist.

26. Therefore. That is, because I have God to assist me in overcoming any
hardships or dangers whatsoever.

Did my heart rejoice. That is, I rejoice with all my heart. Preterperfect
Tenses, says Vatablus; among the Hebrews, are used for Futures and Presents.

And my Tongue was glad. The Hebrew has it, my glory, or honor. That is, and
my gladness excites me to sing an Hymn. Honor, or Glory, says Moller, is
taken for the Tongue. As, Genesis 49.6.
My Honor, be not thou united; that is, I did not approve their Crimes with my
Tongue: See Psalm 30. v. ult. Psalm. 57.12.
Nor did I by my command excite them to perpetrate evil. Therefore then is the
Tongue so called, as being that member particularly framed to celebrate the
Honor of God, and the praises of men. And for that reason they who revile God
or Men, their Tongues are deservedly called dishonor and infamy.

Moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope. The Hebrew has it, in safety. As if
he had said, Although it may happen that my body maylie prostrate in the cold
Arms of Death, enclosed within the Sepulcher, yet my confident hopes of
returning from death to life, affords me tranquillity, and security of mind.
Says Kimchi, in Psalm. 16. v. 9. While I live, my flesh shall remain in safety,
because he shall deliver me from all harm. But in a mysterious sense, he
believes it to be as if he had said, After Death my flesh shall lie in the
Grave secure from Worms, because they shall have no power over it.

27. For thou will not leave my Soul in Hell. The sense in reference to David
is, thou will not suffer me to be slain by Saul; 1 Samuel 22.1.
but in relation to the Messiah, of whom David's concerns were Types, thou will
not leave me long in the state of the dead, or, which is the same thing, thou will not suffer my Soul laid down for my Sheep, to be a long time shut up
within the receptacle of Souls separated from the body, into which I descended,
l. 5. c. 26. Upon Luke 16.13.
to satisfy the law of death, as Ireneus speaks. Worthily therefore Grotius,
True it is, says he, that Hell is a place subtracted from our sight, and when
it is understood in reference to the Body, it signifies the Grave, where the
Body lies without a Soul, but in reference to the Soul, it denotes that Region
or State, wherein the Soul remains without the Body. Therefore as Dives was in
Hell, so was also Lazarus, the Regions being only distinguished. For both
Paradise and Gehenna, or, as the Greeks called those places, Tartarus and
Elysium were in Hell. And that this was the opinion of the Greeks, is most
certain, whom Virgil follows in the sixth of his Aeneids. Nor let any one
question the Jews, for whom I bring Josephus to vouch, who says that the
Prophet Samuel was raised by the Witch out of Hell. The same Author speaking of
the Sadduces, They take away, says he, all punishments and rewards out of
Hell. Again, where he sets down the opinion of the Pharisees, he appoints the
seat both of punishment and reward in Hell, under ground, because the Infernal
Regions by the Greeks are called Subterraneal: Either because Hell was thought
to be under ground, or rather because it is no more in sight then the most
hidden recesses which the Earth conceals. Josephus, reciting the Opinions of
the Esseans, de Bill. Jud. l. 2. c. 12.
places the Souls of the Godly beyond the Ocean, to which in another place,
according to the judgment of the same persons, he allots the most holy Region
of Heaven. But indeed those phrases of speech, under the Earth, in the Air,
beyond the Ocean, and what we find in Tertullian, beyond the fiery Zone,
signify no more then that which is invisible, and inaccessible to us. Thus far
Grotius, De bono mortis cap. 10.
to which he adds that place of St. Ambrose It had been enough to have said to
those Philosophers, that Souls, set at liberty from the body, went directly to
Aides, that is, to a place which is not seen, which we call in Latin infernus.
And lastly, the Scripture calls those receptacles of separated Souls, Magazines.

Thy Holy One. In the Hebrew, thy bountiful. That is, him, who never, nor in no
place, found thy bounteousness, and loving kindness, withdrawn from him.

To see Corruption. That is, to be corrupted. Thus To see death is to die. Luke
2.26.
The Hebrew word (...), which properly signifies Corruption, or putrefaction,
as the two great Apostles, Peter here, and Paul, c. 13.30. urge the Emphasis of
it, is nevertheless very often taken for a ditch or pit, where dead bodies lie
putrefying. Psalm. 57.7. and 94.3.
So the Greek word whereby Luke expresses the Hebrew word, is by the
Interpreters of the old Testament, not only used to denote bare Corruption,
(...) 16. Pro. 27.21.
but also the place of Putrefaction. To see the Pit, says Vatablus, is to be
laid in a Pit to suffer putrefaction. The sense therefore of this half verse in
reference to David is, thou will not (...) being through thy benignity
appointed to Reign, to die a sad death by the hand of my Enemies; in relation
to the Messiah typified by David; Thou will nor suffer me, toward whom thou
hear a Love most (...) and ineffable, to lie so long in the Grave, till my
body be rotten.

28. Thou have made known to me the way of life. In the Hebrew, Thou will make
me know the path of life. In respect of David, it signifies, thou will open me
a most certain way to deliver me from the death designed me by my Enemies. In
respect of the Messiah, thou will bring me back from death, to perpetual and
immortal life.

Thou shall make me full of Joy. That is, thou shall heap joy and comfort upon
me.

With thy face. As if he had said, Being by thee beheld with a benign and
gracious Aspect.

29. Men and Brethren. A kind compellation to gain the affections of the
Hearers. Neither does Peter in the least deny the cited words of Psalm. 16. to
be any wise understood of David: But urges them so to be uttered by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, that literally, and properly they are not to be
understood of David, but of Christ, of whom David made a representation.

Of the Patriarch David. Patriarch is a compound Greek word of Patria,
signifying Family, and Arche, Beginning. However every Father of a Family, is
not called a Patriarch by the Hellenists, but only they who in Hebrew are
called the Heads, or chief of the Fathers; that is, the Fathers of the Fathers
of a Family, and the Founders of the whole Family and Kindred. They are called
the Heads of the Fathers, Exodus 6.25.
and 1 Chr. 9.9. Patriarchs. And thus David is properly called a Patriarch,
because he was the Founder of the Royal Family; which is called in Greek
Patria, c. 7. v. 8, 9.
Lineage, Luke 2.4. And so below, the twelve Sons of Jacob are called
Patriarchs, because the several Tribes derived their names from them, as being
the Founders of their Race, and deduced their Original from them. Heb. 7.4.
So Abraham is called a Patriarch, because the whole race of the Elect people
of God descended from his Loins. There were also other Patriarchs improperly so
called, not in respect of Pedigree, but in regard of their Superiority, and
Precedence. Thus they, whom the Author of the Chronicles calls Princes of the
Tribes of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 27.22.
the Greeks call Patriarchs of the Tribes, and in this sense also King David
advanced to the most supreme degree of Dignity, might be styled a Patriarch.
Such were the Patriarchs improperly so called, whom the Hellenist Jews after
the destruction of Jerusalem, chose for their Chieftains. Therefore, says the
learned Heidegger, Exercitat 1. Hist. Patriarch. n. 6. Vopisc. in the life of
Saturnin.
Hadrian to Severianus the Consul, makes mention of the Patriarch of the Jews
dwelling in Alexandria. Epiphanius also relates in his disputation against the
Ebionites, That some part of the Jews in his time inhabited the City of
Tiberias, who acknowledged a Head or Supreme, to whom they gave the Title of
Patriarch; to whom also were joined several Assistants, who were called
Apostles. From which custom to think that Christ gave to his Disciples the name
of Apostles, is a gross mistake of Baronius, ad annum 32. n. 5.
as Casaubon learnedly makes out. But in the Christian Church, as being a
Spiritual Family, after the Passion of Christ, several Bishops were called
Fathers, and Archbishops Patriarchs; that is to say, chief among the Fathers.
Whom it was lawful to suffer, if not as Fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15.
at least as Pedagogues in Christ. But the Ambition of these Persons
increasing, the chief Archbishops, whom they called Bishops of the highest
Seat, usurped this Title to themselves; till at length four of them obtained
this Title to be conferred upon them Principally above all the rest; the
Patriarch of Rome, of Alexandria, of Antioch and Jerusalem; to whom was added
at length the Patriarch of Constantinople, made the second, by reason of the
new Romes Dignity.

Is dead. He died in the Feast of Pentecost, if we may believe the Jerusalem
Talmud.

His Sepulcher. With which the bones and ashes of David are covered.

30. Of the Fruit of his Loins. The words are taken out of the 132 Psalm, v.
11. where the Greek has it, of the fruit of thy Belly; that is, by the birth of
thy Wife. The same sense answers to both. There is added here in the Greek
Text, to raise Christ according to the flesh. But there is no reason appearing,
why this addition, which the Greek Copies have, and Chrysostom has expressed,
should be brought into the least suspicion of being untrue. For, says the
learned Ludovicus de Dieu, when Luke does not relate what was singly sworn to
David, but what David as a Prophet knew to be sworn to him, it did not behove
him barely to recite the words of the Promise, but to explain how David as a
Prophet understood them. God had promised to David, that he would settle in his
Throne one of the fruit of his Loins; that, David as a Prophet knew to be
nothing else, but that God would raise Christ according to the Flesh, from the
fruit of his Loins, to sit upon his Throne.

To sit upon his Throne. Christ is said to sit upon David's Throne, because he
was designed by God to be his Successor, who after a Celestial and Divine
manner should Reign over the House of Jacob, that is, the people of God, over
whom, David had received from God the Earthly Dominion. For which reason,
Christ himself affirms that he has the Key, that is, the Power and Empire of
David, though his Throne be not established upon Earth, but translated to
Heaven, and that all Powers both in Heaven and Earth are subjected to his
Empire, together with Angels good, and evil, all People, Tongues, Nations, and
even Death, and Hell itself.

31. He seeing this before. As if he had said, David understanding by the
Spirit of Prophecy, Psalm. 132. and 2 Samuel, 7. Psalm. 16.
that it was promised him, that Christ should be raised from his Seed, by the
same Prophetic knowledge foretold, that the Soul of Christ should not be long
left in a condition separated from the Body, nor his Body remain so long in the
Sepulcher, as to be reduced to dust, before it should be raised.

32. Whereof we are witnesses. As if he had said, we all attest, that this
Jesus was raised from the dead, not by report, but by those certain signs, of
which we were all sensible by seeing, hearing, and feeling.

33. Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted. As much as to say, This
Jesus being taken up into Heaven by the Divine Power.

And by the Promise, etc. That is, and having received the Gift of the Holy
Ghost, which he as Mediator between God and Man, had often promised us, this
has he largely and plentifully bestowed upon us, as by our sudden speaking of
Languages we never learnt, is apparently demonstrable to you.

34. For David did not ascend into Heaven. That is, to the heavenly Throne,
which is typified by his earthly Throne.

But he says himself. So Christ, Mat. 22.43. Mark 12.36. and Luke 20.42. Hence
it is clear, that it was a thing confessed, and apparent to the Ancient Jews,
that the 110th Psalm contained a Prophecy concerning the Messia; and that David
was the Writer thereof. And indeed, says Grotius upon the foresaid place of
Matthew, The Inscription in the Hebrew Copies, is a Hymn of David, which alone
sufficiently argues that it is not to be attributed to Eliezer, or any other
Writer in the times of Ezechias. For through we should grant that the Psalms
Titles were not added by their own Authors, yet they appear to be of very^
great antiquity, and to enervate the credit of them, not by Argument, but at
our own conceited pleasures, to be ma^d for love of contention. The Septuagint
render the word Ledavid, to David but the Paraphrasts and other Jews render it
better of David in the second case. For if we should otherwise interpret it,
there would be none of the Psalms, which might be certainly thought David's.
Whereas the Jews themselves do all confess, that several of th^^ Psalms, having
the same Inscription, Ledavid, were nevertheless written by David.

The Lord said to my Lord. That is, the Eternal Father bespake the Messiah to
be born of me according to the flesh, who nevertheless is my Lord, because he
is the Only begotten Son of the Eternal Father. Rabbi Saadias testifies also
that the Messiah is here called Lord by David. upon c. 7. Dan. v. 13.


Sit thou at my Right hand. That is, sit thou, and reign in the Heavenly
Throne, as the Apostle explains it. He does not say, 1 Cor. 15.25. Heb. 10.12,
13.
stand before me, but sit; which signifies Regal and Judicial Power. Neither
does he say, sit at my feet, but at my Right hand; that is, be thou next in
power to me.

35. Until I make, etc. The word until, says Genebrard, uses to be taken
emphatically for even until, and signifies continuance, not exclusion of future
time, to which it is by no means opposed; as if he had said, Reign with me also
until I have put thy Enemies under thy feet; also, all the time that seems to
be contrary and opposite to thy Reign; also, before I have subdued thy Enemies
at thy feet, even before the Devil, Death, the Wicked, and all Sin be utterly
extirpated. For it is not to be questioned but that at all other times Christ
shall Reign. Observe therefore, that by this and the like particles, the
Scripture and the Hebrew Language affirms what might be otherwise called in
question, Psalm 122. Our Eyes are fixed upon the Lord, until he shall have
compassion upon us. That is, even until or before he shows us his mercy, that
is, in our time of distress, Mat. 28. I am with you until the end of the World,
that is, even until the end of the World, before which time, it seems, many
things may happen to fall out contrary to it.

36. Assuredly, etc. That is, let this truth be to you most certain and
undoubted, that this Jesus whom you demanded to the most ignoble and
ignominious Death of the Cross, is appointed by God the Messiah promised both
in the Law and the Prophets, and invested with all Power both in Heaven and
Earth.

37. What shall we do? That is, by what means shall we obtain pardon of so
heinous a Crime committed by us, when we demanded this Jesus constituted Lord
of Heaven and Earth, the Messiah promised in the Law and the Prophets, to be
put to the scandalous and ignominious death of the Cross.

38. Repent. The Greek, Be wise again, or return to perfect understanding. As
if he had said, So do you repent of the fact, that you may not only change your
thoughts, but also your lives for the better, and compose your selves to live
according to the rule of his Divine precepts. Nothing makes true Repentance,
says St. Austin, Sermon. 7. De Temp.
but the hatred of Sin and love of God. See my Annot. upon Mat. 3.2, 8. in that
edition which I dedicated to the Right honorable Hen. Compton, Lord Bishop of
London, whose most ardent Zeal for true Religion and Virtue, and most liberal
and munificent Charity both to me and the rest of the French Protestants, no
oblivion can ever be able to obscure.

And be baptized, etc. That is according to the command of Christ, let every
one of you, struck with a real sorrow for his sins, be plunged in Water;
because that sacred immersion has been instituted by Christ, like a certain
Signet, Diploma or Pattent, by which he confirms the remission and utter
defacing of their Sins to all those, who seek to him with an unfeigned faith,
as the only Physician of their Souls; so that their sins shall never more be
remembered or imputed to them.

The Sacred Ceremony of Baptism is not to be performed by the sprinkling only
or pouring on of a little Water, but by the plunging of the whole body of them
that are to be baptized; as first, the proper signification of the Greek word
Baptizo declares. Upon Mat. 3.6.
This, says Causaubon, was the rite of baptizing, that persons were plunged
into the Water, which the very word Baptizo sufficiently demonstrates. Which as
it does not extend so far as to sink down to the bottom, to the hurt of the
person, so is it not to swim upon the superficies. Therefore we are
apprehensive, that it is not without cause what some have disputed, that
Baptism ought to be administered by plunging the whole body into the Water; for
they urge the word Baptize. See our Annot. c. 1. v. 5. and our Literal
Explication, Mat. 3.6. and Mark 1.5.

Secondly, Mat. 3.16. and Mark 1.9.
The Example of Christ. When the Synod of Celichyth An. D. 816. where Wolfred
Archbishop of Canterbury presided. Can. 11.
Let, says he, the Presbyters beware, that when they administer the Sacrament
of Baptism, they do not pour Water upon the heads of the Infants, but let them
be always plunged in the Font, according to the Example of the Son of God
himself, who was thrice plunged in the Waters of Jordan. Thus must this
Ceremony be performed according to order. See our Lit. Expl. Mat. 3.15.

Thirdly, The constant practice of the Universal Church till the time of Clem.
5. who was Crowned Pope Anno. 1305. under whom first of all the second Synod of
Ravenna approved the abuse introduced into some Churches about a hundred years
before, that Baptism without any necessity should be administered by aspersion.
Hence it came to pass, that contrary to the Analogy, or intended Mystical
signification of this Sacrament all the West for the most part has in this age
the use of Rhantism, that is, sprinkling, instead of Baptism, as Zepper speaks,
to the great scandal of the Greeks and Russians, who to this day plunge into
the Water those they Baptize; and deny any one to be rightly baptized, who is
not plunged into the Water, according to the Precept of Christ, Council.
Florent. Sect. 9. c. 9. and Lib. of Infants Baptism. p. 693.

Ductor dubit. l. 3. c. 4. Reg. 15. Numb. 9.


as we may find in Sylvester Sguropulus, and Cassander. The custom of the
Ancient Church was not Sprinkling, but Immersion, in pursuance of the sense of
the word, Baptizing, in the Commandment, and of the Example of our blessed
Savior, says Dr. Jeremy Tailor.

The Greek word Baptein, says Salmasius in the Notes of diverse upon Sulpitius
Severus, St. Martin 's life, n. 16.
from which the word Baptizein derives, signifies Immersion, not Sprinkling.
Nor did the Ancients otherwise baptize than by single or treble Immersion. In
the Greek Church at this day, the person to be Baptized is plunged over Head
and Ears. The same thing does Peter Avitabolis testify of the Asian Christians
inhabiting Iberia and Colchi. Only they who are Bedridden, says Salmasius,
because they lie down, were baptized as convenience would permit, not as they
who plunge their Heads under Water, but by pouring the Water upon their whole
Bodies. Thus Novatus was baptized in his sickness by Effusion all over, not by
immersion. Eusebius. 6. Hist. c. 43. Orat. 40.
Gregory Nazianzen relates many and various names of this Sacrament, among
which are these two, Baptism and Washing. And adding the reason for these
Appellations, it was called, says he, Washing, because thereby sin is wash
away; and Baptism, in regard that sin is thereby signified to be buried. For,
as says St. Ambrose, Lib. de initiandis.
Water is that wherein the body is plunged, to wash all sin away. There all
vice is buried. Which in the Book inscribed Reformation of the Ecclesiastical
Laws, printed at London, 1641. is expressed in these words, While we are
plunged in the Water, the death and burial of Christ is recommended to us, that
we openly testify that sin lies dead and buried in us. For, as says St.
Bernard, Immersion is a representation of Death and Burial. But to substitute
in the room of Immersion, either sprinkling, or any any other way of applying
Water to the body, to signify the same thing, is not in the power of the
dispensers of Gods Mysteries, or of the Church. For that, as Tho. Aquinas
excellently well observes, It belongs to the Signifier to determine what sign
is to be used for the signification; but God it is, who by things sensible
signifies Spiritual things in the Sacraments. The Church has no more power than
was derived to it from the Apostles. Now the Apostles were endu'd by Christ
after his Resurrection with authority to preach throughout all Nations the
observance of all his Precepts. Mat. 28.20.
But never was there any power granted them to change the least Tittle in any
of the commands of Christ, much less of adding any new by their own authority.

Lastly, There is another thing that evinces the necessity of plunging the
parties to be baptized, 1 Pet. 3. v. 20, 21.
for that St. Peter asserts, the Genuine end of Baptism, was not to represent
the inward washing away from sin; which may be represented by any exterior
washing of the body; but to express the Death and Resurrection of Christ, as
also our own, and our belief of both Resurrections, as the most famous Sir
Norton Knatchbul in his learned Notes printed at Oxford, anno Dom. 1677. with
the license of the Vice Chancellor, observes upon that place of Peter, whose
words tho long, I cannot but transcribe, they are so full of truth and weight.
The sense and meaning of Peter is, says he, That Baptism which now saves us by
Water, that is, by the assistance of Water, and is Antitypical to the Ark of
Noah, does not signify the laying down of the filth of the Flesh in the Water,
but the covenant of a good Conscience toward God, while we are plunged in the
Water, which is the true use of Water in Baptism, thereby to testify our belief
in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; so that there is a manifest Antithesis
between these words By Water, and, by the Resurrection, nor is the Elegancy of
it displeasing. As if he should say, The Ark of Noah, not the Flood, was the
Type of Baptism, and Baptism was an Antitype of the Ark, not as Baptism is a
washing away of the filth of the Flesh by Water, wherein it answers not at all
to the Ark; but as it is the Covenant of a good Conscience toward God by the
Resurrection of Christ, in the belief of which Resurrection we are saved, as
they were saved in the Ark of Noah. For the Ark and Baptism were both a Type
and Figure of the Resurrection, so that the proper end of Baptism ought not to
be understood as if it were a Sign of the washing away of sin, although it be thus
oftentimes taken metonymically in the New Testament, and by the Fathers, but a
particular signal of the Resurrection by faith in the Resurrection of Christ.
Of which Baptism is a Lively and Emphatical Figure, as also was the Ark out of
which Noah returned forth as from the Sepulcher to a new life, and therefore
not unaptly called by Philo, The Captain of the New Creation. And then the
Whales belly out of which Jonas after a burial of three days was set at
liberty: And the Cloud and the Red Sea in which the people of Israel are said
to have been baptized; that is, not washed, but buried; for they were all Types
of the same thing as Baptism, not of the washing away of sin, but of the Death
and Resurrection of Christ, and our own. To which truth the Apostles, the
Fathers, the Scholasticks, and all Interpreters agree. The thing is so apparent
as not to need any Testimonies; but because there are not a few, who do not
vulgarly teach this Doctrine, it will not be superfluous, to produce some of
those innumerable testimonies that I may not seem to speak without book. And
first let us begin with St. Paul: Romans 6.3, 4. See also, Col. 2.12.
Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the Father of Glory,
so we also should walk in newness of life. 1 Cor. 15.29.
Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at
all? As if he had said, If there be no Resurrection, why are we baptized? In
vain does the Church use the Symbol of Baptism, if there be no Resurrection.
The like Testimonies frequently occur among the Fathers. That believing in his
Death we may be made partakers of his Resurrection by Baptism. Ignat. Epist. ad
Tral. id. Epist ad Philadelph.

Justin Martyr.


Baptism given in memory of the death of our Lord. We perform the Symbols of
his Death and Resurrection in Baptism. We know but one saving Baptism, in
regard there is but one death for the World, and one Resurrection from the
dead, Basil the Great.
of which Baptism is an Image. Hear Paul exclaiming; They passed through the
Sea, and were all baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea. Basil of Seleucia.
He calls Baptism the passage of the Sea; for it was the flight of death caused
by the Water. To be baptized and plunged, and so to return up, and rise out of
the Water, Chrysostom.
is a Symbol of the descent into Hell, Ambrose.
and return from thence. Baptism is a pledge and representation of the
Resurrection. Lactant.
Baptism is an earnest of the Resurrection. Bernard.
Immersion is a representation of Death and Burial. Innumerable are the
Testimonys which might be added; but these I think sufficient to prove that
Baptisin is an Image of the Death and Resurrection of Christ, (from whence we
acknowledge the Mystery of our Religion, Romans 1.4.
his Deity and Humanity) and of all the faithful who are baptized in his faith,
from death in sin to newness of life, which if they lead in this world, they
have a most assured hope, that being dead they shall hereafter rise to Glory
with Christ. Which things if they be so, I beseech you, what affinity is to be
seen between a burial and a washing, that Christian Baptism should be thought
to draw its Original from Jewish Lotions and Divings? For if it were true, that
the end of our Baptism were to signify a washing, or ablution, or if it were
true that the Jews of old did admit their Children or Proselytes into their
Church by the administration of any diving, as it is asserted by many learned
persons of late days, I confess it might be a probable Argument that our
Baptism was fetched from the divings of the Jews. But to prove that our Baptism
is indeed an Image of Death and Resurrection, not of washing, enough has been
said. But as to their Argument, who would have our Baptism to be deriv^d from
the Jewish Lotions, as there is nothing of certainty in it, so is it so far
from being grounded upon any authority of Scripture, that there are hardly any
footsteps to be found thereof in the Old Testament. They deduce the original of
Baptism from the Hebrew word (...), which signifies to wash or cleanse. Exodus
19.10.
But the Rabbis, if I am not deceived, make use of the Hebrew word (...),
which signifies Immersion, thereby making it appear that they owe the notion of
that word to the Greeks, or rather to the Christians. For what affinity is
there between Lotion and Immersion? Besides that, we find some to have been
baptized in Sand. But the thing is so uncertain, that it cannot be said of the
Rabbis, that there were not several among them, who differed very much about
this matter; for in the very Text cited by the forementioned learned men, Rabbi
Eliezer, expressly contradicts Rabbi Joshuah, who was the first that I know of,
who asserted this sort of Baptism among the Jews. For Rabbi Eliezer, who was
contemporary with Rabbi Joshua, if he did not live before him, asserts that a
Proselyte Circumciz'd and not Baptized was a true Proselyte, for so we read of
the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that they were Circumciz'd, but not
Baptized. But Rabbi Joshua affirms, that he who was Baptized, not he who was
Circumciz'd, was a true Proselyte. To whom shall I give credit? To Eliezer, who
asserts what the Scripture confirms, or to Joshua who affirms what is no where
to be found in Scripture? But the Rabbis upheld Joshua's side, and what wonder
was it? for it made for their Business, that is, for the honor of the Jewish
Religion, that the Christians should borrow their Ceremonies from them. But
when I see men of great learning in these times fetching the foundations of
truth from the Rabbis, I cannot but hesitate a little. For whence was the
Talmud sent us? They are the words of Buxtorf in his Synagoga Judaica, that we
should give so much credit thereto, that from thence we should believe that the
Law of Moses either can or ought to be understood? Much less the Gospel to
which they were professed enemies. For the Talmud is called a Labyrinth of
Errors, and the foundation of Jewish Fables. It was brought to perfection, and
held for Authentic five hundred years after Christ; therefore it is
unreasonable to rest upon the testimony of it. And that which moves me most,
Josephus, to omit all the Fathers that lived before the Talmud was finished,
who was also a Jew, and contemporary with Rabbi Eliezer, who also wrote in
particular of the Rites, Customs, and Acts of the Jews, is altogether silent in
this matter; so that it is an Argument to me next to a Demonstration, that two
such eminent persons, both Jews, and living at the same time, the one should
positively deny, the other make no mention of Baptism among the Jews. Besides,
if Baptism in the modern sense, were in use among the Jews in Ancient times,
why did the Pharisees ask John Baptist, Why do thou Baptize, Jo. 1.25.
if thou art not Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet? Do they not plainly
intimate that Baptism was not in use before, and that it was a received Opinion
among them, that there should be no Baptism, till either Christ, or Elias, or
that Prophet came. How then there should be so much affinity between Baptism,
and the Divings of the Jews, that the one should be successive to the other by
any right or pretense, is altogether, I confess, beyond my Faith. They say that
Arrian calls a Jew dipped; but I, as his Commentator does, believe that he spoke
confusedly, and that he rather meant a Christian then a Jew, as in another
place he calls the Christians Galileans; likewise Lubin upon Juvenal. Sat. 3.
v. 14. observes, that there by Jews, are meant Christians, who being expelled
the City by Domitian, were forced to betake themselves to the Woods that were
sacred to Heathenish Superstitions. Therefore that I may conclude, I say with
Alexander de Hales, Tinctio, that is, Dipping, is the formal cause of Baptism.
Thus far the most learned, and highly deserving of Sacred Writings, Sir Norton
Knatchbull, Knight and Baronet. Now, says Grotius, that the Ancients made use
of the word Tingere, instead of Baptizare, is not to be wondered at, seeing the
Latin word, Tingere, is properly the same in signification, and frequently used
for Mersare, to dip, or to plunge.

Hence it is, that Magnus in St. Cyprian, doubts whether they are to be
accounted rightly initiated Christians, who are only initiated by sprinkling,
or pouring, in case of sickness or weakness. To which Cyprian answers, That
whatever benefit accrews by the saving Sacrament, that sprinkling, or pouring
upon, necessity so enforcing, and God indulging, afford to the Believer. And
this is the sense and Law of the Church of England, not that it be indifferent,
but that all Infants be dipped, except in the case of sickness, and then
sprinkling is permitted. And therefore although in cases of Need and Charity,
the Church of England does not want some good examples in the best times to
countenance that permission, yet we are to follow her command, because that
command is not only according to the meaning and intent of the word, Baptize,
but agrees with the Mystery of the Sacrament itself. For we are buried with him
in Baptism, says the Apostle. The old Man is buried, and drowned in the
immersion under water, and when the baptized Person is lifted up from the
water, it represents the Resurrection of the new Man to newness of life. In
this case therefore, the contrary Custom, being not only against an
Ecclesiastical Law, but against the Analogy, and mysterious signification of
the Sacrament, is not to be complied with, unless in such cases that can be of
themselves sufficient to justify a liberty in a Ritual, and Ceremony; that is,
a case of necessity. Thus the learned Jeremy Tailor, Bishop of Down.

But the holy Martyr Cyprian, binds no body to his Opinion concerning those
that are sprinkled, or poured upon, in case of sickness or weakness. Wherein,
says he, our Moderation does hinder no body from thinking what he believes,
and doing what he thinks. Yea, verily, Cornelius, the Roman Bishop and Martyr,
contemporary with Cyprian, in a Synod of fifty Bishops, questioned whether
sprinkling or pouring upon the sick or weak might be called a Baptism or no. As
we may see in his Epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antiochia. Apud Nicephorum lib.
6. c. 3.
Indeed that the sick as well as the healthy were wont to be plunged, which is
properly to be baptized, says Pamelius in his Notes upon Cyprians Epistle to
Magnus; besides other proofs I omit, to be brief, the Acts of several Saints do
testify: as in the Acts of St. Sebastian the Martyr, we find that
Tranquillinus, a Nobleman, afflicted with the Gout, was so baptized by Polycarp
the Presbyter, and restored to health by his Baptism. Also a Paralytick Jew,
who having long tried the Physicians Art in vain, bethought himself of the
application of Christian Baptism; being brought in his Bed to the Font, or
dipping place at the appointment of Atticus, who succeeded Chrysostom in the
Constantinopolitan See, was plunged over head and ears; which being done, he
was immediately freed from his Distemper, and restored to perfect health.
Socrat^s l. 7. c. 4.
Therefore if rejecting the Errors of Human Contention, we return with a
Religious and sincere Faith to Evangelick Authority, and Apostolic Tradition,
we shall find it most safe for them who by necessity; and altogether necessary
for them, who lying under no necessity, were only sprinkled, or poured upon, to
be obedient to Christ, who commanded neither sprinkling nor effusion, but
immersion, and to be plunged into the water according to his Institution, Heb.
5.9.
who is made to all that obey him, the cause of Eternal Salvation. Nor is there
any reason why they should be afraid of repeating Baptism, or of the Scandal of
any Church, Because, as St. l. 1. Ep. 7.
Gregory says most excellently well, that is not said to be iterated; which is
not certainly demonstrated to have been rightly, and duly done. And as he says
in another place, if there be an Offense taken at the Truth; Hom. 7. in
Ezechiel.
it is much better that Offense be taken, then that the Truth should be
deserted. The Customs of Churches ought to submit to the words of Christ, not
the words of Christ to be wrested to the Customs of the Church; in regard the
words of Christ are the Foundation upon which all Church Customs are to be
built, that they may be safe and laudable. Whatsoever savours against the words
of Christ, savours against the Truth; and, as Tertullian says, Whatever savours
contrary to Truth, is Heresy, though it be an Ancient Custom. It is in the
power of God to pardon those that err out of simplicity. But because we erred
once, we are not always to go on in our Errors, Epist. ad Jubaian.
as St. Cyprian admonishes well: It being more proper for the wise, and those
that fear God, to obey the manifest, and open Truth, freely, and without delay,
then obstinately, and pertinaciously to resist it. Scotus having alleged the
judgment of Alexander the Third, 4 Sent. did. 3. q. 4. number. 10.
touching the baptizing of those, of whom it was doubted whether they were
Baptized or no, takes an occasion to recommend three maxims. The first is,
Where there is a possibility, the safest way is to be chosen. Secondly, Where
there is no possibility, the next to the safest way is to be made choice of.
Thirdly, When impossibility ceases, every thing is to be supplied, which
impossibility would not admit. These Maxims, so agreeable to reason, whoever
intends to follow, will never question, but that they ought to be Baptized, if
they have not received that Baptism ordained by Christ, but only the Rhantism,
that is, the sprinkling substituted in its room by a vulgar use, or rather
abuse, (...). Hist. (...). c. 14. ^. 13.
as Luther calls it. See c. 8. v. 38. Nor is it to be doubted, says that
famous Divine, John Forbes, but that they are again to be Baptized, who before
have only received a vain washing, and not the true Sacrament of Baptism. And
though it be not so great as the Papists imagine, yet is the necessity of this
Sacrament very great, and the profit and advantage very considerable.

In the name of Jesus Christ. That is, professing a faith in Christ not
feigned, as we may collect from c. 8. v. 37. See our Annotations upon the
place: Or in the name of Jesus Christ, is the same with in Jesus Christ; as St.
Paul speaks, Romans 6.3.
Are ye ignorant that whosoever of us are baptized in Christ Jesus, according
to the Greek, into Christ Jesus, we are baptized in his death, the Greek has
it, into his death. Upon which words, Eulogius of Alexandria; To be baptized
into Jesus Christ, signifies to be baptized according to the Precept and
Tradition of Christ; that is, L. 2. Contr. Novatian. apud Ph^tium in
Biblioth^^a.
into the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost. And that other into his death, is
Typically representing his death in Baptism. The same Patriarch in the same
place, a little before, What is said in the Acts of those that had received the
Baptism of John, that they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, denotes
that they were baptized according to the Institution and Doctrine of the Lord
Jesus: As also when it is said in another place, that they were baptized into
Christ, and the death of Christ, we ought to understand that the same sense is
thereby signified; that is to say, they were baptized into the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For so the Lord Jesus Christ both taught, Sect. 9.
Confut. Harding.
and commanded his Disciples to Baptize. John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, To
baptize, says he, in the name of Christ, is so to baptize, as Christ
instituted, commanded, and ordained. But those words, in the name of Christ,
signify no more that Baptism was administered in the only name of Christ, not of
the Father and Holy Ghost, then these words, Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ,
argue that he was a Servant of Christ only, and not of the Father, and Holy
Ghost also: Or as if those words which Paul spoke to the Keeper of the Prison,
believe in Jesus Christ, should be thought to free him from a necessity of
believing in the other two Persons of the Trinity. Moreover, if there be any
credit to be given to Pseudo-Abdias the Babylonian, the Apostles in the Infancy
of the Church, when they Baptized, used this Form, I Baptize thee in the name
of the Father, and of his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. Perhaps, to the
intent, that the name of Jesus Christ, which was odious to the Jews and
Gentiles, might be advanced into Honor, in regard that the Holy Ghost was
given in Baptism upon the Invocation of his name. Peter, Epist. 73. ad Jubaian.
says Cyprian, makes mention of Jesus Christ, not as if the Father were to be
omitted, but that the Son might be joined to the Father. l. 3. against Maximin.
Bishop of the Arrians. c. 17.
Hence, St. Austin uses this example to weaken his Adversaries Objection, where
that Arrian gain-says the Holy Ghost to be the Creator, because it is said all
things were made by the Son, If, says he, because the Spirit is not named,
therefore thou think the Spirit of God not to be a Creator, by the same
reason you may as well say, they were not baptized in his name, to whom St.
Peter speaks, Repent, and let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ, because he does not add, and of the Holy Ghost, nor in the name of the
Father, because he is not there named. But if they were commanded to be
baptized in the name of Christ, though the Father and Holy Ghost were not
mentioned; yet we understand that they were not otherwise baptized then in the
name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, why do thou not apprehend, when it is
said of the Son, all things were made by him, that the Holy Ghost also, though
not mentioned, is there likewise understood? Thus St. Austin. Certainly, says
Facundus, l. 1. to Justin. the Emp. c. 3.
Bishop of Hermia, the Apostles baptized in the name of Jesus, though not only
of the Lord Jesus, that is, in the name of the Son only, but also of the
Father, and Holy Ghost. And from hence I gather, that when Baptism was
celebrated, the very words consecrated to the celebration of that Ordinance,
were used. But in a relation it sufficed to mention only the name of the Lord
Jesus, to distinguish it from other divings. But therefore I believe that of
all the three Persons, the name of Jesus Christ is only assumed to denote the
new Baptism, because we are by Baptism buried with him into Death. Yet would it
not be said, unless the Lord Jesus Christ were one of the Trinity.

In remission of your sins. That is, to seal the Remission of your sins, either
received, or to be received by the full assurance of the Conscience. Therefore
the most learned Ames: Bellarmin. Enervat. Tom. 3. c. 3.
The remission of sins consists in the sentence of the offended God, nor can be
attributed to any outward Ceremony, unless it be as to a sign or a seal whereby
that sentence of God is manifested to us. 4. D. 1. Art. 1. Q. 4.
Says Bonaventure, As the Royal Letters sealed with the Kings Seal, are of high
Dignity, power, and value, and are said to do great things, yet there is not in
them any absolute force, but only an Ordainment through the efficacy of the
Royal Power; the same thing is to be understood of the Sacraments. And thus
speak the texts of the holy Fathers according to common acceptance.

And ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Spirit. That is, ye shall be endued
with the Prophetic Spirit, a specimen of which ye saw in the diversity of
Languages. For, says Calvin, this place ought not to be understood of the
Grace of Sanctification, which is generally conferred upon all the Godly.
According to the usual Hebrew phrase, the Prophetic Spirit is called the Holy
Spirit, which by their own confession failed among the Jews after the second
year of Darius the Son of Hystaspes, but was in a more ample measure restored
by Jesus Christ, according to the Prophesy of Joel.

39. To you, etc. As if he had said, For you who believe the Gospel preached by
me, together with your posterity that shall believe, and all that shall obey
the call of God, are comprehended in their number, to whom belongs the above
mentioned Promise by the mouth of Joel.

Who are far off. That is, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. Peter most
skilful in the Scriptures, and now enlightened by the Holy Ghost, knew very well
that the call of the Gentiles was to be; Mat. 28.19. and Acts 1.8.
yea he had learnt it also from Christ. But at what time, and under what
conditions, he was ignorant. Therefore below c. 11. when the Gentiles were not
yet called, he shunned their Converse as polluted; but having known the will of
God, that they were to be called without the observation of the Mosaical Law,
he presently made it his business to go amongst them.

Even as many as the Lord our God shall call. That is, whoever shall obey the
voice of God calling to them. For, says Grotius, in words that signify a
Benefit, the acceptance of the benefit is frequently understood. Thus the
appellation of called is taken, 1 Cor. 1.24. and Jude 1. Thus the word, to be
revealed, is taken, Is. 33.1. Thus God is said to give Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25.
To give Bread from Heaven, John 6.32. To give a Heart, Deuteronomy. 29.4. and
elsewhere many others of the same kind. See our Annot. upon Joel 2.32. upon the
words, Whom the Lord shall call.

40. And with many other words, etc. As much as to say, And he was urgent and
pressed them with Exhortations, followed them close, persuaded, and earnestly
entreated them to separate themselves from the rest of the Jews that were
unwilling to believe in Christ, and contumaciously refusing the Divine Grace
that was offered them, to prevent their being involved with them in the same
destruction.

41. They then who gladly received his words were baptized. Walafridus Strabo,
who in the ninth Century was Abbot of Augia the Rich, c. 26.
in the Diocese of Constans, in his work of the beginning and increase of
Ecclesiastical things. You must observe, says he, that in the prinitive times
the ordinance of Baptism was only administered to those, who through perfection
of body and mind, had attained to this, that they knew and understood, what
profit they received by Baptism, what was to be professed, what to be believed,
and lastly, what was reserved for those that were born again in Christ. Amba
Macaire Bishop of Memphis, who was Secretary to Cosmus the third of that name,
Patriarch of the Cophti, or Christians of Egypt, and lived in the eight
Century, says, as Father Vansleb reports in his History of the Church of
Alexandria, c. 23. that in the primitive times Baptism was not administered in
the Church of Alexandria but once a year, and that was upon Good Friday, and
only to those of thirty years of age. Curcellaeus our Countryman, Baptism of
Infants, says he, Institut. Relig. Christian. l. 1. c. 12.
in the two first Centuries after Christ was altogether unknown, but in the
third and fourth was allowed by some few; in the fifth and following Ages it
was generally received into ^ustom. See our Annot. upon c. 8.37. But from
thence, that the Jews who were circumcised in their Infancy, before
Circumcision was abrogated, were here baptized by the order of Peter, it
appears, that by Baptism and Circumcision two Covenants altogether differing
were to be sealed; of which the one was with those who by the Law of nature
were born of the Seed of Abraham; the other with those who by the gift of
Faith, like Abraham, were spiritually reborn, as that great Divine, eminent for
all manner of Learning, Nehemiah Cox, by most weighty and solid Arguments has
demonstrated in his excellent Discourse of the Covenants that God made with men
before the Law.

Were added. That is, to the body of the Church, which then consisted of a
hundred and twenty Disciples.

Souls. That is, Persons, which in other places we wont to call Heads, by
Synecdoche of the Member.

About three thousand. There is no wonder to be made, that three thousand
persons should be plunged in one day by Peter a Fisherman, and used to the
Water, in regard that in the beginning of the fourth Century Gregory the first
Bishop of the Armenians, baptized in one day, by Immersion, no less than twelve
thousand, as we read in his Authentic Life, and which also Isaac, Patriarch of
the same Nation, confirms in his first Invective. Sermon. in Die Sancti Andreae.
apud No varin.
St. Eucherius, The Lord, says he, calls Fishers to the Apostleship, because
such were of necessary use, who being accustomed to the Water were skilled both
in Fishing and Diving. Therefore he did not ordain them to change their Art,
but only made them Fishers of a far nobler degree. That person famous for his
most exquisite learning both Divine and Humane, James Benignus Bossuet,
formerly Bishop of Condom, Tutor to the most Serene Dolphin, and now prime
Almoner to his most Serene Consort, and Bishop of Meaux, speaking of the three
thousand baptized by Peter; The great number of Converts, In tr ctat. de Commun
^ub binis speciebus.
says he, is no Argument that he baptized them by Aspersion, as some
conjecture; for besides that there is no obligation upon us to believe that he
baptized them all in one day, certain it is that St John the Baptist, who
baptized no less, baptized by Immersion: and his example gives us to
understand, that for the administration of Baptism to a great multitude, they
chose those places which where well stored with Water; besides that the bains
and purifications of the Ancients, principally of the Jews, rendered that
Ceremony easy and familiar at that time. In short, we do not find in Scripture
that any were otherwise baptized than by Immersion, and we are able to make out
by the Acts of the Councils, and by the Ancient Rituals, that for 1300 years
together they baptized in that manner throughout all the Churches, as much as
it was possible for them so to do.

42. And they persevered, etc. That is, and they continued assiduously, and
diligently.

In the Doctrine of the Apostles, That is, in hearing the Apostles teaching.

And in communication of breaking Bread, and in Prayers. In the Greek, And in
Communication, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers; which the learned
Divine, Joseph Mede, renders. And in Communication, that is, in breaking Bread,
and in Prayers. So that the Conjunction and after Communication, is not
Conjunctive, but Explanatory, as frequently in other places. Hence the Syriac
translates the words, And they did communicate in Prayer, and in breaking the
Eucharist. The service of the Ancient Christians baptized according to the
Precept of Christ, consisted of these three parts; hearing the Word, public
Prayers, under which was by a kind of Synecdoche comprehended, Thanksgiving, c.
3.1.16.13. Luke 18.10, 11. Phil. 1.3, 4. and celebration of the Lords Supper.
Breaking of Bread, says the famous Lightfoot, among the Jews signifies that
particular action, with which Dinner or Supper began, but I do not remember
that ever I observed it applied by the Talmudists to the whole Meal. And I
suspect that what Beza affirms, is rather upon trust, than upon proof: It came
in custom, says he, that their mutual ordinary Food, even their Feasts, which
they often made together, were understood under the name of breaking of Bread;
which if true, I must ingenuously acknowledge my own Ignorance; but if not
true, then breaking of Bread, both in this, and the following 46 verse, cannot
be understood of ordinary Food, but of the Eucharist, which the Syriac
Interpreter expresses in Terms; and the Parallel is that of c. 20.7. and 1 Cor.
10.16. But there is a Synecdoche of the member in this Phrase, for a part of
the Lords Supper is set down for the whole, as the drinking of the Cup, 1 Cor.
12, 13. But the breaking of Bread represents the bitter pains which Christ
suffered upon the Cross, wherewith his body was as it were broken and bruised,
for such torments in Scripture are called Breakings or Fractures. Prove. 6.15.
Isa. 30.26.38.13. Dan. 11.26, etc.
Whence we collect, that the Ceremony of breaking the Bread in the Lords Supper
is not a thing indifferent; but whereas it tends to set forth the end of the
Lords Supper, it is altogether to be used according to the Example of Christ
and his Apostles. See Mat. 26.26. 1 Cor. 10.19. and 11.24. The English
Translation is less approved by the learned Mede, who refers the Greek word
Koinonia, to the preceding word Apostol^n, and translates it, The fellowship of
the Apostles.

43. And fear, etc. As if he had said, They that were not yet Converted by the
preaching of the Apostles, stood amazed and astonished at the Novelty of the
Growing Church, and the many signs and wonders wherewith the Apostles
corroborated the force and energy of their Sermons.

44. And all, etc. As much as to say, But all the Believers joined together in
brotherly love, and converted their Estates which they had in propriety to the
common good of all.

45. Possessions, etc. That is, The Rich sold what they had to supply the
necessities of the Poor. They were Jews that did so, and none but Jews that did
so. Show me the like among the Gentiles, when the Gospel came among them. Which
of all St Paul's Epistles gave any such precept, or intimates any such thing?
But as for the Jews, they who once believed in Christ, believed also the woeful
destruction of their own Nation to be within a few years after, and therefore
they thought good, while there was yet time, to improve their Lands and
Possessions to the best use, which they should not many years enjoy. And the
occasion was now fit, at the first preaching of the Gospel, and gathering up a
Church to Christ, to furnish the Apostles and others for this Service and
Employment. And therefore, when the Gospel was also spread among the Gentiles,
the Apostles; were so careful to make collections in the Churches for the
relief of the poor Saints in Jerusalem, even those who at the first had
disfurnished themselves of all, and at whose charge as may be supposed the
Gospel was at the beginning preached among the Gentiles. Sermon. 28. upon Prove.
30.8, 9.
Thus the most learned Joseph Mede. See Romans 15.26, 27. 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 8.9.

46. Continuing daily with one accord in the Temple. That is, they met daily in
the Temple, with a brotherly unanimity to worship God in public.

And breaking bread from house to house. The Greek has, Katoikon, which the
Syriack, and Arabic Interpreters take to be opposed to the Temple, as if it
were singly said, at home, or inprivate, whereas by others it is expounded, at
several houses, that is, sometimes at one house, and sometimes at another.
Salmasius says, That the Ordinance of the Lords Supper was celebrated in the
private houses, where they feasted together. Katoikon is from one house to
another, as Katapolin is from Town to Town. For the Jews eat their Legal
Passover every one in his own house, in imitation of which, Christ instituted
his Ordinance, and ordered it to be eaten at the same hour of Supper. Those
Suppers, as is well known, were called Agapes, Love Feasts, whether celebrated
in the Church, or in the houses of private Persons. In both places they were
partakers of the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, after they had supped.
Hence Agape, Love-Feast, is taken for the Eucharist itself by an ancient
Author, who calls himself falsely Ignatius, in an Epistle to the Smyrnaeans. It
is not lawful without the Bishop to Baptize or Celebrate the Love-Feast, says
he; that is, the Lords Supper. To celebrate private Love Feasts, the richer
sort invited the Brethren to their houses, and then according to custom
celebrated the Lords Supper after the end of the Love-Feast. From which
Love Feasts, the Cuftom continued a long time of blessing and receiving the
Eucharist from house to house. In the fourth Century it appears to have been
still Administered by several Bishops and Presbyters in private Houses. Which
by their last Canon, save one, did prohibit by the Fathers the Council of
Laodicea Ordaining that no oblations should be celebrated in private houses.
This was in the Year 364. But the Fathers of the Synod of Gangra, which was
some twenty years before that of Laodicea, condemned Eustathius, because he
would not allow the private Love Feasts of that sort, at which, without doubt
they received also the Sacrament. If any one, say they, Canon 9.
despises these cordial entertainers of the poor at their Love Feasts, who out
of respect invited the Brethren to their houses; and refuses out of contempt to
be partakers of such biddings to Supper, let him be an Anathema. For it is to
those private Love Feasts that the Canon of the Laodicean Council without
question has reference, forbidding Oblations in private houses. For in those
Love Feasts, which were only entertainments of private Persons, inviting the
faithful Brethren to their Houses, was also celebrated the Oblation, that is,
the Eucharist. For with the Brethren, they invited also the Bishops or Elders,
by whom, according to the custom of that time, the Bread and Wine was blessed
into the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. Nevertheless the Laodicean
Canon did not take away the private Love Feasts, but only the custom of
Communicating the Lords Supper therein. For in the 28 Canon of the same Synod,
the Clergy and Laity invited to the Love Feasts, are forbid to take any parts
of the Victuals; that is to say, according to the Greek way of speaking, to
carry any parts home to their own houses. So they were not forbid to go to the
Love Feasts, but to carry any parts away. By the same Council the people were
restrained from celebrating their Love Feasts in the Temples, in which public
Love Feasts most certain it is, that the Eucharist was wont to be taken. Nehem.
8.10.11, 12.
These Love Feasts seem to have their Original from the Sacred Feasts of the
Jews.

Did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of heart. That is, cheerfully
and temperately, to refresh, and not oppress nature. See Tertullian Apologet.
c. 39. Some there are, who with Chrysostom, believe that the Love Feasts were
wont to follow the celebration of the Lords Supper; whereas on the contrary it
is apparent, that the Sacrament of the Lords death concluded the Supper, by the
custom, which remained in Africa, upon the Anniversary night of the Lords
Supper; 3. Can. 29.6. Can. 9.
as appears by the Councils of Carthage, and by the Epistle of St. Austin to
Januarius, c. 9.

47. Having favor with all the people. That is, they were grateful, and
acceptable to the very strangers, who convinced by the splendor of the virtues
which they beheld in them, applauded those things which they could not yet
imitate.

And the Lord added such as should be saved. That is, such as had separated
themselves from the common impiety of men.

Daily. As much as to say, the multitude of those daily increased, who had
freed themselves from the snares of Impiety, and joined themselves to the
Church of Christ.

CHAP. III.
BUT Peter. In the Greek, at the same time Peter, or as others render it, but
as soon as Peter.

At the ninth hour of Prayer. That is with us, about three of the clock in the
afternoon; which as it was the ordinary hour of Sacrificing, so was it also of
Prayer. As to the times of Sacrificing, thus Josephus: Twice every day, 14
Antiq. 8.
to wit, in the morning, and about the ninth hour the Priests sacrificed upon
the Altar. As to the hours of Prayer, thus Drusius: The Ancient Custom was to
pray thrice a day. Evening, Morning, and at Noon will I pray, Psalm. 55.17.
and cry aloud. Which hours they reckon to be the third, sixth, ninth. The
third answers our nine in the morning, the sixth our twelve at noon, and the
ninth our three in the afternoon. And that there was no more then three hours
of Prayer-time among the Jews, Kimchi clearly demonstrates, upon Psalm. 33.8.
which also Daniel seems to confirm, Dan. 6.10.
who was wont to pray thrice a day. R. Menachem adds also, that the third hour
was set apart by Abraham, the sixth by Isaac, and the ninth by Jacob. Nor shall
you find any other distinctions of hours, wherein the Scripture makes mention
of set Prayers. In the third hour the Holy Ghost descended upon the Disciples
of Christ. Supra cap. 2. v. 15. Infra cap. 10. v. 9.
In the sixth hour Peter ascended into the upper Room to Prayer, and at the
ninth hour Peter and John went to the Temple. Lib. de Jejun.
Whence Tertullian notably infers, That saving always that there is no time
limited, but that Christians are at liberty to pray every where, and at all
times, yet that those hours, as they were the most remarkable in human affairs,
dividing the day, distinguishing business, and made known by public sound, so
were they the more solemn for the celebration of Divine Worship.

2. At the Gate of the Temple which is called Beautiful. This was in the first
Circuit of the Temple, called the Court of the Gentiles, which Herod added to
the rest. Joseph de b^il. J^d. l. 6. c. 6.
It was overlaid with Corinthian Brass, which was much more shining and
beautiful then Gold.

4. Look on us. By which words Peter gives to understand that he was to expect
the benesit as well from John, as from him. Hence the lame person is said in
the next verse to have given special heed to them, as expecting to receive
something from them both. And so the Miracle of the Cure was by both equally
accomplished, though Peter only spoke.

6. Silver and Gold have I none. That is, I have no money at all.

But what I have. That is to say, sound and perfect health.

In the name of Jesus Christ. That is, by the virtue and power of Jesus Christ.
This form was used in Miraculous Cures, and casting out of Devils, Mark 9.28.

7. The Basis's received strength. That is, the soles of his Feet, which the
Latins call vestigia, as well as the footsteps, or prints of the feet.

8. And leaping up, he stood. It refers to the Prophecy of Isaiah; Then shall
the lame leap, as an Heart; Isaiah 35.6.
that is, with an extraordinary nimbleness.

Walking and leaping. He could not compose himself to an ordinary pace through
the excess of his joy. Thus speaks a Classical Author, Rejoicing, Apuleius l.
10.
and full of gladness he expressed his joy by jumping.

10. Were filled with wonder and amazement. This would Virgil express thus:
With minds astonished, fixed the stood.

11. But when they saw. In the Greek and English version, But when the lame
person that was healed, held Peter and John. Thus, says Beza, it runs in all
the Greek Copies that we have seen, as also in Oecumenius. But the exemplars of
the old Edition are here erroneous in two manner of readings. For some write,
but when they saw. Others, but when they held; and these words, the lame Man
being healed, are all left out, both by them, and by the Syriack and Arabic
Interpreters. But the Greek word Kratein here does not signify to take hold of,
but so to hold a thing fast, as not to let it escape out of the hand. Which
argues, that the lame person was loath to depart from them, either out of
affection to those that had cured him, or out of fear of becoming lame again,
if he should forsake their company. Thus Servius observes that Virgil makes use
of the Latin tenere, for to stay and embrace.

To the Porch which is called Solomon's. So the first Court of the Temple was
called, which was also the Court of the Gentiles, in regard the Gentiles had
liberty of entrance into it. It was called Solomon Porch, because there was in
that Court, from the repaired Porch toward the East part of the Temple which,
though never finished, and made perfect, bare Solomon's name. Antiq. 20.8.
Of which Josephus. That Porch belonged to the outward Temple hanging over a
steep Valley, supported with four hundred Cubits of Wall, built of very white
foursquare Stones, the length of every Stone was 20 Cubits, and the depth six.
The work of King Solomon, who first built the whole Temple. Upon which place of
Josephus, the learned Lightfoot makes this observation in his Chorographick
disquisition before St. John. There is no need of a Commentary upon these
words. The Eastern Porch was of the first foundation by Solomon. He speaks
plainly enough, which, and where the Porch of Solomon was; that is, upon the
out-wall of the Temple toward the East. But the Royal Porch stood upon the
South Wall. Which received its Royal Name from King Herod, as Lightfoot upon
the same place a little before observes. The same famous Author in his Hebraick
hours upon the Acts of the Apostles; c. 3. v. 11.
If you distinguish between Porch and Porch, Solomon's was the Eastern, and the
Royal the Southern Porch. But if you would have the whole Court to be
comprehended under the name of Solomon's Porch, tho it seems somewhat more
obscure, why it should be called a Porch, and why Solomon's, yet may it not be
incongruously here admitted. But whether it take its name from Solomon's Porch,
strictly so called, as being the most noble, because anciently built by
Solomon; or whether because Solomon consecrated that Court in his Temple by
Sacrifices; 1 King. 8.53.
or whether, because Solomon filled up immense Valleys, to make a space even
for this Court? Whatever be the reason, we do not deny but this whole Court may
be called by that name, though as we have elsewhere showed, the Porch itself in
a strict sense was only a part, and the Eastern Porch of that Court.

12. As though by our Virtue. That is, as though by any wonder-working
efficacy, or Virtue inherent, or inbred in us.

Or Power. In the Greek, and English Version, Holiness. That is, or by any
faculty divinely ingrafted in us, for our piety toward God.

We had made this man to walk. That is, we had been the causes, that this lame
Person, by a supernatural effect, should walk upon his feet.

13. The God of our Fathers. From whom proceeded the true, and Heaven born
Religion.

Has glorified his Son. That is, in the Miracle by us wrought, has been pleased
to illustrate the glory of Jesus, who is the Messiah promised in the Law, and
the Prophets. This Surname, says Grotius, upon Mat. 14.32. the Son of God,
appears commonly given to the Messiah. John 1.50.
For says Nathanael, Master thou art that Son of God, thou art that King of
Israel: That is to say, from the second Psalm, which the Ancient Hebrews
interpret, according to the mystical meaning, of the Messiah. Therefore where
Christ is by Peter said to be the Son of the living God, Mark and Luke, content
themselves with the word Christ alone. Add to these, Mat. 26.63. Heb. 5.4, 5.
But how God the Father called Christ his beloved Son, see our literal
Explanation upon Mat. 3.17.

Whom. That is, the Messiah promised to you by God, and so openly professing
himself to be, Mark 14.62.

You delivered up. To be put to death by Pilate. This properly belongs to the
Jewish Senate. See Mark 15.1. John 18.30.

And denied in the presence of Pilate. This relates to the people of the Jews.
As much as to say, You would not acknowledge him before Pilate to be the King
Messiah.

He determining to let him go. That is, though Pilate himself, a Gentile, and
an unjust Magistrate, adjudged him Innocent, and so fit to be acquitted, and
dismissed.

14. But you. Born and bred in the true Worship of God, to whom this Jesus, who
is the promised King Messiah, was sent.

Denied the Holy One. That is, Dan. 9.24 Jer. 23.6.
you abjured him who is the Holy of Holies; and our just Lord, or our Justice.

And you required a Murderer to be granted unto you. That is, When it was in
your Power and Choice, whether you would have released this Jesus, a Person of
absolute Innocence and Integrity, or Barabbas convicted of manifest Murder, you
required that Homicide to be dismissed in your favor.

15. But you killed the Author of life. That is, by your urgent instigation,
you compelled Pilate to condemn the Prince of Life to death. The Greek word, as
Erasmus observes, consists of words contrary to themselves, being compounded of
one word, signifying Beginning, and another word derived from the End, as much
as to say, Beginner, and Ender: Therefore Christ is said to be the Beginner,
and Ender of Eternal life. For as the learned John Davenant, Bishop of
Salisbury, observes upon Colos. 3.4. He promised us this life, he merited it,
he prepared it, he will grant it. He promised in the name of the Father, Luke
12.32.
Fear not, little Flock; for it has pleased the Father to give your the Kingd^
John 10.28.
and in his own name, (...) eternal life, (...). He merited it. 1 John 4.9. and
5.11.
God has sent his only begotten Son into the (...), that we might live through
him. (...) prepared us for this and this life for (...). Colos. 1.12.
He has prepared and (...) for this (...) Spirit. He has made us meet to be
partakers of the Lot of the Saints in light. He has enlivened us by Christ,
through whose ^^^e ye are saved. Ephesians. 2.5.
He has also prepared this Kingdom for us by his Ascension. John 14.20.
I go to prepare a place for you, and when I have prepared it, I will come
again and take you with me, etc. Lastly, He will grant to his own this Crown of
Eternal life. John 17.2.
Thou have given him power over all flesh, that to as many as thou have given
him, he should give to them eternal life. There is laid up for me a Crown of
Justice, 2 Timothy 4.8.
which the Lord will give me. Christ is therefore truly called Our Life, Heb.
5.9.
that is the Author or Cause of our life eternal. And being consecrated, he is
made the Author of Eternal life to all that obey him.

You killed. Every one is reputed to have done that, what another does in his
favor.

Whom God raised from the dead. See Annot. on c. 2.24. Whereof we are
Witnesses. When Peter called himself and his fellow Disciples the Witnesses of
Christ's being raised from the dead, it signifies, that with their own Eyes
they saw Christ when he was risen.

16. And through Faith, etc. As much as to say, And through a firm persuasion
of the Divine power of Jesus, this man whom ye see, and knew to have been lame
from his Mothers Womb, now upward of forty years of age, has obtained from
Christ the soundness of his Soles and Ancles.

Has made this man strong. By the Consolidation of his Feet and Anclebones.
Look backward to v. 7.

His name. That is, the effective power of Christ. Name, says Grotius, is here
taken for Virtue and Power.

And faith, etc. As if he had said, By his firm persuasion of the Divine Power
of Christ, which thorough Christ arises to that God, of whom you profess your
selves the Adorers, this perfect soundness is conferred upon him from above,
before you all. When he says, Faith which is by him, by that word he means,
that our Faith no otherwise ascends to God, but as it is founded in Christ.
Therefore then our Faith looks to Christ, and relys upon him, says Calvin. See
1 Pet. 1.21.

17. Through ignorance ye did it. That is, more through a dull and supine
ignorance of the person, than any designed malice, you and the Senators of your
great Sanhedrim wrested from Pilate that unjust Sentence, whereby he judged
Christ the Son of the living God to the Torment of the Cross. However this
ignorance does not excuse your sin, but abates something of the heinousness of
it, and renders it the more easy to be pardoned by God. Hence Christ doing that
upon the Cross which Intercessors use to do, omitting what was to be blamed in
the fact of the Jews, apply's himself to that which in some measure tended to
lessen the offense. Father, Luke 23.34.
says he, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

18. God, etc. As if he had said, But God who wifely disposes all things by
Counsel and Reason, by means of your dull and sottish ignorance brought that to
pass which he knowingly and willingly had decreed, and foretold by his
Prophets, That Christ should suffer to expiate the sins of Mankind. l. 3.
against Marcion.
Says Tertullian, The Scriptures declaring that Christ could suffer death, at
the same time affirms that he could be unknown. For unless he had been unknown,
he could not have suffered.

19. Repent therefore. As much as to say, Therefore let your Repentance be
great, in regard ye have offended God. Repent of your errors, having found the
truth. l. De poenitent. c. 4.
Repent of your affection to those things which God loves not; as Tertullian
speaks.

And be converted. He that repents has no better refuge than the utter
change of his purpose. True repentance is to commit nothing to be repented of,
and to be sorry for it, when any such thing has been committed. This is the
satisfaction of repentance, to root out the causes of sins, and to give no
entrance to their suggestions, says Gennadius of Marseille in his Book of
Ecclesiastical Dogms c. 4. See my Annotations upon Joel 2.12. Matt. 3.8.

That your sins may be blotted out. Not that our Repentance or works merit any
thing at the hands of God, or are so perfect that they can abide the test of
his rigorous justice, but because that God under this condition has decreed to
make us partakers of Salvation purchased by the Blood of Christ. Therefore let
the wicked man relinquish his ways, let him relinquish his evil thoughts, which
cause him to despair of remission of sins, Isa. 55.7.
and according to the saying of the Prophet, Let him be converted to the Lord,
for he will abundantly pardon. For there is nothing wanting in him, whose mercy
is Omnipotent, and whose Omnipotency is altogether merciful. And so great is
the Benignity of his Omnipotency. and the Omnipotency of his Benignity, Epist.
7. to Venantia.
that there is nothing which he will not, or cannot remit to a true penitent,
says Fulgentius. The same Author in the same place a little farther: For such
is the Justice of God, that he condemns the perverse, and saves the Converted.
Isa. 45.22.
Whence, says he, be converted to me, and I will save you. But yet for no
other cause is God moved to pardon the Converted, but out of his mere free love
which he bears to mankind. And this love, which was as it were extinguished by
their sins, is again rekindled by the intercession and obedience of the Son of
God, who remaining still just, was made Mortal. By taking upon him the
Punishment and not the Guilt, Sermon. 37. de Verb. Dom.
he cancelled both the Guilt and the Punishment, says St. Austin.

20. That when the times of refreshing shall come. In the Greek, That the times
of refrigeration may come. It is usual to the Greeks to make use of (...) with
their Aorists for the simple particle ut, that, as you may see below, c. 15. v.
17. Matt. 6.5. Luke 3.35. Hence the Syriack and Arabic Interpreters
understanding that the Greek Hopos an joined only in this text the second
Proposition with the first, they have translated it by the copulative, And,
thus: And the times may come that ye may have rest from the sight of God, and
he may send to you Jesus Christ who was prepared for you. The sense is, That
your sins registered in the memory of God being utterly defaced, the day of
Refrigeration, that is, of Consolation, may shine upon you. As he is said to
burn with grief, who is afflicted with a sharp sense of pain, so is he said to
be Refrigerated when Consolation alleviates his Torment. The Ethiopick Version
explains, the times of Refrigeration, by the times of Mercy. The most learned
and modest Lightfoot, In his Hebraick Hours upon this Verse.
I might perhaps, says he, betray my ignorance in the Greek Language, if I
should acknowledge that I do not understand by what Authority of that Tongue,
the most learned Interpreters have rendered the words, either, That when they
shall come, as the vulgar Latin, Erasmus and the Interlineary; or, When they
shall come, as the English, French, and Italian, or, after that they shall
come, as Beza. But I am not ashamed to confess I understand not, since it
agrees with the Idiom, why they do not render, that they may come. Thus (...),
is taken simply for ut, that, Ps. 9.15.92.8, 119.101. And thus it runs here:
Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, and
that the times of refreshment may come, and God may send you Jesus Christ. Thus
far Lightfoot.

From the presence of the Lord. That is, with the propitious favor of God. The
famous Knatchbull renders it, From the anger of the Lord. And so Refrigeration
from the presence of God, seems to be the same as a flight from his wrath to
come, Matt. 3.7. See our Annotations upon the place.

And he shall send. The Construction requires, that with the most learned
Ludovicus de Dieu, Heinsius, and Lightfoot after the Syriack and Arabic
Interpreters, we render the Greek Aorist in this place by the present tense,
May send. That is, may reveal by the comfortable preaching of the Gospel, than
which nothing can be more pleasing and grateful to afflicted and trembling
Consciences. What, says Lightfoot in the place fore mentioned, can be more
fully and plainly said, if our Interpretation be admitted, to answer the
Conceptions of the Auditors, had they objected against those things which Peter
said; Is it so? Is Jesus whom we crucified the true Messiah? Then all hopes of
Refrigeration by the Messiah are vanished, since the Messiah himself is
vanished and gone. There Is an end of the expectation of Israel's comfort, if
there be an end of him that should be the Comforter. Not so, says Peter, for
the Messiah and Comfort shall be restored to you upon your Repentance, yet so
that the Messiah is still to remain in Heaven. He shall be sent to you in his
comforting and refreshing word, and in his graces and benefits, if ye repent.
The Parallel is that of Acts 13.47. We turn to the Gentiles. For so has the
Lord commanded, saying, I have appointed thee to be a light to the Gentiles. I
have appointed thee; whom? Paul or Barnabas? No, but thee Christ: sent and
shining in the Doctrine of Paul and Barnabas. So c. 26.23. Christ risen from
the dead is said to show light unto the people, and to the Gentiles. So Ephesians.
2.17. It is said of Christ, after he had suffered the death of the Cross for
Mankind, that he came and preached peace to those that were afar off, that is,
to the Gentiles, and to them that were nigh, that is to the Jews.

Who was preached unto you. In the Greek and English, Who was before preached
unto you. St. Chrysostom reads it, Who was before ordained, as the ancient
Greek Copies, which Beza says, he has read; which the Arabic and Syriack
Interpreters seem to have followed, while they turn the words, Who was
prepared; and Tertullian rendering it, Who was pre-designed. The Ethiopick
seems to have read it otherwise in his Greek Copy, seeing that he renders it,
Who was fore-Anointed. But the first and vulgar Lection is to be preferred, He
who was before preached. For, says Lightfoot in his Hebraick Hours upon this
place, the Discourse and Meaning of Peter relates to preaching: for he shall
send you Christ by preaching, as he was preached before. Now you are to
understand, that the Apostle in this Discourse speaks of a threefold time. 1.
Before the coming of Christ he was promulgated by Moses, and by all the
Prophets from Samuel. 2. When he came; at what time God showed him to the
world, v. 26.
raising him up a Savior, then he sent him to you first of all, by his
Doctrine to convert you from your iniquities. 3. When he ascended into Heaven
there to remain; yet then he shall send him to you again upon repentance, by
the preaching of his word, as before he was made known by preaching.

Jesus Christ. That is, Jesus, who is the Messiah or Christ promised in the Law
and the Prophets, for the Redemption and Consolation of Israel.

21. Whom the Heaven must receive. These words carry an Ambiguous sense, if you
look upon the Grammatical Construction; and may signify as well that Heaven is
received by Jesus, as that Jesus is received into Heaven. But when you consider
the meaning of the Speaker, and the context of the words, it is not probable
they should admit of the first Exposition. For Peter speaking of the Jews, by
whose importunity Christ was put to death, disswades them from expecting his
Corporal presence upon Earth, 1 Epist. 3.22.
Who, as the same Peter says, is gone into Heaven, and sits at the Right Hand
of God, and whom the Heaven must receive, not as a Prison, but as his own most
glorious Palace, and Mansion more befitting his Divine Majesty, than the Earth,
wherein he lived during the time of his Mortality. Now by Heaven is meant not
that part of the Sky which is visible to our sight, but the Third Heaven,
Paradise, the Seat and Habitation of God, that inaccessible light which God
inhabits. For Christ ascended above all the visible Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10.
and sits at the Right Hand of the Majesty of God in the highest Altitudes, to
prepare a place for us in the House of his Father, John 14.2.

Until the times of Restitution. According to the Greek, as Hesychius
Interprets it, until the times of a full finishing or atchieving. Tertullian
translates it, until the times of Exhibition; and thus he cites this place,
Until the times of the Exhibition or setting forth of all things, Lib. de
Resur. Carnis.
which God spoke by the mouths of his Holy Prophets. In like manner Oecumenius
explains it, 'Till all things be finished or performed. Lightfoot also
admirably expresses the Sense of this verse in these words: Heb. horis, upon
Mat. 17.11.
Jesus the Heavens both contain, and shall contain as to his person, till all
these things be brought to pass or effect. Therefore do not continue in the
Error of the Generality of our Erring People, to expect his personal presence
upon Earth. Hence it is apparent that Peter meant the time that Jesus should
abide in Heaven, according to what he with the rest of the Apostles had heard
from the Angels before. As if he had said, c. 1.11.
Christ being gone into Heaven, shall there remain till all the predictions of
the Prophets shall be fulfilled; and those being fulfilled, he shall return
from Heaven to Earth to judge the Quick and the Dead.

Since the world began. That is, of old, Isa. 64.4. Jer. 2.20.
of ancient times.

22. For Moses, etc. Although this place, in the first and more gross sense may
be understood from Dent. 18.15. of any Prophet endued with foreknowledge, whom
God should raise up at any time, after Moses, among the people, to the end they
might obey him, as speaking by a Divine Inspiration, so he did not seduce them
from the Worship of the true God, and from true Piety; Yet in the more
exquisite and mystical sense it contains the Prophecy of Christ the Head, and
chief of all the Prophets, to whom all the rest were but forerunners; and then
whom there was none more glorified by those Signs, by which God was pleased to
have his Prophets distinguished. Which mystical sense of this place, in the
time of Christ and his Disciples, was also admitted by the Jews, as appears by
this Text, and below c. 7.34. and by many places of the Gospel, and
particularly by the words of the Samaritan; John 4.25. John 6.14.
and those other of the People who were about to Crown Christ; This is really
that Prophet that should come into the world. For the Messiah was properly
understood by him that should come, Luke 7.19.

A Prophet. That is, one who shall proclaim to men the will of God, as yet
concealed in Mystery.

Shall the Lord your Godraise. That is, shall the Lord your God give, present,
send.

Of your Brethren. As much as to say, Not a Stranger, but one of your own
Nation, born of the Posterity of Israel, and your Relation by the tie of Blood
and Kindred.

Like unto me. Midrasch Kobeleth ad cap. 1. v. 9. See Eusebius demonst. Evang.
lib. 3.
So the Jews comparing the Messiah with Moses, speak in these words, as the
first Redeemer, so shall be the last Redeemer. But Christ was not only like to
Moses for the wisdom of his Doctrine, and the greatness of his Miracles, but he
exceeded him also in Honor and Glory.

Him shall ye hear. That is, ye shall believe in all his Promises, and obey all
his Commandments. Therefore are none of the sayings of Christ to be called in
question, nothing to be omitted which he commanded, nor any thing to be altered
at men's pleasure. Now since there is no place in the Law that more manifestly
points at Christ, John. 7.38.
I believe that Christ refers to it, when he says, Who believes in me, as the
Scripture has said. This the Father with a Heavenly voice declared openly of
Christ, and commanded all to hear him, Matt. 17.5. Admirably therefore Grotius
upon that place of Matthew. Those things which follow in Moses are to be
observed, as if it had been said, You have your selves desired of God not to
act among you by signs of Terror; God consents to your Petition; and therefore
the Word is made Flesh. He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a Servant. Behold him, who while he excells Elias in vehement Zeal
toward the House of God, at the same time exceeds Moses in Meekness. Neither
Thunders, nor Clouds, nor Fires from Heaven bear witness of him, but the
cheering Light and affable voice of the Father.

23. Every Soul. That is, whoever shall refuse to hear Christ who is confessed
and manifestly appears to be recommended by Moses as the Chieftain of all the
Prophets. Deuteronomy. 18.15.19.


Shall be destroyed from among the People. He does not deserve to be numbered
among the People of God, who refuses Christ for his Master, by whom alone God
instructs us, so that he cuts himself off from the Body of the Church, who
refuses to submit to the Head of it. And indeed Eternal Destruction is prepared
for all those that will not obey Christ, 2 These. 1.8.9.
as the Apostle witnesses.

24. And all the Prophets, etc. As if he had said, And all the rest of the
Prophets after Moses in a long Succession of time from Samuel, who led their
Sacred Chorus. Hagigah. fol. 77.1.
Therefore the Jerusalem Talmud calls Samuel, the Master of the Prophets.

Have spoken and proclaimed. In the Greek and English, foretold, or declared
before.

Of those days. Wherein God has chosen to procure the Salvation of his People
by the Christ, whom we preach. But how, or in what manner Samuel nominally
foretold of Christ, does not appear in Scripture, unless we refer hither, what
we read about the Anointment of David who was to be a Type of the future
Messiah, when he was elected King of the Israelites by the Divine Choice of
God, 1 Samuel 1.6. But frequently the Prophets that lived after Samuel among the
Israelites Prophecy concerning Christ. Among the rest, most remarkable is that
of the Prophecy of Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.12. etc.
not to mention those that are frequent in the Psalms, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and
other writings of the Prophets. 25. Ye are the Children, etc. As if he had
said, ye are those to whom belong the Oracles of the Prophets, and the Covenant
made with the Ancient Progenitors of the Hebrews, Genesis 22.18.26.4.28.14.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: according to the Hebrew Phrase, whereby to be said
the Son of any thing, signifies the same thing as to belong unto, or to be
partaker of. Hence Matt. 9.15. The Sons of the Bridegroom, or of the Nuptial
Chamber, are said to be those that lead the Bridegroom into the Chamber: or who
looked after the Garnishing of the Chamber. The Sons of this World. Luc. 20.34.
That is, who lead a Mortal Life, to whom are opposed the Sons of the
Resurrection, that is, those who shall rise to blessed Immortality, and are the
Sons of God, that is, partakers of Divine Felicity. Thus there is mention made
of the Sons of the Kingdom of Light and Darkness. Mat. 8.12. 1 These. 5.5.
But here by the word of Prophets, is meant their Prophesies, Genesis 26.4.28.14.
by a Metonymy of the Cause.

Saying to Abraham. Genesis 22.18. which he repeats to Isaac, and lastly to Jacob.

And in thy Seed. As if he had said, From thy Offspring shall be born the
Savior of all men, of what Nation soever, who shall believe in him. See Gal.
3.8.14.16.

26. Unto you, etc. As if he had said, He, who by this promise was foretold
that he was to be born from the Offspring of Abraham, is Jesus the Son of God,
whom being already born the Son of Man, God has sent to you his Kinsmen, that
first the benefits he is to bestow upon those that believe in him, might be
offered to you before the rest of the Nations, that thereby every one of you
might be excited to reform his conversation. See c. 13.46.

Raising. That is, Presenting, bringing forth in open view, Sec c. 13.12. Judge.
2.16, 18.3.2, 15. Ezec. 34.23. Amos 2.11.
making him conspicuous by most excellent Endowments and Gifts. It refers to
the Prophesies of Moses before mentioned, v. 22. Hence, to rise, or be raised,
is attributed to the Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13.1.34.10, etc.

To bless you. That is, To offer you the highest of blessings. Under the word
Blessing is comprehended all manner of Felicity with which God has, and shall
bless us through Christ, as Remission of sins, Eternal life, and all other
Celestial advantages.

In turning, etc. That is, That he may excite every one of you to exchange your
vicious and corrupt custom of Living, into a pure and undefiled conversation.

CHAP. IV.
AND the Captain of the Temple. That is, who was the chief of all that had the
charge of guarding the Temple. For every night the Temple was guarded by 24
Companies, that kept watch in 24 places: To wit, the Priests in three places,
and the Levites in all the rest. Now that the Chiefs or Overseers of these
Watches are signified by the name of Captains, Luke 22.40. the famous Lightfoot
does no wise Question. He also believes, that to these Watches or Guards, Mat.
27.65.
that of Pilate referred, Ye have a Watch. As if he had said, Ye have Watches
of your own, send some of those to guard the Sepulcher. To this the same Author
adds, I take the Captain of the Temple distinctly and for preeminency so
called, to be the same with the Man of the Mountains House, that is the
Governor of the Mountains Temple, who was the chief of all the chief Officers
of the Watches. For, as Maimonides observes, there was one chief Ruler who
commanded all the Watches, who was called the Governor of the Mountains House.
He went the Rounds all night, having lighted Torches carried before him. And
when he met with any of the Watch that stood not upright upon his Feet, the
Captain said to him, Peace be with thee: Upon which if he found him asleep he
waked him with his Cudgel. He had also power to burn the Garments of him that
slept. Therefore it was a common saying at Jerusalem, What Is the stir here?
Sure the Levite is beaten, or his Clothes are burnt because he slept in his
Watch.

Sadduces. That is, Who placed all their hopes in this life, and therefore
thought they could not be too severe against those that disturbed the peace of
the People, wherein their own quiet was so much concerned. Add, says Grotius,
That if Jesus had risen from the Dead, the victory had been apparently on the
side of the Pharisees, in the great controversy between those two Sects. See
c. 23.6, 7.

2. Being grieved. In the Greek, being vexed, or troubled.

Through Jesus. That is, Through the power and efficacy of Jesus, who rose from
the dead, 1 Cor. 15.20, 23.
the first fruits of them that slept; the dead shall rise.

3. Put them in hold. c. 24.23.
Not in a public Prison, as chap. 5.18. but into private custody, as below.
That is, they did not commit them to Prison, but into the hands of some private
person to be kept diligently.

4. Five thousand. Or according to the Greek and Syriack, about five thousand.
Thus behold Peter, of a catcher of Fish become an expert Fisher of men; at two
or three casts of his Net catching about five thousand Disciples.

5. Their Rulers. c. 3.17. Luke 24.20. John 3.9, etc.
I find the Senators of which the great Sanhedrin consisted, frequently called
Rulers or Princes.

And Elders. That is according to the Interpretation of Grotius, Senators of
the City of Jerusalem. For there were at Jerusalem besides the great Sanhedrin
two other lesser ones, of which we have spoken upon Matt. 5.21. Tho the
Senators of what Sanhedrin soever, were named Elders, yet when the Senators of
the great Sanhedrin are thus named, there is most commonly added, of the
People, to distinguish them from the Elders of Towns, or Senators of lesser
Sanhedrins.

And Scribes. That is, Assistants to the Elders for Counsel and Advice, as
being men skilled in the Law.

And Annas. This president of the Sanhedrin is by Josephus called Ananus, the
Son of Seth, advanced to the High Priesthood, in the room of Joazar, by
Cyrenius, Antiq. 18.3.
and deposed by Valerius Gratus. He had five Sons who all enjoyed the
High Priesthood, which never happened before to any man, Ant. 20.8.
as Josephus observes. His Sonin-law Joseph surnamed Caiaphas, was now
High Priest and Father of the Sanhedrin. For though the Chief Priests were
generally in the great Sanhedrin, yet they are commonly named in particular by
reason of their great Authority.

The High Priest. Since it is plain that Caiaphas was advanced to the
High Priesthood by Valerius Gratus about the fourth year of Tiberius, before
Pilate came to the Government of Jury; and removed by Vitellius, toward the end
of Tiberius's Reign, when Pilate left Judea; it may be deservedly questioned,
why Annas here, and Luke 3.2. is called High Priest? To which Casaubon answers,
because that Annas had already born that high dignity. Scaliger and Bullinger
say, that Annas was so called, because he was next to Caiphas, and his Segan,
Vicar, or Lieutenant General in all the Sacred Ministry. But Baronius says, it
was because he was Prince of the great Sanhedrin.

Certainly, says Blondel a person of inexhausted Learning, there were among the
Jews not only many Priests, but many Chief Priests, when David had
distinguished the Posterity of Aaron into twenty four Families, who were to
officiate in the sacred Ministry by turns. Over every one of these Families
there was a Chief, who is called The Head of the Paternal House, in the Talmud.
Mat. 2.3.16.21.20.18.21.19, 23, 25. Mark 8.31.10.33. Jer. 29.1.
The same person was called Chief Priest in respect of his Classis. Hence it
is, that they are called Chief Priests in the Gospel, and in Jeremy Elders of
the Priests.

Over these 24. Families were two Chiefs, of which the first was called
properly the High Priest, and many times singly Priest. His Vicar might indeed
have been numbered among the Chief Priests at the beginning, but whether he
alone by himself were at any time called High Priest, I much question.
Certainly Bullinger ought to have proved it, before he affirmed that Annas was
called High Priest, because he was the Highpriests Vicar.

In Scripture this Vicar is called the Second Priest, not the first. 2 Kings
25.18. Jer. 52.24.
The Chaldee Paraphrast renders it, Segan. Therefore we read in the Talmud,
that the Segan and High Priest, Joma. fol. 30.
officiated according to their Lots. Not that they were chosen by Lots, but
that they distributed one with another by Lots several of the Sacerdotal
Functions. And a little after, as often as it happened that the High Priest was
suspended from his Function, the Segan was ordered to officiate for him.

Out of the 2 Kings 23.4. it seems that it might be gathered that there were
many Second Priests, seeing it is said there in the plural number, the Priests
of the Second order, but the Chaldee Paraphrast translates in that place, And
the Segan in the Singular, because often the plural number is used for the
singular.

If Annas was Vicar to Caiaphas, as Bullinger will have it, how comes it to
pass that by the Evangelists Annas is always set before Caiaphas? In the 2 Chronicles. 31.12. The ruler over the Treasury of the Sanctuary is called Nagid,
Ruler, Cononiah, and Shimei his Brother the next. Were it proper there that
Shimei should be called Nagid, and be set before Cononiah?

If Annas were called High Priest, because he had formerly officiated in that
dignity, how comes it to pass, that among so many others, who had born the same
Office, only Annas should be mentioned? How comes it to pass that he that had
been High Priest should be always set before him that is yet High Priest? These
Expontifices were indeed called Pontiffs for honors sake, but never any
public acts were marked with their names.

Therefore here I prefer far Baronius before Casaubon, Scaliger, or Bullinger
either, who asserts Annas to be called High Priest, because he was President of
the great Sanhedrin, who by the Hebrews was called Nasi. And the person next to
him was called, the Father of the House of Justice. These two Chiefs of the
Sanhedrin, were both styled Priests, because they were over many Priests. Hence
if I mistake not, we read that the Sons of David were Priests, 2 Samuel 8.18.
that is, according to the Chaldee Paraphrast, Grandees; and indeed they were
Grandees, because both David's Sons were Presidents or Princes of the great
Sanhedrin. Thus far Blondel, which will be more plain out of the following
words of Seldom.

We are to understand, says he, that those Titles of High or Chief-priests,
which denote a certain Function or Dignity in the form of the Jewish Government
at that time much impaired, denoted either a Sacred Function, or Civil Dignity,
which the Highpriest enjoyed above the rest. Where mention is made together of
the High Priest, and of the Sacred Function proper to the Dignity, there that
very person is signified who obtained the peculiar Dignity, that is, the
High Priesthood derived together with the Sacred Function from Aaron. But where
mention is made not at all of the Sacred Function, but altogether of the Civil
Government of the Highpriests, that is, as they governed with an Authority
limited by the Romans, as in many places of the Gospel, and of the Acts of the
Apostles; there it seems very probable that the Highpriests are designed by
that Title, not as they were advanced to the Sacred Dignity, but as they
presided in the Civil Administration. Such a difference concerning the Title is
to be observed in some ancient Synods, where mention is made of Counts. Now the
Dignity of Counts was altogether belonging to the Emperors Court, and as it
had no reference to the Synods being a Dignity within the Emperors Palace or
Court; so as the Counts had in the Synods the delegated power of Caesar, that
Title has no relation at all to the Palace or to its first Notion. But we meet
in the first Action of the Council of Chalcedon with these two Phrases, Give
the Counts, and the Counts entered in. Where the notion of Counts however a
word generally used, shows that singular and particular dignity in respect of
which, they who were Counts presided in the Council, instead of the Emperors;
not at all its vulgar acception for that other dignity, by which they belonged
to the Emperors Palace. Insomuch that I think that by the Highpriests they
were no more understood as Highpriests in respect of their Sacred Function,
where they are mentioned in the places speaking concerning the Civil
Administration, than we understand by Counts in that Synod, their particular
dignity either in the Council-house, or elsewhere in the Emperors Palace.
Hence with license to conjecture I should think, that Annas and Caiaphas both
together styled Highpriests by St. Luke, were not so styled to note their
dignity of the Sacred Function, but their Civil Government, as well as of the
others they are joined with for that year there mentioned. That is to say, that
Annas was Prince of the Sanhedrin, as Baronius will have it, and Caiaphas
Father thereof. Let us suppose that there were such two jurisdictions of Counts
in the Synod before mentioned or in any other, for we hear of Counts also in
the Synod of Ephesus: If any one had noted the year of Caesar's reign in the
Acts of the Synod, and had added for examples sake, under Irenaeus and
Dionysius Counts, certainly no man would have believed them to have been there
named Counts, from that Jurisdiction they enjoyed according to the Vulgar and
Original notion of the word, but from the Jurisdiction they had obtained since,
as according to the custom of that Age, some others being dignified with the
Title of Counts. Which being admitted, it is easy to judge why in the Gospel
Annas and Caiaphas help mutually so much one another in their proceedings
against Christ, both under the Title of Highpriests. That is to say, as they
by reason of their Dignity, and kindred of the High Priest, as then the times
were, presided in the manner aforesaid in the Sanhedrin, where the Prosecution
commenced. Which may not be unfitly said of Annas the High Priest, and Caiaphas
with other Senators of the Sanhedrin mentioned in Acts 4. So that the reason is
easily given, why Caiaphas, by Josephus said at that time to have been invested
with the Sacred Dignity as the Successor of Aaron, is set after Annas. For the
Father was always second to the Prince of the Sanhedrin. Neither was the Office
of Prince or Father of the Sanhedrin perpetual, but translated from one to
another, as occasion required. Which is apparent out of the Talmudick Title,
chap. 3.
Horjaoth and other treatises of the Rabbis. And perhaps at that time it was
Annual, lest the Prolongation of that Authority might be a prejudice to the
rest of the Kindred of the High Priest. And hence perhaps that other question
is to be resolved concerning the High Priesthood of Caiaphas noted by his year,
in the Gospel of St. John. For as the plural number of Highpriests, in the
Sacred Relations of the Administration of civil concerns, signified Judges and
Presidents of Courts, as it has been said already, so the Title of High Priest
in the singular number with the account of his year may seem to denote the
Prince of the Sanhedrin. So that in the 15th. Luke 3.1, 2.
year of Tiberius, Annas was Prince, and Caiaphas was Father of the Sanhedrin.
But in the Passion year Annas was Father, and Caiaphas Prince. Afterward Annas
as being most eminent among his People again Prince, and Caiaphas Father, as in
Acts 4. And certainly Ananias the High Priest; Acts 23.5. where he presides in
the Sanhedrin, is acknowledged Prince of the People, which perhaps was the same
thing with Prince of the Sanhedrin. There are many other places in the New
Testament to be expounded perhaps by such an observation. Nor let any one
object, that thereby it might come to pass, that the High Priest advanced to
the Dignity of the Sacred Function, should give place to the Prince of the
Sanhedrin in the time of his being only Father, and consequently be inferior
to him in that state of Commonwealth. For that was so true, as to the Civil
Administration of Government, of which we discourse, that the High Priest
himself was not only obnoxious to the Jurisdiction of the great Sanhedrin, but
also of the inferior Sanhedrins, as is frequently to be seen in the Talmud and
other writings of the Jews. So that it is no wonder, that he as a member of the
Great Sanhedrin, should be but next in authority to the Prince of the
Sanhedrin. It is to be noted also, that the most learned Rabbis instruct us,
that the two names of those by whose hands in former times their Oral Law was
delivered, Juchasin, fol, 159.
are so to be understood in the solemn numbering of them, that the one denotes
the Prince, the other the Father of the Sanhedrin. So that it is no new thing
to believe that these two were more particularly joined then the rest, and were
named together in matters of great moment. And frequently among the Talmudists
mention is made of Ezra, and of such others with their Sanhedrin, in the
management of business, as if then they were customarily to be taken for
Princes of the Sanhedrin. Thus far the learned Seldom.

And John. Whom Lightfoot conjectures to have been the famous Jochanan Ben
Zaccai the Priest, Juchasin, fol. 60.
who is said to have lived a hundred and twenty years; and forty years before
the destruction of Jerusalem, when the Gates of the Temple opened of
themselves, is reported to have said, Joma. fol. 39.
O Temple Why does: thou disturb thy self, Zech. 11.1.
I know thou shall be destroyed, for so Zechariah has prophesied. Open thy
Doors, O Lebanon, that the Fire may devour thy Cedars. After the destruction of
Jerusalem, says Lightfoot, he got leave of Titus, In Centur. Chorographic.
before Matt.
that Jabneh might receive and retain the Sanhedrin. There he presided himself
two or five years, for the certain number is disputed.

And as many as were of the kindred of the Priests. In the Greek, of the High
priest, as the common English translation has, and the Syriack and Arabic
Version also. That is, Whose Ancestors, says Grotius, not long before enjoyed
the High Priesthood, which great nobility caused them to be admitted into the
great Sanhedrin.

7. By what power. As much as to say, By whose effectual Virtue, or by whose
command and authority, have ye cured this person lame from his Mothers Womb?

8. Filled with the Holy Ghost. That is, moved and excited by a certain
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, Matt. 10.19, 20. Luke 21.14, 15.
according to the promise of Christ, who promised his Apostles, that when they
were brought before Presidents, Kings, and Magistrates, that utterance and
wisdom should be given to them, which all their Adversaries should not be able
to withstand; for that they should not speak themselves, but the Spirit of the
Father should speak within them.

9. If. This Particle is here put for since, or seeing that.

We this day be examined. That is, be endited, according to the Syriack, or be
brought before the Judges, according to the Interlineary Gloss, or be reproved
according to the Latin Interpreter of Irenaus, or as Lyranus expounds it, be
brought to judgment as Malefactors. In the Greek, as Grotius Interprets the
word, be examined.

Of the good deed done to the impotent man. That is, because we have done the
same person a kindness.

By what means he is made whole. As if he had said, To answer by whose power
and authority, this Man lame from his Mothers Womb has received the Ability of
walking and sound Health.

10. By the name. That is, by the Power and Authority.

Whom ye Crucified. By the Hands of the Roman Soldiers. 2 Samuel 12.9.
Thus David is said to have killed Vriah, as is there added, by the Sword of
the Children of Ammon.

Whom. By your means put to so cruel and ignominious a death.

God. Who will show himself as opposite to your deeds and endeavors, as you
were to his Counsel and Will.

Raised from the dead. That is, delivered from death, restored to life.

This. To wit, Christ Jesus typified by David.

Is. That is to say, like David.

The Stone which was set at naught. That is, Rejected, contemned and refused,
as no wise fit, even to be used in the most vile part of the building.

Of you Builders. By you the Senators of the great Sanhedrin, and of the City
of Jerusalem, to whose Care and Guardianship, the Religion and Commonwealth of
the People of God is entrusted.

Which. To wit, being raised from the dead.

Is become the Head of the Corner. That is, is advanced by God to so high a
Dignity, that like the chief Cornerstone he supports and sustains the whole
Weight of the Spiritual building. Most admirably and learnedly has that equally
most religious and eminently lettered Divine Doctor Simon Patrick, Dean of
Peterborough, whose signal and sincere Charity I have often experienced,
expressed the Literal and Mystical sense, of this verse, in his Golden
Paraphrase upon Psalm. 1 Samuel 26.19.
118. v. 22. He whom the Great-men and Rulers of the People rejected, as the
Builders of a House do a Stone, that is not fit to be employed in it, is now
become our King, to whom we must all join our selves, if we hope for safety. In
whom we see a figure of that Glorious King, who shall hereafter be in like
manner refused, Luke 19.14. and 20.17.
and then by God exalted to be Lord of all the world, and the Foundation of all
men's happiness. See our Litteral Explication, Matt. 21.42.

12. Neither is there. As if he had said, In this Christ alone God has put the
Salvation of all men, even their Eternal Salvation, which is not to be attained
but by the Mediator of God and Men, Ep. 83. ad Palistin.
the Man Jesus Christ, as says Leo the Great.

For there is no other name. That is, any other person. So c. 1.15. Name is
taken for Person. And here there seems to be some reason why the word Name is
made use of, because in dangers and vows they are wont to be invoked, and their
Names to be expressed from whom we expect assistance and safety.

Under Heaven. That is, in any place whatever. A Synecdoche of the Species for
the Genus, that is, place under Heaven for any place. For as often as we
discourse concerning Humane things men being under Heaven, and their place here
spacious and large, whatever we allege not to be under Heaven, we look upon to
be no where.

Given among men. That is, given by God to mankind as their Savior.

Whereby we must be saved. That is, through whom we ought to seek our
Salvation, or through whom we must of necessity obtain our Salvation, if we
intend to be saved.

13. Boldness. That is, Freedom of speech and presence of mind.

Unlettered. That is, Without the knowledge of good Letters and honest
learning; for the Apostles knew their Letters, and had read the Scriptures, and
retained them by heart; but they were not versed in harder studies, by which
the minds of men are fraught with understanding.

And idiots. That is, Plebeians, men of mean and inconsiderable Fortunes, as 1 Samuel 18.23. A poor man and lightly esteemed, or contemned and abject, is
rendered by the Chaldee Paraphrast, a poor man and an idiot. And c. 24. v. 14.
where David in contempt calls himself a Dead Dog and a Flea; the Chaldee
Paraphrast renders it weak, and idiot.

15. Aside out of the Council. That is, without the Council-house, where the
Sanhedrin was assembled.

17. Let us straightly threaten them. This translation expresses perfectly the
meaning of the Greek Text which has, let us threaten them with threats.

In this name. That is, by the command and authority of Jesus of Nazareth.

At all. That from that time forward they should neither speak nor preach any
thing, pretending the authority of Jesus of Nazareth, so as that any thing
should be said to be divulged by his command.

19. Whether it be right. That is, whether it be allowable by the Law of
honesty and reason.

In the sight of God. Who tho men be never so blind, will never suffer any one
to be preferred before him.

To hearken unto you more than unto God. Thus the young man answered Antiochus,
commanding him to eat Swines flesh against the Law of God: I will not obey the
Kings commandment, but I will obey the commandment of the Law that was given
unto our Fathers by Moses. 2 Mac. 7.33.
It is recorded that Polycarpus upon his Martyrdom said, We have learnt to give
honors which are due to Emperors and Powers established by God, and which are
no impediment to our Salvation. Of the Mother of the Family thus Clement of
Alexandria, She shall obey her Husband in all things, nor shall she do any
thing without his consent, unless what she believes to be a help to attain
Virtue and Salvation. Ephesians. 6.1.
Of Children, thus St. Paul, Children obey your Parents in the Lord. That is,
according to the Exposition of Chrysostom, Declam. 271.
In what ye offend not God. Quintilian. It is not necessary for Children to do
all those things which their Parents command. There be many things which cannot
be done. If thou command thy Son to give a contrary Sentence to his Opinion.
If thou desire him to witness a thing of which he knows nothing. If thou
command me to burn the Capitol, or seize the Castle, it is lawful for me to
answer; These are things which must not be done. The same Author in another
place, All manner of Obedience is not to be given to Parents, otherwise there
would be nothing more pernicious than received Benefits, should they oblige us
to all manner of Servitude. In Tit. 2. cited by Gratian.
Hierome also, If a Master, says he, commands those things which are not
contrary to the Sacred Scriptures, let the Servant be subject to the Master.
But if he commands those things that are repugnant to it, let him rather obey
the Lord of the Spirit, than the Master of the Body. In Tit. 3.
Again, If it be good which the Emperor or Governor commands, let him obey
the Will of the Commander; but if it be evil, answer from the Acts of the
Apostles, Acts 5.28.
We ought to obey God rather than Men. The same is to be understood concerning
Servants toward their Masters, Wives toward their Husbands, and Children toward
their Parents, that they ought only to be obedient to their Masters, their
Husbands, their Parents, in those things which interfere not with the Commands
of God. The same Gratian in the same place, out of St. Austins 6 Sermon upon
the words of the Lord: Whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God. But what if he command that which it behooves thee not to do? Here indeed
out of fear of Powers contemn Power. Observe the Degrees themselves of Humane
things. If the Governor command any thing to be done, is he not to be obeyed?
Nevertheless if the Proconsul command the contrary, thou verily do not
contemn the Power, but choosest to obey the more supreme Authority. Again, If
the Proconsul command one thing, and the Emperor command another, can any
person doubt but that the latter is to be obeyed, the first to be disobeyed? So
if the Emperor command one thing and God another, what think ye? Pay your
Tribute, obey me, right; but not in the Idol-Temple. He forbids Obedience in
Idol-temple. Who forbids? The higher Power. Pardon me; thou threatnest me with
imprisonment, he with Hellfire. Here Faith is to be made use of as a Shield, by
which thou may resist all the Fiery Darts of the Enemy. c. 98. Ex August. in
Psalm. 124. v. 3.
The same Author in the same place. The Emperor Julian was an Infidel. Was he
not an Apostate, a wicked person and an Idolater? Christian Soldiers served a
Heathen Emperor. But when it came to the Cause of Christ, they only
acknowledged him, who was in Heaven. When he commanded them to worship Idols,
and offer Incense to them, they preferred God before him. But when he bid them
take the Field, and march against such a Nation, they obeyed him immediately.
They distinguished their Eternal Lord from their Temporal Lord. And yet in
Obedience to their Eternal Lord they were Subject to their Temporal Lord. C.
101.
The same Gratian in the same place out of Isidorus: If he who is in Authority
has done, or commanded any one to do what is prohibited by the Lord, or has
omitted, or commanded any precept to be omitted, the Sentence of St. Paul is to
be brought to such a ones mind, where he says, Gal. 1. Tho either we or an
Angel from Heaven preach to you any other Gospel, than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed. If any one prohibits you from doing
what is commanded by God; or on the other side commands that to be done, which
God prohibits, let him be accursed of all that love God. He that is in
Authority, if he speak or command any thing which is contrary to the Will of
God, or contrary to what is expressly commanded in Scripture, let him be
accounted as a False-witness of God, and a Sacrilegious person. Like to all
these things contained in Cap. 101. are to be read in the Rules of St Basil
briefly disputed, c. 114. and 103. See also the Book of the Institutes of the
Monks written by the same St. c. 14.16.
Basil.

20. For we cannot, etc. That is, It is not by any means lawful for us; or we
cannot in Conscience; or our Conscience does by no means permit us against the
revealed Will of God to conceal what we have seen and heard. Thus not to can,
is taken for not to be lawful, frequently in Scripture, as may be seen, Genesis
43. v. 32. and 1 Cor. 10.21. We are to take notice, says Curcellaeus our
Countryman, that this Speech does not always denote a true, and properly so
called, want of Power, or Inability, but sometimes a vehement aversion of the
mind from any thing. As when Peter and John say, Acts 4.20.
We cannot but we must speak those things which we have seen and heard: And
John, 1 John 3.9.
Whoever is born of God cannot sin. Also where the Lord Jesus testifies for the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Apoc. 2.2.
that he could not bear them which are evil. Not that it was impossible for all
these to do those things which are spoken of in those places, but because they
had an abhorrency from such actions. Which was the reason why the Jews could
not believe in the Doctrine of Christ. John 12.39.
For finding it to be repugnant to their carnal desires, they were so averse to
it, that they would not admit it, though they could easily have done it, had
they been so minded. With which he openly reproaches them, when he says, John
5.44.
How can ye believe, who receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
which comes from God only? See our Annotations upon Amos 3.8.

21. So when they had further threatened them. That is, when they had charged
them upon pain, to forbear speaking and teaching in the Name of Christ.

How they might. That is, under what specious pretense.

Glorified God for that which was done. In the Greek, gave glory to God. We
find here the people more rightly judging of Divine things, than they who
challenged to themselves the chief Authority in Sacred things. For the people
acknowledges the Miracle, and praises God for it. The Elders, Pontiffs. Priests
and Doctors of the Law, do not only refuse to acknowledge it, and go about to
deprive it of its deserved praise, but also wickedly deem it worthy of
punishment.

22. Forty years old, etc. Luke here declares, that all whom their passions had
not blinded, could not but judge this Cure of the Lame person a most wonderful
Miracle, in regard he had been lame from his Mothers womb, for forty years
together, and upward. For Diseases of long continuance are not easily
eradicated: Insomuch that though they are not natural, they at length become a
second Nature, getting a head, and hardening with Age.

23. They went to theirs. In Greek as in English, to their own. That is, to the
rest of the Christians; for no men are so peculiarly the Christians, as the
Christians themselves. A Christian is to a Christian his Domestic his Kinsman,
his Brother.

24. And when they had heard. That is, the Threats of the Sanhedrin, or of the
Council of the Chief of the Jews; they did not betake themselves to tears, nor
despond in their minds; or despairing of a good Cause, did they go about to
abandon it; but being destitute of Human Aid, they betook themselves to implore
the Assistance of Heaven, believing that then chiefly to begin, when the other
forsakes them.

With one accord. The consent of pious people, and unanimity of mind, is of
great efficacy in prayer to move God. See Matthew. 18.19, and 20.

They lifted up their voice. With a fervent zeal, and a generous ardour of mind.

To God. There are no Arms for Christians to use against the Magistrate, when
he endeavors to oppress the Truth, and the Professors of it, by his Authority
and Force, but Prayers to God for the Magistrate, and his Salvation. That is to
say, that through the mijd-changing, and heart-converting power of God, he may
be reclaimed from opposing the Truth: Or if he have threatened any thing to the
Professors of it, to prevent him from putting it in Execution.

Lord. To whose Divine Power all Beings in Nature are obedient.

Thou. To whose Clemency, for succor, we thy Suppliants have betaken our
selves.

Art. In the Greek and Vulgar English is added God, or, The God.

Who, etc. As if he had said, whom the Creation of all things demonstrates to
excel in Immense Power, and Infinite Strength.

25. Who. As if he had said, Who to thy demonstration of Power to help, have
added thy promise of Assistance, that resting upon thy Promise and Power
together, we may implore thy Aid, with certain hope of obtaining it.

This is not in the Vulgar English, but it is ^n the Greek Original.
By the Holy Ghost. That is, foretelling f^ture things by thy Divine Instinct
and Inspiration.

Of thy Child. That is, thy Servant, as it is rendered in the common English
Translation,

Why, etc. As if he had said, Why rages the wicked and violent Design to
destroy the Kingdom set up of God? For it shall prove no more effectual, than
if a Fly opposed an Elephant; or if any one should go about to throw down the
Sun from Heaven. In the literal sense this is to be understood of the Kingdom
of David, typifying the Kingdom of Christ. David beheld himself encompassed on
every side with most potent Enemies, the Philistines, Moabites, Sabaeans,
Damascenes, Ammonites and Idumaeans, and beset with powerful Hosts. However, 2 Samuel 5.15.8.1. etc. 10.6, etc.
David derides the vain endeavors of all their threatening Numbers, to deprive
him of a Kingdom so firmly assured to him from Heaven. But in a Mystical sense
the Holy Ghost speaking by the mouth of David, reproaches the ridiculous malice
of the World, for daring to invade Christ and his Church; whereas God has
ordained by his inviolable Decree, though the universality of men, both high
and low, combined in an Impious and Nefarious Conspiration, oppose Christ and
his Church, yet all their Fury will come to nothing. And that this Mystical
sense of the second Psalm belongs to the Messiah, both Rabbi David Kimchi,
Saadias Gaon, Jarchi, and others acknowledge.

26. Stood up, etc. As if he had said, the Princes mentioned in the places last
cited, 2 Samuel 8.10.
wickedly conspired against the irresistible Decree of the Omnipotent God, 1 Samuel 16.13. 2 Samuel 2.4. and 5.3.
and against David solemnly Anointed by the command of God. Those Princes were
the Type of all those, who refusing to be subject to the Lord Christ, are
violently carried forth to their own destruction, to make opposition against
God, whose pleasure it is to Reign in Christ's person. Now David being by the
command of God Anointed King, was an Adumbration of the Son of God, Jesus the
Messiah, or Christ, that is, the Anointed by the Eternal Father, to the
Priestly, Prophetical, and Kingly Dignity, not with Terrestrial Oil, Isa. 61.1.
but with Celestial Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

The Kings of the Earth. Thus by way of Extenuation he calls those Princes who
were Enemies to David, and Jesus Christ, who was typified by David, and to them
he opposes God, whose dwelling is in the Heavens, whose vast Power is not
confined to those narrow bounds that limit Human Force.

27. Were gathered together. As if he had said, For these Enemies of David were
Types of Herodes Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee, and Pontius Pilate Governor of
Judaea, who though in other things there was no good correspondence between
them, they consented together with Heathens and Jews, to the destruction of
Christ, Luke 23.

Child. When it is spoken of Jesus, Hilary and Ambrose translate the Greek word
(...), Son, as Erasmus notes upon this place.

Whom thou have Anointed. That is, whom thou have inaugurated King, Priest and
Prophet by the Unction of the Holy Ghost.

Herod and Pontius Pilate. By virtue of an Hebraism peculiar to the Scripture,
they who have a deriv^d and deputed Power, are called Kings.

With the Gentiles. That is, with the Ethnicks, who were either Counselors
with, or Officers under Pilate, who was the Roman Governor of Judaea.

And the peoples of Israel. The Jews are called the peoples of Israel in the
plural number, not only because they consisted of the Twelve Tribes, each of
which constituted as it were a distinct people; as Isaac prayed for Jacob, Genesis
28.3. and God himself promised, Genesis 48.4. But also because they were a
multitude equally as numerous, as if many Nations had been conjoined together,
Judges 5.14.

28. To do, etc. As if he had said, That they being permitted to give way to
their own passions, whatever thou had ordained in thy Eternal Wisdom might
come to pass; that is to say, that thy Son should be brought to the shameful
death of the Cross by the hands of the wicked, for the salvation of Mankind.
The wicked, says Junius, execute the will of God, when they least dream of it:
They execute the will of God, nevertheless they are not exempted from fault.
For God contributes nothing to the Impiety of the wicked, though he let loose
the Reins of their malice, and out of his most profound Wisdom direct their
fury rather against one than another, and give them the power to execute.

Thy hand. That is, thy Power. God in regard of his Omnipotency, wills nothing
but what he can do; and when it is his pleasure to defend, in vain the Enemies
of Truth lay their Ambushes against the Professors of it. Therefore there is
nothing done, unless the Omnipotent will have it done, either by permitting it
to be done, or by doing it himself. Says St. Austin, Enchirid. c. 95.

And thy Counsel. The Counsels of Men often come to nothing, because they
cannot effect what they have a desire to do: but the Counsels, and
determinations of God never fail. For, as Austin says, Enchirid. c. 96. As easy
as it is for the Omnipotent to do what he pleases, so easy is it for him not to
permit what he has no mind should be done.

Determined to be done. In the Greek, prelimited to be done. For says Simon
Grynaeus, a Person excellently well read in the Greek and Latin: The Greek word
signifies to prelimit, or to circumscribe as it were within a space or circle.
Moreover it is to be observed that this whole eight and twentieth verse may be
aptly joined with the words of the verse last preceding, whom thou have
anointed, in this manner. For Pontius Pilate, and Herod have really gathered
together with the Gentiles, and People of Israel in this City, against thy Holy
Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed to do what thy hand and Counsel decreed to
be done. Which is an egregious sense of the words, and most exactly agrees with
the series of the context. 'For thus, says the famous Divine of our Age,
Stephen Curcellaeus, the Apostles were desirous to show their confidence in
God, by openly professing that all the endeavors of the Enemies of Christ to
disturb the propagation of the Gospel, should be of no effect; nor should they
be able to hinder, but that what God had decreed should be done by Christ and
his Servants for the Salvation of the World, should be duly performed, and
executed. Neither ought that transposition of the words offend any one, or seem
unusual, seeing that there be many such in the Scriptures. Of which it will be
sufficient to bring two or three examples, Rev. 13.8. we read, And all that
dwell upon the Earth shall worship the Beast, whose names are not written in
the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Where the
last words, from the foundation of the world, are not to be connected with the
preceding words, the Lamb slain, but with the more remote words, thus, whose
names are not written from the foundation of the world, in the book of life of
the Lamb slain. See also an harder trajection, Luke 2.34. and 35. Where the
last words, That the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed, are to be
connected with these, and for a sign that shall be spoken against, though there
be an interposition of these words between; Yea, a Sword shall pierce thorough
thy own Soul also. See also c. 4.5. where you are to read, And the Devil taking
him up into an high Mountain in a moment of time, showed him all the Kingdoms
of the Earth; not as it is vulgarly pointed, he showed him all the Kingdoms of
the Earth in a moment of time. For that could not be done, besides, that it was
contrary to the design of the Devil, which was to detain the Lord Jesus for
some time at least in the contemplation of the Glory, and Splendor of those
Kingdoms, to excite his desire and Ambition, not to show him passant, as it
were a flash of Lightning. Lastly, where you find any Parenthesis's inserted in
Scripture, there those Transpositions are always to be found. Which is so
frequent in the Epistles of St. Paul, that you meet with three or four in the
seven first Comma's of his Epistle to the Romans. Concerning which thing
Interpreters may be consulted, and among the rest, Beza, and Piscator under the
word Trajectio.

29. And now. The Adverb of time, and now, is a collective, or rational
Conjunction, inferring a conclusion out of what precedes, and is here used for
therefore, or for this reason. As Gen, 4.11.21.23. and in other (...).

Lord, behold their Threatenings, etc. As if he had said, assuage the Threats of
the Magistrates, lest they break forth to the oppression of the Truth, and that
thy Servants boldly and intrepidly in defyance of those threats, may preach the
Doctrine of Christ, show thy Might and Power to work Miracles, as often as we
shall humbly beseech thee to do it for the sake of thy Holy Son Jesus. This
manner of inspiring Fortitude into the Ministers of Christ, ceases at this day;
seeing that the force of the Miracles formerly wrought by the Apostles, still
remains in its full vigor and efficacy.

30. And when they had prayed. In the Greek, while they were yet praying. That
is, they had scarce finished their Supplications.

The place was shaken. To the end the Disciples might know that God was at hand
by this testimony of his Divine Presence; and certainly understand that their
Prayers were heard according to the promise of Christ. Jo. 14.13.
Whatever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, that is, trusting in my promises
and merits, that will I do; that is, I will take care that ye shall obtain it:
and John 16.23. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatever ye shall ask the
Father in my Name, he will give it you. Something like this passage of the
shaking of the place, Aen. 3. v. 89. etc.
you find in Virgil.

See where the Omen comes, by Heaven distilled,
Into your breasts with fear and horror filled.
Scarce had I spoke, when on a sudden all
The Massy Pile seemed ready just to fall;
The Temple Thresholds, Sacred Laurel shook,
The Mountain too a quivering Ague took.
And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. That is, they felt the power and
efficacy of the Holy Ghost more vigorously operating in their hearts at that
time than before, and found themselves possessed of the promises of Christ:
Whosoever has, to him shall be given, Matthew. 13.12.
and he shall have more abundance, and every Branch in me that bears fruit,
my Father purges it, John 15.2.
that it may bear more fruit.

And they spoke the Word of God with boldness. As if he had said, And now no
longer terrified, or hindered by their fears, they spread the Word of God more
boldly, and freely.

32. And the multitude, etc. As much as to say, And among so many thousands who
had embraced the faith of Christ, such was the Concord and Unanimity of mind,
that there was not the least appearance of Dissension in the whole number. This
happy Concord Christ himself declares should be a mark and badge of his
Disciples. John 13.15. John 17.21, and 23.
And prays the Father to infuse it into them, that the world might know that he
had sent him.

Of one Heart, and of one Soul. A proverbial manner of speech, signifying the
most perfect consent of minds, 1 Chronicles. 12.38. All the rest of Israel were of
one heart to make David King. 2 Chronicles. 30.12. And in all Judah the hand of God
was to give them one heart to do the Commandment of the King and of the
Princes, by the word of the Lord. Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart and
one way, that they may fear me. That is, I will cause them unanimously to
profess one Religion. Aristotle, in Diogenes Laertius, putting the Question,
what a Friend was, answers, One Soul inhabiting in two Bodies. And so Cicero.
That Law of just and true Friendship is very Ancient, in Orat. pro Planc.
that Friends should always will the same thing; Neither is there any more
certain tie of Friendship, then the consent and Concord of Counsels and Wills.

Neither any of them, etc. As if he had said, Nay, this Sacred, and
Praiseworthy Concord among Believers brake forth into external Liberality, so
that none of them privately enjoyed his Estate or Goods, which used to be
estimated at the price of Money, without regarding the necessities of others;
but as their occasions required, they also freely granted the use of them to
those that wanted. Cypr. sub finem lib. de opere and eleem.
This is by a Spiritual Birth to be truly born the Sons of God: This is
according to the Heavenly Law, to imitate the equality of God the Father. For
whatever is Gods, is in common for our use: No man is prohibited from the
participation of his Benefits, but that all Mankind equally enjoys his bounty
and goodness. Thus the day illuminates all alike, the Sun shines, the Showers
water, the Wind blows, upon all alike. Sleep is the same to all, and the light
of the Stars and Moon is common to all. By which example of equality, whoever
is a possessor of Land upon Earth, and shares his Incomes and Revenues with the
Brotherhood, while he is common and just in his free and voluntary largesses,
he is an Imitator of God.

33. And with great Power. As if he said, But the Resurrection of Christ, the
Foundation of all Christian Religion, and of our hopes therein comprehended,
the Apostles did not only vigorously and constantly maintain in words, but
also, as they had prayed before, confirmed by the signal, and astonishing
Miracles they wrought by the power of Jesus Christ by them invoked.

And great Grace was upon them all. That is, The Apostles were pleasing, and
acceptable to all. See c. 5. v. 13.

34. Neither was there. The reason is given why the Apostles were so acceptable
to all; because they were so liberal, and bountiful to all.

That lacked. That is, who was destitute of the necessary support of human life.

For as many. See our Annot. c. 2. v. 45.

Sold them. That is, their Lands or Farms.

35. And laid them down at the Apostles feet. To wit, according to the custom
of those who surrendered any thing to the will and disposal of another. From
which Custom the manner of speaking is taken, Psalm. Orat. pro Flac.
8.7. Cicero speaking of Money paidin Court, says, A hundred pound of Gold was
paid down in the Court before the feet of the Praetor. The same Author in 3 of
his Offices: The Fishes were cast down before the feet of Pythius.

And distribution was made. As much as to say, whatever was necessary to every
one for Food, Raiment, and Physic, was distributed to every particular Person,
so that in the whole Assembly of Believers, there was none neglected or
despised for his Poverty, or that appeared to be swelled, and pufft up with his
Riches.

36. And Joses. Joses, Josetus, Josephus, and Joseph, are one and the same Name
with various Terminations, as Drusius, Grotius, and others observe.

Who was sirnam'd Barnabas. This Surname is a Syriac Composition, from the name
Bar and Nabia, or by abridgment Naba, the third person of the future of the
verb Bia, to comfort. And thus Barnaba signifies, the comforting Son; the
Hebrews and Syrians using often the future for the present Participle, as Lud.
de Dieu observes. Nor was this Surname given him by the common People, but by
the Apostles themselves, which redounded to his greater praise. The names which
were given to the Apostles by Christ, did not want a happy portending: Nor did
they doubtless want the same which were given to others by the Apostles, being
filled with the Holy Ghost. Neither is it a small honor to be approved, and
well charactered by Persons eminent in the Church for their Divine Gifts and
Piety. Wherefore all men ought to labor, not so much to be applauded by those
most excellent Persons (lest it might be looked upon as the effect of Ambition)
as to deserve those praises, and in the first place, to be a cause of
Consolation and rejoicing to all pious, and holy Men, by their Piety, and
singular good Deeds.

A Levite. We know the Levites had nothing of their own, and therefore the
Tenths were given them for an Inheritance, Numb. 18.21. We also know that the
Lands adjoining to the Cities, given them in possession, could not be sold,
Levit. 25.34. Therefore the Farm that Barnabas sold, was some land which some
Virgin of another Tribe, brought either to him or his Father in Marriage. For,
as Grotius observes upon Jerem. 32.7. The Women, if they had no Brothers, were
their Parents Heiresses; and if the next of Kin would not Marry them, they did
Marry to others.

And of the Country of Cyprus. Cyprus in the Hebrew Copher, an Island famous
for having so many Names, as also for its Extent, Fertility, Situation, Wealth,
Colonies, Cities, admission of Christianity, was bounded to the West by the
Pamphilian Sea, to the South by the Egyptian, and Syrian; to the East by the
Syrian; to the North by the narrow straight of Cilicia, according to Ptolomy;
l. 5. c. 14.
by which it seems most probable; that it was forced away by nature from
Cilicia, rather then from Syria, as Pliny delivers. l. 2. c. 88. l. 5. c. 31.
Anciently it was the Seat of five Kingdoms, as the same Pliny testifies. But
from the time that the Ptolomies obtained the Government of Egypt, Cyprus also
was reduced under their subjection, by the frequent assistance of the Romans.
But when the last Ptolomy, the Uncle of Cleopatra, who reigned in Strabo's
time, proud and ungrateful to his Allies the Romans expelled him, An Historical
digression.
took the Island into their own Possession, and reduced it into a Pretorian
Province. The principal cause of its Ruin was Publius Claudius Pulcher, who
falling into the hands of the Cilician Pirates, then very powerful at Sea, and
being required to pay his Ransom, sent the demands of the Pirates to the King,
to the end that he should send the Money, and Redeem him: He sent indeed, but so
small a sum, that the Pirates were ashamed to receive it, and so sending the
King his Money back again, they set Claudius at liberty, without paying any
Ransom. Who being thus freed, was not unmindful of returning the favors he had
received from both. So that being made Tribune of the People, he obtained that
Porcius Cato might be sent to eject the King out of Cyprus. Who hearing of
Cato's coming, prevented the ignominy by laying violent hands upon himself.
However Cato taking possession of the Island, sold all the Kings proper Goods,
and Furniture, and sent in the Money to the public Treasury of the Romans,
which filled the Treasury of Rome with a greater Mass of Money then ever any
Triumph of her Commanders. Florus. l. 3. c. 9.
From that time the Island was made a Pretorian Province. Some time after that,
Anthony delivered it to Cleopatra, and her Sister Arsinoe, but Anthony being
overthrown, all his orders were made utterly void, as Strabo testifies, l. 14.

37. Having Land. That is, by Marriage. For the Levites had no other Lands of
their own, except what they had by their Wives, as we have observed upon the
preceding verse. A memorable example to others is this alienation of his Dowry
Land by Barnabas, not to supply his own, but the wants of others. For a small
Farm of this nature used to be very highly valued by the possessours, insomuch
that they are very unwilling to part with it, and they seem to sell their lives
to the Purchaser that bought it. Therefore it was a high piece of Liberality
and Charity, to alienate an Estate only to gratify others.

CHAP. V.
1. BUT a certain Man, etc. The particle but denotes an opposition, and
connects the beginning of this Chapter, with the latter part of the foregoing.
For Luke there having declared the liberality of the Believers of the Church in
Jerusalem by that eminent and special instance of Barnabas, who sold his small
Possession which he enjoyed by way of Dowry, and brought the whole price of it
to the common stock. Now he illustrateth the same by a different, and (in some
respects) contrary example, and by the Divine Vengeance pursuing it. As if he
should say, But Ananias, and Sapphira his Wife were otherways affected, who
having sold their Possession, kept back part of the Price, etc.

Sold a Possession. The Aethiopick renders the Greek word signifying
possession, Vine, as also he does, the word signifying Land, in v. 8. likeways
the word signifying Field, chapter 1.18. the reason is, because most of their
Possessions in the land of Canaan, Prove. 31.16. Hos. 2.15. Joel 1.11. 1 Chr.
27.27.
were Vineyards. Hence the LXX render the Hebrew word, signifying Vineyards,
Possessions, and Lands.

2. And kept back. That is to say, He through a malicious deceit saved somewhat
by stealth.

His Wife also being privy to it. (Supply) and willingly approving it.

And brought. Ananias alone, Sapphira his Wife being absent.

A certain part. Of the price for which he had sold his Land.

And laid it at the Apostles Feet. Dissembling that he had brought the whole
Sum for which he sold his Possession, hoping also that his fraudulent
dissimulation should not be known.

3. Why has Satan filled thine heart? As much as to say, How could thou
persuade thy self to give room in thy heart to that most inconsiderate, and
foolish rashness suggested by Satan? From Est. 7.5. and Eccl. 8.11.
To fill the heart in Scripture phrase is to make bold. As Ludovicus de Dieu
has demonstrated. Boldness, says he, fills the heart, and swells it up with
burning Spirits, which breaking out to the external members, especially the
Tongue, and the Hands, drives them on to the most daring attempts; for a Heart
full of Spirits fears nothing. And the same Author a little after says; There
is a twofold fullness; one of Faith, whereby the heart of Believers, being
filled with holy Spirits, from the most sure promises of God, does considently,
and without fear despise all adversity; The other of Boldness, whereby the
heart of the Profane being filled with rash Spirits, proceeding from a vain
hope of safety, dares without fear adventure upon any evil. This was Ananias
his case here, whose heart the Devil had so filled with this Spirit of
Boldness, that very confidently; and without fear he ventured to lie to the
Holy Ghost.

To lie to the Holy Ghost. That is to say, That thou should labor to deceive
the Holy Ghost; or, as learned John Piscator explains it, Us the Apostles, in
whom the Spirit acts, and to whom he reveals what is necessary for the
edification of the Church, by a figure called Metonymia adjuncti. So also
Grotius. He is said (says he) to lie to God, or the Holy Ghost, who hopes that
he can deceive the Apostles who are instructed by the Holy Ghost.

And to keep back part of the price of the Land. That is to say, laying but a
part of the price of the Possession sold by you, at the Apostles feet, you
would in the mean time dissemble you laid the whole, thinking your Hypocrisy
could be hid, and that the Apostles, though filled with the Holy Ghost in the
day of Pentecost, could in no wise discover the Cheat.

4. Whiles it remained, etc. As much as to say, Was it not in thy power either
not to have sold thy Possession, or having sold it, to keep the whole price, or
a part of it, to thy self; what then did drive you on, thus to obey the Devils
persuasions, that having secretly withdrawn part of it, and laying it aside,
and laying another part at the Apostles feet; that you by Hypocrisy, and Lying,
should dissemble, that you brought the whole, and laid it at the Apostles feet.
Do not think that we who are men, are only mocked with thy deceitful Hypocrisy,
seeing this mocking tends to the reproach of the Holy Ghost, even as much as if
thou had intended by thy deceit to mock the Holy Ghost, who is God, seeing we
by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost discover the secrets of the hearts.
Likewise Paul, after he had said, what precepts he gave to the Thessalonians by
the Lord Jesus, and upon what condition God had called them, 1 These. 4.8.
he adds, He therefore that despises these things, despises not Man, but God,
who has also given unto us his Holy Spirit. That is to say, seeing it is he
who gave us the Holy Ghost, by whom we are governed, and by whose influence it
is evident that we speak. Men then are opposed to the Holy Ghost; they are also
opposed to God, therefore the Holy Ghost is God. For he to whom Ananias chiefly
lied, or whom he chiefly endeavored to deceive, the same is God, v. 4. v. 3.
but the Holy Ghost is he whom Ananias chiefly endeavored to deceive, or to
whom he lied; it follows then that the Holy Ghost is God, says Learned
Christopher Wittichius in his learned Book called Causa Spiritus Sancti.

Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God. That is to say, thou have not
endeavored to deceive men only, but, above all, the Holy Ghost, who is God,
and who reveals to us things secret. See such expressions in Exodus 16.8. 1 Samuel
8.7. Luke 10.16. and These. 4.8.

5. And Ananias hearing these words. Tract. 8. upon Matthew.
And not being able to endure their sharpness, as Origin excellently notes.

Fell down, and gave up the ghost. Ananias, and Sapphira fell dead at Peter's
feet, because, that mocking the Apostles, inspired by the Holy Ghost, they
mocked the Holy Ghost, or God himself. So Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16.
were swallowed up by the Earth, because they rose up against Moses. And of
those Children, mentioned, 2 Kings 2.24. two She-bears out of the Wood
destroyed forty and two, not so much for mocking Elisha as bald, as for mocking
him, being the Prophet of the true God. Also Elimas, for resisting Paul, Acts
13.11.
is struck with blindness. Now whether Ananias, and Sapphira were by the
Righteous Judgments of God condemned to eternal punishment, seeing Scripture is
altogether silent, we cannot determine. Tertullian and Ambrose affirm it,
Ortgen, and some other Fathers deny it; but we judge it pious ignorance to be
willing not to know, what God was not willing to make known to us.

And great fear came upon, etc, As much as to say, As many as heard that God
punished the Lying, and Hypocrisy of Ananias, with sudden death, were seized
with great reverence to the Majesty of God, that they might very earnestly shun
the heinous offenses so punished.

6. And the young men arose. Supply, who were of lusty Bodies, as Apuleius
speaks.

And carried him out. The Greek word for carried him out, signifies, they
trussed him together, because, as the famous Lightfoot says, They not having
Grave-Cloaths ready, they trussed the dead Body together as well as they could,
and having carried him thence, buried him.

7. His Wife not knowing what was done. Hence Lightfoot observes the reason why
the Greek word to truss together, is used in the verse preceding. For if,
says he they who carried him out of the room, where he fell down dead, had
carried him to his own House, or Lodging, there to get him a winding sheet, his
Wife could not be ignorant of what came to pass; but Synesteilan auton, they
bound, and trussed him up as he was in his clothes, and so carried him out, and
buried him.

Came in. That is where Peter, and the rest of the Believers were gathered
together.

8. Whether ye sold your Land for so much. As much as to say, Whether or not
did ye sell your Possession for any more then that sum of Money which your
Husband gave to us.

Yea, for so much. That is, for no more.

9. How is it, etc. As much as to say, To what end did ye invent this deceit,
as if you would put it to t^^d, whether the Holy Ghost, dwelling in us, and who
by us governs the Church, did know all things? God is said to be tempted in
Scripture, as often as any thing is done with an evil Conscience; for then, tho
it be not so designed, and intended, yet the deed itself seems to be as it were
of set purpose, to try whether God be Just, All-knowing, and Omnipotent.

Behold, etc. In these words Peter does not imprecate Sapphiras death, as
Porphyrius falsely alleges; but by his gift of Prophesying, he foretells the
Judgment of God that was coming upon her.

10. Then fell she down. That, (to wit) the present revenge, executed upon her
and her Husband, might be an example to others.

11. And great fear came, etc. As much as to say; The whole Church, and all who
heard the report of this present Judgment upon Ananias, and Sapphira, were
seized with a high reverence of God. See above, v. 5.

12. And by the hands of the Apostles. (An Hebrew phrase common in Scripture)
that is to say, by the Apostles, or the Apostles Labor, and Mu^^ry intervening.

Among the people. That is, publicly, and openly, the people being present,
and looking on; and upon many of the people, that they might entice some to the
faith, and confirm others in the faith.

And they were. All this must be enclosed in a parenthesis, till we come to the
fifteenth verse, where what now has been spoken concerning the Miracles
wrought by the Ministry of the Apostles is continued.

With one accord. That is to say; with Brotherly Concord, as Livy speaks.

All. (To wit) who were joined to the Church.

In Solomon's Porch. Of which, see above, chapter 3. v. 11.

13. And of the rest. (To wit,) who heard the Apostles Preach, but had not as
yet embraced the faith of Christ.

Durst no man join himself to them. The Greek has, glue himself to them,
meaning that none of these hearers durst any way familiarly converse with the
Apostles, for the fear which they conceived from the prodigious fate of Ananias
and Sapphira, which as yet was fresh in their memory.

But the people magnified them. As much as to say, Yet that put no stop to the
progress of the Gospel, because the people had a greater esteem for the
Apostles.

14. The more, etc. As much as to say, yea, many of both sexes were daily more
and more added to the number of the Believers, although none of those that were
added, durst at that time for fear be very familiar with the Apostles.

15. In Beds, and Couches. Couches, in Latin Grabbati, are known to have been
little Beds, in which the Ancients used to rest at Noon; and because these
Couches were easier carried, in them the sick were put, when they were to be
brought in public, that by a miracle they might be healed.

The Shadow, A. D. 34. n. 275.
etc. What, says Baronius, is the shadow of Peter, but the express image of
his body? And certainly from no other, but such Images formed from shadows, did
the Art of Painting take its Original, that from these you may see that the
Religious Worship of Images was in that Primitive Church first of all
consecrated in Peter's shadow by the special Providence of God, working by that
shadow so many, and so great Miracles. But this Baronius his shadow of
reasoning, will as soon vanish, as we observe that we no where read that even
Peter's shadow it self was ever worshipped by those whom by its touch Peter
restored to health. It is perverse and absurd that the Image of Man should be
worshipped by the Image of God; Lib. 2. div. inst. chapter 18.
for whatsoever he worshippeth is worse and weaker, says Lactantius. St.
Agobard, Bishop of Lions, in the beginning of his Book concerning Images, If,
says he, the work of God; hands must not be Worshipped, and Adored, even to
honor God, how much more the works of Men's hands, are not to be Worshipped,
and Adored, even to honor them, whose likenesses they are said to be?

Peter passing by. Who though he had no greater gift of Miracles then the rest
had, yet he was made better known then they, because he was seen to act and
speak, when the rest were silent, and seemed to do nothing.

And be delivered all from your infirmities. This is not in the vulgar Greek
Copies, neither does the Syrian Interpreter read it.

16. A multitude out of the Cities round about. That is, much people out of the
Towns lying round about Jerusalem.

Vexed with unclean Spirits. (That is,) wearied, and after a strange manner
tormented with these evil Spirits.

17. Then the High Priest rose up. As much as to say, Then went the Chief, or
Prince of the Sanhedrin out, to see what the matter was.

And all they that were with him. (That is) the rest of those that were of the
same Sect for Religion, as the Prince of the Sanhedrin was.

Which is the Sect of the Sadduces. (That is) they who adhered to their
opinions. The words, Sect, and Heresy, are of a middle signification, At that
time the Sadduces had the chief Authority in the Government. As to their
Tenants in matters of Religion, see what we have said, Mat. 3.7.

Were filled with Indignation. That is, enraged with rash, and unruly fury, for
that they saw the Apostles by their Preaching the Resurrection of Christ from
the dead to the people, did strike at the very Root of their Heresy; wherefore
the Sadduces thought it for the interest of their cause, if by force they could
get the Apostles, and their Doctrine suppressed, lest that the people embracing
the Doctrine of the Apostles, their Authority should be despised, and their
Heresy exploded.

18. And laid their hands upon the Apostles. That is, they seized them.

20. Go stand and speak in the Temple. That is, Preach constantly, and freely
to the whole multitude of the people, and to all in common, in the most famous,
and public place of the City.

The words of this life. Which Christ renewed after his death. There is no need
that these words should brea^ difficulty to any man, says Lightfoot, if he
observe (...) words in v. 17. which is the Sect of the Sadduces. For, the words
of this life, are words which assert this life, (to wit, the Resurrection)
which the Sadduces deny. For the controversy was about the Resurrection of
Jesus. (...)
Heinsius thinks that in these words there is an Hebraism. The Hebrew word used
for Life, signifies, says he, among other things, an Assembly, or Company. It
will appear from what precedes, that here is spoken either of all the Apostles,
or most of them, or at least their Assemblies. That place, Psalm. 74. is known,
Forget not the Congregation of thy poor for ever: And before, Deliver not the
Soul of thy Turtle Dove to the multitude; where you have twice the Hebrew word
(...), which the Hellenists in diverse places have diversely rendered. If you
consider the word, it signifies Life, Psalm. 68. Thy Congregation has dwelt
therein; where, if you render the Hebrew verbatim, instead of thy Congregation,
or the Congregation of thine, you must render thy Life. Therefore the words of
this Life, is the same as the discourse of your Company, or Conversation.

21. And when they heard. The Divine Command given them by the Ministry of the
Angel.

Called the Council together. That is, the Senate of the People, or the great
Sanhedrin.

And all the Senate of the Children of Israel. That is, the whole Senate of the
City of Jerusalem, see what we have said above, chapter 4.5. The word which is
rendered Senate, in the Greek, is in the Hebrew Elders. And Hesychius expressly
makes the Greek word, rendered Senate, and the word rendered Presbytery, to be
one, and the same.

24. The High Priest. That is, the Prince of the Sanhedrin.

The Captain of the Temple. See what we have said above, chapter 4. v. 1. and 6.

Chi^f Priests. That is, the heads of the Sacerdotal Families. See our literal
explanation of Matt. 2. v. 4.

Heard these things. To wit, From the Officers which they sent to bring the
Apostles out of Prison.

Whereunto this would grow. That is, whither it did tend, or what it did mean.

26. Brought them without violence. That is to say, Not as they used to drag
Felons (unwilling to come) to Judgment, but after the manner that even honest
men sometimes are called to appear in Judgment.

For they feared. The Captain and his Servants.

The people. To wit, who for the so many and great Miracles wrought by the
Apostles among them, and the favors they who were healed received by them, as
also for the singular integrity of their Conversations, were highly esteemed by
them.

Lest they should have been stoned. By the people who took it in ill part that
violent hands should be laid upon such holy men, and endued with such Divine
Virtue.

28. Did not we straightly command you? That is, we did most strictly, and with
most weighty threatenings forbid.

That ye should not teach in this name. That is, in the Authority of Jesus of
Nazareth, whom the Rulers of the Sanhedrin hated, and despised so exceedingly,
that they would not so much as mention his name.

And behold. Notwithstanding of all our threatenings.

And intend, etc. As much as to say, Yea, also ye intend to stain our
reputation with the reproach of an ungodly slaughter; as if we had unjustly
condemned that Jesus of Nazareth to the death of the Cross. The Hebrews, says
Grotius, express slaughter, the guilt of slaughter, and the punishment of
slaughter, by blood.

29. The other Apostles. (To wit) who, as his Associates, spoke the same things
with Peter.

To obey, etc. To this agrees that Decree of Plato in his Phoedrus, It is
lawful for no man to desert that Office, to which God assigned him. From hence
(that we ought to obey God rather then men) Lorinus well infers, That we
ought to obey men's commands, when they do not contradict God, who gave them
Authority to command. Lib. de praecep. and disp. c. 12.
Hence also Bernard says well, Whether God or Man, who is Gods Vicegerent,
command a thing, we are certainly to obey with the same care, and behave with a
like reverence, whenever man commands nothing contrary to God. See what we
have noted above, chapter 4. v. 19.

30. The God of our Fathers. That is, the God who entered in Covenant with our
Fathers.

Raised up Jesus. This manner of speaking is frequent in Scripture, that God
raised up Prophets, Judges, or other Ministers, which he was to make use of for
some great work. Which is as much as to say, says Calvin, as that the best
natures excellency is weak, except God endue them with peculiar gifts, to whom
he intrusts any great and noble Office. Perhaps this manner of speaking alludes
to that notable place of Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.15. which Peter cited above in his
first Sermon, chapter 3.22.

Whom ye slew, and hanged upon a Tree. That is, whom ye put to a shameful death
upon the Cross. In allusion to that place, Deuteronomy. 21.22, 23.

31. Him has God exalted a Prince, and a Savior. There is an Ellipsis here of
the Praeposition In, so that the sense may be, that Christ, whom you have
condemned to be shamefully hanged, him has God exalted to be a Prince and a
Savior, or has constituted in the supreme degree of honor, that he might be
more fully, and perfectly the Prince of life, to wit, eternal, and the Captain
of Salvation. See above, chapter 3.15. Heb. 2.10. and 5. v. 9.

With his right hand. That by the right hand of God here, being a metaphorical
expression, is understood, his Power, and great Virtue, is clear unto all. If
over since the Creation God did manifest it, surely it was in this work of
Christ's exaltation. Whence Paul does deservedly Celebrate it in these words.
Ephesians. 1.19 and 20.
And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe,
according to the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when
he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in Heavenly
places. For what can be conceived more noble than to endow with immortality a
Man that was born like other Men, subject also to the same infirmities with
them, except only sin, and then set him above all the Heavens, and to put all
things under his Feet, as well in Heaven, as in Earth, that he might govern,
and manage them at his pleasure? For it appears by the circumstances, that all
these things are comprehended under Christ's Ascension, and exaltation to
Heaven, and not a mere lifting up to Heaven, such as was Enoch's before the
Law, and Elias 's under the Law, who neither died before they were lifted up,
nor attained to any dominion after. For these, Curcel. instit. lib. 5. c. 15.
n. 16.
although they were Preludies, and Types of Christ's Ascension, as of ours also,
yet were they infinitely short of it.

To give, etc. As much as to say, That of his great mercy he might bring his
people to repentance; and by forgiveness of sin, which follows repentance
quickened by faith, reconcile them to himself. Calvin says well, Repentance is
indeed a voluntary Conversion. But whence comes this willingness, except that
God change our heart, that of stony it may become fleshy, of hard, and
stubborn, tractable: and lastly, of crooked, straight? But this is done, when
Christ by his Spirit renews us; neither is this the gift of one moment, but
must be daily increased all our life, till we fully adhere to God, which will
be at last, when we shall have put off our flesh. It is indeed a beginning of
Repentance, when a man who first was averse from God, renouncing the World, and
himself, begins a new life. But because (though once upon the way) we are far
from the mark, we must daily be advancing. Both which we obtain by Christ. For
even as he begins Repentance in us, so he gives us perseverance. This is
indeed an inestimable Grace: but it would profit little, unless joined with
remission of sins. For Christ first found us Enemies to God, and the
Corruptions, which make the dissension between him and us, do always stick to
us, so that he might justly be displeased with us rather than favorable to us.
But Justification consists in this, if God impute not our sins to us. Therefore
this latter Grace ought never to be separated from the former. Yea, the Gospel
will be lame and corrupt, unless it consist of these two Members: That is;
unless men be taught that they are reconciled to God by Christ, by the free
imputation of his Righteousness, and by the new birth of the Spirit,
transformed to newness of life. Thus we have in short, how Salvation is to be
obtained in Christ.

32. And we are his witnesses of these things. As much as to say, Now it
becomes us not upon any account to suppress these things which I have spoken,
seeing we are constituted witnesses of them, and so by virtue of our Office are
bound to publish, and proclaim them openly to all. See above, chapter 1.8. Luke
24.48. and John 15.27. The Greek has words here for things, but the sense is
the same; for by words, Peter understands things themselves, after the Hebrew
manner of speaking, to wit, those things of which he briefly spoke before, that
is, whatever respects the Dignity, and Office of Christ, or Man's Salvation
depending thereon.

And so is also the Holy Ghost. As much as to say, Nor indeed do we the
Apostles only witness these things, but also the Holy Ghost himself, who is a
witness beyond exception, to whom by right ye are bound to assent, however ye
refuse to give credit to us. The Apostles alone for integrity, and innocence of
life were worth credit: but lest the stubborness of men might have any pretext
to cloak their unbelief, God would add to this testimony another greater, to
wit, the testimony of his Spirit. This very testimony of the Spirit, is joined
elsewhere with the testimony of the, Apostles, John 15.26 27. Heb. 2.3, 4.
but we must not think that the holy Spirit did bear witness apart from the
Apostles; but by the Apostles, to wit, by their Miracles, and Divine Discourses
proceeding from his Inspiration. Such an Inspiration also did at that time most
evidently manifest itself in the Apostles, while with such readiness of mind
they spoke of so wonderful things, no ways fearing the power, or threatenings of
the great men. After the like manner it is said, Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit, and
Bride say, Come. That is, the Bride inspired by the Spirit says, Come.

Whom God has given. That is, the gifts of which Holy Spirit God has given
largely, and plentifully.

To all that obey him. To wit, Christ, that is, to all that believe in Christ,
and endeavor to frame their conversation hereafter according to the rule of
his Word.

33. They were cut to the very heart. That is, they were ragingly angry. (...):
The Greek word here, and also chapter 7.54. (says Hesichius) is, They raged with
anger, they were very angry.

Took counsel to slay them. That is, they consulted among themselves to kill
the Apostles, who were personally present, and took notice of it.

34. A Pharisee. The Sect of the Pharisees was in greatest esteem among the
Jews, and was gentler than the rest in punishing.

Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law. Or a public Professor. Concerning this Judge of
the great Sanhedrin, Lightfoot says thus; Rabban Gamaliel the first, called
commonly, and for distinction, Rabban Gamaliel the old, was Praeses of the
Sanhedrin, after his Father Rabban Simeon, the Son of Hillel, Paul's Master, and
the thirty fifth receiver of the Traditions, and therefore for this reason,
might well be called Doctor of the Law, as being keeper, and conveyer of the
Traditions received at Mount Sinai; were it not that the Rabbis of the
Inferior Order enjoyed the same Title. He died eighteen years before the
destruction of the City, and Rabbi Simeon his Son took his Chair, who perished
with the City.

Commanded to put forth the Apostles a little space. That is, he commanded them
to retire a little out of the Council, lest by his words they might become
bolder.

35. Take heed, etc. As much as to say, do not act with such a great heat, but
rather have a special care, lest in your preposterous Zeal you may do somewhat
to these Men in this business, whereof afterward you may repent. It is not
probable to me that Gamaliel spoke thus, as if he approved the Doctrine of the
Gospel, or would undertake its defense, but seeing all the rest stirred up with
fury, being a gentle, and moderate man, he by his discourse moderates their
excess. In the mean time, says Capellus, his Disciple Paul most cruelly raged
against the Church of Christ, and wasted it, In sum. Talm. l. 2. tract. de
orat. and bened. sacerdot.
and Maimonides attributes a fact to Gamaliel far different (as it seems) from
this advice; for he says that when he saw Heretics so abound in his days
(meaning Christians, there being none other at that time among the Jews that
might be supposed to have been so called) he composed a form of Prayer, in
which God was requested to extirpate the Heretics, which form he put with the
other forms of Prayer in the Jewish Liturgy then used, that it might be ready
in every ones mouth. If this fact be true, it seems to argue such an enraged
spirit against the Christians, and hatred at the Christian Religion, to have
been in this man, as suits not well with this advice of his, which Luke gives
here an account of: Except that one would think to reconcile Maimonides and
Luke, by saying, this was Gamaliels mind and judgment, that although the
Apostles, and their followers were Heretics, and even dangerous, yet they were
not to be suppressed by human violence, or the Counsels of Human Policy, but
the whole of it should be committed to the wise Providence of God, that their
rooting out must be looked for from God, and not hastened by Human Contrivances,
and therefore that for this purpose he composed that Prayer, and added it to
the rest in the daily Liturgy, whereby God was besought to root out these Men,
if they were ungodly, and Heretics, that if they were not from God, he himself
would in a way, and manner most agreeable to his own Providence, and Wisdom
disappoint, and overturn their designs. As to Paul, Gamaliels Disciple, that
bitter Persecutor of the Church of Christ, two things may be answered; to wit,
that Gamaliel himself was indeed at first of the same disposition with Paul
against the Apostles and their followers, which was cruel, and fierce; but that
then he had changed his thoughts, God having inclined his heart to milder
courses, which often comes to pass; or that afterward Paul dissented from his
Master, as being of a hotter temper, and therefore of a more angry, and hostile
spirit against those whom he thought to overturn the Jewish Religion, received
from their Fathers, for which he was a great Zealot.

36. For before these days rose up Theudas. Theudas is not a Greek, but the
Hebrew name (...), which the Syrians pronounce by a dipthong Theuda, as they
call Thomas, Thaumas, and Joseph, Jauseph, as Grotius noted. Luke (says Henry
Valesius) or rather Gamaliel in Luke says expressly, Upon Eusth. book 2. chapter 11.
that Theudas rose up but very lately, yea, in these same days wherein he
spoke. For before these days rose up Theudas, which words demonstrate the thing
to have been done but very lately, for so both Greeks and Latins use to speak
of a thing lately fallen out, as may be proved by many instances. For before
these days, then, is as much as in these days; for the Greeks and Latins say
before the third day of the Calends, for the third day of the Calends.
Wherefore when Luke subjoyns, after this man rose up Judas, nothing else is
meant by it, then that Theudas was older then Judas the Galilaean. Which gloss,
though at first it seems somewhat hard, yet it is altogether necessary, and
most true, neither does it want examples; for as often as we reckon from the
last, which is nearer us, we must make the first last, and the last first. For
that reason Tertullian in his Apologetick has used the word retro, to say a
good while ago, in times past; and retrosior for ancienter, and nevertheless
retro in Latin: is the same as post afterward.

But because Causabone deny, that ever the Greeks spoke so, we produce a
witness beyond all exception, which is Clemens Alexandrinus, in lib. 7. strom
toward the end.
who speaks in the very same manner that Luke does, for having observed almost
all the Heretics to have broke out about the time of Hadrian, and to have come
even to the Reign of Antonius Pius, as Basilides, and Valentine: he subjoyns,
for Marcion lived about the same time with Basilides, and Valentine, but he as
the elder, was conversing with them, being yet young. He adds then; After whom,
Simon for a while heard Peter Preach. Who sees not in this place of Clemens,
that after whom, is the same with before whom? For neither was Simon the
Sorcerer after Marcion, but rather lived long before him, as is constant among
all. But certainly Clemens, while he makes a Catalogue of Heretics, he
reckoned them first, who were the last, and put Simon the last of all. But also
Geographers describing the situation of Lands, and names of People, speak after
the same manner; for they say, After these are those, that is, above these,
those are placed. exercltat. 2 chapter 18.
And so much against Causabons Opinion, who thought that Theudas, of whom
mention is made in the Acts, to have been older then Judas. But one will
perhaps say that from what we have argued, it seems, to be abundantly evinced;
that Theudas was not elder then Judas of Galilee; yet nevertheless that
Theudas, whereof Luke speaks, must be distinguished from that Theudas,
mentioned by Josephus 20th Book of his Antiq. toward the end of Chapter 2. For the
first Theudas, of whom Gamaliel speaks in that Oration which he had in the
Jewish Council; did raise a tumult in Judea, about the time of Christ's Passion.
But the other, of whom Josephus speaks, stirred up Sedition after the death of
King Agrippa, while Cuspius Fadus governed Judea; about the fourth year of the
Reign of Claudius Augustus. Seeing then that Gamaliel had this speech a little
after Christ's Resurrection, and before. Stephens Martyrdom, that is, about the
latter end of Tiberius his Reign, he could not at all have spoken then of that
commotion which Theudas made, while Claudius Reigned. We cannot meet this
objection any other way, unless we say that Josephus was mistaken for making
Theudas his Sedition later then he ought. For, that there were two Theudases,
who feigned themselves Prophets, one after another, stirring up the Jews to
hope for new things, I can no ways be persuaded. Let Luke and Josephus be
compared, where both of them speak of Theudas, and it will plainly appear that
they both meant one and the same man. Certainly all circumstances agree so
exactly in both Narratives, that Josephus seems to have Commented upon Luke.
One difference there is as to the time, which yet is not of such moment, that
we should invent two Theudases: For if as often as we meet with such
differences in the Narratives of Ancient Writers, we would distinguish Persons,
and things, we must beware, lest unadvisedly we make two men of one. How much
more safe is it, when we find two Writers differing among themselves: to say
that one of them is in a mistake, which since it is wicked to affirm of the
Scripture, the whole blame must be laid upon Josephus. Lightfoot says, Admit
only that Josephus errs in computing the times, in Horis Heb.
and the whole difficulty is removed. And truly, I see not upon what account we
owe that Reverence, and Modesty to Josephus, as to wrestle so much for his
Reputation. Another Theudas must be found out, or the pointing of comma's
altered, or some other, I know not what absurd Plaster must be applied, rather
then Josephus must be accused of a mistake, who yet is found often to trip and
reel, both in History, and Chronology. I would therefore think Josephus his
Theudas to be Gamaliels, but that Josephus mistaking the time, stained a true
History with false Chronology.

Saying he was some body. That is, Boasting himself to be some great and
eminent deliverer of the Jews from the servitude, with which the Romans
oppressed them. 20 Antiq. 2. 2 Hist. 11.
This History Josephus relates thus, (and after him Eusebius) while Cuspius
Fadus Governed Judea, a certain Juggler, named Theudas, having gathered
together a great multitude of men, persuaded them to carry away their Goods and
follow him as their Captain to the River Jordan, and being, as he himself said,
a Prophet, made them believe by his Power he would divide the water, and so
they might have easy passage. By such speeches he deceived many, but shortly
after, Fadus suppressed their madness, having sent some Troops of Horse against
them, who having suddenly surprised them, killed some, and took others
Prisoners; Theudas himself was also taken by them, whose Head they cut off, and
carried to Jerusalem.

And brought to naught. That is, All their endeavors vanished.

37. After this man. These words are the same with before this man, as we
showed in the verse immediately preceding out of Valesius his Notes upon
Eusebius.

Rose up Judas of Galilee. Ant. 18.1. Hist. 1.5.
Of him Josephus says thus (and out of him Eusebius) Judas the Gaulanite, born
in the Town of Gamala, having joined one Saddock a Pharisee in his Society,
stirred up the People to revolt; both of them saying that the Tax was nothing
but a mark of manifest Bondage; and encouraged the whole Nation to defend their
Liberties. The same in the 2 book of the Jewish War, 7. At that time a certain
Galilean, named Judas, stirred up the Inhabitants to revolt, openly upbraiding
them, that they should thus endure to pay Tribute to the Romans, and own,
besides God, some mortal Men to be Lords over them. The same Josephus calls
this Judas the Gaulanite, Judas the Galilean. Antiq. 18.2.
Perhaps he was commonly believed, thus, because that in Galilee he chiefly
stirred up his Tumults, though Gaulan, and Gamala belonged not to Galilee, but
to Perea, or the Region beyond Jordar.

In the days of the Taxing. That is, while Publius Sulpitius Quirinius, or
Cyrenius taxed Judea. Scaliger, (says Valesius) says, Lib. 6. de ementemp.
and in anim. in (...).
That Luke speaks not here of the first Taxing, under which Christ was born,
but of the second, which was made after Archelaus his Banishment; and sharply
reproves Eusebius for confounding these two Taxings among themselves. But
Scaliger himself is very greatly mistaken; who being seconded by no Author,
would obtrude two Taxings upon us, while both Josephus, and Luke himself avouch
there was but one. For Luke says not of the second Taxing, but only of the
Taxing; intimating, that there was but one Taxing. Origin also in his first
Book against Celsus, agrees with Eusebius in these words: After him, in the
days of the Taxing, at which time Jesus was born, Judas a certain Galilean made
many of the People to revolt to him. Therefore Scaliger's Censure must attaint
Origin, for he affirmed the same that Eusebius did. For Origin distinguished
not two Taxings of Judea. Moreover Eusebius agrees very well with himself, for
that having followed the Evangelick Authority, he made that Taxing of Quirinius
to fall about the birth of Christ, it follows that he should apply the
Insurrection of Judas the Galilean to the same time, wherein indeed he differs
from Josephus, but agrees exceeding well with Luke, and with himself. If so
be, that any will choose to embrace our Opinion, there shall no difference be
found between Luke and Josephus. For we say, that the Taxing at the time Christ
was born, began when Herod Reigned in Judea, and that it was ended by
Quirinius, when Archelaus, Herod's Son was banished. In which very time we say
that Judas his Insurrection fell out in Judea, to wit, after Archelaus his
Banishment. Surely, before Archelaus his being deposed; there was no ground why
Judas should stir up the People to revolt; for that the Roman Magistrate would
not Tax there, where the King was a Friend, and an Ally of the People of Rome;
neither were the Jews in any hazard of being Slaves to Foreigners, while they
had a King of their Nation, and Religion. Whence it appears, that the Taxing,
and Insurrection of Judas the Galilean, could not fall out till after Archelaus
his Banishment. Thus far Valesius in his Notes upon Euscbius his Ecclesiastical
History, Book 1. Chap. 5. The same Valesius, in the same place a little before:
Josephus, says he, does indeed mention the Taxing made by Quirinius in Syriae
and Judea, as soon as Archelaus was banished. But he speaks not of this Taxing,
which Luke in his Gospel says, chapter 2.1, 2.
was made, when Herod was yet Reigning. But indeed it seems to me that an
Error has crept into Lukes Text in Quirinius his Name, and that for
Quirinius, the name of Sentius Saturninus ought to be restored. For this man,
as Josephus testifies, was Governor about the latter end of Herod's Reign.
Tertullian also writes, that Judea was Taxed by Sentius Saturninus. Whence it
appears, Lib. 4. contra Marcion c. 19.
that in Tertullians times, some have read in Lukes Gospel, Saturninus for
Quirinius. Besides, it is strange that Josephus should have pretermitted the
first Taxing, who yet was so accurate in prosecuting the History of his Nation,
that he reckons all the Governors of Syria; for he mentions both Sentius
Saturninus, and Quintilius Varus his Successor. When Eusebius understood this,
it was his Judgment that it was the same Taxing that Luke and Josephus
mentioned; but that Josephus was mistaken, who thought this Taxing to have
happened after Archelaus his Banishment. In Chronico.
Therefore the same Eusebius places that Tumult of Judas the Galilean, which
followed upon the Taxing made by Quirinius, about the time of Christ's Birth,
and the end of Herod's Reign. Neither was Eusebius so stupid, as not to see Luke
and Josephus to disagree among themselves in setting down the time of this
Taxing, it being evident, even to the blind. But in this discord he for respect
to the Gospel, chose to disbelieve Josephus, and to follow Luke, which Opinion
is indeed far more likely, and probable then that of Scaliger, who thinks
there were two Taxings of Judea, both made by Quirinius. But in this Opinion of
Scaligers, many things, not very probable, do occur. First, it behoved
Quirinius to have been twice sent to Syria for one and the same purpose, to
wit, to Tax. First, about the time of Christ's birth; then about ten years
after. But it is not probable that one Man should be twice sent to govern a
Province. It is certain that Josephus, that accurate Historian, when he
mentions Quirinius his coming to Syria, and Judea, says not that ever he came
to Syria before, or that any Taxing was before that time made either by him, or
any other Roman Judge. But if the Taxing had been made already, why is it done
again by the same man; for if it had been rightly made, and without Fraud, it
was no ways necessary it should be done again; but if not well, justly it
behoved to send another who should make a more just Taxing. Further, how could
that former Taxing be made by a Roman Magistrate, while Herod Reigned, seeing
that the Senate had declared Herod to be King of Judea by an undoubted Right;
neither had the Roman Magistrate a right to Act any thing by Authority in
Judea, so long as King Herod lived: I pass by that in the last days of Herod,
wherein Christ was born, Saturninus, and Varus, but not Quirinius were Caesar's
Deputies in Syria. These be the Arguments whereby I am chiefly inclined to
think Scaligers Opinion not probable, who argues for two Taxings. Neither does
it withstand that Luke says that the Taxing which was made a little before
Christ was born, was the first; for by it is only meant that this was the first
time wherein the Romans Taxed Judea, neither was there ever any Taxing before.
It is also false what Scaliger says, that the latter Taxing belonged to
Archelaus his Tetrarchy, infine 17. Ant. and init. 18.
and was for his Goods only. Yea, Josephus says expressly that Quirinius was
sent by Caesar to Tax throughout Syria, and Judea. Petavius followed Scaligers
Opinion, to which he adds this only, that both these Taxings were made by
Quirinius, in Rat. temp.
being sent with an extraordinary Power to Syria. But both Luke, and Josephus,
their words refel this, for Luke says, When Cirenus was Governor of Syria; and
Josephus has: To do Justice among the People; which cannot be said but of the
ordinary Governor. Casaubon in his Exercitations, takes the same course to
reconcile Josephus and Luke. But indeed in my Judgment all of them have lost
their Labor, for one of them must needs be in a mistake, which since it is
heinous to say of the Evangelist, it is safer to lay the cause of the mistake
upon the Jewish Writer. Which, if it seem somewhat harsh to any, there remains
yet this one way of reconciling them, which we mentioned already, that in Lukes
Text we restore Saturninus instead of Quirinius, and that we say the Taxing in
his time was made, not by the Roman Governor, but by King Herod himself. It
might also be said that this Taxing was indeed finished, and perfected, when
Quirinius was Governor after Archelaus his Banishment; yet it begun long before
toward the end of Herod's Reign, at which time Christ was born. Thus also the
difference that appears between Luke and Josephus is taken away. By this means
Luke and Josephus agree excellently well together, for the Evangelist calls
that Taxing, which began to be made about the time of Christ's Birth, Herod
being yet alive, the Taxing of the Governor Quirinius, because it ended at
length under Quirinius. This indeed in my Opinion is the fittest interpretation
of that Gospel Text in Luke, being such as supposes only one Taxing to have
been made, not two, as Scaliger, and others following his Opinion, contrary to
the faith of History have devised. Thus far the Learned Valesius.

Drew away much People. That is, made many of the People revolt from the Romans.

After him. That is, To him.

He also perished. As much as to say, Says Origin, Lib. 1. cont. Cells.
Who after he was punished himself, his Doctrine also was overthrown, except
some few remainders.

38. Refrain from these men. That is, Have nothing to do with them, as Matt.
27.19.

Of men. That is, Of men's devising.

And let them alone. To these words must be joined that part of the verse
immediately following, Lest happily ye be found even to fight against God.

For if this Counsel, etc. The construction requires that these words, and the
following, till the forecited part of the next verse, Lest happily ye be found,
etc. should be enclosed between two Parenthesis's.

It will come to naught. That is, it is not so firm as that it can stand.

39. Ye cannot overthrow it. That is, ye will labor in vain to overthrow it,
forasmuch as whatever is of God, must stand in spite of all men. Bullinger in
his Commentaries upon this place, highly extols this Counsel of Gamaliels. But
if we believe Calvin, Gamaliel drew a perverse consequence from true
Principles, because that which only should be applied to Faith, he does
misapply to outward duty, and way of acting. And so he not only overthrows all
political order, but also he enervates the Discipline of the Church. Castellio
in his Vatican answers Calvin thus: Seeing the business was about a matter of
Religion, which was yet then in Controversy, and not about any Crime expressly
forbidden by the Law, Gamaliel could not, though he had been a Christian, have
given the Jews a better advice. First, his reason was true, if it was not from
God, it would fall of it self, according to that of Christ, Every Plant which
my Heavenly Father has not Planted, Matt. 13.15.
shall be plucked up: Let them alone, 1 Samuel 24.
etc. And of David, who would not kill, Saul when he might. Also the Examples
which Gamaliel produces, are true. Now whereas Gamaliel feared that they
should fight against God, that came afterward to pass; which, if they had
followed his advice, had never been. And a little after, Whereas Calvin says
that this advice of Gamaliels is such as would overthrow all Political Order,
and enervate Church Discipline, he says not true; for the Discipline of the
Apostles was not quite without Nerves, though it had no such Nerves as Calvin
speaks. Also Political Order is in force in sins that are certain, and without
Controversy. In the Law of Moses the LXX Elders judged in smaller, and more
easy Causes, and brought the more hard and difficult to Moses, and he consulted
with God concerning them. So may it also be done now. Adultery, Manslaughter,
false Witness, and other certain, and known Crimes, may without hazard be
judged: But for Heretics, the matter is controverted (for if it were not
controverted, it would not be debated any more then Murder) and therefore are
to be referred to the Oracle. Therefore as Moses waited the time of the Oracle,
and yet did not in the mean while overthrow the Political Order, so we are to
wait the time of Gods Judgment, which will be a certain Oracle in this
Controversy. Yet God in the mean time will make use of the service of his
Ministers in things not controverted. These are Castellio's words, with which
agree these choice words of the Sermon Preached before the House of Lords on
Nov. 5. 1680. Of Societies of Men, Christians of all others are most averse
from ways of violence and blood, especially from using any such ways upon the
account of Religion: And among Christian Churches, where they differ among
themselves, if either of them use these ways upon the account of Religion, they
give a strong presumption against themselves, that they are not truly
Christians. Thus far the Right Reverend Bishop of St. Asaph, William Lloyd, a
Man of excellent Parts, great Erudition, singular Piety, and Benignity, to whom
I do, and shall all my life time acknowledge my self to be extremely bound.
Orat. 32.
We do not, says Gregory Nazianzen, brand our Enemies with Reproaches, as many
do, covering the weakness of their Reasons, and Arguments with foul Language,
as is said of the cuttle Fish, that it vomits its ink in the Water, to escape
the Fisher, but we make it appear by this infallible proof, that we fight for
Christ, because we fight with Meekness and Humility, as Christ did. Salvianus a
Presbyter of Marseille, lib. 5. de Provid.
speaking of the Arrians, whose Heresy every Orthodox Man abhors: They are
Heretics, says he, but they do not know it. They are Heretics with us, but
with themselves they are not such; for they so far judge themselves Catholics,
that they defame our selves with the brand of Heretical overthwartedness. What
therefore they are to us, we are the same to them. The Truth is with us, but
they presume it to be with themselves. Gods Honor is with us, but they think
that what they believe is for his Honor. They are Ungodly, but this they think
to be true Godliness. They err, but they err with a good intention, thinking
that they both Honor, and Love God. Though they have not an Orthodox Faith,
yet they think it to be a perfect love of God, and how they shall be punished
for this heterodox Error in the day of Judgment, none can know, except the
Judge. In the mean time, God, as I think, therefore lengthens his patience to
them, because he sees, that although they believe not aright, yet they do err
only out of love to a Judgment, which they suppose to be religious.

40. And to him they agreed. To wit, That they should not kill the Apostles;
but not that they should send them away untouched; which yet was fit and
agreeable to what Gamaliel spoke.

And when they had called, etc. As much as to say, When they had called in the
Apostles, whom before they commanded to go aside, or be carried out of the
Council, and lest the Council should seem to Assemble against them as
Innocents, and guilty of no Crime, they punished them with that Judicial
punishment of forty stripes enjoined, Deuter. 25. v. 2, 3. which was inflicted
upon the disobedient, and was commonly called by the Hebrews a striking. The
Jews by the Romans permission had power to correct their own in Judea, and some
Neighboring places, even with strokes.

They commanded, etc. As much as to say, They strictly forbad them that they
should not henceforth Preach the Gospel of Christ, and that they should speak
nothing to any man that tended to the praise of Jesus of Nazareth.

41. And they. To wit, The Apostles were dismissed by the Sanhedrin, after
being basely beaten, as Christ foretold, Mat. 10.17, 21, 35, 23.34. Mark
12.5.13.9. Luke 12.11. Mat. 5.11, 12. Luke 6.22, 23.
also remembering his Command.

Departed from the presence of the Council rejoicing. By these words is meant.
That the Apostles did with so much constancy of mind endure these Persecutions,
that they not only did not complain, but also greatly rejoiced. The most Pious,
and eminent for Learning, Dr. J. Sharp, Dean of Norwich, who formerly by his
own Beneficence, and the Liberality of the Right Honorable Lord Heneage Finch,
late High-Chancellor of England, did frequently, and largely supply my wants,
in that famous Sermon made before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
London, upon Michaelmas day, An. Dom. 1680. says most truly, and elegantly of
the just Man. Let what will happen to him, he is full of Peace and Joy, for he
has met with no disappointment of his designs. His great aim was to please
God; and his Conscience from Gods Word assures him that he has done it, and he
has nothing to do further, but to wait for the happy time, when the secrets of
all hearts will be revealed, and every Man's Conscience and Actions will be made
manifest, and then he doubts not to receive approbation, and praise, and a
great reward in that day of the Lord Jesus; and so much the rather, because
this light affliction wherewith he is now exercised, 1 Cor. 2.17.
he is assured, will work for him a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
glory.

That they were, etc. As much as to say, That they had this singular proof of
the Grace of God, to be afflicted for Christ's sake, Phil. 1.19.
and the propagating of his Kingdom. Here, says Calvin, the Cause should be
respected, which associates us to the Son of God, who not only with his Glory
swallowed up the dishonor of the World; but turned its Reproaches, Mockeries,
and Abuses to a great Honor.

42. And daily, etc. As much as to say, But the Apostles relying upon the
protection of Christ, no wise frighted with the Adversaries Threats or
Punishments, did contrary to the unjust prohibition of the Sanhedrin, Preach
the Gospel of Christ, not only sometimes, but daily, not only from house to
house, that is, privately in every house, but also publicly in the most famous
place of the City, the Temple. He, says Calvin, that accounts himself happy
when he suffers for Christ, let him never faint, though he should undergo hard
Trials. For the Apostles were in a manner armed with stripes, that without fear
they might hasten to death. Woe therefore to our wantonness, who, as soon as we
have suffered the least Persecution, like Soldiers discharged from service,
presently surrender the Torch to others.

CHAP. VI.
1. THe number of the Disciples. That is, Of such as believed in Christ, and so
the Churches Wealth increasing, her Affairs increased also.

Multiplied. To wit, daily in Jerusalem.

There arose a Murmuring. As it ordinarily happens in a great multitude.

Of the Grecians. The Greek Text has Hellenists. The Holy Writers of the New
Testament did call all Gentiles by the name of Hellenes, when Religion was
treated of. And so I am apt to think that they were called Hellenists, who
either themselves, or their Forefathers having been addicted to the
Superstition of the Gentiles, were, being Proselyted, ingrafted to the Jewish
Nation.

Against the Hebrews. They seem to be called Hebrews here, that were sprung
from the Jews Line. Clemens Alexand. and Chrysostom call them Hebrews from the
very first Original.

Were neglected. That is, Were not enough supplied. To wit, The Hellenists
Widows, who were either sick, or burdened with Children, were worse
entertained than the Hebrew Widows were in their daily distributions of
necessaries for Food and Raiment. Salmasius says, that the Cause of this
Murmuring made by the Hellenists, was: That they lamented their Widows to be
passed by in the daily Ministration, because doubtless the Jewish Women were
chosen, and taken to that Office. The Aethiopick rendered it, Because they saw
their Widows serve daily. It seems the despising of the Hellenists Widows
consisted in this, that the daily labor of serving the poor, was laid upon
them.

2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples. That is, The
Apostles convened the whole Flock of Believers in Christ, that in such a
multitude there might be enough, out of which the Deacons might be chosen, and
that the Election might be by the Votes of the whole Church.

And said. To wit, To the whole Congregation of the Disciples, or Believers.

It is not reason. That is, It is neither convenient, nor expedient.

That we should leave the Word of God. That is, Be less taken up in propagating
the Doctrine of the Gospel.

And serve Tables. That is, That we should apply our selves to the care of
serving the poor among Believers in bodily necessaries. Here is a figure called
Synecdoche, expressing the thing containing for the thing contained, Tables,
for the meat and drink used to be laid on Tables. Also of the part for the
whole, that is, even for every thing else beside meat and drink that belonged
to bodily sustinence. And so to serve Tables, is the same as to look after
things necessary to maintain the bodily life.

3. Look ye out. That is, advisedly choose.

Men of honest report. That is, Whose Faith and Uprightness is unquestionable.

Full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom. That is, Abundantly furnished with
Spiritual Wisdom, or Wisdom proceeding from the Holy Ghost.

Whom we may appoint over this business. That is, Whom we may appoint to take
care of the poor, as the Officers among the Jews called Parnesim in each
Synagogue. in Mat. 4.23.
See Lightfoots Horae Hebratcae.

But we, etc. As much as to say, We being liberate from this Care of overseeing
the poor among the Faithful, in things pertaining to the bodily life, may with
all care attend our Office, either pronouncing what the Church must say after
us in public Prayers to God, or instructing the people.

5. And the saying pleased, etc. As much as to say, And so by the advice of the
Apostles, were seven Stewards chosen by the common consent of the whole Church,
to take the care of the poor, and of distributing the Churches Money. Their
names were St^phen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas a
Stranger, or Proselyte of Antioch. From their Greek names it appears that in
this Election, chief respect was had to the Hellenists. The first Church of
Christ was made up of Jews only, none of the Gentiles being as yet either
called, or admitted to it. It consisted of two sorts, to wit, Hebrews, who were
such from their first Original, and of Hellenists, who in respect of their
Lineage, and Nation, were Greeks, that is, Gentiles, but by Circumcision were
incorporated to the Jewish Nation. The first seven Deacons of the Church, says
Salmasius, were chosen out of the number of the Hellenists, who were all of
them, except one, born at Jerusalem. And seeing the Hellenists were Proselytes,
and six of them born at Jerusalem, Luke reckons the seventh last, whom he
tells us was a Proselyte of Antioch. If it were simply read in Luke, and
Nicolas a Proselyte, it would be no wise doubted but we should understand the
other six to have been Jews, and not Proselytes; but since he adds a Proselyte
of Antioch; who can doubt but the rest were likewise Proselytes, though not of
Antioch, but of Jerusalem? for these things came to pass in Jerusalem.

6. Whom they set before the Apostles. To wit, That by their Authority, and
Blessing, they might be confirmed.

And when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. Here the form of
Election is set forth, which was also in the Primitive Institution of the
Church used in making Bishops, or Presbyters. The Church presented Men of great
Wisdom and Piety, to the Apostles or their Delegates, who were greatly endued
with a Spirit of discerning, to be ordained; who, after having tried them,
prayed to God that he would bless them in the new Office to which they were
appointed, and endue them with such Wisdom, as they might with great success
manage the same. Those Prayers being ended, they laid hands on them, in token
of the Ministries being committed to them. Sometimes also the Holy Ghost did by
the Prophets point out by name such as he would have chosen to this or that
Ministry. Acts 13.2. 1 Timothy 1.18. and 4.14.


7. And the Word, etc. As much as to say, Such was the power of the Holy Ghost
speaking by the Apostles, and working Miracles, that every day many, and among
them, some even of the Priests in Jerusalem, which Christ's own Preaching did
not bring in to embrace, at least to profess the Faith, did now (having
overcome all respect to carnal fear, and vainglory) adjoin themselves to the
number of the Believers, and obeyed the precepts of Faith, or Doctrine of the
Gospel.

8. Full of Faith and Power. That is, eminent for the Faith and Virtue of
Miracles. This manner of speaking is not unusual in Scripture, to say they are
full of the gifts of God, in which the strength and grace of the Spirit does
notably discover, and show forth itself.

9. There arose. By rising, Luke means, those of which he speaks to have
opposed the Doctrine of the Gospel, not to have dragged Stephen presently to
Judgment, but to have first debated with him concerning the Religion he taught.
These opposers of Stephen were either Hellenists, or Strangers, who lived in
Jerusalem, either about their Affairs, or for Studying. The Jews tell us there
were four hundred and eighty Synagogues in Jerusalem.

Of the Libertines. Suidas. Libertines, the name of a Nation. Moreover in the
first Collation of Carthage, Mem. 201.
is mentioned one Victor Bishop of the Church of Libertina in Africa or
Numidia. Learned Junius suspects some Corruption to have been made in the
Letters of the Word Libertines; for he notes, that they were those Strangers,
who as Epiphanius witnesses, called Holy Houses Lebrathas, and the Parishes
belonging to it, with the whole Convent Labras; for, says he, all these
belonging to one Synagogue were called Lebrathenun, and from thence corruptly
the Synagogue was called the Synagogue of the Libertines.

And Cyrenians. What Cyrene was, whence they were called Cyrenians, see our
Literal Explication on Matt. 27.33. and Amos 9.7. Antiq. 16.10.
Josephus testifies, that there were many Jews in Cyrenia.

And Alexandrians. Alexandria, the Metropolis of Egypt, whence these
Alexandrians came, was built by Alexander, from whom it took its Name.
Ftolomeus Philadelphus adorned it with a Library of seventy thousand Volumes;
but famous men for Learning and Wisdom who were its Inhabitants, were a greater
Ornament to it. Among which were Renowned Philo the Jew, of whom was that
Proverb: Either Philo Platonizeth, or Plato ^ bilonizeth; Appion the
Grammarian, whom Tyberius Caesar called, The Cymbal of the World; and Plinius,
the Trumpet of public Fame; Didymus the Grammarian; Claudius Prolemeus, though
some say that Pelusium was his Country; Appianus the Historian, therefore
called the Alexandrian; Clemens Presbyter surnamed Alexandrinus; Origin of whom
it is said, Where well none better, where ill none worse; Athanasius, Cyril,
Dydimus surnamed the Blind; and others, whose names I do not now remember.
Alexandria is now by the Turks, under whose Yoke it groans, called Scanderia,
by corrupting the name of Alexander, whose Corpse Quintus Curtius Lib. 10. chapter
10.
says, was transported thither from Memphis. Ptolomies famous Library, as
Ammianus Marccllinus says, Lib. 22. chapter 41.
was burnt when the City was destroyed under Julius Caesar. The Jews had equal
privileges in Alexandria with the Macedonians. See Grotius upon 3 Macchab.

And of them of Cilicia. Cilicia, now Carmania, was one in Constantines time,
then it was divided into two parts, the first of which was called Cilicia, the
first and Champaign ground and Consular, says Spanhem, Introd. ad Geog. Sac.
It had upon the West Isauria, upon the East the second Cilicia, upon the South
the Sea of Cyprus; the Metropolis of it is Tarsus, the Head of the Nation, a
Colony of the Romans, a free City, having the privilege of a Roman City; We
contradict this, moved by the Reasons of Grotius upon that place.
whence that of Paul of Tarsus below chapter 22.28. The second Cilicia called also
Trachea, having upon the North Mount Taurus, upon the East Comagene, upon the
South the Issick Gulf, which had its Name from the Town Issus between Syria and
Cilicia, famous for the Victory obtained there by Alexander against Darius;
where also Cicero as he reports of himself, was called Emperor, and 2. Ep. 10.5
Attic. 20.
boasts that he had the same Tents which of old Alexander had. This was a
Province ruled by the Emperors Lieutenant sent thither with a Garrison, but
its Metropolis was Anazarba, or Anazarbus, otherwise called Diocaesarea. There
is mention made of this second Cilicia in the Acts of the Council of Chalcedon.

And Asia. See what we have said above, chap. 2.9.

10. And they were not able to resist the Wisdom and the Spirit. That is, The
Wisdom suggested to him by the Holy Ghost. The Particle and is put in the
beginning of the Verse instead of but, which is frequently done in other places
of Scripture.

By which he spoke. As much as to say, by which Stephens Tongue, and his Mind
while he was speaking were directed, according to Christ's Promise, Matt. 10,
20. Luke 21. v. 15. Beza witnesses, that in a most ancient Greek Copy of his
is added here, Because they were reproved by him with all boldness, that is,
with all freedom.

11. Then. To wit, when they could not resist the Truth.

They suborned. The old Latin Interpreter expresses it by the word
submiserunt, in which sense the best Latin Authors use the Verb immittere. See
Gellius 4. Noct. Attic. 18. Salust. Catil. Plin. Lib. 6 Epist. 13.

12. The Elders. That is, the Senators of the Sanhedrin.

To the Council. The Greek has it Sanhedrin.

13. And set up false witnesses. They are also said to be false Witnesses who
give a false construction to what has been truly spoken, and turn it to a
crime; as they here turn that to wickedness and blasphemy, which according to
truth was foretold of the destruction of the Temple, and the ceasing for the
most part of the Rites depending thereon. See Luke 19.43, 44.
David inveighs against such Witnesses in the Person of Doeg, Psalm. 52.2, 3, 4,
and 5. compared with 1 Samuel 22.9, 10, 11, 12, and 13.

Blasphemous words. That is, Base and reproachful.

Against this holy place. That is, Against the Temple of God. Acts 25.8. Mat.
26.61.


14. And shall change the customs. That is, The legal Ceremonies, which
typified Christ to come and the Gospel Law.

15. Saw his Face as it had been the Face of an Angel. That is, they beheld his
Face full of Reverent and Serene Gravity.

CHAP. VII.
1. THe High Priest. That is, the chief of the Sanhedrin.

Are these things so? As if he had said, Are these things true which they say
and witness against thee?

2. And he said. Seeing Stephen was accused, because that he, moved by Divine
Instinct and Inspiration, had foretold the destruction of the Temple, and the
abolishing of the Legal Ceremonies, that he might demonstrate and evince that
there was no evil in that, he briefly running over all ancient History even to
their times, covertly intimates, that the favor of God was restricted to no
place, even not to the Temple or Tabernacle; and also that the Jews, if they
did sufficiently lay to Heart their own doings, and those of their Nation, had
no reason to be offended at this Praediction.

Men Brethren and Fathers. If we may give credit to the famous Salmasius,
Stephen, Who was a Proselyte, calls the Jews Brethren, as being partaker of the
same Promises with them, an observer of the same Law, a Worshipper of the same
God. He calls them also Fathers, because Proselytes, being their Disciples from
whom they had the Law, were accounted as it were their Children, and they as
their Fathers. But the Apostle Paul, who was not a Proselyte, but a Jew by
Nation, uses the same compellation to the Jews below c. 22. v. 1.
. It is more reasonable therefore to say, that both Stephen a Proselyte, and
Paul a Jew by birth, call the Younger among them Brethren, and the Older
Fathers.

The God of Glory. Heb. The King of Glory Psalm. 24.7.
. That is, the Omnipotent and Glorious God, King of Kings.

Appeared unto our Father Abraham. Stephen might use this expression, not only
as a Christian, but also as a Jew, or a Proselyte of the Jewish Religion. The
God of the Jews, who calls himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and of
Jacob, is also the God of the Proselytes; for the Proselytes worshipped one and
the same God, and bound themselves to observe the same Law with that, which he
gave to the Jews. If they could call the God of the Jews their God as well as
the Jews, who can deny that they could call Abraham their Father? But seeing
Abraham, by the Promise made by God to him, was called the Father of Nations;
those Nations, whose Father he was called by God, could be no other than those
which the Messiah purchased to God the Father by his own Blood. And there is no
doubt but the Christians at this day may call Abraham their Father. Thus far
the renowned Salmasius.

When he was in Mesopotamia. That is, While he yet abode at Vr of the Chaldees.
Not to mention the Fables of the Hebrews, who change Vr into an Appellative
name, I do not approve of their Opinion, though it seem more probable to
Bochartus, Phaleg. l. 2. c. 6.
who places Vr toward the Mountainous parts of Armenia, in the Confines of
Syria, and more Northern Mesopotamia, where by the name Vr, they denote a
Persian Castle Amm. l. 25. c. 26.
. For neither does the Name of Chaldaea seem to be extended so far; nor had
Abraham then come from the East, but rather from the North: Neither can a
Demonstrative Argument be drawn from the similitude of Names, (such as is that
of the Persian Castle in Marcellinus, whither he reports that Cassianus and
Mauritius came) as Bochartus himself elsewhere observes. Isaac Vossius, a very
learned man, will have Vr to be the same with Chebar or Chobar, at the
Confluent of Chabor and Euphrates; but the way is nearer from that place into
Syria, nor was it needful for those that were journying to Canaan to go up into
Charan, nor was that a City of Chaldaea. Therefore it is uncertain whether it be
Vra, mentioned by Pliny l. 5. c. 24.
, in the turning of Euphrates toward the East, and Babylonia: Or Ouria spoken
of by Eupolemus, a City of Babylonia, according to Eusebius Praep. l. 9.
; but according to Ptolomy, situate near Euphrates, in Babylonia; or the City
Orchoa; or any other City of Chaldaea, whose name was changed. But the
Chasedim, Chaldaeans, who were issued from Chesed the Son of Nachor, Genesis 22.
v. 22. seem to be mentioned by a Prolepsis, Genesis 11.31. as are the names of
Bethel, Dan, etc. Thus far the most renowned Frederick Spanhem the Son, in his
Introduction to Sacred Geography. The most learned Usher Bishop of Armach is of
opinion that the word Chasedim is rather an Appellative of a Sect, denoting
Diviners and Magicians, than the proper name of a Nation. The Fortune Tellers
in Chaldaea it self are also found distinguished by that name, Dan. 2. v. 2,
and 20.4. v. 7. and 5. v. 11. Stephen says, Heidegger, Reckons Mesopotamia the
same with Chaldaea. For this reason certainly, that that part of Mesopotamia
which lies next to Syria is in the Scriptures also mentioned under the name of
Chaldaea. And Pliny lib. 6. c. 26. declares that some part of Babylonia, yea
Babylon it self was comprehended within the bounds of Mesopotamia. Babylon, the
Head of the Chaldaick Nations for a long time, enjoyed the greatest renown in
the whole World; on which account the rest of Mesopotamia and Assyria was
called Babylonia. And the same Pliny a little after: There are also Cities in
Mesopotamia, Hipparenum, and this of the Chaldees, as also Babylon near the
River. Narraga, which gave name to a City. The Persians demolished the Walls of
Hipparenum. The Orchens also a third Sect of the Chaldaeans, were placed in the
same Situation, turned toward the South. Moreover Tremellius is of Opinion,
that Orchoe is the same with Vr. The same Pliny l 6. c. 27.
also declares, that Mesopotamia is bounded on the East with Tigris, on the
West with Euphrates, on the South with the Persian Sea, and on the North with
the Mountain Taurus. So that not only all encompassed by the two Rivers, but
also all places situate by their Banks, are to be comprehended in Mesopotamia.
Possibly the Words of 1 An. 7.
Josephus tend also to the same purpose, where, speaking of Abraham, he says;
When the Chaldaeans, and the rest of the Mesopotamians rose up against him, he
determined to transmigrate himself, and relying upon the good Will and Favor
of God, he went and dwelt in the Land of Canaan. It is therefore apparent, that
Abraham's Native Country Vr, may be rightly ascribed both to Mesopotamia and
also to Chaldaea. Thus far Heidegger Hist. Sac. Patriarc. Tom. 1. Exercit. 23.
number. 45. and Tom. 2. Exerci^. 3. number. 5.
. Babylon, says Lightfoot, may be also said to be in Mesopotania, partly
because it was situate betwixt the two Rivers, Euphrates and Tigris, but
especially according to Scripture Idiom, because it was on the other side of
the River. Which that it is observed by the Vulgar Interpreter, you may see
from Jos. 24. v. 3. where for that which is in the Hebrew; And I brought
Abraham your Father from beyond the River, he has, I brought therefore your
Father Abraham from the Porders of Mesoptamia. Eratosthenes in Strabo. l. 3.
says, That Mesopotamia is comprehended with Babylonia in a great circle by
Euphrates and Tigris.

Before he dwelt in Charan. As if he had said, Abraham was indeed as yet in
Mesopotamia, when the Lord appeared to him, but at Vr of the Chaldees, not at
Charan. Abraham departing from Vr of the Chaldees with his Fathers House, came
to Charan, not with an intention to abide there, but to go over to the Land of
Canaan, as says Torniellus, A. M. 2113. number. 3. But when he was come to Charan
of Mesopotamia, an Eastern City not far from Vz, where Job afterward
inhabited, his Father Therach was there seized with a Distemper, whereof he
died; hence his duty to his Father, now a dying, who had given himself as a
Guide and Companion of this Pilgrimage on the account of Religion, detained and
kept back Abraham from accomplishing his begun Journey, and so he dwelt at
Charan till Therach accomplished the days of his Pilgrimage, being now 205
years of Age as it is related, Genesis 11, 31, 32. by way of Anticipation.
Mesopotamia where the Euphrates runs close by it, Frid. Spanhem. Hist. Job
1. c. 7. n. 4.
toward the South and East, is adjoining to Arabia the Desert, being only
parted from it by the River, so that there are indeed some Cities (such as even
at this day are Ana, or Anna, of the largest and most famous of that Country)
some whereof on this side of the River are accounted Cities of Mesopotamia.
Hence they have one and the same Language, Religion and Customs; the nature of
the Ground is the same, being plain and barren, and running out into waste
Deserts, producing the same Herbs and Twigs; the same Emir also, or Prince of
the Arabians extending his Dominion a great way in Mesopotamia. Whence it is,
that the Southern part of Mesopotamia is by Xenophon, l. 1. Anabas. Pliny,
Hist. l. 5. c. 24. Strabo Geogr. l. 16. and others, reckoned a part of Arabia.
But now Charan the place of Nachors abode, called by Josephus (...), also
Charrhai by Stephen, Ptolomy and Sozomen, (...) in the Acts, by Jerome Aran, as
also Carrae, if it be the same City, with that of the Roman Writers of the
Crassian Overthrow, Charan by the Georg. Genesis 24.10.
of Nubia, called also Nachor from Nachor who built and inhabited it, is
situate in that part of Mesopotamia, which the River Chabora waters, between
Euphrates and Ascorus; for by Holy Writ we may learn that Charan lay in the Way
that leads from Chaldea into Canaan, Genesis 11.31. So that it is altogether
more Southerly toward Arabia the Desert, and Syria Palmyrena or Aram Tsaba.
For the Way from Vr of the Chaldees to Palestine is from the East to the West,
except where to avoid the unpassable places of Arabia, Travelers turn toward
the North, through that part of Mesopotamia that is more Southerly, which is to
the Northwards of Chaldaea. Again the Country of Charan was said to be Easterly
in respect of Palestine, Genesis 29.1. Hence it is certainly in the Southerly part
of Mesopotamia, which borders with that part of Arabia where the Inhabitants
dwell in Tents, according to the Style of the Scripture and the insight of
Maps. For the Northern parts of both the Syria's and the Country of Assyria are
not said to be Eastward, but Northward. Hence we may discern their mistake, who
will have Charan to be situate a great way toward the North and the Mountains
of Armenia, about the 36 or 37 degrees of Latitude, and who confound it with
Edessa, or Orfa, as R. Benjamin, Peter Appian, Jacob Ziglerus, Joseph Moletius
and others. And the Carrae that are there marked toward the Assyrians, whence
Lucan called them the Assyrian Carrae, as in the Book of Tobit they are placed
between Niniveh and Raghes, are of necessity altogether different from the
Charan of Nachor, and Abraham. Charan therefore in Mesopotamia was fituated
betwixt Babylonia and that part of Syria which led into Palestine; hence it
lies more toward the South, not far from the River Euphrates, as the Chaldaean
Paraphrase has it; the Nubian Geographer confirms this, who will have Harran
to be more Southerly than the City Aleppo, about the 31 Degrees. North. Lat. Hence
Arias Montanus on Genesis 24. v. 10. declares the City Padan to be in that Tract
nearer to Babylonia, which more truly was the Country in which Charan the City
of Nachor was situate; nor was it contiguous to Palestine, as Adrichomius will
have it in the Theater of the Holy Land, which, as being in Mesopotamia, is
rather contiguous to Arabia the Desert, as this is extended Northward to
Euphrates, wherein we have placed Jobs Habitation; yea those of the East do
declare that Charan in Abraham's days was inhabited by the Sabaean Arabians, as
also the famous Huttinger in his Oriental History, c. 8. out of Keesseus the
Muhammedan,

And he said unto him. To Wit, When he was addicted to the Superstition and
Idol-Worship of the Chaldaeans, or, as those of the East say, of the Zabians,
Jos. 24.2.

3. Get thee out of thy Country. The uninterrupted tenor of the words
sufficiently imports that he speaks of one call, when Abraham dwelt at Vr
of the Chaldees, where he was born and brought up. The call it self together
with the Promise is extant, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. Stephen indeed left out the
Promise, because it was not needful to touch upon every particular.

Come into the Land which I shall show thee. He promises that he will at
length show him the Land, which he did not express in the Call it self. Hence
also, Heb. 11.8. Abraham is said to have gone out, not knowing whither he went.
If Abraham knew not whither he went, and the Land toward which he must go,
could not be showed him till after his setting out; whence is it that by a
Prolepsis, Abraham is said to have set out from Vr of the Chaldees, together
with Therach his Guide in his Pilgrimage, and Sarah and Lot his Companions
therein, that he might go into the Land of Canaan? Torniellus answers in the
year of the World 2113 number. 3. That it might very well be, that Abraham when he
set out, knew that God would have him go to the Land of Canaan; but that he did
not know, whether God would have him to settle there, or go further to some
more remote Country, and therefore he came into Charan, not with a design to
settle there, but to pass over toward the Land of Canaan, firmly believing
that there the Lord would show him the Land whereto he must go, and in which he
must abide; even as a little after it truly came to pass. For when he came to
Sichem in the Land of Canaan, he heard from God Genesis 12.7. To thy Seed will I
give the Land.

4. Then. To wit, after Abraham understood, both Gods Commands and Promises.

He came out of the Land of the Chaldaeans. As if he had said, He utterly
forsook his Fathers House, and together with his Father, Sarai and Lot departed
from Vr of the Chaldaeans. Stephen will have Mesopotamia the same with
Chaldaea. The Arabians, says Ludovicus de Dieu, are still of Opinion that
Chaldaea belongs to Mesopotamia. For the Geographer of Nubia, in the sixth part
of the fourth Climate, where he describes Mesopotamia, says, that Bagdad
extends thither, which is that we now call Babylon the Metropolis of
Chaldaea; whose Province Benjamin in his Itinerary concludes to be Beretz
Sinear, in the Land of Shinar, which is, Chaldaea. But although Gods call
commanding Therach, together with Abraham, Sarah, and Lot to depart from Vr of
the Chaldaeans, was directed to Abraham, yet because Therach was Father of the
Family, therefore, Genesis 11. v. 31. the business of Migration is ascribed to
him, not to a Son of his Family, as Scaliger In Elencho. Pareano.
has rightly observed.

And dwelt in Charan. For no long time, says the most Eloquent of the Jews,
Philo in his Book of Dreams. Aug. 16. de Civ. Dei. 16. says, that Abraham's
departure from Vr of the Chaldaeans, and from Charan fell out in one and the
same year; which Josephus confirms, while he writes, 1 Ant. 8. That Abraham
left Chaldaea when he was 75 years of age. Moses speaking, says Heidegger, of
Therach, Abraham and the rest that went with them to Charan, says Genesis 11. v.
31, (...) and they dwelt there. And of Therach indeed, that when he was aged
205 years, he there put a period to his last day. But Moses has not expressed
how long Abraham and the rest of his Companions dwelt there: Yet it is probable,
that he did not stay long there, yea, not a whole year, that he might not seem
refractory to the Divine Call. For what else but Sickness and Infirmity of Body
could detain Therach from accomplishing his Journey he had undertaken, whom
Piety toward God caused to forsake his Native Country, and his own House?
What also but dutifulness toward his dying Father, who on the account of
Religion had given himself for a guide and a companion in this Pilgrimage,
could hinder Abraham, whose ready obedience in obeying the Divine Call is so
much spoken of in the Scripture, from going straight into the Land of Canaan?
For that Therach either taken with the pleasantness of the place, as Aben Ezra
fondly imagines, or making a relapse unto his old Idolatry, as others allege,
tarried at Charan, and would not accompany his Son, is as like a Fiction as may
be. Nor are we much moved with Petavius, Bonfrerius, and Harvilleus Arguments,
by which they would evince that Abraham dwelt at Charan several years. First,
say they, (...).
Stephen says that Abraham dwelt in Charan. But it is probable, that by the
word dwelt some years are denoted. 2. Abraham is said, Genesis 12.5. to have made
Souls, that is, to have purchased Slaves, Beasts, and Cattle, whereby his Goods
were increased. Now in purchasing these, and gathering them together, there
must of necessity several years be spent. 3. Abraham calls Charan his own Land,
Genesis 24.4. But he would not have called it his own Land, if he had not dwelt in
it for some years. For who would call that his own Land which he only passed
over? These Arguments have no solidity in them. Not the first; for let us
suppose, that Therach and Abraham departed from Vr of the Chaldeans toward the
latter end of the Spring, and that Therach's sickness interupting them,
continued there all the Summer and Winter following, and then, that Abraham
again parted from Charan in the beginning of the next Spring; was not the
interval of time long enough, that he might be said to have dwelt there? So he
who hires a House for six Months, although a lesser time, is yet no less said
to have dwelt there, than he who has continued his Habitation in it for six
years. And the Hebrew word (...), as also the Chaldaic (...) signifies not only
to dwell, but also to sit; so that the shortest stay in a place is enough to
say these words of an inhabitant. Not the 2d. for there is no necessity why we
should rather understand Moses of gathering together Riches, Slaves, and Cattle
brought forth in his House, than of procuring by Emption Slaves, Cattle and
other things, whereby his Patrimony left by his Father might be increased. And
this Acquisition in how small a time might it be performed? Not the 3d. for
neither does Abraham call Charan his own Land, but Aram Naharaim, or
Mesopotamia, as appears, Genesis 24.4. compared with v. 10. But not Charan only
was in Mesopotamia, but also Vr of the Chaldaeans, as we have showed above.

And from thence, etc. Therach Abraham's Father is said to have lived 205 years
when he died at Charan, Genesis 11.32. But Abraham, whom Stephen here says
plainly not to have gone from Charan till after Therach's decease, Genesis 12.4.
he is said expressly to have been 75 years of age when he departed Charan. If we
substract these 75 years from the 205 of Therachs age, the remainder will be
130 years. Abraham was therefore born in the 130th. year of Therach. And
therefore when Genesis 11. v. 26. Therach is said at the 70th. year of his age to
have begotten Abram, Nachor, and Haran, the meaning is, Therach began to beget
three Sons, Abraham, the first in Merits and Dignity, but the youngest by
birth; the second Nachor; Haran the third, whom many will have to have been the
eldest of all, seeing he was Father to Melcha the Wife of Nahor, and Jescha,
whom the Hebrews think to be Sarah Abraham's Wife. Abraham therefore, after the
death of his Father went forward to the Land of Canaan, according as the Lord
had commanded him when he was yet in Vr of the Chaldaeans, taking with him
Sarah and Lot, who came with him from Vr of the Chaldaeans, and all the
substance that he had purchased at Charan. Josephus 1 Ant. 8. reports, that
Abraham in his Journey from Charan to Canaan, made a stop at Damascus, and
Reigned there; his words are these: Nicolaus the Damascene in the fourth Book
of his History writes thus: Abraham reigned in Damascus, when he was a
Stranger, as who had come with an Army from the Country situate above Babylon,
which is called Chaldaea. Nor much different is that of Justin. Trog.
Pompeius's Epimator. l. 36.
The City had its name from Damascus King thereof. After Damascus Azelus, then
Adores, and Abraham and Israel were Kings thereof. But, as Pererius excellently
reasons, On Genesis 12.11.
Abraham had sinned grievously, nor had he fulfilled the command of God,
whereby he was enjoined to depart from Mesopotamia into Canaan, as was fitting,
if he had attempted not only to stay at Damascus, but also making light account
of Gods Promises, to purchase himself a Kingdom. Add, that Abraham every where
professed himself a Pilgrim and Stranger; and Jacob acknowledged the same of
himself and his Forefathers. He therefore had no where a proper Seat and
Habitation, much less a Kingdom. Nor does the account of Time permit that
Abraham should be said to have made any long stay at Damascus, that he might
reign there. For, seeing the year in the which he departed Charan, was the 76
year of his age, and the same Abraham, after he had dwelt ten years in Canaan
took Hagar to Wife, of whom in the 86 year of his age he begot his Son Ishmael
Genesis 16.
, it appears that he went directly from Mesopotamia to Canaan, and that he no
where fixed any settled Habitation till he came to Canaan. Moreover, whether he
had obtained that Kingdom by force or entreaty, he would not so soon have
deserted it, especially when he was constrained by Famine to undertake a
Journey to Egypt; nor would the Sacred Writers have neglected to give some
hints of a passage so considerable, and which would have tended so much to the
glory of the Jews.

5. And he gave him not, etc. Stephen proposes two things here to be considered
in Abraham, whereby God did mightily exercise his Faith. First, That he
transported him into Canaan, which the Jews now inhabit, and yet gave him no
possession, not so much as a Foot-breadth Secondly, That he promised to give
this Land to him and his Seed, when as yet he had no Seed.

6. And God spoke, etc. As if he had said, But God foretold to Abraham seized
with a deep sleep and fear, Genesis 15.
that his Seed should be a Stranger in a Land that is not theirs; that is, in a
Strange Land, and should be in Bondage and Affliction there 400 years. That
these 400 years are to be computed from the hundredth year of Abraham in the
which he begot Isaac, or the 105th. year, in which a separation was made of
Abraham's. Seed, and an appointing of Isaac Heir, Ishmael being Banished Genesis 21.
, is beyond all Question; for in this Prophesy (in which he appoints 400
years, for the Wandering, Affliction and Bondage of his Posterity) God makes
express mention of the Seed that should Wander, be Afflicted and in Bondage;
and therefore these four hundred years cannot be thought to have had a being,
before that Seed was appointed or actually differenced and determined. But the
time from Abraham's removing into Canaan to the year of the Israelites departure
from Egypt is computed to be four hundred and thirty years. Hence Paul, Gal.
3.17. plainly reckons 430 years from the Promise made to Abraham, Genesis 12.
when he was about to depart his Native Country, to the publishing of the Law
which was on the third Month, after the Children of Isreal's departure out of
Egypt. The years of the Pilgrimage of the Children of Israel, says Heidegger,
are described by Moses, Exodus 12.40. (...) And the Sojourning of the Children
of Israel, (...) that sojourned in Egypt, continued 430 years. On which place
Dr. Usher Bishop of Armach Chronol. Sac. l. 2. c. 8.
learnedly observes three things especially. First, That the Word (...), as
generally it denotes any Habitation, so when it is referred to Forreiners and
Strangers it signifies a Pilgrimage. Hence with the Hebrews (...) denotes a
Sojourner and Pilgrim: and Abraham himself, Genesis 23. says that he was (...) a
Stranger and Pilgrim. And Genesis 21. instead of (...) the Chaldee has (...). And
chapter 28. v. 3. instead of (...) the same has (...). Secondly, That the Land of
Canaan, as it was accounted the Land of the Sojourning of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, so also of the Israelites that descended from them; to wit, by reason of
that strict tie of kin that is betwixt Forefathers and their Posterity. And
truly God had promised to those three Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
that he would give them this Land of their Pilgrimage, to be by them heritably
possessed, Psalm. 105.11. which afterward was accomplished in their Posterity.
As therefore the Possession of the Posterity is attributed to the Forefathers;
so also the Pilgrimage of the Forefathers to this Posterity. Instances of this
you may see Psalm. 66.6. Hos. 12.4. Amos 5.25. Judge. 10.11, 12. Acts 7.42.
Thirdly, That seeing the Hebrews have no cases, the Pronoun (...) here has an
ambiguous reference. Hence it is that the Vulgar Latin Edition, the Polyglot
Bibles, the Royal of Antwerp, and the Jayan of Paris read in this place; But
the dwelling of the Children of Israel, who sojourned in Egypt, was for 430
years. Whereas other Copies of the same Edition have; The dwelling of the
Children of Israel, whereby they abode in Egypt. To which latter acceptance of
the Relative Pronoun determining the Chronography, seeing it attributes 430
years to the sojourning of the Children of Israel in Egypt, which was a shorter
time by half, the former is altogether to be preferred, which removes that
inconveniencie, and gives us only a Prosopography; or a description of them
whose entire Pilgrimage beginning at the 76th. year of Abraham's age, is
continued thence to the going forth out of Egypt for the (...) of 430 years.
But the reason why Moses takes that Description of the Israelites from their
sojourning in Egypt, was, because that Pilgrimage of the Patriarchs, was both
but of a few only, and frequently interrupted, and less obvious to men's view,
to wit, when they were but small in number, yea very few, and Strangers in it,
and went from one Nation to another, and from one Kingdom to another People,
Psalm. 105.12, 13. But this of their Children in Egypt comprehended a great
multitude of Men, was stable, and much spoken of by all. For three things, as
Pererius notes, made the sojourning of the Children of Israel in Egypt
observable and famous. First, The preferment of Joseph, during whose life the
People of Israel were in very great repute. Secondly, Their notable and
admirable Increase after Joseph 's death, though they were afflicted with a
most heavy Bondage. Thirdly, Their deliverance, and going forth out of Egypt,
accompanied with so many and great Miracles. The Greek has thus translated that
place of Exodus 12.40. Now the Pilgrimage of the Children of Israel, whereby
they and their Fathers wandered in the Land of Canaan, and in the Land of Egypt,
continued 430 years. Thus have the Alexandrin Manuscript, the Complutensian and
Aldin Editions. And it appears that it was read so of old by Eusebius in his
Chronicon, Quintus Julius Hilarion in his small Book of the duration of the
World, Austin q. 47. in Exodus and Sedulius in Gal. 3. Moreover in the very time
of the Apostles Dositheus delivered this place of Exodus to his Samaritans thus
new pargeted out of the Greek Translation: Now the sojourning of the Children
of Israel, and of their Fathers, whereby they sojourned in the Land of Canaan,
and in the Land of Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years. Georg. Syncellus
In Chron. p. 117.
says, The Computation of 430 years of the Pilgrimage of Israel in the Lands
of Canaan and Egypt, according to Gods Praediction to Abraham takes its
beginning, by the common suffrage of the Interpreters and Historians from the
75th. year of Abraham's age. Moreover, not only Eusebius, and other Christian
Chronographers divide the space of 430 years into two equal Intervals, but
Josephus 2 Art. 6.
also, and before Christ's days Demetrius. not Phaleraeus, but the younger, from
whom Alexander surnamed Polyhistor relates that from the time that Abraham was
chosen from among the Nations, and came from Charan into Canaan, unto the
coming of Jacob into Egypt, was 215 years. Which Sum of 215 years may be made
up out of the Scriptures without any difficulty. For Abraham went to Canaan
when he was 75 years old, Genesis 12.4. From the time that Abraham went to Canaan
to the hundredth year of his age, in the which he begot Isaac, Genesis 21. v. 5.
are 25 years. From Isaac's Nativity to that of Jacob, Genesis 25.26. 60 years.
From Jacobs Nativity to his going down with his whole Family into Egypt, Genesis
47.9. 130 years. All which years added together make up the Sum of 215 years.
As to the other 215 years past in Egypt till their going out thereof; Bp. Usher
describes them thus; from Jacobs going down into Egypt until the death of
Joseph are 71 years. Thence till the Birth of Moses 64. Thence to the
Israelites going forth out of Egypt 80, Exodus 7. v. 7. All which years joined
together make up the 215 years of the sojourning of the Israelites in Egypt.

Shall bring them into Bondage. Aug. 16. Civ. Dci, 24. As it is written of
Thara Abraham's Father; And his days at Charan were 205 years; not that they
wree all passed there; but because they were there sinished; so likewise it is
therefore here added, And shall bring them into Bondage, and will afflict them
400 years, because in that same affliction the number is completed, not
because it was all performed there. The same Augustine, Q. 47. in Exodus says,
What God said to Abraham, Know of a surety that they Seed shall be a Stranger
in a Land that is not theirs, and they will bring them into Bondage, and
oppress them 400 years, is not to be understood so, as if the people of God
were to continue in that most grievous Bondage for the space of 400 years; but
because it is written, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called; the 405 years are
computed from the year of Isaac's Nativity until the year of the outgoing out
of Egypt. If therefore ye substract from the 430 years the five and twenty
which intervened betwixt the Promise and the Birth of Isaac, it is no matter of
admiration, if the Scripture would express the 405 years by the even sum of
400, seeing it uses so to denominate time, that that which a little exceeds or
comes short of the sum of the more perfect number, be not computed. What
therefore he says, They will bring them into Bondage, and oppress them, is not
to be referred to the 400 years, as if they should keep them in Bondage so many
years; but the 400 years are to be referred to this, Thy Seed shall be a
Stranger in a Land that is not theirs; for that Seed was a Stranger, whether in
the Land of Canaan, or that of Egypt, until they received for their Inheritance
the Land, according to Gods promise, which was accomplished after that they
were delivered out of Egypt: So that a Hyperbaton is here understod, and the
order of the Words should be thus: Know of a surety that thy Seed shall be a
Stranger in a Land that is not theirs 400 years; but that this is supposed to
be interposed, and they will bring them into Bondage, and oppress them; so that
this Interposition does not belong to the 400 years. For it was in the latter
part of the years of this sum, that is after the death of Joseph, that the
people of God labored under that grievous Bondage.

7. And the Nation to whom they shall be in Bondage will I judge. That is, I
will punish. To judge is frequently used for to punish. 2 Chronicles 20.12. Our God,
will thou not therefore judge them? Psalm. 9. v. 19. Let the Nations be judged
in thy sight. And hence Judgment is put for Punishment, Prove. 19.29. Judgments
are prepared for Scorners; that is, Punishments. So Exodus 12.12. Against all
the Gods of Egypt I will execute Judgment; that is, I will inflict punishment
upon all the Gods of Egypt.

8. And he gave him a Testament. Gr. A Covenant. As if he had said, After he
had made those excellent Promises he commanded Abraham and his Posterity to be
Circumcised; that the same Circumcision might be as it were a Seal of the
Covenant entered into with Abraham and his Natural Seed. This, says Grotius,
makes for Stephens purpose, that the observance of Circumcision might not be
believed to be the cause of the Promises.

And so. To wit, After he was Circumcised.

He begot Isaac. Not by the power of Nature, but by virtue of Gods promise made
to him, that Isaac, given on account of the Promise, might be an Earnest and
Shadow of the Grace that was to be given by the Gospel.

The Patriarchs. That is, The Fathers of the twelve Tribes of Israel. See above
c. 2. v. 27.

9. And the Patriarchs moved with Envy. Here Stephen briefly hints at the
Emulation of the Patriarchs, from whom the Jews boasted of their Original, to
wit, that they, Genesis 37.28.
out of a detestable hatred and envy sold him to the Midianite Merchants, who
was by God ordained a Savior for them, that they might carry him into Egypt.
This is, says Casaubon, that selling of Slaves, which the Ancients called
(...), when the Slaves were sold on that condition, that they should be
transported into remote Countries. Moreover, Stephen covertly insinuates, that
after the same manner, Jesus was delivered by the envious Multitude of the Jews
to the Romans, that he might be Crucified.

And God was with him. As if he had said, But God turned the Evil, wherewith
Joseph's Brethren oppressed him, to his good, Genesis 50.20. As it also fell out
in your Envy against Jesus who was Crucified, above, c. 3, v. 8.

10. Gave him Favor and Wisdom. A figure of speech called Hendyad^^, that is,
He made him gracious for his Wisdom, Genesis 41. v. 39.

In the sight of Pharaoh. That is, With Pharaoh King of Egypt, whom the
Egyptian Priest Manetho calls Mephramuthosis. Justin also out of Trogus l.
36. c. 2. declares that Joseph was entirely beloved by Pharaoh. For, says he,
being most quicksighted, he was the first that invented the knowledge of
Dreams, and nothing either of Divine or Humane Affairs escaped his knowledge,
so that he foresaw the Barrenness of their Lands, many years before it came to
pass; and all Egypt had perished with the Famine, if the King had not at his
Admotion commanded by an Edict, that the Corn should be laid up in store for
several years; and his proofs were such, that they seemed not to proceed from
Men, but to be Oracles given from God.

He made him Governor over Egypt. That is, He advanced him to the chief place
of Authority in the Kingdom, Genesis 48.43.

And over all his House. That is, according as Grotius interprets it, He made
him also Master of his Court, such as the High Stewards were to the French of
old, and to the Greeks of Constantinople, the (...), so called because the care
of the Palace was committed to them. So God has set Jesus Christ over his
Heavenly Court, and has given him supreme power next to himself.

Now there came a Dearth, etc. That is, When sufficient provision was made in
Egypt for a Famine, a grievous scarcity of Corn vexed sorely the whole Earth,
as Sulpitius Severus expresses it. Sac. Hist. l. 1. So now a hardness of
Heart, blindness of Mind, and a Famine of the Heavenly Bread, came upon those
who are called Egyptians by a certain Figure of Speech, who profess the
Christian Religion externally, and upon the Jews, who would drive away,
exterminate, and cast out Christ.

12. He sent our Fathers first. That is, In the first year of the Famine. As if
he had said, Jacob pinched with Famine sends his ten Sons for Corn into Egypt,
keeping Benjamin his youngest Son with him at home. So, says Daniel Brenius,
in the first Embassage, whereby the Jews are hitherto compelled to be as it
were disowned of God in Egypt Spiritually so called, Messiah the deliverer,
although by them desired, yet is not acknowledged, because they were not yet
aright affected for the evil of rejecting him, and the Judgments they thereby
brought upon themselves.

13. And in the second. To wit, Year of the Famine, when Joseph's Brethren
returned to him for Corn.

Known, etc. That is, He made himself known to them Genesis 45.1.
. And so Joseph's Kindred was made known unto Pharaoh or Mephramuthosis. The
manifestation of Joseph to his Brethren, when they returned to him the Second
time, says the now cited Daniel Brenius, does typically represent to us, that
the Jews at last brought under with calamities, at the second time, when the
Gospel of Christ shall be again Preached, and his name spread throughout the
whole Earth, shall acknowledge him for the Messiah, and God on the other side
owning them for the Messiah s Brethren will make them partakers of his good
things through him.

14. Then sent Joseph, etc. As if he had said, At the command of King
Mephramuthosis, Joseph sends back his Brethren furnished with Chariots,
Provision and Presents, to bring thither his Father and his whole Family with
all expedition: forewarning them that the Famine would continue five years
longer, as says Sulpicius Severus. Sac, Hist. l. 1. See Genesis 45.

Threescore and fifteen Souls. That is, consisting of 75 Persons. Interpreters
have been at very much pains, says the famed Lud. de Dieu, to reconcile this
place with that of Genesis 46.27. where Moses makes mention only of 70 Souls of
Jacobs House, that went down into Egypt. But there is no great difficulty in
it, if we say that the places are not parallel. For Moses makes his account,
wherein together with Jacob only his posterity, and those that proceeded out of
his Loins are comprehended, his Sons Wives being expressly excepted, v. 26. For
which reason, not only those who actually entered Egypt with him, but also
Joseph and his two Sons, Ephraim and Manasse, are comprehended in the number of
seventy, although they were in Egypt long before; because both as proceeding
out of Jacobs Loins, and being as to their Original of the Land of Canaan, they
were strangers in Egypt, and so were deservedly reckoned, as if they had gone
down into Egypt with Jacob. And it is of singular moment in that Catalogue,
that Judas's two Grandchildren by Pharez, to wit, Hezron and Hamul, although
they were not then born, as may be gathered from the series of Time, but
afterward in Egypt, are comprehended in that number, v. 11. that they might
supply the place of the two Sons of Juda, Er and Onan, then deceased. For which
reason also, Number. 26.21. whereas in the rest of the Tribes, not the
Grandchildren, but only the Children make up the Princes of the Families, in
the Tribe of Juda alone, not only his Sons, Selah, Pharez, and Zera, but also
his Grandchildren Hezron and Hamul, are made Princes of the Families of Judah,
as if added to his Sons. But none of these things have place in Stephens
Discourse; for he does not give a Genealogy of Jacobs Race, but only gives an
account, who they were that Joseph sent for from the Land of Canaan into Egypt.
His words are, Then sent Joseph, and called his Father Jacob unto him, and all
his kindred, threescore and fifteen Souls. He sent for more than proceeded out
of Jacobs Loins, but did not send for all that came out of his Loins. First
therefore, Juda's two Grandchildren are to be excluded there, then Joseph
himself with his two Sons; for he could not send for those, as not yet born,
nor himself and his Sons, as already dwelling in Egypt. Therefore if we
substract these five, and then Jacob their Father, who is mentioned apart by
Stephen, there remain of Moses number of 70. but 64 to wit, the Eleven
Brethren, one Sister Dina, and 52 Sons of the Brethren, to which, if we add the
eleven Wives of of the eleven Brethren, which undoubtedly Joseph sent for
together with their Husbands, and which belonged to the Kindred, ye have his
whole Kindred 75 Souls. The Ethiopick renders it, And Joseph after that he knew
that, he commanded that they should call his Father, and all his Kindred. And
there came unto him 75 Souls. Which version excludes Joseph and his Children,
because they could not be said to come unto him; but in that he errs, that he
includes Jacob also in the number of the 75 Souls, as coming also with the rest
to Joseph. For that number agrees only to his Kindred. Nor does it militate
any thing against what is said, that most are of Opinion that the ten Sons of
Benjamin, who are comprehended by Moses in the number of the 52 Grandchildren
of Jacob, Genesis 46.21. were at that time either none or few of them born, and
therefore they could not be rightly said to have been sent for by Joseph. For
it may be answered, that his Sons, though born afterward, might be rightly
added to the number, lest he only among all the Brethren should be reckoned
without Children. But there is no necessity to recur to that, seeing he was of
that age then that he might have had so many Children. For Joseph was thirty
years of age when he was first brought before Pharaoh, Genesis 41.46. Betwixt
which time and Jacobs entrance into Egypt interceded seven years of Plenty, and
two of the Famine, Genesis 45.6. Now when Joseph was 39 years of age, Benjamin
might be of the age of 37. at which age, especially where Polygamy had
obtained, why might not he be Father of ten Sons? Hence it may be collected,
that neither is there any error to be imputed to Moses's Text from Stephens
words, nor to Stephens words from Moses's Text, but that both spoke very well
according to their different intent. Hence it also follows, that the Text of
the Seventy Interpreters is corrupted, which Genesis 46.27. instead of Seventy has
Seventy five. Which seems certainly to have been done by some Christians, who
when they could not reconcile the place of Stephen with the words of Moses, and
did believe that by all means Stephen was to be credited, they altered the
Greek Text of Moses or rather corrupted it, that it might be at least
demonstrated whence Stephen had these things. There are manifest signs of
Corruption. For, First, All the Hebrew Copies, Josephus Antiq. 4. and the
ancient Latin Interpreter read only 70. Secondly, The Seventy Interpreters
themselves, Deuteronomy. 10.32. where this story is repeated, do agree with the
Hebrew, and number only 70. Thirdly, That they might varnish the 27th. Verse we
have mentioned, with the more likeness of Truth, they have corrupted also the
20th. Verse, where contrary to the Faith of all the Hebrew Copies, and the
Samaritan, and Ancient Latin, they have added five others of Joseph's
Posterity, to wit, Machir the Son of Manasses by his Concubine Syra, and Galaad
Machirs Son, Manasses Grandson: As also Ephraims two Sons, Sutalaam and Taam,
and Edem one Son of Sutalaam Ephraims Grandson. But instead of Taam, Augustine,
16 Civ. Dei. 40. has Bareth, from 1 Chronicles. 7. in which Chapter it is also to be
observed, that there is neither mention made of Taam nor Edem, and that the
Sons of Manasses, Machir, and Ephraim were reckoned more than five. Wherefore
did they then pitch upon only five of them to put into Moses's Catalogue?
Because they who would supply Stephens number in Moses did not stand in need of
more. But the same Persons, not very consistent with themselves, v. 27. added
to Manasses and Ephraim with their five Sons and Grandsons two others although
without their names. For instead of that which is in Moses, And the Sons of
Joseph who were born in Egypt were two Souls, the Seventy have Nine Souls.
Whence at last was the number of the 57 Souls to be collected; so that all
things in that Verse are most corrupt, and worthy of no credit. Nor can any
greater absurdity be imputed to Stephen, then that Joseph sent for not only
himself, and his two Sons present with him, but also his three Grandsons, and
two of their Sons, who were born long after.

15. So Jacob went down into Egypt. Jacob being strengthened after his
Sacrifices offered to God, went down into Egypt with his whole Family, in the
beginning of the third year of the Famine, being now aged 130 years, Genesis
45.46, 47. and Deuteronomy. 26.5.

16. And were carried over into Sichem, etc. As if he had said, The Bones of
the Patriarchs, who went down with Jacob into Egypt, were first indeed
transported to Sichem, but thence to Hebron, and interred in the Sepulcher
which Abraham, Genesis 23.16. bought from the Sons of Ephron. And thus at Sichem
indeed were the empty Monuments as Hieronymus an Eyewitness testifies in the
Epitaph of Paula, but in Hebron were the true Sepulchers of the Patriarchs of
which Josephus says, 2 Ant. 4. But his Brethren died after they had lived
happily in Egypt, whose Bodies after some time their Posterity and Children
buried at Hebron. But they transported the Bones of Joseph afterward, when the
Hebrews departed out of Egypt into Canaan. Whence it may be concluded that the
Bodies of the Eleven Patriarchs were buried at Hebron, and that before their
departure out of Egypt: But that Joseph's Bones were transported into Canaan
long after, at their departure. For although he does not say that the Bodies of
the Eleven Patriarchs are buried in Hebron immediately after their Death, but
(...), a time intervening: Yet he says that Joseph's Bones only were transported
(...), afterward, when they were departed out of Egypt. The Interring of the
former therefore was performed before the departure. Which says the famous
Lud. de Dieu, the very series of Stephens discourse seems to evince. For when
he had first spoke of the Death of Jacob, then of the Death, Transportation,
and Burial of the Patriarchs, he subjoyns, that then the time of accomplishing
the promise made to Abraham drew near, and that the people, increased to a
great number, incurred the Kings, hatred, and were by Moses, after they had
suffered most heavy afflictions, brought out of Egypt, which truly are so
recited, that they seem to have happened after the Interment of the Patriarchs.

In Sichem. Sicemus, or Sicema, sometimes the Metropolitan City of Samaria, was
situate on Mount Garizin, according to Josephus. In Calce Lib. 11. Antiq.
And seeing, says he, he was kindly entreated by all he came near, the
Samaritans, who then held the Metropolis Sicema, situate on Mount Garizin, and
inhabited by the Apostates of the Jewish Nation, seeing that Alexander did
entreat the Jews so magnificently, they resolved also to profess themselves
Jews. Benjamin Thudelens. gave them the same situation in his Itinerary, by
whom it is called Nebelas, that is, Neapolis, for so they called it in his
days. Pliny also, lib. 5. c. 13. makes mention of Neapolis among the Towns of
Samaria, which formerly was called Mamortha, says he. Its name was altered
from the Hebrew into a Greek form; for it is in the Hebrew Shechem, whereof
mention is made, Genesis 33, and 34. where it is declared that Simeon and Levi the
Sons of Jacob, for the Rape committed on their Sister Dina by the King of
Shechems Son, took it, and destroyed all the Males together with the King and
his Son. Afterward Abimelech Judge. 9.45.
razed it to the Ground and sowed it with Salt. But Jeroboam King of Israel
rebuilt it, and dwelt in it, as it is declared in the History of the Kings 1
King. 12.
. We read, Genesis 33.19. that Jacob purchased a parcel of Land from the Sons of
Hemor the Father of Shechem for a hundred Kesithis, that is, Sheep or Lambs.
Here Joseph, whose Issue obtained the propriety thereof, is said to have been
buried Jos. 24.32.
. In the same place God renewed his Covenant with the Israelites a little
before the death of Joshua; the Israelites, gathered together, besought Roboam
that he would remit the Rigor of their Yoke; and Christ had a conference with
the Woman of Samaria at Jacobs Well. It was of old a City of Refuge, and the
Metropolis of the Levites.

And laid in the Sepulcher. As if he had said, They were carried from the Land
of Sichem to Hebron, and laid in the Burying place purchased by Abraham of old
for 400 Shekels.

Of the Sons of Hemor. These words are not construed with the Verb bought, but
with the more remote, were laid, And so the Praeposition of, does not denote
the Sellers of the Burying place, but the place it self, from whence the
Patriarchs were carried forth to their Burial to be laid in the Sepulcher which
Abraham bought. The famed de Dieu expounds, of the Sons of Hemor, by the help
and assistance of the Sons of Hemor, the Father of Sichem. For, says he,
seeing that Interment happened when strange people had all the Power in the
Land of Canaan in their Hands, and so the Hebrews might incur danger, when they
were interring the Bodies of their Fathers, they very wisely first made their
application to Sichem, and they not only demanded the assistance of the Sons of
Hemor, but also, that they might the more safely accomplish it, they committed
the whole business to them, to do in it as they thought fit. So, of the Sons of
Hemor, etc. is not to be construed, with bought, but with, are laid, which
Opinion I confess is prevalent with me for Josephus's Authority, 2 Antiq. 4.

Hemor the Son of Sichem. An Hebraism, that is, Hemor of Sichem, or the
Sichemite. In the Greek it is an Elliptick speech, Emmor of Sichem, which may
be variously supplied according to the various acception of the word Sichem, by
which, sometimes a person, sometimes a place is designed in the Scriptures. If
it be taken for a place, it is plain that Inhabitant is understood; if it be
referred to Emmor alone, or if it be referred to the Sons of Emmor, which I
rather think, Inhabitants is to be supplied: So that the meaning is, from the
Sons of Emmor the Sichemites, that is, from the Emmorrean Inhabitants of
Sichem. But if Sichem here be taken for a Person, the word Father is to be
supplied, and it must be rendered with the learned Beza, from the Sons of Hemor,
the Father of Sichem. For Emmor or Hemor was Sichems Father, not his Son, as
appears from Genesis 33.19. and Jos. 24.32. Nor is there any reason, why the Greek
words cannot bear that, seeing the like occurs in approved Greek Writers.
Herodotus in Clio (...), Adrastus the Nephew of Gordius, who was Father to
Midas. Thalia, (...), Cyrus Cambyses's Father. Aelianus, 13. Var. 30. (...),
Olympias Alexander's Mother. Steph. de Vrb. on the word (...), Daedala a City
of Lycia built, or as the learned Tho. de Pinedo has rendered it, was so called,
by Daedalus Icarus's Father. Also Luke 24.10. (...), Mary the Mother of James,
is rightly rendered by the Syrian and both the Arabicks, out of Mark 15.4. where
it is expressly.

17. The time of the Promise. That was to be performed.

Which God had sworn to Abraham. The famous Manuscript of England, and the
Vulgar Latin read, had confessed. That is, Which God had made to Abraham, and
confirmed by an Oath. Maimonides says, that every earnest affirmation of God
is called an Oath. Such is, knowing know, Genesis 15.13. that is, know assuredly.

The people grew and multiplied in Egypt. As if he had said, There was an
incredible multiplication of the Israelites from the time that Jacob went down
to Egypt, so that in the space of about 216 years, of seventy Men 603550 Males
were descended, and those above the age of twenty years, besides 22000 Levites,
and the Infants that were drowned and destroyed by Pharaoh, Exodus 38.26. Numb.
1.46, 47.3.39. the devices of the Egyptians being set at naught by God. There
are not wanting other instances of a speedy increase. Mankind did so increase
in 250 years after the Flood, that in the Army of Ninus against the Bactrians
there were 700000 Foot, and 200000 Horse, according to the relation of Diodorus
Siculus out of Ctesia.

18. Till another King arose, etc. B. Usher in his Annals on the year of the
World 2427 says, Ramesses Miamun is that New King who knew not Joseph; born
after his death, willingly casting off the remembrance of his benefits. And by
his advice the Egyptians who were afraid of mischief from the Israelites, kept
them under with hard bondage; besides their Domestic and Rural Service they
had also the building of the Kings Storehouses imposed upon them, to wit, the
Cities Pithom and Raamsis or Ramessis, Exodus 1.8,-14. Acts. 7.18, 19. one of
which Mercator thinks was so named from the King the Builder thereof, the other
possibly from the Queen.

19. The same dealt subtly with our Kindred. That is, Craftily, of Free Men
making them vile slaves.

And evil entreated our Fathers. To wit, very severely.

So that they cast out their young Children. As if he had said, So that they
were forced to expose their young Children that were Males to the raging
Waters. The wicked King, says Usher, after he had in vain commanded Shiphra
and Pua the Hebrew Midwives to make away the Male Infants privately, published
an inhumane Decree to drown them in the River, Exodus 1.15, -- 22. in the time
that intervened betwixt the Birth of Aaron and Moses.

To the end that they might not be quickened. That is, That they might not be
preserved alive. (...), to bring to life, as with the Hebrews, (...), the
Syrians, (...), and the Arabicks (...), signifies not so much to give life
anew, as to preserve that is already in being. See Exodus 1.17, 18, 22. Ezechiel
a most ancient Jewish Poet, whom Clemens Alexand. strom. 1. and Eusebius. lib. 9.
^repar. Evang. have made mention of, in his Tragedy of Moses published in Greek
and Latin by Frid. Morellus at Paris, 1609. has excellently expressed the
import of this Verse in these words, But cruel Pharaoh, against us wholly bent,
Did many cunning stratage^^ invent
Us to enthral; our Lives a burden were;
In making Bricks, our Bodies daily wear,
While he did many Fenced Cities rear.
Next must the tender Parent his dear Son
In Seven-stream'd Nilus rapid Waters drown.


20. In which time. To wit, when the Israelites by the Kings command were
compelled to drown their Children immediately when born.

Moses was born. Usher on the year of the World 2433 says, Jocebeda, 40 years
after the Death of her Father Levi, brought forth Moses to Amram his Nephew her
Husband. For Moses was 80 years of age when he spoke to Pharaoh to let the
Israelites go out of Egypt, Exodus 7.7. and 40 years after their outgoing, when
he died in the 12th month he was 120 years of age, Deuteronomy. 31.2. and 34.7.

And he was exceeding fair. This Terence would have expressed, And he was of so
beautiful a Countetenance that none exceeded him. The Latin word, Gratus (...),
says Grotius, is from the Greek in Exodus 2.2. where it is in the Hebrew (...),
Beautiful. To God, which is added here in the original, is an Hebraism, (...),
to God, that is, very beautiful. See our Annotations on Jonah 1.2. on these
words, The Great City. Justin out of Trogus l. 36. c. 2. makes mention of the
Comeliness and Beauty of Moses. Of which Josephus thus, 2. Ant. 5. None was so
indifferent a spectator of Beauty, who would not admire the Beuaty of Moses,
and many that met him when he was carried in the Streets were so taken with his
Beauty, that they not only looked on the Countenance of the Child, but also
forgetting other business made it their work to satiate themselves with
beholding him. For such was the Child's Beauty, that it as it were captivated
and detained the Beholders.

And nourished up. As if he had said, The great affection of Moses's Parents
overcame all their Fears, and so contrary to the wicked Edict of the King they
hid him three Months at home, Exodus 2.2. Heb. 11.33.

21. And when he was cast out, etc. As if he had said, When by reason of the
diligent Inquisition made by the King, and their Egyptian Neighbors, the Child
could not longer be hid, his Mother put him in a Basket of Bul-rushes daubed
with Slime and Pitch, and laid it in the Flags by the River side; Miriam or
Mary Moses Sister standing afar off, and expecting the event of it. Being so
laid out he was found by Pharoah's Daughter, who, as Josephus 2 Ant. 5.
Epiphan. in Panar. and others say, was called Thermutis, and she delivered him
to be nursed by Jocebed his Mother, who was brought to her for that purpose by
the Child's Sister that stood by the River side, and adopted him for her Son,
Exodus 2. And thus the Hands of Pharoahs Daughter preserve a Revenger of her
Fathers Cruelty, says Augustine. Philo adds that Thermutis was Pharoahs only
Heiress, and that she had been long married, and because she had no Children,
she gave out that she was with Child, that it might be believed that she
brought forth Moses, and not that she adopted him. This possibly is hinted at
Heb. 11.25. where it is said, that Moses when he was grown, refused to be
called the Son of Pharoah's Daughter. Yet in Josephus 2 Ant. 5. Thermutis
acknowledges before the King her Father, that Moses was not born her Son, but
taken up, Whom I have resolved to adopt for my Son, and to make him thy
Successor in the Empire and Government. The same Josephus adds, that Moses in
his infancy cast upon the Ground, and trampled upon with his Feet, the Crown
when it was put upon his Head by the King of Egypt in jest. Hence he was in
great danger of his life by the instigation of the Egyptian Priests, but was
preserved by Thermutis.

22. Was Learned, etc. In Ezekiel the Tragic Poet, Moses is induced speaking
thus of himself: Us while a Child most carefully she bred,
And royally in Disciplines instructed,
And as she had been my Mother nourished.


Moses. That he was named Joachim at his Circumcision, and when he was received
into Heaven Melchi, Clemens Alexand. Strom. 1. reports, but whence he had it,
is uncertain. In Philo's Antiquities he is said to have been called Melchil by
his Mother. Thermutis called him Moses, that is, drawn out, or taken out, to
wit, of the Waters of Nilus, from (...), he drew out, he brought out, Exodus
2.10. Josephus believes that Moses was so called from the Egyptian word (...)
Water, and (...), preserved, which comes from (...). From (...) also is Monius,
as Abenesdras affirms he was called by the Egyptians. Yea, says the most
Learned Hofman in his universal Lexicon, in some Verses of Orpheus he is called
(...), that is, (...), as much as to say, born in the Water. But Salmasius, Ep.
60. thinks that the Etymology of Moses is plainly Egyptian, and verbally it
imports, says he, taken out of the Water, as an old Poet in Eusebius
affirms, that is (...); for (...), in that Language signifies Water, (...)
to take.

In all the Wisdom of the Egyptians. The Wisdom of the Ancient Egyptians
chiefly consisted in Hieroglyphics, and Mathematics. The invention of
Geometry, seeing by reason of the inundation of Nilus, the bounds of their
Lands could scarce be distinguished, is attributed to them.

And was mighty in words and deeds. As if he had said, And he was a Man exactly
accomplished with all Learning and Virtue.

23. And when he was full forty years old. Berescith Rabba, fol. 115. Col. 3.
Moses lived 40 years in Pharaoh 's Court, and 40 in Midian; and the same number
of years he ministered unto Israel. See also Shemoth Rabba, fol. 118. Col. 3.
What Moses did till he was forty years old, the Scripture no where declares.
Josephus reports 2 Antiq. 5.
that he was a General in the Ethiopick War, and that when he Besieged Saba, he
married the Kings Daughter by name Tharbis, who was deeply in love with him.
Whatever there be of this War, which Theodoret and others say is fabulous,
there is no doubt but that Moses has omitted many things concerning himself out
of Humility. For it is not probable that he gave himself over to laziness and
sluggishness during the forty years that he lived at Court like a Prince.

It came into his Heart to visit, etc. As much as to say, By a new and
extraordinary impulse of the Spirit he was moved to visit his Brethren the
Israelites, whose Spirits were broken with the rigor of their Bondage. Philo
says, that Moses used frequently to visit his Brethren the Israelites that
were groaning under their Burden, and that he supported them with Comfort, and
dealt with the Taskmasters to be gentle toward them: And that he was thereupon
suspected by the King and his Court to be one that affected Innovations.

24. And seeing one of them. To wit, A Hebrew, whom Rabbi Solomon, by what
Authority I know not, affirms to have been the Husband of Shelomith the
Daughter of Dibri of the Tribe of Dan, that is mentioned, Levit. 24.11.

Suffer wrong. That is, wrongfully beaten, Exodus 2.11. Some think that this
Egyptian who beat the Hebrew was one of the Kings Governors who took account
of the Israelites Work, and punished those that were slack. The Jews add, that
this Egyptian committed Adultery with the Wife of that Israelite, who while he
was inveighing against this injury of the Egyptian with Words, had his Mouth
stopped by the Egyptian with Stripes.

He avenged him. That is, By a just revenge he provided for his security. For
at that time there was no Judge who could redress the injury, and the injury
was urgent and could not admit of delay of time. Yet many of the Ancient
Fathers, amongst whom Augustine, l. 22. against Faustus c. 20, and seq. do
accuse Moses of too great Zeal and Praecipitancy. Oecumenius on the Epistle of
Jude says, that the Devil contended chiefly about the body of Moses as
unworthy of Burial on that reason chiefly, for that he killed the Egyptian
unjustly.

Smote the Egyptian. The Scripture has not expressed the manner how he smote
him. The Ancient Hebrews, as Clem. Alex. 1. Strom. testifies, do also
fictitiously and fabulously report, that the Egyptian was not killed by Moses
with any external weapon, but by the bare pronouncing of the name Jehovah
against him; as Peter did kill Ananias and Saphiras by a mere word. Sulpicius
Severus says, Moses, Sac. Hist lib. 1.
when he was come to a man's age, seeing a Hebrew beaten by an Egyptian, moved
with grief, revenging his Brothers wrong, kicked the Egyptian to death.

25. For he supposed, etc. As if he had said, he thought that they would
understand, when they saw him so ready to defend his Brethren when wronged by
their Enemies, that they were to be delivered afterward by God from the
Tyranny of the Egyptians by his means; which yet they did not understand. By
this Testimony of Stephen Moses seems to have killed the Egyptian on this
account, as being acquainted with his call to deliver the Israelites from the
grievous Bondage of the Egyptians. Which the Scripture is silent in, Exodus
2.12. This Augustine observed in his second Question on Exodus.

26. And the next day. That is, The next day after that Moses killed the
Egyptian, and covered him with Sand after he had killed him.

He showed himself to them as they strove. That is, He saw two Israelites
quarrelling, as the Vulgar Latin Interpreter renders it, Exodus 2.13. Jonathan
and Rabbi Solomon say, that these two Hebrews that contended were Dathan and
Abiram.

And he would have set them at one again. Gr. And he forced them to Peace. That
is, he used all means to reconcile them. The name of the Effect, says Grotius,
is given to the Endeavor, and the word signifying as it were Violence,
denotes the earnestness of the agent, as (...), to constrain, Luke 14.23. and
(...), to use forceable means, Luke 24.29. See the like expressions, Genesis
19.3.33.11. in the vulgar Latin 12. Matt. 14.22. Mark 6.45. Gal. 2.14.

Saying, etc. He does not cite the very words which Moses Exodus 2.13. is said
to have spoke to him, that did the wrong to his Neighbor, but he expresses the
sense very well. For, says Grotius, there, he is called (...), Neighbor, who
is here called (...), Brother, Countryman, descended of the same Ancestors.

27. But he that did his Neighbor wrong. He in the Original Hebrew is called
wicked, who has an evil Heart and malicious Mind. Equity commands, says
Aristotle in his Book of the Art of Oratory, that we make a difference betwixt
Injuries, and Faults, as also betwixt Faults and Misfortunes. Misfortunes are,
which can neither be provided against, nor are committed with a malicious Mind;
Faults, which might have been prevented, yet are not done out of malice; but
Injuries are done both designedly and maliciously.

Who made thee, etc. Chrysostom on 2 Cor. 7.13. says of Moses; Even before he
had brought out the People with his hand, he led them by his Actions: Wherefore
that Hebrew was very foolish in that he said to him, Who made thee a Ruler and
a Judge over us? What say thou? Thou see the deeds, and do thou make
controversy of the name? Just as if one that saw a Physician cut exactly
according to Art, and so help a distempered member of the Body, and then should
say unto him, Who made thee a Physician? Who gave thee a power to cut? My Art,
good man, and thy Disease. So also his skilfulness made Moses a Judge. For to
govern is not only a Dignity, but also an Art, and that indeed the sublimest of
Arts. The same Master of the Church handling this Subject on Ephesians. 3. in the
end, says, Thy Injustice, thy Cruelty has made me a Ruler and a Judge.

29. Then fled Moses at this saying. As much as to say, Moses understanding by
this upbraiding Language, that it was publicly known that he killed, tho
justly, the Egyptian that wronged the Hebrew, and fearing what might befall him,
by reason thereof, he fled. The Egyptians, as Grotius observes, esteemed the
Hebrews as Slaves, yea as Beasts, whom they would have every one persuaded to
be incapable of Injury.

And was a Stranger in the Land of Madian. T^^^ is, And he was an Exile in the
Land of (...) Eusebius makes mention of two Cities of that name. (...).
The first is beyond Arabia toward the South in the Desert of the Saracens to
the East of the Red Sea: whence they are called Madianaei, and the Country of
Madianaea. The other is near Arnon and Areopolis, whose Ruins are only to be
shown now. A Learned Author under the name of Jerome, writes In Loc. Heb. Act.
Apost.
that Moses was an Exile in the latter.

Where he begat two Sons. As if he had said, Where after having taken to Wife
Sephora or Zippora, Daughter to Hobab or Jethro, Niece to Raguel, he begat two
Sons of her, Gersom and Eliezer, as Sulpitius Severus expresses it, Book 1.
Hist. Sac.

30. And when forty years were expired. To wit, During his Exile at Madian.

There appeared to him. To wit, To Moses while he kept the Flock of Jethro his
Father-in-law.

In the Wilderness of Mount Sina. Where there were excellent Pastures. To the
South of Judaea are Sinim, Isa. 49.12. Sinaeans, as the Vulgar Interpreter has
translated Sini, Genesis 10.17. whence the Barren Country of Sin, and in it Mount
Sinai has its name, Exodus 16.1. Moreover it is certain, that the same Mountain
is called both Horeb and Sin: or Sinai, yet so that toward the East it is
properly called Sinat, or Sina, but that part that looks to the West Horeb.

An Angel. Heb. Exodus 3.2. An Angel of Jehovah, that is, an Angel acting in the
name of the most high God.

In a flame of Fire in a Bush. Gr. In a flame of Fire of the Bush. That is, the
species of the flaming Fire did show that God came in his Ambassador to revenge
the Injuries the Egyptians had done to his People, but the Bush not consumed
was a Type of that same People that should be preserved alive amidst all these
Calamities caused by the wicked.

31. When Moses saw it. To wit, The burning Bush pot consumed.

He wondered at the sight. Astonished at the strangeness of this Miracle.

And as he drew near. To the Bush.

To behold it. That is, That he might look more nearly into it.

The voice of the Lord came unto him. As if he had said, The Angel, the
Messenger of the Lord spoke to him to this purpose. In diverse and sundry
manners God spoke to the Fathers, but at length in the last days he began to
speak to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1.

32. I am the God, etc. Orat. 6.
Athanasius says, But that Angel was not the God of Abraham, but God spoke in
the Angel; and it was the Angel that was seen, but God spoke in him. The Author
of the Answers to the Orthodox in Justin Martyr, Quest. 112. The Angels who in
Gods stead appeared and spoke to Men were called by the name of God himself, as
that which spoke to Jacob, and to Moses. Yea Men also are called Gods. It is
given to both by virtue of the Office enjoined them, both to be in the stead,
and bear the name of God. But when the Office is fulfilled, they are no more
called Gods, who only obtained that name on the account of some work they were
to do.

The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. When God is
said to be the God of any, it is to be understood a special Favourer, and
Bountiful Patron of him, as sufficiently appears from that form of the
Covenant, Levit. 26.12. I will be your God, and ye shall be my People, which
Paul cites, 2 Cor. 6.16. and from the peculiar Covenant made with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Genesis 17.7, 8. Now they had some good things measured out unto
them in this life, but mixed with many troubles. For neither had they any
settled place of their own, but wandered up and down with their Families and
Flocks, and were also frequently tossed with the Injuries of Men and Fortune.
Hence also Jacob called himself a Stranger and Pilgrim, when he spoke to
Pharaoh, which the Author to the Hebrews very pertinently insisteth on, c. 11.
v. 13. It remains therefore that God was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
not only when they lived on Earth, but also when God spoke these things to
Moses. For, as I said, nothing had befallen them in this Life which could
answer the magnificence of so great a name. But besides we much more do good to
him, if we can, for whose sake we do good to others. God wants not power, and
he says that he will bless their Posterity for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; much more therefore, will he do good to them. But they who are dead are
not capable of a Benefit, if they are always to continue in the state of death.
It follows therefore, that they are to be restored unto Life, as Christ from
hence evinced against the Sadduces, Matt. 22.32. Mark 12.27. Luke 20.38. that
he may in a peculiar and special manner be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, that is, may be beneficial to them. Moreover Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
as we have observed on the forecited place of Matthew do not signify the Soul,
which is only a part of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but the Person consisting
both of Soul and Body, to which Life and Death are properly attributed. But
seeing the Promises of God are no less certain than things that are now in
being, in Gods account, who is both willing and powerful to raise them from the
Dead, they are reckoned as risen already according to that Luke, 20.38. For all
live to him. Origin, Book 4. against Celsus, says that the names of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob joined with the name of God, had so great Virtue, that not
only were they intermixed by their Posterity with their holy Frayers, and the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob called upon in driving away evil Spirits, but
were also made use of by all Charmers, and those that dealt in Magic.

Durst not consider. That is, Behold, as it is in the English, or Contemplate.
For as Grotius observes, words belonging to the internal and external senses
are applied promiscuously to both. In the Hebrew, Exodus 3.6. it is, And Moses
hid his Face because he was afraid to look upon God.

33. Then said the Lord unto him. That is, The Angel sent by God. Philo says,
that God in the promulgation of the Decalogue spoke not by himself, but,
filling a certain rational mind with a clear knowledge, which forming the Air,
and attenuating it as it were in likeness of flaming Fire, uttered a distinct
voice, as the breath does through a Trumpet.

Put off, etc. This, Exodus 3. is declared to have been said to Moses, before
that God told him by the Angel sent by him, that he was the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob. See what we have said on Eccles. 5.17.

34. I have seen, I have seen. As if he had said, With my Eyes intently fixed I
have steadfastly looked upon it. God is said to see the affliction, and hear the
groans of a People, when he raises them up, and refreshes them when they are
sorely perplexed and almost spent with grief; as on the contrary he is said to
shut his Eyes, not to hear their cry, to turn his Back, when he seems to
neglect them when they cry. Thus, when God is said to descend, says Calvin,
there is no need that God should move himself locally to bring help to his
People; for his hand is stretched out through Heaven and Earth; but this is
spoke with respect to our Sense; for when he did not regard the affliction of
his People, to our apprehension he might seem to have been absent, and to have
had his care exercised about some other thing in Heaven. Now he declares that
the Israelites shall be sensible that he is near them.

And now I am come, etc. As if he had said, Go therefore to Amenophis, Father
to Sethosis or Ramesis and Armais, and Son to Ramessis Miamun, who succeeded
his Father, who died in the 67 year of his Reign, in the Kingdom of Egypt, 19
years ago, and show thy self a Leader in restoring thy People to their Liberty.
That the same Man whom the Egyptians called Amenophis, Father to Sethosis, or
Ramessis and Armais, was by the Greeks called Belus the Father of Egyptus and
Danaus. Bishop Usher has most clearly collected out of Manethon on the year of
the world 1494. And truly the time assigned to Belus by Thallus the
Chronographer, 322 years before the destruction of Troy, according to the
relation of Theophilus of Antiochia, and Lactantius, does exactly jump with the
age of our Amenophis. Although the Mythologists confounding Belus the Egyptian
and Belus the Assyrian, Ninus's Father, do Fable that this Belus, who was
drowned in the Red Sea, transplanted Colonies from Egypt into Babylonia. Thus
far the most renowned Usher in the now cited place.

35. This Moses, etc. Moses who was appointed by God to be a Savior to the
Israelites, is at the first rejected by them, in this typifying Christ, whom at
his first coming the greatest part of the Israelites refused to acknowledge.
Nor in any other respect is Moses here called (...), a Redeemer, but because
after many and strange Miracles wrought by him in Egypt, when at last the
Firstborn of the Egyptians were slain by the destroying Angel, he preserved
the People of God by the Blood of the Lamb and brought them safe out. And so,
says Lud. de Dieu. he gave a Type of that true Price and that true Redemption,
which Believers rejoice to have been purchased for them, by the Death of the
First-begotten of all the Creation, and by the Blood of Christ the immaculate
Lamb.

Sent by the hands of the Angel, A Hebraism. That is, giving him a command by
an Angel.

He brought them out. He largely publishes both the good deeds Moses did for
the people, and the honors conferred on him by God; that so the stubbornness
of the People against him might appear the more base, and it might be less to
be wondered at, if those who were come of such ungrateful Parents, were so
unnatural and inhuman toward Jesus Christ.

Showing Wonders and Signs in the Land of Egypt. The Royal Palace of Egypt was
at that time Tzoan, that is, as the Chaldaean Paraphrast Interprets it, Isa.
19.13. Tanis, whence has its name the Tanitish Mouth of Nilus, which some call
Saitish, as Strabo testifies l. 17. Asaph testifies that the Miracles were
done there by Moses, Psalm. 78.12.

And in the Red Sea. The commoner sort of the Literate World, think that was
called so, because its Waters are Red, whereas this Sea according to Q. lib. 8.
cap. 9.
Curtius differs nothing from others in color; the same in the same place
says, It had its name from King Erythras, for which reason the Ignorant
thought that its Waters were Red. Agatharchides affirms the same in his
Collections out of Book 1. of the Red Sea. Apud Photium in Bibliothec^, cod.
CCL.
That Erythras, from whom they say it had its name was Esau, who from his
redness was called Edom, Genesis 25.25. These are of equal signification, Erythras
in the Greek, Edom in Hebrew, Ruber in Latin, Red in English, Rouge in French.
Hence by the Greeks it is called (...), in Latin Rubrum Mare, in English Red
Sea, in French Mer Rouge; but in the Holy Scripture it is called (...), The Sea
full of Weeds, because it abounds in Sea Reits; it runs by the Land of Edom,
that is, Idumea. In this Sea Solomon set out that Fleet whereof mention is made
1 Kings 9.26.

In the Wilderness forty years. This time answers to those years in which
Christ, after his offering up himself in the Cross for us, which was typified
in the Pascal Sacrifice, did continue to invite the Jews to Faith and
Repentance, by Miracles wrought by God through the Ministry of his Apostles.

37. This is that Moses, etc. As if he had said, This very same Moses, Deuteronomy.
18.15. gave you Signs, whereby to discern a true Prophet, and so he commended
Jesus to you in whom those Signs do shine much more gloriously than in other
Prophets. See what we have said above, c. 3. v. 22.

38. Was in the Church, etc. As if he had said, In the Assembly and meeting of
the People in the Wilderness, he was a Truch-man betwixt the Angel that spoke
to him in Mount Sina, and our Fathers who stayed at the bottom of the same
Mountain. See Exodus 19. That which is immediately subjoyned, says Beza, about
his conferring with the Angel in Mount Sina, and receiving the Tables of the
Law, does manifestly seem to denote a certain special Convention of the People,
to wit, that History which is mentioned in Exodus from Chap, 19. to 35.

With the Angel which spoke to him. In Gods name, and by his special
appointment. 15. Antiq. 8.
Josephus says, Seeing we have received our Principal Tenets, and the most
holy part of our Laws from God by Angels. The Law was given by Angels, by the
Ministry of a Truch-man, to wit, Moses, that it might be of force until the
promised Seed should come, Gal. 3.19. And the Writer to the Hebrews, prefers
the Gospel to the Law in this, that the Gospel was given by Jesus Christ,
whereas the Law only by Angels, Heb. 2.2. In which places, says Grotius, they
are called Angels with a number denoting a multitude, whereas Stephen only said
Angel, because such is the custom of those Visions, that one Angel sustains the
Name and Person of God, and the rest are as it were his Attendants. See Genesis
18. Luke 2.13. compare 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. with Matt. 13. v. 39, 41, and 49. Whence
is it therefore that the Angel who gave out the Law says, Exodus 20. I Jehovah,
as also other Angels who were sent about matters of great concern do speak.
Even after the same manner as Heralds do proclaim the Judges words, as says
August. 2 Trin. 2. and in like sort they suffer themselves to be addressed to; so
Moses says that God Jehovah, spoke to him in the Bush, Exodus 3.15. and he that
spoke called himself, (...), which is an Explication of the word (...). But
Stephen says that the Angel of the Lord was seen by Moses in the burning of
the Bush, and that by the Authority of Moses himself, Exodus 3.2.

Who received the lively Oracles. That is, he received from God the Doctrine of
Life and Salvation, to deliver it to us; nor did he deliver any thing to us,
but what he was commanded from above.

39. To whom our Fathers would not, etc. As if he had said, But our Fathers,
not so much rebellious against Moses, as against God himself in his Person,
turned their minds to the profane Rites of the Egyptians, as Lactant.
expresses it, l. 4. Instit. c. 10. That the worshipping of Beasts obtained in
Egypt long ago, and that it began to be in use before the Israelites went up
out of Egypt, is plain from Exodus 8.26. In the Edition of Athias, v. 22. where
when Pharaoh, or Amenophis, Father to Sethosis or Ram^ssis, and Armais, said
unto Moses and Aaron, Go and Sacrifice to your God in this Land, they answered
that they should Sacrifice the Abomination of the Egyptians, that is, Sheep and
Oxen, which the Egyptians abused to abominable Idolatry. For the Sacred Writers
used to call the Idols of the Gentiles Abominations, as you may see, Deuteronomy.
7.25.12.30, 31. 2 Kings 22.13. Ezra 9.1. Isa. 44.19. Or, the Abomination of the
Egyptians, that is, a Sacrifice which the Egyptians will abhor, who will never
suffer those living Creatures to be killed for an Offering, which they worship;
and in this sense the Vulgar and Chaldee Interpreters understand it. The
Egyptians also erected in their Temples the Statues of those living Creatures
which they worshipped when alive. Mela l. 1. c. 9. says, They adore the
Statues of many living Creatures, but much more the living Creatures
themselves. Strabo l. 17. where he speaks of their Temple says, But no Image,
or at least not in the likeness of a Man, but that of some Beast. And therefore
King Mycerinus hid his Daughter in the Cavity of a Wooden Ox, covered with
Gold, to which the Saites daily sacrificed by burning all sorts of
sweet smelling things. Herodot. lib. 2.
And Stephanus de Vrbibus on the word Busiris says, It is commonly reported
that Isis buried Osiris there, laying him in a Wooden Ox, and therefore the
City was called Busosiris. He will have, says the most Famed Bochartus
Hierczoic. P. 1. l. 2. c. 34.
, Osiris buried there by his Mother Isis, to have been shut up in a Wooden Ox,
whence the City was first called Busosiris, and then afterward by contraction
Busiris. Therefore that Learned Man is mistaken, who affirms that the Egyptians
worshipped only live Animals, not their Effigies, and that the Images of Oxen
are no where read to have been made use of in their worship. Moreover, that the
Israelites while they were in Bondange to the Egyptians, did also serve their
Gods, Joshua, c. 24.14. and Ezekiel, c. 20.7, 8. and 23.3, 8. expressly testify.
From whence it seems to follow that the Israelites imitated the Customs of the
Egyptians, when they worshipped the Molten Golden Calf in the Wilderness. To
which the words of Stephen in this and the following verse have a very near
reference, Their Hearts turned back again into Egypt, saying unto Aaron, Make
us Gods to go before us, etc. and they made a Golden Calf. l. 4. c. 10.
Rightly therefore Lactantius says of the same Israelites; They turned their
minds to the profane Rites of the Egyptians. For when Moses their Leader went
up into the Mount, and tarried there forty days, they made an Ox head of Gold,
which they called Apis, which might go before them for a Sign. And Jerome on
Hos. 4. It seems to me, that therefore both the People of Israel made that
Calves Head, which they worshipped in the Wilderness, and Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat set up his Golden Calves, that they might retain that which they had
learned in Egypt, in their superstitious worship, to wit, that Apis and Mneuis
were Gods, which were worshipped in the shape of Oxen. And Aug. Psalm. 73. The
Calf which that unfaithful, and Apostatizing People worshipped, seeking after
the Gods of the Egyptians. And Basil of Seleucia, Orat. 6. They worshipped a
Calf in the Wilderness, even as they did in Egypt. By the way note, that
instead of an Ox or a Calf, Lactantius said, an Ox head, and Jerome a Calves
head, as Tertullian against the Jews, c. 1. When the Ox head came forth to
them. And Cyprian of the excellency of Patience, that he might call an Ox head,
and an Earthly Figment the guides of his Journey. And Ambrose of Repentance, l.
1. c. 8. casting behind their backs their Faith, they worshipped a Calves head.
And on Exodus The Calves head was made. Also, But the following things will
inform us wherefore the Calves head went out. Also, Moses brake the Tables of
the Law, and stamped the Calves head. And Optatus, l. 3. In the days of Moses
the Children of Israel worshipped a Calves head. And Jerome on Hos. 7. They made
a Calves head in the Wilderness. And on Amos c. 5. They formed the Gold into the
shape of a Calves head. And August. in Psalm. 61. A Calves head was the Body of
the Wicked. And Isidorus Orig. l. 8. c. 11. where speaking of the Egyptian
Apis, The Jews made the Image of this head to themselves in the Wilderness. And
the Sentence of the Fathers of the Seventh Synod about the use of Images, When
they inconsiderately made a Calves head. And Eutychius of Alexandria L. 1. Hist.
p. 106.
, They took their Wives Ornaments, and melted them, and there came forth out of
them a Calves head. Which will excite the Readers Admiration, seeing, if I
mistake not, in ten several places of the Scripture it is said, that the
Israelites made and worshipped a Calf, and that Moses bruised the Calf, but no
where is it to be read the head of a Calf. Yet there is no reason why any
should imagine that this Idol according to the Opinion of the Ancients, had the
head only of a Calf, the rest of it resembling a Man, such as was (...), the
Feminine representation of Isis in Herodotus. For a head of an Ox, or Calf,
signifies nothing else but an Ox or a Calf. So Iliad. PS v. 260. in the Plays
at Patroclus 's Funerals, Achilles for rewards to the Gamesters, caused to be
brought out of the Ships, Horses and Mules, and the strong heads of Oxen, that
i^ Periphrastically, Oxen, as the Scholiast observes there. Again, in the Hymn
on Mercury, Apollo's Oxen taken from him by Craft are thrice called Strong
Heads of Oxen. Which Virgil Aeneid. 5. v. 61 and 62. imitates thus, Alcestes,
of the Trojan Offspring gives,
Of's bounty, every Ship two Heads of Beeves.
Two Heads of Beeves, that is, two Oxen. Thus far the universally Learned
Samuel Bochartus.

40. Make us Gods to go before us. No Sentence could contain in it self a
greater absurdity, seeing they cannot be Gods that are made by men; nor could
Images be said to go before them, which have Feet and walk not; yet there is no
need of thinking that Monster of Polytheism to be insinuated by this
expression; for the Plural is used for the singular, as when the Israelites say
of one Calf Exodus 32.4.
, These are thy Gods, O Israel, which have brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. So in the Hebrew Original Abraham, who acknowledged one only God, yet
said, Genesis 20.13. The Gods made me wander from my Fathers House. And, Genesis
35.7. Jacob called the place Bethel, because the Gods were there seen by him.
And David, Psalm. 49.2. Let Israel rejoice in his Makers. And Solomon, Eccles.
12.1. Remember thy Creators. The Philistines also, tho they knew that they
worshipped but one God in Israel, yet when they were struck with his Terrors,
they said, Who will deliver us out of the Hands of these mighty Gods? These are
the Gods that smote the Egyptians 1 Samuel 4.3.
. And therefore Jonathan understood these things as spoken of one God. So
likewise Theodoret, Quest. 1. on 1 Kings. Nor is it to be doubted, but the
Israelites intended the same in these words, These are thy Gods, O Israel;
which the following words plainly show, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. By which words they did not signify that they were delivered by this
Idol, which they knew to be void of Life, and but lately made; but that they
might not seem Idolaters, they would be believed to worship the true God in
this Idol. Which very thing Aaron had respect to Exodus 32.5.
, when he called the Feast dedicated to that Calf, the Feast of Jehovah, as if
the worshipping of that Calf had been the worshipping of God; that Micah also,
who had the Molten Teraphim, and Jeroboam who made the Calves pretended the
same, appears from Judge. 17, 3, and 13. and 1 Kings 12.28. which yet was but a
vain subterfuge, nor did it acquit them from the Crime of Idolatry before God.
That the Israelites so understood these words, These are thy Gods, is evinced
by these of Nehemia, c. 9. v. 18. They made themselves a Molten Calf, and said,
This is thy God which brought thee out of Egypt, that is, an Image or Symbol of
that only God, who in very deed performed what he promised to our Fathers, and
delivered thee from the Egyptian Bondage with a strong hand, and stretched-out
arm.

For this Moses, etc. The people took occasion of asking this of Aaron from
Moses's stay on Mount Sina, whence he did not return till forty days were
expired, Exodus 24.18. which things tho they are plain in Holy Writ, Exodus 32.1.
yet are strained to a different sense by the Jews. For on the Hebrew words, and
the people saw that Moses tarried (...), the Talmudists have it thus Tract. de
Sabbat. c. 9. p. 89. A.
, Don't read (...) tarried, but (...), that is, Six are come, viz. Hours. For
when Moses went up to the Mount he told the Israelites, I will return at the
end of forty days, in the beginning of the six hours, from which the 40th. day
begins. When therefore these forty days were expired, Satan came to trouble
the World, and said unto them, Where is Moses your Teacher? They answered that
he was gone up into the Mount. But says he, The six hours are expired wherein
he promised to return; which when they did not value, he added, that Moses was
dead. But when they were no more moved at that, he showed them the figure of
his Coffin; and then they said to Aaron, As for this Moses, the man that
brought us out of Egypt, we know not what has befallen him. In Bereschith
Rabba, Sect. 41. the Devil is said to have shown Moses himself hanging between
Heaven and Earth. In Jonathan's Paraphrase, they conjectured, that Moses was
consumed in the Mountain, whereon Fire glistered from the Face of God.
Therefore as being now deprived of their Leader Moses, they ask Visible Gods
which may go before them. Moreover, if we may give credit to the Tanchuma, fol.
46. those men who asked this were not Israelites, but the 40000 men who went up
out of Egypt with the Israelites, and the two Egyptian Magicians, Janes and
Jambres by name. But these are but foolish inventions to vindicate their
Ancestors from the crime of Idolatry, when none who has not quite lost his
senses but may smell out their deceit. For if instead of (...) we read (...),
the Sentence will be incoherent, nor will these words agree in the least with
the following. Besides it supposes, that in Moses's time the days were divided
into hours, which is plainly contradictory to all History. For other Nations
have learned the division of the day into twelve hours, invented by the
Babylonians, long after, as we are informed by Herodotus, and others; this
especially is to be considered, that if Moses by Divine Instinct did foretell
at what time he would return, he returned at the very moment he appointed, nor
was there any reason why their patience should be wearied out by his delays.
Lastly. There is nothing more false than that only the Strangers, who joined
themselves to the Israelites when they came out of Egypt, asked Gods from
Aaron. For, Exodus 32.1. it is said, the people came together to Aaron, and v.
3. That all the people brought their Earrings to him. For we know not, say
they, what is become of this Moses who brought us out of Egypt. But Moses
brought only the Israelites properly out of Egypt; the others followed them
voluntarily. But also, v. 8. they are called Israel, v. 13. The Scod of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; v. 14. The People of God. Therefore the Levites when
they executed vengeance to punish the guilty, did not kill only Strangers, but
their Brethren, Sons, Friends, Neighbors, sparing none that came in their way;
because the guilt was universal. With good reason therefore does Stephen
upbraid the Jews with this, that their Fathers said to Aaron, Make us Gods, etc.

41. And they made a Calf, etc. On that very same day in which the people
desired that they might have an Idol made after the manner of the Egyptian
superstition; Aaron, whether overcome with fear, or some other praeposterous
Affection, hearkening to the mad multitude, contrary to the express words of
the Law, Exodus 20.23. commanded them all without respect to Sex to bring their
Earrings, and when they were brought melted them in a Vessel fit for that
purpose, and presented the Calf that came out of it to the people, built an
Altar to it, and appointed a solemn Feast to be kept the next day, as it is
more fully declared, Exodus 32. Hence, Deuteronomy. 4.20. it is said that God was
mightily incensed against Aaron, and was about to destroy him, and would
certainly have cut him off had not Moses interceeded for him.

And offered Sacrifice unto the Idol, etc. The Israelites come together
according to Aarons appointment early next morning, worshipped the Calf, and
offered Burnt Offerings and Peace Offerings to it, and the people sat down to
eat and drink, and rose up to play, Exodus 32. v. 6. For they worshipped this
Idol after the same manner that they did the true God. Except that of all the
kinds of Sacrifices the Sin Offerings were only omitted, which yet they stood
most in need of. And how guilty soever they were, yet they thought they had
performed their Sacred Rites aright, and their Consciences were benumbed with
acting so great wickedness. Feasting and Festival Plays were Appendixes of the
Sacrifices even in the Worship of God. For whereas Sacrifices were either Burnt
Offerings, or Sin Offerings, or Peace Offerings: In Burnt Offerings all the
Sacrifice was burnt; in Sin Offerings a part of it fell to the Priests share,
who only feasted on it; in Peace Offerings the Offerers according to their
right retained a certain portion of the Sacrifice, that they might call
together their Friends, if they so thought fit, and be merry with them. For in
these Feasts the Israelites were commanded to rejoice before the Lord, Deuteronomy.
12.7. and 16.11. yet not with a light, lascivious and petulant, but with a
pious and moderate joy, and conjoined with a Praising Gods name, as in the
presence of the All-seeing God. And that Plays were also then used, appears by
David's example, whom Michol out at a Window spied dancing, and playing, after
he had offered Sacrifices before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16. 1 Chronicles. 15.29. But
whereas Plato l. 7. de Leg.
says, that some dance (...), with a modest and becoming motion of the Body,
others (...), immodestly and unseemlily, undoubtedly David's dancing was (...),
modest, and composed, not desultory and light. But Idolaters, says the most
renowned Bochart, Hierozoic. p. 1. l. 2. c. 34.
were so bad personaters of the faithful in this point, that they did not
contain themselves within these Bounds. For these sacrifical Feastings
frequently ended in Drunkenness or Lasciviousness, or Contention, Riots,
Beatings, and Slaughters. Therefore the Ancients attribute the first rise of
Drunkenness to these Feasts. And Aristotle Apud Athen. l. 2.
says, that (...), signifying to be Drunk, was called so in the Greek,
because, (...), after their Sacrifices were performed they drank more
liberally. To the same purpose is that which Seleucus writes, that in the same
place Feasts were called (...), because they thought it was their duty to drink
largely for their Gods sakes; and (...), etc. because they were congregated or
came together for the sake of their Gods. For otherwise, it was not of ancient
custom to set before any, Wine or Delicacies in any abundance, unless it were
done for the Gods. To which that gradation of Epicharmus has respect, After
Sacrifice was Feasting, after Feasting Tippling, which to me seems very
delightful, from Tippling proceeded Frowardness, of Frowardness came Railing,
of Railing Strife, from Strife Condemnation, whence Fetters, Stocks, and Fines.
Where the Israelites are said after they had Sacrificed to have sat down to cat
and drink, and rose up to play, the Rabbis by the word play, understand mostly
these things. For besides these undecent Plays, the Tanchuma will have two
others to be designed in this place, to wit, Whoring and shedding of Blood. The
former he proves from Genesis 39.14, 17. where Potiphars Wife accuses Joseph, as
if he had come (...) to play with her, or to mock her, that is, to force her.
The latter out of 2 Samuel 2.14. where Abner says to Joab, speaking of the
twelve Benjamites, who were joined with the like number of David's Soldiers, Let
the young men now arise, (...), and play before us: Play, that is, let them
fight and fall on to one another overthrow. As if that most fierce engagement
in which twelve pair of young men destroyed one another, was looked on by the
spectators only as a Play, as the Encountrings of Fencers at Rome. Whence the
Ancient Hebrews in Kimchi say, Because the people made no account of the Blood
of the young men, as if it had been a Play, therefore they were punished, and
fell by the Sword; to wit, in that Battle which is mentioned, v. 17. But I see
no reasen why the Israelites should be believed to have played thus after their
worshipping of the Calf, that is, to have fallen either into uncleanness, or
into n^urdering one another. I confess, that these have oftentimes been the
consequents of Drunkenness; but I find that the Israelites did eat and drink,
yet not to Drunkenness. But, Deuteronomy. 29.5, 6. they are said to have had no Wine
nor strong Drink, that is, inebriating Liquor, all the forty years they were in
the Wilderness. Therefore, whereas in the Greek Version, Exodus 3.18. Moses
coming down from the mount, says to his Servant Joshua, (...), I hear the
voice of them that are singing through Wine, that (...), whencesoever it has
crept in, is a mere gloss, of which neither the Hebrew Text, nor other versions
have the least appearance of. For in the Hebrew it is only (...), I hear the
voice of them that sing, or, that sing one after another. I think therefore
that some of the Greeks have rendered it, (...), others, (...), for which the
half-learned have written (...), and this made up of both (...). So that the
(...) might be instead of the Hebrew (...), as it might be read before the
Vowels were written down, and be written by them who were ignorant of the force
of the Hebraism. For it was not unusual with them merely to Copy words that
were unknown to them. The Samaritan renders it the voice of sinners, as also
the Syriack, for instead of (...) they read it (...). Truly therefore the Greek
Scholiast, The Samaritan, I hear the voice of Sins. Nor ought that to have been
suspected by Drusius. Thus far the most exquisite in all kind of Sciences,
Samuel Bochart.

42. Then God turned. That is, God turned his back on them. It is an Active
Verb for a Reciprocal, says Grotius.

And gave them up to worship the Host of Heaven. That is. He gave them over to
their Lusts, that instead of one Idol they might invent innumerable.

As it is written in the Book of the Prophets. To wit, The twelve lesser, which
were written and bound up in one Book or Volume, by reason of their brevity.

Have ye, etc. See our Litteral Explanation on Amos 5.25.

43. Yea, ye took up, etc. That which is here declared, that the Israelites
carried about with them in Wagons, and Litters the Images of Moloch or Rephan,
was done by them when they yet abode in the Wilderness, to wit, when they,
enticed with the wiles of the Moabitish and Midianitish Women, worshipped
Baalpeor, or Belphegor the God of the Moabites, and as I think, of the
Midianites also, and offered Sacrifices to it, Numb. 25. and Psalm. 106. For
Baal, and Moloch, or Melech, or Molech, are names commune to all the Gods,
which were distinguished and differenced by Epithets, as you may see by
comparing 2 Kings 18.34. and Isa. 36.19. with Isa. 37.21. Whence also the God
of the Ammonites, who is commonly called Moloch, is called Baal, Jer. 19.5. and
elsewhere; neither will ye almost find the name Moloch used peculiarly for the
God of the Ammonites in the Scripture, but where the naming or mentioning of
the Ammonites either goes before, or immediately follows; wherefore it is
called Melcom or Milcom with a Pronoun Relative to the Ammonites. Yet Theodoret
on Psalm. 105. has observed, that Baal or Bell is in a special manner attributed
to Saturn. Suidas on Beelphegor says, Beel is Saturn, but Phegor is the place
where he was worshipped, whence he is called Beelphegor. Servius on A^neid. 1.
says, In the Carthaginian Tongue, Bal signifies God, but by the Assyrians,
Bell, by a certain use peculiar to Sacred things, is called both Saturn and Sol.
Also with the most learned Moloch is the same with Saturn, especially in these
words of Amos, cited here by Stephen, where the same is called in the Hebrew
Original (...), and in the Seventy Interpreters (...). He upbraids them
therefore, because they carried about with them the Tent and Image of the Star
Saturn, which they wrought for themselves, that they might worship them as
Types and Figures of their God, when yet the true God will not be worshipped by
a visible or external shape. See our Literal Explication, Amos 5.26. on which
place Grotius speaks thus: As Moloch is an Ammonitish name, so Kiun is an
Arabic or Persian, which Abenesdra says, is also written Kivan, and that it
is with them the same that Saturn. The same is called by the Syrians Remmon, 2
Kings 5.18. to wit, because it was in the highest Orb, as Tacitus speaks. As
Kiun was also pronounced Kivan, so Remmon was also Remvan; which the Greeks,
having lost the use of the letter F, wrote (...) or (...), which is their true
writing. But Moloch, Kiun, or Kivan are called Gods, because although they were
referred to the same Star, yet they had diverse Names, Habit and Worship, as the
Moon and Diana with the Greeks. Many Men also were related to the same Star
among different Nations: and Moloch was of the shape of a King, Kivan of a Star.

Beyond Babylon. In the Heb. Amos 5. v. 27. And I will remove you beyond
Damascus. See our Literal Explication there. The most renowned Samuel Petit,
renders the place of Amos otherwise, And I will carry you away further than
Damascus is carried away. Now the Inhabitants of Damascus Amos 1.5. 2 Kings,
16.9.
were carried over into Kir, which Samuel Petit himself doubts not but was in
Babylonia, and he suspects that that City of Babylonia, which by Ptolomy in the
fourth Table of Asia is called Chiriphe, had its name hence: But the Prophet
does foretell that the Israelites should be carried further than those of
Damascus were; for these were carried into Babylonia, but they should be
carried further than into Babylonia, to wit, into Media. See 2 Kings 17.6.

44. Tabernacle, etc. He aggravates the wickedness of the Jews, because, when
they had both the place and manner of Divine Worship prescribed by God, both in
the Wilderness, and in the Promised Land, they hankered after External Figures
with a preposterous abuse of the true and pure worship. As if he had said, The
Tabernacle indeed was set up by Moses at the command of God, but which should
bring men back to its Heavenly Archetype, whom Moses saw in the Mount.
Excellently says Calvin, For God does not regard External Rites, but
precisely, as they are Symbols of Heavenly Verity.

Of Witness. They who translate (...), Tabernacle of the Congregation, may be
reconciled with them who render it, Tabernacle of the Witness or Covenant,
provided it be so called, not so much in respect of the people that came
together there to God, as in respect of God himself, who was there made known
to the people by the declaration of his Testimonies and Covenant, and as it
were met there with them. For so, says Lud. de Dieu, God himself explaineth
it, Exodus 29.42. where there is a reason given why it is called (...), because
(...), I Will meet you in that place, that I may speak with you there. You see
that God meets, that he may speak, and indeed, that I may speak with thee, to
wit, Moses, which might be done without any assembling of the people. Nor was
this name given to the Tabernacle from (...), a Porch, which was the place the
people met in, but from (...), the most holy place, where was the Ark, where
God met with Moses and the High Priest; whence Exodus 25. v. 22. (...), and I
will meet thee there, to wit, at the Ark, and I will speak with thee at the
Propitiatory. Thus far de Dieu. Hence the Ark is called, The Ark of the
Covenant, and the Ark of the Testimony, or (...), the Testimony absolutely. The
Tabernacle is also called, Numb. 9.15. and 17.23. the Tabernacle of the
Testimony or Witness. Also Exodus 28. v. 21. and Numb. 1.50. The dwelling place
of the Testimony.

According to the fashion that he had seen. That Moses is said to have seen a
fashion, the Spirit of God thereby signifies, that we must not devise forms at
our pleasure; but that all our Senses should be fixed on the form showed by
God, that all our Religion may be formed according to it. The Godly, says
Calvin excellently, according as he usually does, receive nothing but from the
word of God; but others think anything lawful they have a mind for, and so they
make their own pleasure a Law, when yet God approves of nothing but what he
himself has appointed. I pray God that all that are called by the name of
Christians may judge by this most sound Rule in their Controversies about
Religion, and then all their Judgments and Opinions would easily agree.

45. Bringing in. That is, As the Arabic excellently translates it, When they
had received that, to wit, from those who died in the Wilderness. So Mat.
26.27. Taking the Cup, that is, when he had taken the Cup, or as it is rendered,
Mark 14.23. having taken the Cup. See what we have said on Matt. 37.48.

Our Fathers with Jesus. That is, With Joshua, who at the Death of Moses
succeeded in the Government, appointed by God, and who in name and deeds
performed by him typified Jesus Christ.

Into the Possession of the Gentiles. Gr. (...); Which the Syriack renders
Periphrastically, into the Land which God gave them for a Possession among the
Gentiles. Greek Interpreters promiscuously use (...), in, with the Ablative,
and (...), into, with the Accusative, because the Hebrews put the letter (...)
for both the Praepositions, but (...) is used for (...) and (...), and rather
signifies the Land it self which is obtained and possessed, than the taking or
acquisition of it.

Whom God drove out from before the Face of our Fathers. That is, At the
arriving of our Fathers. This manner of speaking is to be seen, Deuteronomy. 2.21, 22.
and often elsewhere: Which the Authors of the Inscription, that Procopius
Gazensis saw in Africa, have imitated, We are those who fled from before the
face, that is, at the coming of Jesus the Robber the Son of Nave, that is, Nun.

Even in the days of David. In the Greek, as also the English it is, unto the
days of David. As if he had said, And so the Tabernacle of the Testimony was
flittering and wandering until God declared to David by an Angel from Heaven,
that he had chosen the Threshing-Floor of Arauna, 1 Chronicles. 21.
or Ornan the Jebusite for a sure and fixed Seat for the Ark.

46. Who found, etc. As if he had said, This David obtained by the singular
favor of God, that when he was earnestly desiring to build a settled Seat for
the Ark of the Lord, God showed him the place chosen for that purpose.

And desired. Earnestly and most desirously; binding himself with a Vow, Psalm.
132.3. that he would in no time or place lay aside that solicitous care in
searching out the place appointed by God for building the Temple, until he
found it by Divine Revelation. This Vow of David's was according to the will of
God, in regard God had promised, Deuteronomy. 12. that he would choose to himself a
certain place, which should be the Sanctuary Seat, and had added a command,
that the People should frequent what place soever he should make choice of, and
there perform the external Rites he had prescribed in the Law. But the vows of
the Papists are partly ridiculous, and foolish, or even impossible, and partly
manifestly impious, because they are made out of an opinion of Merit, and to
Created things, therefore David's vow does in nothing justify them.

Tabernacle. That is, A Habitation, or place, not designed for a short abode,
as a Tent, or Tabernacle properly so called is, but like a House intended for a
certain, and settled dwelling, Ps. 132. v. 5. Until I find out a place for the
Lord, an Habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. That is, until I find the
place appointed by God for building the Temple, in which, as in a certain Seat,
the Ark of God may be put, to the end, that he who delivered Jacob powerfully
from dangers, may be Worshipped with a constant reverence, by the people,
frequenting his Worship according to his Institution, Deuteronomy. 12. It is expressed
(...), Tabernacles in the plural number, because the Temple had three
Divisions, Psalm. 68.36.

47. Solomon. etc. As if he had said, The place designed for the building the
Temple, was indeed showed to David, but not he, but his Son Solomon was
permitted to build that Temple. 1 Kin. 5.


48. But the most high, etc. As if he had said, But Solomon, while he was a
building the Temple, knew very well that God could not be included in such a
structure, and he expressly prefaced in that solemn Prayer which he made, 1
Kings 8.27. which afterward is more clearly expressed, Isa. 66. v. 1, 2. to
wit, that all things are filled with the Majesty of God, and that they wrong
him, who dream that he is tied to a Temple made with hands, and after a
Childish manner think that they deserve at his hands by doing of things of
nothing.

49. The Heaven, etc. As much as to say; I, who am every where, and govern all
things, have no need of a Temple made by men; I called indeed the Temple, which
Solomon set about at my command, my rest, Psalm. 132.14. not that my Glory is
comprehended in its narrow bounds, or that I delight in a visible, and fading
Building, but that I would have that to be the sign and pledge of my presence
to those who Worship me with an inward purity of heart, and a sincere affection
of Godliness. See our literal Explication, Mat. 5.34. on these words, Is God's
Throne.

50. Has not, etc. The meaning is, All things which ye behold any where are
made by me, and are therefore at my disposal. By these words, says Calvin, the
Prophet intimates, that God has no need either of Gold, or Costly Ornament of
the Temple, or Sacrifices. Whence it follows that his true Worship does not
consist in Ceremonies. For he desires none of those things which we offer to
him on their own account, but only that he may exercise us in the study of
Godliness. Which argument is more largely handled, Psalm. 50. For although it is
a shameful stupidity to think to feed God with Sacrifices, yet if Hypocrites
were not overwhelmed therein, they would not lay so great a stress on trivial
things. Whatsoever Worship is not performed in Spirit, is unsavory in Gods
account. Therefore let us know that God seeks us, not our Possessions, which
we obtain from him only at his pleasure, by his Free Grace. And hence it is
also manifest, what a vast difference there is betwixt true Religion, and the
carnal inventions of Men.

51. Of a stiff Neck. In the Gr. as also the English, stiff-necked. That is,
untractable, and refractory. See our literal Explication on Hosea 4.16. Seeing
Stephen does not give direct answers to the heads of his Accusation, I
willingly am of their mind, says Calvin, who think that he would have spoke
more, had not his discourse been tumultuously interrupted. For we know what a
Consistory of Judges he had. Wherefore it is no wonder if they forced him to
hold his Peace, with their tumultuous noise, and mad Outcries. And we also see
that of purpose he used long Circumlocutions, that he might lenify them as wild
Beasts. But it is very probable that their Rage was stirred up when he showed
them that they had grievously corrupted the Law, that their Temple was polluted
with Superstitions, and that there was nothing that remained pure among them:
by reason that they resting in bare Types, did not Worship God Spiritually;
because they did not refer their Ceremonies to the Heavenly Type. But although
Stephen did not immediately go about to vindicate himself, but did endeavor by
degrees to soften their fierce Spirits; yet he spoke very pertinently to purge
himself of the Crime they Impeached him for. These were the two principal Heads
of his Accusation; That he had spoke Blasphemy against God and his Temple; That
he had endeavored to abrogate the Law: Stephen, that he might dissolve these
Calumnies, beginning his discourse from the calling of Abraham, shows that
the Jews had no advantage of the Gentiles by nature, by proper right, or by
Merits for their works; but only by free gift, to wit, because God had adopted
them in the Person of Abraham. It makes likewise very much for him, that the
Covenant of Salvation was made with Abraham, before there was a Temple,
Ceremonies, or Circumcision itself. Which things the Jews so much gloried in,
that they thought there could be no true Worship performed to God, no Holiness
without them. He afterward declared how wonderful, and manifold the goodness
of God had been toward Abraham's Race, and on the other hand how wickedly, and
perversely they had rejected the Grace of God, as much as lay in them. Whence
it plainly appears that it cannot be ascribed to their Merits that they are
reckoned the People of God, but only because God of his own good pleasure chose
an unworthy People to himself, and did not cease to do good to them, though
ungrateful. By this means their high and proud Spirits might have been subdued,
and reduced to humility, that being stripped of their foolish pride they were
puffed up with, they might come to the Mediator. Thirdly, He showed that an
Angel was Praeses in giving out the Law, and that Moses did so discharge his
Office, that he said, other Prophets should arise after him: yet of whom of
necessity there was to be some Chief and Prince, who should put an end to all
their Prophesies and Praedictions, and bring them to a full accomplishment.
Whence it is collected that they were not at all Moses's Disciples, who did
reject that Doctrine that was promised, and held forth in the Law, together
with its Author. Finally he shows that all the old Worship which was prescribed
by Moses, was not to be accounted of for itself, but ought rather to be
referred to another end, because it was made with respect to a Heavenly
Archetype: But that the Jews were corrupt Interpreters of the Law, in that they
took every thing in a Carnal, and Earthly sense. Hence it is evinced that there
was no wrong done to the Temple or Law, because Christ is brought in as the End
and Verity of both. But seeing the state of the cause did especially depend
upon this point; that the Worship of God did not properly consist in
Sacrifices, and outward things, and that all Rites did nothing else but shadow
out Christ, it was Stephens purpose to insist chiefly on this point, if the
Jews would have permitted it: but when he came to the main point, they were
highly enraged, and would not give audience any further; he could not make
application of what was spoken, and instead of an Epilogue, he was forced to
conclude with a bitter rebuke.

Uncircumcised in Hearts and Ears. As if he had said, Whose Hearts are full of
vicious affections, and whose Ears are shut and obturate to all sound Doctrine.
The Jews are in the same manner upbraided, Lev. 26.41. Jer. 6.10. and 9.26.

Ye always resist the Holy Ghost. In the Greek it is, Ye fall down cross its
way. That is, Ye stubbornly despise the Holy Ghost speaking in the Prophets,
and you set your selves in opposition to his admonitions, as those do who stop
one in his Journey. This is (...) to walk across ones way, Levit. 26.22, 23,
24, 40, 41. Stephen seems to have had respect to Isa. 63.10. With this agrees
that sharp upbraiding of Jeremiah, c. 7.24. etc. Ezekiel. 20. from v. 5. to the
end of the Chap. Nor is the promiscuous multitude only accused of Rebellion
before God, but the Priests, Princes, and Prophets are upbraided with the same
Crime, Jeremiah 2.8.5.31.6.13.8.10.10.20, 21.22.21, 22.23.1, 2, 9, 11-31.32.30,
32. Ezekiel. 8.12.22.25. and Hos. 4.1. Mic. 3.5, etc. Zeph. 3.1. Zech. 7.11. Mal.
2.8, 11.3.7.

As your Fathers did, so do ye. As if he had said, You Children have succeeded
your Fathers in the same Wickedness.

52. Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? Excellently
Luctantius; 1 Instit. 4.
Prophets were therefore sent by God, both that they might be setters forth of
his Majesty, and Chastisers of Men's Wickedness. But the Precepts of Justice are
unpleasant to the vicious and evil livers. Therefore they, who were both
accused of sin, and forbid to do it, put them to death, after they had most
cruelly tormented them. 1 Kin. 19.10. Elias complains thus, They have slain
thy Prophets with the Sword, and I, even I only am left, to wit of all those
who came to the knowledge of Ahabs Court, and they seek my life to take it
away. Nehem. 9.26. They slew thy Prophets which testified against them, to turn
them to thee. See Mat. 5.12 21.35.23.31, 33. Luke 6.23.13.34. Heb. 11.37.

And they killed. To wit, your Fathers, degenerated from the Piety of our
Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Which showed before of the coming of the Just One. That is, the Messengers
that were sent before the Face of Christ that was to be born, who, as Drusius
expresses it, is here in a peculiar manner called the Just One; possibly,
because he was Innocent, when he was put to death. For (...) is a Law Term,
signifying a supposed guilty person that yet is innocent; to which is opposed
(...) a Person that is accused as guilty, and is so indeed, as in that place of
David, Psalm. 109.6.
(...), when he shall be judged, that is, when he shall contend in Judgment,
let him be condemned.

Of whom ye, etc. As if he had said, But ye with a combination of wickedness
did most wickedly conspire against Christ himself, the Author of Righteousness,
and Salvation, nor left ye any means unattempted to bring about his death. See
above, c. 3. v. 13.

53. By the disposition of Angels. Gr. At the appointment of Angels, that is,
Angels in the Name of God ordaining, and enjoining the observation of the Law.
So the Law is said to have been ordained by Angels Gal. 3.19.
. And Heb. 2. v. 2. it is called the Word spoken by Angels. And although the
Law was given principally by one Angel sustaining the Name and Person of God,
yet because this was done in a stately manner, many Troops of Angels having
attended him as Apparitors, the promulgation of the Law in Mount Sina, is
rightly ascribed to Angels.

54. They were cut to the Heart. As if he had said, They were enraged with a
mad fury, and that unruly, and headstrong fury against Stephen broke forth
into a gnashing of Teeth, as a vehement, and violent Fire does into a Flame.
See what we have said above, c. 5. v. 33.

55. But he being, etc. As much as to say, But Stephen armed with an invincible
power of the Spirit, lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and straight saw a certain
resplendency representing the Divine Majesty, and Jesus triumphing in that
Flesh in which he was abased.

56. I see the Heavens opened. The opening of the Heavens is a sign previous to
Visions, Ezekiel. 1.1. some of the Hebrews will have nothing else signified by the
opening of the Heavens, but that any thing is done, or showed by a Heavenly
Power. But the Pagans thought that the Heaven was also opened by Heavenly
Portents. Livy l. 17. says, That the Heavens were divided as it were with a
great gaping: and that a great light shined out where it was open. And on that
of Virgil, Aeneid. 9. v. 20.
I see Heavens part asunder in the middle, Minellius says, That it was divided
and opened with a great Chasma or gaping. Servius In Augural. lib.
among other Prodigies, Heaven was also said to have parted asunder.

And the Son of Man, etc. An Hebraism, as if he had said, I see that Man Christ
Jesus, whom as despised, and the lowest of men, you think destroyed by death,
enjoy the Government of all things in Heaven. Christ appears to Stephen not
sitting, but standing on the right hand of God, that he may thereby signify
that he is ready to afford him help in that conflict of his for his Name. Yet
in most other places the phrase of sitting on the Right Hand, or Right-hands of
God is used, as more fitting to signify the glorious state of Christ, to wit,
that Majesty and Power of ruling all things, which he obtained after his
Ascension into Heaven, before which all must stand and be judged. Augustine
says, that Christ is said to sit as a Judge, and to stand as our Advocate with
the Father.

57. Then they cried out with a loud voice, etc. As if he had said, Those of
the multitude who were standing by, when they heard this Declaration of Christ's
Glory, breaking out with a horrible Noise, as if it had been intolerable
Blasphemy, they shut their Ears, either by putting their Fingers therein, or
the flap of the Ear, I mean, that lowest, and soft part of the Ear which the
Greeks call (...) from (...), to take, because the Ancients pulled the Ear on
that part, that they might give any a Caution; Hence the Poet, Virg. Ecl. 6. v.
3, 4.
-- Then Phoebus, thus
Nipping my Ear, advised.
The Hebrews call this part in a Sheep (...), Amos 3.12. in a Man (...), Exodus
29.20. and frequently in Leviticus; and (...), Tail, in the Writings of the
Rabbis. Humanists call the flap of the Ear, Lana, Lanna, or Lamna, the Ancient
Glossary, Lana, (...), the Glossary of St. Benedict, Lannae, (...).
Philoxenus's Lexicon (...), Lamna. Of the flap of the Ear the Talmud In Tract.
(...) fol. 5.2.
speaks thus: Wherefore is the whole Ear hard, but the Flap soft? That if any
hear an immodest word, he may bow his Flap, so as to shut his Ear. In the same
place, speaking of the pointed figure of the Fingers. Wherefore is there in
Men's Fingers a point like to that of a Key? That if any hear an undecent word,
he may put his Fingers into his Ears.

And ran upon him with one accord As if from a Judgment of Zeal, which while
the Commonwealth retained its Liberty, they according to the Law used against
the Authors of Idolatry, who openly, in the view of many, had given themselves
to it. These were presently, without any respite to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 13.9, 10.
But, says Grotius, These men sinned two manner of ways in this particular;
first, against the Law, which even while that was a free Commonwealth, would
not have that popular Judgment practiced, save only upon the Authors of
Idolatry, which Stephen was not; and then against the Romans, who had taken
away from them all right in matters of life and death. And the boldness of
those Men whom Josephus calls Zelots increasing daily, both incensed the
Romans, and was the occasion of the destruction both of their City and Temple.
See the same Grotius on the now cited place of Deuteronomy, and Book 10. of the
Right of War and Peace, Chap. 20. Number. 5 and 9.

58. And cast him out of the City, and stoned him. That is, And after they had
cast him out of the City, they stoned him as a Blasphemous Person. Praecept.
Jubente, 99.
Rabbi Moses de Kotzi does thus describe the Ceremony of stoning by Tradition:
The Wise Men say that a Man used to be stoned naked, but not so a Woman; that
their Clothes used to be pulled off at four Cubits distance from the place
where they were stoned, their secret parts being only covered before. The place
of stoning was twice the height of a Man, to which place he that was to be
stoned went up with his hands bound. Then one of the Witnesses beating him upon
the Loins, threw him headlong upon the Earth. By which, if he was not killed,
the Witnesses lifted up a stone that was set there; it was just so much as two
Men could carry; which one of the Witnesses rolled down upon him with violence.
And if there was life still left in him, all the People stoned him. Talmud
Hieros. fol. 23.1. Babyl. Sanhed. fol. 42.2. The place of stoning was without
the Council House, according to that of Levit. 24.14. Carry out the Blasphemous
Person without the Camp. Tradition. The place of stoning was without the three
Camps. Gloss. The Court was the Camp of Divine presence: The Mountain of the
Temple, the Camp of the Levites: Jerusalem, the Camp of the Israelites. R.
Moses Maimonides in the Treatise of the Aedifice of the Temple, c. 7. n. 7.
says, There were three sort of Camps in the Wilderness, that of the
Israelites, which was divided into four Partitions, that of the Levites, of
which mention is made, Number. 1.50. And shall encamp round about the Tabernacle;
And that of God, without the Gate of the Court, in the Tabernacle of the
Covenant. And in reference to these afterward, that space which lay betwixt
the Gate of Jerusalem, and the Mountain of the Temple, answered to the Camp of
the Israelites; the space betwixt the Gate of the Mountain of the Temple, and
the Gate of the Court, which was the same that was called Nicanors Gate
answered to that of the Levites: and the space that was about the Gate of the
Court, represented the Camp of God. My Brother Lewis Du Veil in his most
elegant Latin Translation of the same Maimonides on the Treatise of the manner
of going up to the Temple, c. 3. number. 2. has most learnedly noted: That that
is true, we may learn from the Apostle, who in the last Chapt. of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, v. 11, 12, 13. speaks thus: For the Bodies of those Beasts,
whose Blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the High Priest for sin, are burnt
without the Camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the People with
his own Blood, suffered without the Gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him
without the Camp, bearing his reproach.

And the Witnesses. To wit, that they might be in readiness to cast the first
stone, according as the Law enjoined, Deuteronomy. 17.7. Although therefore, says
Beza, all these things were done tumultuously, and that not without violation
of the Governor of the Provinces Authority, yet they would seem to do nothing
but what the Law of God enjoined them. Josephus 20. Antiq. 8. declares that
while Albinus Festus 's Successor governed Judaea, Ananias the High Priest
with the like boldness caused James, the Brother of the Lord to be stoned, on
the account of which wickedness the Priesthood was taken from him, and
conferred on 'one Jesus. Excellent is that of Calvin, on the now cited place of
Deuteronomy. Not without reason would God have the guilty dye by their hands, by whose
Testimony they were condemned. Executioners were not made use of among the
People of ancient times, that in punishing the Wicked, there might be a greater
sense of Religion, modesty and reverence. But God especially committed this
charge to the Witnesses, because the Tongue of a great many is precipitant, not
to say blabbing, so that they would make no scruple to kill one with their
words, whom they durst not so much as touch with their Finger. It was therefore
an excellent expedient for restraining this lightness, not to receive the
Testimony of any, unless his hand were ready to execute Judgment.

Their Clothes. To wit, their upper, or outer Garments. Gr. (...), Lud. de Dieu
on John 13.4. says, Although (...) in the singular number signifies sometimes
a Cloak, yet (...) in the plural number is not, that I know of, used to signify
one Cloak. Nor is there any fear of their being naked. For seeing in those hot
Countries they made use of most fine stuff, they put on several Garments one
upon another, that the force of the Sunbeams might not easily penetrate them,
which yet they easily put off, when they had occasion so to do. Next to the
Body was (...), the Shirt; above it (...), the Breeches; over it (...), the
Robe, a Garment that hung down to the Ankle; to which was added (...), the
Girdle, wherewith they girded it, that it might not hinder them in their
walking; above all these was, (...) or (...), the Cloak. Suppose then that our
Lord laid aside his Cloak and Robe, it is rightly expressed in the plural
number, (...), his Clothes, and yet he was not naked. But also our Lord is
rightly said to have been naked by a phrase usual among the Eastern Nations,
where he is said to be naked, who has put off his Robe, although at the same
time he has both his Shirt, or inner Coat and Breeches on him. Thus King Saul,
sung naked before Samuel. 1 Samuel 19.24.
Thus Peter was naked in the Boat, Joh. 21.7.
who therefore is said to have put on (...), not certainly his innermost
Garment, or Shirt, but, as its name intimates, that which was put on above the
other, to wit, his Robe, which as we said, was made fast about them with the
Girdle; whence it is also said, (...), he girded his upper Coat.

Young Man. Saul, who is here called (...), a young Man, was, according to
Chrysostom, upwards of 30 years of Age, when he kept the Clothes of the
Witnesses that were laid down at his Feet. And truly, a little after, when he
was converted to the Faith of Christ, he is called by Ananias, (...) a Man, c.
9. v. 13. Nor is it likely the High Priest would have conferred so much power
on a young Man, when he was yet under Tutors, against the Christians. See the
same Chap. 9.2. and Paul himself below, c. 26. v. 4. testifies that he spent
all his youthful years among the Jews before his Conversion. Estius on the
Epistle of Philemon, says, That Saul the Persecutor was called a youth, or
rather a young Man, (...), from the age of Youth, which reaches to the 35th
year, or as others say, even to the 40th. Cicero, when he pleaded Sextus
Roscius's Cause, calls himself a young Man, when yet at that time, according to
Gellius, L. 15. c. 28.
he was 27 years of age. Antonius, Bishop of Grass in France, in the life of
Paul, writes that he was 33 years of age, when he persecuted the Church of
Christ. From that time to the 11th year of the Reign of Nero, when Paul in
Bonds writ the Epistle to Philemon, by Onesimus his Servant, according to
Bishop Vshers Chronology, were 30 years; and therefore Paul then above the age
of 60, does rightly call himself Paul the aged, seeing, as we have noted on
Joel 1. v. 2. he was called an old man by the Hebrews, who was 60 years old.

Whose name was Paul. This Hebrew born of the Hebrews, descended of the Tribe
of Benjamin, born at Tarsus in Cilicia (which City, that it was then famous for
the study of Philosophic, and Liberal Sciences, is confirmed by the Authority
of Strabo, L. 14.
) by Sect a Pharisee, and the Son of a Pharisee, did at this time apply himself
to the study of the Law in the Synagogue of the Cilicians at Jerusalem, and
frequented the School of Gamaliel, a Doctor of the greatest repute among the
Pharisees; being a strict observer of the Law of God, as also of the Traditions
of their Fathers. See below, c. 21.39.22. 3. 23.6-34.26.4, 5. 2 Cor. 11.22.
Gal, 1.14. Phil. 3.5, 6.

59. And they stoned Stephen calling. To wit, upon the Lord Jesus, as is plain
by the subsequent words The most Learned Curcellaeus says; Institut. l. 5. c.
21. number. 21.
There is no small weight in these words of Christ, Joh. 14.13, 14. Whatsoever
ye shall ask: And, if ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it. For he
could not hear the Prayers of his Servants, and grant what they ask, if he had
no power. Hence it appears that that, If ye ask any thing in my Name, is to be
understood of Prayers immediately directed to him, as if he had said, If ye ask
any thing of me, relying on my Power and Promise. Otherwise there is no
Question but we may, yea, it is our bounden duty to direct our Prayers to God
the Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, as we are taught, John 15.16-23. But
of such Prayers it is not spoken in this place. Therefore also Stephen made no
scruple to call upon him even while he was a dying, saying, Lord Jesus receive
my Spirit. Where they ridiculously shift, who will have the word Jesu to be of
the Genitive Case; as if Stephen had not directed his Prayers to Jesus himself,
but to God the Father, who is the Lord of Jesus. For, besides that Jesus Christ
in the Writings of the New Testament is always denoted by the name of Lord, to
distinguish him from God the Father, even the use of the Greek Tongue does not
permit that in that phrase, (...), the latter word (...) should be of the
Genitive Case; for then it must have had an Article praefixed to it, and been
expressed, (...), to distinguish the Person of Jesus from God the Father;
otherwise there is no person skilful in that Language, who can take that Phrase
otherwise than in the Vocative Case, as Rev. 22.20.

And he kneeled down. As was usual in fervent Prayers, especially in dangers.

Lord, etc. The blessed Stephen, says Ambrose, Ser. 56. de Tempore.
by his Faith did not seek Christ upon Earth, but viewed him standing on the
Right Hand of God: there he found him where he sought him with devotion of
mind. But Stephen not only sees Christ in Heaven, but touches him also by his
Martyrdom. For he touches the Lord while he prays for his Enemies, and as it
were holding him with his Faith, he says, Lord lay not this sin to their
Charge. Understand therefore how great glory there is in true Devotion. Mary
Magdalen, John 20.17. though standing near our Lord, does not touch him;
Stephen, while upon Earth, touches Christ in Heaven: She sees not a present
Christ among the Angels; Stephen among the Jews beholds his Lord while absent.

Lay not. Gr. (...) Verbally rendered, says Grotius, it is, weigh not. So Ezra
8.25-32. Job 28.15. Jer. 32.9, 10. Zech. 11.12. This Verb (...), to account, or
appoint, is instead of the Hebrew (...), which 1 Kings 20.39. is translated
(...), to weigh, Exodus 22.17. (...), to render; Isa. 55.2. (...), to weigh.
Anciently Money was heavy Brass, which used first to be weighed, and then paid.
Thence (...) in Greek a Weight, in Latin libripens, impendia, expensae,
pendere, pensiones, and the like. But because in ballancing accounts, that
which I charge another with, does discharge me as much as if I had weighed it,
that is, paid it, hence it is that (...) signifies to charge. And by reason of
the similitude which sins have with Money-debts, as he is said to pay
punishments, who suffers them, so he is said to charge, or impute, who will
exact them, not to impute, who will not exact them. But in this place, charge
not, or lay not, imports thus much, do not make so great account of this sin,
as to block up their way to Conversion, even as in that saying of Christ, Luke
23.34.

He fell asleep. That is, he died.

In the Lord, That is, For the Lord, or for Christ's Cause. The Hebrews do so
use (...). In the Lord, is not in the Greek Text.

CHAP. VIII.
SAul, etc. Being about to speak of the Persecution of the Church of Jerusalem,
forthwith he mentions Saul, who was the principal Cause of that Persecution,
therewithal declaring upon what account he was induced to persecute the
faithful Members of Christ, who lived at Jerusalem, viz. because he did consent
to the death of Stephen, or rather, because he was, as the Greek Text has it,
(...), delighted together: That is, As a Zealous Pharisee, together with the
stoners of Stephen he was delighted in his death, of which, in the foregoing
Chapter. So that truly, after he once tasted the blood of the Faithful, he
thirsted more unsatiably after the same, and was the more provoked to lay his
hands on them.

At that time. That is, About that time.

In the Church. That is, Against the Church.

All. Who had embraced the Faith of Christ, and consisted of some thousands.

Were scattered abroad throughout the Countries of Judea, and Samaria. That is,
Through the Towns and Villages of Samaria, strictly so called. Some of these
Believers so scattered abroad, not long after went unto Damascus, below, chap.
9. v. 19. and 25. among whom was Ananias, a Religious Man according to the Law,
and having a Testimony of all the Jews that dwelt thereabouts, below, chap. 22.
v. 12. Some unto Rome itself peradventure, and among these Andronicus, and
Junius, Kinsmen of Saul the Persecutor, and who before him embraced the Faith
of Christ, Romans 16.7. Some finally went even unto Phaenice, Cyprus, and
Antioch, preaching the Word of the Lord unto the Jews only, below, chap. 11.19.
to those, viz. that were scattered abroad in those places among the Nations,
Jam. 1. v. 1. 1 Pet 1. v. 1.

Except the Apostles. Who stayed at Jerusalem, that with an invincible
constancy they might there profess themselves to be the Witnesses, and
Preachers by the special appointment of God, of those things, which they did
assuredly know by hearing and seeing of Christ, the Savior of Mankind.

2. They took care, etc. As if he should have said, The devout Men took care of
Stephens burial together, and did witnesss both by words, and great store of
tears, how grievously, and bitterly they took his death, who did in no ways
deserve it at their hand. Which, notwithstanding it is not once to be doubted,
but that they did do it moderately enough, seeing they were well acquainted
with the Precepts of Christ, which among other things also did forbid
immoderate grief. See 1 These. 4.13.

3. Saul, etc. Luke returns again to describe the Persecution of the Faithful
of the Church of Jerusalem, as if he should have said, In so great
outragiousness of the bloody Jews against the Church of Christ, Saul did more
waste it then the rest; for having received power from the Sanhedrin, not only
when the Saints were put to death by him, did he give his voice against them,
but also he entering into every house, and hailing thence both Men and Women,
did bind them, and commit them into Prison, and did beat them often through all
Synagogues: and so for fear he forced some to blaspheme by denying Christ, he
persecuted others, constant in the Faith, to death. So cruel and furious is the
vehemence of the Zeal which is not according to knowledge. See below, chapter 9.13,
and 21. chapter 22.4, 5, and 19. chapter 26.9, 10 and 11. Gal. 1.13, and 23. Ihil. 3.6.
1 Timothy 1.13.

4. Therefore they that were scattered abroad. For the Persecution raised at
Jerusalem.

Passed over. That is, Traveled over diverse places.

Preaching the Word of God. That is, Preaching, and declaring wherever they
came the Doctrine of Christ confirmed by his and his Apostles Miracles. Which
manner of preaching of the Gospel is granted to any Christian that is well
Catechized in the Christian Doctrine; yea, rather Charity, which we owe to
others estranged from it, and the love of spreading the glory of God, requires
the self same from every Christian.

5. Philip. He, who above, chap. 6.5. is reckoned the second in the Register of
Deacons, and below, chap. 21.8. is called an Evangelist.

Going down unto the City of Samaria. That is to say, Coming down into Sebaste,
which commonly was called Samaria, or, if we credit famous Lightfoots
conjectures, into Sichem, which at that time was the Metropolitan, or Mother
City of all Samaria. See what we have spoken of Samaria above, chap. 1.6.

Did preach Christ unto them. That is, did bring Tidings of the comfortable
Gospel of Christ to the Inhabitants of that City.

6. And the people gave heed, etc. As if he should have said, A great multitude
of Men and Women, with one accord did consent unto the Doctrine preached by
Philip, having heard the Miracles which elsewhere he had wrought; and having
seen those which he did work, while they did see him.

7. Many, etc. As if he should have said, Because many possessed with evil
Spirits, were released from their Tyranny, the Devils themselves showing that
they were thrust out of the possessed against their will, and very many others
that had Palsies, or lame hands, or feet, were healed.

8. And there was great joy in that City. Both for the benefit of the Cures,
and for the Grace of the Gospel.

9. But there was a certain man called Simon. By Surname Githeus, from Gitta, a
Village of Samaria, where he was born.

Which before time. That is, Before Philip the Deacon had come down from
Jerusalem to Samaria.

Was in the City. Of which the former verse makes mention.

A Sorcerer. That is, working such effects by Diabolical Art, which he could
not work, neither by a Divine, nor Natural Power.

Seducing the Nation of Samaria. As if he should have said, And by this means
it came to pass that he enchanted, and bewitched the Nation of the Samaritans.

Giving out that himself was some great One. That is, loftily boasting. The
Scholiast of Horace upon the first Epistle of the second Book, Like a Conjurer,
let him promise to do great things.

10. To whom they all gave heed from the least to the greatest. That is, All
for the most part believed his Enchantments, not only the Samaritans of the
baser, and poorer sort, but also of the more worthy, and higher sort. There is
no respect here had by the word of the least, and greatest to age, but unto the
state or condition, as Deuteronomy. 1. v. 17. Psa. 115. v. 13.

Saying, etc. As if he should say, That they were so fully persuaded that Simon
himself was that power of God, which every Nation does Worship as the highest.
Simon did say, says Irenaeus in his first Book, chapter 20. That he was the highest
power, that is, he who is Father above all things.

11. And to him they had regard. As if he should say, Simon had so great
Authority among the Samaritans.

By his Sorceries. That is, By his Magic bewitchings.

Had bewitched. That is, Had driven them unto madness. Satan can work so much
by his Instruments upon the minds of Men, when God permits him.

12. But when they believed. To wit, The Samaritans, being delivered from their
madness.

Preaching the things, etc. That is, To him Preaching that most Blessed,
Heavenly State, which by the Grace of God, through the Merits of Jesus Christ,
they were about to obtain, who did most steadfastly believe the promises of the
same Christ, and did most constantly obey his Precepts. Luke above, v. 5. did
more briefly express the sum of the Gospel by the Preaching of Christ; here
more fully, by the Preaching of the Kingdom of God, and of the name of Jesus
Christ; but the sense in both places is the same; for Christ brings us back,
reconciles, restores us into favor with God: afterward regenerates us by his
Spirit; that Satan being overthrown, God may reign in us, and we renewed unto
Spiritual Righteousness, and dead unto the world, may live a heavenly life in
the Earth, and at length may obtain eternal blessedness in the Heavens.

They were baptized. That is, they were dipped in the water, according to Christ's
Command, Mat. 16.16.

Both Men and Women. Who, viz. did profess themselves to have embraced the
Christian Religion; but not Infants, who seeing they do not at all understand
the Gospel Preached, they cannot consent unto it, that is, They cannot believe.
See what we have said above, chap. 2. v. 38. and 41. and what we shall say
below, v. 37. and 38.

13. Then Simon. That man in times past so perverse, and notoriously wicked.

Himself believed also. The Doctrine of the Gospel Preached by Philip, to wit,
with a temporary Faith, if those things be true which the Fathers have written
concerning the same Simon. See Mark 4.17. and Luke 8.13.

And when he was baptized. That is, and when he had professed his Faith
publicly, by being dipped in the water, according to Christ's Commandment.

He joined himself to Philip. That is, He departed not from Philips side, and
gave heed both continually and daily to his Preaching.

Beholding the Signs, and Miracles which were done. That is, The Miracles which
were wrought by Philip through the power of God, for the confirmation of the
Doctrine Preached by him.

Being amazed, wondered. Such truly is the force of the Spirit of God, that it
can move the hearts of the most wicked Men, and draw them into amazement.

14. When. As if he should have said, But the Apostles, who, as is said above,
ver. 1. tarried at Jerusalem, when the rest of the Faithful were scattered
abroad from thence, being informed of the Conversion of the Samaritans unto the
Faith of Christ, sent Peter and John out of their Company, unto Samaria, by
consent of them all, to the end, they might lay their hands on the Samaritans,
and so might give them the singular gifts of the Holy Spirit, as appears by
that which follows. By the way, hence we may see, that Peter was not a Monarch
of the Apostolical College, and of the whole Church, for the Ambassador uses
not to be greater, and higher then he that sends him. I do reckon the Pope will
not suffer himself to be sent in Embassy any where by his Cardinals, and fellow
Bishops.

15. Who. Peter, to wit, And John.

When they were come. Viz. Unto the City of Samaria, in which Philip the Deacon
had Preached the Gospel of Christ.

Prayed for them. Samaritans. Hence we may see that the power of bestowing the
gifts of the Holy Spirit is not in the power of the Apostles, but in the power
of God, and Christ; for otherwise there was no need of Peter, and John's Prayers.

That they might receive the Holy Ghost. That is, those excellent gifts of the
Holy Spirit, with which every where then they who believed in Christ, and not
only they who were to preach the Gospel, and govern the Church, were
wonderfully gifted: that having obtained the gift of Prophesying, and speaking
with diverse Tongues, they might confirm the Doctrine of Christ, which then was
new. See above, chap. 2. v. 38. and below, chap. 10. v. 44, 45, and 46. chap.
19.6. 1 Cor. 12. v. 8, 9 and 10.

16. For as yet he was not come upon any of them. As if he should say, None of
these Samaritans as yet was gifted with those excellent gifts, in which God did
present, or show, as it were, the visible presence of his Spirit for a time to
his Church, that he might confirm the Authority of his Gospel for ever, and
that he might witness that his Spirit is to be always the chief ruler, and
directer of Believers.

Were baptized, etc. As if he should say, Although they had now believed in
Christ, and had professed publicly their Faith, by being Baptized with Water,
according to the Commandment of Christ. And hence we may see that those
extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, are neither tied to the sincerity of
Faith, nor to Baptism of Water lawfully received, so far are they from being
conferred by any virtue of Faith or Baptism of Water.

17. Then laid they their hands. Many Nations had a Custom, but chiefly the
Jews, to point out the most excellent things, not only with words, but also
with visible signs; hence arises laying on of hands, when by Prayers the
Divine Power was invocated for another. See Genesis 44. v. 14 and 15. Matthew. 9. v.
18.19. v. 13, and 14. Ma^k 20. v. 16. but God was wont to give this Honor to
his Prophets, as to bestow his gifts upon others, at the prayers of the
Prophets, of which prayers imposition of hands was a Symbol. So Moses was
commanded to lay his hands on Joshua, that he by that means might receive the
larger gifts of the Spirit at the Prayers of Moses, Numb. 27. v. 18 and 20.
Naaman, the Syrian Prince, conjoyneth calling on Gods Name with laying on of
hands, 2 Kings 5.11. Even so, God being called upon by his Apostles, did bestow
those singular gifts at the laying on of their hands, with which he gifted the
most part of the faithful, at the beginning of the Preaching of the Gospel,
that they might be a most sure sign of the Faith of those that were converted
to Christ, and an undoubted token of the verity of the Doctrine of Christ. Let
us remember, excellently says Calvin, That the laying on of hands, was the
instrument of God, at which time he did give the visible graces of his Spirit
to his own. But since the Church has been deprived of such Riches, to wit, the
visible graces of his Spirit, laying on of hands would be but an unprofitable
Image.

And they received the Holy Ghost. As if he should have said, God did give unto
the Samaritans converted unto Christ, and dipped into the Water, according to his
Precept, at the Prayers of the Apostles, and their laying on of hands, the
graces of his Spirit, wherewith they being gifted, could Prophesy, and do
Wonders, such as are mentioned, 1 Cor. 12.

18. And when he had seen, etc. That is, when Simon Magus perceived that those,
on whom the Apostles laid their hands, did as surely receive the gifts of the
Spirit, as if those gifts had been in the Apostles power, he will buy this
power of giving those peculiar graces unto them, on whom he should lay his
hands. And indeed, because Simon did reckon the Heavenly gift such a vile
thing, that he first under the Gospel did attempt to purchase it with Money,
the giving, and receiving of an Earthly Price for an Holy, and Spiritual Thing,
is called Simony, 1. q. 1 c. Presbyter, and 1. q. 3. c. Altar. The Canonists,
notwithstanding out of the Opinion of the Schoolmen, call the Buyers of Holy
Things, Simoniacal Persons, the Sellers Giezites, from Giezi, Heb. Gehazi, the
Servant of Elisha the Prophet, 2 Kings 5.20, etc.

Give ye, etc. He will not buy the gifts of the Holy Spirit, that were commonly
given to Believers, but that gift, wherewith the Apostles alone being endued,
to wit, that at their Prayers those gifts were bestowed on whomsoever they laid
their hands, as if that could be prised, that is dearer than all gold.

20. Thy Money, etc. As if he should say, Thy Money offered to such a wicked
use, being as it were altogether infected, and polluted with the contagion of
the wickedness of thy profane mind, abide with thee. and perish with thee in
the same destruction, which, unless thou repent, shall surely befall thee;
seeing that thou do so contemptuously undervalue the Spirit of God, that thou
would set to wicked Sale his inestimable gift given freely unto us to
illustrate the glory of Christ by our Ministry. Beda, and the common gloss have
observed that the words of Peter are not so much a Curse, as a Threatening, or
Threatening Prediction, but that it is conditionally to be understood in respect
of the Person of Simon, is made manifest below, v. 22.

21. Thou have, etc. As if he should say, for neither as thou art now disposed,
can thou be either partaker, or sharer of that eternal life which we do
Preach. Peter gives an account why he thundered forth a detestable Prediction
against Simon Magus so confidently, even now in the foregoing verse.

In this Preaching. To wit, Preached by us, of obtaining eternal life, by a
sincere, and lively faith in Christ. This Preaching is every where called the
Gospel, and the Word of God. See above, v. 4 and 14.

For thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Many who are not of a right
heart in the sight of God, oftentimes excel in gifts of the Spirit, for neither
did the perverseness, and hypocrisy of Judas the Traitor, hinder him to excel
in the gifts of the Spirit: neither had the gifts of the Spirit been so
corrupted, 1 Cor. 14. if their hearts had been sincere, and estranged from all
wickedness. Peter therefore does not give the cause why Simon could not partake
of the gifts of the Spirit, as those do suppose, who do think by the name of
Preaching, to be signified by an Hebraism, the gifts of the Holy Spirit; but
why he could not obtain eternal life, promised in the Gospel, Preached by the
Apostles, because truly God is the searcher of hearts, who does not save any,
except the upright in heart; he sees his heart to be wicked and perverse, and
by crooked windings, or backgoings, to have turned from the sincerity of the
Gospel.

22. Repent therefore, etc. As if he should have said, If therefore thou will
be acquitted of that punishment which does abide for thee, repent forthwith of
thy wickedness; and having cast off all perverseness, and hypocrisy, do thou
uprightly, and sincerely direct all thy actions up to the rule of the Doctrine
of the Gospel Preached by us, and come to God, to entreat him that he would
mercifully pardon that guileful device of thy heart, to abuse wickedly the
gifts of his Spirit into profane gain. The Particle, if perhaps in this place
does not signify any doubt, but how much difficulty and labor Simon is to have
in entreating against the punishment of his wicked deed. Therefore, says
Calvin, Peter does not strike a fear upon Simon, that might subvert, or
overthrow this confidence of obtaining in his heart, or trouble him: but
causing unto him an undoubted hope, if he should beg it humbly, and from his
heart, only for the cause of stirring up of ferventness, puts him in
remembrance, that pardon for the hainousness of his offense was difficult. It
is necessary that our faith shine before us in going to God: even that it may
be the Mother of praying.

23. In the gall of bitterness, etc. Gr. (...). The Interpreters take (...) in,
with the Accusative Case for (...) in, with the Ablative, which elsewhere I
confess is necessary, whether it may be so here, I doubt; for (...) may contain
a Hebraism, as it is, Isa. 1. v. 31. and the strong shall be (...), for Tow,
that is, as Tow, and his work for a spark, that is, as a spark. 2 Cor. 6. v.
18. I shall be unto you (...), for a Father, that is, as a Father, and ye shall
be unto me, (...), for Sons and Daughters, that is, Sons and Daughters. So in
this place, Peter says more emphatically, that Simon is the pure gall of
bitterness, and a mere bond of Iniquity, then to be in the gall of bitterness,
and bond, or band of iniquity. As if he should say, I see thee wholly, how
great soever thou art, to abound with sins, and to be intang^ed almost with
inextricable vices. In the words of Peter there are two very elegant Metaphors,
whereof the first seems to be taken out of Deuteronomy. 29. v. 18. and 32. v. 31. the
other out of Isa. 58. v. 6. See the like phrases, 2 Timothy 2. v. 26. and Heb. 12.
v. 15.

24. Pray ye to the Lord for me. Simon did feel that he was such within as
Peter did say. Therefore when he did judge Peter, and his fellow John, to be
signally honored with grace, and love by our Lord Jesus, and to be dear unto
God, he will use their prayer, as they did use Jobs Prayer, who did injure him.

That none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me. To wit, above, v.
20. but although one only Peter is faid to have spoken, John, notwithstanding
did approve of his words, or spoke like to them. Now, says Calvin, a Question
does arise, what is to be thought of Simon? The Scripture leads us no farther
then unto a conjecture, that he yields unto the rebuke, and being touched
with the sense of his sin, fears the judgment of God, afterward betakes
himself unto the mercy of God, and commends himself to the Prayers of the
Church. These being certainly not the least signs of penitence, therefore we
may conjecture he did repent. And notwithstanding the Ancients with one consent
do write that he was a grievous Adversary to Peter afterward, and that he did
dispute with him three days at Rome. There is a written disputation that goes
under the name of Clement, but which contains such unpleasant dotings, that it
is a wonder Christian Ears can bear it. Afterward Augustine shows unto
Januarius, that there were diverse, and fabulous reports spread about that
matter in his time at Rome: wherefore there is nothing safer then having
renounced uncertain Opinions, simply to embrace what is written in the
Scripture. What elsewhere we have read written concerning Simon, may deservedly
be suspected for many Causes. Epiphanius counts it among the Heresies of
Simon, that he said the Old Testament was from an evil God; when,
notwithstanding a great many other Fathers do write of him, that he did say
that he himself was the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and in the Person
of the Father, he did give the Law to the Jews upon Mount Sinai, and that he
did appear in the Person of the Son in the time of Tiberius, and did suffer an
imaginary death, and that afterward he did descend in fiery Tongues in the
Person of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles: and that Christ neither did come,
nor did suffer any thing by the Jews. Again, others do write that he did teach
that he himself was God, and descended in Samaria as the Father, and did appear
to the Jews as the Son, in the rest of the Nations he did descend as the Holy
Ghost. Ignatius unto the Trallians, calls Simon Magus, The first begotten Son
of the Serpent, Apol. 2. ad Antoninum.
that was the Prince of Wickedness. Justin Martyr tells us that at Rome, in
the Island of Aesculapius in the River of Tiber, betwixt the two Bridges, that
the same Simon was rewarded with a Statue, and Altar, having this Inscription
in Latin letters, To Simon the holy God. Photius says that Simon did carry an
Image of Christ about him, in his Epist. 38. Epiphanius Haer. 21. tells us
that he brought in the Worship of Images. We may see in Beda, in the fifth Book
of his History of England, chap. 28. that a certain kind of shaving was
invented by him. Haer. 39.
From him, says Austin, did come the Angelicks, so called, because they did
Worship Angels Religiously, whom the Apostle rebukes, Col. 2.18. The which
Heresy, Theodoretus, writes, that it did arise in the Apostles time, on the
cited place of the blessed Paul: and that the thirtieth Canon of the Council of
Laodicea, is to be understood concerning the same Heretics, who in the same
Country of Asia did build Oratories to Saint Michael the Archangel. From him
did also proceed the Collyridians, who did Worship Christ's Mother with Divine
Honor, witness Epiphanius. Simon did say that how many soever believed in him,
do not fear the threats of the Law, but act whatsoever they act as Freemen:
for they were not to obtain Salvation by good Works, but by Grace. Theodoretus
declares that of him in his abridgment of Heresies. It is manifest out of
Origens Book against Celsus, that the Simon his Disciples did deny Jesus to be
the Son of God, and the same Origin in his sixth Book against Celsus, testifies
unto us that he did shun Martyrdom, and without difference Worship Idols. The
same Simon is reported to have had for a Companion of his Crimes one Selene,
that is, the Moon, or as others call her Helen, a Harlot of Tire, whom after he
had taken out of the Custom-house, that he might commend her to all, as Numa
Pompilius his Egeria, he did call her Goddess, the Holy Spirit, and Divine good
pleasure, and did affirm that of her he did beget Angels, and that the Trojan
War in time past was undertaken for her, who is that lost sheep whom he came
down from Heaven for to seek, having disguised his form of God, that the Angels
that are over every one of the Heavens, might not know him. Let the belief of
all these, and other things, which are reported of Simon, lie upon the Authors
Credit.

25. And they indeed. To wit, Peter, and John, who were lately sent thither
from Jerusalem.

Testified, and Preached the Word of God. As if he should say, After they had
faithfully uttered what things they had learned from our Lord Christ, that the
sure Authority of the Gospel Doctrine, Preached by Philip the Deacon, might
continue, and flourish, as a well witnessed, and authentical Verity. Hence it
is manifest therefore, that not only Peter, and John came down to Samaria, from
Jerusalem, that they might enrich the Samaritans with the gifts of the Holy
Spirit, but also that they might establish them in the Faith they had even now
received, by approving of the Doctrine of Philip.

And Preached the Gospel in many Villages of the Samaritans. As if he should
say, They Preached the Gospel in many of the Towns of the Samaritans, through
which they went.

26. And the Angel, etc. Our Lord Jesus in his unparalled Clemency and Mercy
uses one of the Heavenly Messengers, who now are subject unto him since he is
gone into Heaven, 1 ^et. 3. v. 22. to communicate that knowledge that brings
Salvation unto men.

Spoke unto Philip. Viz. The Deacon, and now an Evangelist, who in Samaria
first Preached the Doctrine of Christ, and declared it to be true by Miracles.

Arise, etc. The Angel neither speaking any thing rashly, nor concealing any
thing craftily, expresses unto Philip whither he must go to try his Obedience,
shows him what Christ would have him to do; with what profit, and unto what end
he hides, and keeps it secret from him. So whosoever committing the success
unto the Lord, shall go wherever he shall command him, he shall find by
experience that it shall happily prosper, whatever thing he undertaketh at his
command.

Unto Gaza. Gaza is the pure Hebrew word, (...). This name signifies fortified,
strong. The LXX are wont to pronounce the letter Ain by g, and sometimes they
omit it, whence this City of Phoenicia is called Aza, or Gaza; in ancient times
it did belong to the Philistines, afterward to the Jews, for Juda took it,
Judges 12.18. afterward in process of time Alexander the great did vanquish
it, in besieging of which, he received a wound upon his Shoulders, as Arrianus
does write in his second Book concerning Alexanders expedition, whose situation
he does thus describe: Gaza is distant from the Sea about twenty furlongs, and
there is a sandy, and deep ascent unto it; and the Sea that is near the City,
is slimy; the City itself is great, and situated on a high hill, and compassed
about with a strong wall, it is the utmost inhabited to one that goes out of
Phoenicia, unto Egypt, at the entrance of the Wilderness. At length Alexander
King of the Jews, who also was called Janneus, 3 Antiq. 21.
Aristobolus Brother, did demolish it, witness Josephus. Samson, or Simson, of
old a Judge of the Hebrews, did make this City famous by his noble Acts, and
Death, Judge. 16. from the situation of this, the new Gaza is little distant, as
we learn by Justus the Hebrew, and Dominicus Marius Niger in his fourth Book.
It was called Constantia, in the time of Constantine the Great, from Constantia
his Sister, as Eusebius informs us in his Chronicle. From this Town were
Procopius Gazaeus, also Timotheus Gazaeus, who as Suidas writes, flourished
under Anastasius the Emperor. Nathan, the false Prophet, did arise in it about
the year of our Lord, 1666. who together with his false Messiah, Sebathai Sebi,
did deceive the foolish Jews, not those whom Titan of better clay their inwards
framed. Men, and more especially Fools, do believe what things they do desire.

This is desert. A Hebraism, that is, which is desert. Some refer this unto the
way, which in respect of the other way, leading to the same place was not very
common, for the Wilderness of Mount Casius lies between them, as Strabo does
write in his sixteenth Book. Others rather unto the ancient Gaza, which
remained desert from Jamneius, or Jannaeus his time. Strabo, who flourished
about the time of Tiberius, bears witness that this Gaza was not inhabited
about the time Luke wrote these things; in that notwithstanding he was
deceived, that he did think it remained desert from the time of Alexander the
great.

27. And he arose and went, etc. As if he should say, Being about to obey the
voice of the Angel, he went presently whither he was commanded.

And behold a man of Aethiopia. That is, a certain Man of Aethiopia, which, as
it is thought, is now called the Kingdom of the Abyssines. Zaga Zabo, Bishop of
the Abyssines, in Damianus a Goes, We, says he, did receive Baptism almost
before all other Christians, from the Eunuch of Candace, Queen of Aethiopia,
whose name was Indich. Irenaeus in his third Book, chapter 21. Eusebius in his
second Book, chapter 1. Hier. on Isa. 51. testify, that the seeds of the Gospel
were sown by this Eunuch among the Aethiopians, and were afterward adorned, and
farther spread abroad among them by Matthew the Evangelist.

An Eunuch. This Greek name is derived from (...), which signifies a Bed, and
(...), I have: which signifies a Groom of the Chamber, but because truly they
who were set over the Nursery of Women, as the keepers of the Women's Bed, were
commonly gelded; by this name were all called, whose Stones were cut off,
wounded, or bruised, which are as the witnesses of Manhood. Nature has denied
the use of Venery to this sort of men, for their too great coldness. The Kings
of Persia made use of Eunuchs, and Stephanus also naming a certain Village of
Persia, called Spada, in which the custom of gelding began. Terence also is a
sufficient enough witness in his second Scene of the first Act of his Comedy
Eunuchus, that Eunuchs were wont to be used in the service of Queens. Thou
said moreover that thou would have a Eunuch, because Queens alone make use
of those; I have found one. Therefore if that Ethiopian was gelded, that was
fulfilled in him, which Isaiah did foretell, chapter 56. v. 4, and 5.

Powerful. Gr. (...). Cicero uses this Greek word in his eleventh Philippic
Oration, Seneca in his Thyeste. It is rendered by Tertullian in his Book
concerning the Resurrection of the flesh, Potentator, that is, a Man of great
Authority.

Under Candace Queen of the Aethiopians. Pliny in his sixth Book of his natural
History, chapter 29. says that Candace was a common name to all the Queens of
Aethiopia, which had passed unto them for many years since. Ludovicus de Dieu
says, That this Queens proper name was called Lacasa, the Catalogue of the
Ethiopian Kings does affirm it; which Marianus Reatinus does subjoyn unto his
Grammar; although little credit be to be given unto that Catalogue, because it
is stuffed very full of Fables and Trifles.

Who had the charge of all her Treasures. The Greek word is thought to be a
Persian word, signifying Riches, moveable Goods, a common Treasure, and
whatsoever thing we possess. That Eunuch then was the Keeper of the Queens
Money, or principal Officer of the Queens Treasure, which is wont to be called
Treasurer. The Ethiopian Interpreter adds, that this Eunuch was Governor of
the City of Gaza.

And had come to Jerusalem for to Worship. This Eunuch had come to Sacrifice to
the true God into the place Consecrated by the Law to his solemn Worship, being
either a Jew by descent, although born in Aethiopia, or a Proselyte; for
Cornelius was the first fruits of the Uncircumcision, below, chapter 10.

28. Was returning, etc. As if he should say, And after the Sacrifices were
ended at Jerusalem, he was incontinently carried home again into Aethiopia in
his own Chariot, and was reading in the Prophet Isaiah. It is an excellent
pattern of Godliness, that so great a Potentate did, even while he was in his
Journey, earnestly read the Holy Scriptures, although he was but a Layman, as
they commonly call it, and a Politician. For the reading of the Holy Scriptures
is even commended to those, as Deu. 17. v. 18, and 19. Josh. 1. v. 8.

29. Said, etc. As if he should say, But the Holy Spirit did speak these words
to Philip within, Go near unto the Chariot, and join thy self to its side.

30. Running thither, etc. As if he should say, Philip having cheerfully obeyed
the Holy Spirit, took an opportunity to reveal the truth of the Gospel unto him
from the reading, whereunto he did see the Potentate earnestly bent.

31. And he said how can I, etc. He speaks not of any testimony of Scripture,
nor of things commanded and forbidden, which are clear of themselves, and that
stand in need of no explication; but concerning mystical Prophecy, which as
long as it is not accomplished, or although the accomplishment be come, being
unknown to any, is not well enough understood; but if an interpretation be made
upon the present accomplishment, by a Man filled with the Spirit of God, the
Prophecy is very easy to be understood, even as this Potentate did know, and
perceive presently the meaning of a very abstruse, and hard place, once only
proposed to him by Philip. Nobly, 2 doct. Christ. 6.
says Augustine, And profitably has the holy Spirit so modified the holy
Scriptures, that by very clear places he might satiate our hunger, by the more
dark rub off our contempt or loathing; there is almost nothing searched out of
these obscurities, which may not be found plainly spoken elsewhere. Therefore
in explaining the obscurer places of Scripture, the more learned are to be
consulted, who are much exercised in them; but they are so to be consulted,
that they may make plain and evident to those that consult them, that their
exposition is the genuine and true sense of the Scripture, but not impose upon
their consulters to yield to their interpretation before they have tried it.
For here Philip did inquire of the Potentate, whether he did sufficiently
understand what he did read; we must therefore know, and understand those
things which we are to believe.

And he desired Philip, etc. Great was the Modesty, and Humanity of this
Potentate; who not only suffered himself patiently to be enquired at by a
stranger, and mean born man, as it did appear, but did confess his ignorance
frankly, and freely, did invite him most lovingly to come up into his Chariot,
to sit, and confer with him, and to expound unto him the Scriptures that he did
not understand.

32. The place. Gr. (...), from the Greek Verb (...), which signifies I
contain, or embrace, that is, a sentence comprehended, or shut up in a full
compass and measure of words, which they commonly call a section or period.

As a Sheep, etc. The meekness, and patience of Christ, when he was to die, to
purge away the sins of men, is described by the similitude of a Sheep and a
Lamb, taking patiently their shearing, and slaughter itself, when the most part
of other Creatures, while they are led unto the slaughter, use to cry out, and
wrestle against it.

So opened he not his mouth. As if he should say, So he who, John 18. v. 6.
overthrew a great band of Men by one word, when he was taken, and led away, was
bound, beaten with Whips, nailed to the Cross, did not threatningly complain,
or speak angry words. See 1 Pet. 2. v. 23.

33. In his humility. (Gr. in his humiliation) his judgment was taken away.
That is, by a base and detestable wrong, or oppression of him, he was
condemned, and delivered up unto death against all Law. The Hebrew has, Isa.
53. v. 8. He was taken from straining and judgment. That is, after he was bound
by the wicked Sedition of the Jews, and condemned by the sacrilegious voice of
Pilate, he was lifted up upon the Cross. See John 3. v. 14. and chap. 12. v. 32
and 33. the LXX seem to have read in the Hebrew Text, (...), instead of (...).

His generation, etc. As if he should say, Who can express in words the
wickedness of that Generation wherein he lived, who did proceed to so great a
wickedness, and ungodliness, that undeservedly they did condemn him with a
cruel death. These words, and such like are frequent among the Jews, says
Lightfoot. Midras Schir. fol. 173. In the Generation in which the Son of David
shall come, the Synagogue shall be a Brothel House, Galilee shall be destroyed,
and Gablan shall be wasted. -- The wisdom of the Scribes shall be corrupted,
good and merciful Men shall fail, and Truth itself shall cease, and the face of
that Generation shall be as the face of Dogs. -- R. Levi says: That the Son of
David shall not come, but in a Generation in which there shall be impudent
Faces, and which shall deserve destruction. R. Jannay says: When ye shall see
Generation after Generation, railing, and blaspheming, then look for the feet,
that is, the coming of the King Messiah. Thus far famous Lightfoot.

' For his life shall be taken from the Earth. Heb. Isa. 53. v. 8. Because he
was cut off from the land of the living. That is, They slew him most
undeservedly with an untimely and violent death. See Daniel 9. v. 26. Luke 23.
v. 31. These words of the Prophesy are put in the Preterperfect Tense, whereas
they have the signification of the Future. The Jews did understand excellently
well from these things Prophesied here by Isaiah, that the Messiah should
suffer pains, straits, reproaches, finally a violent death, and shameful
punishment; but when they did know for a certainty by the predictions of the
Prophets, that both the highest Honors were prepared for him, and the greatest
Power, and a Kingdom also, they do suppose they can marvellously well prevent
the discrepancy of the Prophesies, in which the 2 comings of Christ are
predicted, the one humble and base, the other Noble and Honorable, if so be
they can devise two Messiahs, the one to come of that ancient Joseph, the Son
of Jacob, by Rachel, which Messiah should be called Nehemias, the Son of Uziel;
that this should be unhappy, and appointed to miseries, and a bloody death, in
fighting against the wicked, and monstrous Armillus; that the other should
spring of the Lineage of David, and be the rest^rer of the Kingdom of Israel,
and abound in glory, and gather the dispersed in Israel, by whom the Messiah
Son of Joseph is to be raised unto life again, after that God has discomfited
Armillus, and all Armillus's Army with fire and brimstone sent down from
Heaven. This Doctrine, says Huetius, eminent in every sort of Learning, is
delivered in the 6th Book of the 2d part of the Talmud, which is concerning the
Feast of Tabernacles, chap. 5. and the same Doctrine is found both in Berescith
Rabba, and in R. David Kimchi, and Aben Ezra, and R. Makir in his Aromatic
Powder, and in a great many later Rabbis. In which it is mavelous to think
how great an Error has deceived them. There is prophesied one Messiah, his
two comings; they look for two Messias's, one coming. Of the which fiction of
theirs, if any shall enquire a reason from them, they will either give none, or
a foolish one. They allege these words of Isai. 32. v. 20. Blessed are ye that
sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet of the Ox and the Ass.
They expound that sowing to be Money given to the Poor, which, who shall give,
they say he is worthy of Elias, and both the Messias's: They think Elias is
noted by the word immittentes, that send forth, because it is written in Malac.
4. v. 5. Behold, I will send Elias the Prophet. They expound the foot of the Ox
to be the Messiah, that is to come of Joseph, because Moses being near to
death, spoke of Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33. v. 17. His Beauty is like the Firstling of
his Bullock: but they expound the Ass to be the Messiah Son of David, whom
Zacharias did predict, chap. 9. v. 9. That he should be poor, and carried on a
she Ass. It is tedious to me to rehearse those trifles, which, notwithstanding
are to be found in Berescith Rabba; but it is profitable to know the madness of
this Sect thoroughly. The later Rabbis should have been ashamed to grow wise.
Therefore they follow the Authority of their Fathers: but even this very self
same Testimony out of Berescith Rabba reproves their Error, where they
acknowledge out of the Prophesy of Zacharias, that the Messiah Son of David is
to be poor. Therefore Aben-Ezra acknowledges himself to be ignorant whether
Zacharias does point at the Messiah there or not: Whereas Saadias Gaon will
have Zacharias to Prophesy there of that Messiah, to whom Daniel, chap. 7. v.
14. promises Power, Riches, and an eternal Kingdom. The other place of Moses,
in which Joseph is compared unto a firstling Bullock, and which they do
attribute unto the Messiah Son of Joseph, is applied unto the Messiah Son of
David, in the Midrash Thehillim. The Jews say that Jacob did Prophesy these
words concerning the Messiah Son of David, Genesis 49. v. 10. Till he come who is
to be sent, and he shall be the expectation of the Nations. And these words,
Psalm. 71. v. 17. And all the Tribes of the Earth shall be blessed in him; all
Nations shall magnify him: but in the Book of the Talmud, entitled Sanhedrin,
the same Testimonies are referred unto that Messiah, of whom Isaiah spoke,
chap. 53. v. 4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows. R.
Selomon Jarchi in his Expositions upon the Gamara of Sanhedrin, and R. Moses
Alschech say, that the 53d Chapter of Isaiah belongs unto the Messiah Son (...)
David, in which are told the griefs, reproaches, death of the Messiah, the
which opinion Ra. Isaac Abrabaniel retains in some places. This indeed does
teach that the Messiah Son of David, is signified in those words, which are,
Isai. 11. v. 3. and 4. He shall not judge after the sight of his Eyes, neither
reprove after the hearing of his Ears, but with Righteousness shall he judge
the poor. But the same Book of Sanhedrin teaches that the Messiah, whom Isaiah
foretells there, shall be punished by God. The Messiah that is sprung of
Ruth, is the self same that was the Nephew of David; notwithstanding we read in
Ruth Rabbathi, that a Kingdom, and Calamities are portended unto this Messiah
in these words, which are in Ruth 2. v. 14. Come hither, and eat of the Bread,
and dip thy morsel into the Vinegar. Therefore some Rabbis of no small Note do
agree that there is one only Messiah to come twice.

34. Answering. That is, Beginning to speak, or having begun. See our Literal
Explication, Mat. 11. v. 25.

Of himself. These things in some manner in a Typical sense may not badly be
understood of Isaias himself; who suffered many evils in Manasses's time. But
they are understood of another in a full and perfect sense, to wit, of Christ,
that suffered griefs, reproaches, and a bitter death, that he might give us
eternal Salvation.

35. And opening, etc. As if he should say, But Philip having begun a long
Oration from this place of Isaiah, which was before his hands, he took an
occasion to instruct the Eunuch about Jesus, in which this, and other
predictions of the Prophets are fulfilled in an excellent manner. He told him
that that Jesus who was born of the Family of David, born of a Virgin at
Bethlehem, and suffered a bitter death for our Offenses, was raised from the
dead, to sit at the right Hand of God the Father, whose only begotten Son he
is, and that none is to obtain eternal Salvation, but those who earnestly
repenting of their sinful condition, believe in Jesus himself, and obey his
precepts. And that those that do profess his Faith and Repentance, ought to be
dipped into the Water, according to Christ's appointment, that the remission of
sins may be sealed unto them by this holy dipping, which remission is freely
granted to every repenting sinner, when he does believe in Christ.

36. And as they went on their way. That is, while they went forward in the
Eunuchs Journey to Gaza from Jerusalem.

They came unto a certain water. Eusebius in his Book of Hebrew places, which
Hierom did translate and augment, says, Bethsur in the Tribe of Juda, or
Benjamin, and at this day is called Bethsoron, a Village to us in the twentieth
mile, as we Travel from Aelia to Hebron, near which there is a Fountain that
springs at the foot of the Hill, and is sucked up by the same ground in which
it arises. And the Acts of the Apostles do tell us that the Eunuch of Candace
the Queen was Baptized in this Fountain by Philip. And there is also another
Village called Bethsur, in the Tribe of Juda, distant a thousand paces from
Eleutheropolis.

See here is Water, etc. It does manifestly appear that the Eunuch among other
things was taught by Philip, that Baptism of Water was of necessity to be taken
by them, who repenting of their sinful life, do embrace the Faith of Christ, as
a Holy Rite appointed, and commanded by Christ himself, that it might be in
itself a figure of new life, and a seal of the remission of sins obtained
through Christ.

37. If thou believe. That the Eunuch is not permitted to be Baptized, unless
he had professed a sincere Faith in Christ, it does sufficiently enough declare
how truly great Basil has spoken in his Book on the Holy Spirit, chapter 12. Faith
and Baptism are the two means of Salvation, inseparably cleaving together; for
Faith is perfected by Baptism, but Baptism is founded by Faith, and by the same
names both things are fulfilled. For as we believe in the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit: so also we are Baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit: and indeed there goes before a Confession leading us unto Salvation:
but Baptism follows, sealing our Confession and Covenant. But the Covenant of
God is his promise of giving us eternal life, and our answer is our promise of
Worshipping God according to his will revealed to us. The same Churches Teacher
in his third Book against Eunomius: Baptism is the seal of Faith, Faith is the
confession of the Godhead: it is necessary we should first believe, then be
sealed with Baptism. According to this Rule of Scripture, and agreeing with
reason itself, the most part of the Greeks in all Ages, even unto this day,
retain a Custom of delaying Infant Baptism, till they themselves can give a
Confession of their Faith, as Grotius has noted on Matthew. 19. v. 13. But
especially the sixth Canon of the Synod of Neocasarea is to be observed, whose
words are as follows: Concerning a Woman with Child, that she may be Baptized
when she pleases; for her Baptism concerns not her Child. For every one is to
give a demonstration of his own choice in a Confession. For however the
Interpreters draw it to another purpose, it does appear that the question was
made of Women big with Child, because it did seem that the Child was Baptized
together with the Mother, which, notwithstanding, ought not, nor used not to be
Baptized, except of its own proper Election and Profession. And to this purpose
are the words of Balsamo: In Compen. can. tit. 4.
The unborn Babe cannot be Baptized; because it is not come into light, neither
can it have a choice of making Confession, which is required in Holy Baptism.
And Zonaras, The Babe will then need Baptism, when it can choose. But the Synod
does determine that Baptism of a Woman great with Child, does therefore rightly
proceed, because her Baptism concerns her alone, who can Confess what she
believes, and not the Child in her Womb. But that Synod of Neocaesarea was
held before the first Nicene Synod; For we read the name of Basil Bishop of
Amasia, subscribed to the Neocaesarean Synod, who suffered Martyrdom under
Licinius, as Eusebius writes in his Chronicle. Gregory Nazianzen in his 40th
Oration, which is upon Holy Baptism, treating of those who die without Baptism,
gives us an instance in those to whom Baptism was not administered, by reason of
Infancy. And the self same Nazianzen, though he was a Bishops Son, being a long
time bred up under his Fathers care, was not Baptitized, till he came to Man's
age, as he does teach us in his life. In like manner Basil the great, that was
born of very devout Parents, and instructed unto Godliness from his Childhood,
was not Baptized until he was a Man, if any Credit be to be given to his life,
that goes about under the name of Amphilochius. John of Antioch, called
afterward Chrysostom, was born of Christian Parents, as the truer opinion is,
Tutored by the famous Bishop Meletius, was yet not Baptized till he was one and
twenty years of age. Hierom also, Ambrose, and Austin, who were born of
Christian Parents, and consecrated to Christian Discipline, even from their
Childhood, were not Baptized before they were thirty years of age. Hence it
does manifestly appear, That the wisest of our Fathers in Christ did not come
unto Baptism, until they were come to a strong and confirmed wit and age; as
Jeremy Tailor, Bishop of Down, observes in the 12th Sect. of the life of
Christ, in the Sermon on Repentance, n. 20. Tertullian in his Book of Baptism,
chap. 18. gives advice to Infants to come unto Christ to be instructed, not to
be Baptized before they have understood the force of Baptism. Therefore, says
he, For the condition, and disposition, also age of every Person, the delaying
of Baptism is more profitable: yet chiefly about little ones. What need is
there of Sureties to be brought in danger, who even themselves may break their
promises through mortality, and be deceived by the increase of an evil
disposition? Indeed the Lord says, Do not ye hinder them to come unto me. Let
them come therefore while they grow to years, let them come while they learn,
and while they come, let them be taught. Let them become Christians, when they
are enabled to know Christ. Why does innocent age hasten to the remission of
sins? Men will deal more warily in worldly affairs, so that they who are not
trusted with an Earthly Inheritance, are trusted with an Heavenly: let them
know to ask for Salvation, that thou may appear to have given it to him that
desires. Ludovicus Vives affirms, None, In Aug. 1. Civ. 27.
except grown to Man, or Woman's estate, were wont to be Baptized. The famous
Bishop of Meaux, J. B. Bossuet in his French Treatise of the Holy Supper under
both kinds, pa. 127. As touching Infants, the pretended Reformed (so the
Papists in France do call the Protestants, who follow Calvin's Opinions,) say
that their Baptism is grounded on the Authority of the Scripture; but they
bring us no place out of it, expressly affirming it, and what consequences they
draw out of the same, they are very far fetched, not to say very doubtful, and
too deceitful. One nameless Person, a very learned Man, answering to the
Treatise of this learned Bishop, says, p. 92. As for the Custom of Baptizing
Infants, I confess we no where read any thing expressly, and particularly
written in the Gospel, from whence the necessity of Paedobaptism can be showed:
and that those places of the Gospel, by which it uses to be proved, at the most
do prove, that that custom of Baptizing of Infants is lawful, and permitted, or
rather not impermitted, or unlawful. If all the Anabaptists rested in that
Opinion, neither condemned that custom of wickedness, and sacrilege, reason
would be on their side, neither would they say any thing which should not be
founded on the common Principles of all Protestants. The Primitive Churches did
not Baptize Infants; the learned Grotius has made plain, and proved that in
his Notes on the Gospel. That does most plainly appear by the very Rite of
Baptizing, used in the Roman Church. For Baptism is to be asked, before the
Person to be Baptized enter into the Church, which the Surety does in the
Infants name; a clear and distinct Confession of Faith is required, which the
same Surety rehearses in the Infants Name; a renouncing of the World, its
Pomps, the Flesh and the Devil, is to be promised, which the Surety, or as they
call it, the Godfather promises for the Infant; Is not this a clear argument,
that of old, the Persons who were to be Baptized, asked themselves Baptism in
their own Name, of their own Choice, and profess their Faith, and were wont to
renounce their former life, to consecrate the remainder of their life in this
present mortal flesh to Jesus Christ? Curcellaeus says in his dissertation of
Original sin, number. 56. that the custom of Baptizing Infants, was brought in
without the Commandment of Christ, and did not begin before the third Age after
Christ was born, in the two former Ages no sign of it does appear. This Custom
being brought in, was much more frequent in Africa, then in Asia, and other
parts of the world, and with a certain greater opinion of necessity, unto which
they did fall, who did expound of Baptism, that of Christ, John 3. v. 5. Except
a man be born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, and as if it did also include Infants; whereas notwithstanding our Lord
Jesus speaks unto those that were come to age, only in the Person of
Nicodemus, and does declare how greatly they stand in need to be born again of
the spirit of water; that is, of the Spirit purifying their Hearts. Christ
indeed by this metaphor alludeth unto the Baptism of Water that was sometime to
be commanded by him, but did think only of the Baptism of Persons grown to
years of understanding, seeing he commanded, Mat. 28. v. 19. that those that
were to be Baptized, should first be instructed in the Faith. For it cannot be
that the Body receive the Sacrament of Baptism, except the Soul receive the
verity of Faith before hand, as Hierom has observed on that place of Matthew.
See what we have noted above, upon chapter 2. v. 41.

With all thy heart. That is, With an earnest desire of thy Heart, and an
unfeigned Faith. The Scripture, says Calvin, oftentimes takes the whole Heart,
for the sincere, and unfeigned Heart, unto which is opposed a double Heart. So
there is no need that we should imagine them to believe perfectly, who believe
with their whole Heart, when there may be a weak and samll Faith in him, who
notwithstanding shall have an upright Heart, and free from dissimulation. So it
is fit to take that which David glories of, that he does love the Lord with
all his Heart. Philip truly did first Baptize the Samaritans, whom as yet he
knew to be far distant from the mark. The Faith therefore of the whole Heart,
is that, which having lively roots in the Heart, nevertheless endeavors to
grow daily.

Thou may. Hence we may gather how absurd their Opinion is, who think that
by Baptism, Faith is produced in Infants new born, and destitute of the use of
all reason. For if Baptism cannot do it in those that are come to years, it can
much less do it in Infants. Neither can it be said, except very absurdly, that
they do believe in Christ, or in his Gospel, when there does not indeed appear
even the least shadow of Faith in them. They do not know their Parents by any
token, and know not what difference there is betwixt their right, and left
hand, how then are they able to understand the least thing of the mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven, which are the objects of our Faith? They do not consent
unto any human thing; can they then assent unto Divine things? They do frame no
resolution in their mind as yet, can they then frame that resolution of leading
their lives according to the Gospel? Neither is their Opinion much sounder, who
do not ascribe any act of Faith to Infants, but yet nevertheless attribute some
seeds of Faith. For what is that Seed? In the Seed lies hid the whole strength
and substance of the thing that is to arise from thence. Is there any such like
thing in Infants? Does this virtue show itself of its own accord in them, when
they grow? No truly, unless they be instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel.
But, Heb. 11.6.
they say, Without Faith it is impossible to please God, therefore we must
judge either that Infants have Faith, or that they are damned Eternally, if
they die in their Infancy. 7 institut. 8.
Famous Curcellaeus says, It is a foolish consequence, as if truly it did not
appear, that this, at all the rest of the precepts of the Gospel, belongs to
those that are grown to years only, and are capable of instructions, either of
Virtue, or of Vice, and that it does oblige them alone. Truly Faith is not more
necessary unto Salvation, than the observation of the rest of the precepts of
the Gospel, and to live after the Spirit, not after the Flesh. Since then
Infants can be saved without these, why not also without Faith? The holy
Scriptures do show, 2 Samuel 12. v. 18. that David's little Son, begotten of
Bethsheba by Adultery, died the seventh day after his birth. David did not
mourn for him being dead without Circumcision, who mourned for him before he
died. Ambrose says in his Funeral Sermon on the death of Valentinian, He did
weep that he might not be taken from him: but left off to weep after he was
taken away, whom he knew to be with Christ. And that ye may know that to be
true which I assert, he did weep for Amnon his incestuous Son, that was
murdered, be mourned for Absalom the parricide, when he was slain: he did not
think it needful to mourn for his innocent Son; because he knew that they died
for their wickedness, he did believe that this should live for his innocence.
This proof of St. Ambrose does show that that was no special privilege
revealed to David concerning that Infant; but that David did take that ground
of consolation from the common Law, which does comprehend all the Infants, at
least of Believers dying in their Infancy.

I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. As if he should have said, I
unfeignedly believe from my Soul and Heart that Jesus Christ is the only
begotten Son of the Eternal God, the Redeemer, and Doctor of the world,
promised in the Law and Prophets, who reconciled the Eternal Father to us by
the Sacrifice of his death, and swallowed up by the shining of his Gospel,
these sparks which did glister in the Old Testament, that whoever should hear
him, and should lead his life up unto the rule delivered by him, should obtain
Eternal Salvation by his Intercession and Merits. Hence it is manifest, That to
be Baptized in the name, or unto the name of Jesus Christ, is no other thing
then to be Baptized upon profession of Faith in Christ, without Hypocrisy, and
upon promise that he does embrace the Doctrine revealed by him in the
Scriptures, with an earnest desire of heart, and will reform and correct his
manners according to it.

38. And he commanded the Chariot to stand still. That is, And he commanded the
Chariot driver to stop the Chariot.

And they went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch. Both he
that was to Baptize, and he that was to be Baptized went down into the water,
because he ought not only to sprinkle him with water, but to dip him into the
water, Christ commanding (...), dipping, but not (...), sprinkling. The Roman
Order published with the Writers concerning Ecclesiastical Ceremonies; The
Presbyters enter into the Fountain within unto the water, and the Males are
first Baptized, and then the Females. Luther in his Latin Tom. 1. Printed at
Wittenburgh, fol. 71. concerning the Sacrament of Baptism; The name Baptism is
a Greek word, it may be turned a dipping, when we dip something in water, that
it may be wholly covered with water; and although that Custom be now altogether
abolished among the most part, for neither do they dip the whole Children, but
only sprinkle them with a little water, they ought altogether nevertheless to
be dipped, and presently to be drawn out again. For the etymology of the word
seems to require that. And the Germans also call Baptism Tauff, from deepness,
which they call Tieff in their Tongue, as if it were meet that those be dipped
deeply, who are Baptized. And truly if ye consider what Baptism does signify,
ye shall see the same thing to be required; for it signifies this, that the
old Man and our Nativity, that is full of sins, which is wholly of flesh and
blood, may be overwhelmed by the Divine Grace: therefore the manner of Baptism
ought to answer to the signification of Baptism, that it might show a sure and
plain sign of it. The same Tom. 2. in Latin, concerning Babylons Captivity,
fol. 79. The other thing, says he, which belongs to Baptism, is the sign or
the Sacrament, which is the dipping itself into the water, from whence also it
has its name: for, to Baptize in Greek, is to Dip, and Baptism is Dipping. For
it has been said, that signs are appointed according to the Divine Promises,
which resembled that thing which the words do signify, or, as the later writers
say, The Sacrament effectually signifies. And a little afterward: That the
Minister dippeth a Child into the water, signifies Death. That he again
brings him out of it, signifies life. So Paul expounds, Romans 6. And a few
words afterward: That therefore washing from sins is attributed to Baptism, it
is truly indeed attributed, but the signification is softer and slower then
that it can express Baptism, which is rather a sign both of Death and
Resurrection. Being moved by this reason, I would have those that are to be
Baptized, to be altogether dipped into the water, as the word does sound, and the
mystery does signify. John Bugenhagius Pomeranus, both a Fellow and Successor
in the Ministry of Luther at Wittenburg, whom Thuanus, and Zanchius witness to
have been a moderate, very godly and very learned Man, does affirm about the
end of his Book published in the German Tongue, in the Year 1542. That he was
desired to be a Witness of a Baptism at Hamburgh, in the year 1529. that when
he had seen the Minister only sprinkled the Infant wrapped in swathling
Clothes, on the top of the head, he was amazed: because he neither heard, nor
saw any such thing, nor yet read in any History, except in case of necessity,
in Bedridden Persons. In a general Assembly therefore of all the Ministers of the
Word that was convened he did ask of a certain Minister John Fritz by name, who
was sometime Minister of Lubic, how the Sacrament of Baptism was Administered at
Lubec? Who for his Piety and Candor did answer gravely, that Infants were
Baptized naked at Lubec, after the same fashion altogether as in Germany. But
from whence and how that peculiar manner of Baptizing has crept into Hamburg,
he was ignorant. At length they did agree among themselves that the Judgment of
Luther, and of the Divines of Wittenburg should be demanded about this point:
which thing being done, Luther did write back to Hamburg, that this sprinkling
was an abuse which they ought to remove. Thus plunging was restored at Hamburg.

Common Fonts, big and large enough, were in Ancient times fitted and
accommodated to dipping, in the which Fonts, by Conduits, or certain inferior
passages, the water overflowing upon the Baptized, did run away, as is manifest
even by this memorable History of Socrates, 7 Hist. Eccl. 17.
which we do here bring in. A certain Deceiver, a Jew by Nation, counterfeiting
himself to be a Christian, was oftentimes Baptized, and by this sort of Cheat
had scraped together much money. When he had deceived many Christian Sects by
this Craft, for he had been Baptized both by the Arrians and Macedonians:
having none more whom he could deceive, at length he came to Paul Bishop of the
Novatians: and affirming that he had an earnest desire to be Baptized, he
prayed the Bishop that he would be pleased to Baptize him himself. He indeed
praised the Jews will and desire, but did deny that he could give him Baptism,
before he had been instructed in the principles of Faith, and besides all this,
had fasted many days. But the Jew, who contrary to his wish or expectation was
compelled to fast, did so much the more urge that he might be Baptized. The
Bishop therefore not willing to offend him with a longer delay, when he
pressed, and urged him to it, prepares the things that are necessary to
Baptism. And when he had bought a white Garment to the Jew, and commanded the
belly of the Font to be filled with water, he brought the Jew thither, as if he
were going to Baptize him. But a certain secret virtue and power of God made
the water suddenly to vanish. But when the Bishop, and those who were present,
suspecting nothing of what then was done, they did think that the water ran out
by some secret passage underneath, where it was wont to be let out, they fill
the belly of it again, after they had carefully stopped all the passages. And
when the Jew was brought again to the Font, the water did again altogether
vanish. Then Paul said, Either O Man thou deceivest, or has unknowingly
received the Sacrament of Baptism before. When therefore a great many men
flocked together to see this Miracle, one that knew the Jew, found him to be
the self same man that was Baptized before by Bishop Atticus. Hereto belongs
also what the Maidenburg Centuriators do relate of Rathold. 8 Cent. 6.
In the Year of the Lord, say they, 718. Rathold, General of the Frisians, was
brought unto this by the Preaching of Bishop Vulfran, that he was to be
Baptized. When he had entered into the Font with one foot, drawing back the
other foot, asked where the most part of his Ancestors were? Whether in Hell,
or in Paradise? And hearing that more were in Hell, drawing back his foot that
was in the Water, It is better, says he, that I follow the greater part then
the fewer. And being so deceived by the Devil, promising that he would give him
three days hence matchless gifts, the self same third day he perished with a
sudden and eternal death. Sigebertus. Henry of Erford does relate the same out
of the Acts and Monuments of Vulfran, chap. 26. Bergomensis says that 'twas in
the year 729. Hither also pertains the History of Constantine, who from hence
got the Surname of Copronymus, because when he was Baptized in his Infancy, he
defiled the waters of the holy Font with the Excrements of his Belly, in the
Year of Christ 720. We have a like example in the Emperor Wenceslaus, the Son
of Charles the Fourth, who was born at Norinburg the 28th of September, in the
Year M.CCC.LXI. For he also is reported to have defiled the water with his
Dung, when he was Baptized. Moreover it is reported that while the water that
was to be applied to the Baptism of Wenceslaus, was warming, the Pastors house
by Saint Sebald, was set on fire, and burned out. Which things certainly could
not happen, if both the Copronymus's, the one in the West, and the other in the
East, had been sprinkled, and poured with a little water, being wrapped up in
their swaddling Bands and Clouts. About the end of the eleven hundredth Year
after the birth of Christ, Odo, Apud Andream S. Michaelis Abbatem in Othonis
Actis lib. 2. c. 15.
or Otho, Bishop of Banberg, who first Preached the Gospel to the Inhabitants
of Pomerania, as Suffridus his assisting Presbyter does witness; When there
were three Fonts built, he did so order, that he himself should Baptize the
Male Children alone in one of the Fonts, and the rest of the Priests, the Women
apart, and the Men apart, What manner of Fonts these were, and after what
fashion all were Baptized, is declared there after this manner: The good Father
caused the Administration of the Sacrament to be done with so much diligence,
also with so great neatness and honesty, that nothing undecent, nothing to be
ashamed of, nothing ever might be done there, which might not please any of the
Gentiles. For he commanded very big Hogsheads to be dug a little deep into
the Earth, so that the mouths of the Hogsheads did stand above ground unto the
height of a man's knee, or less, which being filled with water, it was easy to
descend into them. And he caused Curtains to be hanged about the Hogsheads upon
small Pillars set up, and Cords put into them, that each Hogshead might be
enclosed all about with a Vail in manner of a Circle: But a linen Cloth did
hang upon a Cord put through it, before the Priests, and his Fellow Ministers,
who stood on the one hand, to Administer the Sacrament, that so all things
being very modest on every side, there might not be any thing censured as folly
or filthiness in the Sacrament, lest the honester sort of Persons should
withdraw themselves from the Sacrament of Baptism for shame sake. The Author
proceeds, and declares the thing yet more clearly in this manner. When
therefore all did come to be Catechized, the Bishop speaking unto them all,
commonly with a speech that did agree to such, and setting one sex over against
another, on the right hand, and on the left, anointed the Catechized with Oil:
afterward bids them go from the Font. Therefore they coming unto the
entrance of the Curtain, they one by one only did enter in with their
Godfathers, and presently the Godfathers did receive the Garment, with which
the Person to be Baptized was clothed, and the Taper, when he went down into
the water, and they holding it before their face, until they did restore it
again to him, when he came out of the water. But the Priest, who did stand at
the Hogshead, when he had rather heard, then seen, that there was some body in
the water; having removed the Vail a little, with thrice dipping of his head,
did perfect what belonged to the Sacrament of Baptism, and when he had anointed
him with liquor of Chrism on the Crown of the Head, and a white Garment being
put on him, and when he had drawn back the Vail, he commanded the Person that
was Baptized, to come out of the water, his Godfathers covering, and putting on
him the Garment which they did hold. Neither did the diligence of Otho in the
Winter time, neglect to find out what was most convenient for the season, to
wit, he celebrated the Sacrament of Baptism in warm Baths, and in hot water
with the same neatness, and observation of Modesty with the Hogsheads set into
the Earth, and Curtains applied, Frankincense, and other odoriferous Species
sprinkling all things. This most accurate diligence of Saint Otho proves, that
the prudence of those Men was contrary unto all good order, who after a
thousand and three hundred years after Christ, did change Baptism, that is,
dipping appointed by Christ into Rhantism, that is, sprinkling brought into its
place with great boldness, lest those that were to be Baptized in cold
Countries and Seasons, if they should be plunged according unto Christ's
Commandment, might fall into diseases, or be chilly with cold; for the heating
of the water might be a sufficient remedy against this evil, or danger, as the
above quoted excellent Divine, and Reformer, John Bugenhagius in his
aforementioned German Book, does urge more at large. 'Anciently, (when Rhantism
was not yet substituted to Baptism) says the English Chrysostom of this Age,
Those who were Baptized, put off their Garments, which signified the putting
off of the body of sin; and were immersed, and buried in the water, to
represent the death of sin; and then did rise up again out of the water, to
signify their entrance upon a new life; and to these Customs the Apostle
alludes Romans 6. etc. Thus the very Reverend John Tillotson, D. D. Dean of
Canterbury, a Man of great liberality toward the poor (which I my self profess
with a grateful mind, that I have oftentimes had experience of it,) commended
by all good Men for the excellency of his Wit, the uprightness of his Mind, the
Purity of his Manners and Doctrine, in a grave and famous Sermon on 2 Timothy 2.
v. 19. Christians, says another Doctor in Divinity, who excels in every sort of
Learning, and zeal of true Piety, being plunged into the water in Baptism,
signifies their undertaking, and obliging themselves in a spiritual sense to
die, and be buried with Jesus Christ (which death and burial consists in an
utter renouncing, and forsaking of all their sins,) that so answerably to his
Resurrection, they may live a holy and godly life. So that Reverend Minister of
the Gospel, Edward Fouler, Canon of Gloucester, in his admirable Book concerning
the scope of the Christian Religion, does interpret the force of the words of
the Apostle, Romans 6.4. Deservedly therefore that most learned Anonymus
Protestant of France, who answers to that Tractate concerning the Communion
under two kinds, of my Lord James Benign Bossuet, the famous Bishop of Meaux,
says, page 24. and 25. It is most certain that Baptism has not been
Administered hitherto, otherwise than by sprinkling by the most part of
Protestants, but truly this sprinkling is an abuse. This Custom, which without
an accurate examination, they have retained from the Romish Church, in like
manner as many other things, makes their Baptism very defective. It corrupts
its Institution, and Ancient Use, and that nearness of similitude, which is
needful should be betwixt it and Faith, Repentance, and Regeneration. This
reflection of M. Bossuet, deserves to be seriously considered, to wit, that
this Use of plunging has continued for the space of a whole thousand and three
hundred years, that hence we may understand that we did not carefully, as it
was meet, examine things which we have retained from the Roman Church; and
therefore since the most learned Bishops of that Church do teach us now that
the Custom established by most grave arguments, and so many Ages, was first
abolished by her, this self same thing was very unjustly done by her, and that
the consideration of our duty does require at our hands, that we seek again the
Primitive Custom of the Church, and the Institution of Christ. The same person
there a little afterward: Tho therefore we should yield to M. Bossuet, that we
are convinced by the force of his arguments, that the nature and substance of
Baptism consists in dipping, what may he hope for from us, but that we
profess our selves obliged to him by no small favor, and thank him that he
has delivered us from error, when we greatly erred in this thing? And as we
are resolved indeed, to correct and rectify this error, so we desire earnestly
with humble prayer and supplication of him, that he would correct and mend that
error of taking away the Cup from the Laics coming unto the Holy Supper. Does
Monsieur Bossuet think that the Protestants will have a greater respect of that
Custom which they have found not to be lawful, and that by the most weighty,
and solid arguments, than of the institution of Jesus Christ, and that to let
Rome get an opportunity of boldly, and freely breaking the Laws of Christ by
the pernicious imitation of our example? Far be that wicked frame of mind from
them; they are straiter bound by the Authority of their Holy Master, then to
despise his voice, when his sound comes to their Ears. My Sheep follow my
voice, and again I do know my sheep. None, except Wolves lurking under a
Sheep-skin refuses, and turns from it. So far our most learned Anonymus,
which is most agreeable to his admonition unto the Papists barring the Laymen
from the Holy Cup, in the Preface of his forecited answer to the Treatise of
the Bishop of Meaux concerning the Communion under both kinds. There is no
place therefore for cogging in these things, for those that pretend the
specious Title of received custom for the days practice, when Jesus Christ and
his Gospel is not the Custom, but the Truth. From the beginning it was not so,
says the same Jesus unto them, who did object unto him the worst, and cursed
Custom of their Ancestors. when we shall be presented before the Judgment of
Christ, he will not judge his Disciples by Custom, but by the lively, and
effectual Word of his Gospel. Neither should any be taken with a vain hope of
framing an excuse from the Authority of the Church, because all the Authority
of the Church is from Christ, granted unto her for that intent and purpose,
that she might procure a Religious Obedience to his Laws, and Heavenly
Precepts, but not that she might break, repeal, and cancel them. Thus far the
Anonymus our Countryman, whose sound reasoning has made the Booksellers
generally suppose him to be Monsieur de la Roque, the most famous Pastor of the
Reformed Church which is at Rouan, whom his Writings do show to be inferior to
none in Godliness and Learning. Heidegger in his Historico-Theological Anatomy
of the Council of Trent, p. 2. upon the Canons of 21 Session, says, There is
in the Church no more power of changing the Rites of the Sacraments appointed
by Christ, than there is power of changing his Word and Law. For as this his
Word contains a sign audible, so those Rites do contain a visible sign of his
Divine Will. Let us shut up all therefore with that most Holy Martyr Cyprian,
in his sixty and third Epistle to Caecilius: Verily it becomes us to obey and
to do what Christ has done and commanded to be done, when he himself says in
the Gospel: If ye do whatsoever I command you, henceforth I will not call you
Servants, but Friends. And that Christ alone ought to be heard, the Father also
bears witness from Heaven, saying: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, hear ye him. Wherefore if Christ alone be to be heard, we ought not to
give ear to what another before us did think meet to be done, but what Christ
did first do, who is before all: for neither ought we to follow the Custom of
Men, but the Truth of God, seeing God speaks and says by Isaiah the
Prophet: Without cause they do Worship me, teaching the Commands and Doctrines
of Men. And again our Lord in the Gospel repeateth the self same thing, saying:
Ye reject the Commandment of God, that ye may establish your own Tradition.
Julius, the first Roman Bishop of this name, in his Epistle to the Bishops
through Egypt, and Paschal the second, in his Epistle to Pontius, Abbot of
Cluny, do check those who did give unto the people dipped bread for the
perfecting of the Communion, seeing that in the first celebration, and
institution of the Eucharist, Christ did give Bread and Wine apart unto the
Apostles, and Paschal does absolutely command that they should not depart from
that Custom in any thing, by a human and new Institution, the which Custom
Christ did keep and Commend. We may see the words of Julius in Gratian. De
consec. Did. 2. cap. cum omne.
God grant that in like manner all that are called Christians, and either
ignorantly, or simply by a human, and new Institution have changed Baptism, or
retained the change of Baptism dipping, that is, appointed by Christ into
Rhantism, that is, sprinkling, against the Apostolical, and Evangelical
Discipline observed by our Ancestors, by the space of a thousand and three
hundred years in all places, now having seen the light of the verity clearly,
may return unto the Root, and Original of our Lords Tradition, neither may
there be any other thing done by them henceforth, than what our Lord did first
for us, and did Command to be done by us in his Gospel. See what we have noted
above, chap. 2. v. 28.

And he Baptized him, To wit, Philip immersed the Eunuch into the Water,
according to Christ's Command.

39. And when they were come up out of the Water. As if he should say, But as
soon as the Eunuch had received of Philip Baptism, or the Sacred Dipping.

The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip. Some Copies have in this place, The
Holy Spirit came upon the Eunuch, but the Angel of the Lord caught away Philip.
As also Hierom has cited in his Dialogue of the Orthodox, and Luciferian, and
Grotius has noted after Erasmus, and Beza. If we do follow that, it will be
needful to acknowledge that without any laying on of hands, the Eunuch did
receive that extraordinary gift of the Holy Spirit, which Cornelius, with his
Household received also before Baptism, below, chap. 10. v. 44 and 47. Men did
believe of Elias disappearing of old, that he was caught away by the Holy
Spirit, and transported to some other place, 1 Kings 18. v. 12. and 2 Kin. 2.
v. 16. But if this be understood of an Angle, the same happened to Philip, as
the Writer of the last Addition unto Daniel, chap. 14. v. 35 and 38. believed
to have happened to Habakkuk the Prophet. But Philip was carried by the Spirit,
or by an Angel of the Lord, not out of the body, but in the body, as Paul
speaks, 2 Cor. 12. v. 2. The Eunuch seeing it, that he might be confirmed in
the faith in Jesus Christ, by that miracle that was added unto the Doctrine.

And the Eunuch saw him no more. The Christian Religion is said to have been
sown in Aethiopia by this Eunuch, when he returned thither, which Religion is
in some measure now retained by the Abyssines, though mingled with Errors, and
Jewish Ceremonies. See what I have observed above upon v. 27. and what I have
spoken concerning Aethiopia, upon Amos 9. v. 7.

But he went. Gr. (...). for. A reason is given why the Eunuch did see Philip
no more, to wit, Because he traveled in his Journey he had entered upon unto
Aethiopia, rejoicing in the knowledge of the Gospel, which he had attained unto
by Philips means, who was offered to him by a special Providence of God, but
now Philip was carried to another place, where there was need of his Ministry.

40. Was found. That is, did appear, and was seen. Esth. 1. v. 5. Who were
found. That is, were present. Exodus 35.23. With whom were found. That is, were,
or did appear. Mal. 2. v. 6. And iniquity was not found in his lips. 1 Pet. 2.
v. 22. Neither was guile found in his mouth, that is, it was not. We have the
Verb find, for to see, Genesis 4. v. 13 and 14. and elsewhere in many places. And
therefore, says Grotius, (...) is translated, by (...) to see, Jer. 23. v. 11.
and Lamen. 2. v. 9. Mat. 1. v. 18. She was found with Child. That is, she
appeared great with Child.

At Azotus. Gr. (...), with the Accusative for (...), with the Ablative, as
above, v. 23. Azotus, Heb. (...), was first subdued by Joshua, Josh. 11. and
15. afterward it was one of the Cities of the five Provinces of the
Philistines, famous for the Temple of Dagon, whereof there is mention made, 1 Samuel 5. v. 4. and by the death of Judas Macabaeus, who died about it, witness
Josephus, 12 Antiq. 19. where it is falsely read (...) for (...), as appears
from 1 Mac. 9.15. afterward Jonathan, the Brother of Judas Macabaeus took it,
and burnt it with the Temple of Dagon, 1 Mac. 10. v. 84. Josephus 13 Antiq. 8.
Thartan, General to Sargon, King of the Assyrians, took it of old, whom the
Hebrews do expound to be Sennacherib, Isa. 20. v. 1. It was a very strong
fortified City, for it sustained the Siege of Psammetichus, King of Egypt, by
the space of twenty nine years, by whom at length it was taken, as Herodotus
writes, Book 2. where he calls it a great City of Syria, because under Syria
was comprehended Palestina, Judaea, Phaenicia, and Idumaea. It was famous also
by the Arabian merchandise, whose Market Town it was, lib. 1. c. 10.
as Mela does report; also Ptolemy in his fifth Book of Geography, chap. 16.
Pliny 5. Hist. Not. chap. 14. have made mention of it. The Women of this City
are called, Nehe. 13. v. 23. (...), Azotides, whom the Jews took for Wives, and
their Sons did speak the language of Ashdod, as is manifest out of the same
Chapter, v. 24. Azotus is reported to be distant from Gaza, (concerning which
above, ver. 26.) forty Miles.

And passing through, etc. As if he should say, Having gone from Azotus to
Caesarea of Palestina, he did Preach the Gospel in all Towns, through which he
went even unto the end of his undertaken Journey. This Caesarea was at first
called the Tower of Strato, it was magnificently repaired by Herod the Great,
adorned with Porches and Temples; it was called by the same Herod Caesarea, in
Honor of Augustus Caesar, as Josephus witnesses, 15 Antiq. 13. It was
perfected the tenth year after it was begun, as the same Josephus tells us, 16
Antiq. 9. Eusebius Pamphilius owed his birth to this City, and was afterward
Bishop of the same. In like manner Acacius, (who lived in the time of the
Sophister Libanius) whose life we have in Eunapius Sardinius, and Procopius the
Rhetorician and Historian, Secretary of Belisarius Captain of Justinian the
Emperor's, and Fellow Companion of all his Wars, of which he wrote the History.
There was also another Caesarea different from this toward Paneas, which Mat.
16. v. 13. and Josephus, 20 Antiq. 8. is called Caesarea Philippi, it is called
by Ptolemeus in his fifth Book, chap. 15. Caesarea Panias, which King Agrippa
the younger, when he did enlarge its Territories, he changed its name, and in
honor of Nero, called it Neronias, as Josephus does write in the place even
now cited. See our literal explication, Mat. 16. v. 13.

CHAP. IX.
1. BUT Saul. Like a bloody Wolf. See what is spoken above, chap. 8. v. 13.

Breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the Disciples. A Greek phrase.
That is, From the bottom of his heart breathing out cruelty against the
Disciples of Christ. So Cicero said, Catiline raging with boldness, breathing
out wickedness, wickedly contriving the ruin of his Country.

Went unto the High Priest. That is, To the Prince of the highest Sanhedrin,
who perhaps as yet was the same Annas, of whom above, chapter 4.6.

2. And desired of him. As also of other Senators of that great Sanhedrin, as
may be seen below, v. 14. and chapter 22.5. and 26.12.

Letters. That is, Letters from the Senate.

To Damascus. (...), or as it is read, 1 Chronicles. 18.5. (...), Damascus, or
Darmascus, a most famous City of old, the Head, and Royal Seat of Syria
surnamed Damascena, as the most eloquent of the Prophets, Isaiah 7. v. 8.
witnesses. It was situated below Mount Hermon, from whence flowed two Rivers,
Amana, or Abana, and Parpar or Parphar, Which Stephanus Byzantius calls
Bardinis, the rest of the Greeks seem to call it Chrysorrhoas. Amana ran
through the midst of the City, but Parpar did glide without the City, as
Benjamin Tudelensis witnesses in his Itinerary. There is also mention made of
these two Rivers, 2 Kin. 5.12. See our literal explanation upon Amos 1.5. The
Builder of Damascus lies in the Grave of Antiquity, Ant. lib. 1. c. 7. toward
the end.
notwithstanding that Josephus said that Vz, the Son of Aram, and Grandson of
Shem built it. Jerome also in his questions upon Genesis, where he enumerates
the posterity of Shem, speaks as if he were of the same opinion. But a little
after speaking of Eliezer of Damascus, Abraham's Servant, he says there: They
say that by this man Damascus was both built and named. The same in the
beginning of his seventh book upon Isa. We read first the name of Damascus in
Genesis, who before Isaac was born in Abraham's house, and was esteemed his
Heir, if Sarah had not had a Son by the Promise. It is expounded either a kiss
of blood, or a drinker of blood, or the blood of hair Cloth. But if, says the
same Author upon Ezekiel. 27. Damascus be interpreted a drinker of blood, and that
Tradition of the Hebrews be true, that the field in which the Parricide Cain
slew his Brother Abel, was in Damascus, whence the place was marked with this
name; then Paul with just cause went to Damascus after the slaughter of Stephen
the first Martyr for Christ, that he might bring the Believers in Christ bound
to Jerusalem, that, to wit, he in the same place might imitate the deeds of
Cain toward Abels followers. Damascus bred a good many famous Men, among
which, Nicolaus Damascenus, a Peripatetick Philosopher is the chief, who among
other things did write an universal History of eighty Books, according to
Suidas, an hundred and twenty four according to Josephus, Lib. 6.
an hundred forty four according to Athenaeus, of which a few fragments are
remaining. He was very familiar with Herod the Great, also very much beloved of
Augustus Caesar, so that after him he called either Dates Nicolai, Lib. 14.
Lib. 8. q. 4. Lib. 13. c. 4. Lib. de virgin. and coel. Rhodigin Lib. 6. c. 5.
as it is in Aheneus, Plutarch Symposiac^n, Plinius, Isiodore in his Glosses,
Adhelmus, or a kind of Cake, according to Serenus Sammonicus, Hesychius,
Milesius, Photius, and Suidas. Joannes Damascenus was of this City, who of a
Jew became a Christian, in the year of our Lord 461. and another John Surnamed
Manzur, whom Suidas extols to the Skies, the Greeks being very Prodigal in
their own praise. lib. 2. de hist. graecis c. 24.
Although indeed, says Vossius, Damascenus was a most learned Man, and of
great Fame, yet in many things he was overcredulous. His Histories related in
his Sermons show this. Baronius does truly acknowledge that his Writings are of
very uncertain credit, and that he abounds with many fictions: Exercit. 13.
adver. Baron. sect. 38.
which opinion of his Casaubon confirms, where he remarked many and gross
Errors. In others of his writings he does not appear Judicious: as for examples
sake, when he tells us of Falconillaes Soul, that she by the Prayers of S.
Thecla; the first Martyr, was delivered from the punishments of Hell, although
she died in the Heathens Errors and Idolatry. Likewise where he says, that the
Soul of the Emperor Trajan was exempted from infernal punishments, by the
Prayers of Gregory the Great. Both which you may read in Damascenus, in his
Oration of those who dyed in the Faith. This man was a great defender of Images
against the Emperor L^o Isaurus, and his Son Constantine the fifth of that name
surnamed Copronymus; in a Synod of three hundred thirty eight Bishops,
convocated by the same Constantine, held at Constantinople, Anno Dom. 754.
which also was called the seventh Oecumenick Synod, he with Germanus, and
George, sometimes Patriarchs of Constantinople, was Condemned as an Idolater,
and Worshipper of Wood and Images, as appears from the Acts of that Synod,
which are inserted in the sixth Action of the Acts of the second Synod of Nice.
Amongst his own he was called Chrysorrhoas for his Eloquence. He dyed Anno Dom.
760. The Damascene Prunes are also famous, which were wont to be carried from
the City Damascus to Rome, together with small Figgs called Cottana, of which,
Juvenal Satyr 3. v. 85. By the way we may observe that this kind of small Figgs
was so called, as Hesychius witnesses in (...), from the Hebrew word (...)
little. Hence Martial says Elegantly. Lib. 13 Epigram. 28.
These Cottana, which have been sent to thee in a round turned Pannier, if they
were bigger, they would be Figgs. This name Cottana among the Cretians,
signified also a Virgin, as witnesses the same Hesychius, in the forecited
place, which is deduced from the same Root (...), little, to wit, Gi^le. If you
desire to know more of this most Ancient City, you may consult the Itinerary of
Benjamin Thudelensis, and Hoffmans universal Lexicon.

To the Synagogues. How great a multitude of Jews was at Damascus, De bell.
Jud. lib. 2. c. 25.
may be gathered from what Josephus says; that under Nero ten thousand Jews
unarmed, being by chance gathered in the public Baths, were there oppressed,
and slain by the Inhabitants of Damascus. It is very probable that many of the
Jews converted to Christ. did, to avoid the Persecution stirred up at
Jerusalem, fly to Damascus: therefore Paul not being content to have vexed them
at Jerusalem, he willingly undertook the pains to prosecute them thither. For
the Governor of Damascus, under Aretas the King of ^rabia the Stony, and
Damascus, was a great favourer, and abettor of the Persecutors of Christ's
Disciples, as appears from 2 Cor. 11.32.

That if he found any, etc. As much as to say, That a License, and liberty
might be given him to bring all such as he found Professors of the Christian
Religion, without difference of Sex, bound as Malefac^ors to Jerusalem. The
Romans, says Grotius, allowed the Sanhedrin the privilege of taking, and
beating, not only over the Jews of Palestine, but also without Palestine, where
there were Synagogues that willingly acknowledged the Jurisdiction of the
Sanhedrin in matters pertaining to Religion.

Of this way. That is, Of this Sect and Institution, as below, chapter 19.9 and 23.
chapter 22.4. chapter 24.14.

3. There shined round about him a light from Heaven. Like a lightning brighter
then the Sun, as may be seen below, chap. 22. v. 6 and 26. v. 13.

4. And he fell to the earth. Because he was struck, and as it were blasted
with the brightness of that light sent to him from Heaven.

He heard a voice. To wit, Descend from Heaven with that light.

Saying, To wit, In an Hebrew Dialect, as Paul himself says below, chapter 26.14.

Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me. Augustine says elegantly, as his manner
is. Tract. 10. in Epist. Joannis.
The Head being to ascend into Heaven, he commended his Members upon Earth, and
departed. Now you do not find Christ speaking upon earth. You find him speaking
but in Heaven, and from Heaven it self. Why? Because his Members were trod upon
on Earth. Therefore he said from above to Saul the Persecutor: Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? I ascended into Heaven, nevertheless I lie upon Earth, as
yet. I sit here at the right hand of the Father; there I am hungry, thirsty,
and a stranger as yet. See Matthew. 25.40, 45. and Luke 10.16.
Believers are the Mystical Body of Christ, and his Mystical Members; hence
whatever is done to them, Christ takes it as done to himself.

5. Who art thou Lord. As much as to say, Whose voice do I hear?

And the Lord said. As much as to say, Christ who wasin Heaven and spae from
Heaven itself, answered.

I am Jesus, etc. As much as to say, You hear the voice of that Jesus of
Nazareth, whom thou persecutest, while you pour out your rage, and storms of
your wrath upon my Servants.

It is hard. In Trucul. Act. 4. sc. 2. v. 55.
That is, It is a very troublesome and vain labor. If thou beatest the pricks
with thy fists, thou hurtest thy hands, says Plautus.

To kick against the pricks. The Greek and Roman Writers frequently use this
Proverb against such as attempt a thing that will happen ill to them. For if
Oxen being thrust and galled with the goad, while they draw the Plough or Cart,
should kick, while they would hurt the goad, they do but hurt themselves,
because as the Scholiast upon Pindarus, in the end of his second Pythia, says,
they are more sorcly stricken, and beating their heel against the sharp goad,
they are pricked again with its point. Therefore by this proverbial phrase the
Lord Jesus declares that Saul's wrestling against him was to his own great hurt,
so that if he desisted not from applying himself to ruin the Christians, it
would come to pass that he should dye a sad death.

6. And he trembling and astonished, etc. As much as to say, But Saul being
terrified with the brightness of the Heavenly light, and the voice which came
from Heaven, puts off his Wolf-like fierceness, and puts on a Sheep like
disposition, and also freely, and willingly gave himself to do the commands of
the great Shepherd of Souls whom he lately despised. For the Lord Jesus sends
him to the City of Damascus, that he might there be taught of him what he
himself would have him do, to whom he should commit that charge from Heaven.

And the men which journied with him. That is, They who were Paul's Companions
in his Journey to Damascus.

Stood speechless. That is, Being astonished at the strangeness of this
admirable thing, they stood unmoved, or that I may use Virgils phrase, they
stuck immovable to the ground. To stand here denotes not a posture of the
body, but a mere staying, and is opposed to going forward, not to lying
prostrate, seeing below, chapter 26.14. that Paul's Companions fell upon the Earth.
So Genesis 19.17. Neither stay thou in all the plain, that is, do not tarry nor
delay. Lev. 13.37. If the scall be at a stay, that is, spread no farther.

Hearing a voice. To wit, Sent from Heaven, which beat upon their Ears,
although, as it is said below, chapter 22.9. they understood not the meaning and
signification of the words; either because they were not skilful in the Hebrew
Dialect, wherein Christ spoke to Saul, as may be seen below, chapter 26.14. or
because they indeed heard the sound of the voice, but in the mean time did not
exactly take up the words of that sound. They heard, says famous Lightfoot,
(...), a voice, but they heard not (...), a word. The like happened, Jo 12.29.
Therefore to hear, below, chap. 22.9. is put for to understand, as Genesis
11.7.42.23. Deuteronomy. 28.49. 2 Kings 18.26. Isaiah 36.11. Jer. 5.15. and 1 Cor.
14.2 and 21.

But seeing no man. Although they lifted up their Eyes to Heaven, whence the
voice came, that they might see who spoke to Saul. This, says Beza, is the
force of the word (...) in this place. For otherwise it were no wonder that
they saw none, who being struck with fear, durst not lift up their Eyes. Saul
only saw him, who spoke to him, as Dan. 10.7.

8. And Saul arose from the earth. The Greek has it, he was raised up, as
Daniel was. Dan. 8.18.

And when his Eyes were opened, he saw no man. That is, His Eyelids, which
were shut, being separated, he saw nothing at all, because his Eyes were dazzled
with the great brightness of that Heavenly light which shone round about him,
v. 3. as appears from the verse immediately following, and v. 12, 17 and 18.
and below, chapter 22.11.

But they led him by the hand. As blind men are usually led. So Saul, who
intended to lead the Disciples of Christ bound from Damascus to Jerusalem, he
himself is led, as it were, bound to Damascus.

9. And he was three days without sight. It is probable that in these three
days wherein he was deprived of his bodily sight, the Lord Jesus did make known
to him the Doctrine of the Gospel by internal visions, that he might truly say,
that he did not receive, nor learn the Gospel from any mortal man, but Jesus
Christ, who sits at the right hand of the Father, revealing it to him, Gal.
1.12.

And neither did eat nor drink. Esth. 4.16.
As the Jews of old, for three days. This he did, partly to give an outward
testimony of his inward repentance for his former doings, partly to be excited
to pray with fervency. Adv. Psych.
For Tertullian says well, We are much more powerful in spirit, and lively in
heart for spiritual things, while fasting, then when that dwelling house of the
inner man is stuffed with Food, and overwhelmed with Wine. The Jews were
forbidden to drink upon that day wherein they fasted: so that it was accounted
a breach of their Fast, if they should swallow a drop of Wine or Water. They
allowed one to wash his mouth, and wipe it, provided he did spit it out again.
As may be seen in (...), in the Treatise of a Fast. They except from this
concession, that fast which they keep upon the day of pardon, which they call
Jom Kippur, and upon the ninth day of the fifth month, which they call Ab; upon
these days they think it not lawful to wash the mouth.

10. And there was a certain Disciple. Oecumenius calls this Ananias a Deacon,
and thinks him to have been one of the LXX Disciples who adhered to Jesus
Christ, while he was conversant upon Earth, next to the Apostles. Augustine
will have him a Presbyter. Dorotheus writes that afterward he was made Bishop
of Damascus.

In a vision. Divinely excited. See what we have said above, chap. 2.17.

Behold I am here, Lord. An Hebraism, That is, I am ready to receive, and do
thy commands.

11. Go into the street which is called Straight. That is, Into that street of
Damascus, which is called Straight, the Greeks call it Euthia, perhaps because
it was plainer, and straighter than any other street of that City.

Of Tarsus. That is, Born in Tarsus, that most famous City of Cilicia. See
below, chap. 21.39. and chapter 22.3.

For behold he prays. Luke shows that Saul during his three days fast, was
continually taken up in praying.

12. And he has seen a vision. To wit, Saul with the Eyes of his mind. They
are the words of Luke, telling that Saul saw Ananias laying his hands upon him
at that very time, wherein the Lord spoke to Ananias concerning Saul. It is a
vision, says Macrobius, when one sees that which falls out in the same manner
that it appeared to him. Suetonius in the life of Augustus: M. Cicero having
pursued C. Caesar into the Capitol, by chance told his former nights dream to
his intimates, that a Child of a comely countenance being let down from Heaven
in a golden Chain, stood at the door of the Capitol, and that Jupiter gave him
a scourge: afterward having on a sudden seen Augustus, whom, as yet being
unknown to the most part of them, his Uncle Caesar had called to the Sacrifice,
he affirmed it to be him, whose Image appeared to him in his sleep. In the same
place a little before, of Q. Catulus: And the next day having met Augustus
being otherwise unknown to him, beheld him not without admiration, and said he
was most like the Boy of which he dreamed. Thus Ovidius says, As I dreamed to
see men by order, such do I perceive and see by order. Lib. 11. Asin. Aurei.
Apuleius says, I presently perceived one of the Holy Priests, beside the mark
of his foot, also in the rest of his habit and carriage agreeing exactly with a
night Image, whom afterward I knew to have been called Asinus Marcellus. Which
places, though taken out of the writings of Heathens, do most fitly illustrate
this Narration. For although Luke mentions only his name, and the laying on of
his hands, yet it is probable that Saul did see Ananias, as if he did view him
with his Eyes. To wit, his countenance, stature, and all the rest of his
complexion: and therefore when he recovered afterward his sight, he knew them
to agree perfectly with his vision. See what we have said above, chapter 2. v. 17.

And putting his hands on him, etc. See what is noted above, chapter 8.17. and
below, v. 17.

13. How much evil he has done to thy Saints. The Christians are frequently so
called, partly, because by the very profession of Christ's Doctrine, and of
their Faith in him, they are selected from the common sort of Unbelievers to be
Gods peculiar People, whom God himself by the Merits, and Intercession of
Christ appointed to endow with an Heavenly Inheritance; partly, because by
their professed holiness of life, they are eminent beyond all other Mortals, if
they be not only Christians in name, but really such.

14. And here, etc. As much as to say, And (omitting his other Villainies) he
now comes with power to bind all such as have given up their names to thee.

From the Chief Priests. That is, From the Princes of the Sa^hedrin. For it is
a Synecdoche, whereby the whole great Sanhedrin is designed by its noblest part.

That call on thy name. To call on Christ, or the name of Christ, is to give up
his name to Christ, and to profess himself his Disciple. So below, v. 21. and 1
Cor. 1.2. To name the name of Christ, is put in the same sense, Romans 15.20. and
2 Timothy 2.19.

15. He is a chosen Vessel unto me. An Hebraism. That is, a most choice
instrument, a vessel for Gods use, says Rabbi Israel. ad Psalm. 51.
Neither, says Grotius, did Polybius speaking of Damocles, use the word (...),
a vessel, in another sense: for this man was a most profitable vessel for
service, and most fit for business. Compare 2 Timothy 2.20, 21.

To bear my name. That is, That he might be a publisher of my glory.

Before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel. As much as to say,
That by his Preaching, my name may be famous among the Nations, yea, and among
their Kings, as well as among the Jews. This refers to these places, Isaiah
49.6. and Jer. 1.10.

16. For I will show unto him, etc. As much as to say, I will foreshew him how
many things he must undergo for Preaching my name, to wit, popular hatred, the
rage of the Gentiles, Prisons, Stripes, Hunger, Thirst, Shipwreck, and a cruel
death: and yet he will Preach my Name, and willingly suffer what he did to
others for my names sake.

17. He entered into the house. To wit, Into Judas's, where Saul lodged, as
abovesaid. v. 11.

And putting his hands on him. Putting on of hands is a visible sign of Prayer.
Whence below, chapter 28.8. and Jam. 5.14. health restored by a Miracle is
attributed jointly to both.

The Lord, etc. As much as to say, Christ sent me, who am but a common
Disciple, not an Apostle, to interpret unto you his will, that by his Grace you
may receive the sight, which you lost, being dazzled with the brightness of the
Heavenly light; which shall be unto you a sign of an inward vision that you
shall receive from Christ himself, through the abundant communication of the
gifts of the Holy Ghost, without any human help, as soon as you shall recover
your bodily sight.

18. As it had been scales. Which, when Saul's Eyes were dazzled with the
Heavenly light, were congealed, and hardened of the humors which fell from his
Brain.

And he arose, and was baptized. After Christ's Institution, by Ananias his
advice, as may be seen below, chapter 22.16.

19. And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. He did not refresh his
Body, though spent with three days fasting, until he had abundantly satisfied
his Soul, enlivened through faith by receiving Baptism.

Certain days. Gal. 1.17.
For as Paul himself writes, he in a short time went out of Damascus, (which
then was under the Dominion of the Arabians) unto Arabia, which is the first
Nation wherein Paul Preached the Gospel, being like Moses in this, who had his
first station in Arabia, after he had left Egypt. So the Prophesy, Isaiah
42.16. is mystically fulfilled.

With the Disciples which were at Damascus. That is, He joined himself with
Christ's followers; there were a good many such at Damascus, since the time of
that dispersion, of which above, chapter 8. 1 and 3.

20. And straightway, etc. As much as to say, Without any delay he taught in
the Assemblies of the Jews at Damascus, that Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah,
or Christ promised in the Law and the Prophets, by weighty, and solid
arguments, which he learned from no man, but from Christ himself. Compare v.
22. and Gal. 1.15 and 16.

21. That he is the Son of God. He says presently, v. 22. That this is very
Christ. It seems this Surname was commonly given to the Messiah. John 1.49.
For Nathaniel says, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of
Israel, to wit, out of the second Psalm, which the Ancient Hebrews in the
abstruse sense interpreted of the Messiah. Therefore where Peter in Matthew,
Mat. 16.16.
calls him Christ the Son of the living God, Mark and Luke satisfied themselves
with the name Christ. And no wonder, seeing, as Origin says excellently. What
was Divine in that Man Jesus whom we understand, the very same was the only
begotten Son of God.

Is not this, etc. As much as to say, Is Saul also among the Prophets, 1 Samuel
10. v. 11.

That destroyed all them that called upon this name in Jerusalem. That is,
raged with great cruelty against all Christ's Disciples at Jerusalem. The Greek
word, says Grotius, which is rendered, destroyed, signifies to vex. Paul uses
the same word in this History, Gal. 1.13 and 23.

And came hither. To wit, To Damascus.

22. But Saul increased the more in strength. To wit, In knowledge, and liberty
of speaking. Whence in some Copies is added in speech.

And confounded the Jews. As much as to say, And being thus strengthened by the
Holy Ghost, he confuted, reproved and convinced the Jews.

Proving. Gr. (...), supply, (...), them, that is, teaching them, as the
Arabian turns it, teaching them for certain, as the Aethiopick renders it. It
answers to the Hebrew word, (...), which is rendered to instruct, to cause to
understand, Isa. 40.14. Dan. 9.22. and the word (...), that is rendered to make
known, Exodus 18.16. Deuteronomy. 4.9. Isa. 60.13. also (...), to teach, Exodus 4.12 and
15. Lev. 10.11. Psalm. 32.10. (...), is properly to join things by art, that by
an indissoluble tie they may stick together. But he who teaches any other,
allures him to himself, and by persuading, and convincing him, does, as it
were, knit, and glue him to himself. Hence in Hesychius (...) is interpreted
persuasion, doctrine, faith; (...), let him teach. (...). those that have been
taught. Hither belongs that of Paul, 1 Cor. 2.16. Who has known the mind of
the Lord, that he may instruct him? Gr. (...), that is, as Lud. de Dieu
interprets it, that he may thus convince him by his reasons, as to knit him,
and as it were glue him to himself.

23. And after that many days were fulfilled. By those many days are to be
understood the three years which Paul spent in Arabia, whither, as we observed
above, v. 19. out of Gal. 1. v. 17. he was gone soon after his Conversion,
although Luke, who was not with him, does not make mention of this Journey.
Paul, says Capellus, Gal. 1.17. denies that he came to Jerusalem to the
Apostles, immediately after his Conversion, but that he went straight from
Damascus to Arabia, and from thence returned to Damascus. Lastly, that after
three years he came to Jerusalem. These three years must be begun no where but
at Paul's Conversion, that by this Paul might testify that he came not to
Jerusalem, until the end of three years after his Conversion, to them which
were Apostles before him. This being granted, it must needs be that Paul spent
not those three years in Damascus, but in Arabia. For if a great part of them
was spent at Damascus, seeing that Damascus was distant from Jerusalem but a
very few days Journey, and that there was great commerce betwixt the
Damascenes, and the Jews at Jerusalem, how could it be, when Paul came from
Damascus to Jerusalem, that all the Believers did avoid him, not knowing that
he was converted to the faith of Christ? Hence then it seems a strong argument
may be drawn, that Paul immediately after his Conversion, went from Damascus to
Arabia, and that he spent those three years there, after which time, when he
came to Damascus, and immediately had snares laid for him by the Jews, that
being let down in the night time by the wall in a Basket, he came to Jerusalem,
and that at first the faithful fled from him, because he spent all the time
since his Conversion in Arabia, among that people who had little or no Commerce
with those of Jerusalem. So that thus they might be ignorant of his Conversion,
which could not so easily be, if Paul had spent those three years, or the most
part of them at Damascus.

The Jews took counsel to kill him. By a judgment of zeal. Of which we spoke
above, chapter 7.57.

24. And they watched the Gates. The Jews, to wit, of the City, that he might
not escape, and be gone. See how soon that which Christ foretold above, v. 16.
is fulfilled.

25. Let him down by the wall. As Rahab of old did the Spies: Josh. 2.15. 1 Samuel 19.12. Strom. 4. and 7.
she let them down by a Cord through the Window. So also David was let down
through a Window. Clemens Alexandrinus says excellently, What hazards must be
undergone, and what shunned by him, who neither wishes for, nor fears death,
Christ has left to be judged by Gods glory, and the use of Men. Although a
Christian fly, he flies not for fear, but obeying his Masters command, Mat.
10.23. and keeping himself pure for the Salvation of others, to whom he may be
useful, says Origin against Celsus.

Let him down by the wall in a Basket. With Cords. As Jeremiah, Jer. 38. v. 6.

26. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem. Paul the Apostle going to Damascus,
was converted to the knowledge of the Heavenly Truth, and Faith in Jesus
Christ. This year, says Camerarius, is put the first of his Apostolic Office,
and it falls in the 35th year of Christ, and the twentieth of Tiberius his
Reign. The second year he went to Arabia, and from thence having come to
Damascus, he fell in danger, whence he was delivered, being let down by a wall
in a Basket. This year is now Paul's third year, and of Christ the 37th, and
that time falls in in the end of Tiberius his Reign. Upon the 38th year of
Christ, and the first of Caius Caesar, and his own fourth year he came to
Jerusalem to see Peter. See Gal. 1.17 and 18.

He essayed to join himself to the Disciples. That is, He endeavored to become
acquainted with them, and converse with them, as Believers do with one another,
above, chapter 5.13. and below, chapter 10.28.

27. But Barnabas. Of whom above, chapter 4. 36.

Brought him to the Apostles. To wit, Which were at Jerusalem, to Peter, to see
whom he mainly came thither, and to James the Lords Brother, Gal. 1.15, 19.

And declared. To wit, Barnabas.

How he had Preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus. That is, Openly,
and publicly Preached Jesus and his Doctrine.

28. And he was with them. That is, With Peter and James.

Coming in and going out. That is, Executing his Apostolical Office. See of
this manner of speaking above, chapter 1.21.

29. And he spoke boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus. As much as to say, He
strongly maintained the Cause of Christ.

And disputed against the Grecians. Who they are that are here called Grecians,
Hellenists, we have explained above, chapter 6. v. 1. and it is no wonder that
Paul, as being of Tarsus, did dispute with them peculiarly, and by themselves,
and that with the greater desire, because in that controversy raised by the
very same men against Stephen, they found none more for their Faction than this
same Paul. Him also, says Beza, they slandred, that when he could not obtain
Marriage of the Highpriests Daughter, being moved with anger, imbrae ced the
Christian Religion. Many such like Fables does that murdering Spirit invent
this day against the faithful Servants of God, both alive and dead. Ebion the
Heresiarch certainly, as Epiphanius relates, Haer. 30.
slandereth Paul, that being a Greek, and his Father also being a Greek, he
should have gone up to Jerusalem, and that having tarried there a short while,
he fell in love with the Highpriests Daughter, and hoping to enjoy her in
Marriage, was Circumcised, and embraced the Jewish Religion: but that his hope
being frustrated, he was enraged with anger and wrath against the Law. The very
simplicity of the truth, wherewith the Holy Spirit has again and again sealed
the History of Paul in the Holy Scriptures, refuteth enough the gross calumny
of Ebion against him.

But they went about to slay him. Inhumane and cruel Hypocrisy and
Superstition, when they find themselves unable to resist the Truth, they, like
Ravenous Beasts, with blind and precipitous violence run on to persecute it.

30. They brought him. Who was forewarned by a Vision, that he should leave
Jerusalem, as may be seen below, chapter 22.17 and 18. The Syriack adds, In the
night.

To Caesarea. To wit, Philippi, situated about Mount Lebanon, at the meeting
together of Jor and Dan, where Jordan has its beginning. See what we have
noted concerning this City, above, chapter 8.4. Mat. 16.14.

And sent him forth to Tarsus. A most famous City of Cilicia, where Saul
himself was born, as may be seen below, chapter 21.39. and chapter 22.4. Of this City
Strabo says, Tarsus is situated in a Plain; it was built by the Argivi, who
with Triptolemus wandered, seeking for Io. The River Cydnus passes through it
to the very place where young Champions exercise their strength. Its Springs
not being far distant from it, and its Channel running through a huge Valley,
whence presently the River falls into the City; the River is cold and sharp,
whereby it cures both Men and Cattle that are troubled with the Gout, or
thickness of sinews. They of Tarsus were so addicted to the Study of
Philosophy, and that Discipline which they call Encyclia, that they out-stript
Athens, Alexandria, and any other place that can be named, where there were
Schools, and Exercises of Philosophers, and of Learning. Tarsus brought forth
men eminent for Learning, among others, Hermogenes, who wrote with great praise
of the Art of Rhetoric, whose work is yet extant. Stephanus Byzantius says
that Tarsus was built by Sardanapalus the last King of the Assyrians. Others in
Dio Chrysostomus, say it was built by Heroes, Lib. 14.
or Giants. Ammianus Marcellinus says that Perseus the Son of Jupiter, chapter 41.
and Danaes were the builders of Tarsus, Lib. 4.
of which Judgment was Solinus, and Lucan who therefore calls it Persea.

31. Then had the Churches rest. To wit, The heat of Persecution being
assuaged, when the violent, and furious rage of the Churches Enemies, which was
stirred up at the sight of Saul, was laid. There is no War, contrary to the
Churches Peace, but Persecution.

And were edified. That is, And were confirmed, as Paul uses the word, 1 Cor.
1.10.

Walking in the fear of the Lord. A Hebraism, That is, Most reverently
Worshipping the Lord. The like construction is in 1 Mac. 6.23 and 59.

32. Passed throughout all Quarters. That is, Went about from one place to
another, encouraging the Brethren.

Which dwelt at Lydda. Lydda, which was afterward called Diospolis, is a City
of the Tribe of Ephraim, not far from the Mediterranean Sea, upon the confines
of the Tribe of Dan. It is also called (...) in the Hebrew Text, 1 Chronicles. 8.12.
This City, as Josephus relates, its Inhabitants being gone up to Jerusalem, 4
Bell. Jud. 23.
to the Feast of Tabernacles, was burnt by Cestus. Benjamin in his Itinerary,
says, that Lydda in his time was called (...), now it is commonly called S.
George.

33. Named Aeneas. Aeneas, or as the Poets pronounce it Aineias, is the Greek
Interpretation of the Jewish name Hillel.

34. Arise, and make thy Bed. He is not commanded to rise and walk, but he
himself (not another, as was usual) who for eight years space could not move
one of his Members, is commanded to rise, make up, smooth, and fit his Bed for
lying in, which was disordered, uneven, and troublesome to lie upon, as it
uses to be by the tossings of sick People; this was a sure argument that
strength was restored to his Members.

35. Sarone. Saron, or Sarona, or Saronas, is the name of a Region beyond
Jordan, upon the Borders of the Tribes of Dan, and Ephraim, upon the Coast of
the Mediterranean Sea, from Joppa, even to Caesarea of Palestine, rising below
Lydda, of which Region, 1 Chronicles. 27.29. and Isa. 33.9. See our literal
explanation on Cant. 2.1. The Metropolis of this Region was called Lesharon, or
Lasharon, which belonged to Saron. Whence among the Kings conquered by Joshua,
Josh 12.18. there is, The King of Lasharon. The vulgar Latin, Pagninus, and the
English Interpreter judged rightly that the letter Lamed did belong to the
denomination of the City, as also in the Judaick Map, (...), is a Royal City,
upon a Hill called the Hill of Saron, in the Tribe of Ephraim. Luke seems here
to call this place the Saron, by an Emphasis, for there is another City called
Saron, beyond Jordan, in the Tribe of Gad, upon the River Arnon, of which, 1 Chronicles. 5.16.

36. Tabitha, which by Interpretation is called Dorcas. That is, whose proper
Syrian name Tabitha, from the Hebrew (...), a Roe, was by the Greeks expressed
by their proper name Dorcas. She was called Dorcas, says Grotius, among the
Greeks, even as Thomas Didymus, Cephas Peter. See below, v. 39.

Full of good works, and Alms-deeds which she did. A Hebrew phrase. That is,
Marvellously given to every praiseworthy work, chiefly to Offices of Charity,
by which our Neighbors are helped, and the poors want supplied.

37. Whom when they had washed. The custom of washing the Bodies of the dead, 4
var. hist. 1.
was used by Greeks, Latins, and Hebrews. Elian writes of the Illyrian
Dardans, That they were only washed thrice in their whole life, to wit, after
they are born, when they are married, and when they dye. In Euripides, Creon
King of the Thebans, calls Jocasta to wash the Body of her Son. Misenus the
Trumpeter is washed, and anointed, before he is buried, in Virgil Aen. 6. v.
218 and 219. Where Servius cites out of Ennius: A good Woman washed, and
anointed the Body of Tarquinius. Maimonides in his Abridgment Talmudick, called
(...), Book 4. of the fourth part, chapter 4. Of Mourning, and Mourners. It is,
says he, the custom in Israel, about the dead and their burial, that when any
is dead, they shut his Eyes, and if he has his Mouth open, it must be shut,
tying a ligature about his Jaws, that it open not again, the place at which he
voids his Excrements is stopped, but this after the Body is washed. Then he is
anointed with Ointments made up of diverse kinds of perfumes, and his Head being
shaved, the Body is rolled up in white linen, prepared for the purpose, which
are not of great value, that an equality may be kept betwixt the rich and the
poor. Also the face of the dead, before he be put in the Coffin, is covered
with a Handkerchief, the price of which must not exceed the fourth part of a
Shekel, which fourth part is equal to an Attick Dram, and to the Roman
Denary; and is equivalent to seven pence halfpenny of the now English Money.
Being then put into the Coffin, says Maimonides further, he is carried upon
Men's shoulders, even to the burying place, and there before the Body be buried,
there are some things read, which have been written by their Ancestors for this
purpose, whereby Divine Justice is set forth, and the sins of men exaggerated,
for which they deserved death, and God is entreated that he may exercise his
Justice, so as not forget himself to be merciful. Then the Corpse, together with
the Bier, upon which it lay upon its back, being put in a Cave, is covered.
Lastly, they go to the Mourners, and something is recited by them for their
comfort. Which being ended, every one goes to his business, neither does there
any difference appear betwixt the rich and the poor, the noble, and the
ignoble, neither in the burial of the dead, nor in the comfort of the living.

38. And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh unto Joppa. There are said to be six miles
betwixt Joppa, and Lydda. See what we have said of Joppa in our literal
explanation, Jon. 1.3.

39. Showing the Coats and Garments. That is, Woven works, the Monuments of her
hands, as Virgil speaks. The words in the Greek signify Coats and Cloaks.

Which Dorcas made while she was with them. So it is in the Greek, but the
Vulgar Interpreter takes the words, as if it were said, which she made for
them. So also Cyprian in his Book of Alms, and Works does take them. Tabitha,
says he, being very much given to the doing of good Works, and Alms-deeds,
when she was sick and dead, Peter is called to her lifeless Corpse; and when
according to his Apostolical Humanity he came, the Widows stood about him
weeping, and requesting, showing the Cloaks, and the Coats, and all the
Garments which they had taken before, neither did they interceed for the dead
with their own words, but with her Works. Peter knew that what was thus asked,
might be obtained; and that Christ's assistance would not be wanting to praying
Widows, when he himself was clothed in the person of those Widows. When
therefore he prayed upon his knees, and this fit Advocate for the Poor and
Widows, had presented to God the Prayers addressed to him, having turned about
to the Body that lay already washed upon a Table; Tabitha, says he, rise in
the name of Jesus Christ. Neither did he, who said in his Gospel, that he would
give whatever was asked in his name, fail Peter, but brought present help.
Death therefore is suspended, and her spirit restored; and to the wonder, and
astonishment of all, the revived body is restored to the light of the world; so
powerful were the deserts of Charity, such was the efficacy of good works. She
who gave supplies to the laboring Widows merited, that is, obtained, to be
restored to life by the prayer of the Widows. The Ancient Ladies used to make
woven Garments with their own hands, as Servius has noted upon Aeneid. 11. v.
74. See 1 Samuel 2.19. Prove. 31.13. Tob. 2.11, etc.

40. But Peter put them all forth. That is, Commanded them to go forth, that
being solitary, and retired, he might pray with greater freedom.

And kneeled down and prayed. That all the parts of him might be employed in
the Worship of God, and that the outward exercise of the Body, might help the
weakness of the mind. It is our part, says Calvin, as often as we kneel, that
the inward submission of our Heart answer the Ceremony, that it may not be vain
and deceitful.

Tabitha arise. This speaking to the dead Body, does more clearly hold out the
power of God in raising the dead, then if in the third Person it should be
said, Let this Body be enlivened, and revive again. Therefore Ezekiel holding
out the deliverance of the People under the Type of the Resurrection, chapter 37.4.
Dry bones, says he, hear the Word of the Lord. And Christ, John 5.25. The dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that shall hear, shall live.
That was the real voice of Christ, which being sent out at Peter's mouth,
restored her spirit to Tabitha's Body, The circumstances which follow, are put
to confirm the truth of the Miracle.

42. Believed, etc. Now the fruit of the Miracle appears manifold. For God
comforted the poor, a pious Matron is restored unto the Church, in whose death
there was a great loss, and many are called to the Faith. For though Peter was
the Minister of so great a miracle, yet he keeps not men to himself, but
directs them to Christ.

43. With one Simon a Tanner. It was a custom even among the learned of the
Jews to learn some Trade, so that when it was requisite, they might sustain
themselves, and not burden others. So Rabbi Jose was a Skinner, Rabbi Jochanan
a Shoemaker, Rabbi Juda a Baker, Rabbi Meir a Scrivener. 18 Antiq. 12.
Josephus says of Asinaeus, and Asilaeus, Jews in Babylon, Their Mothers set
them to learn the Weavers Trade, which is not esteemed undecent to those
Nations, where even men are makers of Yarn. So the Apostles were Fishers after
Christ's Resurrection. Paul, who was trained up in Sacred, and Profane Learning
at Tarsus, and at Jerusalem made Tents as well as Aquila, born in Pontus, below
chapter 18. v. 3.

CHAP. X.
1. THere was in Cesarea. Which in the time of the Romans, was the Head City of
Palestine, as we learn from Tacitus lib. 8. Cornelius the Centurion who is
spoken of here, was made Bishop of this City by Peter, as Isidore says in his
Chronicle, or rather Lucas Tudensis in his Additions to it.

Cornelius. This Name shows him to be a Roman, or at least of Italian
Extraction, and in him began to be fulfilled the Prophesy of Isa. c. 2. v. 4.
and 11.

Centurion of the Band, which is called the Italian Band. That is, Of the
Italian Legion. The Italian Legion, says Grotius, is on an Ancient Stone,
which Lipsius on Tacitus Hist. 2. mentions, and Tacitus himself of tentimes.

2. A Devout man, and one that feared God. That is, A Worshipper of the true
God, according to that, which reason and the Law of Moses did teach him to be
most agreeable to inward Godliness. Such are called holy amongst the Nations by
the Talmudists, Devout Greeks, below chap. 7. v. 4.

With all his house. Cornelius did Govern his Family in the fear of the Lord,
contemning the fear of danger, which might thence follow, for the Jewish
Religion was very odious in those Days: Neither was it lawful for any Roman, to
embrace any strange Religion was they called it. Wherefore, says Calvin very
well, although the sincere profession of the, Gospel is much at this day decri'd:
Yet that fearfulness is too Griminal, if on the account of that unjust hatred,
any one should not dare dedicate his Family, by a holy Institution, to Gods
Worship.

Giving much Alms to the poor. That is, To all Poor Jews, whom he loved the
rather for that they Worshipped the one true God, and with open bowels did
bestow what Gods Goodness had afforded him.

And praying to God always. That is, Assiduous in pouring forth Prayers to the
one true God, to which the daily benefits of God do invite us and stir us up.

3. He saw in a vision evidently. Not in dreams but waking, with Corporeal
Eyes, not ravished in Spirit without himself, as it happened to Peter after, v.
10. and chap. 11. v. 5.

About the ninth hour of the day. That is, about the hour of evening Prayer and
Sacrifice. See our Notes above, chap. 3. v 1.

An Angel of God. Out of Gods Goodness, an Angel and an Apostle are sent to the
Centurion, who had rightly made use of the Heavenly gifts bestowed on him, that
he might be enriched with the full light of the Gospel.

4. What is it, Lord? As if he should say, Command what thou will, Lord, I will
obey thy Commands.

Are come up for a memorial before God. That is, Thy Alms and thy Prayers have
been pleasing to God. The Phrase is taken from the Legal Incense. For, says
Grotius, that is properly called (...), in Greek (...) a memorial, Levit. and
elsewhere. And the smoke of the Incense is said to ascend, Rev. 8. v. 4. But
this Incense was a Type of Prayers, Rev. 5. v. 8. and 8. v. 3. Prayer, say the
Ancients, is carried up by two wings, fasting and the works of mercy.

5. And now. That is, Now therefore. The Angel shows him the Apostle, and the
Apostle shows him Christ.

6. He shall tell thee what thou ought to do. That is, as it is expounded
chap. 11. v. 14. Who shall speak words to thee, in which thou and all thy
Family shall be saved. As if he should say, He will instruct thee in the
knowledge of Christ, (which is the only way to Salvation) that thou, and thy
whole house, may be saved. God uses no other way, but the Instrument of
preaching, to instill into men the knowledge of the Gospel. This is Gods
ordinary way which he has established, and we may not expect another, most
truly says (and proves it, from Romans 10. v. 14.) My dearest Wifes Uncle, the
reverend Samuel Gardner Doctor of Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
ordinary, in his grave and learned Sermon on the Dignity and Duty of the
Ministers of the Gospel, Printed in 1672.

7. A Soldier fearing God. All the Domestics of Cornelius feared the Lord, as
is said before v. 2. but all the Soldiers, which were under his Command, were
not Godly and Religious. We have a like, (...) of Soldiers and Domestics,
Matt. 8. v. 9.

Of them that waited on him. That is, They waited before the doors to receive
his Commands. Ovid, speaking of a Lover and a Soldier, says, This tends his
Mistresses, but that his Captains, doors.

8. When he had declared all these things to them. Cornelius explained all
things to his Soldier, and Servants, the more to encourage them to perform a
Command, which they saw was more Gods than Man 's. He doubted not, says
Calvin, to trust those with this great secret, whom he had before trained
honestly up.

9. Peter went up to the house top. Gr. to the roof of the house. The Jews
built the roofs of their houses flat, not spire wise. Hierom in his Epistle to
Sunia and Fretela says, that in the Eastern Provinces, that is called (...)
which the Latins call tectum. For in Palestine and Egypt, or in those places
where the holy Bible was writ or interpreted, their houses are not ridged but
flat roofed, which at Rome they call Leads or Balcony's, that is, flat roofs
supported by Beams placed across. The Vulgar Translation uses this word for a
house, Prove. 21. v. 9. and 25. v. 24. Anselm, on Matthew. fol. 45. In Palestine
they use to make their Roofs flat, not copped. Even so the Temple of Solomon
was made flat above, and in the Circuit of the Gallery there were Grates, lest
any one should unawares fall down: and the Doctors had there their Seats, that
they might from thence speak to the People.

To pray. To wit, Secretly, and without interruption. Suetonius says of
Augustus; If at any time he desired to do any thing in secret, and without
interruption, he had an apartment above for that purpose, etc.

About the sixth hour. That is, As the famous Drusius interprets it, The time
of Prayer, which they call, The Prayer of Sacrifice, or of Oblation; which
begun at half an hour past six, and lasted till half an hour past nine. It was
also the hour of Dining, therefore in the Book, whose Title is Principium
Sapientiae, it is called, The time of Refreshment. Before this Prayer they
tasted not of any thing, and it was of great esteem amongst the Ancients. See
what is said above, chapter 2. v. 15. and chapter 3. v. 1.

10. Would have eaten. Gr. Tasted. That is, Eaten. A Metonymia of the designed
effect, says Piscator; for we taste Meats for this Reason, that if they please
us, we may eat them. From hence we may gather, that the Jews were wont to Dine
at Midday, (which with them was the sixth hour,) and Josephus in his own Life,
says that this was the hour of their Dinner on their Sabbath. See before, chapter
2. v. 15.

He fell into a Trance. That is, He was entranced, or without himself, that he
minded not what was done about him, neither had he any sense of any outward
thing, but was wholly intent upon his Internal Idea's. (...) in this place is,
says Price, (as says Apuleius in his Apology) to be astonished even to the
forgetfulness of things present, and the Memory being by little and little
removed from Corporeal Things, is made intent upon that Nature which is
Immortal and Divine. Augustine says of his Mother, 9 Confess. 5. she suffered a
defection of mind, and for a time was estranged from noticing things present.

11. And he saw Heaven opened. That is, Heaven seemed to him to be divided, as
it were with a wide opening; and that way it opened a covering like a great
sheet, did descend to him bound at the four Corners, hanging from Heaven down
to the Earth. But, says Grotius, that sheet seemed to hang from Heaven, to
signify our liberty indulged from Heaven. See what we have said before, chap.
7. v. 56.

A certain Vessel, as it had been a sheet. Gr. (...). Although I am not
ignorant, says the most famous Heinsius, how large signification the (...) of
the Heb. and the Vas of the Romans has, yet I had rather in this place call it
involucrum, a Cloak, or something like it; (...), a Cloak, as it were a Sheet,
especially since (...) is used by the Greeks for a Cloak, Hesychius the most
learned of Interpreters, (...), every thing that serves to cover. It may be he
alludes to the (...) of the Hebrew Shepherds, which was either a Cloak, or a
Satchel, in which they used to put their Meat, and Cups, out of which they
drank, and their other Necessaries. Such a one is that of Zech. 11. v. 15.
(...), the Vessel of a foolish Shepherd. Although there the Greeks render
Vessels in the plural number.

Knit at the four Corners, and let down to the Earth. That is, Being bound at
the four Corners to hang from Heaven to Earth.

12. Wherein were. Not in reality, but in appearance, as says Cyrill of
Alexandria, lib. 9. against Julian.

All. That is, All sorts.

Four-footed Beasts of the Earth, and creeping things, Gr. Four-footed Beasts,
and wild Beasts, and creeping things. The word (...), four-footed Beasts, in
the Vulgar Latin Edition, is taken in as large a sense here, as amongst the
Naturalists: But in the Greek Text it only comprehends Domestic Creatures, and
which are wont to be kept for the common use of Men, as Camels, Horses, Asses,
Dogs, Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, and others of that kind: and therefore is added, and
wild Beasts. The Hebrew Noun (...) is taken four ways: First, for any Brute
Creature, as when it is only opposed to Man, as Psalm. 36. v. 7. Whence it is,
that the Serpent is also reckoned amongst the (...) Genesis 3. v. 14. Secondly,
For any four-footed Beast, somewhat big, which brings forth young ones alive,
when it is opposed to Birds, Reptiles, and whatsoever lives under the water.
But wheresoever (...) and (...) are opposed, as Genesis 1. v. 25. then (...)
signifies Beasts of Burden, Flocks, or any Domestic Cattle, and (...) wild
Cattle, whose other Name (...) Psalm. 50. v. 11. and 80. v. 14. seems to be
taken from their motion: Because the Hebrew (...) and Arabic Hazaza, signifies
to move, or, move ones self. For the tame and gentle Animals have their
Pastures ascertained by their Owners, and are fed at home: on the contrary, the
wild Cattle wander about here and there for their Food, and (as the Philosopher
says) like Shepherds, are forced from place to place for their Food. But it
appears from 1 Samuel 17. v. 44. Isa. 18. v. 6. Jer. 27. v. 33. that wild Beasts
are also often comprehended under (...). Moreover in Deuteronomy. 14. v. 4 and 5.
Stags, Roes, Buffles, etc. are reckoned amongst the species (...), which the
Law allows to be eaten. Lastly, In Job 40. v. 10. the Noun (...) a Seahorse
is of a Plural Termination, but singular sense.

Creeping things. A creeping Creature, or Reptile, is called (...) from
treading the ground, and (...), from plenty, and (...) from the flowness of its
motion. The Noun Reptiles, Genesis 9. v. 3. and in other places is often taken for
any thing that treads. Sometimes it is opposed to four-footed Beasts and Birds,
and so it includes Fishes, as here, and Lev. 11. v. 46. Romans 1. v. 23. For a
Water Animal in the Hebrew Phrase is called (...) a Creature creeping in the
Waters. For although (...), to swim, is proper to Water-Creatures, whence they
are called (...), Swimmers, Wisd. 19. v. 18. yet the Scripture says they creep
in the Waters, but never says they swim. Every thing that swims, Hexaem lib. 5.
cap. 1.
says Ambrose, has the Figure, or Nature of a Creeping thing. For although,
when they have plunged themselves into the bottom, they seem to cleave the
Water, yet when they swim on the top, their whole Body creeps, and is drawn
over the uppermost parts of the Water. Also Amphibious Creatures, which have
feet, and the use of going: yet when they are on the top of the Waters, they do
not walk, but swim; neither use they the sole of the foot for treading, but as
an Oar for creeping. Lastly, In Scripture every Creature is said to be a
Reptile, which is neither a four-footed Creature, somewhat big, nor a Bird, nor
a Fish. So Moses places amongst Reptiles the small four-footed Creatures, as
Mice and Moles, Lev. 11. v. 29. or all that are without blood, or creep upon
their bellies, as Worms, whether they fly, as, besides some Locusts, Flies,
Butterflies, etc. whether four-footed, as Locusts, or have many feet, as the
Worm Scolopendra, Lev. 11. v. 42.

Fowls of the Air, That is, Birds, a Bird, says Bochartus, is a two-footed
Creature, winged, and feathered. It differs much from a four-footed Creature,
having neither Hairs, Lips, Teeth, Horns, nor Forefeet, but it has (...),
Feathers for Hairs, and (...), a Beak for Lips and Teeth, (...), Wings for the
Fore-feet, and for Horns, some of them have (...) a Comb. Also Birds want
Brows, Eyebrows, Nostrils, and Ears. The Owl and Bustard have Feathers for
Ears, the rest have holes. Inwardly they have neither Reins nor Bladder, and
therefore their Urine and Dung are excerned at one passage. What in Cattle is
the (...), the Maw, Deuteronomy. 18. v. 3. that in Birds is (...), a Crop, Lev. 1. v.
16. There also (...), as some will have it, is the Belly of a Bird, which the
Hebrews in other places call (...) from Jer. 51. v. 34.

13. And there came a voice unto him. To wit, From Heaven; by which voice God
purified those things, which were before unclean, and abrogated the Law which
concerned the choice of living Creatures, that he might withal inform him that
no sort of People is forsaken of God.

Kill, and eat. That is, Kill all these, and without making any Difference, eat
of them all. As God, by this voice from Heaven, did show that he gave the Jews
converted to Christ, the liberty of eating of all sorts of Meats; so it also
signified that there was no reason to abstain from Communion with Strangers,
after that through Gods assistance by their Faith in Christ, they were purged
from their Idolatry, and evil manners, and had wholly devoted themselves to
Piety. For the Pale, or the common wall of the Ceremonial Law, which forbad a
closer Communion betwixt the Jews and Gentiles, being removed, there was no
reason that Souls joined by Holiness to Christ and to God, should be any longer
separated from one another.

14. Not so, etc. Ezekiel being commanded to taste an unclean thing, chap. 4. v.
14. gave a like answer. Daniel and his Companions, Dan. 1. v. 8 and 12. chose
rather to feed on pulse alone, than be defiled by the Kings Meat. Eleazar, 2
Mac. 6. v. 18. though they would have constrained him to eat Swines flesh, by
forcing it into his mouth, chose rather to endure the greatest Extremities,
then in this respect obey the King. Do not (says he in Josephus) esteem this a
small sin, to eat defiled meat; for the case is the same, whether thou
transgress in great or small matters, for by both the Law is alike despised.
Seven Brothers with their Mother imitating Eleazars constancy, having, for the
same cause, suffered very much, ended their lives in Martyrdom. These things
are described, 2 Mac. 7. and in Josephus his Book of the Maccabees.

Common and unclean. That is Profane or impure. For when God had chosen the
Jews for his own People, he prescribed them a form of living, which should
distinguish them from the profane Gentiles. Therefore whatsoever was in use
among the Gentiles against the rule of the Law, was called common, or unclean:
for nothing was thought sanctified or pure, but what God had ordained for the
use of his People.

What God has cleansed, do not thou call common. As much as to say, Now when
God has abolished, and abrogated his Laws concerning unclean Meats, do not
thou, out of a foolish scruple, abstain from any sort of Meat, as if they were
profane or impure. That this distinction of Beasts into clean and unclean,
(used even before the flood, Genesis 7. v. 2.) is by Christ taken away, is
evident, not only by this voice to Peter, uttered from Heaven, but from Mat.
15. v. 11. Romans 14. v. 14, etc. 1 Cor. 10. v. 25, 26 and 27. Col. 2.16, 17, 20
and 21. 1 Timothy 4. v. 4. Tit. 1. v. 5. Therefore if any one does yet use this
distinction of Meats, as besides the Jews, the Arabians, and Mahometans do, he
limits himself by an idle scruple, nor uses that liberty which Christ by his
death has procured us. The Verb (...), which is here translated (...), is
properly to pollute, improperly to esteem, or declare a thing polluted, as it
is after expounded, v. 28. (...), to call a thing common or unclean.

16. This was done thrice. To signify the immutableness of the Divine Purpose,
which was to be thoroughly imprinted in his mind.

And straight the Vessel was received up into Heaven. The sheet let down from
Heaven, represents the Church culled by Heaven from among the Jews, and
Gentiles, made clean by Faith, which in its Spiritual Birth, as it were,
descends from Heaven, Rev. 3. v. 12. and 21. v. 2. And as this sheet was taken
up into Heaven, so are they to return to Heaven.

17. Now while Peter doubted in himself what this Vision, which he had seen,
should mean. That is, While Peter was considering with himself what this Vision
sent him from Heaven should signify.

19. The Spirit said unto him. That is, The Spirit commanded him. (...) he
said, oftentimes with the Hebrews, but always with the Arabians, is as much as
to bid, to command. Such is that, Luke 12. v. 13. Speak to my Brother, that he
divide the inheritance with me. That is, Command my Brother to divide the
Inheritance betwixt us.

20. Doubting nothing. To go thither, where these men fetch thee, although he
that sends for thee be not a Jew.

For I have sent them. The Spirit is said to do that which he commanded by the
Angel before, v. 5. Hence, says Calvin, we are warned that the Consciences of
Men cannot be assured that they do that which they do safely otherwise, than as
being taught by the Word of God, they propose to themselves to do nothing
without his advice or command.

21. But Peter going down to the men. To wit, As is supplied in the Greek Text,
who were sent to him from Cornelius.

22. Of good report among all the Nation of the Jews. That is, Not only
recommended by the praises of this or the other man, but of the whole Jewish
Nation. Solinus of Scipio Nasica: He was adjudged a good man, not by a private
Testimony, but by the attestation of the whole Senate.

To hear words. That is, Commands, or what he ought to do, as before, v. 6. the
Angel spoke. So (...) Words, LXX Interpreters call (...), commands, Deuteronomy. 17.
v. 19. Jer. 19. v. 15, etc.

23. Some of the Brethren. Peter prudently takes six of the Brethren in his
Company, that they might be witnesses of what he did. See after chap. 11.12.

24. But on the morrow. That is, After Peter went from the City of Joppa.

Having called, etc. Cornelius, like Rachab of Jericho, Josh. 2. v. 12 and 13.
studies not to keep the benefit of faith to himself, but desired that all his
Relations and Kinsfolks might be made partakers of the same Grace with him, as
who, he knew, might be comprehended under the name of his Family.

His near Friends. Vulg. Necessariis amicis. Gellius 13. Noct. At. 3. Those
who are conjoined by the Law of affinity, and familiarity, are called
Necessarii Festus. Necessarii, as says Gallus Elius, are such who are either
Kinsfolks, or Related by Marriages, on whom, above others, friendly kindnesses
are bestowed. Nonius calls Necessarii Allies, Seeing that, says he, Necessitas
is affinity, hence those that are Allied by Marriage, are called Necessarii.
But that not only Allies, but Kinsfolks are comprised under this name, is
sufficiently manifest from this place of Valerius Maximus, lib. 2. chapter 1. Our
Ancestors did celebrate a solemn Feast, and called it Charistia, at which none
were present but Allies and Kinsfolks; That so, if any Quarrel were betwixt
those very near friends called Necessarii, it might at this sacred Feast be
quite quashed by friendly Peacemakers. Marcellus does distinguish Necessarii
from Friends and Neighbors, as if they were bound together by a nearer tie of
Amity, lib. 4. Epist. fam. to Cicero. Amidst the great scarcity of Friends,
Neighbors and Intimates (ac necessariorum) who would sincerely have favored
my safety, I was very sensible of your great kindness and good will toward me.

25. And it came to pass that as Peter was coming in. Gr. But as it happened
that Peter entered. That is, When Peter was just now about to enter the House of
Cornelius. For, says the most famous Beza, these things were not acted openly,
but at Cornelius 's house, and that even at the threshold of his door, as
appears from V. 27 and 28.

26. But Peter, etc. Peter does not admit of a Religious Reverence to be paid
him as Gods Ambassador, as was in times past given to the Prophets; because
the Man Jesus Christ, the only Mediator betwixt God and Men, is alone possessed
of that Embassy, and that Authority joined to it; all others besides, in the
matters of Religion, are not Lords or Masters, but Fellow Servants and
Disciples. See Rev. 19. v. 10. and 22. v. 8 and 9.

I my self also am a Man. That is, An Earthly Man, a Minister of that Divine
and Heavenly Man Christ Jesus, and thy Fellow Servant.

27. And as he talked with him. From the threshold (of the House) where he met
him, into the House itself.

28. How that it is an unlawful thing. That is, It is thought an unlawful thing.

To keep Company, or come unto one of another Nation. Seeing that the Jews
could not altogether avoid converse, and Commerce with Strangers, they ordered
the matter so, that they neither went to their Houses, nor eat with them. On
this account it was that Peter, v. 21 and 22. first speaks before the doors, to
the Men sent by Cornelius, neither brought them into the House, until he was
assured they were those of whom he had been warned by God; and chapter 11. v. 3.
Peter is accused by the Jews, that he had entered the Houses of Men
Uncircumcised, and eaten with them. And hence is that in Justine the Historian
about the Jews: Because they remember they were driven from Egypt for fear of
Infection, lest they should for the same reason be hated by the Natives, they
cautiously avoided Communicating with Strangers: which at first happening for
this reason, became by degrees a matter of Discipline and Religion. And
Apollonius Molo says, That they do not frequent the Company of those who follow
a course of life different from the Jews. Which, says most famous Seldom,
Josephus plainly asserts to be true, whilst he largely defends the same thing
from some of the Greek Customs about Strangers.

But God has showed me that I should not call any man common or unclean. That
is, That for the future no man should be reputed unclean, for being
Uncircumcised.

29. Without doubting I came. Gr. I came without gainsaying. Calvin says
excellently: This is the holy silence of Faith, when without remonstrating with
God, we quietly undertake what he commands, banishing far from us what contrary
Arguments may be suggested to us.

30. Four days ago to this hour. In the Greek is added, I was fasting. The most
Learned Ludovicus de Dieu thinks that the present hour is meant, and that in
the morning of that day. For, says he, seeing that Joppe is nine Miles, or a
days Journey from Caesarea, Peter set forth of Joppe on the day before, and the
day after in the morning entered Caesarea, and discoursed with Cornelius. It is
four days to that very hour, says Cornelius, since I betook my self to
fasting: for I translate (...), I was fasting, not, I fasted.

At the ninth hour I was praying. Gr. And at the ninth hour, to wit, of that
day, on which I betook my self to fasting, praying.

And behold. When I was very earnest at Prayer, and my mind was free from all
disturbances, which things are wont to make us more obnoxious to Phantasms and
Visions.

A man. That is, An Angel in the shape of a Man. So Moses promiscuously
sometimes calls them Men, sometimes Angels, whom Abraham saw in Humane shape.

In bright clothing. A bright Garment, says Calvin, was a mark of Celestial
Glory, and as it were a badge of that Divine Majesty, with which an Angel ought
to shine. The Evangelists tell us that Christ's Garments had such a brightness,
when he showed his Glory to the three Disciples in the Mount. And they tell the
same of the Angels, when they were sent to attest Christ's Resurrection. For as
hitherto God has designed to suit our infirmities, and commanded his Angels to
come down in our fleshly shape; so he allows them some rays of his Glory, to
make the commands he sends by them, reverenced, and believed.

31. Heard. See our Notes on v. 4.

33. Thou have well done that thou art come. That is, Thou have done very
commendably in coming. See a like phrase of praising, 2 Pet. 1. v. 19.

In thy sight. (...). So the Syriack, and Arabian reads it, whereas the Vulgar
Greek Editions have it, (...), in the sight of God. That is, Having God before
our Eyes, whom it is not lawful to mock by dissimulation.

To hear all things, etc. Cornelius prudently distinguishes betwixt God and
Man, for he makes God the Author of the Commandments, but allows Man no more
but the Ministry and Embassy. Thou shall find us, says he, attentive and
obedient Disciples to all those things God has Commanded us by thee: so that he
alone shall have the Command, thou shall be only his Minister: he alone shall
speak, but from thy Mouth. And God prescribes this to all his Servants in the
person of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33.7. And thou, O Son of Man, I have set thee a
Watchman unto the House of Israel: therefore thou shall hear the word at my
mouth; and warn them from me.

34. But Peter opening his mouth. It Is an emphatical phrase, which is wont to
be used, when one, after a long silence, begins to speak, as Job 3.1. and of
any matter of singular moment, as Psalm. 78.2. Prove. 8.6. Mat. 5.2. and 13.35.
and that with an eager vehemence, with an ardour and emotion both of mind and
voice, as Jud. 11.35. Job 33.2. Ps. 49.4. Thus the Apostle would have the
Ephesians by prayer to entreat God, that utterance might be given him, that he
might open his mouth, Ephesians. 6.19. where the words (...), by way of explication
are expounded in the following phrase, (...), with boldness.

Of a truth I perceive. That is, What before, being prejudiced, I did not
understand. (...), says Heinsius, he may say, who being really persuaded, is
forced to change his Opinion. Peter was persuaded that it was unlawful for a
Jew to converse with Gentiles. Although the Lord in that vision, which is
mentioned v. 11. and afterward, endeavored to make him forsake this Opinion:
Now being by Cornelius 's Example, more fully convinced that that was true
which was enigmatically by a vision signified to him, he says that he is (...),
which is, conquered by truth, or compelled by the truth to change his Opinion.

God is no respecter of Persons. That is, There is no Man whom God respects for
those Prerogatives, which may be common as well to the bad as good. It is to be
observed, says Estius on Romans 2.11. That this phrase, by which any one is said
to be a respecter of Persons, which indeed is peculiar to the Holy Writ, is
derived from the Hebrews, to whom they are said to take, or accept a Man's
Countenance, or to look upon a Man's Countenance, who, for some quality they see
or know in him, as for his Power, Riches, Nobility, Kinship, do so reverence
and love him, that for his sake, they deviate from Truth, Justice, and Right.
Hence is that reviling of the Judges, Psalm. 82.2. How long will ye judge
unjustly, and accept the Persons of the wicked? Hence the Pharisees, and the
Herodians deceitfully endeavoring to entrap Christ, said, Mat. 12.16. Mark
12.14. We know that thou regardest not the Persons of Men, but teach the way
of God in truth. For this reason Justice is painted blind, because it respects
not the faces of men. But because the Greek word (...), the compound of which
(...), respecting of Persons, signifies both the face and person: From thence
it happens that the Latin Interpreters sometime translate it, to respect the
face, sometime, to respect the person, when as the Hebrew word (...) properly
does only signify faces. Whence also the Syriack translates it, the respecting
of faces, here, and Jam. 2. Thus far Estius.

35. But in every Nation, etc. Therefore there was no need that Foreigners
should follow the legal Rites of the people of Israel, to obtain Grace with
God. That was only requisite to make them be partakers of the Land of Canaan,
and its Temporal Blessings. But as to the Spirituals, it was always true, which
Peter here says, In all Nations, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted with him. Although through prejudice he had not
understood this before. For he speaks of the Uncircumcised Gentiles, and who
did not keep the Law of Moses, such as was Cornelius the Centurion. For this
reason the Prophets, when they reprehend the wickedness of Idolatrous People,
and denounce the Judgments of God against them, they never accuse them for
omitting Circumcision, or keeping of the Sabbath, or violating any such like
Ceremonies, neither do they advise them to keep them: but only remember their
sins against the Law of Nature. For that Covenant did oblige no others besides
the Israelites, with whom it was made. Of this, see Isai. from chapter 13. to chapter
22. and Ezekiel. from chapter 25. to the 33. Also Obadiah, Jonah, and Nahum. And
moreover when other People were called by the Gospel to the knowledge of the
true God, God would not oppress them with the burden of the Ceremonial Law, as
after, chapter 15.

He that fears him. That is, Who fears nothing more, then that he should
commit, or omit any thing by which he should alienate God from him, and make
him less propitious, and favorable to him.

And works righteousness. That is, And lives purely and incorruptly.

He is accepted with him. From the favourableness of the accepter, not from the
worth of the deed or doer. This, says Austin, is not occasioned by the weight
of man's merit, but by the order of the Divine Counsel. Hence Paul, 2 These. 1.
v. 5. does not say the Faithful are worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which
they suffer, but are esteemed worthy, (...), to wit, out of the Grace and Mercy
of God, who will have them reputed such. Neither was Christ's mind otherwise,
Rev. 3.4. although he simply, and without any restriction calls the faithful
worthy to walk with him in white, because he esteemed them so by Grace.

36. The word which God sent, etc. Gr, (...), which also is in Hebrew (...),
This is the word which he sent: That is, Which he signified by a Messenger. The
Particle (...), which forms the Accusative Case, in such like Constructions is
as much as the Pronoun (...) with a Verb Substantive understood, and is to be
rendered by a Nominative Case. Examples make this appear, Hag. 2.5. (...), LXX.
verbatim for (...), This is the word which I have covenanted with you, Zech.
7.7. (...), for (...), Are not those the words which the Lord has cried? In
chapter 8.17. (...), for (...), For these are all those things which I hate. 2
Kings 9.24. (...), for (...), Thou and I are those who rode on Horseback. So in
this place (...), is the same as (...). Which, says Ludovicus de Dieu, the
Rabbis most usual way of speaking confirms; who when they would say (...), say
(...), which is word by word, (...), the word which he sent you. (...) properly
signifies him, but is used by them for that is. So (...) is properly them, and
is used by the Rabbis for they are. The Syriack Translation did well
understand the Hebraisin of this place, which translates it, For this is the
word which he sent.

Declaring Peace by Jesus Christ. That is, When he had foretold the future
peace, and the reconciliation of God with Men by Jesus Christ. Peter, says
Lud. de Dieu, seems to have in view that saying of God in Isa. chapter 56.1. Thus
says the Lord, keep ye Judgment, and do Justice, for my Salvation is near to
come, and my righteousness to be revealed, The Peace or Salvation which was at
hand by Jesus Christ, is there declared, but at the same time the word is sent,
that is, the command to the Children of Israel, that they should work Justice.
And so the Children of Israel themselves are taught, that those only are truly
accepted of God, and even all those who study righteousness. Because there
straight is added, Blessed is the Man that does this, and the Son of Man that
lays hold on it. Whosoever he be, whether Jew or Gentile, without any respect
of Persons. And so he truly says that that which he had said in the 35th verse,
is the self-same speech which God had long before sent to the Children of
Israel, when he declared peace by Jesus Christ, who was to come.

He is Lord of all. That is, Neither is Christ the Lord of one, but of all
Nations. Moses was the Minister of the Law, and that to the Jews alone: But
Christ is the Power of God to give Salvation to every one that believes, to
the Jew first, and then to the Greek, Romans 1.16. Hither pertains what Paul
says, Romans 3.29. Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the
Gentiles, etc. and Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and
has broken down the middle wall of partition between us, etc Hence Luke 2.14.
At Christ's birth the Angels declare peace on Earth to Men: at his Resurrection
all power both in Heaven and Earth is given him, Mat. 28.18. and a little
before his departure he commands his Disciples that they should Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, Mar. 16.15.

37. You know, etc. As much as to say, You have heard by fame and report, that
there is a rumor spread over all Judea, which first begun in Galilee, since
that John Preached Baptism, thereby to stir peoples minds to the expectation of
Christ.

For beginning. The Causal Particle is wanting in the Greek Text. And indeed
deservedly, for it is referred to Verbum, the word, which here is put for the
fame, or report of Jesus, which report is said to have begun in Galilee.

38. Jesus of Galilee, how God anointed him. The Particle (...), how, is
transposed, as Romans 12.3. and the Relative, (...), him, is redundant after the
manner of the Hebrews. But as for the word anointing, says Beza, it is derived
from the Custom of the Jews, whose Kings, Prophets, and Priests used to be
Anointed. Thence it came to pass that they were said to be Anointed by God, on
whom he had bestowed Gifts and Virtues. But here is allusion made to the place
of Isa. 61.1. cited Luke 4.18. which also David Kimchi by a mystical sense
refers to the Messiah.

With the Holy Ghost. That is, With the Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

And with power. That is, Power of Preaching the Gospel with profit and success.

Who went about, etc. That is, In three years time he traveled over all Judea,
that no corner of it should want his good deeds.

Oppressed of the Devil. That is, Troubled with desperate Diseases. All
Diseases, says Calvin, are as so many ferula's which God chastises us withal:
But when God, out of his Fatherly Indulgence, deals mildlier with us, then he
is said to smite us with his Hand: But in his heavier punishments he makes use
of Satan, the Minister of his Wrath, and as it were, his Executioner. And this
distinction is to be diligently kept: For it were an absurd thing to say a man
were possessed by the Devil, who is only troubled with a Fever, or any other
common distemper: But the loss of our Understanding, raging Madness, and other
prodigious Maladies, are fitly, and properly attributed to Satan. For which
reason the Scripture calls those men possessed with the Devil, who fall
suddenly mad, and are hurried with such folly, that they almost seem to be
turned into Beasts.

For God was with him. That is, Because God loved him specially, and always
heard him, Mat. 3.17. Joh. 11.42.

And we. To wit, The Apostles.

Are witnesses. Eyewitnesses.

40. And showed him openly. That is, Openly showed him, being arisen from the
dead.

41. Not to all the people. Who had most cruelly slain him, or delivered him to
be slain.

But unto Witnesses chosen before of God. That is, first designed by God
through Christ. Luke here uses the Verb (...), which properly signifies to
choose with hands lift up, for, in general, to choose: which also Grotius
observes to be done by Josephus and Philo.

Who did eat and drink with him. That is, who lived with him in the most
friendly and familiar manner.

After he rose from the dead. These words are to be joined with the end of the
foregoing verse, as Camero well observes.

42. And he commanded, etc. Lest any one should think, that though indeed those
things were revealed to the Apostles, which in their time were fit to be known,
but yet that there were other things which God would reserve for future Ages,
we must observe that our Lord Jesus, who is here said to command the Apostles
to Preach to all People, that he was appointed by God to be the Judge of the
Quick and the Dead, did foretell, Mat. 24.14. that the Gospel, by which he
should judge the World, should be Preached all over the whole Earth, that it
might be for a Testimony to all Nations, and that then the end should come.
Which thing also these words of Paul seem to allude to, that God shall judge
the secrets of Men according to the Gospel by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.16. not
therefore by any more perfect Doctrine or Revelation.

Ordained by God to be the Judge of the quick and the dead. A Judge according
to the Hebrew Custom does in this place denote such a Judge, who at the same
time has the Dominion, and chief Power over them to whom he is appointed Judge.
From whence, Romans 14.9. Christ is said for this end to be dead, and live again,
that he might have the chief Dominion conjoined with the chief power, as well
over the Souls of the dead, as over both the Bodies and Souls of the living.
For this, says he, Christ died and rose again, that he might have dominion
over both the living and the dead.

43. To him give all the Prophets witness, Isa. 53.4, 5 and 6. chap. 59.20.
Jer. chap. 31.34. Dan. 9.24. Mich. 7.18 and 19. Zech. 13.1. Mal. 3.17.

Remission, etc. That is, That by the help of Christ alone, all, whether (...)
or Gentiles, may obtain Remission of sins, who with a sincere mind to embrace
Christ, as the only Savior appointed by God for them who live according to his
Doctrine.

44. The Holy Ghost fell on all. That is, The gifts of the Holy Spirit were
poured out upon all. From whence Peter below, v. 47. and chapter 11.17. concludes
that the Uncircumcised Nations are to be initiated to Christ, and to the Church
of God by Baptism: seeing that God, by the pouring out of Spiritual gifts upon
them, had made it evident that they were to be received by him through faith
only, without any observation of the Mosaical Law. The same Argument Paul uses,
Gal. 3. v. 2, and 5.

45. Of the Circumcision which believed. That is, Six Jews believing in Christ,
whom Peter had brought with him. Henceforwards now Luke begins to distinguish
the Circumcised Believers from the Uncircumcised, as Paul used to do, calling
the former Jews, the other Greeks, as Luke himself below, chap. 19 and 20.

46. Speaking with Tongues. That is, With diverse, and those strange ones.

48. And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. That is, He
commanded them, that professing the faith in Christ himself, they should be
Baptized according to his Institution.

Then, etc. That Peter condescended to this request of Cornelius, and those
that were with him, appears from chap. following v. 3. Thus being made a
So-journer, and Guest of the Gentiles, he made it evident that a Jew might
lawfully do that, which before he thought a sin, that is, eat with Gentiles
that feared God. In like manner he eats with the Gentiles at Antioch, and after
their manner eating all sorts of food, which for that he had left off
afterward, because of the coming of the Brethren of Jerusalem, he was
therefore rebuked by Paul before all the Congregation of the Faithful, Gal.
2.11, etc.

CHAP. XI.
AND Brethren. That is, The rest of the Faithful.

The Gentiles. Uncircumcised.

Contended, etc. Those who of Jews, were made Christians, chid Peter, not for
that he had preached the Word of God to Gentiles: for no Law, or Ancient
Tradition forbad to teach the way of Salvation to all who desired to know, and
be admitted into it; but for that he had conversed, and sojourned with them for
some days. See our Notes on chapter 10.28.

3. Wherefore, etc. The word wherefore, here does not denote an interrogation,
but the subject of reproof.

4. But Peter beginning. That is, Being about civilly, as Brothers ought to do,
to excuse it.

Expounded to them in order. That is, Related the whole order of what was done
with truth and sincerity, as Apuleius in his Apology words it. Moreover the
Relation is the same which we had in the foregoing Chapter, and in the same
words: where if any thing in it need explaining, the Reader may have recourse.

12. We entered into the man's house. That is, Into his house, for entering into
which, you chid me.

15. But when I began to speak. As if he should say, Whilst I was earnestly
discoursing with them, and they believed me. See what we said, chapter 1. v. 1.

As on us. Apostles, and other believing Jews.

How that he said. That is, What he said, to wit, when he gave us the command
concerning the promise of the Father to be expected at Jerusalem, and about our
staying there, until we were endued with power from on high; as you may see,
chapter 1. v. 5. compared with Luke 24.49.

John, etc. See our Notes on chap. 1. v. 5.

If therefore, etc. Peter says he cannot deny a Brotherly Communion with the
Gentiles, on whom the pouring out of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, does manifest
them to be Adopted Gods Children.

18. They held their peace. That is, They complained no further, knowing the
will of God.

Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. As if he
should say, Even God by his Spirit has Circumcised the hearts of those
Uncircumcised Gentiles, who believe in Christ without Carnal Circumcision, as
says Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and of Hearts of Stone, has made them Hearts of Flesh,
as Ezekiel, chap. 11.9. says; that so being reformed, and regenerated, they
might obtain eternal life.

19. And they which were, etc. Now Luke returns to the Context of the former
History. He had hinted before, chapter 8. v. 1. and 4. that after Stephens death,
when the rage of the Wicked increased, all of them being terrified fled hither
and thither: inso much that only the Apostles staid at Jerusalem, When by this
means the Body of the Church was rent, it happened that by the dispersion of
those that fled, the Gospel was spread amongst far distant Countries, which
before was enclosed, as it were in a Barn, within the Walls of one City. And so
it came to pass that the name of Christ passing over Seas and Mountains, became
known to the remotest parts of the World. And thus, according to the Prophesy
of Isaiah, chapter 10.22. The Consumption has overflown in Righteousness. See our
Notes, chapter 8. v. 1.

From the tribulation. That is, From the Persecution.

Under Stephen. Gr. (...), upon Stephen, That is, as Erasmus and Beza rightly
translate it, for Stephen. In which sense we say in Latin, super hac re doleo,
That is, for this thing. So, says Ludovicus de Dieu, (...) with a Dative Case
properly signifies upon, as also, for, Luc. 1.29. (...), she was troubled upon,
that is, for, or at his saying. Hence we learn, that if the constancy of one
man stir up Cruelty in the minds of wicked men, the blame of the whole
misfortune is unjustly laid on him: Neither does Luke mark it as any disgrace
to Stephen, when he relates that on his account, the Church was more than
usually persecuted: but rather a great Commendation, that as a valiant Leader,
he had by his own example animated the rest to fight Courageously.

As far as Phenice. Phenicia joins with Syria, and is Neighbor to Galilee, and
its chief Cities were Tire, Sidon, and Beryth. The Palm Trees of this Country
were most commendable, which the Greeks call (...), Phoenix, from whence, it is
probable the Country derived its Name. Here the Verses of Sidonius Apollinaris
to Caes. Jul. Val. Majorianus, deserve to be inserted.

Each Country does its proper wares supply,
Chaldaea Spikenard, the Indies Ivory.
Assyria Gems, the Arabia 's Frankincense,
Sera of Wools has store, and sends from thence;
Atthis has Honey, and Phenicia Palms, etc.
And Cyprus. See what we have spoke of this Country, chap. 4.36.

And Antiochia. The most famous City of Syria, standing in that part which
borders on Cilicia.

Preaching the Word of God to none but to the Jews only. Being afraid, lest if
they should preach the Gospel to Strangers, they should cast Childrens bread to
Dogs.

20. Men of Cyprus and Cyrene. That is, Inhabitants there, but of Jewish
Extraction, and Educated in the Jewish Religion. See our Notes, chap. 2.5 and
10.

Spoke unto the Grecians. By a singular impulse of God. These Grecians, says
Calvin, are not called (...), but (...). And therefore many think they were of
Jewish Extraction, though Natives of Greece, which thought I do not approve of.
For those Jews of whom he spoke a little before, since they were partly
Cyprians, must needs be reckoned amongst them; because the Jews make Cyprus a
part of Greece. And Luke distinguishes them from those, whom he afterward
calls (...). Moreover, having said that the Word was Preached to none but to
the Jews, and noted those who being banished their Country, lived in Cyprus and
Phenicia: as it were correcting this exception, he says that the Grecians were
taught by some of these. Certainly that Antithesis makes us expound it as meant
of the Gentiles. For Luke shows, that some few did more freely disperse the
Gospel, because they were not ignorant of the calling of the Gentiles, since
that Christ had commanded, Mark 16.15. that from the time of his Resurrection,
the Gospel should be promiscuously Preached to the whole world. And the most
learned Grotius says that we should not in this place read (...), as it is in
the vulgar Greek Copies, but (...), as it is in the Alexandrine Copy in
England, and as the Syriack, Latin, and Arabic read it. Besides, says he,
from the time of the Grecian, that is, the Macedonian Empire, the Jews, from
the prevailing part, called all the Uncircumcised, (...). So is that word used,
2 Mac. 4.36. And hence (...), 2 Mac. 4.10. (...), 2 Mac. 4.15. (...), 2 Mac.
6.9. and 11.24. strange Customs, or the Customs of the Gentiles. And in Paul
often.

Preaching the Lord Jesus. The whole sum of the Gospel is comprehended in
Christ, who reconciles us to the Father, and begets us again by his Spirit,
that Satan being overthrown, the Kingdom of God may be raised up in us. See our
Notes, chapter 8.12.

21. And the hand, etc. That is, And God was present with the Men of Cyprus and
Cyrene, Preaching the Gospel to the Greeks or Gentiles, and helped them, so
that many of the Grecians were stirred up, and persuaded to believe in Christ.

22. Tidings came, etc. That is, As soon as the fame of the Conversion of these
Grecians or Gentiles, came to the Ears of the Church at Jerusalem, which had
learnt from Peter that God by evident signs had testified, that, together with
the Jews, the Gentiles should by their guidance be called to partake of Christ's
Grace, the Members of that Church sent Barnabas a Cyprian, that he might make a
further improvement of the rudiments of Faith at Antioch, and give form to the
Building begun, that the Church might be rightly established there.

23. Had seen the Grace of God. That is, That the Gentiles, by the free
breathing of the Divine Spirit, were sincerely converted to Christ.

With purpose of heart. That is, With firm love.

To abide in the Lord. That is, To cleave to Christ, and be tied to his Justice.

24. Full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith. That is, Most plentifully furnished,
and adorned with the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost, and above all, with
a lively Faith.

And much people was added, etc. Now when the number of the believing Gentiles
was greater, Luke says they increased by Barnabas's persuasion. Thus, says
Calvin, does the Building of the Church go forward, when with mutual Consent,
they-help one another, and what is begun by one, is heartily approved of by the
others.

25. Departed, etc. Barnabas was not afraid, so that Christ should be promoted
by the prosperous success of the Gospel, though Paul's coming should detract
something from him.

26. Christians. John of Antioch, in his Chronologica, says that the name
Christian begun to be used at Antioch, when Evodius was Bishop there. His words
are, as Seldom translates them. About the beginning of the Reign of Claudius
Caesar, ten years after the Ascension of our Lord and God Jesus Christ,
Evodius, after St. Peter the Apostle, was created Bishop of Antioch, a City of
Syria the great, where he also was made Patriarch. And in his time they were
called Christians, their Bishop Evodius living with them, and giving them that
Name. For Christians before were called Nazaraeans and Galilaeans: Evodius
according to Jerome, was created Bishop by Peter, in the third year of Claudius
Augustus, and of the common Christian Account, 44. It Is certain that about the
beginning of Claudius his Reign, the believers in Christ were called
Christians, as others are wont to be from him, whose Doctrine they follow; who
otherwise were called Disciples, Brethren, and Believers, and in contempt,
Nazaraeans, and Galilaeans, as from the very words about Claudius, which next
follow, may be gathered. But this name, not derived from Christ after the
Greek, but Latin form, is by some, both of the Ancients and Modern, said to be
that new name; by which the Prophet Isaiah Prophesied that Gods Servants should
be called, chapter 65.15. But, says Seldom, though this name had its beginginning
thus in that place, nevertheless its use does not seem to be so frequent
amongst the Apostles themselves, or in their language for some years following.
For besides that place wherein it is recorded in the Acts, that the Disciples
were first called Christians at Antioch, it only occurs in these following.
King Agrippa to Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. And Peter
unto the scattered Jews, But if any suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed. Neither is there any mention of the Christian name in any other of the
Apostles Epistles, much less are all they to whom they are directed, called
Christians. But they almost always greet them by the names of Saints,
Believers, or Churches, with the addition either of the place, or of Jesus
Christ, or of God, or the like, or plainly call them Jews, as in each Epistle
of James and Peter. Therefore for seven years, or thereabouts after Christ's
Ascension, as before, none was of those that believed, who were afterward
called Christians, besides Jews by birth or those, who were received of them by
the entire right of Proselyteship.

27. But in those days. That is, In the same year, in which the Believers in
Christ; whether Jews, and Circumcised, or of the Uncircumcised Gentiles, began
to be called Christians.

Came. Gr. (...), came down.

Prophets. That is, Some of those that believed in Christ, who were next to the
Apostles, and by Gods special Revelation of some particular Mysteries relating
to edifying the Church, did foretell things to come. Such as these are also
mentioned afterward, chapter 13.1. 1 Cor. 12.28.14.32. Ephesians. 4.11.

29. And there stood up. That is, Begun some sort of action as before, chapter
5.17. Exodus 32.1. Deuteronomy. 32.38. Esd. 106, etc.

One of them. That is, Of the Prophets, who came to Antioch from Jerusalem.

Named Agabus. From the Hebrew (...), Hagaba, mentioned, Esd. 2.24. or (...),
Hagab, in v. 46. which next follows in the same Chapter of Esdras.

Signified by the Spirit. That is, By the Divine breathing of the Spirit.

That there should be a great dearth throughout all the world. This universal
Famine foretold by Agabus, began in the fourth year of Claudius Caesar; in
which Herod Agrippa died, before his death, as appears by the Chronicle of
Eusebius, and by Orosius, lib. 7. c. 6. This Famine still raging in Judea,
Helena, Queen of the Adjabens, in the Confines of Assyria, and Mesopotamia,
converted to the true Worship of God by a certain Jew, did, by plenty of
provisions bought in Egypt, abundantly supply the Jews in their wants, as
appears by Josephus, 20 Antiq. 2, 3. Another particular Famine at Rome, in the
second year of Claudius, preceeded this universal one, of which, Dio, lib. 20.
But another happened in the eleventh year of the same Claudius: of which
Tacitus lib. 12. c. 43. Suetonius in Claudius, c. 18. and Orosius in the lately
mentioned place.

29. But the Disciples, That is, The Christians who lived out of Judea, and
more especially the Antiochians.

As any one was able. That is, According to the plenty every one had.

Every one purposed. That is, Decreed, and determined.

To send Ministry. That is, Alms, or as the English Version has it, relief. So
the word (...), Ministry, is used for Alms, 2 Cor. 8.4.9. 1 and 2. (...), to
Minister, Heb. 6.10. who relieve the poor.

To the Brethren which dwelt in Judea. That is, To the Christians in Judea,
especially to those who dwelt in Jerusalem, who had impoverished themselves by
selling their Possessions, and bestowing the Money to public uses, as you may
see, chapter 2.45. and 4.34. And therefore Paul recommends them sometimes to the
Achaians, and sometimes to the Macedonians.

30. Which also they did. That is, They brought this good purpose to effect.

Sending. To wit, What was gathered.

To the Elders. Gr. (...) This is the first mention of Elders or Presbyters in
the Church. By the Jews, says Grotius, not only those are called (...),
Seniors, who were chief in the public judgments, but also who presided in
every Synagogue. The second Law in the Book of Theodosius about the Jews,
translates Presbyters: In another Law they are called, The Fathers of the
Synagogue. But the whole Government of the Churches of Christ, is conformed to
the example of the Jewish Synagogue. Even also amongst the Grecians, Dionysius
Halicarnasseus in his second Book, says, The Ancients were wont to call their
Nobles, and old Men Presbyters.

By the hands of Paul and Barnabas. For by, the Hebrews say (...), by the hand.
There is mention of this Ministry being fulfilled after, chapter 12.25. From whence
it appears that Paul omitted this Journey, because it did not belong to his
purpose, when he tells the Journeys to Jerusalem by him undertaken, Gal.
1.18.2.1.

CHAP. XII.
1. ABout that time. That is, In which the Famine foretold by Agabus began,
Paul and Barnabas came to Jerusalem, to convey the Contribution to the
impoverished Brethren, as appears by the conclusion of the foregoing Chapter,
as also by the end of this.

Herod the King. The Grandchild of Herod the Great, by his Son Aristobulus,
firnamed Agrippa, as the Syriack Translation here calls him: On whom Caius
Caligula Caesar bestowed the Tetrarchies of Philip and Lysanias, with the Title
of King, and afterward the Tetrarchy of Galilee, which Caligula took from
Herod Antipas: To these Claudius Caesar added Judaea and Samaria; so that he
possessed his Grandfathers whole Kingdom, which had been divided into
Tetrarchy's by Augustus, Jos. 19. Antiq. 4. This Agrippa in the second year of
the Empire of Caius Caligula, as he passed through Alexandria, whose Citizens
bearing an inveterate hatred against the Jews, were much grieved that any of
that Nation should be honored with the Title of King, was played upon, and
scoffed at in the place of exercise, by the Satyrs of their Poets. And a
certain Madman, named Carabas, was brought into the place of exercise, who
night and day used to wander naked through the Streets, and so placed, that he
might be seen by all. Then they put a paper Crown upon his Head, and a straw
Mat upon his Body instead of a Robe: for a Scepter one gave him into his Hand a
piece of a Reed taken off the ground. Having thus adorned him with Royal Robes,
and (as Stage Players use) transformed him into a King, the young Men with
poles on their Shoulders waited on him as his Guard: then some came to pay
their respects to him, others desired him to confirm their Privileges, others
advised with him about the public Good. After this, all the bystanders
shouted, calling him aloud Marin; which name in the Syriack Language signifies
Lord. Philo against Flaccus relates these things. And thus the King of the Jews
was derided by others, just as about five years before, they had mocked at the
Royal Dignity of their true Lord Jesus Christ.

Stretched forth his hands. A Hebraism. That is, He undertook. See Genesis 3.22.
Deuteronomy. 12.7. Luc. 9.62.

To vex certain of the Church. Because they oppugned the Rites and Ceremonies
of his Forefathers, of which Josephus says he was a religious observer, lib.
19. Antiq. c. 7.

2. And he killed James. The Elder, the Son of Zebedy. And so he was the first
Apostle that was Baptized with that Baptism of blood, of which Christ speaks,
Mat. 20.23. But Clemens Alexandrinus adds from an Ancient Tradition, lib. 7.
Hypotypose^^n apud Eusebius. 2. Hist. Eccl. 8. and Suidas in the word (...), that
that very man who had accused James, when he saw how boldly this Apostle gave
testimony for Christ, did ingenuously confess that he also was a Christian. And
as they were both going to the place of Execution, he on the way desired pardon
of James: and James, after having paused a while, answered, Peace be to thee,
and kissed him: and so they both ended their lives by the stroke of the Ax.

With the Sword. (...) killing with the Sword, or beheading, was a sort of
criminal punishment of the four kinds of death, by which the Jews made the
guilty suffer, as we have noted upon Mat. 20.19. Sanhedrin, fol. 3. B. If those
who seduce people to a strange worship, are but few, they are stoned, and their
goods are not Confiscated: But if they be many, they die by the sword, and
their goods are Confiscated. James indeed was but one. But, says the most
famous Lightfoot, Herod knew Peter, and a great many more, who in his judgment
did persuade the people to an irreligious worship, and he acts with James, as
he intended to act with the rest.

3. But because he saw it pleased the Jews. To wit, The death of James.

4. To bring him forth to the people. That is, To expose, and deliver him to
the punishment of a public death.

5. By the Church. That is, By the Christians assembled from house to house, as
appears from v. 2. and 17.

For him. That is, For his deliverance.

6. Bound with two Chains. Whereas otherwise the Criminal had only one Chain
tied to his right hand, which was also tied to the left hand of the Soldier,
who had the charge of guarding him, as may be seen in Plin. lib. 10. Ep. 30.
Senec. Ep. 5. and lib. de tranquil. c. 10. Augustine also seems to hint the
same thing upon the 118th Psalm: Two are bound and sent to the Judge, a Thief,
and one bound with him, one of them a wicked person, and the other innocent,
both of them tied with one Chain, but yet far enough from one another. For the
Chain was of such a length as did not hinder their convenient passing along,
and that there should be no pain, and no danger of the Prisoners escaping, as
the Theodosian Codex phrases it.

And the keepers before the door kept the Prison. Here is described the
diligent efforts of Peter's Enemies to keep him securely, that so the power of
God in delivering him, might be more manifest.

7. A light shined. At the approach of the Angel, as Luke 2.9.

On the apartment. That is, In that part of the Prison, in which Peter was
chained, which the Syriack Translation calls (...), the house.

And smiting Peter's side. As they do, who have a mind to rouse any one.

Quickly. That is, Without delay.

8. Gird thy self. That is, Gird thy Coat on, as the custom was, Jer. 13.1.
Peter had lain down in his Coat.

Bind on thy Sandals. Dio translates caligas, (...), Soldiers Shoes. These sort
of Shoes were mostly used by the Jews, which the Greek Text calls (...); they
cover the soles of the feet, and seem to be the same with the Shoes called
Dusty, because, that by reason of their shortness, they did not keep out the
Dust.

Cast thy Garment about thee. That is, Thy outward Garment, as those do, who
are going abroad.

9. He wist not, etc. As if he should say, He believed all this to be but a
dream, because so unlookt for a deliverance did exceed all belief. For when
those things happen we most wish for, we can scarcely believe them to have
happened, see Genesis 45.26. Job 29.24. Psalm. 126.1. So when Flaminius, by an
Herald declared the Grecians Freemen, and only liable to their own Laws: When
the People, says Livy, lib. 33. heard the Heralds voice, their joy was so
great, as not to be bounded. They could scarce believe that what they heard was
real. Being amazed, they gazed at one another, and not trusting their own Ears,
they fancied all but a dream, each of them asking his Fellow what his thoughts
of it were.

10. But passing by the first and the second Watch. The Prison in which Peter
was, if we may believe Adrichomius, was in the Court which encompassed Herod's
Palace about, (for it was Herod's, not the Cities Prison) where the Kings
Soldiers kept Guard. Betwixt the Gate of this Prison, and the Iron Gate of
Jerusalem, there were diverse Entries, which the French, call Corpse de Guard,
where used to be Centries. And therefore the Aethiopick version is the best,
And when they had passed the first and second Entry.

Which opened to them of its own accord. That is said to be done, (...),
freely, or of its own accord, which is done without human care or labor, Lev.
25.5. 2 Kings 19.29. Wisd. 17.6. Mar. 4.28. so the Kingdom of Christ is called
a Stone cut without hands, Dan. 2.34. That is, Fashioned without the labor or
industry of Man. And Homer calls him (...), self-taught, whom God has taught.

And going out, they passed through one street. Or, one broad way within the
City.

And forthwith the Angel departed from him. Leaving the rest to Peter's
Industry, now he was placed in safety.

11. Peter coming to himself. His Amazement being shaken off.

Now I know, etc. That is, Now I perceive that my deliverance has happened in
reality, not in vision, and that by the help of an Angel sent from Heaven by
the Lord, lest I should be slain by Herod, as the Enemies of the Christian
Religion, the Jews, desired.

12. And considering. That is, Deliberating with himself what he should do.

He came to the house of Mary. This Matron seems to have been a Widow, because
the House was called hers, without mentioning her Husband. Hereby also it
appears that whereas, chapter 4.34. it is said, that as many as had Houses, sold
them, those Houses are to be excepted in which they dwelt and met together, as
also is shown before, chapter 2.46.

Whose surname was Mark. This John Mark, the Son of Mary, seems to be called
Barnabas's Sisters Son, Col. 4.10. Betwixt this Man and Paul, there happened a
little Coldness, ch, 15.39. But they were soon reconciled, as good Men use to
be, and then a strict Friendship succeeded this Coldness. Hence it is that
Paul, Col. 4.11. numbers him with Jesus Justus, alone, of the Circumcised,
among his helpers, and 2 Timothy 4.11. desires Timothy to bring him along with him
to Rome, as one that would be very useful to him.

Where many were gathered together. For seeing that the Believers, of whom
there was already a great number, could not meet together all in one body, they
divided themselves into diverse Congregations in several Houses to pray to God
for Peter. See v. 17. From hence it appears, that when necessity, and the rage
of Persecutors force us to it, holy Meetings, though in the night, are not
unlawful. For that this Meeting was held in the night, is plain from v. 6 and
18.

13. The door of the Gate. Heb. (...) Judge. 18.16 and 17. Ezekiel. 40.11. That is
called, says Kimchi in his Book of Roots, (...), which is without the doors of
the Gate. For all that which is within and without, as also the doors, and
outward Threshold, is called (...), in as much as it is joined to the door
post, and apper Threshold. But that is called (...) which is always open, and
though the doors be shut, is always left open.

A Damsel came to see. Gr. (...), to hearken, that is, to spy who it was that
knocked at the door so late at night. She came, says Grotius, that she might
know by his voice who he was, lest she should rashly let any one in.

Named Rhoda. Heb. (...), a Rose. Many Women's Names are derived from Flowers,
Herbs, and Trees, as (...), Susanna from a Lilly, (...), Hadessa, from a
Myrtle. The Greek name Rhode, (...), is also mentioned in the fragments of
Menander.

15. It is his Angel. That is, A Messenger sent from him. So John the Baptist
is called an Angel, that is, a Messenger, Mat. 11.10. The Disciples of John
sent to Christ, Angels, Messengers, Luke 7.24. The Disciples of Christ sent
into a Village of the Samaritans, Luke 9.52. The Spies sent by Joshuah, whom
Rahab entertained, James 2.25. This is the simple interpretation of the Greek
Noun (...), neither have we any reason to think that the Believers understood
it here otherwise: since they had never heard that Heavenly Angels needed to
knock at the door to obtain entrance; and they knew it did not agree with the
Nature of Spirits, who with their subtileness can penetrate the most solid
Bodies. Therefore they thought that the Damsel, out of her earnest desire of
Peter's deliverance, which all the Godly had, had understood the Messenger
discoursing of Peter, as if he had said, that himself was Peter.

16. They were astonished. That is, They were struck with an unlooked for joy.

17. But he beckening unto them with his hand to hold their peace. That is,
Desiring silence by the beckening of his hand, as afterward, chapter
13.16.19.33.21.40. Quimilian speaking of the Hands, says, They are either held
up or down, according as we consent or deny.

How the Lord had brought him out. Peter does not give the honor of his
deliverance out of Herod's Prison to the Angel, but to the Lord of Angels, who
made use of the Angel in it.

Tell ye to James. An eminent Servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
peculiarly selected, together with John and me, to Preach the Gospel to the
Jews, Gal. 2.9. and who, some believe, governed then the Church at Jerusalem.

And to the Brethren. That is, And to the rest of them who live in the strict
brotherly Fellowship of Christ's Disciples. So also in other places by Brethren
are meant Christians, as before, chapter 2.30.10.23.11. 1 and 12. James 1. 2 and 9,
etc. But Peter would have this deliverance told to all the Christians living in
Jerusalem, that so he might free them from their trouble about him, and they
render thanks to God.

And going out, he went out into another place. Out of Jerusalem, as it seems.
Some say he went toward Antioch, and then by long Journies came to Rome. But
Lactantius has recorded in his Golden Book of the Deaths of the Persecutors,
that Peter came not to Rome till the Reign of Nero, 25 years after Christ's
Ascension into Heaven. Moreover Damasus, to whom is ascribed the Book of the
Popes inserted in the first Tome of the Councils, says that Peter came to Rome
in Nero's time. Ration. Temp. p. 1. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Therefore what Petavius writes: The Acts of the rest of the Apostles (besides
Peter and Paul) not being treated of with any faithfulness, or credit worthy of
an History, remain in obscurity, this also may deservedly be said of both
Peter's Bishoprics, of Anti^ch and Rome, of this being extended to 25 years, of
(...) Acts at Rome, of the Popedom there erected, (...) his contention with
Simon Magus, which began the^^ and of a Successor appointed by him.

18. Amongst the Soldiers. That is, Those (...) guarded Peter.

What was become of Peter. That is, What had happened to Peter, that they could
not see him in the Prison.

19. Examining the Keepers. That is, Causing a Judicial Process to be made
about the Keepers.

He commanded them to be brought out. That is, To be haled out to Punishment.
Plin. lib. 10. Ep. to Trajan, speaking of the Christians, says, When they
again confessed, and that I had the third time questioned them with threats of
punishment, seeing them obstinate, I commanded them to be brought out, that is,
to be put to death. And this is a common phrase amongst the Ancients, as may be
seen in Seneca de Ira very often, in Suetonius in his Caligula, etc. He that
translated the Canons of Petrus ^lexandrinus into Latin for (...), to be
brought away, reads (...), having translated it to be choakt, that is, to be
strangled.

And going down from Judaea to Caesarea. Which before was called Strato's
Tower, of which before, chapter 8.40. Josephus likewise makes mention of this
Journey, 19 Antiq. 7.

He there abode. In the Greek there is an Ellipsis of the Adverb (...), there,
as also afterward, chapter 14.3.

20. But he was displeased. Gr. (...), revolving war in his mind. The Cardinal
Baronius was of Opinion that Herod was angry with the People of Tire and Sidon,
two maritime Cities of Phoenicia, situate near the Borders of his Kingdom,
because they received Peter in his flight. But this is uncertain, as Tirinus
has well noted. See what we have said of Tire and Sidon, Mat. 11.20.

They came with one accord. That is, The Ambassadors by the common Appointment
of both Nations, came to Herod.

Who was of the Kings Bedchamber. That is, Who had the Office of the Kings
Chamberlain.

Desired Peace, etc. That is, They by their Prayers endeavored to reconcile
the Kings mind unto them, because their Country could not be nourished, or
subsist without the assistance of Judaea, Galilee, and other Countries under
the power and command of Herod.

From him. Gr. From the Royal, Viz. Country, That is, From the Country
subject to King Herod.

21. And upon a set day. That is, On a day appointed for this, to wit, the
second day of those Plays which he exhibited in honor of Claudius Casar. So
Josephus 9 Antiq. 7. Arrayed in a Royal Apparel, (as Josephus in the same place
says,) clothed with a Garment all over wrought with Silver of admirable
Workmanship, which reflecting the Beams of the Sun, shined so bright, that all
those that beheld him, were seized with reverence and fear.

Sat upon his Throne. Gr. Tribunal. (...), in this place is a certain sort of
high seat placed in the Theater, whence Josephus, in the lately cited place,
says, He came into the Theater. Every place, says Grotius, that is raised
higher than the rest, is by the Greeks called (...), and by the Syrians (...),
which word the Syriack Translation here uses.

Made an Oration to them. To wit, To the Ambassadors of Tire and Sidon, that
for the future he might keep those people under.

22. But the people gave a shout. Foolishly flattering him.

The voice of a God, and not of a Man. Josephus thus expresses the meaning of
this flattering Acclamation: Presently, says he, these pernicious flatterers
shouting. salute him as a God, praying that he would be propitious to them:
That they had hitherto reverenced him as a Man, but that now they did
acknowledge, and confess that there was something in him more excellent than
mortal frailty can attain unto.

And immediately the Angel of the Lord sinote him. With a grievous pain about
his Heart and Entrails, as appears from Josephus, 19 Antiq. 7. whose words are
these: Not long after he looking upwards, perceived an Owl perched upon a Cord,
which he thought was (...), a Messenger of his misfortune; whereas formerly he
had denounced unto him his felicity, and conceived thereupon a most hearty and
inward grief: and suddenly he was seized with a terrible griping in his belly,
which began with very great vehemen^y. For when long ago Herod being bound by
the command of Tiberius, leaned on a Tree, on which an Owl sat, a certain
German foretold that the face of Affairs changing, he should shortly be raised
up to the highest Dignity. But yet remember, says he in Josephus, 18 Antiq. 8.
that whenever thou shall see this bird again, thou shall die within five days
after. Therefore Agrippa, being near his death, called the same Owl (...), the
Messenger of Evil, whereas before it was the Messenger of Good. Yet Eusebius
has described the mentioned place of Josephus, 19 Antiq. 7. about Agrippa
going to die, without mentioning the Owl, as if Josephus meant the Angel, by
whom Herod is here said to be smitten, which is no small oversight.

The Angel of the Lord. In inflicting Evil, God makes use of the Ministry of
Angels, Exodus 12.7. 2 Samuel 24.19. 2 Kings 19.35.

Because he gave not God the Glory. That is, Because he had neither reproved,
nor rejected these impious flatterers, as may be seen in Joseph. 19 Antiq. 7.
God did not punish Herod presently for James's death, and the ill treatment of
other Christians, because in those Actions he might have some pretense of
Ignorance, and inconsiderate Zeal: But for his sinning against the Majesty of
the Deity, in not hindering those impious flatterers.

Eaten of Worms. In a very Ancient Greek Manuscript of Beza, is added, (...),
as yet alive. Josephus says that Herod was tormented with the Gripes for five
days together, without intermission, Luke tells the cause of those Gripes, by
the Worms gnawing his Entrails to pieces, that being alive, he might be
sensible he was not a God. Hence it was, that looking upon his Friends. Behold
(says he, Joseph. 19 Antiq. 7.) I, whom you esteem a God, am commanded to
leave this life, fatal necessity refuting your Lie; and I whom you have styled
immortal, am by death snatched away. But the Will of the Celestial Deity must
be endured: Neither have I lived obscurely, but in such Felicity, as all may
proclaim me blessed. So we read of Antiochus Epiphanes, when he was about to
die, 2 Mac. 9. etc. So that Worms in abundance came out of the body of this
wicked man, and while he was yet living, his Flesh drop^ off amidst his Aches
and Torments, so that the stench of his Rottenness was noysom to his whole
Army. So that he who but a while before conceited himself as high as the Stars,
could not now be carried, because of his intolerable filthy smell. Then it was
that he began to abate his haughty Pride, being smitten by an hidden wound, and
admonished by a Divine Rod to come to know himself, since that his Torments
every moment grew greater and greater. And when even he himself could not
endure his own stink, he spoke thus: It is but just that we should be subject
to God, and a mortal Man should not in his proud Thoughts equalize himself to
him. Josephus writes that Herod the Great a little before his death, was
troubled with crawling Worms about his rotten privy Members, 17 Antiq. 8. In
the Melpomene of Herodotus, Pheretima, the Queen of the Cyrenians, though
living, swarmed with Worms. In the Boeoticks of Pausanias, Cassander the Son of
Antipater, his skin was filled with Water, and from all parts of his body, yet
alive, Worms broke out. In the Pseudomantes of Lucian, the Impostor Alexander
died as the Son of Podalirius, his foot being putrified up to the Groin, and
swarming with Worms. Eusebius 8 Hist. 16. says, that out of the Emperor
Galerius Maximianus's bowels came out infinite quantities of Worms, which
caused a deadly smell. Dioclesian, says Cedrenus, before he died, had his
Tongue putrified, and great heaps of Worms came out of his Jaws. His body,
says Eutychius Alexandrinus of the same Emperor, was so full of Worms, that
it dropped them on the ground, and his Tongue, with his Jaws, were consumed, and
so he died. Concerning Julian, Uncle of Julian the Apostate, whose privy
Members rotted off, Sozomenus, lib. 5. c. 8. And there the putrified flesh was
turned into Worms, and the malignity of his Distemper was above the Physicians
Art. Nestorius also, if we may believe Evagrius. lib. 1. c. 1. having his
Tongue eaten out with Worms, passed out of the miseries of this life, to suffer
more grievous punishments inflicted on him by God's just Judgments, and those
to last to all Eternity. Like to this is that which Baronius, (out of Surius,)
ad Annum 698. relates of Dodon, who had slain Lambert the Bishop of Tongres.
All Dodons bowels of a sudden putrified, and he voided them out at his mouth,
stinking strangely: At length his body being corrupted by a Consumption, and
the Worms, stunk so intolerably, that it was thrown into the Meuse.

He gave up the Ghost. In the fifty fourth year of his Age, the seventh of his
Reign, and the fourth year of Claudius Caesar, the fifth day after those
vehement Gripes, which the Lord by his Angel inflicted on him, because he had
not left Gods honor untouched, as Peter before, chapter 10.26. And Paul and
Barnabas hereafter, chapter 14.14 and 15. The Children which Herod Agrippa left,
were one Son named Agrippa, about seventeen years of Age, who at that time was
educated at Rome by Claudius: But he had three Daughters: Of which Berenice was
seventeen years old, and Married to her Uncle Herod, King of Chalcis in Syria.
The other two were then Virgins: Mariamne Aged ten years, and betrothed by her
Father to Julius Archelaus, the Son of Chelcias: and Drusilla six years old,
and betrothed to Epiphanes, the Son of Antiochus, the King of Comagena, Joseph.
19 Antiq. 7.

24. But the Word of God grew and multiplied. That is, This Enemy of the
Servants of Christ being dead in this manner, the Preachers of the Gospel
gathered new strength, and every day more and more were converted to the faith.

25. When they had fulfilled their Ministry. That is, When by a supply of Money
sent them by the Antiochians, as before, chapter 11.29 and 30. they had relieved
the necessities of the Brethren dwelling at Jerusalem.

And taken John with them, whose surname was Mark. The Son of that Matron,
which is described by him before, v. 12.

CHAP. XIII.
PRophets. Who being by Inspiration made privy to hidden things, did also
foretell things to come, to know which, the Church was concerned.

And Teachers. Who did find out, and interpret the meaning of the Word of God,
which was not obvious to every one.

With Herod the Tetrarch. Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee, is simply called
Herod the Tetrarch, Mat. 14.1. Luke 9.7.

2. And they ministered. That is, Publicly discharged their Office. This Office
seems to have been that of Prophesying, and Teaching, for in the verse
immediately preceding, they are called Prophets and Teachers. So cardinal
Cajetan understood it, therefore Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius render
the word (...), Ministering, by (...), Preaching, But the Syrian, and Arabian
interpret it (...), Praying. For they restrained here the word (...), to
public Prayers only, because of the Fast mentioned next to it, to which, in
the next following verse Prayer is joined. In the same sense Erasmus renders
Sacrificing; for Prayers, and the Praises of God are esteemed as Sacrifices,
Heb. 13.15. There is none, says Beza, that is indifferently versed in the
Greek Tongue, who knows not that (...) is mainly said of public Offices. Hence
Paul himself, Romans 13. calls Magistrates sometimes (...), and sometimes (...).

And fasted. Fasting is acceptable to God, when it is for a good end, to wit,
to tame the body, that the mind may be the fitter for works of Piety. See our
Literal Explanation, Mat. 6.16.

The Holy Ghost said. To wit, To the Prophets of the Church of Antioch, and by
them to the whole Church.

Separate me, etc. The Holy Ghost bids to sep^rate Barnabas and Saul, not to
the Lord, but to himself, whereby is meant that the Lord, and the Holy Ghost
has the same virtue and power; which if he were less then the Lord, he would
have said, Separate Saul and Barnabas to the Lord, or to God. He commands them
to be separated to him for that, to which he himself called them. He therefore
constituted them Ministers to himself, he calls them his own Servants. But as
we cannot be Men's Servants in such things as concern Religion and Conscience,
so neither can we be the Servants of Angels; for the same reason which Paul
adduces, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a Price, be ye not the Servants of
Men, militates against both these Services. The Servant of Men there is opposed
to the Servant of Christ, who subjects his whole self, Soul and Body to him:
For he Redeemed us, and addicted us to his service, by the Price of his own
Blood. He who thus is the Servant of Christ, cannot in the same sense be the
Servant of Men; he is therefore bound by Christ for his Servant. So for the
same reason he cannot be the Servant of Angels, who are our Fellow Servants.
Therefore the Holy Ghost, who so bound Paul and Barnabas to his own Service, is
not an Angel, nor a company of Angels, but Lord of all, who has the same
worship and glory with the Father and the Son, as the Fathers of the second
Occumenick Council at Constantinople, say in the Symbol of that Council.

For the work, etc. That work which they ought to do for the Holy Ghost, is
described in this Chapter and the next, unto the 26th verse, where they are
said to have fulfilled that work. They were sent by the Holy Ghost to Preach
the Gospel, and bring many to the obedience of the Faith. This work is
peculiarly the work of the Holy Ghost, who is the Author, and uses to be
called the worker of Faith, which yet is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. therefore
the Holy Spirit is God, which works, and produces that Faith in the Saints;
and so the whole work of Regeneration, by the super-abundant Riches of his
Grace.

I have called. That is, Appointed.

3. And then, etc. As much as to say, Having prayed and fasted, they blessed
Saul and Barnabas, separated by the Holy Ghost, in the name of God and Christ,
by the solemn Rite of imposition of hands, and then bad them farewell. The
laying on of hands, says famous Heidegger, upon Paul and Barnabas, by the rest
of the Teachers of the Church of Antioch, does not properly belong to their
Ordination: For Paul was not called of men, neither by men, Gal. 1.1 and 2. It
was therefore a token not of their deputation to the Ministry, but merely of
the Churches great desire that Paul and Barnabas should succeed in their
Ministry.

They sent them away. That is, They bad them farewell. See Matthew. 14.15, 22 and
23.15.23.

4. So they. To wit, Saul and Barnabas.

Being sent forth by the Holy Ghost. That is, Having taken Journey by the
command of the Holy Ghost.

Departed into Seleucia. A Neighboring City to Antioch, built, and so called
by Seleucus Nicanor, King of Syria.

And from thence they sailed to Cyprus. An Island in the Mediterranean Sea,
adjoining to Syria, the Country of Barnabas. See above, chapter 4.36.

5. And when they were at Salamis. The Metropolis of Cyprus, built by Teucris
the Son of Telamon, and by him so called, from the name of his Country. This
City was afterward called Constantia, or Constantina, then Nova Justinopolis,
or Justinianopolis; and this day it is called Famaugusta.

They Preached the Word of God. To wit, That great Gospel of Jesus Christ.

In the Synagogues of the Jews. Which were many in Cyprus. The Author of the
Hebrew places of the Acts, under the name of Jerome: Salamis, a City in the
Isle of Cyprus, now called Constantia, which the Jews in the time of Trajan
defaced, having killed all the Inhabitants. The same says Jerome in Eusebius's
Chronicle about Trajans time.

They had, etc. As much as to say, And John surnamed Mark, of whom above, chapter
12.12. was their helper in Preaching the Gospel.

6. And when they had gone thorough the Isle. To wit, Cyprus, whose Metropolis
Salamis, toward the East, was famous among the Nations for the Temples of
Jupiter.

Unto Paphos. A City of the same Isle of Cyprus, toward the West, Hist. lib. 2.
chapter 2.
famous for the Temple of Venus, to see which, Vespasian longed, Tacitus says.

A false Prophet. That is, Falsely boasting himself to be a Prophet.

Whose name was Barjesus. Gr. (...) Seeing this wicked man is said to have been
a Jew, the Etymology of this word must be taken from the Hebrew Tongue. It is
therefore the conjecture of the most famous Ludovicus de Dieu, that this
Impostors name was (...), and with a very small alteration (...), which the
Arabian has literally expressed out of the Greek, (...), the Son of Health;
because he professes the art of procuring health and soundness. So in the
Syriack he is called (...), the Son of Ulcers; that is, a Physician that
professed to cure Ulcers; for (...), signifies only such a tumor, as is
incident to Ulcers and old sores.

7. Which was with the Deputy. The word (...), properly signifies a Proconsul,
or the Vicar of the Roman Consul, who governed the Province as a Deputy. But
seeing that he, who governed Cyprus, was not Proconsul, but Vice-Praetor, here
is a Catachresis, or abuse of the word. But, says Grotius, it is no wonder
that the Greeks being great flatterers, gave the most honorable Title to the
Governors of their Provinces. The name of President is general, which may be
here used in the Latin.

8. Elymas. There are many derivations, and significations of this name. To us
it seems, says Ludovicus de Dieu, that (...) is a Hebrew, or Chaldaick Name
(...), a healer, or a curer, from (...), to cure, in which sense it is taken,
not only among the Hebrews, but also frequently among the Syrians; nor does it
differ from (...), the Son of Health, and (...), the Son of Boils, of which
above, v. 6. Neither is it unusual to render the letter (...) of a most hard
aspiration by E. such are (...), etc. nor to change the letter (...) in as,
such as (...).

Sorcerer. Or Magician. The Persian Name Magie, and Magician, for Sorcery, and
Sorcerers, not evil in themselves, are applied by an abuse to mavelous, but
wicked Arts, wrought by the help of Devils, and to those that are given to such
Arts. See our literal explication on Matthew. 2.1.

For so is his name by interpretation. Which in v. 6. is Barjesus; therefore
Elymas is not the Arabic name (...) rendered Sorcerer, and which agrees to all
such as are given to Magic, seeing the Syriack, Arabic and Aethiopick
Translation do not begin the word Elymas with (...) Ain, but with (...) Aleph;
but it is an interpretation of this Sorcerer Barjesus his name, as the Text
faith, and the Syrian Interpreter confirms. See what we have just now cited of
Ludovicus de Dieu.

Seeking, etc. That is, With great study and endeavor he turned aside Sergius
Paulus, the Vice-Praetor, from receiving the faith of Christ.

9. Then Saul, who also is called Paul. He has a twofold name for his
twofold relation, his Hebrew name Saul, because he was an Hebrew by birth; his
Roman name Paul, because he had the freedom of a Rom^n. Under the same notion,
says famous Lightfoot, S^las is also called Silvanus, for he also was a Roman,
as may be gathered from Acts 16.37. The same upon 1 Cor. 1.1. It was common,
says he, for them in the Jewish Nation to be called among the Jews by a Jewish
name, but by another name among the Ethnicks, or by the same name tranflated
into the Ethnic language: as Thomas among the Jews, was Dydimus among the
Greeks, and perhaps Silas among the Jews, was Tertius among the Romans, Romans
16.21. that is, from (...), and Jason, Secundus. Compare Romans 16.21. with Acts
19.4. or by some other different name: as he whom Luke calls Herod, Acts 12.1.
is by Josephus called Agrippa: and John is also called Mark, Acts 12.12. Hence
that gloss upon Maimonides in Gerushin, c. 3. Perhaps he has two names, to
wit, a Jewish name, and that, by which, they who are not Jews, called him. And
that of the Jerosolymitan Talmud, in the Treatise called Gittin, fol. 43.2. the
Israelites without the Land of Israel have the same names with the Gentiles.
Yea, hear what they say in the same Treatise, fol. 45.3. of the Jews also
living in the Land of Israel: Perhaps one of them has two Wives, one living in
Judaea, the other in Galilee. And perhaps also he has two names, one in Judea,
another in Galilee: if he subscribe his name by which he is called in Judea, to
send her who is in Galilee away, or subscribe his name, by which he is called
in Galilee, to put her away, that is, in Judea, it is no Divorce. It is no
wonder therefore; if Saul, who was born out of the Land of Israel, and was a
Roman, should have a Roman name, together with his Jewish name, And it is worth
observation, that he being now made the Apostle of the Gentiles, does always
call himself by his Gentile, never by his Jewish name; and that Luke writing
his Acts, does call him Saul, while the scone of the History was among the
Jews, but Paul, while among the Gentiles.

Filled with the Holy Ghost. As much as to say, Finding himself full of a
Prophetic Spirit, that he might foretell Gods vengeance against Elymas.

10. Subtilty. The Greek word, (...), signifies easiness of doing, from the
word (...) easy, and (...) I work: and so it is taken here by Erasmus for
craftiness, but by others for a ready boldness for any wickedness.

Thou Child of the Devil. As much as to say, Thou who resemblest, and imitatest
the perverse inclinations, and wicked temper of the Devil, even as if thou
had been born of him. See John 8.39, 40, 41 and 44.

Enemy of all righteousness. As much as to say, Who art contrary to all just
and righteous things.

Will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord. As much as to say,
Will thou always with thy blasphemous Cavils traduce the Righteous Doctrine
which came from God, full of equity and goodness, as deformed, vicious, and
full of unrighteousness, Paul seems to allude to Hos. 14.10. where see our
Literal Explanation.

11. And now. That is, And now therefore, as above, chapter 10.5.

Behold. Beside your expectation.

The hand of the Lord is upon thee. That is, The terrible hand of a revenging
God is lifted up against thee to give thee a terrible blow.

And thou shall be blind, not seeing the Sun. The same thing expressed with a
double phrase, beats the more strongly upon the Ears of the hearers, and
demonstrates the efficacy of him that speaks.

For a season. Defined, and limited.

And immediately. As much as to say, Paul had scarcely foretold the imminent
stroke of God upon Elymas, when the prediction took effect.

12. Then, etc. As much as to say, When Sergius Paulus saw the Doctrine of the
Gospel Preached by Paul, confirmed by the sudden blindness of Elymas, its great
Opposer, he believed the Gospel, being struck with admiration, that this
Doctrine of Christ was joined with such mavelous Virtue.

13. Now when Paul and his Company. That is, His Companions. When, says
Calvin, he says that Paul's Companions loosed from Paphos, he in the first
place means Paul himself, then the rest, excepting one. Thus by observing that
ones delicateness, he praised others, who with unwearied constancy followed
Paul.

They came to Perga in Pamphilia. Perga was one of the most famous Cities of
Pamphilia, which the Temple of Diana, called by Cicero, Verrina sexta, The most
Holy, and most Ancient, did beautify. To this Temple, as Strabo tells us, lib.
14. there was a Sacred Gathering every Year. Appollonius Pergeus, (whose four
Books of Cones are extant in Greek and Latin, as Andreas Quenstedt says, de
patriis illust. vir. whence he was called by the Men of that Age, The Great
Geometrician) owes his Birth to this City. Of Pamphilia we have spoken above,
chapter 2.10.

John. Mentioned above, v. 5.

Departing from them. Perhaps shunning the pains, and the danger of the rest of
the Journey. See below, chapter 15.38.

Came to Jerusalem. To his Mother.

14. They came to Antioch in Pisidia. Which was called the Caesarean Colony, as
Pliny says, Not. Hist. lib. 5. c. 27. He added, says Beza, the name of
Pisidia, to distinguish this Antioch from that other in Syria, from whence they
went. Pisidia was to the North of Pamphilia, and it had Lycaonia upon the East,
which of old was a part of Pisidia, upon the West Phrygia Pacatiana, being
situated between these two Provinces; it was formerly governed by a President,
then by a Praetor under Justinian, Nov. 24.

And went into the Synagogue. That is, Into the meeting place of the Jews.

On the Sabbath day. The Evangelists in Greek use to call the Sabbath day,
Sabbata, in the plural, according to the Custom of the Septuagint. See their
Translation, Exodus 20.10.

And sat down. To wit, To hear something taken out of the Law and Prophets
read, as was usual to be read in the Synagogues, according to the most Ancient
Jewish Custom, as may be seen below, v. 27. and chapter 15.21.

15. And after the reading of the Law. The reason why the five Books of Moses
only are called the Law, are given by the Author of (...), because these Books
of Moses were given to all Ages. But the Prophets Sermons are (...), because
they received every Prophesy from the Holy Ghost, according to the exigence of
the time, or of any fact. Whichreason, says Ludovicus de Dieu, is not
altogether to be despised. But the five Books of Moses, being divided into
fifty four Sections, which they call (...), are read yearly by the Jews in
their Synagogues. They begin the reading of them the next Sabbath after the
Feast of Tabernacles, and thenceforward they read one Section every Sabbath
day, except two, whereon they join two lesser Sections, to be read together at
once, that so in a years time, all may be read over, and may be finished the
ninth day of the Feast of Tabernacles, which therefore the Jews call (...), the
gladness of the Law. There are some that do not read over the whole Law but
once in three years: but this is not the common Custom, says Maimonides, In
summa Talmudica tract. de precibus and Benedict. sacerdotum cap. 13.

And the Prophets. Every Sabbath Day the Jews read a Section taken out of the
Prophets in their Synagogues, answering to the lesson read out of the
Pentateuch. And they call it the Dismission, because the Prophetical Section
being read, the People are dismissed. Antiochus Epiphanes, says Elias in his
Thisbi, did by an Edict forbid the Israelites the reading of the Law. What did
the Israelites do? They took one Section out of the Prophets, whose matter was
like the things which were treated of in that Section of the Law which was
assigned for that Sabbath. As for example, upon that Sabbath whereon that
Section (...), should be read, they read out of the Prophesy of Isaiah, chapter
42.5. Thus says the Lord, the Lord that created the Heavens etc. but when the
Section of Noah, Genesis 6.1. was to be read, they substituted a Section answering
to it out of Isai. 54.9. For this is as the waters of Noah unto me. And so also
of the rest of the Sections. But now, though this Decree of Antiochus be void,
yet that Custom of reading Sections taken out of the Prophets, accommodated to
the Sections of the Pentateuch, is not taken away; for even to this day, they
read such Sections as these of the Prophets, after the Section of the Law.

The Rulers of the Synagogues sent unto them. That is, They who did Administer,
and oversee the Affairs of the Synagogue. Grotius upon Matthew. 9.18. It is to be
observed, says he, that men of known goodness were set over the Jewish
Synagogue, who were called in the Chaldaick language (...), that is, Pastors
which word is also frequently read in Benjamins Itinerary. Or also (...),
Masters, as the Syrian put it in Mark, or (...), which signifies Gatherers, or
Arbitrators, which is read in the Syrian in the Acts. The Hellenists called
them (...), Rulers of the Synagogue, as we are taught from Acts 13.15. where
mention is made of many Rulers of the Synagogue in one and the same Society.
But there was one eminent among them, preferred to the rest for learning, whose
proper office it was to expound the Law, and to recite the words of the public
Prayers, as Justin against Trypho teaches us. Him the Hebrews call (...), the
Chief, or also (...), in Syriack (...), the Prince of the Synagogue, and by
excellency Archisynagogus, Luke 13.14. Philo calls him (...), the Praeses,
sometimes also (...), the Eldest, to whom he attributes the Office of
explaining the things that were obscure in their Books, and of debating the
matters, and of reciting before the People the words of the Hymn they were to
sing.

Ye men and brethren. Hence it appears that such as seemed able to Preach, were
extraordinarily invited to it; at least that it was usual to suffer others to
do it beside the ordinary Rabbis, is plain by Christ's example, Luke 4.15 and
17.

16. Then Paul stood up. That he might be the better heard by the Congregation.

And beckning with his hand. See what we have said above, chapter 12.17.

Men of Israel. That is, Ye Posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or Israel,
who by your birth are reckoned the Lords People.

And ye that fear God. As much as to say, And ye who of the Gentiles have
embraced the Worship of the living God.

Give ear. Devoutly, and Religiously.

17. The God of this people of Israel. Of the People descended of Jacob, who
was called Israel, whence also all his Posterity are called Israel.

Chose our Fathers. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, peculiarly to be his Servants
and Friends.

And exalted the people. That is, He blessed the people, which came of them
with great increa^ Exodus 1.7. a Metaphor taken from Buildings which are
finished to the top.

When they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt. As much as to say, Where
the people were oppressed by the Egyptians in whose Land they dwelt.

And with an high arm. That is, With his great power signally exerted. It is a
metaphor taken from men, who when they are to do any thing with force,
especially to smite one, they use to lift their Arm high.

Brought he them. Lying under a bitter slavery.

Out of it. To wit, Egypt, when they could hardly bear longer their most heavy
bondage in it.

18. And about the time of forty years. It is said about, because there seems
one year to be wanting of the complete forty years.

Suffered he their manners, etc. That is, He destroyed not that perverse and
obstinate people, while they were in the Wilderness, betwixt Egypt and Canaan,
which was promised to their Fathers.

19 And. when they had destroyed seven Nations in the land of Canaan. God, Genesis
15.19, 20, 21. promised unto Abraham ten Nations, the Kenites, the Kenizites,
the Cadmonites, the Hittites, the Peresites, and the Rephaims, the Amorites,
the Canaanites, the Girgasites, and the Jebusites. But Paul numbers seven
Nations only here, which the Israelites by Divine assistance overthrew, nor is
there any mention of the Kinites, or the Kenites, nor of the Kinizites, or
Kenezites, nor of the Cedmonites, or Cadmonites, in the distribution of the
Land, and the preceding War. See Deuteronomy. 7.1. Josh. 3.10. and 24.11. sometimes
six only are mentioned, as Exodus 3.8 and 17. Judge. 3.5. Neh. 9.8. where beside
the Kenites, the Kenezites, and the Cadmonites, in the two first places the
Girgasites, and in the third place Rephaim, or the Hivites, are passed over in
silence. Rabbi Solomon Jarchi, upon the forecited place in Genesis says:
There are ten Nations mentioned here, but he gave them but seven. And the other
three, to wit, the Edomites, the Moabites, and the Ammonites, who are the
Kenites, Kenizites, and the Cadmonites, shall at last fall into the inheritance
of the people, because it is said, Isaiah 11.14. They shall lay their hands
upon Edom and Moab, and the Children of Ammon shall obey them. This is the
common Opinion of the Jews. Others understand by them the Arabians, Salmaeans,
Nuthaeans: others Damascus, Asia, and Spain: some also Asia, Turkey, and
Carthage. But all the Jews with one consent maintain that these three Peoples
are yet to be subjugated by the Messiah. They also argue, that seeing they are
not already overcome, the Messiah is not yet come. But passing by Jewish
Fables, who loving an Earthly Kingdom, do fancy dreams to themselves, it is
very probable that the Kenites, and Kenizites in that interval of time betwixt
Abraham and Moses, were either quite extinguished, or lost their name, or were
little famous, and so counted among other Nations; for Joshua mentions them no
where, either in the division of the Land, nor in the account of the Nations,
which he overcame. Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch, in Hexaemero, writes indeed,
that the Kenites did inhabit the Mounts Libanon, and Amanus, but whence he drew
this, is uncertain. After the time of Joshua, mention is made of the Kenites, 1 Samuel 27.10. and 30.29. But that they are the same with these, whom God speaking
to Abraham in the forecited place, Genesis 15. mentions, is not certain. As to
the Cadmonites, they were the same with the Hivites. They are called (...),
East Countrymen, because they dwelt upon Mount Hermon, verging toward the East
parts of the Land of Canaan. They seem after Abraham's time to have been
reckoned with them, whom God speaking to Abraham himself, called Rephaims, as
may be gathered from Josh. 12.4 and 5. It is credible, says Masius, upon Josh.
3.10. that in a most populous Country many different Kindreds dwelt, and that
the same Kindreds were not always called by the same names, is certain; for
they who in the Covenant with Abraham, are called Rephaims, seem now by Joshua
to be called Hivites.

In the land of Canaan. This most famous Country in Asia the greater, was
inhabited by Chanaan the Son of Cham, and divided among his eleven Sons, and
their Posterity, most of them retained their names in Moses times. It Is
commonly called by Christians, The Holy Land, namely, because they Reverence,
with Helena, the Mother of Constantine the Great, the ground whereon of old the
footsteps of our Savior were imprinted, Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Constant. Magn.
42. Its borders are toward the East, the River Jordan; toward the West,
Egypt, and the great Sea, which is called the Mediterranean; toward the South,
the Desert of Arabia; toward the North, Mount Libanon.

He divided their Land to them by Lot. By Joshua their Captain, the Successor
of Moses, with Eleazar the High Priest, Josh 13.7. and 14.1 and 2.

20. About, etc. We find the number of Four hundred and fifty years constantly
kept in the Greek, Latin, Syriack, Aethiopick, and Arabic Books; but the place
and order of the number is various and different in the different Editions. For
in the Ancient vulgar Latin Translation, says the Reverend Usher, Archbishop
of Armagh, Chron. Sac p. 1. cap. 12. They are thus rendered: He divided their
Land to them by Lot, about four hundred and fifty years after, and afterward
he gave them Judges: even as Joannes Mariana testifies, he found it written in
some Greek Manuscripts: to wit, in the Manuscripts of Petrus Taxardus, Marquess
of Velesio, which are greatly suspected to have been designedly both here, and
otherwhere, conformed to the vulgar Latin Translation. But the Alexandrian
Copy, which we have in England, written in great letters, and is of far greater
Antiquity than those cited by Mariana, reads it thus: He divided their Land to
them by Lot in about Four hundred and fifty years, and after that he gave them
Judges. The very same thing is also found in those diverse readings, which
Robert Stephen added to the New Testament, which he printed in Greek at Paris,
A. D. 1568. Also a certain Greek Copy published at Paris, and cited by Beza in
his Annotations upon this place, agreeing with it, and another Manuscript of
the new College of Oxford, except only that in this, wants the Pronoun their
after (...), Land in the other the Pronoun them is added after the Verb he
gave. In all which, it is manifest that those four hundred and fifty years
relate not to the continuance of the Judges, but to the time of the division of
the Land. Moreover, some very learrned Men of our Age, as Francis Junius
relates, did think that this circumscription of Times does belong to the former
part of this spcech, even retaining the vulgar reading of the Greek Copies; to
wit, that as they think some fit Participle must be understood, as if it were
thus read: After the four hundred and fifty years were (ended) he gave Judges.
By this means the beginning of this account will depend upon the first words of
the Apostles speech, V. 17. The God of this People Israel chose our Fathers.
But when God had promised to Abraham, as yet not having a Son, that he would
give the Land of Chanaan to his Seed, Genesis 12.7. Acts 7.5. Afterward Ishmael
his first born being excluded, the choice of the Fathers was made in Isaac,
according to that, In Isaac shall thy seed be called, Genesis 21.12. Further, from
the birth of Isaac, until the going of his Posterity out of Egypt, there
passed four hundred years and five, to which, add forty six years and a half,
which were betwixt that and the dividing of the Land, they make up four hundred
fifty one years and a half, which Paul calls about four hundred and fifty
years. Famous Ludovicus de Dieu says somewhat otherwise. I altogether agree
with them, says he, who will not have reckoned here the years wherein the
Judges ruled; (for thus it seems impossible to make the four hundred and fifty
agree with the four hundred and eighty years, which were from the coming out of
Egypt, to the beginning of the Temple of Solomon, 1 Kings 6.5.) but these
which passed from the Birth of Isaac, till the time of the Judges, as if it
were written, And afterward, about Four hundred and fifty years, he gave
Judges. To tell, not how long the Judges ruled, but when God gave them; to wit,
after these things which were declared, v. 17, 18 and 19. which were acted in
about Four hundred and fifty years. The Account agrees. For from Isaac to
Jacobs birth, are sixty years; thence to the going into Egypt an hundred and
thirty; thence to the coming out of Egypt two hundred and ten; thence to the
entering into the Land of Canaan forty; thence to the dividing of the Land
seven years; which together make four hundred forty and seven years; that is,
about four hundred and fifty, for there are only three wanting. For that in v.
17. God chose our Fathers, is rightly referred to the time of Isaacs birth:
because that then God, who had already chosen Abraham of all the People of the
Earth, did of all Abraham's Children choose Isaac, in whose Family the Covenant
should stand, saying, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

He gave unto them Judges. These Judges among the Hebrews were directly like to
the Roman Interreges, and afterward to the Dictators, neither did they differ
in any thing from the Hebrew Kings, but that they had not a Guard, and Royal
Pomp, and therefore exacted not Taxes nor Tributes; nevertheless they were, as
Josephus speaks, Governors with a Sovereign Power, and therefore are called
Kings, Judge. 9.16. They made Abimelech King, that is, Judge. When Samson was
dead, Judge. 18.1. In those days there wat no King in Israel, that is, Judge.
And as the Kings had power of killing without the Sanhedrin, as the Talmudick
Title (...), and 2 Samuel 1.15. and other places teach; so had also these Judges,
as appears from the examples of Gideon, Judge. 8.16 and 17. and Jephta, Judge.
12.6. which things are rightly observed by Abarbaniel in the beginning of the
Book of the Judges. Josephus uses also to call those Judges by the name of
Prophets, because they were immediately given of God, and therefore endued with
Prophetical gifts.

Until Samuel the Prophet. Who was the last of those Judges.

21. And afterward, etc. As much as to say, But afterward, to wit, when Samuel
had governed the Commonwealth one and twenty years, they after the example of
other Nations asked a King, 1 Samuel 8.5. and 19. and at the importunate desire
of the people, God gave them a King in his anger, Hos. 13.10 and 11. Saul the
Son of Kish, of the Tribe of Benjamin, but not of the Tribe of Juda, for whom
the Scepter seems to have been appointed of old, Genesis 49.10.

By the space of forty years. Seeing that Ishbosheth, when he succeeded his
Father Saul in the Kingdom, was forty years of age, 2 Samuel 2.10. we understand
that Ishbosheth is born at the same time as Saul was first privately Anointed,
then publicly declared King before the people at Mizpeh, 1 Samuel 10.1.24 and
25. Nor was it long after, as says Usher in his Annals upon the year of the
World, two thousand nine hundred and nine, as appears from 1 Samuel 12.12. to
wit, about a month after, as it is expressly in the seventy Interpreters, and
Josephus 6 Antiq. 5. that Jabesh Gilead was besieged by Nahash, and by Saul
delivered, having scattered the Ammonites. Whence at a meeting the whole people
had at Gilgal, the Kingdom was renewed to Saul, 1 Samuel 11.14 and 15. Samuel
confirming his integrity in the execution of his Office, complaining of the
injuries done him, terrifying the people with Thunder and Rain in the time of
Wheat-Harvest, and then comforting them by proposing the mercy of God, 1 Samuel
12.17, etc. Whence it appears that these things came to pass about the Feast of
Pentecost, and at the beginning of the third month, one and twenty years after
the Ark, which the Philistines had carried away, was restored at the same time
of the Harvest, 1 Samuel 6.13. whereby we may gather, that as there were twenty
years betwixt the bringing again of the Ark, and the subduing the Philistines,
from 1 Samuel 7.2. and 13. so also that there passed a year betwixt the freeing
of the Israelites Land from the Philistines, and Saul^ being declared King, is
gathered from these words, 1 Samuel 13.1. Saul Reigned one year, and when he had
Reigned two years over Israel. Whereof a better sense cannot be given then
that: that one year was past since the subduing of the Philistines by Samuel,
when Saul began to Reign; and that he Reigned two years after free from the
yoke of the Philistines. For in aftertimes Saul was by the Philistints
stripped of his Authority, and the people of Israel oppressed by them with a
heavy and long bondage. Which being at length removed, Saul is said to have
taken the Kingdom over Israel, that is, to have again recovered it, 1 Samuel
14.47. It is a proof that this oppression lasted many years, that it having
began eight years before David was born, yet before it was ended, Samuel named
him to succeed in the Kingdom of Saul, 1 Samuel 13.14. The Lord has sought him a
man after his own heart, and the Lord has commanded him to be a Captain over
his People. For that the Israelites might be past all hopes of recovering their
liberty, lest they might have Weapons, the Philistines carried away all the
Smiths from them: so that when the Israelites came to Battle among all them,
Saul and Jonathan only were found armed with Sword and Spear, 1 Samuel 13.19 and
22. Daniel Brenius in his Friendly debate against the Jews, Quaest. 26. How,
says he, is that consistent, which is written, Acts 13.21. that Saul, who was
the first King of Israel, Reigned forty years, when the Scripture mentions
only two years? Answer. These two years mentioned, 1 Samuel 13.1. may be so
taken, as not to note the whole sum of Saul's Administration, but that time of
his Government, until he chose these three thousand, which are mentioned there,
v. 2. otherwise if we will absolutely that the whole time of Saul's Reign is
described, v. 1. then will arise this difficulty: To wit, how David, who began
to Reign at thirty years of Age, 2 Samuel 5.4. and therefore if Saul Reigned 2
years only, appears manifestly to have been twenty eight years of Age, when
Saul began to Reign, and consequently when he killed Goliath, is advised, by
Saul, 1 Samuel 17.33. not to fight with Goliath, because he was yet but a Youth;
likewise he is called a Youth, v. 42. How, I say, is he called a Youth, being
in his nine and twentieth year? Not to speak of those many Battles that are
said to have been fought against so many People, during Saul's Reign, 1 Samuel
14.46. and in them the various Conflicts betwixt David and the Philistines, 1 Samuel 18.25. Then afterward his flight, and his changing of his lurking places
so often, because of Saul's manifold Persecutions: Lastly, David's dwelling among
the Philistines one year and four months, 1 Samuel 27.7. compared with chapter 29.2.
where Achish says that David was with him these days, or these years, that is,
some days, or some years, and other things are mentioned to have fallen out in
Saul's Reign, all which do abundantly demonstrate that there was more then two
years space betwixt Saul's Reign and David's. And these things are thus far so
debated, as if that place in Samuel were esteemed entire and incorrupt in the
Editions which are now extant. But now indeed we must know that the Hebrew
Copies show this place to be imperfect, when betwixt the word Schanah and Ben,
they leave a void place; for some of them have it thus written, Ben -- schana
Schaoul. It is probable the numerical note is wanting, which expressed the
number of the years of Saul's Age, when he began to Reign: for it is usual in
these Books of Kings, to insert the Ages of the Kings, and the time of their
Reign, in the beginning of the History of their Acts, as 2 Samuel 2.10. where we
read thus written: Ishbosheth, Saul's Son, was forty years old when he began to
Reign over Israel, and Reigned two years. Which same thing is done in David,
and other Kings. Hence some Greek Copies supplying the number here, do write:
(...), Son of thirty years. Seeing therefore that the beginning of the verse
here is judged defective, what wonder is it that the like fault does happen as
to the number in the latter part of it, which defines the time of Saul's Reign,
and that therefore the number expressed by the Evangelists, who might as yet
see the place entire, did differ so much from what is this day seen in our
Copies? Especially seeing that in the end of the sixth Book of Josephus's
Antiquities, Saul is said to have Reigned eight years, while Samuel lived, and
two and twenty after his death. Which is a token that of old there was another
reading of this place extant, having the notes of the numbers, though not so
much dissering.

22. And when he had removed him. That is, Saul being rejected, while yet
alive, for a punishment of his disobedience, 1 Samuel 13.14. and 15.28. and 16.1.

He raised up unto them David to be their King. That is, That Jacobs Prophesy,
Genesis 49.10. might be made good, he promoted David, of the Tribe of Judah,
hitherto a mean and obscure man, to the Kingly Dignity, who upon Saul's death
should succeed in the Kingdom. See the forecited places, and Psalm 78.70 and
71. Psalm 113.7 and 8.

To whom he also gave testimony, and said. 1 Samuel 13.14. and Psalm. 88. in the
Hebrew 89.20, 21.

I have found. As much as to say, I have gotten such a man as I would wish in
the Person of David, who, to wit, will do whatever I command him, whereas Saul
against my express command spared the King of the Amalekites, and the fattest
of the Cattle. See 1 Samuel 15.22 and 28.

23. Of this man's. To wit, David's.

Seed. That is, Posterity and Offspring.

According to his promise. 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 Chronicles. 7.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 89.37 and
38. Isa. 11. 1 and 2. Jer. 23.5 and 6. Mic. 5.2.

Raised unto Israel a Savior, Jesus. That is, He raised the promised Savior
to the people of Israel, which is Jesus, who saves his people from their sins.
See Matthew. 1.21. God of old raised Saviors for Israel, Judge. 3.9 and 15. who
delivered them from Bodily Bondage, and Earthly Miseries; but he raised up
Jesus to be the Author of Eternal Savlation to all them that obey him, Heb.
5.9. to confer the causes, means, and ways of repentance, and to grant time and
place, and to purchase for repenting sinners a remission of their sins, by his
Merits and Prayers. See what we have said above, chapter 5.31.

24. Preached, etc. As much as to say, John as his forerunner, had prepared
his way, according to the Prophesy of Malachy, c. 3.1. when Jesus was to enter
forthwith upon his Office, by the Preaching of Baptism, to testify repentance
of sin, which not only includes the avoiding of evil, but the following of
good, or works of Piety.

Before his coming. The Greek has it, Before his entering. That is, Before the
Lord Jesus had entered upon his Office, So, says Grotius, Lawyers say also, to
enter upon the Consulship.

To all the people of Israel. That is, publicly, so that many came to John to
be Baptized, Matthew 3.5.

25. And as John fulfilled his course. That is, says Learned Heinsius, when
John was to execute his Calling. This, Col. 4.17. is called, To fulfill the
Ministry that one received from the Lord. Col. 1.25. To fulfill the Word of God.
Romans 15.19. Fulfill the Gospel of Christ.

Whom think ye that I am. To wit, The Messiah, promised in the Law, and in the
Prophets. Paul related not the very words, but the sense which is in John 1.20.

There comes one after me. That is, There is one to enter upon his Office
after me.

Whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to loose. Petronius said, To loose the
strings of his shoes. The Baptist would express the basest kind of Service.
Suetonius in his Vitellius: He sought from Messalina for a very great Office,
that she would allow him to pull her shoes off her feet. See our literal
explanation, Mat. 3.11.

26. Whosoever among you fears God. See what we have said above, v. 16.

To you is the word of this salvation sent. As much as to say, We have a
Command from the Lord to Preach to you who are of the stock of Abraham, or
taken into his Family, as Proselytes, this saving Doctrine of Jesus the
Savior, to which John gave so honorable a Testimony.

27. For they. This word for is in this place put for but.

That dwelt at Jerusalem, and their Rulers. That is, Not only the common people
at Jerusalem, but also the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, and the whole
Sanhedrin.

Because they knew him not. To wit, To be the promised Messiah. See what we
have said above, chap. 3.17.

Nor yet the voices of the Prophets, etc. As much as to say, Neither
understanding the Prophesies of the Prophets, which used to be read every
Sabbath to them in the Synagogues. See what we have noted above, v. 15.

Condemning. Viz. To death, him, to wit, Jesus.

Fulfilled. That is, brought to pass, supply, these voices of the Prophets,
whereby it was foretold that the Messiah should be by (...) despised,
reproached, mocked, afflicted, pierced, and slain, as Isa. 53. Dan. 9.24, etc.

28. And though they found no cause of death in him. As much as to say, Could
find no true Crime worthy of death in him, who did well explain the Law, and
bestowed many favors upon the people.

Yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain. That is, They persuaded
Pilate that he would adjudge him to death.

29. And when they had fulfilled all, etc. As much as to say, And when they had
brought upon Christ all the punishments, and reproaches which the Prophets
foretold the Messiah was to suffer, Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, having
taken him from the Cross, laid him in a Sepulcher, John 19.38. and 39.

30. But God, etc. As much as to say, The Jews at Jerusalem, and those who were
chief among them, the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees delivered Jesus to be put
to death unjustly, but the just God being against them, did bring him back from
death to life.

31. He. To wit, Jesus being raised from the dead.

Was seen many days. That is, Forty days.

Who are his Witnesses to the people. As much as to say, The Eyewitnesses, who
are remaining, do to this day openly, and publicly profess that Jesus Christ
being risen from the dead, did appear to them forty days.

32. And we. To wit, I and my Companion Barnabas.

Declare unto you, etc. As much as to say, We now Preach unto you the promise
made to our Fathers of the Messiah to come, because that God has now fulfilled
it to us, who are their Children. Time therefore persuades, and presses us,
that what he has fulfilled to us, we should declare unto you.

The promise which was made to the Fathers. To wit, Abraham, Genesis 22.18. Isaac,
Genesis 26.4. Juda, Genesis 49.10. David, 2 Samuel 7.12. Isaiah 11.1.

33. God has sulfilled. That is, Really performed.

To us their Children. That is, To us who are their Children.

In that he has raised up Jesus. Gloriously, whom they had undeservedly put to
a barbarous, and ignominious death.

My Son, etc. Although these words in their literal meaning, do in some respect
agree to David as to the Figure, who is, as it were, begotten again of God,
that he might be his Son, when he was delivered from the snares of his Enemies,
2 Samuel 5.12. and 19.22. The firstborn, or chief among the Kings of the Earth,
who are called the Sons of God, Psalm. 82.6. appointed of God, Psalm. 89.27 and
28. yet upon a far more honorable account were they fulfilled in the
firstborn from the dead, Col. 1.18. Rev. 1.5. in Christ who was shadowed by
David, and called by David's name, Jer. 30.9. Ezekiel. 34.23. Hosea 3.5. seeing
that being risen from the dead, all power was given him in Heaven and in Earth,
Matthew 28.18. This Paul teaches here, and the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, chap. 5.5. These words, says Camero, are not to be so taken, as that
Christ after his Resurrection had begun to be the Son of God, and to be
begotten by him, but because that God did then most powerfully declare Christ
by his Resurrection to be his own Son. For this is the manner of Scripture,
that things be then said to be done or born, when they are manifested, and do
appear, as when Solomon, Prove. 17.17. says, A friend is born in a day of
adversity; that is, he then discovers himself, when our streights press us. For
although the Father also before the Resurrection gave Testimony to him, yet
because until his Resurrection Christ was as it were, encompassed with
infirmities, and liable to death, his calling to the Mediatory Office was
somewhat obscure until that day. But when, having laid aside his Mortality, he
gloriously rose again, and ascended into Heaven, then did he properly, as it
were, openly declare unto all, that Christ is both his Son, and called to the
Priestly Office. But God until that very day, as he saw becoming his own
Wisdom, delayed to make this mystery known. Hence it is that Paul says in this
place, that God at last, after Christ's Resurrection, said to him, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. Justin in his Colloquy with Trypho: Saying
he was born from thence, whereof it was to come to pass he should be born. From
this place of Justin, and from Rabbi David Kimchi, it appears that the Jews of
old looked upon the second Psalm, as upon a Prophesy concerning the Messiah.

34. That, etc. As much as to say, But that he raised Jesus from the dead, not
to die again, as they which Elijah, and Elisha raised, did die, that he might
be the eternal King of his people, whom he should make eternal partakers of
glory with him; so he said in Isaiah the Prophet, chapter 55.3.

I will give you the sure mercies of David. The LXX render in Isaiah the Hebrew
word, (...), the holies, but 2 Chr. 6.42. they render it mercies. Therefore
holies, and mercies are the same, in both are understood the free promises of
God made to David. For which, says Ludovicus de Dieu, he will not wonder that
the Hellenists called them (...), holies, who knows when they would call God
(...), bountiful, they call him holy, Psalm 17.28. and render the Hebrew word
(...), indifferently mercy and righteousness; and lest any should think that
they mean any other thing by righteousness, then they do by mercy, they
frequently render (...), which properly denotes righteousness by mercy, and
alms, as justice is also frequently put by the Arabians for bounty; therefore
by the custom of the Hellenists, the holies, the righteous, and the mercies are
the same. Now, that by David, in the place of Isaiah, cited here by Paul, is
understood the Messiah, is well observed by the Rabbis, Kimchi, and Abenesra.
Therefore, says famous Lightfoot, the Resurrection of Christ as the Apostle
interprets it, is called (...) God also by the Prophet, from whom these things
are taken, promises a Resurrection, and the benefits of the Resurrection of
Christ: He promised, and foretold his death, chapter 53. But what inercies are
to be expected by a dead Messiah, if he should be always dead? His benefits are
weak and infirm, if death should put an end to them. Therefore he promises
benefits, and mercies which are firm, stable, and shall never end, which shall
flow from his Resurrection.

Sure. The Greek has (...), that is, according to Hesychius's interpretation,
firm, and stable. In that very sense this Greek word is used by the Hellenists,
1 Samuel 25.28. 1 Kings 11.38. and (...), for to confirm and establish, 1 Chronicles.
17.14.

35. Wherefore also in another Psalm. To wit, Psalm. 16.10.

He says. To wit, David himself by the Spirit of Prophesy, concerning the
promised Messiah which was to come of his Seed, and to Reign for ever, 2 Samuel
7.13. 2 Chronicles. 6.42. directing his speech to God.

Thou shall not suffer. See what we have said above, Rel. Christ. Institut.
lib. 5. cap. 3. n. 7.
chapter 2.27. Although, says Curcellaeus, I deny not but these things were in
some respect fulfilled in David, as in the Type, when God delivered him from
the hands of his Enemies, and suffered them not to take away his life, that he
might afterward (...) in his ^race; yet does it far more eminently (...) to
Christ, who was but for a short time left in the grace, in which he felt no
corruption, nor did he afterward return any more unto it; when David, who,
though he felt (...) corruption at that time, when his Enemies (...) death, yet
afterward he, as all other men, (...) to the necessity of nature.

36. After he had served his own Generation by the will of God. That is, In
governing his People, and advancing Religion in some measure.

Fell asleep, and was laid unto his Fathers. That is, died, and was buried,
even as his Fathers were.

And saw corruption. That is, And his Corpse rotted in the Grave.

Whom, etc. As much as to say, But Jesus Christ was in so short a time restored
from death to life, that his Body laid in the Sepulcher, was no ways vitiated
with rottenness.

38. Through this man is preached unto you remission of sins. As much as to
say, It is preached to you by me and Barnabas, that the Penitents shall have a
free pardon of their sins from God, being reconciled by this only Mediator
betwixt God and Man, the Man Jesus Christ.

39. And by him. That is, By the merits and intercession of this Man, to wit,
Jesus Christ.

All that believe are justified. That is, Whosoever shall by a lively faith
adhere to Christ, as to a Teacher sent from Heaven, the Redeemer, and Mediator
of Men, shall by his Merits and Intercession, obtain pardon, and remission of
his sins from God.

From all things, etc. As much as to say, Seeing the Law of Moses gives no hope
of pardon, except of sins committed through infirmity, or ignorance, but
denounces the punishment of death without mercy upon greater Crimes, Numb.
15.22, etc. Heb. 10.28. but if any man repenting of his former life, will with
a sincere faith embrace Christ, he shall through him be absolved from any sins
whatsoever committed against the law of God.

Be justified. That is, Purged and expiated, as Daniel 8.14. or freed, as Romans
6.7.

40. Beware, etc. As much as to say, Therefore take heed, lest if ye embrace
not the faith of Christ, the same happen to you, which of old happened to your
Fathers, foretold by Habakkuk, in the Book of the smaller Prophets, to have
your City and Temple overthrown, and your selves carried away, for your
contempt of Heavenly Admonitions.

41. Behold ye despisers. The Hebrew Original has (...), Habbak. 1.5. Most
Interpreters render the word (...), as a double diction compounded of a
Praeposition and a Noun, among the Heathen. But the LXX, whom the Apostle seems
to have followed here, as also the Syrian Interpreter taking it for one single
diction, rendered it despisers, Not. Misc. ad portam Mosis cap. 3.
arrogant, or insolent. (...), says incomparable Pocockius, for a plural taken
from the singular (...), bago, termined like (...), kano, a Zealot, namely from
the root (...), which though we do not find elsewhere in the Hebrew Bible,
(which is the only treasure of the pure and Ancient Hebrew that remains among
us) yet the use of the Arabic Language added to the Authority of these
Interpreters, does abundantly confirm me that it has been used by the Hebrews
of old. And a little after: I believe, says he, it will trouble no man more,
that (...), is not written with an (...) altogether latent and idle in the
pronouncing, then to see if he will embrace the other reading, written (...),
not (...), or otherwhere (...), not (...), or that the same letter, (to wit,
(...)) should often be taken away in other words, where it is radical. The
Masora notes that (...) is thirteen times wanting in the derivatives from that
one Verb (...).

And wonder and perish. The Hebrew has, Habakkuk 1.5. (...). Rabbi Tanchum in
the forecited place of Pocockius: The repeating of the same Verb in different
Conjugations, says he, is for confirmation sake, and perhaps by one of the
Conjugations he meant admiration, by the other astonishment, confusion, such as
admiration at some strange thing uses to beget. Therefore adds Pocockius,
the simple word (...), seems to signify somewhat more then either (...), among
the Hebrews, or (...), among the Syrians; neither is it seldom I think, that
among both the Hebrews and Arabians, increased Conjugations signify somewhat
less, though different, then the simple Theme does. The Greek has: And wonder,
and disfigure, supply, as Grotius has very well observed, your faces, so that
the sense is the same as Mat. 6.16. wax very pale, to wit, out of fear.

For I work, etc. As much as to say, For the work which I am to work in your
time, shall be so great, that if any shall at this time foretell it, they will
not easily believe him. This the Prophet means of Gods stirring up the
Chaldeans, a fierce Nation, to lay Judaea waste for the sins of its
Inhabitants. But the Apostle turns, and accommodates these words to the Jews of
his time for rejecting Jesus the Messiah sent from God, unless they repented,
and embraced him, whom God has exalted, by faith, and says that they likewise
shall be grievously punished by a powerful Foreign Nation.

42. The Gentiles besought. That is, Such as among the Gentiles did Judaize,
and did therefore frequent the Jewish Assemblies, although they were
Uncircumcised, such was Cornelius, and at that time not a few, they, I say,
besought Paul and Barnabas.

That these words might be Preached to them. That is. That they might more
fully explain what they said of the Messiah, and the benifits that were to be
obtained by him.

43. Now when the Congregation was broken up. That is, When the Assembly being
dismissed, every one went to their own Houses.

Religious Proselytes. That is, Such as of other Nations had come over to the
Jewish Religion.

Who. To wit, Paul and Barnabas.

To continue in the grace of God. That is, To persevere in the Doctrine of the
Gospel about Jesus Christ. The Doctrine of the Gospel is by a Metony my called
the Grace of God, which is come unto men merely by the Grace of God. See
Hebrews 12.1. 1 Pet. 5.12.

44. The Word of God. That is, The Doctrine revealed from Heaven, and Preached
by Paul and Barnabas, concerning the attaining eternal Salvation through faith
in Christ.

45. The Jews. Who were obstinately incredulous.

The multitudes. That is, The multitudes of men which gathered to hear Paul and
Barnabas.

They were filled with Envy. That is, They bursted with Envy, that Foreigners
converted to the Jewish Religion, were made equal with them.

And spoke against those things which were spoken by Paul. To wit, Concerning
Jesus Christ and his Doctrine.

Contradicting and blaspheming. There is, says Ludo^icus de Dieu, a very
emphatical Hebraism in this ^^^ase, such as you have, 1 Samuel 6.12. which the
^^X render, They went going and lowing: That is, (...) went with a constant
lowing: So they spoke against, contradicting and blaspheming. That is, with a
constant blaspheming attending their contradicting.

46. Waxed bold. That is, Fearless, no wise discouraged with the contradiction
of their Adversaries.

It was necessary. By Christ's Command and Example, Matthew 10.6.15.24. Luke
24.47. and above, chapter 1.8.

That the Word of God should first have been spoken to you. That is, That
forgiveness of sins, and eternal Salvation to be obtained from God through the
only Mediator betwixt God and Man Jesus Christ, who is the Messiah promised in
the Law and the Prophets, should first be Preached to you.

And judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life. It is a phrase of the
Greek elegance, whereby the same is meant, as if it were said, Ye contemn and
despise eternal life, which is given to men by God, through Jesus Christ alone.

Lo we turn to the Gentiles. As much as to say, The Preaching of the Gospel by
our Ministry shall be transferred from you, who are unthankful, to Foreign and
Uncircumcised Nations, in hopes of better growth and fruit there.

47. For so has the Lord commanded us. Above, chapter 1.8. Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15.
Luke 24.47. and that to this Saul or Paul there was a command given by Christ
concerning his Embassage, which he was to undertake for Christ to Foreign
Nations, to Preach them the Gospel, appears below, chapter 22.21.26.17 and 18. Gal.
1.16.2.8.

I have set, etc. As much as to say, For what is spoken of Isaiah, as Christ's
Type in some measure, Isa. 44 6. is truly fulfilled in Christ the Lord, whom he
did shadow. For the virtue of Christ shall in no case be restricted to the
people of Israel only, but as the words of God sound in Isaiah, his light will
send forth its beams to the far ends of the Earth, by the Preaching of his
Disciples, for the Salvation of such, who of any Nation in any part of the
Earth shall believe in him.

48. And when the Gentiles heard this. Pisidians by birth, Aliens from the
people of Israel, that Salvation was promised to them many Ages before by the
coming of Christ.

They were glad. That it was at length fulfilled, which was foretold so many
Ages before.

And glorified the Word of the Lord. That is, They praised the goodness of God,
which shined forth in the Gospel, preached to them by Paul and Barnabas.

And as many as were ordained to eternal life. That is, As many as were
Candidates of eternal life, as Mede excellently expounds it, Sermon. 3. in Act.
17.4. or as many as were sincerely, and honestly disposed, to perform whatever
God requires of men, to give them eternal life. The Verb (...) is used of an
Army, and placing of Soldiers, of the registring them in order or rank. Hence
the Books that treat of ordering, and drawing up an Army, are called Tacticks.
And so may Lukes words be rendered here, as Mede excellently notes in the
forecited place. As many as had given up their names to eternal life, believed:
or by an Ellipsis of a Participle, who were of the band and company of such as
hoped, and earnestly endeavored to attain eternal life; otherwise, as many as
were in readiness for eternal life; finally, and most conveniently, if it be
taken in a military sense, and not of destination or appointment, As many as
were ordained to eternal life.

49. The word of the Lord. That is, The Gospel of Christ preached by Paul and
Barnabas at Antioch, the Metropolis of Pisidia.

Throughout all the Region. To wit, of Pisidia. So was spread the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, opposed in vain by his Enemies, he ruling in the midst of them,
Psalm. 110.2.

50. But the Jews. Obstinately resisting the Truth.

Stirred up the devout. That is, Certain Women of the Gentiles, who had
submitted to the Law of Moses.

And honorable Women. Not of the common sort, but Nobles.

And the chief men of the City. As much as to say, These malicious Jews having
abused the blind zeal, and imprudent simplicity of these Matrons, by their
means instigated the Nobility, or chief Men of Antioch against Paul and
Barnabas.

And raised, etc. As much as to say, And they brought the matter so far, that
Paul and Barnabas themselves were with a strong hand born down and afflicted,
and at length expelled from the Borders of Antioch in Pisidia.

51. But they. Paul, to wit, and Barnabas.

Shook off the dust off their feet. By this Rite according to Christ's Precept,
Mat. 10.14. Luke 9.5. and 10.11. They testified that they having discharged
their duty, were free from the punishment that was abiding the Inhabitants of
Antioch in Pisidia, for rejecting the Doctrine of the Gospel, which was
Preached to them.

Against them. That is, For a Testimony against them, as it is, Luke 9.5.

And came unto Iconium. The Metropolitan City of Lycaonia, situated at Mount
Taurus, whereof among others, the famous Amphilochius was Bishop, who under
Theodosius the great, was most vehement against Heresies, and of an eminent
Authority, as it does appear even by the third Law, De fide Catholica. Lycaonia
of old, a part of Pisidia, has Pisidia upon the West, Isauria upon the South,
Cappadocia the second upon the East, and upon the North, Galatia Secunda,
called also The Healthy.

52. And the Disciples, etc. As much as to say, But such as at Antioch in
Pisidia did believe in Christ by the Preaching of Paul and Barnabas, were
filled with joy, for the entrance which was opened for them to eternal life,
and with the gifts of the Holy Ghost for the sealing of their Faith.

CHAP. XIV.
1. AND it came to pass in Iconium. Viz. The Metropolis of Lycaonia.

That they went both together. Paul and Barnabas.

Spoke. That is, Preached the Gospel.

A great multitude both of the Jews, and also of Greeks. Whosoever professed
not the Jewish Religion, were by the Jews called Greeks, since they lived under
the Greek or Macedonian Empire, dividing all the men of the World into Jews and
Greeks, in respect of Religion, not of Country.

2. Stirred up. Or incensed, made them evil affected.

The Gentiles. That is, Men professing another Religion than the Jewish, whom
Luke in the preceding verse calls Greeks, and likewise did oppose the Jews to
them.

Their minds. That is, Their wills, as Psalm. 41.3. in the Hebrew Text.

Against the Brethren. So are all Believers in Christ called, because they have
one Father in Heaven, which is God, whose Children they are after the Spirit,
to whom they have got access through Christ, and they themselves have one for
another a reciprocal, brotherly love, though they be gathered out of diverse
Nations.

3. Abode they. At Iconium.

Speaking boldly, etc. As much as to say, Being encouraged by the Lord boldly
to Preach the Gospel, whereby the great Grace of God concerning the Remission
of sins, and the gift of eternal life to such as believe in Christ, and repent,
is declared; for the Lord himself approved the Gospel Preached by them, and did
by Signs and Miracles wrought by their Ministry, vindicate it from reproach.

4. With the Apostles. To wit, Paul and Barnabas.

5. With their Rulers. That is, With their Nobles.

To stone them. To wit, The Apostles Paul and Barnabas.

6. They were aware of it. That is, Paul and Barnabas were aware of this
conspiration against them.

And fled. According to Christ's Precept, Mat. 10.33. lest they might rashly run
themselves upon death.

Unto Lystra and Derbe, Cities of Lycaonia. This place may be two ways
interpreted; one way is, that he might tell that Lystra and Derbe are Cities of
Lycaonia, the other, that he might tell that they fled to the Cities of
Lycaonia, and to Lystra, and to Derbe; Which Exposition, says Drusius, seems
more true. For Lystra and Derbe are Cities of Isauria, which although it be
near Lycaonia, yet is it distinguished from it. Chrysostom writes, hom. 8. in 2 Timothy 3.11. that Timothy, Paul's Disciple, was of Lystra. But Geisner is an
Authorless Author, that he was of Derbe.

Round about. To wit, Lystra and Derbe.

7. And there they preached the Gospel. That is, They left not off their Office
of Preaching the Gospel which God had imposed upon them.

9. The same heard Paul speak. That is, Preaching the Gospel.

Who. Paul.

And perceiving that he had faith to be healed. That is, Seeing the lame man
stirred up by his Preaching and Signs hope, that his inbred lameness should be
healed.

10. Said with a loud voice. That he might be heard of all that were present.

11. The Gods, etc. As much as to say, The Gods are come to us in human shape.
This the Ethnick^ believed sometimes to have fallen out, as may frequently be
seen in their Poets.

12. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter. For Jupiter, in Ovid, Met. 1.
compasses the earth in human shape.

And Paul, Mercurius. Whom Jupiter used to lead with him, as may be seen in
Plautus's Amphitruo.

Because he was the chief speaker. As much as to say, Because it was his charge
to speak. For Mercurius was esteemed as the God of Eloquence; and the Messenger
of the Gods, whence Claudian says of him, That he is a God common to the Gods
of Heaven and Hell, Carm. 33. de raptu Proserpinae v. 89, 90, 91.
who alone has a right and power to enter both in Heaven and in Hell, and
maintains the communication between the Princes of both Kingdoms, Heaven and
Hell.

Then the Priest of Jupiter, which was before their City. It seems that the
Temple consecrated to Jupiter, stood near the Gates of this City, in which
Temple the Image of Jupiter was also seen, seeing Jupiter was accounted the
Governor and Defender of this City. For the Idolatrous Nations used to dedicate
almost every City to the peculiar care, and chief Tutelage of particular Gods.

Oxen and Garlands. Oxen and Garlands are Oxen Crowned with Garlands. Minutius
in his O^^avius, The Beasts for Sacrifices, are fattened to be slain, the Hosts
are Crowned to be tormented.

Unto the Gates. That is, When he brought the Oxen Crowned with Garlands, to
the (...) of the City, where Paul Preached, and the lame Man, whom he restored,
did sit, or to the door of the house where Paul and Barnabas lodged. For this
was, says Lud. de Dieu, the fashion of their houses in all the Eastern
Countries, that the first door being opened, which looked into the street, you
presently come to another covered with a Vail, which the Arabians call a
covering, lest he that enters, may see into the Bedchamber, where the Master
of the Family stays.

With the people. That is, a great multitude of the common people following him.

14. They rent their clothes. Very many Nations had this Custom, to rent their
Garments in grief, or vehement anger: first, in great grief and sadness, as may
be seen, Genesis 37.29 and 34. Number. 14.6. Judge. 11.35. 1 Samuel 4.12. 2 Samuel
1.11.13.19. Then, when they heard any, especially a Jew blaspheme. Hence the
learned among the Jews gather that Rabshakeh the King of Assyria's Chamberlain,
was a Jew, and Apostatized to Ethnicism, because King Ezechiah rent his
clothes, when his blasphemous words were told him, 2 King. 19.1. So Cajaphas
rent his Garment, when he believed that by Christ's Confession God was
blasphemed, Mat. 26.65. But they are mistaken, who conclude from Lev.
10.6.21.10. that the High Priest was altogether forbidden to rent his clothes.
For the discourse there is concerning mourning over the dead, not of the
public and universal mourning of the whole people: that in this case it was
lawful for him to rent his clothes, is evinced from the example of Jonathan the
High Priest, when he was overcome in Battle, 1 Mac. 11.71. But the most learned
among the Rabbis, say that the High Priest used to rent his Garment from the
bottom of it, but the rest of the Jews from the top.

Ran in among the people. Earnestly, and vehemently to deprecate their too
great honor.

Crying out. That is, Speaking with a loud voice.

15. Men, etc. As much as to say, Ye men of Lystra, why would you
preposterously worship us mortal men instead of God? We are liable to
infirmities of the same nature with you, to whom we Preach, that casting away
all these feigned Deities, with which the world has hitherto been deluded, ye
may turn to that living God, who has life in himself, and communicates the
same to others.

From these vanities. That is, Idols, which are without life, strength, and
profit, and therefore are called vain, and vanities. See 1 Samuel 12.21.15.23. 1
King. 16.26. Is. 66.3. Jer. 2.5.10.14. and 15.16, 19. Amos 2.4. Jon. 2.9.

Which made, etc. The Heathenish Gods did not make Heaven and Earth, being all
born since they were made. See Jer. 10.11.

16. Who in times past. That is, In former Ages.

Suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. That is, Suffered all Nations
to live after what manner they pleased, not giving them a Law, as he did to the
Israelites, to keep them thereby close to their duty, and his Worship, and
seldom sent to other Nations, than the Israelites, Prophets to recall them from
their Errors.

17. Nevertheless, etc. As much as to say, Yet God did not at any time let the
Nations want a Testimony of his goodness. For the benefits which God by nature,
his ordinary Handmaid, confers upon men, do every moment reach their senses,
and draw the attentive considerers to love and worship the bestower of them.
For reason imprinted upon men's hearts, teaches them that they ought to be
thankful to such as are most beneficial, and liberal to them, and to worship
and honor God greatly, for the benefits they daily receive, and expect from
him. But after what manner God is especially to be worshipped, the same reason
with which all are endued, does abundantly declare, to wit, that the best
worship of God is a pious and honest life, with which he is better pleased,
then with any gifts, as Persius says excellently, Sat. 2. Tell me, you
Priests, what profit do the Gods receive of the Gold that is consecrated to
them in their Temples? Even as little as Venus receives of the Puppets, that
the Maids being about to Marry, offer to her. Why don't we offer that to the
Gods, which the vicious offspring of great Messala cannot offer out of all
their great riches? To wit, an innocent life, conform unto the divine and human
laws, spotless thoughts of our minds, and a heart thoroughly honest and
virtuous; grant that I bring to the Altars of the Gods true piety, and a pure
mind, and I shall please the Gods with a very small Sacrifice, even with a Cake
made of meal and salt.

In that he did good. Although the power and wisdom which shine forth in the
works of God, are sufficient to persuade his being, and that he must be loved,
feared and worshipped; yet the despisers of that might seem to be excusable,
had they not experienced God to be so beneficial to them. Therefore Paul in
this place omitting to mention Gods power and wisdom, he is content to admonish
the Lystrians of his great bounty, which they at all times have tasted, that
they might know how much they were beholden to him upon that account.

And gave us rain from Heaven. Whereby the Earth is made fertile to bring forth
fruit.

And fruitful Seasons. Appointed for bringing forth certain fruits, as the
Spring, Summer and Harvest.

Filling our hearts with food and gladness. Some read it in the Gr. your
hearts. Calvin says excellently; To fill the heart with food, is nothing else
but to bestow food, which may satisfy the desires of men. By gladness, Paul and
Barnabas mean, that God according to his great favor, bestows more upon men
then their necessities call for: as if it were said, That food is given to men,
not only to repair their strength, but to rejoice their hearts.

18. And with these sayings, etc. As much as to say, Paul and Barnabas could
scarcely with these sayings restrain the Lystrians from Sacrificing to them.

19. From Antioch. To wit, The Metropolis of Pisidia.

Jews. Obstinately unbelieving, who envied Paul and Barnabas.

Who persuaded the people. Some Copies add: Saying, that they tell no truth,
but lie in every thing.

And having stoned Paul, etc. As much as to say, Paul, because he was the chief
speaker, was so violently assaulted with stones, that he was thought dead. This
stoning Paul does mention. 2 Cor. 11.25.

20. Howbeit as the Disciples stood round about him. As much as to say, The
Christians came to stand about his Funeral, as Apuleius speaks.

He rose up, and came into the City. That is, Having recovered from the
stupefaction, which the many wounds he received by the stones, had put him in,
he raised up himself from the ground, where he lay for dead, and being by the
mavelous virtue of Christ refreshed, strengthened, and as it were brought to
life again, he returned to Lystra. Paul's words, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9 and 10. do seem
to relate to this.

21. Had taught many. The Gr. has it: Had formed sufficient Disciples, that
is, when they had brought a fit number of Auditors over to this, that they
might receive the faith of Christ, and become his Disciples. In this sense the
same active verb here used, is put, Mat. 28.19. and its passive, Mat. 27.57.

They returned again to Lystra. Where a little before Paul was assaulted with
stones.

And to Iconium. Whence above, v. 5 and 6. they fled for fear of danger.

And Antioch. Of Pisidia, whence they were expelled, above, chap. 13.50.

22. Confirming. Gregory the great says excellently, lib. 31. Mor. in Job c.
15. Behold Paul was overwhelmed with stones, yet he is not removed from
preaching the truth. He may be killed, but he cannot be overcome. He is cast
out of the City as dead, but he is found another day within the City an unhurt
preacher of the Gospel. O how strong is infirmity within this man! O how
conquering his torment! O how masterly is his patience! By the repulse he is
stirred up to dispute: by strokes he is raised up to preach the Gospel: he is
refreshed by his torment to drive away the wearisomness of his labor.

Through much tribulation, etc. As much as to say, Whoever enters into the
Kingdom of God, or labors to live according to the Gospel, stirs up the
worlds hatred against himself, and therefore must lie in the way of many, yea,
and grievous vexations. Which appeared in the Author of this way of living,
even the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who foretold that the same should befall
his followers, Mat. 10.17 and 18.23.34. Joh. 16.33.17.14.

23. And when they had ordained. Gr. (...), when with swetched out hands they
had ordained, or chosen by votes. (...), properly signifies to choose with the
hand stretched forth. When Assemblies for choosing of Magistrates were to be
kept, they appointed one whom they thought the most fit for that Dignity, and
having produced him upon the Theater, his name was proclaimed by a Crier, and
it was said, to whomsoever this seems good, or pleases, let him lift up his
hand: and then such as approved of the Election, by lifting up their hands,
testified that the man Elected, seemed to them a fit man to bear the Office of
a Magistrate, but they who disapproved it, kept in their hand: which Party
soever had the greater number, had the Election decreed accordingly. Hence came
that word (...), and he who became Magistrate by such suffrages, was called
(...). This Elias the Cretian does testify upon Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 3. and
Zonaras upon the Canons of the Apostles, teaches us, that first the word (...)
did signify the suffrages; but afterward, (the Ancient Rites being abolished)
was used for Consecration. In this sense the word (...) is taken, 2 Cor. 8.19.

Elders. Famous Frederick Spanhemius in his Isagogick Epitome to the History of
the New Testament: The Bishops, says he, which were ordained in every Church,
were so called from the care (...), of overseeing, as the same are called
(...), Elders, from their age and gravity, (...), Pastors, from their Office of
feeding, (...), Doctors, Ministers, from their Office of teaching, and
ministering to Christ, (...), set over, Governors, from their right to govern.
Compare below, chapter 15.2, 4 and 6.20.17 and 28. Tit. 1.5 and 7. 1 These. 5.12.
Irenaeus in his Epistle to Victor, Bishop of Rome in Eusebius, lib. 5. hist.
Eccl. chapter 26. The Elders, who before Soter governed the Church, that you now
govern, were, I say, Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telespore, Sixtus. Irenaeus calls
them Elders every where, whom others do frequently call Bishops, and to whom he
attributes the government of the Church of Rome. Also Victor himself in an
Epistle under his name to an unknown Desiderius Bishop of Vienna in France,
expresses himself thus: As thy fraternity has been taught by the Elders, who
did see the Apostles in the flesh, and who governed the Church until thy time.

And had prayed with fasting. See what we have said above, chapter 13.3.

They commended them to the Lord. To wit, To be protected.

24. And after they had passed through Pisidia. See what we have said above,
chapter 13.14.

They came to Pamphylia. See our Commentary above, chapter 2.10.

25. And when they had preached the Word in Perga. As much as to say, And when
they had preached Christ's Gospel in Perga, of which City, see our Notes, chapter
13.13.

They went down into Attalia. The City Attalia having its name from Attalus
Philadelphus its builder, is by Strabo mentioned among the Cities of Pamphylia,
Geog. l. 14.

26. And thence sailed to Antioch. The Metropolis of Syria.

Whence they had been recommended to the grace of God, etc. As much as to say,
Whence having gone forth to preach the Gospel, they were recommended to God by
the prayers of the Church, that he would put forth his grace to advance the
labors of the Apostles of the Gentiles, whom himself had appointed. See above,
chapter 13.3.

27. Had gathered the Church together. Of Christians dwelling at Antioch.

They rehearsed. Even as such who return from an Embassage, use to give an
account of what they have done.

All that God had done with them. An Hebraism; the meaning whereof is, all that
God did to them. To wit, What grace he conferred upon them, how great help and
strength was present with them in converting men, and working miracles.

28. And there they abode long time. To wit, At Antioch.

With the Disciples. That is, Christians. See what we said above, chapter 11.26.

CHAP. XV.
1. AND. That is, then, at that time.

Certain men. Of the Jews professing Christianity, whose Ringleader herein
Philastrius and Epiphanius say, was Cerinthus, De Haeres. c. 87. Here Is 28.
a Disciple of Simon Magus and of Carpocrates.

Which came down from Judaea. viz. To Antioch the Metropolis of Syria. These
Persons the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2. v. 4. calls in the Greek Text, Irreptitious
false Brethren, that is, false Brethren brought in unawares, and who came in
privily to spy out the Liberty of the Church.

Taught the Brethren. To wit, Those of the Gentiles which were converted to
Christ.

Except ye be Circumcised after the manner of Moses. That is, according to the
Rite prescribed by God to Abraham, which Moses describes, Genesis 17. v. 10. And
again Commands, Lev. 12. v. 3. Some Books here have it, Except ye be
Circumcised and walk after the manner of Moses. So that other Ceremonial Laws
of Moses might be understood to be added, to which they bind themselves whoever
they be that are Circumcised, to obey the Law of Moses. See Gal. 5.3.

Ye cannot be saved. That is, obtain Eternal Salvation.

2. When therefore Paul and Barnabas. Who had rightly instructed the Gentile
Converts in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, and taught that they were not
bound to Circumcise themselves.

Had no small Dissension and Disputation with them. To wit, those rigid
Persons, who burning with too great a Zeal for the Ceremonial Mosaical Laws,
contended, that Christians were not freed by Christ from that too grievous Yoke.

They determined. Viz. The Christians of Antioch.

That Paul and Barnabas. Who were as one Party in this Controversy. It Is
credible that Paul, when it was thus decreed by the Church of Antioch that he
should go to Jerusalem, was admonished by Revelation, that he should altogether
do what the Church had appointed: For Paul, Gal. 2.2. speaking of this his
Journey, says, That he went up to Jerusalem by Revelation.

And certain others of them. That is, of them who urged the Necessity of
Circumcision. Concerning which matter the Jews themselves were not altogether
agreed. Joseph. 20. Antiq. 2.
For when Izates King of the Adjabenes being instructed in the Religion of the
Jews by one Ananias, thought he could not be a perfect Jew unless he were
Circumcised; his Tutor dissuaded him therefrom, saying, That he might without
Circumcision piously worship God, if he zealously embraced and followed the
Jewish Institutions; For therein did Religion consist rather than in
Circumcision. But yet the same King a while afterward by the advice of another
Jew named Eleazar (whom Josephus reports to have been famous for his Skill in
the Law) did cause himself to be Circumcised. Likewise Tryphon the Jew in
Justin Martyr, does not exclude the Uncircumcised from all Hopes, saying, If
thou continue in the Course of Philosophy, and a blameless Life, there remains
an hope of the better Portion. And this favorable Opinion seems to be received
amongst the Jews at this day, as may be gathered from Menasseh ben Israel, De
Resurrect. l. 2. cap. 9. De Capit. fidei, cap. 24.
yet Isaac Abrabanel approves the Tradition of the Ancients in these Words,
Whoever is not Circumcised shall inherit Hell. It Is certain the Jews that lived
whilst yet their state was flourishing, had more rigid Sentiments in this
matter, than those whom the sense of Calamities has since humbled and rendered
less apt to Censure; For these dare not deny all participation of Bliss to the
Gentiles in the Life to come, tho still they esteem that they shall be as much
more happy than all other People, as the Gibeonites of old were inferior to
them in the Land of Canaan; whence arose their murmuring against Christ, when
in the Parable, Matt. 20. he seemed to equal the Gentiles with them.

To the Apostles. Those who had daily lived with our Lord Jesus, and followed
him as his Domestics, whom he was pleased to make Witnesses of his
Resurrection, and to send them through all the World to preach the Gospel, to
whose number Paul was afterward added, being called to that Office by Christ
after his Ascension; as before, Cap. 9. So that he was inferior in no respect
to any of them, Gal. 2.9. Some add also Barnabas as one of the Apostles, from
the foregoing Chapter, v. 13. The Apostles (says Spanhemius) had an equal
Dignity and their cure was universal, In Epitom. Isagogica ad Histor. N. Test.
not of one Church only, but of all, Matthew. 28.19. 2 Cor. 11.28. So that
Apostles are no more to be reckoned in the Order of Bishops of a particular
Church, than the Pretorian Prefects or Vicar Generals of old, in the Rank of
Governors of one City or Province.

And Elders. In the Apostles Age there were Presbyteries, or Colleges of
Bishops or Presbyters in every Church, who (says the same Spanhemius) had the
Administration and Guidance thereof in Common, to wit, ordinarily, of which
Presbyters (as there were then distinct Gifts) some gave themselves more to the
Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. Others to Government and Discipline, Romans 12.8.
1 Cor. 12.28.

About this Question. That is, to consult them; whether Circumcision of the
Foreskin were necessary to the attainment of Eternal Salvation?

3. Being brought on their way by the Church. That is, Paul and Barnabas and
the rest of the Deputies of the Church of Antioch to Jerusalem, accompanied by
the Antiochean Brethren some small part of their Journey; As afterward, Ca.
20. v. 38. Ca. 21. v. 15.

They passed through Phoenice and Samaria. In which there already dwelt some
Christians, see before Chapter 8. v. 5. and 14. And Chapter 11. v. 19.

Declaring the Conversion of the Gentiles. That is, that very many of the
Gentiles in diverse places by their Preaching, which God had been pleased
divinely to assist, were converted to the Faith of Christ.

And they caused great Joy unto all the Brethren. This tidings of such Numbers
of the Gentiles converted, caused the faithful much to rejoice.

4. Received of the Church, and of the Apostles and of the Elders. That is,
they were welcomely received as well by the Christians in general that dwelt at
Jerusalem, as particularly by the Apostles, and by the Elders, or proper
Pastors of the Jerusalem-Christians.

5. But there rose up, etc. These are the Words of Luke, willing to signify
unto us, that there were some Pharisees at Jerusalem who believed in Christ,
that sided with those that moved this Debate at Antioch, and urged that the
Gentiles converted to Christ ought to be Circumcised. For those men whose Sect
had hitherto been the Chief in the Jewish Religion, seem to have reckoned, that
they were to be uppermost too in the Christian Church, and their Opinions to
prevail above the rest; But others conscious of their own Liberty, gave not
place to them for an hour, Gal. 2.5.

Of the Sect of the Pharisees. In Greek it is, of the Heresy of the Pharisees;
for that Word of old was of a middle signification, and sometimes used in good,
sometimes in evil part; whence Paul afterward, Chapter 26.5. calls Pharisaisme,
the most exquisite or strictest Heresy of the Judaical Religion; Nay, he gives
Christianity it self the same title, Chapter 24.14.

That it was needful to Circumcise them. Those Zealots that would have
subjected the Gentiles to the Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, did chiefly press
Circumcision, because they knew, that That being once received, there could
afterward nothing hinder their being obliged to the other Legal Ceremonies;
for there was nothing that did more keep men of riper years from Judaism than
the fear of Circumcision; Besides, whoever did take that upon them, did bind
themselves to the observation of the whole Law, Gal. 5.3.

To keep the Law of Moses. Viz. The Ceremonial, as a Condition of obtaining
Salvation; for here was no Controversy moved touching Moral Works necessary to
Salvation.

6. And the Apostles came together. Whether all the Apostles were then at
Jerusalem, or only some of them, and who, is hard to say; For it is certain
(says the incomparable Curcellaeus) That the Apostles did remain there a
pretty while after the Receiving of the Holy Ghost; nor did they, it seems,
depart thence, before the Persecution stirred up at the Death of Stephen the
first Martyr; For all the Twelve were yet at Jerusalem, when the Choice was
made of the seven Deacons, Acts 6.2. yet in that grievous Persecution they did
not presently remove, Acts 8.1. But amongst the Ancients there is a constant
Fame, that the Apostles did not long after continue their Residence there, but
divided the Parts of the World between them by Lot, in which each of them
should repair to preach the Gospel; Concerning which may be consulted Origin on
Genesis, and Eucherius of L ons, who write, that the East fell to Thomas and
Bartholomew; The South to Simon and Matthew; The North to Philip and Thaddeus;
The Midland Regions to Matthias, and James surnamed the Just; The Provinces of
the Mediterranean Sea to John and Andrew; The West to Peter and James the Son
of Zebedee, but all the World alike to Paul; whence in some Calendars of the
Roman Church, the separation of the Apostles is celebrated on the Fifteenth of
July; But as to the year when the same happened, there is almost every where a
total silence. There is another Division of their Work made amongst the
Apostles mentioned, Gal. 2. v. 7. viz. how the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was
committed to Paul, and that of the Circumcision to Peter, but that relates not
to this place. This Council at Jerusalem seems to have been holden after that
first separation of the Apostles, and that there were then no more Apostles
residing in that City but Peter and James, who also alone are read to have
delivered their Sentence in that Council; Although I think we ought to add unto
them, John, who is mentioned, Gal. 2.9. For that which Paul says there, v. 1.
that he after fourteen years went up to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking also
Titus with them, appears by the Circumstances which he there recounts, to be
meant of this Journey which he made thither, that he might be present at this
Council whereof we are treating. So that at least four Apostles appeared there,
Peter, James, John, and Paul, besides those Apostolical Preachers, Barnabas,
Judas surnamed Barsabas and Silas of whom we find mention, Acts 15.22. As also
Titus, as appears, Gal. 2.2. and other famous men, of whom consisted the Church
at Jerusalem; So that there never was a more eminent Convention than this,
unless when the Apostles were all present. Thus Curcellaeus. Others conceive
all the Twelve Apostles were here actually present, and that the distribution
of the Provinces of the World, which the Ancients speak of, was made afterward
amongst the Apostles when the Gentiles all abroad began to flock into the
Church.

And Elders, Who are elsewhere called Bishops. Presbyters (or Elders) and
Bishops were then the same; see what is said before on Verse the second. But in
this Council besides the Apostles and Presbyters of Jerusalem there were
present other Members of the Church, viz. mere Brethren, as we find afterward,
v. 22. and 23.

7. And when there had been much disputing. On both sides.

Peter rose up. To make an Oration to the Synod.

And said to them. That is, to all the Christians of what Calling or Condition
soever that were present in the Synod.

Men Brethren. So Peter calls not only the Apostles and Elders, but all other
Christians present in the Council, being so taught by Christ, Matthew. 23.8.

Ye know that a good while ago. According to the Greek, from the ancient or
first days. The famous Lightfoot doubts not but in these Words Peter had
respect to what Christ said to him, Matthew. 16.19. I will give unto thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; which is as he the said Lightfoot Interprets it,
Thou first shall open the Door of Faith to the Gentiles. Then the Lord chose
him, that by his mouth the Gentiles might first hear the Word of the Gospel,
and Believe; And this he says was done, a good while ago, or in the first days,
that is, as he speaks before in the first Chapter v. 21. in the time when the Lord
went out and in among us; which time is expressed, Luke 1.2. by these Words,
from the beginning.

Among us. Who of the Circumcision believed in Christ.

That the Gentiles by my mouth should hear. To wit, first.

8. And God who knows the hearts, etc. As if he should say; Which when I
performed, God the searcher of hearts, witnessed by a manifest Sign, that he
had adopted the uncircumcised Gentiles that embraced the Faith of Christ,
communicating to them the same Gifts of the Holy Spirit, which he has imparted
to us who are Believers Circumcised. It Is plain Peter here respects the History
of the Conversion of Cornelius by his Ministry, set forth at large in the tenth
and eleventh Chapters. In Diatrib. de Esu Sang.
Between the Conversion of Cornelius the Centurion (says Curcellaeus) and this
Council of Jerusalem, about twenty years, as most Chronologers acknowledge,
were elapsed, and it is very strange, that in so long a space, after God by that
most illustrious Example, had manifested his Will to admit the uncircumcised
into his Church, and to partake of all Spiritual Blessings; yet the Opinion,
that Circumcision was still necessary to please God, would not be rooted out of
the hearts of the believing Jews; But the Reverence of those Rites of the Law,
as being divinely instituted, had made such Impression on their Minds, that it
was not easy presently to remove them; and to convince them of the Liberty
purchased for us by the Blood of Christ. For even after this celebrated
Council, the same Opinion seems to have remained in many of the Church of
Jerusalem, as appears, Acts 21.20. and other Monuments of Ecclesiastical
History, particularly in Sulpitius Severus, who in the second Book of his
Sacred History, treating of the Emperor Hadrian, says; That then almost all
did believe Christ to be God, under the Observation of the Law.

Purifying their Hearts by Faith. That is, when he had cleansed the Minds of
these uncircumcised Gentiles from the sins, wherewith they were defiled, by a
lively Faith on Christ; with which whosoever is endued, presently resolves to
renounce all Impiety and worldly Desires, and to live soberly, justly and
godlily in this World.

10. Now therefore why tempt ye God? That is, why do you grievously offend God?
He that offends God (says Grotius) tempts his Patience, and he offends him,
who opposes his Will sufficiently revealed.

To put, etc. As going about to impose the Yoke of all the Ceremonies of the
Law on the Necks of all such Gentiles as have believed on Christ, which the
Israelites themselves, were never able to bear but with the greatest
molestation.

The Yoke. To wit, of Bondage, as Paul calls the Legal Rites, Gal. 5.1. because
they consisted in things indifferent, which of themselves were neither good nor
requisite, but depended only on the pleasure of the Lawgiver, so that they
seemed suited rather to the state of Servants, than to men of a free Condition.
It Is true the Precepts of Christ are also called a Yoke, but an easy one, and
a Burden, but a light one, Matthew. 11.30. For what (says Salvian) does he
require of us, what does he command us to follow, but only Faith, Chastity,
Humility, Sobriety, Mercy and Holiness, all which do not Burden, but Beautify
us?

Of the Disciples. That is, of the Gentiles converted to Christ.

Which neither our Fathers, etc. As much as to say, which Yoke of the
Ceremonial Law for the vast multitude of Ritual Precepts, seemed insupportable
to our Ancestors, as well as to us.

Note, We are often said not to be able to do that which we do with grievance
and difficulty, as Mark 1.45. Luke 11.7. John 6.60.

11. But by the Grace of our Lord Jesus, etc. Even we our selves who are Jews
originally having embraced the Faith of Christ, are most certainly persuaded,
that not by Circumcision or other Rites of the Mosaical Law, but by the
gracious Reconciliation of us to God, we shall obtain Eternal Salvation
purchased by the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ. The same Paul teaches, Gal.
2. v. 15. and 16.

Even as they. To wit, the Disciples lately converted to Christ out of the
Gentiles, of whom was treated before, v. 7, 8, 9, and 10. do believe that they
by the same free gracious Benefit exhibited to them by God in Christ, shall
enjoy Eternal Salvation. Where note, That Relative Pronouns are not always
referred to that which next goes before, but to that which is chiefly handled
in the whole Discourse, as you may see before, Chapter 7.19. and Chapter 10.6. and in
diverse other places. Now here that which is principally and professedly treated
of, is of those who from Heathens were of late made Christians, and not of the
Ancient Israelites, of whom there was no Question moved, but only mention made
of them, as by the By in the Verse next before-going.

12. All the Multitude kept silence. That is, when Peter had finished his
Speech, all the Brethren, who were there Assembled, Above v. 5.
even those who before did urge Circumcision to be necessary to the obtaining
Salvation, stood silent.

And gave Audience to Paul and Barnabas declaring. Their Narrative did much
conduce to confirm what Peter had delivered, that the Gentiles were not to be
bound to observe the Ceremonies of the Law, since God performing amongst them
such great Signs and Wonders by the Ministry of Paul and Barnabas, did plainly
enough show that he regarded not Circumcision and other Rites of that kind
wherein the Gentiles were not initiated, and that in Christ neither
Circumcision avails any thing nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature, Gal.
6.15.

13. And after they had held their peace. To wit, Paul and Barnabas.

James answered. Answered here, is an Hebraism familiar in Scripture, and
signifies only, began to speak This James was the Son of Alpheus, and surnamed
the Lesser, In Tractat. de Eccles. Ca. 8. N. 9.
and the Brother of the Lord. To James (says Curcellaeus) was the Church of
Jerusalem peculiarly committed, as appears, Acts 21. where it is said, that Paul
when he was come to Jerusalem, went to James and the Elders of the Church. He
also seems to have presided, or been Chairman in the first Council held at
Jerusalem, Acts 15. and that because it was celebrated in his peculiar
District. For it is he that there in the Name of the whole Assembly pronounces
the Sentence concerning the Controversy that was arisen amongst the Gentiles,
which is the Office of a President. He also at last there consummated his
Course with Martyrdom. Nor need it seem strange, if he to whom (with the rest
of the Apostles) the whole World was committed, did permit himself to be as it
were shut in one City; since by teaching at Jerusalem he did after a sort,
teach the whole World, such was the vast Concourse of both Jews and Gentiles to
that City. See what is said before, Chapter 12. v. 17.

14. Simon. Viz. Who by Christ was named Peter, see Matthew. 4.18. and 10.2. John
1.43. 2 Peter 2.1. The Hebrew Name (...) is writ both here, and in Luke 2.25.
in Greek Letters (...). But the Greeks for the same do use (...), a Greek name
of like sound, as Ecclesiasticus, Chapter 50. v. 1. Josephus, and others. But here
Luke, says Grotius, followed the Hebrew Pronunciation, because he brings in an
Hebrew speaking to Hebrews; The Syriack here and elsewhere expresses the Name
after the same manner. They err that think here is meant that Simeon mentioned
Luke the Second; James briefly repeats what had been said by Peter.

Simeon has declared. Before, v. 7.

How God at the first. To wit, in Cornelius and his Relations.

Did visit. That is, by pouring upon them his Holy Spirit, declared.

To take out of them a People for his Name. That the Gentiles which before were
not his People, he would now take to be his People. See afterward, v. 17. and
Romans 9. v. 25. and 26.

15. And to this agree the Words of the Prophet. That is, to this saying of
Simon Peter are consonant the Promises made long since in the Writings of the
Prophets, concerning the Gentiles being to be received for the People of God.

As it is written. That is, as by this one Testimony amongst many for brevity
omitted, which is extant, Amos the 9. v. 11. and 12. plainly appears; For there
God not only promises, that by his Messiah the House and Kingdom of David
should be restored to its former state, but also should be advanced to a much
greater Magnificence, since the Gentiles aliens to that Covenant should be
brought in thereunto, the partition wall of the Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law
being broken down, as is said, Ephesians. 2. v. 14. and 15.

16. After this I will return. James cites the Sense, not the Words of Amos,
see our Literal Explication on Amos Chapter 9. v. 11. and 12. In these Words
respect is had to the Words which in Amos preceed, wherein God threatens
grievous punishment to the Israelitish Sinners. But to those Menaces adds a
Promise, that it should come to pass, that being reconciled to them, he would
at the time by himself preappointed, visit them again with his Benefits.

I will Build again the Tabernacle of David. That is, the House or Kingdom of
David. The Hebrews call every Habitation, a Tabernacle, because that was the
most Ancient Habitation. The Sense of this Verse is, as if he should say; The
Kingdom of David first divided by the cutting off of ten Tribes, and afterward
wholly decayed, I will restore, so as that it shall again flourish, as in the
past times of David and Solomon. This Prophecy was first and in the grosser
sense fulfilled in Zorobabel a Type of Christ, but was perfectly accomplished in
Christ himself, and shall be yet more fully, when of all the Tribes of Israel
many submitted, and shall unto the end of the World submit and adhere unto him
the Son of David, and acknowledge his Sovereignty shadowed by David's Throne.
See our Literal Explanation on Amos 9. v. 11. and Hos. 1. v. 11. and Chapter 3. v.
5.

17. That the residue of men might seek, etc. The Kingdom of David shall be
restored to so great Splendour, that besides the People of Israel heretofore
subject to it, the rest of the Nations shall submit thereunto, and be numbered
amongst the People of God. This in the Literal and Typical Sense was made good
when the Maccabees subjected to themselves great Numbers of the Ishmaelites,
Ammonites and Moabites. And when Hyrcanus subdued the Edomites. Joseph. 12.
Antiq. 11. and 12. Idem. 13. Ant. 17.
But in the Mystic Sense intended by the Holy Ghost speaking by the mouth of
Amos, is fulfilled in the Conversion of the Gentiles to Christ, that they
together with the Jews embracing Christianity, may sincerely and religiously
worship him, and live according to his Requirements. This Verse is often
expounded of the Call of the Gentiles in Bereschith Rabah, Sect. 88.

Seek. In the Hebrew Text of Amos it is, Jirshou, might possess, for which the
Seventy read Jidreshou, might seek; unless perhaps they took the Verb of
possessing, for the study and endeavor of possessing, as it is taken, Deuteronomy. 2.
v. 24. and 31.

The rest of men. The Hebrew Text of Amos is wont to be translated, The rest of
Edom; But the Seventy took the Hebrew Particle Eth, which for the most part is
set before the Accusative, to be here a Note of the Nominative Case, as it is
used, 1 Samuel 17. v. 34.2 Kings 6.5. and Chapter 9.25. Nehem. 9. v. 32 and 34. Jer.
33.5. and Chapter 38.16. Ezech. 39.14. And for Edom they seem to have read Adam, or
rather, says the famous Ludovicus De Dieu, as often elsewhere, so here they
might think Edom to be taken in a larger sense than for the People properly so
called; for as of the Two Sons of Rebecca, Jacob represented the Church, so the
elder Son, viz. Esau or Edom shadowed out all the rest of mankind that were
Aliens from the Church; For which reason in the Writings of the Rabbis, the
Roman Empire, especially as it extended far and wide through almost the whole
World, was styled the Kingdom of Edom, and to this day, by Children of Edom,
they mean all Christians. Since therefore here the Prophet opposes to the
Tabernacle of David, that is, the Kingdom of Israel, the Relics of Edom, they
fitly enough thereby understood, the rest of men.

The Lord. The Words of Amos as translated by the Seventy, bear no sense,
unless understood, as just before was said of the Tabernacle of David restored,
instead of which James puts, The Lord, that is, God the Restorer and Master of
this Tabernacle; for whom men seek that Tabernacle.

Upon whom my Name is called. See what was said on Amos 9.12. In the Greek by
an Hebrew Pleonasm is added (...) upon them, which Word (...) is referred to
(...) the Nations; for since by Nations, are understood Men of the Nations,
there is in the Gender of the Adjective more regard had to the sense of the
Substantive, than to the Substantive Word. See Matthew. 28.19. Romans 2.14.

18. Known unto the Lord are his Works, etc. As much as to say; It Is nothing
strange that God should heretofore about 800 years ago by his Prophet Amos
publish his Intention of calling the Gentiles, which now he executes; for
whatever God does or is any time to do, was foreseen and ordained by him before
the beginning of the World. That from the beginning, or before the beginning of
the World are used in one and the same sense, will be evident to any that shall
compare, Ephesians. 1.4. and 2 Timothy 1, 9. with 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. and Rev. 13.8.

19. Wherefore, etc. As much as to say, Therefore from the Word of God I judge
that the importune Yoke of Legal Ceremonies is not to be obtruded upon Gentile
Christians, but an Epistle Exhortatory to be sent to them, that they abstain
from those things which cannot be done without Detriment to Piety. Hesychius a
Presbyter of Jerusalem, speaks of this our Apostle James deciding here the
Controversy of the necessity of observing the Ceremonial Laws, in this manner;
Apud Photium in Bibliotheca Cod. 275.
How shall I celebrate James the Servant and Brother of Christ, the chief
Captain of New Jerusalem, the Prince of Priests; Head of the Apostles; amongst
the Heads, the Crown; amongst the Lamps, over-shining; and amongst the Stars
the most Illustrious? Peter preaches, James decrees, and a few Words dispatch
the Question, I judge that they should not be disquieted, etc. I judge whose
Judgment it is not lawful to abrogate nor deprave the Decrees; for in me the
Judge both of Quick and Dead speaks by my Organ; I yield indeed a Tongue, but
the Voice proceeds from him who is the Father of Language and Giver of Speech.

20. That they abstain from the Pollutions of Idols. That is, from things that
have been offered to Idols, as appears v. 29. Meats offered to Idols, (says
Curcellaeus) James calls (...), In Diatriba de Esu Sang.
Pollutions of Idols; For (...) signifies Pollution, but not of any sort
promiscuously, but only that which proceeds from unclean Meats, such as were
those that Moses's Law did forbid unto the Israelites, and specially things
offered to the Gods of the Heathen. Whence God, Mal. 1.7. Complains that the
Jews offered upon his Altar, (...), bread polluted; And we read of Daniel and
his Companions, whom Nebuchodonosor appointed to be fed daily with his
Victuals, and of the Wine whereof himself drank, that they resolved not to be
polluted from the King's Table, nor from his Wine Dan. 1. Because they feared
that amongst the same there might be somewhat forbidden them by the Law, Lev.
11. Deuteronomy. 14. or offered to Idols, touching which they had this Command. Exodus
34.15.
Thou shall not make a Covenant with the Inhabitants of the Land [of Canaan]
lest when they have committed Whoredom with their Gods and adored their Images,
some of them should invite thee to eat of what they have sacrificed; A
dangerous Example of which there is Numb. 25.1. etc. Now things offered to
Idols may be considered two ways, when the Question is put about eating them;
1. As Flesh to be sold in the Market, or privately offered to us by an Infidel
that has invited us, at his own private House. 2. As Flesh consecrated to
Idols, and so having a peculiar Sanctity, especially when in the place where
Idols are kept they are eaten in honor of some certain false God, as 'twas the
manner to celebrate Banquets in the Sacrifices of the Heathen. And in both
these respects they are considered by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 8. and the 10. As to the
former respect, to feed on Idolothytes (or things offered to Idols) is a thing
altogether midling or indifferent, provided it be done without administering
Scandal to the weak, 1 Cor. 10. v. 24.25. etc. But in the latter regard it is a
thing Evil, as being conjoined with the Profession of Idolatry, or which may at
least so be taken, by those who know not our mind and so may give them a
grievous occasion of Scandal; And hereunto appertain those Texts. The things
which the Gentiles sacrifice, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.
they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God; but I would not that ye should have
fellowship with Devils; ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord and the Cap of
Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table and of the Table of Devils.
Where we may see that the Apostle, did not look upon it as an indifferent
Action, and lawful out of the Case of Scandal, to eat of these things in the
Idols Temple, but as a most wicked thing, and for which there could be no good
Plea. But you will say, what then is the meaning of those Words, 1 Cor. 8. v.
9. and 11. But take heed lest this Liberty of yours [of eating Idolothytes]
become a stumbling block to the weak, etc. I Answer, the Apostle so speaks by
way of Concession, in respect of those who boasted of their Knowledge, and did
defend an Action unworthy of Believers, viz. their sitting down to meat with
the Gentiles in the Idols Temple, with this vain pretext, That they knew that
an Idol was nothing, and therefore by that which was nothing they could not be
defiled; whose reasonings the Apostle here meets with thus: Be it as you say,
yet you ought to abstain from those Idol-feasts, if it be but for the sake of
your weak Brethren, who perhaps do not so well as you understand that an Idol
is nothing, and to them you may administer a most dangerous stumbling block or
scandal; And therefore in frequenting such Feasts, you sin against your
Brethren whom you cast into peril of Eternal Damnation; And also against Christ
himself, who has redeemed them with his Death. As for my own part, I am far
otherwise minded, for I would abstain for ever, not only from those Sacrifices,
but even from the eating of any sort of Flesh whatsoever, rather than offer any
offense to my Brother. Paul therefore for a double cause would have Christians
refrain the Feasts of Heathens kept in their Idol-Temples; First, because they
were in themselves evil, and none could be present thereat without Approbation,
of seeming to join therein; And Secondly, because by going thither they gave
grievous offense to weak Brethren. But this last reason he presses chiefly, 1
Cor. 8. Referring the other unto Chapter the tenth, where so vehemently, (as we
have seen) he thunders against those Ethnic Banquets, charging such as haunt
them to be partakers of the Table and Cup of Devils. And the Apostle seems to
have fallen into this Discourse from an occasion administered by the Corinthians
themselves, who had consulted him by an Epistle touching certain matters, and
particularly concerning Meats offered to Idols; 1 Cor. 7.1.8. 1. and seq.
And perhaps, how the Decree of the Apostles not long before made at Jerusalem
was to be understood. Here therefore the best Interpreter that could be wished
of that Constitution, from whom we may learn how far the Prohibition of things
offered to Idols does extend, and what force it has to bind the Consciences of
faithful Christians. For there being diverse kinds of Idolothytes, the Question
cannot be solved but by using a Distinction; Some Idolothytes there are from
which we are to abstain only for fear of, or to avoid the scandal that may
thence happen to arise; such are those, which are commonly sold in the Market,
or which are set before us in the private Treats of our Friends. But there are
other Idolothytes from which we must abstain, because it is simply and in it
self evil to eat thereof; As those which are eaten in an Idol-Temple, which is
always done with some either open or tacit approbation of Idolatry. To this of
the latter kind, as being of greater moment, the Apostles no doubt in their
famous Council had chiefly an Eye. Yet sometimes it may happen, that to eat
even of those Idolothytes which are set to sale in the Market may not be
without danger; As we are taught in the History of Julian the Apostate, who out
of his restless desire to propagate the Pagan Religion, or rather to vex the
Christians, caused all the Meat in the Shambles to be polluted with Sacrifices
offered to his God's, that so the Christians might be forced to feed on
Idolothytes, unless they would starve; Of which very thing we read in Theodoret
thus. He (that is, Ecclesiast. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 14.
Julian) first defiled all the Fountains, that were either in the City of
Antioch, or at Daphne (most famous Suburbs of the same City) with wicked
Consecrations, so that whoever drank the Water thereof should likewise be
infected with the stains of Idolatry. And at last, whatever was exposed to sale
in the Market, he polluted in like manner. For all the Bread, Flesh, Fruits,
Herbs, and other Eatables, he caused to be sprinkled with Holy Water; which
when the Christians saw, though they could not but grieve, lament, and heartily
detest those Abominations, yet they refused not to eat thereof in Obedience to
that Rule of the Apostle, Whatever is sold in the Shambles that eat, 1 Cor.
10.25.
asking no question for Conscience sake. Otherwise it is well known how much
eating of Idol-Sacrifices was commonly abhorred amongst Christians; Insomuch
that our Lord Jesus lays Jezabel's Charge as a most heinous wickedness, Rev.
2.20.
that she had seduced his Servants to commit Fornication, and to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols. And Leo the Great Decreed, That whether Fear or Hunger
prevailed with any to eat of things sacrificed, Epist. 79. c. 5.
those that did it should be purged by satisfaction of Penance. So in Minutius
Faelix, when Caecilius objects to the Christians, That they abhorred those
pieces of Meat which were taken from the Sacrifices, and those Drinks wherewith
there had been Libations made on the Altars. Octavius presently answers, That
we contemn the Relics of Sacrifices, and Idol-offered Cups, proceeds not from
Fear, but is an Assertion of our true Liberty; For although every thing that is
brought forth, as it is the inviolable Gift of God, cannot be corrupted by your
doings, yet we abstain lest any should think either that we give place to those
Devils to whom you offer, or that we are ashamed of our Religion. Yea,
Augustine shows himself so scrupulous in eating of Idolothytes, that he seems
to praise a man for choosing to starve rather than touch them; For thus he
writes; It remains that we speak something of that Christian Traveller whom you
speak of, Epist. 154. ad Publicolam.
overcome with necessity of Hunger, if he can no where find any thing but meat
that is placed in an Idol's Temple, and where no other Person is present,
whether it be better for him to choose to dye for Hunger, rather than take the
Food for his refreshment. In which Question, it does not necessarily follow
that the meat so found is offered to the Idol. For it might by some traveling
that way and turning in there to refresh themselves, be either by forgetfulness
or voluntarily be left behind, or set there on some other occasion. Therefore I
briefly Answer; Either he is certain that the meat is Idolothyte, or certain
that it is not, or the same is unknown. If he be certain it is, it is better he
should with Christian Courage refuse it; even with manifest hazard of his Life,
as the Question supposes. But if he knows it is not, or is ignorant whether it
is or no, then let him take it without any scruple of Conscience for the use of
his Necessity; where it appears that Augustine did in no wise esteem the eating
of Idolothytes as a thing indifferent, and from which we are to abstain only
for fear of Scandal; but looked upon it as a thing altogether evil in it self,
and to be avoided though no man were privy thereunto. For he supposes no other
man to be present, whom there might be danger to offend by doing it, and yet in
such a Case prefers rather out of Christian Virtue to abstain, than to do any
thing unworthy of his Calling though for saving of his Life. The same did the
Ancient Christians that lived amongst the Pagans always judge, so that many of
them chose rather to die, than to pollute themselves with any such Food. In the
Roman Martyrology on the eleventh of March is celebrated the Memory of
Fourscore Martyrs in Campania who would not eat Flesh sacrificed, nor worship
the Head of a Goat. And since Abstinence from eating of Blood is by the
Apostles in their Decree, placed in the same degree of necessity with the
avoiding things offered to Idols, (of which it were not lawful for us to eat at
this day, if we conversed amongst Idolaters) we may conclude the former
likewise ought not to be counted as only a Temporary Law, and given to avoid
the Scandal of the weak, but to be of perpetual duration even to the end of the
World, and that although there were none that by its Violation could be
offended.

Fornication. We take the Word in its most usual sense for the Carnal
Commixture of a single Man with a single Woman; which commonly amongst the
Heathens was not looked upon as any Sin or Evil; And therefore there was reason
to fear lest some of them who but lately were come over to the Christian
Profession, should yet take undue Liberty therein, unless the same were
expressly forbidden. For how light the Gentiles made of this Uncleanness is
known from that Passage in Terence. It Is no such heinous Business, believe me,
In Adelph. Act. 1. Sc. 2.
for a young Fellow to Wench a little, etc. And Cicero palliates it after the
same manner in his Oration on behalf of Caelius. Let something be indulged to
his Age; Let Youth be allowed to be more free; Let not all things be denied to
Pleasure; When was not this done? When was it condemned? Where not permitted?
Nay severe Cato himself in Horace, when he saw a Youth entering the Stews, Cries
out, It Is fit young men should go down thither; Hor. 1. Ser. 2. v. 34.
As if it were an Argument of their probity and honesty that they went to those
Public Brothels, and did not attempt the Chastity of other men's Wives, etc.
And how much some new converted Christians needed a Bridle herein, appears by
the serious Exhortations Paul uses to avoid Whoredom, 1 Cor. 6.15. 1 These. 4.
v. 3. and 4. and elsewhere.

And things strangled. That is, Animals deprived of Life, without letting forth
the Blood. The Learned Curcellaeus makes some scruple whether this be not an
Addition to the Primitive Authentic Text; his Words are as follow; We read
(says he) the Word (...), In Diatrib. de Esu. Sang. ca. 11.
suffocated or strangled, in the New Testament, which at this day we use,
amongst those things which the Apostles prohibited to the New-converted
Gentiles; But the said Word is by us deservedly suspected, since it is not
acknowledged by many of the Ancient Fathers, yea by some expressly rejected as
supposititious; of whom the first and most ancient is Irenaeus in his Third
Book against Heresies, Cap. 12. Where largely and Word by Word writing over
this whole Place, from Verse the seventh to the thirtieth, he makes not the
least mention either in the Sentence of James or the Apostles Letter, of things
strangled; which is a manifest token, that in the Book which he used that Word
was not. For that he did not recite it from his Memory is plain by that
accurate Repetition of the Words, in which nothing else is wanting. Secondly,
De Pudic. cap. 12.
Tertullian where he exactly recounts all other things appertaining to this
Place, yet makes no mention of these things strangled. Ad Quirir. L. 3.
Thirdly, Cyprian reciting this Text takes no notice hereof. Fourthly, Jerome
on the fifth of Galathians writes thus; In the Acts of the Apostles the History
sets forth that when some arising from the Circumcision had asserted that those
of the Gentiles that had believed, ought to be circumcised, and keep the Law of
Moses; The Elders which were at Jerusalem, and the Apostles, being together
assembled, appointed by their Letters that the yoke of the Law should not be
imposed upon them, nor further observed, but only that they should only keep
themselves from things offered to Idols, from Blood, and from Fornication, or
as in some Copies it is written, from things strangled, or any thing strangled.
Which Note shows that Word not to be found in most of the Copies which came to
Jerome's hands, and that it was not constantly so read. Fifthly, Ambrose, or
whoever was the Author of the Commentaries which pass under his Name, on the
Epistles. For on Gal. the second he says thus. Lastly, Here are found three
Commands given by the Apostles and Elders, whereof the Roman Laws take no
notice, viz. to keep themselves from Idolatry and Blood, as Noah (was
commanded) and from Fornication, which some Sophists of the Greeks not
understanding, and yet knowing that Blood was to be refrained, adulterate the
Scripture, adding a fourth Command, that is, to abstain from strangled. Now
whatever may be offered to diminish the Authority of this Commentator, yet none
of sound Judgment can be persuaded, that he would have durst to speak thus, if
the word strangled, which he rejects, had been commonly read. And thence at
least it appears that this word strangled was not then in most Copies. Sixthly,
In Speculo.
Augustine recites first out of Acts 15. the words of the Apostles Decree, and
afterward out of the 21. Chapter, those which there James repeats, but still
omitting the mention of strangled; Which that he did not by Inadvertency is
plain by these words which he adds. We see here that the Apostles would impose
no Burdens of the Old Law, as far as it relates to corporal Abstinence, on the
believing Gentiles, but only these three things, viz. that they should abstain
from what had been offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from Whoredom. Whence
some think that there are only three deadly Sins, Idolatry, Murder, and
Fornication, in which last is understood Adultery and all other fleshly
mixtures but with a lawful Wife. The seventh Witness shall be Pacianus Bishop
of Barcelona, who Bellarmine says died whilst Theodosius was Emperor; He in
his Exhortation to Repentance speaks thus. It seems good to the Holy Ghost, and
to us, to lay no further Weight upon you, but this; It Is necessary that you
keep your selves from things sacrificed to Idols, and Blood, and from
Fornication, from which abstaining you shall do well, Farewell; this is the
whole Conclusion of the New Testament. In which words there is no mention of
strangled. The last Evidence shall be Gaudentius Bishop of Brixia in his
Treatise of the Maccabees, who mentions indeed Things strangled, but not as any
thing distinct from Blood, but comprehends them therein. Therefore (says he)
St. James with the rest of the Apostles, made a Decree to be observed in the
Churches, to abstain from things sacrificed, from Fornication, and from Blood,
that is, from things strangled. They passed by Homicide, Adultery, Witchcrafts,
because those things needed not to be named in the Churches, which even by the
Laws of the Gentiles were punished. They pretermitted also all those minuter
Legal Observations, and established only the things before mentioned to be
observed, viz. That we should not be profaned with unclean Meats sacrificed to
the Devil; Nor yet be polluted by the Blood of Animals strangled, nor violate
our Bodies which are the Temples of God by the uncleanness of Whoredoms.

All which Testimonies manifestly show, That this particular, of things
strangled, was not anciently in most Copies of the New Testament, or was
comprehended in the prohibition of Blood, and consequently that there is some
ground to suspect the same to have been falsified. For which there is this
reason of no small moment to be added; That the eating of things strangled, or
(which is tantamount) of that which dies of it self, is by the Law of Moses
expressly permitted to Strangers, Deuteronomy. 14.21. And yet even the Stranger was
under pain of death prohibited to eat Blood, Lev. 17. v. 10, 11, and 12. But it
is not credible, that the Apostles, who so studiously did remove all the rest
of the Burdens of the Mosaical Law peculiar to the Israelites, from the
converted Gentiles, would yet impose upon them any more heavy one, than what
all Noah's Posterity were obliged unto. But this they would have done, if they
added a prohibition of things strangled, which belonged to the peculiar
Discipline of the Israelites; As also did that accurate manner of killing
Beasts, and cleansing them from their Blood, of which we read, 1 Samuel 14. v.
33, and 34. Besides, it is not difficult, if care be used to wash away and
separate the Blood from Creatures strangled, or that die of themselves; Nor
would I otherwise, unless that be done, have Christians at this day to eat
thereof, that they may show how much they regard this Apostolical Constitution.
Although I do not think that Piety consists in those smaller Matters, which
relish of Judaism; But that it suffices to avoid sin if never any Blood
separated from the Flesh be eaten.

And Blood. In some Greek Copies there is added, And whatever they would not
have done to themselves, not to do to others; Which also is repeated (in those
Copies) afterward at the end of the twenty ninth Verse, changing the Third
Person to the Second. These Additions both Irenaus and Cyprian read in the
places (of their Works) before quoted; The Aethiopick Interpreter retains them,
and the Complutensian Edition of the Greek, which (says Curcellaeus) was
Printed according to the most Correct and Ancient Copies, and deservedly
obtains the first Place amongst Modern Editions.

Concerning the Prohibition of Blood we shall treat more largely afterward, v.
29. This only I here observe, that there is a particular Blessing promised to
those that abstain from Eating of Blood, Deuteronomy. 12.25. And that the very same
Phrase in the Commination (or Threatening) against Blood-eaters used Levit.
17.10. is made use of again, Lev. 20.5. where most grievous Punishment is
denounced against Idolaters. And that the same is no where used besides against
the Transgressors of any third Precept, but only in those two Cases of Idolatry
and Eating of Blood, is noted by Maimonides, More Nevochim, p. 3. Cap. 46.

21. For Moses, etc. It Is beyond doubt that the intention of James in these
words, was to give a reason for his Judgment, but to which part thereof, it
relates, is not very plain. Curcellaeus thinks to the last Branch, Why 'twas
fit to write in this Case to the Converted Gentiles, viz. Because otherwise,
unless it were expressly declared unto them, that they were freed from keeping
the Rituals of the Law, they may think themselves still bound thereunto, since
they use to be present in the Synagogues of the Jews, where the Law of Moses in
which the same are strictly Commanded, use to be publicly read every
Sabbath Day. Chrysostom conceives James here intended to assign a Reason, why
there was no such Reason for Writing of this matter to the Jews that had
embraced the faith of Christ, as there was to the new-believing Gentiles;
because the former might well enough know their duty from the Law, which
according to ancient Custom was read unto them every Sabbath in their
Synagogues. What (says he,) Hom. 33. in Acta Apostol.
is the meaning of this, I Judge as much as I say with Authority, that we ought
to write to them, that they abstain from things offered to Idols, and
Fornication, and what is strangled and from Blood. For these tho Corporal
things, are yet necessary to be observed because they occasion great Evils. And
lest any should object, And why should we not Write the same things to the
Jews? He adds, Moses from ancient time in every City has those that Preach him,
that is, Moses continually speaks to them, as being read every Sabbath. And a
little after: Moreover he shows that this Discourse is not made to please or to
spare them as weak, but the contrary. For it should have been a great shame for
the Instructers, and a Superfluous burden. Hugo Grotius takes the sense of
this Verse to be thus. For as to Moses, those which are of the Jews cannot
complain that he is contemned by the Gentiles of our Religion. Since Moses is
read in our Assemblies no less than in those of the Jews, as from ancient times
has been accustomed, and that too, on the Sabbath Days. But to me the
Interpretation of Curcellaeus seems most Genuine and Probable, since those
given by Chrysostom and Grotius look more strained.

Every City. That is, where the Jews or Christians or both do dwell.

Preach him. That is, who publicly read his Law to the People. The Greek word
(...), which is Translated to Preach, signifies says Grotius, to pronounce
with a loud voice like a Crier. As Exodus 32, 5. Mat. 3.1. and elsewhere often.

In the Synagogues. By these the Religious Assemblies of the Jews are vulgarly
signified, yet Grotius thinks that here it may be understood of the Christian
Congregations, as James, 2.2. Theophilus of Antioch, speaks thus, Synagogues
which we call Churches.

Every Sabbath Day. It was the ancient manner of the Christians, (which amongst
the Moscovites or Russians, the Syrians and Melchites and Abyssines, yet
continues) to meet together, no less on the Sabbath Days, commonly called
Saturdays, than on the Lordsdays, Vulgarly called Sundays. So the Author of the
Constitutions Apostolical, under the Name of Clement Bishop of Rome, L. 7. Ca.
23. injoyns. The Sabbath Day and the Lords Day keep ye Festivals, or Holy;
because that is dedicated to the memory of the Creation, this of the
Resurrection. Constantine the Great as Eusebius Witnesses in his Life, L. 4.
Ca. 18. Ordained: That all who lived in the Roman Empire, should on the Days
called by the Name of our Lord, rest from all work, and should also in like
manner keep Holy the Sabbath Days. Gregory Nyssenus in his Oration against
those that took Reproofs unkindly: With what Eyes can thou behold the
Lord's Day, who have despised the Sabbath? Do thou not know that these days
are Brethren? So that, if thou undervaluest one, thou offendest the other.
Asterius Bishop of Amasea, in his Homily of Divorce: The joining together and
Concourse of these two days is Famous amongst Christians, of the Sabbath I
mean, and the Lord's Day, which in a Circle returning time brings about every
Week, For as Mothers and Nurses of the Church, they both Assemble the People,
and cause the Priests to sit down together to teach them, and so both lead and
impel, as well the Disciples as their Teachers to the care of Souls. Socrates
in his History, L. 10. Chapter 22. Witnesses, That all the Churches every where
throughout the World, do as duly as the Weeks come about, Celebrate the Divine
Mysteries on the Sabbath Day, except only the Church of Rome, and that of
Alexandria. And in his 6th Book, and 8. Chapter speaking of the Tumults which the
Arians stirred up at Constantinople in the time of John Chrysostom, says,
When the Feasts of every Week came, to wit, the Sabbath and the Lord's Day, in
which Assemblies use to be held in the Churches, etc. Sozomen Lib. 7. Ca. 19.
Some meet together on the Sabbath Day, and likewise on the first day of the
Week, as at Constantinople, and amongst most other Christians. But at Rome and
Alexandria they do not do so. Anastasius of Nica: The Sabbath and the Lords
day, L. Quaest. q. 77.
are Days Holy and Festival. Neither is it lawful on them to fast. Theodorus
^alsamon. The Sabbath Days are by the Holy Fathers almost in all things made
equal to the Lords days. Hence it came to pass, That as on the Lords days there
was no fasting, as being Days of Rejoicing, as the Gangrensian Synod teaches,
Can. 18. So neither on the Sabbath Days, except on one only which was that
before Easter. In the Canons of the Apostles (as they are called, which tho
Learned Men know they deserve not that Title, yet they must be confessed to be
ancient) the 65th Canon runs thus: If any Clerk shall be found Fasting on the
Holy Lord's Day, or on the Sabbath, except one only, which next precedes the
Paschal Solemnity, on which Christ laid in the Sepulcher; let him be deposed,
(or degraded,) but if he be a Layman, let him be, withdrawn from (or
Excommunicated.) Ignatius in an Epistle to the Phillipians goes higher. If any
one shall Fast on the Lord's Day, or on the Sabbath Day, save only on the
Sabbath before Easter, He is a Murderer of Christ. And to omit for Brevity the
rest of the Testimonies of Antiquity, Tertullian in his 4th Book against
Marcion says, That the Sabbath Day from the beginning of the World had this
Privilege, to be free from Fasting. Therefore when Justin Martyr, and
Tertullian deny that the Patriarchs before Moses did Sabbatize, it is to be
understood not of their assembling together on that day, but of a strict rest
during all the day. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Magnesians: Let us not
Sabbatize after the manner of the Jews, enjoying Idleness. For he that Works
not, let him not eat, and in the sweat of thy Brows thou shall eat thy Bread,
say the sacred Oracles. But let every one of you Sabbatize spiritually,
applying your selves with Joy to Meditation on the Law of God, rather then to
indulge the Body with rest, admiring the Works of God, not Eating or Drinking
superfluously and walking Proudly, or pleasing your selves with Dances and
unreasonable Frolicks. And after the Sabbath is over, let every Christian keep
Holy the Lord's Day. Origin Hom. 23. on Numbers. It is necessary that every Holy
and Righteous Man should also observe the Feast of the Sabbath. But what is
that Feast, unless what the Apostle says, Hebr. 4. There remains therefore a
Sabbatisme, that is, a keeping of the Sabbath, to the People of God? Therefore
leaving the Judaical Observation of the Sabbath, let us see how a Christian
ought to keep the same. On the Sabbath Day nothing ought to be done of all
Worldly Works. Therefore if thou do forbear secular Employments, and do
nothing Worldly, but spendest the times in spiritual Exercises, coming to the
Church, hearing the Divine Scriptures read and handled, Employing thy thoughts
on Heavenly things, careful of thy future Hope, and having the approaching
Judgment before thine Eyes, shall have a regard not to things present and
visible, but to those that are future and invisible; This is the true
observation of a Christian Sabbath. But on the Sabbaths in the Assemblies of
the primitive Christians, the Holy Scriptures of the Old Testament were wont to
be read to the People, even as amongst the Jews. Which Custom the Synod of
Laodicea, which was held about the year, 364. altered, establishing that on the
Sabbath Days, the New as well as Old Testament should be read. Can. 16.

22. Then it pleased, etc. As if he should say, All that were present at this
Jerusalem Council approving the Sentence of the Apostle James as most
equitable, That it might forthwith be put in Execution, and the strife kindled
at Antioch, which easily might spread it self to other Churches, be happily
Composed, by common Consent, Judas and Silas, Men of principal note and
Authority amongst the Brethren, and of whom there was no suspicion that they
were more addicted to either Party in this Controversy, were chosen, that they
might go along with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch, and carry thither the Epistle
of the Synod.

With Paul and Barnabas. Since they were as it were one Party in this
Controversy touching the Observation of the Mosaical Rites, and to some might
be suspected as less Impartial, it was not thought so fit that they should
return to Antioch alone.

Judas who was Surnamed Barsabas. Possibly the Brother of that Joseph Justus,
who was also called Barsabas, before in Chapter 1. v. 23.

And Silas. This seems to be he who is called Silvanus, 2 Cor. 1.19. 1 Thessalonians.
1.1. 2 These. 1.1. and 1 Pet. 5.12.

Chief men. The Greek has leading Men, that is, of great Esteem and Authority.

And Wrote Letters, etc. That is to say, A Synodical Epistle being written by
them to be carried and delivered to the Churches, the Words whereof were as
follow; The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, etc. Where it is well noted by
Beza, that the Copulative is ill left out in the vulgar Latin. For, says he,
here the Apostles and Elders are manifestly distinguished from the rest of the
Assembly, whereas yet the Epistle was wrote by the Common consent and in the
name of them all, the matter, after the Apostles and Elders had debated it and
given their advice, being ratified by the General suffrages of the whole Church.

To the Brethren, etc. The Epistle is addressed to the uncircumcised Brethren,
which were in Antioch the Metropolis of Syria, and in the rest of that Country
elsewhere, and in Cilicia a Region next to Syria, in Tarsus the Chief City
whereof, Paul who was born there, having been Conversant since his Conversion
to Christ, as appears before Chapter 9.30. and Chapter 11.25. It Is not to be doubted
but he had there Converted many to the Christian Faith. But that which they
write to these amongst whom the Contest about keeping the Mosaical Rites began,
was to serve for the Instruction of all other Gentiles embracing the Faith of
Christ, in the like Case; and therefore it is said afterward Chapter 16.4. of Paul
and Silas, That as they passed through the Cities, where there were Christian
Churches, they delivered to them those decrees, which had been established by
the Apostles and Elders, that were at Jerusalem, with the consent of the whole
Church, to be observed. For those were not only Cities of Syria and Cilicia,
but of many other Provinces. And Paul writes to the Corinthians of the same
matter 1 Cor. Chapter 8. and 10. yea even at this Day, and to all Christians
wheresover, this Epistle shows, that they are not obliged to observe the
Ceremonies of Moses's Law; Nor is there any such notable place in the whole New
Testament where the same is so expressly and professedly taught.

Greeting. In Greek, (...), To Rejoice. The forms of Salutations among the
Greeks, at the beginning of their Epistles are these (...), to Rejoice, (...)
to be well, and (...) to do well; the first referring to the Mind, the second
to the Body, and the last to external things; but before all of them is Employed
or understood (...) or (...), such a one, or they (who write the Epistle)
desires or wishes. In stead of which the Latins, for the most part use,
Salutem, Greeting, and the Hebrews (...) Peace, Comprehending in one Word all
Felicity and Prosperity, and all good things as well of the Mind as of the
Body, and also those which are called the Goods of Fortune. Horace imitates
this Greecisme in that Epistle which begins Celso gaudere.

24. Certain who went out from us. That is, some Converted Jews that went down
from Jerusalem to Antioch. See before v. 1.

Troubled you with Words. That is, by their vain talking and arguing have
disquieted your Minds.

Subverting your Souls. That is, rendering your Consciences uncertain and
doubtful, saying, you must be Cir^ cumcized and keep the Law, to wit,
Ceremonial of Moses, for Touching that only was the debate, none questioning
but that all the Moral Precepts are to be observed and performed by Christians.

Saying. It Is nothing unusual to put the Words (...) and (...), I say, for I
Command or require. See Matthew. 4.3. Mark 5.43. Luke 12.13. and Chapter 19. v. 15.
etc. So the Hebrew word Amar, is taken, 1 Kings 11.18. 1 Chronicles. 20.17. Esther
1.10. and 11. and elsewhere. Whence, Lewis de Dieu says, That with the Arabians
it signifies nothing else but to Command.

To whom we gave no such Command. The Apostles, and Elders of the Church of
Jerusalem and other Brethren, protest that they were neither the Authors nor
Assertors of this Doctrine, that requires Circumcision and other Legal Rites to
be observed as necessary to Salvation.

26. Men that have hazarded their Lives. Above, Chapter 13.50.14.19.

For the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. That is, for our Lord Jesus Christ to
propagate his Glory and Gospel.

27. Who shall tell you also the same things. Which are contained in our
Synodical Epistle.

By Mouth. That you may be informed of our unanimous Decree both by our
Writing, and their Speaking.

28. For it seemed goed to the Holy Ghost and to us. That is, It seemed good to
us, who are Inspired with the Holy Ghost. Hence (says Curcellaeus) appears
what Authority this Apostolic Decree ought to have with us, which was not
properly dictated by men, but by the Holy Spirit who guided them. For if we
greatly esteem the several Books of the New Testament, because we are verily
persuaded, that the Writers thereof were Inspired by the Holy Ghost, how much
ought we to reverence this Epistle, penned by so many great men filled with that
blessed Spirit? And therefort it is in no wise likely, that therein was only
treated of indifferent things, and such as for some small time for avoiding of
Scandal were to be avoided; since the Majesty of the Authors from whom it came,
first of the Holy Ghost, and then of diverse Apostles and very many Apostolic
men, persuades the contrary, viz. That therein must be handled Doctrines most
grave and important, and which tend to the Edification of the whole Church of
Christ, even to the End of the World. Had the Decrees of after Councils had
such great Authors; O with what out-spread Arms would they have been embraced
by all the Lovers of Divine Truth; But, alas! In many of them which say, It
seems good to the Holy Ghost and us, there presided the Spirit of Ambition,
Covetousness, Wrath, Envy, Pride, Ignorance, to say no worse, rather than the
meek and gentle Spirit of Christ; What wonder is it then if no good proceeded
from thence, but that instead of composing Differences they rather multiplied
and increased them more and more?

To lay upon you no greater Burden. By the Word Burden are not to be
understood the Moral Precepts whose Honesty Nature alone and without the help
of an other Tutor, is able presently to teach any one. For as, says
Curcellaeus, the Political Laws of the Gentiles will not release any one from
them, so neither will the Law of Christ, which is the Injoyner of a more
perfect Holiness. Nor ought those things to to be counted or called a Burden,
which are so honest and commendable, that of all that know them, even although
none should command them, they ought to be observed. But certain positive Laws
are called a Burden, which are indeed founded in natural Honesty, but yet not
so plainly as that all should forthwith perceive it, and are of a middle nature
between those that are absolutely Moral, and such positive Laws, as depend
merely on the Will and Pleasure of the Lawmakers, and therefore are necessarily
to be often recommended, urged, and inculcated, lest they be unknown or
neglected. Of the Laws of this sort, whereof Moses delivered many, it seemed
good to the Apostles, to prescribe only those here mentioned, to the converted
Gentiles, and especially to free them from the Yoke of Circumcision, which many
of them were most averse unto, that so the Difficulty of Christian Discipline
might not retard the Course of the Gospel, and this agreeable to the Sentence
of Peter and of James before v. 10. and 19.

These necessary things. The Greek has (...), supply (...), besides these
things necessarily, where, to be ^^served, is understood. Grotius notes, that
the Phrase is purely Greek, and by Demosthenes and Plutarch used of things
which by Law ought to be done, and so he translates this place thus; Besides
those things which it is altogether necessary to be done. Tertullian: Besides
those things from which there is a necessity to abstain. Cyprian: Besides those
things which are of necessity. But Salmasius thinks this place corrupted, For,
says he, Libro de Foenore trapezitico, p. 440.
in the Greek it should be read (...), not as vulgarly, (...), which in this
Construction is not at all Greek, nor can be made so; but (...) I must, the
Greeks commonly say who also may say (...), but here the Syntaxis will not bear
it. Excellently has that Reverend Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, now the most worthy
Dean of Paul's noted on this Text, That it was not enough for them (the
Apostles, and Elders, and Church of Jerusalem) that the things would be
necessary, when they had required them, but they looked on an antecedent
necessity either absolute, or for the present state, which was the only Ground
of their imposing those Commands upon the Gentile Christians. Thus in the
Preface to his Irenicum, That Person of known Piety, who has scarce his Equal
for Learning Sacred and Secular, Ingenuity and Eloquence, whose Liberality to
help the Poor and Strangers, I do with all Gratitude acknowledge my self to
have eminently experienced.

29. That ye abstain from Meats offered to Idols. Christians, says Justin
Martyr disputing with Trypho, will undergo all torment and punishment, even
Death it self, rather than either worship Images, or eat of things that are
offered unto them. And when Trypho had said, That there were some who were
called Christians, who would eat of the Idol-Sacrifices, and said that their
Conscience was not bound in that matter. He answers, That they do indeed usurp
that Name, but teach those things which proceed from the Spirit that is a
Seducer. See our Notes before, v. 20.

And Blood. To wit, dressed and gathered together of set purpose, as Zonaras,
or reserved for the nonce, as Balsamon interprets it. The reason why the
Apostles would that the converted Gentiles should abstain from Blood, is
assigned by the Ancients to be, because they indeed were not obliged by those
Precepts of Moses which were given to the Israelites, nor by the Law of
Circumcision, which only bound the Posterity of Abraham; yet still they were
not free from those Commands which God had laid on Adam and Noah, to which
Christ added some things, but took away nothing. For as Tertullian speaks; In
Christ all things are called back to the beginning, Libro de Monogamia.
so that Faith is reverted from Circumcision to the wholeness of Flesh, as it
was from the beginning; And the Individuity of Matrimony (that is, to have but
one Wife at a time) as it was from the beginning, and Divorce restrained,
because it was not so from the beginning; and lastly the whole man called back
into Paradise where he was at first. The same Author treating of the Apostles
forbidding of Blood. Libro de Jejuniis.
As after the Deluge, so in the Reformation of Mankind still one and the same
Law sufficed, That they should abstain from Blood, the eating of other things
being permitted.

But this is to be understood of mere Blood, and separated from the Flesh, not
of a few drops which by chance being not diligently enough cleansed away, may
remain in the Veins. And certainly, (says Grotius) As the Observation of this
Precept (if it be not too superstitiously pressed) is easy, so there are very
honest Reasons for it. For if we regard what is natural, those Nations which
use such Food are wont to be fierce and wild, as we see in America; Or if we
look on what is Moral, it is a most excellent and plain signification that we
ought to abstain from Revenge, for he that revenges himself is said to be fed
with Blood. Origin adds another Cause, because the Devils were believed to be
fed with Blood. When therefore Paul, 1 Cor. 10.25. says, What is sold in the
Market, eat ye, asking no question for Conscience sake, must be restrained, as
Clemens Alexandrinus advises, Conveniently to the Exception of those things
which are mentioned in the Catholic Epistle of all the Apostles, Stromatum, L.
4.
wrote by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, recorded in the Acts of the
Apostles, and carried by Paul himself unto the Faithful. Hence S. Biblis in
Eusebius, 5. Hist. 1.
being rackt to make her confess that the Christians fed upon Infants,
generously answers, How should they eat Children, when it is not lawful for them
to feed on the Blood even of brute Beasts? The Author of the Questions and
Answers to the Orthodox in Justin q. 145. Since, says he, Blood consists of the
same things as Flesh does, why does God permit the Flesh of Animals to be eaten
but forbids the Blood, or eating of the Flesh in the Blood thereof? Answer,
That in that matter also God might separate us from the Immanity of Beasts, who
greedily lick up the Blood of those Creatures whose Flesh they devour. Clemens
Alexandrinus having related how the Scythians use to drink the Blood of their
Horses: Paedagog L. 3. Ca. 3.
and the Arabians of their Camels, adds, Then may such savage Beasts perish,
who make Blood their Food; For it is not lawful for men to touch Blood, since
their Bodies are nothing but Flesh trimmed up with Blood. Origin against
Celsus, L. 8. tells us, That things strangled are Animals dead and the Blood
not taken out of them, which they say are the Food of Devils with the smell of
which they are fed, and therefore these are forbidden to be used by us, lest we
should be nourisht with the Food of Devils, and the evil Spirits should be
nourished with us, if we feed as well as they upon strangled things. The same
Father on Matthew. 15. says, That he is fed by Faith, who believes that what he
eats was neither offered in the Sacrifices of Idols, nor strangled, nor Blood.
And at another place, Thou see that this Law of refraining from Blood, In
Epist. ad Romans L. 2, Ca. 2.
which was given in common to the Children of Israel and to the Strangers, must
also be observed by us, whom the Scripture uses to call Proselytes and
Strangers. Tertullian in his Apologetick, Chapter 9. coming to Refute the Scandals
of the Gentiles who charged the Christians with killing of Infants and eating
them, does it thus; Let your Error blush to object this to the Christians, who
allow not so much as of the Blood of Animals at our Tables; Nay further, who
abstain from things strangled and that dye of themselves, lest we should in any
kind be defiled with Blood at least, which is hidden within the Guts. Lastly,
Even you your selves amongst the Trials of Christians are wont to bring to them
some Puddings well filled with Blood; well knowing that to them that is
unlawful by which you would have them Exorbitate: And how comes it to pass that
you should believe those whom you ^now to abhor the Blood of a Beast, are yet
so greedy of Humane Blood, unless you have by experience found the latter to be
sweetest? So Octavius in Minutius Felix: It Is neither lawful for us to behold
Homicide: nor to hear of it, and so wary are we from meddling with humane
Blood, that we admit not the Blood of Beasts amongst our Viands. In the Book
called the Apostles Canons, wherein are contained the most Ancient Customs of
the Church, the 63. Canon runs thus: If any Bishop, Priest or Deacon, or any of
the Holy Order shall eat Flesh in the Blood thereof, or any thing that died of
it self, or taken by wild Beasts, let him be degraded, for these things the Law
forbids, but if he be a Layman, let him be excluded from Communion. The Council
of Gangre, Anno Christi 325. Can. 2. If any shall condemn a man that with Piety
and Faith shall have eaten of any sort of Flesh, which is not defiled with
Blood, or offered to Idols, or strangled, as such an one, who for such
promiscuous eating is excluded from hopes of Salvation, let him be Anathema;
Behold! here the Fathers being to assert the use of Flesh against certain
Heretics, do yet except Blood and Strangled, and Idol-offered. Cyril of
Jerusalem, Catech. 4. The Apostles and Elders write a Common general Epistle to
all the Gentiles, that in the first place they forbear Meats consecrated to
Idols, and next from Blood and what is strangled: For many rude and savage
People, living brutishly do like Dogs delight to lick up Blood, and like the
wild Beasts of the Wilderness, abundantly devour things strangled. Paciamus
Bishop of Barcelona in his Exhortation to Repentance, tells us, That it is the
Epitome of the New Testament, to abstain from Idolothytes, Blood, and what is
strangled, and that to do otherwise is a great Sin. See what we cited out of
Chrysostom before V. 21. In the second Council of Orleans, Anno Christi 536.
Can. 19. and 23. It was Decreed, That Catholics who revolt to the Worship of
Idols, or that by unlawful Presumption make bold to taste of Meats consecrated
to the Honor of Idols, shall be repelled from the Assemblies of the Church; As
also those who feed on any thing that which being killed by the biting of
Beasts or by any Disease, or other Chance is strangled. Theodorus, (as some
will have him) Archbishop of Canterbury in his Penitential: Beasts that are
worried by Wolves or Dogs are not to be eaten unless by chance whilst they are
yet alive they be first killed by some man; but let them as well as a Heart or
Buck that are found dead be given to the Dogs and Swine: So likewise if Birds
or other Creatures be strangled in Nets or Gins, they are not to be eaten, nor
if an Hawk have seized them and they are found dead; Because in the Acts of the
Apostles we are commanded to abstain from Fornication, Blood, things strangled
and Idolatry. He that eats any such Flesh as either died alone, or killed by
any Beast, let him do Penance forty days. In the Council of Roan, Anno 682.
Burchard. Decr. L. 19. C. 85. and 88. Et Regino L. 2. De Eccles Did. Ca. 369.
compared with Chapter 371. and ^72.
It was ordained, that Inquiry should be made, whether any one had eaten Blood,
or any thing that dyed of it self, or was worried to death by any Beasts. In
the sixth General Synod (which was held Anno D. 692. under Justinian the second
Emperor of that Name Surnamed Rhinometus, at Constantinople in a vaulted
Appartment of the Emperors Palace, which Appartment was called Trullum, whence
it is called Synodus Trullana) the sixty seventh Canon runs thus; The Holy
Scripture enjoins us, Regino. Ibidem C. 5. N. 46. Burchard, L. 1. Ca. 94. M. 45.
that we obstain from Blood, from things strangled, and from Fornication.
Justly therefore we condemn those who by any Art dress or prepare the Blood of
any Animal and so eat it: He that is guilty thereof, if he be a Clerk let him
be degraded; If a Layman Excommunicated. Bid in his Book of the Remedies of
Sin, C. 14. Whoever shall unwittingly eat of any thing that died of it self,
let him repent twenty days; He that is poor or dull and shall eat any thing
(Fraudatum) stolen or unjustly come by, let him do 4. days Penance: But for
those that do these things knowingly, be they sick or well, Let them do
Penance 40. days; Those that do it often, Let them do 40. days or a years
Penance; Which Place of Bid Salmasius in his Book, De Famore Trapezitico,
amends, and for Fraudatum, stolen, reads Suffecatum, strangled, or Afratum,
which is a kind of Pudding: Yet in the Penitential of Theodorus we find a
Passage agreeable to that first Text of Bid, (...). Ca. 370.
If any one shall kn^wingly eat any thing (...), or plundered, or unjustly come
by, if he be poor let him do Penance seven days; If rich forty. Clearer yet to
our purpose is that which the same Regino, L. 1. C. 300 has out of the
Penitential of Theodorus or Bid: Have thou eaten of any thing that died of it
self or worried by Beasts? do Penance forty days; The like if thou have eaten
Blood. So Zachary Bishop of Rome in his twelth Epistle to Boniface Archbishop
of Mentz, forbids those Beasts to be eaten, which were either strangled or
taken by other Beasts. The Synod of Worms under Ludovious Pius, Ca. 64. If an
Animal be wounded, and tasted by wild Beasts, and a man finds it before it be
dead and kill it, he may lawfully eat thereof; but if it be dead first, let its
Flesh be thrown away. And Chapter 65. Animals which are worried by Wolves and Dogs,
are not to be eaten by any but Dogs and Hoggs. Nor is a Deer or Goat if found
dead: But of Fish you may eat, because they are of another Nature; but Birds
and other Creatures if they are strangled in Nets are not to be eaten. Rabanus
Maurus Archbishop of Mentz upon Leviticus, L. 5. Ca. 8. It is therefore
necessary to keep this Commandment Literally, and in no wise to eat Blood; For
thou will find that the same thing is also commanded by the Apostles. Most
remarkable is that Ordinance of the Emperor Leo Sixth of that name, Surnamed
the Philosopher, Anno Chapter 886. Constable. 58. Although God both of old by Moses the
Lawgiver commanded that Blood should not be eaten, And by the Preachers of
Grace declared that men ought to abstain from such Food; And although the
eating thereof as well under the New Testament as the Old, has ever been
condemned as an infamous and unlawful thing; Yet to that degree of Obstinacy or
rather Madness are men grown, that they refuse to yield Obedience to either
Law, but on the contrary some for Gain, and some for Gluttony, do with the
highest Impudence contemn the Command, and turn Blood, whereof we are forbidden
to eat, into a Food. For Information has arrived at our Ears, that stuffing
Blood into Guts, as in Bags, they presume to eat the same as usual Meat; which
our Imperial Majesty judging not fit to be tolerated, nor enduring that both
the Divine Precepts and the Honor of our Commonwealth should be violated by
such an ungodly invention of men, whose whole Devotion is for their Belly, does
hereby ordain and command, that no Person shall dare practice that wickedness
in any kind either for his own use, or to defile others by selling them such
detestable Food. And let him know whoever he be that shall henceforth be found
to contemn the Divine Command, and convert Blood into Food, whether Buyer or
Seller; He shall forfeit all his Goods, and after he shall also have been
severely whipped and his head for dishonor shaven close to the skin, he shall be
sent in perpetual Banishment. Regino Abbot of Pruym in the Diocese of Triers:
L. 2. de Eccl. Discip. cap. 373. and 374.
If any one shall eat the Blood of any Animal, let him do Penance forty days.
The faithful are to be admonished that none of them presume to eat Blood. For
in the beginning when License to eat Flesh was granted by God to man, we find
Blood is forbidden: For the Lord says to Noah, and his Sons: Every thing that
moves and lives shall be to you for Food, except ye shall not eat Flesh with
the Blood: Which not only is very often reinforced in the Old Law, but also in
the New Testament, the Apostles upon great Deliberation write to the Gentiles
of the Primitive Church, that they should keep themselves from the Defilements
of Idols and Fornication, and what is Strangled and Blood, which Jerome
expounding, says, That these Commands according to the Letter belonging to
every Christian, that he eat not what dies of it self, whether of Bird, or
Beasts, to wit, where their Blood is not powered forth, which the Apostles
Epistle sent from Jerusalem necessarily requires. Nor what is taken and killed
by any Beast, for that too is likewise Strangled: And from Blood, that is not
to eat it with the Blood: If therefore these things were written to such as
came over from Heathenism, as the very Rudiments of Faith, and were sufficient
as to the Salvation of those who by inveterate Custom had wallowed in Impiety
and Unbelief, with what face can any think light of transgressing them?
Especially considering that Blood and things Strangled are there equalled with
Idolatry and Fornication: Whereby all are taught what a grievous sin it is to
eat Blood, since it is compared with Idols and Whoredom: Therefore if any shall
violate these Commands of the Lord and his Apostles, let him be suspended from
the Communion of the Church, until he shall worthily have repented. These
Canons have I alleged under the name of Regino, because he has not informed us
from whence he collected them. Amongst the Canons of the British Church
collected by Sir Henry Spelman, the fifty second Canon made under Edgar King of
England, Anno Chr. 967. Requires that no Christian eat Blood of any kind. Adam
of Bremen in the fourth Book of Eccles. Hist. Ca. 20. Amongst other Errors of
the Pagans, wherewith Adalbert Archbishop of Bremen, complained that the
Christians of that Place, were infected even unto his days, reckons these; That
they licentiously did use to eat things that died of themselves, or were
strangled, and also the Blood, as well as the Flesh of Cattle that draw or bear
burdens, as Mules, Asses and Horses. Johannes Zonaras cites the Fathers of the
beforementioned Sixth Council held in Trullo at Constantinople, whose sixty
seventh Canon we cited before, and proves out of Genesis, that they followed
the Authority of the Divine Scripture. Theodore Balsamon on the same Canon
says; The Latins without distinction eat things strangled, and as I hear the
People of Adrianople do use the Blood of Animals in certain Dishes. And on the
sixty third of those that are called the Apostles Canons; As for those
Creatures which are taken by Hawking or Hunting and are strangled, how they are
eaten by some (that is, how they dare eat them) I do not understand. Otto
Bishop of Bamberg in the Year 1124. as Conrade Abbot of Vrsperg witnesses,
having converted the People of Pomerania, enjoined them not to eat any thing
unclean, that is, nothing that died of it self, or was strangled, or offered to
an Idol, nor yet the Blood of any Animal. And to this day amongst the
Christians the Greeks do refrain eating of Blood, as is certain from the
Testimony of Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica in his Book of the Primacy of the
Pope; And of Jeremy the second of that Name Patriarch of Constantinople. The
same thing we are assured of the Muscovits and Russians by Sigismund Baron of
Heberstein; of the Abyssines by Damianus a Goes, and of the Maronites
inhabiting in Syria and Egypt, by Edw. Brerewood. From all which Proofs which I
have here brought, it is evident, that there is no Opinion at this day disputed
amongst Christians, which has been so constantly and universally believed as
this, that we are still obliged to abstain from Blood. Neither indeed do those
other Texts of Scripture, which only in general grant Liberty to feed on all
things, make any thing against this particular and express Apostolical
Prohibition of Blood; For it is well known that general Laws ought to be limited
and restrained by particular ones.

And what is strangled. That it, the Blood being not taken out, as Origin says
in his 8th Book against Celsus. See what we have said before v. 20. The Greeks
(says Grotius) and other Nations as we learn from two places in Athenaeus,
esteemed things strangled amongst their chiefest Dainties, that is, such flesh
wherein the Blood was carefully preserved and kept in, That the same might be
boiled together and so eat more delicately; which thing was also against the
Law of not eating Blood. And that in Africa in Austines time (as he tells us in
his 32. Book against Faustus the Manichee, Ca. 13.) those were laughed at who
made it a Religious scruple to eat things strangled, Is no Argument, says
Curcelleus excellently, of their Error, but rather of the profaneness of those
who mocked them, and undervalued and contemned the Commands of God, as often we
see happen at this day. So those that desire Baptism might be administered not
by sprinkling, but, as in the ancient Church it was used, by an Immersion of
the whole Body into the Water, are scofft at. And because they are thus derided
by men that have very little or no Religion, others are ashamed to approve and
practice it, tho Convinced it ought so to be done.

And Fornication. This Sin was prohibited to the Israelites. In some Copies
there is added, Deuteronomy. 28.17.
And those things which ye would not should be done to your selves, do not you
do to others; As we noted before, v. 20.

From which keeping your selves you shall do well. The most Ancient Copies add
(...), which the Ancient Interpreter of Irenaeus renders, walking in the Holy
Spirit; And Tertullian in his Book of Pudicitia, You being born or carried by
the Holy Ghost.

Fare well. As the Latins at the close of their Epistles use the Imperative
Vale or Valete, so the Greeks the Verb (...), or (...) but this is wanting in
those Ancient Books, wherein are the last mentioned Words, (...), etc.

30. So when they (that is, Paul and Barnabas) were dismissed (that is by the
Synod of Jerusalem) they came to Antioch the Metropolis of Syria.

They delivered the Epistle. Synodical of the Council of Jerusalem to the
Br^thren of the Church at Antioch being assembled together.

31. Which when they (that is the Brethren of Antioch) had read, they rejoiced
for the Consolation. That is, they rejoiced for the Comfort received by that
Epistle, whereby they were freed from the Burden of all Legal Ceremonies, and
only to observe those things which were altogether necessary.

32. Being Prophets also themselves. That is, instructed with the Gifts of the
Holy Spirit, whereby they were able to apprehend and interpret the true Sense
of the Word of God, where it was not to every one obvious, they being thus
qualified as well as Paul and Barnabas.

Did with many Words exhort and confirm the Brethren. As much as to say, They
did more largely from the Word of God propose to the Antiochean Christians
Comforts against Dangers and Difficulties, that neither their Faith nor Piety
might waver, or fluctuate with uncertain Errors.

33. And after they had tarried, etc. When those sent from the Church of
Jerusalem had for some time continued at Antioch, they had leave from the
Antiochians to return back to those that sent them, with wishes of Peace, in
which Word the Hebrews comprehend all things happy and prosperous. But whereas
it is commonly read even in the Greek Copies; That they were let go in Peace
from the Brethren unto the Apostles, (...); The Alexandrine Manuscript and many
others read it more truly thus, (...), To those who had sent them; As also the
Vulgar Latin has it. I conceive, says Beza, that in this place, by Apostles
ought to be understood the Church of Jerusalem in general, not those peculiarly
so called, of whom it is probable very few were then at Jerusalem, and perhaps
none but James; For this was some pretty while after the Synod held there.

34. Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to continue there still. As much as to
say, Yet after they had leave to return, Silas thought fit of his own accord to
remain a little longer with Paul and Barnabas.

And Judas returned alone to Jerusalem. These Words in most Common Greek Copies
are only understood, but in some they are expressed.

35. Paul also and Barnabas continued, etc. That is, they stayed at Antioch
after the departure of Judas, where with many others mentioned before, Chapter 11.
V. 19, 20, 27, and 28. and Chapter 13. V. 1. they daily preached the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ contained in the Gospel, and inspired unto them by the Holy Ghost.

36. In every City where we have Preached. Viz. of Syria, Pamphylia, Pisidia,
Lycaonia and Lycia.

And see how they do. That is, whether they continue steadfast in the Faith
received, and grow and profit in Godliness.

37. And Barnabas determined to take with them John, etc. To be their Companion
in this Journey proposed by Paul.

38. ^ut Paul thought not good to take him with them. The Ethiopick translates
it, But Paul desired Barnabas not to take Mark. Concerning this John Mark. See
before Chapter 12. V. 12.

Who departed from them from Pamphylia. See Chapter 13. V. 13.

And went not with them to the Work. Viz. of Preaching the Gospel through the
several Towns of the lesser Asia.

39. And the Contention. In Greek (...), A sharp Commotion, or stirring up.
That is, by an eager dispute between Paul persuading what was more Just, and
Barnabas desiring what was more kind, there arose an incensing to Anger, and an
Offense, but without any Hostile Hatred or Malice.

They departed asunder. As Abraham and Lot did, yet conserving still their
Friendship, Genesis 13.9. This Contention arising by humane weakness between these
two Apostles, otherwise most agreeing, did by the Divine Providence produce
this Good; That those two Eminent Preachers of God's Word being separated, and
taking different Journeys into Places remote from each other, they the more
promoted the Common Work of their Lord and Master, and further propagated the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

Barnabas took Mark. Who was his Sister's Son, Col. 4.10. Yet the suppositious
Dorotheus Tyrius in his little Book of the Life and Death of the Prophets,
Apostles and Disciples of Christ, distinguishes this Mark from him mentioned,
Col. 4. making one Bishop of Byblos, the other of Apollonias.

40. And Paul chose Silas. That is, for the Companion of his Journey and
Ministry, and departed, that is, from Antioch.

Being recommended, etc. That is, commended to God by the Prayers of the
Christians there, that God would bless his Journey and Labors with prosperous
Success. We may, says Calvin, from the Context collect, that in this Contest,
Paul's Conduct was most approved of by the Church: For when Barnabas went away
with his Companion, there is no mention of the Brethren, as if he had privately
withdrawn himself without taking leave of them; But Paul is recommended by the
Brethren to the Grace of God, whence it appears that the Church rather took
part with him than with Barnabas in this matter.

41. And he went thorough Syria. The Chief City whereof was Antioch, from
whence he set forth.

And Cilicia. In which Paul himself was born.

Confirming the Churches. In the Christian Faith and Godliness.

Commanding them to keep the Precepts of the Apostles and Elders. Viz.
expressed in the Apostolical Decree before V. 29. But note these Words are not
in our English Translation, as being not in the Greek Text nor in the Syriack
Version; yet as to the thing it self, that the same was done by Paul, there is
no doubt to be made, since that Epistle from Jerusalem was directed to the
Brethren of Syria and Cilicia, who walking in Peace and Tranquillity, had been
troubled and perplexed with Scruples by those that urged the necessity of
Circumcision and other Legal Ceremonies. See before, V. 23, 24. and afterward,
Chapter 16. V. 4.

CHAP. XVI.
1. THen came he to Derbe and Lystra. Cities of Isauria, of which see above,
Chap. 14.6.

And behold a certain Disciple. That is, a Christian.

Was there. Either at Derbe, or at Lystra.

The Son of a certain Woman which was a Jewess and believed. That is, whose
Mother Eunice, as also his Grandmother Lois, 2 Timothy 1.5.
being of the Jewish Nation and Religion, believed in Jesus Christ.

But his Father was a Greek. And, as it is apparent, uncircumcised, not
suffering Timothy to be circumcised while he was a Child, though begotten by a
Jewish Mother.

2. Which. To wit, Timothy.

Brethren. That is, Christian.

3. Acts 19.22. Romans 16.21. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2.
Him would Paul have to go forth with him. That he might be his Companion in
his Travels, and his Helper, and his Work-fellow in the Gospel.

And took and circumcised him because of the Jews, etc. Paul did not therefore
circumcise Timothy, because he laid any weight upon Circumcision, or thought it
necessary to Salvation, seeing Paul himself teaches expressly, Gal. 5.6.
the Jews who have embraced Christ to be no further bound to the Ceremony of
Circumcision; But because he hoped by his pains many of the Jews not yet
converted might be converted to Christ, who would avoid Timothy being Son of a
Jewish Mother, as an imitatour of his profane Father, if he had neglected
Circumcision, by which the Israelites were distinguished from the rest of the
People of the Earth; for they knew he was begotten by a Father, who was a
Gentile.

4. And as they went through, etc. As much as to say, as they went through the
Cities wherein the Christian Churches were, they delivered them those things,
which the Synod at Jerusalem had decreed as necessary to be observed by those
of the Gentiles who were become Christians. Above, Chapter 15.21 and 29.


5. And the Churches, etc. As much as to say, And so the Churches advanced in
the received Faith of Christ, and were augmented, the multitude of young
Converts daily increasing.

6. When they had gone throughout, etc. As much as to say, Having traveled
through Phrygia and Galatia, Provinces of the lesser Asia, they were forbidden
by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost to preach the Gospel in Asia the
Proconsular, or Asia properly so called, a Region of the same lesser Asia,
which borders upon the Aegean Sea, and has upon the North Bythinia, upon the
East Phrygia, and upon the South Caria; see what we have said of Phrygia and
Asia the Proconsular, above, Chapter 2.9, 10. Galatia otherwise called
Gallograecia, is a Region of the lesser Asia bordering upon Phrygia, so called
from the Galls, who having lost their Country, burnt Rome, and laid waste
Italy, fixed their Residence here, where of old the Phrygians did inhabit. It
was a Proconsular Province, says Spanhemius in his Introduction to his Sacred
Geography, divided into the first and the second under Theodosius; the first
Galatia had upon the East Helenopontus, upon the South Galatia Salutaris or the
healthy, upon the West Phyrgia, of which as Strabo witnesses, of old it was a
part, and upon the North Paphlagonia. Its Metropolis was Ancyra, distinct from
that Ancyra of Phrygia, wherein of old was held the Ancyran Synod. Galatia the
second called also Galatia the healthy, was governed by the Emperor's
Lieutenant, and as it has been said already, laid more to the South and East,
than the first Galatia; It had Paphlagonia and Honorias upon the North, upon
the South Pisidia and Lycaonia; its Metropolis was Pessinus called also
Pesinus. Now the reasons why God would not that the Gospel should at that time
be preached by Paul and Timothy in the Proconsular Asia, whose Metropolis was
Ephesus, are hid from us. He might have had many, either that he would make use
of their Ministry some where else, or that he had appointed some other to that
work. What ever it is, certainly the reason is not to be brought from God's
absolute Decree of Reprobation, as Calvin upon this place does; for it is
certain that the Gospel was at least soon after preached in this place, and
that by Paul himself, so that Demetrius the Silver-Smith did greatly lament the
admirable Progress of the Gospel in Asia by Paul's Ministry, saying, Chapter 19.26.
Ye see and hear that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia this
Paul has persuaded and turned away much People, saying that they be no Gods
which are made with hands.

7. After they were come to Mysia. Mysia is a Region of Asia the lesser upon
the Hellespont, bordering upon Troas; whose Inhabitants were called Mysi and
Mysii, and in the Aeolick Dialect Mysadii, says Stephanus. These Mysians were
men of a base Temper, so that they made the place become a Proverb, for when
they spoke of a man of no worth, they called him last of the Mysians; and
because he who once comes to be contemned, is exposed to the Rapine and Injury
of others, therefore from that Nation flowed another Proverb, The Prey of the
Mysians. This second Aristotle made use of, Rhetoric lib. 1.
as Cicere did of the first Proverb in his Oration for Lucius Flaccus. For,
says he, as I suppose your Asia consists of Phrygia, Mysia, Caria, Lybia;
whether then is this Proverb, ours or yours, A Phrygian is made better by
stripes? for is not this your common saying of all Cari^, if ye were to do
anything with hazard, That it should chiefly be done in Caria? For what is more
common and famous among the Greeks, then if a man be brought to despite to
say, He is the last of the Mysians? Strabo places also a People called the
Mysians in Europe at the Confines of Panonia upon the River Danubius, and
thinks that the Mysians in Asia took both their Name and Original from them;
but these in Europe are by Plinius called Moesi. Mysia is divided into the
lesser, or Helespontick, lying toward the Helespont and has Troas upon the
South; and the greater, which is called ad Olympum, or Olympenica, where live
the People called Olympeni. It is bordered upon the West with Mysia the lesser
and Troas, upon the East with Bithynia, upon the South with Asia Proconsular or
Asia properly so called. Ptolomy makes also the European Mysia double, the
higher and the lower; but the European Mysia is more properly called Moesia.

They essayed to go into Bithymia. Buhynia is a Region of Asia the lesser,
which making one Province with Pontus ( Pontus lying Eastward of it and
Bithynia Westward) it is bounded upon the North by the Euxine Sea, upon the
East by Galatia, upon the South by Asia properly so called, upon the West by
the Propontis. Bithynia, says Thomas de Pinedo, is a Region upon Pontus of old
called Cronia, then Thessalis, then Meliande, as witnesses Plinius, in which
Author I think Mariandyne ought to be read for Maliande, Lib. 5. Chapter 32.
for so was Bithynia called of old, as Eusebius tells in his Chronical Canon,
where at number 594 are these following Words: Bithynia was built by Phoenix,
being first called Mariandyne. Upon which place Scaliger, to whom few are like
in erudition, says that it is not well said in Latin, Condere Bithyniam; but
his Opinion deceived him, for the Phrase is common both among Greeks and
Latins, as I have noted else where; I will not therefore make needless
Repetitions lest I become wearisome to my Reader. Servius says also that
Bithynia was called Bebricia. Aeneid. l. 5. v. 537.
Plinius the younger governed this Province with a Proconsular Power under
Trajan. The most famous Cities in Bithynia were Nicomedia, Lib. 17. c. 13.
which Ammianus Marcellinus calls the Mother of the Cities of Bithynia; Nice
famous for two Councils, called by Strabo the Metropolis of Bithynia, and
Chalcedon where was a Council celebrated of six hundred and thirty Bishops,
Lib. 12. Geogr.
A. C. 451.

But the Spirit suffered them not. As much as to say, But the Lord Jesus Christ
revealed to them that he would not that at that time they should go to Bithynia.

8. Came down to Troas. Troas is thought by some to have been the
Mediterraneous part of Phrygia, whose chief City was Ilium called Troy; but
others think that the Town is noted bearing the name of the same Region, of
which Plinius, The chief place of Troas was Amaxitus, 5 Not. Did 30.
then Cebrenia and Troas it self called Antigonia, now Alexandria a Colony of
the Romans. It seems it may be gathered from Chapter 20. v. 6. and 2 Timothy 4. v. 13.
that it was this City Troas. Paul came thither to preach the Gospel of Christ,
as is clear, 2 Cor. 2.12.

9. There stood a man of Macedonia and prayed him, saying. That is, there
appeared as it were the likeness of a man clothed with a Macedonian Garment,
and speaking in the Macedonian Language.

Come over into Macedonia and help us. To wit, by the preaching of the Gospel
of Salvation. Macedonia one of the largest Regions in Europe, is bounded upon
the East with the Eugean Sea, upon the South by Thessaly and Epirus, upon the
West by the Ionian Sea, upon the North by Mount Scardus and Orbelus. It is said
to have taken its name from Macedo the Son of Jupiter begotten by Thyia
Deucalion's Daughter. It was also called Ematia and Macetia, whence its
Inhabitant is called Macetes, and if it be a Woman Macetis. The most famous
Cities of Macedonia were Thessalonica for its bigness, Ege for the Sepulchers
of the Kings, and Pella for Alexander's Birth. The most famous of its Rivers
was Strymon, of its Mountains Athos, which because it is situate between
Macedonia and Thrace, it is by some annexed to Thrace. The Kings of Macedonia
boasted that they have descended of Hercules. Hence in stead of a Crown and
Kingly Purple they appeared crowned with the skin of a Lion's head, in which
Ornament they delighted more than in any precious Stones. This Kingdom began to
flourish in King Caranus, it was enlarged by Philip, Alexander the Great's
Father; but it increased to such Greatness under Alexander himself that he
subdued Asia, Armenia, Iberia, Cappadocia, Syria, Egypt, India, Phoenicia,
Media and Persia, and at length all the East and India. At last it decayed
under Persous the Son of Philip, who being overcome by Paulus Aemilius the
Consul, lost his Kingly Dignity together with his Kingdom; such a difference of
Fortune these two men showed, both Philip's Sons, the one like Lightning
conquered all those Nations, but the other lost the Kingdom it self, and was
carried Captive with his Wife and Children to Rome by Aemilius, and since,
Macedonia was reduced to the form of a Prefecture, as Plinius rel^tes. 4. Hist.
Not. 10


10. Immediately we endeavored. From this and many places following it
appears, that Luke who wrote those Acts of the Apostles did attend Paul as his
Companion from Troas, if not from Antioch.

Assuredly gathering. The Word in the Original, says Hesychius, signifies
conferring; That is, saying one to another. Ludowic de Dieu says, that the
Word is also rendered by Hesychius, to make to join, to induce in Love and
Assent, in which signification it is also taken intransitively, as in Plato de
Repub. lib. 6. according to the Interpretation of Budaeus, and so the Greek
Word may here be fitly rendered, consenting, unanimously determining.

To preach the Gospel unto them. To wit, to the Inhabitants of Macedonia.

11. We came with a straight course. The Greek has it, We sailed with a
prosperous wind. As below, Ch 21. v. 21.

To Samothracia. Samothrace is an Island in the Aegean Sea bordering upon
Thrace not far from the mouth of the River Hebrus, with a City of the same
Name. The Latins frequently call it Samothracia, as Virgil. 7. Aeneid. v. 207.

This Island was before called Dardania from Dardanus the Son of Jupiter
begotten by Electra; who because of his Brother Jasius whom he had killed fled
thither from Italy. It was also called Leucadia, because it appears whitish to
the Spectators afar off. Afterward Thracia from the Thracians that inhabited
it. And lastly, it was called Samothracia, because that after the Thracians the
Samians dwelt therein. Plinius says, that this Island was the fullest of
commodious Harbors of any of the rest, 4. Not. Hist. 12.
and is raised up upon the Mountain Saoce; Lib. 10.
wherefore it was also called Saocis, says Hesychius. Strabo says likewise,
it was called Melite and Samos. But at this day it is commonly called
Samadrachi. The Sacrifices of the Samothracians were most famous amongst the
Ethnicks of old, the Ceremonies of which Plinius calls most Holy: Lib. 36.
Chapter 5.
Therefore Germanicus in Tacitus was taken with desire of seeing the Sacrifices
of the Samothracians, Lib. 2. Anal.
but the North winds crossing him made him change his purpose. The
Samothracians were called the Kinsmen of the Romans, because Dardanus carried
away the Houshold-Gods from Italy to Samothrace, and from thence to Phrygia;
which afterward Aeneas carried back from Troy to Italy, says Servius. The
Samothracian Rings were likewise famous, Aeneid 3.12.
which were either all Iron but overgilded, or Gold, but with a little Iron
Head, that the Iron might be instead of the Jewel, as may be seen in Plinius.
Lib. 33. Not. Hist.
Hence those Rings are called Samothracia ferrea by Lucretius, lib. 6. The
Ancients believed that those Samothracian Rings had some preservative Virtue:
As also the natural Rings of the Greeks which were hollow and void within, as
Artemidorus writes. In the Ceremonies of the Priest of Jupiter, it was written,
Do not use a Ring unless it be hollow and void. That famous Grammarian
Aristarchus is said to have been a Samothracian, who challenged such a right in
Homer's Verses, that he would let none pass in Homer's name, but such as he
approved of; whence the Censors of other men's Writings are called Aristarchi.

And the next day to Neapolis. A Sea Town of Macedonia upon the Confines of
Thrace at the Gulf Strymonicus, which now is commonly called Christopoli.

12. And from thence to Philippi. This City is placed betwixt Mount Pangaeus
and the Coast of the Aegean Sea. Some adjoyn it to Thessaly, others to Thrace,
and others to Macedonia; For that those Regions were joining. It became most
famous by the Fight of Augustus and Antonius with Brutus and Cassius, Caesar's
Murderers. Stylax speaking of Thrace says, that this City was first built by
Callistratus the Athenian, which when afterward it was repaired by Philip King
of Macedon and Father of Alexander the Great, was called Philippi. It was
formerly called Datus or Datum; Also Crenides from (...), which signifies
Fountains, because of the many Fountains that spring there, as witnesses
Appian. Next to Thessalonica and subject to it was the City Philippus or
Philippi, Iib. 4. de Bell. Civil.
betwixt Apollonia and Amphipolis, famous for Paul 's Epistle, the first Fruits
of the Christian Church, and, as is commonly thought, for Epaphroditus his
Episcopacy, says Frederick Spanhemius in his Introduction to Sacred Geography.

Which is the chief City of that part of Macedonia Colonie. These Words must be
read so, neither must there be any distinction put between City and Colony, as
those Learned men Bertamus Cornellius and Hugo Grotius has noted. Such as go
to Macedonia from the Isle of Samothrace, the first City they meet that is a
Colony upon the Coast of Edonis (which is a part of Macedonia situated upon
both sides of the River Strymon, not far from its mouth in the Confines of
Thrace) is Philippi. Neapolis, says Grotius, is a City of Edonis which is a
part of Macedonia in which also is Philippi: But Neopolis is in the Strymonick
Gulf it self, Philippi farther toward the inner part of it.

Of that part of Macedonia. That is, that part of the Country of Macedonia, to
wit, Edonis.

A Colony. To wit, of the Romans which was much esteemed, because of the many
Prerogatives granted to the Inhabitants of the Colonies. Paul, says Grotius,
chiefly followed the Colonies, because there were most men there, and that of
diverse Nations. Celsus says, In leg. colon. D. de cens.
the Philippian Colony enjoys the privilege of Italy. Vlpian, in the
Province of Macedonia the Dirreachens, Cassandrians, Philippians, In lege, in
Lusitania eodem tit.
Dienses and Stobenses enjoyed the same Privileges with the Italians.

Abiding certain Days. (...).
The Greek Verb here used signifies not only simply to tarry in any place, but
to be instant in working, to be bent upon a thing with greatest endeavor, as
Aretius noted upon John 3.22. Hence, exercise, is called in Greek, (...),
whence we may see that Paul with his Companions tarried some days at Philippi
to preach the Gospel.

13. And on the Sabbath. That is, upon a certain Sabbath.

We went out of the City. Either because the Jews made choice of a place remote
from the multitude for their Meetings, or because they were not allowed to meet
within the City.

By a River side. To wit, by the River Strymon, as some will have it, L. 4.
Not. Hist. 10.
of which Plinius says; The River Strymon is the Border of Macedonia rising in
Hemo a Mountain of Thrace: It is observable that it emptieth it self in seven
Lakes before it diverts its Course. They being afterward gathered into one
Channel, it runs by Amphipolis into the Gulf of the Aegean Sea, which also
from it is called the Strymonick Gulf.

Where Prayer was wont to be made. The Greek Word, Enomiseto, is rendered, was
wont, by Beza and Piscator, and is also so used frequently by Greek Authors, as
Henricus Stephanus confirms by Instances. I would not strain the Word if I
should render it, it was reported, or it was thought, to wit, by us, that is,
we thought, as the Ethiopick renders it; Budaeus tells out of Plato, says
Ludovicus de Diew; That, Nomisesthai, is used to be taken for, to be esteemed
and in fame.

Prayer. The Greek word, Proseuche, rendered, Prayer, signifies both Prayer and
the Place of Prayer. Hence the Scholiast interprets the Word Proseucha, used by
Juvenal Sat. 3. A placewherein the Jews pray. Philo calls the Synagogues
Proseuchas, because there the Law was read, and Prayer was made. But also,
says Grotius, in such places as had no Synagognes, to wit, where the number of
the Jews was small, or where the Magistrate did not tolerate Synagogues, the
Jews had places appointed for Prayer, far off from the Multitude, and
especially by the River and Sea side. We also may gather from the next, Chapter 17.
That at Philippi, In Here Is. Massalianorum.
there was no Synagogue. At Sichem, now called Neapolis, says Epiphanius, The
place of Prayer is in a Plain about two stones cast without the City, made in
the form of a Theater under the open Heaven by the Samaritans, who endeavor to
follow the Jews in all things. For the Jews, as Chrysostom notes, did not only
pray where the Synagogue was, but also without it in a place as it were
appointed for that end.

And we sat down and spoke. They used to sit down, when they began a long
Discourse.

Unto the Women which resorted thither. In the Jewish Synagogues the Women are
separated from the men by a grated Wall.

14. A Seller of Purple of the City of Thyatira. That is, born in the City of
the Thyatirians. Thyatira, says Strabo, A Colony of the Macedonians, which
some say was the last of the Mysians. Lib. 13.
Ptolemy calls it a Metropolis. lib. 5. c. 2. The Author of that Book which
treats of the Places of the Acts of the Apostles, under Jerome's Name, says,
Thyatira a City of Lydia which is a Province of the lesser Asia, once famous
for Aesculapius his Temple; of which that Lydia the Seller of Purple, who at
Philippi embraced the Faith of Christ, was a Citizen. Pliny describes the
Province of Lydia thus; 5. Not. Hist. 29.
Lydia overspread with the windings of the River Meander, reaches above Ionia,
and borders with Phrygia upon the East, with Mysia upon the North, and with
Caria upon the South, being formerly called Maeonia. Stephanus also adjoyneth
Thyatira to Lydia, and says, it was called the furthermost City of the
Mysians. Plinius says, Vbi supra.
It is washed by the River Lycus, and sometimes surnamed Pelopia and Eurippa.

Which worshipped God. That is, devout, and as is credible, Supra Chapter 13.33.
Infra Chapter 17, 4.
a Proselyte, who having left the Ethnic embraced the Jewish Religion; for so
were such Proselytes wont to be called.

Heard. To wit, our Holy Conference with the Women.

Whose. Religious Woman desirous to be saved.

Heart the Lord opened. As much as to say, God did inwardly knock at her heart
that she might obey the outward Call which she had by Paul's preaching:
According to that which the Royal Psalmist says; Ps. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant: Jo. 7.17.
And Christ Jesus, If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self; meaning that he who
desires to be certain of the Truth of Religion, ought first to be possessed
with an ardent desire to do the Will of God, and that then God would not suffer
him to be tossed with Doubtings, but would reveal to him what he ought to
follow in order to his Salvation. Yet it cannot be said for certain that Lydia
alone believed Paul's preaching, for that Luke's making mention of her only
seems only to tend to show what moved Paul with his Company to go to her House.

That she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. Calvin says
excellently; The manner of speaking is to be noted that Lydia 's heart was
opened, that she might attend to the Words of an external Teacher; for as
preaching alone is nothing else but a dead letter, so upon the other hand we
are to take heed that no false imagination, nor the likeness of any secret
Revelation take us off from the Word, whence our Faith depends, and in which it
rests. For many that they may enlarge the Grace of the Spirit, devise I know
not what Enthusiasms to themselves that there may be no use for the external
Word; But the Scripture allows not such a Divorce, which joins the Ministry of
men with the secret inspiration of the Spirit. Except Lydia 's mind had been
opened, Paul 's preaching had been but literal, yet God does not inspire her
naked Revelations only, but Reverence to his Word. That the Word of man which
otherwise would evanish in the Air might penetrate into the Soul endued with
heavenly Light. These fanatical men are therefore mistaken, who under pretext
of the Spirit cast off external Doctrine. We therefore must observe the
temperature made here by Luke, that we can profit nothing by the bare hearing
of the Word without the Grace of the Spirit, and that the Spirit is conferred
on us, not to beget contempt of the Word, but rather to instill the Faith of it
in our Minds, and write it in our hearts.

15. And when she was baptized. Calvin says notably, Hence it appears how
effectually God in a little moment of time wrought upon Lydia 's heart; for it
is not to be doubted but she truly embraced the Faith of Christ, and gave up
her name to him before she was admitted to Baptism by Paul.

And her Household. That is, and her Domestics, who believed the Preaching of
the Gospel were baptized also. Lydia, says Calvin, had not the hearts of all
her Family in her hand, so as at her pleasure to convert whom she would to
Christ; but the Lord blessed her Holy Endeavors, so that her Domestics became
obedient.

She besought us. That is, she prayed and obtested us with many Prayers.

Saying, if ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord. As much as to say,
Seeing ye have approved my Faith in Christ by the Seal of Baptism. The Particle
If denotes not doubting but confirming, See Acts 49.11.17. Mat. 12.27. Jo.
10.35.13.32.18.8, Gal. 5.25. 1 Pet. 1.17. etc. 5. Ad Attic. 14.
and signifies seeing, forasmuch as. So Cicero, I would have thee, if thou
think me no less diligent to learn what passes in the Commonwealth than thou,
to write to me what ever comes to pass. Also If is put for forasmuch as, by
Virgil, 1. Georgick 7. and 17. as Servius has noted.

Come into my House and abide there. That is, lodge with me.

And she constrained us. By her Prayer that we should go in and lodge with her.
So the two Disciples that were going to Emaus, constrained Jesus by friendly
persuasions, Luke 24.29.
instantly entreating him to tarry with them. So by earnestness of entreaty the
Guests were bidden to be compelled, Luke 14.23. So Genes. 19.23. Lot compelled
the Angels to come into his House. So also by their Prayers his Servants
compelled King Saul to eat: 1 Samuel 21.23.
So Lucius Apuleius, By chance she greatly pressed that I should be with her at
her little Supper, As. Aur. lib. 2.
and when I would have excused my self as being chargeable, she denied me
leave. Lib. 3.
And again, Milo my Host, Adjuring me by the great force, virtue and power of
this day, that I should engage to sup with him this day, neither went he away
himself, nor suffered me to be gone.

16. To Prayer. Or, to the place of Prayer, the Word in the Greek signifies
both.

A Damsel. That is, a little Maid Servant.

Possessed with a Spirit of Divination. So the Syriack Interpreter has it; but
the Greek has it, A Spirit of Python. Plutarch says, That all men that were
accused as having a Spirit of Fortune-telling were called Pythons. Lib. de def.
orac.
Famous Bochart proves that Pethen is an Asp, 2 Hieroz. 3.5.
and seeing in Egypt Asps grew to the smallest bulk of a Dragon, which is five
foots, that the Hebrew Word Pethen was common to the Dragon and the Asp. And to
this, says he, the Greek name Python, which the Poets give the Dragon that was
killed in Parnassus, does allude. Yet Ephorus has written that it was not a
Dragon but a man, Lib. 9.
from whom Strabo reports, that Apollo with Arrows killed a fierce man named
Python, surnamed Draco, after that for a long time he had infested the
Inhabitants of Parnassus with Murders and Robberies. The same man instead of
Python is named Delphynes by Suidas after Apollonius. If I see any thing in
this darkness, Argon. lib. 2. v. 708.
This man was a great Robber in Phocis, whose true Name was Delphynes; Python
was a Surname given him by the Phoenicians, who then inhabited the neighboring
Boeotia, because of the tumults which he stirred up, and the robberies he
committed. Indeed with the Arabians who have Phe instead of Pe, because they
want the Letter p. the Word Phathana signifies to stir up Tumults; Phithna,
Sedition, Slaughter; Phathan, Seditious, a Thief, or Robber; but the same man
is of a Robber made a Dragon by the Inventers of Fables, because in Syriack
Pithun or Pethen signifies a Dragon, and therefore is he also called Python.
From this Python were the Pythian Plays, and the City of the Delphs Pytho or
Phython, and Apollo himself called Python. Macrobius says, Lib. 1. c. 20.
that the Greeks prattle, that this Name Python was given to the God for
killing the Dragon. Therefore the Spirit of Python, Acts 16.16. is the Spirit
of Apollo, by which Demon it was believed that Woman-Conjurer was possessed.
Hence the very Conjurers themselves who were of old called Eurycleae, are now
called Pythones, says Plutarch in his Book of the cessation of the Oracles. In
this sense the Hebrews, instead of Python write Pithom, by a small change of
the Word, and dream that those kind of Southsayers did not speak out of the
Belly, but out of the Armpits. See pray Maimonides his Treatise concerning
Idolatry, chapter 6.

Which brought her Masters much gain. Perhaps to her Master and Mistress.

By Soothsaying. That is, by receiving the Rewards of her Southsaying from
those who consulted her concerning hidden matters, as things stolen, the
success of a Journey, and the like. The Scholiast observes upon Aristophanes,
That Eurycles did, as speaking out of his Belly, foretell true things to the
Athenians by the help of the Demon which was in him. Hence all Southsayers are
called Ventriloqui and Euryclitae, from Eurycles the first Author of the thing.

17. The same followed Paul and us. Silas, Timothy and Luke, Paul's Companions.

These men are Servants of the most High God. An unclean Spirit sometimes
speaks Truth, but not for a good end.

When an evil man counterfeits good, then is he most evil.

Which show unto us. Philippians.

The way of Salvation. That is, the way by which eternal happiness is to be
attained.

18. And this did she. That is, reiterated it.

But Paul being grieved. That the Truth should be rendered suspected by the
Testimony of a lying Spirit so often repeated. See what we have noted upon Mark
1.25.

Turned. To the Damsel that had the Spirit of Divination,

To the Spirit. To that Spirit of Divination, to wit, which possessed this Damsel.

I command thee, etc. As much as to say, Using the power given, Mark 16.17. by
the Authority which Jesus Christ, and I from him have over you: I command you
presently to come out of that Woman.

And he came out the same hour. As much as to say, That unclean Spirit being
dashed with the Authority of Christ, presently obeyed, Paul commanding him to
come out of the Damsel whom he possessed; as presently it was evident in her by
the effects. There are Examples of the power of casting out Devils by Christ's
Authority granted by him to his Servants to be seen, above, Chap. 5.16. and 8.7.

19. And when her Masters saw. To wit, the Master and Mistress of the possessed
Damsel, or also her Masters Children.

That the hopes of their gains was gone. That is, that no hope remained, the
Damsel being left by the Spirit of Divination, that they could get any more
Riches by her art of South-saying.

They caught Paul and Silas. Who being stirred up by a holy Zeal, and by the
instinct of the Spirit of God, did cast the unclean Spirit out of the Maid,
although it flattered them.

And drew them into the Market place unto the Rulers. That is, to the
Governors of the City, Keepers of the public peace and Judges of the Guilty.

20 And brought them to the Magistrates. The words in the original signify
Captains of the Guard. Who had the charge of Seizing, Punishing and Imprisoning
the Guilty, the Sentence, to wit, of the Rulers, that is, of the Judges,
preceding. Others will have those who were called Princes or Rulers in the
preceding verse, to be called in this verse, with a more honorable title of
Magistrates, and in both places they understand the Duumvirs of the Colony.

Saying these Men, etc. They slandered the holy men as troublers of the public
Peace; while they sought to revenge their own private loss, for which they were
much grieved; 1 Kings 18.17.
so of old the ungodly Achab slandered the Godly Prophet Elias.

Being Jews. Whose name was hateful to the Romans because of their different
Religion and Manners.

21 And teach Customs. The Romans among the Laws in the twelve Tables ordered.
Let none have Gods apart, neither let new or strange Gods be privately
worshipped, unless publicly received. Let the Customs of the Country and
Family be observed, let sacred private things always continue. Live. Lib. 4.
Therefore it was given in charge to the Aediles, that they should observe lest
any other than the Roman Gods should be Worshipped, nor after any other manner
than that of the Country.

Being Romans. That is, our City being a Colony of the Romans, and therefore
are we called by the name of Romans.

And the multitude rose up together against them. As much as to say, And they
were stirred up against Paul and Silas, who tho innocent were charged with
forged Crimes by the Master and Mistresses of her, who had the Spirit of
Divination, or also by her Masters Children.

And the Magistrates. The Greek has it the Captains of the Soldiers or of the
Guards, as above, v. 20.

Rent off their Cloths, etc. As much as to say, Not regarding their cause
aright, they commanded the Officers both to tear off the innocent Men's cloths,
and to scourge their bodies with Rods. It was a custom among the Jews as you
may read in Mishnah in the Treatise Macoth, as also among the Romans, as is to
be seen in Livie, Plutarch, and other Historians, not to take off the cloths of
such as were to be whipped, but to tear them off, that their bodies might be
naked to receive the Lashes.

23 And when they had laid many, etc. As much as to say, Paul and Silas being
beaten with many strokes, the Duumviri or Magistrates of the City commanded
them to be led to Prison. Adding further their Commands to the Jailer, that he
would keep them close, lest they might escape, and so they not be able to
punish them farther.

The Jailer. The Greek has it, keeper of the Prisoners. Paulus Juris-Consultus
calls him Governor of the Prison, Ambrose the Deputy of the Prison, others the
Jailer. Now the Greeks think the Jailer spoken of here to have been Stephanus
whom Paul mentions 1 Cor. 1.16. and 16.15, 17. but this is uncertain, because
Stephanus with his house is called the first fruits of Achaia. 1 Cor. 16.15.
But Achaia is a distinct and separate Region from Macedonia where the Jailer
lived at Philippi, where he was converted to Christ: unless one should say that
he was born at Achaia and removed to Philippi, whence perhaps he returned back
again to Achaia, to wit, to Corinth.

24 Who. To wit, the Jailer.

Thrust them into the inner Prison. That, to wit, being enclosed within so many
Gates they might be the more securely kept.

Made their feet fast. The word in the original is, he guarded their feet, that
is, made them secure. By a Metonymy, as Grotius says, for a Guard secures us.

In the Wood. that is, (as it is interpreted in the English Translation) in the
Stokes, which Plautus calls a Wooden Guard.

25. And at Midnight. When men are as it were buried in deep sleep.

Sang praises unto God. Ruff. Presbyter of Aquilia in the Title of the 72 Psalm
says, Hymns are Songs which contain the praise of God. If it be praise and not
of God, it is not a hymn: if it be praise, and of God, if it be not sung it is
not a Hymn. It must therefore that it may be a Hymn have these three things,
Praise, and of God, and a Song. In Lib. de fide.
And therefore deservedly does Gregorius Baeticus Bishop of the City Granata in
Spain, call David Hymnidicus. Paul then and Silas sung Praises to God for the
honor put upon them, Chapter 5.41.
in that they suffered innocently for promoting the Glory of Christ. See above.

26. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake. By the great Power and Might of
God.

So that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken. Not only did the Edifice of
the Prison it self totter, but also the very ground upon which it was built was
greatly shaken; by such an Earthquake God shows that he himself is present with
his Servants, and that by his strength they shall be rescued from the Severity
of furious Magistrates.

And immediately. That is, as soon as by the Earthquake the whole Prison was
shaken.

All the Doors were opened. To wit, of that Prison.

And every ones bands. To wit, who were bound in that Prison.

27. And the keeper of the Prison awaking. To wit, by the great Earthquake.

He drew out his Sword and would have killed himself. For fear of the
Magistrate, lest by him he should be put to a more cruel death. If the
Prisoners escaped, says Grotius, the Jaylors used to undergo the same
Punishment that they were to suffer. L. ad Commentariensem, C. de custodia
Vinctorum.

28. Do thy self no harm. For fear of a worse Death.

For we are all. Who were bound in this Prison, before all its Doors were
opened by the Earthquake.

Here. Perhaps they who beside Paul and Silas were bound in that Prison,
listening to their unlooked for Songs, and astonished with the wonderful
Earthquake, did not observe that their bands were loosed, nor that all the
Prison-Doors were opened.

29. Then he called for a light. From his Domestics, who were in his house
adjoining the Prison.

And sprang in. To the Prison, with Force and Speed, to see if all the
Prisoners were there.

And came trembling. For fear of Divine Judgment.

And fell down before Paul and Silas. Worshipping, after the custom of the
Eastern Kingdoms, and thence brought to Macedonia, from the time of Alexander
the Great, when he Conquered Asia.

30. And brought them out. From the Cloister of the inner Prison to some open
place of the Prison, where they might more freely breath.

And said. Like those who were moved with Peter's Sermons, Acts 2.37. Luke 3.10,
12.
the People and Publicans converted by John.

Sirs. Thus the Jailer gave them this honorable Compellation, knowing them to
be men of great Holiness, in that when they were so strictly kept, and had
deliverance offered them from Heaven, their bonds being loosed and the doors
set open to them, so that they might flee, especially if they had suffered him
to kill himself, as he would have done; yet they fled not, but were more
solicitous for his Life than for their own. To call them Sirs whom we would
honor, says Grotius, was a custom then received both among the Greeks and
Romans, as witness Martial and others.

What must I do. As much as to say, I have heard you declare the way to attain
the greatest happiness, neither does the Miracle which God wrought concerning
you, suffer me to doubt of the truth of it, show me therefore I beseech you
what course I shall take that I may attain to this happiness?

31. Believe on the Lord Jesus. That is, rest upon Jesus Christ whom God
appointed to be the only Savior, with true confidence of heart, firmly
believing, that repenting of your former conversation, and seriously proposing
to pass the rest of your life, conform to the Rule of his Doctrine, you shall
be discharged from all your Sins.

And you shall be saved. That is, and you shall obtain the chief happiness in
eternal life according to Christ's promise. Job. 3.15, 16, 36.6.47.


And thy house. That is, and your household upon the same condition, to wit, if
they also embrace Christ with the same faith, which inclines the heart to
repentance and amendment of Life, conform to the rule of his Doctrine.

And they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, etc. That is, the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, what that Jesus the Son of God is, what he did upon Earth, and
suffered for the Redemption of Mankind, how great Miracles he wrought, how he
lived again tho by the Instigation of the Jews he was Crucified, and ascended
above all the Heavens, and was made Lord of all: what Promises and Precepts he
proposed. These things they briefly held out to him. For it was usual with the
Apostles to declare such things in their Sermons.

And to all that were in his house. As much as to say, They not only imparted a
clear and distinct knowledge of Christ and of his Doctrine to the Jailer, but
also to all his Domestics, who went with him from his house to the Prison, to
see if any of the Prisoners had escaped, the Prison Doors being broke open with
the Earthquake.

33. And he took them the same hour of the Night and washed their Stripes. That
is, says Grotius, having led them to some Pool, which was within the Bounds of
the Prison, he washed off the Blood which the rods had drawn. Blood is washed
off with water, and by its coldness the flux thereof is stanched; also by
washing, wounds are cleansed and disposed for healing; therefore it is usual to
wash wounds with Water.

And was baptized. As much as to say, Both the Jailer himself and all his
Domestics, who heard the word of the Lord Preached in the next following
verse, without delay were according to Christ's instruction dipped in Water,
that by this sign they might profess that they would die to Sin and lead a new
and godly Life for the future.

34. And when he had brought them into his house. Joining to the Prison, as
Jaylors houses use to be.

He set meat before them. That is, he refreshed them with a Treat as Levi did,
Luke 5.29. and Zaccheus 19.6.

And rejoiced believing in God with all his house. The Participle here gives
the reason of his joy, as much as to say, He rejoiced and was exceeding glad,
that not only himself, but his whole household had acknowledged and received the
faith of the true God, of whom he was formerly ignorant. So the Ethiopian
Eunuch, when he embraced the truth, Acts 8.37.
is said to have been full of Joy.

35. The Magistrates sent. The word Magistrates signifies in the Greek,
Captains of the Soldiers. See what we have said above, v. 20.

Sergeants. Grotius thinks that in the Latin Translation the Greek word
Rabduchos should be retained. For although, says he, Plutarch and the
Glossarie, call Sergeants Rabduchos in Greek, yet the Greek word it self
signifies any of the Magistrates Officers that carried a staff, which is in
Greek, called Rabdos, as a sign of their Office. Calvin renders the word,
apparitores. Beza and Stephanus, Viatores.

Saying, let these men go. The City Judges repented that for the sake of the
incensed multitude, they had commanded strangers to be beaten without hearing
their cause, as if they had been convicted Malefactors, contrary to the Roman
Laws, and of all Civilized Nations.

36. Go in Peace. That is, go with Freedom, and fare you well.

37. But Paul said unto them. Who were sent by the Magistrates.

They have beaten us openly. The Magistrates are said to have done this,
because they commanded it to be done.

Uncondemned. That is, unheard, contrary to the order of Law, whereby,
whosoever determines any thing before he has heard both Parties, tho his
Determination be just, he has been unjust in Determining.

Being Romans. Against the Porcian and Sempronian Laws. Cicero for Rabirius.
The Porcian Law takes away rods from the Bodies of all the Roman Citizens. And
in his fifth Oration against Verres. There was a Roman Citizen whipped with rods
in the Marketplace of Messena. All the while notwithstanding his pain and the
noise of the rods nothing was heard from this Wretch but these words, I am a
Roman Citizen, thinking with the remembrance of his City, to repel the strokes
and abate the pain. And then. O sweet name of Liberty! O great Privilege of
our City! O Law of Porcia and Laws of Sempronia! And a little after: It is a
Crime to bind a Roman Citizen, heinous wickedness to beat him.

And have cast us into Prison. As if they intended to inflict more cruel
punishments upon us.

And now do they thrust us out privily. As much as to say, And now having
publicly and openly disgraced us, do they privately and clandestinely thrust
us out without any reparation of our honor.

Nay verily, etc. But truly we shall not now go out of Prison, unless the
Judges themselves take us honorably, that it may appear that we were
undeservedly beat and put in bonds.

And they feared, when they heard that they were Romans. That is, they were
afraid lest they should be accused of Treason, with which Cicero threatens
Verres toward the end of his fifth Oration against him. For it was declared by
the Law, that if a Roman Citizen was hurt, the very Majesty of the Roman People
should be accounted as hurt. They were not moved, says Calvin excellently,
with the other head, that they wrongfully raged against innocent Men, without
any trial of their cause: And yet that was a greater reproach. But because they
seared no revenger among Men, they were not moved with the Judgment of God. And
hence it was they so unconcernedly passed by, that which was objected
concerning the unjustness of it; they were only afraid of the Roman axes, for
violating the Liberty of a Citizen. They knew this was Capital to the greatest
of their Deputies, what then would it be to the Decurions of one Colonie? Such
is the fear of wicked Men, who have a stupid Conscience before God, greatly
indulging themselves in all Sins, until revenge from Men threaten them.

39. And they came. To wit, the City Judges, to the Prison to Paul and Silas,
who, as it pleases Grotius, are called Romans by a Synecdoche, seeing Paul
only had the privilege of the City of Rome. Such a Synecdoche is in Matthew.
27.44.

And besought them. Some render it, and comforted them. To wit, they entreated
them with fair words, that they would forgive the wrong which they did them
undeservedly, being forced to it by the clamor of the People; and so
acknowledging their innocence they comforted them.

And brought them out and desired them to depart out of the City. As much as to
say, Having brought them out of Prison, they urged them with entreaties that
they might depart out of Phillipi, lest they might suffer worse from the angry
Philippians.

40. And they went out. To wit, Paul and Silas.

And entered into the house of Lydia. That Godly Woman of Philippi, of whom see
above v. 14.

And when they had seen the Brethren. That is, the Christians who were met in
Lydia's house.

They comforted them. With an exhortation to Constancy in the Christian
Religion, seeing God does even beyond expectation, by Miracles aid and assist
such as for this Religions sake are persecuted.

And departed. From Philippi, as the City Judges requested them in the verse
immediately preceding. To wit, says Grotius, partly that they might not bring
themselves into unnecessary troubles, partly because Macedonia, which God had
recomended to them, is of a far greater extent.

CHAP. XVII.
1. NOw when they had passed through. To wit, Paul and Silas.

Amphipolis. A City of Macedonia near Philippi, bordering upon Thrace, which as
Thucydides says, Lib. 1. and 4.
was first called Nine ways, but being taken by Agnon the Athenian General it
was called Amphipolis, because it is washed on both sides by the River Strymon.
It was afterward by the Grecians called Christopolis, the Christians commonly
called it Christopoli, the Turks calls it now Emboli, it is an Archiepiscopal
City of Macedonia.

And Apollonia. A City of Macedonia in that part of it called Mygdonia, upon
the River Chidor, about twelve Miles distant from Thessalonica, which now is
called Ceres.

They came to Thessalonica. The largest City of Macedonia, and a most Famous
place of trading. Lib. 7.
Which as we read in Strabo's excerptions, was first called Therme, it was
built by Cassander, who called it Thessalonica after the Name of his Wife the
Daughter of Philip the Son of Amynta, having carried thither the Inhabitants of
the neighboring Cities, such were the Chalastrians, Aeneans, Cissians, and
also some others. It bordered upon the Thermean Gulf, so called from Thermes,
whence it is supposed to be that which the Italians now call Golpho di
Salonichi, for they call Thessalonica Salonichi.

Where was a Synagogue of the Jews. There being none, to wit, in Amphipolis,
nor Appollonia.

2. As his manner was. Which, to wit, Paul had of going in into the Jews to
their Synagogues.

Reasoned with them out of the Scriptures. To wit, of the old Testament which
was received by the Jews as Canonical.

3. Opening. As much as to say, Openly explaining as well the express
Prophesies concerning the Messiah, as the types by which he was shadowed, that
he might make it clear to them, that he was to suffer strokes, wounds and a
shameful Death, and again to return to Life. And that therefore, Jesus whom he
preached, is this Messiah foretold by the Prophets, seeing all that the
Prophets foretold of his terrible Sufferings, bitter Afflictions, ignominious
Death, and glorious Resurrection, are by the event found fitly to quadrat in
him alone. Whoever sights for Christ sake against Heretics, uses this method
of Paul's, he threatens with heavenly Weapons, he draws up a Scripture-Army,
with these Swords he forces Heretics to their Duty, with these Crosses and
Torments, he subdues and breaks their hardness, says the Learned Nic.
Rigaltius our Countryman upon Tert. Scorp. Cap. 2.

And that this Jesus whom I Preach unto you is Christ. That is, See below v.
17. and Chapter 26.9. and above Chapter 5.39.
that Messiah of whom the Prophets foretold, that being put to an ignominious
Death, he would rise again.

Whom I Preach unto you. The discourse passes from an oblique Person to
direct, as it is frequent in any Author, and especially in sacred Writers.

4. And some of them. Of the Jews, who were present at the disputes which Paul
had in the Thessalonican Synagogue.

Believed. To wit, that Jesus is the Messiah promised in the Law and in the
Prophets, who would save such as believed in him from their Sins.

And consorted with Paul and Silas. There is in the word in the Greek somewhat
more meant says Grotius, and it signifies that they were wholly addicted to
Paul and Silas, as things hereditary among the Jews. Lucan uses this verb:
Aristides also uses (...) for the same.

And of the devout Greeks. That is, such as were Gentiles by birth, who having
forsaken vain Idols, embraced the worship of the true God before the Gospel was
preached to them.

A great Maltitude. It seems to point out that few of those who were Jews by
birth, but many of the Gentiles who formerly deserted Gentilisme and went over
to the Jewish Religion were converted to Christ.

And of the chief Women. Of the chief men of the Cities Wives, who of Heathens
were made Proselytes as were also their husbands.

5. Moved with envy, etc. As much as to say, But the Jews who were most
obstinate in opposing the Gospel Preached by Paul and Silas, being enraged to
see it believed by so great a multitude; and having got together most wicked
Scoffers and such as were given up to all kind of wickedness, stirred up the
People in Companies against Paul and Silas, and having beset Jason's house, who
took them in to lodge with him, tumultuously endeavored to draw them out
thence, and to expose them to the fury of the incensed rabble to be by them
killed and torn in pieces.

Certain lewd followers of the baser sort. The word in the Original signifies
certain Juglers. Tacitus calls those Jugglers a base rabble frequenting the
Games and Theaters. Cicero the dreggs and mire of the City. Apuleius the homely
dreggs of the mean People. Horace a Dreg, that is, born where the common People
resort and almost in the Marketplace. Livius, a Market faction. Plautus,
Buffoons, which he thus paints out in these words: Indeed there is nothing more
sottish nor dultish, nor more lying, nor more tatling, nor more bold in
speaking, nor more perjured, than those busy homebred Citizens, which they
call Buffoons.

Lewd. To wit, such as delighted in all mischief and wickedness.

And gathered a Company. That is, And having gathered together the multitude of
the rabble.

And assaulted the house of Jason. That is, they beset the house of Jason a
Citizen of Thessalonica with whom Paul and Silas lodged. Some think this Jason
to be the same with him mentioned Romans 16.10. though he then dwelt at Corinth.

And sought. That is, they endeavored with all their might.

To bring them out to the People. That is, in sight of the People that in their
rage they might tear them to pieces.

6. And when they found them not. To wit, Paul and Silas.

And certain Brethren. In Christ, that is, Christians.

To the Rulers of the City. That is, to the Magistrates of Thessalonica.

Crying. Like Jangling fellows in a Court, whose custom is to fill the Court
with bawling, and cries even to hoarsness, to deafen the Judges ears. Lib. 1.
de orat.
Hence Cicero calls them both baulers and outcryers. We seek not for I do not
know what Lawyer, nor Bauler nor Jangler in this our discourse. And Lib. 3 de
orator. he says of Pericles, But no bauler has taught him to bark out his
hour. Lib. 12. Instit.
Quintillian also calls them Barkers. Above all things that modesty perishes
which brings Authority and Belief to an Orator, if he of a good man become a
Jangler and a Barker.

These that have turned the World upside-down are come hither also. As much as
to say, These vagabonds who by introducing their new Religion stir up Sedition
in every Nation, are also come to this City of Thessalonica, to the end they
may trouble us, who are at peace, with their new Doctrines. Well says Calvin,
This is the State of the Gospel, to have these Vproars, which Satan raises by
opposing it, imputed to it. This also is the maliciousness of Christ's Enemies,
to lay the blame of Tumults upon holy and modest teachers, which they
themselves have procured. Certainly the Gospel is not preached to this end, to
stir up men to strifes among themselves, but rather that it may keep them in
peace being reconciled to God. When Christ Liberally invites us there to come
unto him, Satan and the wicked rage; therefore Paul and Silas might easily have
defended themselves, but it was requisite for them to undergo this false
slander for a time, and so long as they were not heard, silently to pass it by.
And the Lord by their example meant to teach us not to give place to slanders
or false reports, but rather to stand stout in asserting the truth, being
content to be evil spoken off, for what was well done. Therefore away with the
perverse wisdom of some, who to escape false slanders, stand not to betray
Christ and his Gospel by their treacherous moderation, as if their good name
were more precious than Paul's, and such like, yea than the sacred name of God,
which is not free from Blasphemies.

7. Whom Jason has received. That is, Jason their Favourer has received them
to his house.

And these all do contrary to the Decrees of Caesar. The People of Rome, and
afterward the Caesar, who transferred to themselves the Government of the
People of Rome, suffered none in the Provinces subject to their Government, of
which Macedonia at that time was one, to be called King without their own
sermission. A great and Odious Crime, says (...) too impudently forged. Paul
and Silas sought to ^rect the Kingdom of Christ which is spiritual, the Jews
knew well that this might be done without any injury to the Rom^n ^^rpire. They
knew that they meant nothing less than to overthrow the public State, or to
deprive Caesar of his Authority; the Jews therefore maliciously catch (...)
this preceive that they might procure hatred to these Innovents. The
Macedonians had no such respect for Religion, much less for the Jewish; that
for its cause they should forthwith drag Persons unknown to the slaughter, the
Jews then catch at the pretense of Treason to oppress these Innocents with the
Odiousness of that Crime alone. Neither does Satan cease to this day to spread
such mists before men's dazzled eyes. The Papists know very well, and are
sufficiently convinced before God, that it is more than false which they lay to
our charge, That we overthrow all Civil Government, that Laws and Judgments are
taken away, that the Power of Kings is subverted by us. And yet they are not
ashamed to the end they may make the whole World to hate us, falsely to report
us to be Enemies to public Order. For we must note that the Jews not only
allege that Caesar's Commands were violated, because Paul and Silas durst
presume to innovate somewhat in Religion, but because they said there was
another King. This crime was altogether forged. Moreover if at any time
Religion force us to resist tyrannical Edicts, which forbid us to give due
honor to Christ and due worship to God, we may then justly say for our selves
that we do not violate the Power of Kings. For they are not so exalted that
they may endeavor like Giants to pull God out of his Throne. That excuse of
Daniels was true, that he had not offended the King, while yet he obeyed not
his wicked Commandment, neither had injured mortal Man, because he had
preferred God to him. So let us faithfully pay to Princes their Tributes, let
us be ready to any Civil Obedience, but if not content with that degree, they
would pluck out of our hands the Fear and Worship of God, there is no reason
why any should say we despise them, because we make more account of the Power
and Majesty of God.

King. To wit, of all humane kind. For, says Grotius, the Christians called
Jesus Lord, which frequently occurrs in this Book, most frequently in Paul's
Epistles. But this word in the Greek is the same with that, that is rendered
King. Rev. 1.8.15.3.17.14.

Another King. To wit, ^^n Caesar. Who, says the same Grotius, called himself
Lord of the World.

8. And they troubled. As much as to say, By these false accusations against
Paul and Silas, they both raised a suspicion in the People who were gathered
together in the Court, and in the Magistrates before whom they were accused.

9. And. This Particule, which otherwise is a Copulative, is here taken for the
Adversative Particule but, as it is often elsewhere.

When they had taken Security. That Paul and Silas should appear in Judgment
when ever it should be needful.

Of Jason. Paul and Silas's Host.

And of the others. Christians, to wit, who, v. 6. together with Jason were
drawn before the Magistrates of Thessalonica.

They let them go. That is, suffered them to go free.

10. But the Brethren. That is, the Christians who lived in Thessalonica.

Immediately. Lest the incensed People, stirred up by the perverse Jews, should
use Violence and Force upon Paul and Silas.

Sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Beraea. That is, in a Clandestine way
having taken the advantage of the darkness they led and accompanied them out of
the City, that they might pass to another City of Macedonia called Beraea. The
Macedonick Beraea lies betwixt Thessalonica and the Candavian Hills, which
divide Illyria from Macedonia, near the River Lydia in the Region of Emathia.
This City is now commonly called Veria, for so do the present Greeks pronounce
it. The Turks call it Boor, 4 Not. hist. 10.
as Leunclavius says. Plinius among the Cities of Macedonia reckons Pella in
the first place, the Country of Philip and Alexander the Great, Kings of the
Macedonians, secondly Beraea.

Who. Paul and Silas.

Coming thither. To Beraea.

Went into the Synagogue of the Jews. To try if they could convert any of the
Beraean Jews to Christ.

11. These. The Jews dwelling in Beraea.

Were more noble then those in Thessalonica. That is, they surpassed the
Thessalonians in excellency of Disposition and Nobleness of Mind.

In that they. The Jews of Beraea.

Received the word of God with all readiness. That is, with bended ears and
ready minds, they attended the Gospel Preached by Paul.

And searched the Scriptures daily. That is, searching out most diligently the
meaning of those things, which were foretold of Christ, in the Law, and in the
Prophets.

Whether these things were so. That is, that they might see through it, whether
what was Preached by Paul concerning Jesus, did agree with the written Oracles
of Moses, and the Prophets, concerning the Messiah. Yea as Cyril Bishop of
Jerusalem says excellently, Catech. 4.
nothing of the Divine and holy Mysteries of Faith ought to be delivered by
Guess without Scripture Authority, nor be spoken upon mere probability and
dress of Words. Hence it is clear against the Papists, that there is no blind
obedience owing to the Pastors of the Church, but that they indeed are to be
esteemed noble among Christians, who diligently examine by the Testimony of the
Holy Scripture, what ever is Preached by their Pastors. We pretend to no blind
obedience due to Church-mens directions, and account them nohle Christians, who
search and try all they say by that test of the Scriptures, says that Man of a
most solid Judgment, and in defending the Principles of the Orthodox Faith,
against Popery and Irreligion, short of none, the most Religious and most
Learned Gilbert Burnet, Doctor of Divinity, In his excellent Book entitled the
Mystery of iniquity unvailed.
to whose large Charity to the Poor and Strangers I profess myself greatly
indebted.

12. Therefore many of them Believed. As much as to say, But when the Jews of
Beraea had by this Scrutiny of the Scriptures discovered the most mavelous
Harmony and Agreement of Paul's Doctrine with the Prophesies of Moses and the
Prophets, a great many more of them believed the Gospel Preached by Paul, and
acknowledged Jesus to be the Messiah, promised in the Law, and in the Prophets,
than of the Thessalonians born Jews.

And also of honorable Women, etc. As much as to say, Yea and very many honest
and respected Ethnicks of both Sexes at Beraea, believed in Jesus Christ.

13. The Jews. Obstinately resisting the Word of God, or the Gospel Preached by
Paul.

And stirred up the People. Against Paul at Beraea.

14. And then immediately, etc. As much as to say, But the Christians at
Beraea, that Paul might be delivered from the snares of the unbelieving
Thessalonian Jews, took care to convey him to the Sea Coast, entering into a
Ship as if he were to sail from these Regions, while Timothy and Silas abode at
Beraea, that they confirm in the Faith, these who were newly converted. But
what Luke did or where he was at that time, since he himself is silent, is rash
to conjecture.

To go as it were to the Sea. The Syrian, Arabic, and Ethiopick, render it
simply to the Sea, either (...) or (...), being put by a Pleonasm; for says
Ludovicus de Dieu, the particle (...) is used by the Atticks with the
Accusative in stead of (...), and is often in Xenophon, Aristophanes,
Demosthenes, and other Writers. Eustathius notes upon Homer, Iliad. B.
that Orators frequently put (...) as it were, redundant.

15. And they. Who by Command from the Brethren at Beraea.

Conducted Paul. To the Sea Shore. The Greek words signify serling Paul, that
is by their Company secured Paul from the snares of his Enemies, or undertook
to put him in a safe place, as Famous Beza renders it.

Brought him unto Athens. To wit, the Attick, where Paul seemed secure from the
implacable hatred of the Thessalonian Jews. In my most ancient Copy, says
Beza, after unto Athens, it is written, and he passed by, (to wit, tarrying no
where there) Thessalie: because he was forbidden to Preach the Gospel to them,
to wit, to the Thessalians. Certainly it were strange otherwise, that Paul
should have passed by so many Regions, as are betwixt Thessalonica and Athens,
to wit, Thessalie, Baeotia and Attica, having no where Preached the Gospel, or
that Luke who was Paul's Companion as appears above, Chapter 16. v. 10. should have
omitted that History of what was said and done there.

And receiving a Commandment, etc. As much as to say, And when they who had
conveyed Paul from Beraea, had received a Commandment from him to Silas and
Timothy, who were left at Beraea, that with all speed they would come to him,
they departed from Athens to return to Beraea. Athenae Atticae, is a Famous
City of Greece, upon the River Ilissus, near the Saronick Gulf, and the chief
Metropolis of Attica, from whence the Romans thought Humanity, Learning,
Religion, Fruits, Laws and Rights to have had their rise, Cic. pro. Lucil. Flac.
and from thence distributed over all the Earth. Hence Lucretius in his Sixth
Book.

Athens first gave us Laws, and changed our Food.
For Acorns tender Fruit and Corn bestowed
On wretched Man; each was a mighty Good.
But then she taught us how to Live at ease,
She taught the Joys of Life, and showed us Peace.
16. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens. That is, for Silas and Timothy,
that they might help him to promote the work of the Gospel.

Was stirred, etc. As much as to say, he was vexed with great trouble of
Spirit, that walking the Streets of Athens, he should meet with so many Images
of Gods in so many places. The Greek has it, his Spirit was grieved. So Asaph
said. My heart is grieved. Psalm. 73.21.
It must needs be that what is wicked should displease a good and just Man, and
whom evil displeases, Lib. de ira Dei Cap. 17.
must be grieved when he sees it done, says Lactantius. And a little after.
It is natural to a good Man to be grieved and stirred up at the Sin of another.
So Mattathias seeing a Jew sacrificing to Idols was inflamed with great Zeal. 1
Macc. 2.24.
So righteous Lot seeing the Wickedness of the Sodomites was daily vexed. 2
Pet. 2.8.
So Rev. 2.2. the Angel of Ephesus cannot bear them which are evil. Apuleius
seeing an Adulterer coming daily to his Mistress, said, But this did wholly
break my heart.

Given to Idolatry. Causabon renders the Greek word here filled with Idols.
Petronius facetiously exposing the Athenians, introduced one saying, Verily our
Country is so full of Deities ready to help, that you may easier find a God
then a Man in it.

17. Therefore disputed he. To wit, of Religion and its concerns. The Apostle
of Christ does not begin with a violent hand to pull down their Idols, but with
a nervous discourse to remove the Idolatry out of their hearts. Let Heretics,
says Bernard, rather be taken, then put to flight, Sermon. 64. in Cantic.
taken I say, not with Arms, but let their Errors be refelled with strong
Arguments. Sermon. 66.
And again. Faith must be persuaded, not commanded. Lactantius. Instit. Lib. 5.
Cap. 19.
There is no need of Force and injury, because Religion cannot be forced, the
business indeed is to be done with words, rather then mith strokes to make
People willing. A little after, We Christians do not inveigle Men, as the
Ethnicks themselves charge us with, but we teach, prove and demonstrate;
therefore we hold none against his will, for he is unprofitable to God, that
wants Faith and Devotion; and yet none leaves us while the truth it self
retains him. See what is noted above, v. 3. and Chapter 5.39. and below Chapter 26.9.

In the Synagogue with the Jews and with the devout Persons. That is, with such
as were Jews by birth, and also with the Proselytes, who being descended of
Foreign Nations, did embrace the Jewish Religion. See above. v. 4.


With all that met with him. That is, with all that went to the Market.

18. Certain Philosophers of the Epicureans and of the Stoics. He names two
sorts of Philosophers who were most averse from the Christian Religion. For
Epicurus thought that it was below the Majesty of God to care for humane
affairs. For this cause Cicero, Plutarch, and others have expunged Epicurus out
of the List of Philosophers. For the Epicureans, says Grotius, they neither
believed that the World was made by God, nor that he had any care of humane
Affairs; nor that there is any reward or punishment after Death; neither any
good but what is perceived by the Senses. The Stoics all to a Man excepting
perhaps Socrates alone, were of a High and Proud Spirit, they proudly and madly
boasted that the Wise Man whom they feigned in their Idea, was equal with God,
yea in some repects beyond him. The Wise man, says Seneca, knows as much of
his own age, Epist. 53.
as God does of all ages. There is something wherein the wise man surpasses
God; God by the Prerogative of his nature fears nothing, the Wise man by his
acquired Prerogative. Behold a great thing, to have the Weakness of a Man, and
the Security of a God. And Epist. 73. Sextus used to say, That Jupiter was
nothing more Powerful than a good Man. Jupiter has more to give to Men, but of
two good Men he is not the best that is the richest. Wherein does Jupiter
excel a good Man? He is longer good. A good man esteems himself nothing the
less, that his Virtues are bounded within a short space of time.

Encountered him. That is, they sharply assaulted him.

Babbler. That is, a Sower of words, and as Plinius says, one who willingly
wastes words. The Greek word (...) is used by Aristotle, for a little bird
called in Latin Frugilega, for that with its Bill it gathers the seeds that are
dug up, and feeds upon them. Hence says Eustathius, It was by the Atticks
Translated to those Beggars that went about the Markets, that they might gather
what dropped from the Sacks and thereby feed. Hence it is used as a reproach upon
Men of no Esteem, who are despised by all. Paul then is called by the Athenian
Philosophers, Spermologus, not as a Babbler, Who as Gellius says, comes off
with moist and slippery Words, without any respect to matter. But as a man of a
low Fortune, and very meanly clothed. As much as to say, What will that vile
Fellow say?

He seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods. These unclean Spirits, which
the Ethnicks Esteem and Worship as Gods, are called in the Scripture Daemonia,
which is their honorable name in Greek, as if ye would call them knowing and
Wise, because of the Oracles given by them: Indeed the title of knowing, does
admirably agree with the History of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil.
Genesis 3.
Moreover among the same Athenians, Socrates the Philosopher was also accused
of old; that he did take away the received Gods, introducing others and new
Demons, that is, Deities, As Diogenes Laertius writes in his Life.

19. And they took him. To wit, Paul, that he might go with them to such a
place, wherein he might more decently declare what new things he alleged, than
in the Market among the Promiscuous Multitude.

Brought him unto Areopagus. Areopagus was one of the five Regions in Athens,
in which the whole City was sometimes divided. These were Martius Pagus or
Areo-Pagus, Saturni Pagus, Panis Pagus, Neptuni Pagus, Mercurii Pagus.
Areo-Pagus was named from Mars who in Greek is called (...), as much as to say,
the hillock of Mars, because there at first, Mars having killed Halirrhotius
Neptunes Son, being summoned as guilty of Death, answered his charge, as says
Pausanias; or because it was consecrated to Mars, that Mars his Temple should
be there, as Saturns, Pans Neptunes and Mercuries were in the other four. The
Judgments instituted by Cecrops the first King of Athens, about weighty Crimes
and Causes, were exercised in Areo-Pagus by the Judges. Hence Hesychins,
Areo-Pagus at Athens is a Tribunal in its Castle. The Castle of Athens was
called by its proper name Acropolis and Polis, as the most Learned Thomas de
Pinedo has observed. Juvenal calls its Tribunal Curia Martis. Sat. 9. v. 100.
Upon which place Thomas Farnabius says, that the Judges of that Court, were
used to give their sentence without opening their Mouth, in writing some
Letters or Characters. See Pers. Sat. 4.13. It is called Areo-Pagus from (...),
Mars, and (...), a Rock, a Hillock; for Mars being here accused of Murder
before twelve Gods, was absolved by six Sentences. The Judges of this Court
were Upright and Incorrupt; whence these sayings, more severe then an
Areopagite; and more silent then an Areopagite. Cicero. The affairs of Rome
stand thus, Lib. 1. ad attic. Epist. 14.
nothing more severe, nothing more constant, nothing more strong, then the
Senate, which is like Areopagus of Athens.

May we know. As much as to say, Go on now, if you please declare unto us this
new Doctrine which you Preach.

20. Strange, etc. As much as to say, for you Preach Doctrine unheard of by us
till now, the which we have a great desire to know fully.

21. Athenians. That is, the Citizens born in Athens.

And Strangers. That is, such as from other Nations had come to Athens, which
was famous for Arts, and for its Harbor, and resided there, and also conformed
themselves to the Customs of the Natives.

Spent their time in nothing else, etc. That is, they spent their time in
searching after and spreading new Rumors. Lib. 3.
In Thucydides, Cleon charges the Athenians that they are always Slaves to
unaccustomed things, but despisers of the accustomed. The like is to be found
in Demosthenes.

Some new thing. The Greek here uses the Comparative for the Positive. So also
Plato, and Demosthenes use it.

22. Then Paul stood in the midst of Mars hill and said. As much as to say,
When Paul stood in the midst of that Famous place called Mars hill, filled with
the concourse of Men, with a steadfast Countenance thus he spoke to them.

Ye men of Athens. So their own Orators, such as Demosthenes and Oschines use
to call them.

I perceive that in all things ye are too Superstitious. Erasmus has noted
that in this discourse Paul showed Admirable Policy and Prudence. Whose words
seeing they greatly illustrate this place, we shall not think it a trouble to
insert them. The Apostle, says, says he, Preaching the Gospel at Athens, had
to do with men of diverse Opinions; here were the Epicureans, that deny that
there are any Gods, or deny that they take any care of humane Concerns: And the
Stoics unprofitable hearers of Gospel grace; for that they make their own Wise
man equal with the Gods, and place Man's chief good in his own strength. The
rest of the multitude in miserable blindness, worshipped all kinds of Demons
for the true God. How does he temper his Speech at such a Theater? Does he
begin to execrate their crime of Idolatry? Does he call the Gods of the
Athenians, Wood or Stone, or which is worse then these, wicked Spirits, hateful
to God and Enemies to all humane kind? Does he upbraid them with their wicked
Crimes, by which they were given over to a reprobate sense, as he twists it in,
in his Epistle to the Romans? Nowise, for it was not as yet expedient, but very
moderately says, That he understood by their Images and Monuments, that the
Athenians were altogether given to Superstition. The word Superstition is
smoother then idolatry, and this same he mitigates by the Comparative, too
Superstitious: And this again he lessens by adding as if, what means this
Civility of the Apostles? Whither does he look, what does he catch at, did he
fear the Athenians? Not at all, but it is their gain that he designs and
follows; he knew the Athenians, as the other Nations, to have been given to the
worshipping of Images, even before he came to Athens. But that he might not
seem to have brought with him a bad report of the Athenians, or to be
Inquisitive in another commonwealth; he says that he perceived their
Superstition, by the Images set up in public, and that not designedly, but
passing by accidentally. Neither does he call them Idols or Monuments of
Impiety, but in a smoother Term Sebasmata, which also is taken in a good
meaning: And it was designedly that he said that he saw an Altar with that
Inscription; to the unknown God. What did he do with this Policy, that he might
make use of their readiness to hear, if he would not seem to be the Author of
new Gods, which by the Athenians was punished with death, but he would Preach
that which they long ago, though ignorantly worshipped. Now consider with what
words he Preaches the unknown God: He does not say, the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, the God of Jacob; As Peter did speaking to the Jews, but with a
discourse so tempered that he might with patience be heard even by Ethnicks;
God that made the World and all things therein. Paul adds, Seeing that he is
Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands; neither is
he worshipped with men's hands as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives
to all Life and breath and all things. Hitherto has he said nothing that may
not be suffered, neither do you hear the Testimonies of the Prophets here,
which Peter made use of to the Jews; but he produces the Testimony of Aratus,
for we are his offspring, not naming him indeed, but what was more fit to
persuade them, As, says he, certain also of your own Poets have said. Though I
suspect the word Poets has been added by latter Authors, for this reason, that
the most ancient Author Irenaeus, citing this place does not add Poets, nor yet
Augustine. Now observe with what Prudence, he accommodates this Testimony of
Aratus to his purpose: If God be not far from every one of us, by whose favor
we Live and Breath, he is not then Visible or Corporeal, or perceptible by any
sense, far less then our Souls are, seeing he is as it were the Soul of our
Soul. Then, if we be his Children, it becomes us not being Children to have low
thoughts of so great a Father: For it is certain the Soul is the far nobler
part of Man, without which the Body is nothing: but the Body of Man is better
by far then Images of Wood, Stone, Brass, Silver, Gold, in which there is no
sense of any thing, nor motion, neither were they made by God, but by the
Tradesman; therefore they who worship Images, they have that for a God, which
is viler then the basest part of Man. Ye see with how much caution, and with
how much Temperance, he Demonstrates the Worshipping of Images not to be
Religion, but Superstition. Certainly here was room to be incensed at the
blindness of the Athenians, who having learned these things from their Authors,
yet would worship Dead and Dumb things instead of God. Yet neither here does he
speak any sharp Word: He refers the madness of former ages to the times, and
Gods winking at them, that he might excuse what had been done heretofore, by
the ignorance in which God suffered men to be blinded for a time; only that
they might now repent at the shining light of the Gospel. Neither does he
properly here direct his discourse to the Athenians, but speaks in general that
he might the less offend. That all men, says he, might every where repent, he
shows that a pardon for what was past, was ready for such as would betake
themselves to better; otherwise that severe Judgment was near to such as would
despise so great a favor from God. Neither does he speak thus, We declare to
you that Gods Judgment is at hand, and that they ought to flee to repentance.
But God declares. No mention is made as yet of Christ, of whom they had no
knowledge. Now a natural way of teaching begins with known things. Here
observe, Paul who in his Epistles with so loud a Trumpet, personated the
Majesty of Christ, how sparingly he touches him. No mention of the Divine
Nature, also as to the Cross which was foolishness to the Nations, silence. He
calls him only a Man, whom God has set out in this World, that the truth being
by him cleared, the Penitent should be freely pardoned, and the unbelieving
being now innexcusable should be justly punished. Neither does he adduce the
Testimonies of the Prophets here; but only with one argument proves what he
said, because God raised him from the Dead. Only at the mentioning of the
Resurrection some mocked, others being more modest, said, We will hear thee
again of this matter. He who desires to be more fully taught, has profited in
some measure. Here also it seems the Apostles Discourse was interrupted, his
Auditors leaving him, neither would he press them any further. But departed
from among them, says Luke, waiting a more fit occasion. Also this same
happened by Paul 's Wisdom, that he was neither misused, nor railed at, nor
hurt by any seizing upon him, but departed safe, but not without gain. Them who
cleaved to him he more fully instructed, among which were Dionysius, and a
certain Woman named Damaris, and others with them. Hence it apears how great
force a discourse tempered with prudent meekness has.

Superstitious. The Greek has it too Superstitious. They are called
Superstitious, says Lactantius, Lib. 4. instit. Cap. 28.
who worship the surviving memory of the deceased, or who surviving their
Parents, honor their Images as household Gods. For they called them
Superstitious, who assumed to themselves new Rites, that they might instead of
Gods honor the Dead, whom they thought were from men received into Heaven: but
them who worshipped the Public and Ancient Gods, they called Religious. Virg.
Aen. 8. v. 187.

Foolish Superstition, which knows not the Ancient Gods. But, says
Lactantius further, seeing we find also the old Gods, in the same manner
consecrated after Death, they are therefore Superstitious who worship many, and
false Gods. But we are Religious, who supplicate one, and the true God. Servius
upon the forecited out of Virgil Evanders words to Aeneas. Superstition, says
he, is a foolish and Superfluous fear, Aeneid. 8.
or it is denominated from little old Women, who surviving many, dote for age,
and become fools. Or according to Lucretius, Superstition is a vain and
superfluous fear of Divine and heavenly things which are above us.

23. Your Devotions. The Word in the Greek signifies those Deities which are
worshipped.

I found an Altar. The word (...) in the Greek Bible, and Fathers, and Ara in
the vulgar Latin Translation of the Bible and the Latin Fathers, is used only
of an Altar erected for the honor of Idols, seeing the Altar erected under the
old Testament for worshipping the true God, is constantly and always called
(...) in Greek, and Altar in Latin. One Table was wont to be placed in the
midst of every meeting Place of the Primitive Christians, upon which every one
laid what he bestowed for the use of the Poor, as we are informed by Theodoret;
and because Alms are noted with the name of Sacrifice, Lib. 5. Cap. 18. Heb.
13.16.
that table upon which they were laid was called by the ancient Christians an
Altar. This Table also was appointed for the use of the Lords Supper, and hence
it came to pass that by little and little, they which did partake of the Bread
and Wine of the Lords Supper at this Table, which for the Alms laid upon it,
was called an Altar, were said to have partaked of the Altar. Of this table
Paul speaks, and Athanasius in his Epistle to solitary Livers. 1 Cor. 18.21.
This also is to be observed that when Christians in the time of Constantine
the Great, did begin to build sumptuous Churches to God, then also in place of
that one Wooden Table, almost in every Church of God, there was one of Stone
erected, which yet served for the same use, that the Wooden Table did before.

With this Inscription, to the unknown God. The God of the Jews, was by the
Gentiles called Unknown, because he had no name, by which they knew him. It was
not lawful commonly to pronounce the sacred name of (...), by which the Jews
called him. Hence he is called by Lucan in his second Book of the Pharsalian
War, the uncertain God. By Trebellius Pollion in the Life of Claudius, Moses
his uncertain Deity. By the Ethnicks in Justin Martyr in his Paraenesis to the
Greeks, altogether hidden. By Caius Caligula in Philo, Lib. de Legatione ad
ipsum
the unnamed God. And by Isaiah the Prophet himself, Chapter 45.15. A God that
hides himself. As the Inhabitants of Mount Carmel in Tacitus, Hist. Lib. 2.
Cap. 78.
gave neither an Image, nor a Temple to this God, but only an Altar and
Reverence: So also says Usher, the Athenians did place their Altar of Piety in
the middle of their Town without any Image, as Statius says in the twelfth
Book of his Thebaids. The Author of the Dialogne, whose Title is Philopater,
and by some is ascribed to Lucian, Swears by the unknown God, which was in
Athens; and at the end of the same Dialogue he says, We having found an
unknown God at Athens, and Worshipping with hands spread out to heaven, to him
we will give thanks.

Him therefore, etc. As much as to say, Therefore that Deity which confusedly
known ye Worship, I declare to you distinctly and clearly to be God, the Maker
and Governor of this Worldly Fabric.

24. God, etc. As much as to say, This true God who created and made Heaven and
Earth, and produced all things that are contained within the compass of Heaven
and Earth, seeing he is Lord of this Universe as of his own work, cannot be
enclosed in Temples made with men's hands, as the Earthly Kings are in the
Palaces wherein they dwell. See what is cited out of the Greek Poet Euripides
in the Latin Edition of this Commentary.

Dwells not in Temples made with hands. See what we have said above, Chapter
7.48. The ancient Chistians called the places of their Meetings, Churches,
Conventicles, Dominica, Oratories, Basilics, and Gods houses. But they gave the
name of Temple commonly to the Idols places only, although Lactantius calls the
Temple of God, 5 Instit. 2.
a building dedicated by the Christians to Religious Worship. S. Jerome in his
Epistle to Riparius, says of Julian the Apostate, that either he destroyed the
Basilics of the Saints, De Idolo. Cap: 15. and Coron. Militis Cap. 11.
or turned them to Temples. And Tertullian, he is said to renounce the Temples,
who has renounced the Idols.

25. Neither is he worshipped with Men's hands, as though he needed any thing.
That is, neither do Religious Men offer their worship to God, as it were with
their hands, as if he had need of that Worship, but because it is a humane
duty. The same is the meaning of Psalm. 50. v. 10.11, 12, and 13.

Seeing he. The meaning is, seeing he by his free bounty, is the cause of Life
to all living, and supplies them with abundance and Plenty of all things that
nature wants.

Life and Breath. That is, the breath of Life, as is clear from Genesis 2.7. God,
says Grotius, the Father of Spirits, Numb. 16.22. that is, the Author of Life
to all Living, especially to Men, as having like God gotten the Dominion of
themselves and of other things.

26. All Nations of Men. To wit, as Lactantius says, 6. Instit. 10.
We are all sprang of one Man whom God made.

For to dwell on all the face of the Earth. That is, that Men being multiplied
and dispersed over all the Regions of the earthly World, should inhabit all the
Parts of the habitable Earth. See Genesis 11. v. 8. One Man, says Lactantius in
the forecited Chapter, was made by God, and by this one the whole Earth was
filled with Mankind.

And has determined. That is, having determined the times wherein every People
were to inhabit every Region, which cannot be prevented nor passed over.

27. Seek the Lord. As much as to say, God by Creating Men, and distributing
the Earth to them to dwell in, proposed this end to himself, that Men should
seek God, who is Lord and Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things that
are in them. To seek the Lord is nothing else, but by worshipping of him
earnestly to seek his Grace and Favor, and to endeavor to be reconciled to
him, as appears from these words of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Heb. 11.6.
He that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them, that diligently seek him.

If happily they might feel after him. That is, if happily they might fix upon
God, who being by his nature incorporeal, yields himself and his Goodness so
many ways to be felt, and enjoyed, that he seems as if made bodily in
aspectable things; to make himself in some measure known even by feeling.

And find him. That is, and seeking after him, find him. To seek after God,
says Curcelleus in his dissertation of the necessity of the knowledge of
Christ, Numb. 19.
is the same as to give him due Worship and Honor. Witness that of the holy
Writer, that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11.6.
And to find him is to be partaker of his favor; as the Prophet shows when
he says, Isay 55.6.
Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found; call upon him, while he is near.

Though he be not far from every one of us. As much as to say, tho he be so
near us with his benefits, that he does demonstrate that he is easily found, if
we shift not the pains of seeking after him.

28. For in him we live and move and have our being. This Phrase In him, is an
Hebraism, signifying no more than by him. As when the Pharisees charged Christ,
that, by the Prince of Devils he did cast out Devils. The vulgar Latin has it,
Matthew. 9.24. and 12.24.
In the Prince. As also below v 31. he is to Judge the World by that man whom
he has appointed, there it is also, In that Man, meaning our Lord Jesus
Christ. The meaning then is, by Gods Power we are Created, and being Created
are preserved, nourished, sustained, and enjoy what is sufficient both for
Necessity of Life, and Pleasure.

As certain also of your own Poets have said. He mentions many of them,
because, In Homer, Hesiod, Menander, Callimachus, Pindarus, are somethings,
which make to this purpose. But Paul being a Cilician, cites only the words of
his own Countryman, Aratus the Cilician.

For we are all his Off spring. This half verse is read in Aratus his
Phenomenon, which were translated out of Greek into Latin by Cicero, while he
was but very young, as he says himself; De nature. deor. Lib. 2.
And since by Sextus Ruffus Avi^nus. It is agreed upon among the Learned, that
Aratus being a man ignorant of Astrology, did speak most excellently and
ornately of the Heavens and Stars, as Cicero says. This Aratus, surnamed
Solensis, De Orat. Lib. 1.
was born at Solis, a City of Cicily, which being afterward repaired by Pompey
the Great, was called Po^^ciopolis; he was Famous in the time of Prolomeus
Philadelphus, and lived splendidly in the Palace of Antigonus Gona^a, the Son
of Demetrius Poliorceta, who took the Government of the Macedonians, about the
hundred fifty and fifth Olympiad. Suidas makes a Catalogue of his works, among
which his ^hanomena are the most esteemed, whose admirable beginning Virgilius
has imitated in his third Eclogue, v. 60. What, says Grotius, was said by
Aratus of Jupiter, Paul adop^eth to the true God, because by Jupiter the wisest
among the Greeks did understand the most high God. Thus Aristaeus in Josephus
says, that the Jews Worship the God of the Universe, whom the Greeks call
Jupiter.

29. For as much then as we are the Offspring of God. That is, forasmuch as we
are the Children of God. Paul, says Gro^ius, accommodat^^ hi^ self to a
P^^tical way of speaking, meaning that we (...) God in our mind, and for this
(...) his Children. But in the new Testament we are (...) Children upon a more
weighty account, because we (...) Goodness; again we shall at our Resurrection
(...) his Children, by parta^ing of his (...).

We ought not to think, etc. As (...) to say, None that is in his right mind
should (...) to wit, Silver, Gold, and Stone, to God, though Graven with the
best Art that man can invent. For Silver, Gold, and Stone, are things far below
man, and are cannot be, but more ^gnoble then the Artisi^er. See Isay
40.18.44.13.46.5.
M^^^er, says Beza, we must know that by the Greek word (...) (...) Work, but
also by a Synecdo^^^ (...) all such things (...) use to (...) representing God.

30. And the times, etc. As much as to say, But God whose purest honor is in a
worship that is far from the Senses, seeing he has hitherto passed by those
Sins which in those former times the Idolatrous Nations through gross ignorance
committed, now the darkness of former times being driven away, does by the
Preaching of the Gospel, strictly charge all Men every where without disserence
or choice of Nations, to amend their former Sins and Mistakes, and lead a new
Life according to the rule of Gods Commandments.

Winked. The Word in the Greek signifies dissembled. By the verb (...), says
Beza, is meant him who makes as if he slightly saw the outside of things. This
Hor^tius calls somewhere Pervidere, that is, says the same Beza, if I am not
mistaken, per transe^^am et leviter videre, see by the by and slightly. Now God
is said to have despised, overlookt and winked at those times of Ignorance;
either because he composed not a form of Religion for the Nations, as he did
for the Israclues, by which they were to be bounded in his Service and Worship;
neither sent he any Prophets to them to drive away their darkness, but suffered
them to walk in their own ways, as is said above, Chapter 14.16. or because he did
not then severely punish them, but patiently suffered them. See Romans 3.26.

31. Because. A reason is given why men ought to amend themselves.

He has appointed a day. That is, he has limited a certain day, though he
has kept from our knowledge, when it is to come.

In the which he will Judge the World. That is, the Inhabitants of this World.

In Righteousness. That is, Justly, according to every ones works, without
respect of Persons. Romans 2.6, 7, 8.


By that Man whom he has ordained. That is, by that Man whom he has
constituted Judge of the Quick and Dead. See above, Chapter 10.42.

Whereof he has given assurance unto all Men. That is, has by a sure
Argument, and worthy of credit, proved that Christ was to be judge of the
World, when he raised him from the Dead. God, says Grotius, by raising Christ
again from the dead, gave the greatest Testimony to his Doctrine that he could
give, but this also was in this Doctrine that he was to be Judge of Mankind.
Matthew. 25.31. and Seq. Joh. 5.25.


32. And when they heard of the Resurrection of the Dead. That is, that a Man
was raised from the Dead.

Some mocked. As they use to do, who give no faith to what is spoken. An
Ethnic in Minutius deriding the Christians, They build, says he, and knit
together old Wives Fables, they say they are to rise up again, after they are
dead and in Ashes, and I know not with what boldness they believe one another,
their own lies; you might think they are risen again already. Neither did the
Platonicians, who thought that bodies were given to Souls for Punishment,
believe the Resurrection of bodies; nor yet the Epicureans nor the
Peripateticians, who taught that God had no care of humane things; these more
openly, but those in their secret discourses.

And others. Who thought it not repugnant, as Man might at first be made by
God, so also he might again be renewed by him.

Said, we will hear thee again of this matter. To wit, when we are at leisure.

33. So Paul departed from among them. As much as to say, Paul being put off to
another day, went from Areopagus.

34. Howbeit certain Men. Of them who heard Paul Preach in Areopagus.

Cleave unto him. That is, says Grotius, having insinuated themselves more
into his acquaintance. So (...) is taken above, Chapter 5.13.9.26.10.28.

Dionysius the Arcopagite. That is, one of those Senators of Areopagus, who
judged with such integrity of Capital matters, that they judged only in the
night, not in the day time; that so they might take notice of what was spoken,
not of who spoke. Eusebius says that says this Dionysius the Areopagite was
appointed the first Bishop of the Church of Athens, Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap.
4.
as another Dionysius Bishop of the Church of Corinth, a most ancient Writer
witnesses.

And a Woman named Damaris. This Woman was the Wife of Dionysius the
Areopagite, if we believe Ambrose, Chrysostom and Augustine.

And others. Less Famous Athenians.

With them. To wit, with Dionysius and Damaris.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. After these things. Paul having sent Silas and Timotheus, who came to him
from Beraea, back again to Macedonia, stayed alone at Athens, and himself also
again and again intended to go to Thessalonica, but could not accomplish it,
being hindered by Satan, therefore he sent Timothy thither to comfort and
strengthen the Thessalonians in the Faith. In the mean while having left
Athens, 1 Thessalonians. 2.17, 18.3.1, 2.
he came to Corinth, which the most eloquent of the Romans in his Oration for
the Ma^ilian Law, calls the light of all Greece, was a City of Achaia or
Peloponnesus, for Peloponnesus was contained in Achaia, situated in the
Isthmus, w^^ took its name from it; the Greeks call any narrowness of ground,
betwixt a Peninsula and the main Land, an Isthmus, but it was by way of
excellency said of the Corinthian or Peloponnesian, wherein Plays were
celebrated to Neptune. This City of Corinth was Famous for two Ports, of which
the one was called the Port of Lechea, the other of Cenchrea; the one was used
to traffic with the Europeans, the other to negotiate with the Asians; the
former laid near the Ionian, the other the Aegean Sea; therefore it was called
by the Latins bimaris, by the Greeks (...), its Castle was called
Acrocorinthus. For as Strabo reports, it was a Hill so encompassed with Walls,
Lib. 8.
that it was as useful as a Castle. There was Pyrene a Fountain Sacred to the
Muses. This same City was formerly called Ephyra. Authors do not agree about
its builder, though Plutarch in his Book of the Malice of Herodotus, calls it
the City of Glaucus, as if it had been built by Glaucus, of whom mention is
made by Stephanus; In (...).
having by its trading acquired great Riches, it was by the Father of the Poets
surnamed the Rich, Iliad. 2.
by (...) it is called, Blessed Corinth, the threshold of Neptunes I^^hmus
^^^ous for young Men. By its riches it became to such an excess, that hence
arose that Proverb, It is not every one that may sail to Corinth. But the
Corinthians were always much addicted to Whores, esteeming this so far from
being base, that Whores were admitted to their public Prayers, and it was a
part of their Prayer, that the Gods would increase the number of the Whores,
and their Income. Some also vowed to bring in more Whores, as we have it from
Athenaeus and Aelianus. There, Lais exacted the tribute of her Lust of all
Greece, prostituting her self for ten thousand Drachmaes, who when she died had
a Tomb made Famous with the Verses of all the Poets. And hence it is that to
play the Corinthian, is commonly among the Greeks to Whore. And a Corimbian
Maid with Plato, is one that Prostituteth her self. The Scholiast of St.
Gregory of Nazianz upon his first Oration against Julian notes, that there were
always most Famous Whores at Corinth. Aelianus also says, that the Corinthians
were Drunkards. Pride uses to accompany Riches, which Plutarch observes was
very great at Corinth. It was always their Language, the Corinthian born of
Jupiter will not suffer these things. This their pride when it had puffed them
up even to contemn the Roman Name, brought Ruin upon them, L. Mummius having
vanquished them. But the City being repaired by Julius Caesar, as Strabo and
Diodorus Siculus in his Fragments, says, In a very short time as their Riches
returned to them, so did their Vices. The Studies of Philosophy of old
slourished there, Periander Prince of the City being r^ckoned among the seven
wise men of Greece, and Diogenes the great derider of the opinions received
among men being much conversant there.

2. And found a certain Jew. To wit, by birth, but now a Christian by Religion,
as is clear from what follows.

Born in ^ontus. A Region of Asia near the Sea, which they call the Euxi^^ Sea.

Lat^ly come. To wit, to Cori^^h.

From Italy. Italy is a most famous Region in Europe; It has the Name of
Italus a certain King of the Arcadians, as says Thuc^dides, being sormerly
called Ausonia, A^sonis, Hesperia, Saturnia, Lib. 6.
Latium, and Ocnotria. it has for its bounds upon the North, the Alps, upon
the East, Arsya, a River of Histria and the upper Sea, which also is called the
Adr^^tick Sea, upon the South the lower Sea or the Tyrrbenian and Tuscan Sea,
upon the Fast again the Alps, even to the Medi^^^^an Sea. Italy, says C.
Julius Solinus, was spoken of with so much care by all, especially by Cato,
Cap. 8.
that now nothing can be found which the diligence of ancient Authors did not
take before, having so large a subject for praising its excellent ground, while
the most excellent Writers consider the wholsomness of its places, the
temperateness of its Air, the fruitfulness of its ground, the warmness of its
Hillocks, the thickness of its Woods, harmless Forests, the increase of its
Vines and Olives, its Folds, Herds, so many Rivers, so great Lakes, the banks
of Violets bearing twice a year, and among other things the Mount Vesuvius,
which burns and casts out Flame, Baias with its warm Fountains, so frequent
Colonies, the continual beauty of new Cities, so splendid Ornament of ancient
Towns, who were first built by the Aborigines, the Aurunci, Pelasgians,
Arcadians, Sicilians, and afterward by the Strangers of Greece, and at last by
the Roman Conquerors. To all these advantages of Italy is opposed the crime of
Debauchery with Males, says Thomas de Pinedo in his notes upon Stephanus de
Vrbibus. Nicolaus Leonicus says, De Var. Hist. Lib. 3. Cap. 25.
that the Italians by the long warlike expeditions forced of necessity, were
the first that abused Males. But I think this Vice had its rise from the
Greeks, Lib. 1. Cap. 135.
seeing that Herodotus says, that the Persians being taught by the Grecians
were given to love Boys, from them its probable this Vice has crept in among
other Nations, though Vices are also learned without a Master.

With his Wife Priscilla. This eminently Pious Woman and her husband Aquil^
born in Pontus, are mentioned with commendation, Romans 16.3. 1 Cor. 16.19. See
also 2 Timothy 4.19.

Because that Claudius had Commanded. The fifth Emperor of the Romans, a
doltish man, who was altogether governed by his Wives, and the Servants he had
made free.

All the Jews to depart from Rome. Under Jews were also comprehended Christians
born of Jews. The Jews, says Suetonius, making daily Tumults, Chrestus
stirring them up, In Claud. Cap. 25.
were by Claudius expelled out of Rome. If I mistake not, says Bishop Usher,
Suctone only makes mention of this Chrestus, for that here he meant Christ our
Lord, from whom he elsewhere names the Christians, I cannot as yet persuade my
self. From the latter part of this Book of the Acts of the Apostles we may
gather, that this edict of Claudius, was not long observed at Rome, which
perhaps was the reason why Josephus did not mention it.

From Rome. The most Famous City of Italy, was called by the Greeks (...)
(which signifies the same as Valentia in Latin) by the Latins Roma. Plinius
says, Lib. 3. Not. Hist. Cap. 5.
it had also another name, which by the Secrets of the Ceremonies, was esteemed
a crime to speak. The same says Servius. Which name a certain Tribune of the
People having ventured to say, was put to Death, as Solinus says, Ad Aeneid.
Lib. 1. v. 281. Cap. 1.
or was hanged, as says Servius upon the first of Virgils Georgicks, v. 499.
This Tribunes name was Valerius Soranus, about whom besides the cited Authors,
you may see Plutarch, Quaest. Problem. 60.

3. For by occupation they were Tent-makers. That is, they exercised the Trade
of making Tents or Shades, in which Men not only encamp in time of War, but
also at home in time of Peace, did live in the Summer time. These they made
either of Linen, or of skins sewed together. The Syriack renders the Greek
word Cannopy-makers. Vatabius and others, Arras-makers. See what we have noted
upon Chapter 9.43.

4. And he reasoned, etc. As much as to say, Yet Paul did debate about the
Christian Religion in the Place, which was consecrated for the meetings of the
Jews every seventh day, in which the Jews did chiefly and of purpose apply
their mind to Religion, and brought over to his Judgment both Jews, and Greeks
or Gentiles, who went to the Synagogue of the Jews either through curiosity, or
to search into the truth. Also Sueton writes, that the Greeks used to dispute
upon the Sabbath Day. In Tiberio Cap. 32.


Interposing the name of Jesus. These words are not in the Greek Text, nor in
the Syriack Translation.

5. And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia. Whom, to wit, Paul,
as we said above v. 1. had sent from Athens.

Paul was pressed in Spirit. That is, being by the Inspiration of the Spirit as
it were, suddenly caught, he Preached with great Zeal.

Testifying, See below Chapter 20.22.
etc. That is, firmly averring that Jesus was that Christ or Messiah, promised
in the Law, and in the Prophets.

6. And when they opposed themselves, etc. As much as to say, But when the
obstinate Jews resisted Paul while he Preached, and blasphemed Christ whom he
Preached, that he might testify that he had nothing in common with them, did
in their presence shake his Raiment, that there might not so much as any of the
dust stick to him, and said unto them, Your Blood, etc.

Shoke his Raiment. That is, his upper Garment. So Matthew. 26.65. the chief
Priest rent his Clothes, that is, his upper Garment. Mark 5.30. who touched my
Clothes, that is, my Garment, as it is a little before in the singular number.
V. 27, 28.
Joh. 13.4. Christ rises from Supper, and laid aside his Garments, Joh. 19.23.
that is, his Garment, or upper Cloak. When the Soldiers had Crucified Jesus,
they took his Garments, and made four Parts, where is meant one Cloak, from
which the Coat is presently distinguished, as it is demonstrated in Gerard's
Evangelical Harmony in the History of the Passion.

Blood, etc. This, says Beza, is a kind of obtestation, as if Paul should say,
Cap. 14.
I see ye run into your own destruction. Therefore I take God to witness before
you, that not I, but your selves are the cause of your own ruin. So speaks
David, 2 Samuel 1.16. For by Blood is meant sometimes slaughter, sometimes all
kind of destruction, the cause of which according to the manner of the Hebrews,
he is said to be, upon whose head, that I may speak so, it is laid, that is, to
whom it is imputed, as if he had shed his own Blood, that is, killed himself,
whence that horrible outery of the Jews, Matthew. 27.25.
His Blood be on us and on our Children.

Henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles. As much as to say, From this time,
because ye repel the Grace of God offered to you, I will turn aside from you
to the Gentiles. See above Chapter 13.46.


7. And he departed thence. To wit, from the Synagogue.

Into a certain Man's house named Justus. The Syriack and Arabic read only
Titus. The vulgar Greek Copies have Justus only, but some Greek Copies have
both Titus Justus, as also the vulgar Latin Interpreter.

One that worshipped God. That is, who of an Ethnic was made a Proselyte to
the Jewish Religion. See above Chapter 16.14. and 17.4.


8. Believed on the Lord. That is, by Paul's Preaching he was persuaded that
Jesus was the Messiah, the Redcemer of the World promised in the Law and in the
Prophets.

With all his house. That is, with all in his Family that were capable of
Faith. The like Phrase is in Joh. 4.5.

And many of the Corinthians. As much as to say, But a great many more of the
Ethnicks, who dwelt in Corinth, then of the Jews.

Hearing. To wit, Paul Preaching.

Believed. That is, received the Faith of Christ.

And were Baptized. Crispus the Ruler of the Synagogue, and Gaius whom Paul
calls his host were indeed baptized with Paul's own hands, Romans 16.
as he himself witnesses, but the rest by Paul's Companions and Helpers, 1 Cor.
1.14.
Timothy and Silas, that by a holy dipping into the Water, they might openly
before the World profess and declare their Faith, Mark 16.16.
according to Christ's Prescript, Whosoever believes and is baptized shall be
saved. Upon which place of Mark the well Learned Paulus Columesius of Rochell
in his Sacred Observations, Printed A. D. 1679. and dedicated to the Right
Honorable Henry Compton Lord Bishop of London formerly my greatest and most
liberal Benefactor. "Hence, says he, you may not underservedly observe that
only the adult are capable of Baptism. That the Ancients were of this Judgment,
Valefridus, Strabo, Lib. de reb. Eccles. c. 26.
Ludovicus Vives, Erasmus in a certain Epistle, which Paulus Merula published
with others in the year 1607. Ad Aug. de Civ. dei, Lib. 1.27.
Grotius, in his Epistles to several Frenchmen, Salmasius in his Book of
Transubstantiation, Page 418. edit. secundae. as also Matthew 19.14.
and Joannes Baptista Thiers in his most useful Book concerning the diminishing
of Festival days, do plainly confess. With these ancients Berengarius that
great man may be reckoned, Page 494.
Page 264.
whom George Cassander, who was most skillful in those things, in the Preface
to his Book concerning Pedo-baptism, and the most worthy Professor and Doctor
in Law of the Royal University of Angiers, Francis de Roy in Berengarius his
Life, report to have opposed Pedo-baptism. The Albigenses did exactly follow
Berengarius; for Joannes Chassanio a French Divine in the History of the
Albigenses, reports out of the History of Triers, Lib. 1. Chapter 6.
which Dominus Lucas Dachery a Benedictin Monk, a Man who daily deserves
greatly at the Commonwealth of Learning, did three years ago insert in the
twelfth tome of his Spicilegium. The place cited by Chassanio occurs, Page 243.
There were at that time in Ivodium, which belongs to the Diocese of Triers,
Heretics who denied that the substance of the Bread and Wine, which is
consecrated by the Priests upon the Altar, did really change into the Body and
Blood of Christ, and they said that the Sacrament of Baptism does not profit
infants to their Salvation. Thus far our Countryman Colmesius, a Man of vast
Learning. See what is observed above, Chapter 2.41. and 8.12. and 37.

9. Then spoke the Lord. That is, Jesus Christ, to whom all Power is given in
Heaven and Earth. Matthew. 28.18.


In the Night by a Vision. That is, in a Night Vision. Chapter 2.17.
See above what I have noted upon these words, they shall dream Dreams.

Be not afraid. As much as to say, Let not the fear of being disturbed fright
you from Preaching the Gospel here.

10. I am with thee. According to my promise, Matthew. 28. v. 20. See what we
have noted there.

And no Man, etc. As much as to say, Neither will I suffer you to be wronged or
hurt by any of thine Enemies.

For, etc. As much as to say, I would not have you cease from Preaching the
Gospel in this Luxurious City, because there are many in it, beside those
already converted, who are yet to be converted by thy Preaching and reckoned
with my People and my Sheep. As Christ calls them here his People, and Joh.
10.16. his Sheep from the future, So, says Grotius, those names are given from
the time past, as Matthew. 21.31. This seems to relate to the Prophecy of Isaiah
54.15.

11. And he continued there, etc. As much as to say, Paul therefore being
confirmed by this admonition of Christ's, spent a year and Six Months at
Corinth, in Preaching the Gospel to the Corinthians.

12. And when Gallio was the Deputy of Achaia. This Gallio was Brother to L.
Annaeus Seneca the Philosopher Nero's Master. When he was younger, he was
called M. Annaeus Novatus, but afterward L. Junius Gallio having adopted him
for his Son, he took this Name with his Family. Seneca his Brother wrote to
this Man his Book of a blessed Life, and he writing to his Mother says, that
he had obtained honors. Achaia, says Grotius, was a Proconsular Province
under Augustus, Tiberius adjoined it to Macedonia, and made it a Caesarean
Province. But Claudius restored these Provinces to the Senate, that is, made
them again Proconsular, as witnesses Sentonius, in Claudius, Chap. 25. and
Dion Book, 60. Spanhemius in his Introduction to his Holy Geography: Among the
Provinces, says he, of the Macedonian Diocese Achaia has the first place in
the rotice of the Empire, being subject to the Proconsul, while the rest were
Consular or Presidial. Also we must understand this Achaia to be of larger
extent, then it is in Ptolomy, containing the ancient Greece, to wit, Aetholia,
Locrus, Phocis, Boeotia, Attica, and all the bounds, in which Peloponnesus
extended it self. Corinth was its Me^ropolis, being of old the richest of its
Cities, the common Market Town of all Asia and Europe, the entry, and as it
were the door of Peloponnesus, situated in the middle of the Isthnuts. Among
the other Cities of this Achaia, which were Famous for Bishops and Churches,
and saluted by St. Paul, in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, next to the
Corinthian that of the Athenians in Attica, for antiquity, splendour of the
City, (having been enlarged with privileges by the Pompeys, Antonies,
Hadrians) for the foundation of its Church by St. Paul, for the Conversion of
Dionysius, ( not to speak of Hierothens the Areopagite, whom they say was
Dionysius his Master) for the Episcopacy of the same Dionysius in Eusebius, and
of Publius Quadratus, etc. was deservedly among the first.

The Jews made in surrection with one accord. To wit, the unbelieving, of whom
above v. 6. being stirred up partly because Paul had withdrawn some from them,
of which see above, v. 8. partly because he joined with the Jews, who believed
in Christ, the Ethnicks who believed in him though not Circumcised into the
same People of God.

And brought him to the Judgment. Of Gallio's Deputy-ship.

13. Contrary to the Law. To wit, of Moses, according to which it is by the
Romans allowed to us Jews to live in Greece.

This fellow. A Jew by birth.

Persuades Men to worship God. Without the observation of legal Ceremonies,
especially Circumcision. Therefore, says Grotius, the Jews came to the Deputy,
because in Achaia they had not such a Power of chastising those of their
People, as they had in Judea and the neighboring Regions.

14. And when Paul was now about to open his Mouth. That he might answer the
accusation drawn up against him.

Gallio said unto the Jews. Paul's accusers.

If it were a matter of wrong. That is, if any of you had been wronged contrary
to the Civil Laws.

Or wicked Lewdness. That is, if a mischief were committed through a wicked
design.

Bear with you. As much as to say, That I should patiently hear your
accusation, and Judge the Controversy.

15. But if it be a question of words. That is, but if there be any debates
among you about dubious expressions.

And names. If, to wit, that Jesus whom Paul Preaches should be named Messiah
or not.

And of your Law. Supply, rites.

Look ye to it. That is, I leave it to you and permit that either ye compose
these Controversies among your selves, or that ye dispute them, with what words
ye please.

For I will be no Judge of such matters. As much as to say, For I have no mind
to employ my self to take up Controversies in your Religion. It belongs not,
says Grotius, to the Roman Magistrates to meddle with these things, no more
than with the debates of the Epicureans and Stoics among themselves.

16. And he drove them from the Judgment Seat. That is, says Grotius, he
removed them from the place of Judgment, as bringing nothing which came within
his Cognizance.

Then all the Greeks took. That is, the Gentiles of the People of Achaia, who
stood before the Judgment Seat, and saw the Jews therefore driven out from
thence with Contempt, because that with triffling questions of their Law they
interrupted the Deputy, who was taken up with other things.

Sosthenes the chief ruler of the Synagogue. Who was either with Crispus, of
whom above, v. 8. a great while ago, among the chief Rulers of the Synagogue,
of such it is showed above, Chapter 13.15. that there were many in one Jewish
Synagogue, or that, Crispus having embraced the Faith of Christ, he was
substituted in his room, or that he was chief Ruler of another Synagogue, as
Grotius says, than that whereof Crispus was Ruler; for in great Cities there
were many Synagogues, of which each had their own chief Rulers. For the same
reason there were of old at Rome, Antioch and other great Cities, except
Alexandria, ( where, says Epiphanius, there was always another custom,) many
Bishops according to the different limits of Cities and assemblies of
Christians. But the Synod of Nice did forbid that, for the future. This
Sosthenes seems to have been chief man among Paul's accusers, whom nevertheless
some say to have been afterward converted to Christ, and think him to have been
that Sosthenes, who with Paul wrote the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

Beat him before the Judgment Seat. See 1. Coriath. 1. v. 1.
Thinking to gratify the Deputy, if they should beat a Man of great Authority
among the Jews, who that they might be gone the speedier, were reproachfully
driven from the Judgment Seat.

And Gallio cared for none of these things. The Deputies, as Famous John
Pricaus observes, used willingly to look over such Petulancies, as did not
directly impair the Majesty of the Roman Name, that the yoke might sit the
softer upon the Subjects, neither were reasons wanting to Gallio beyond the
Deputies of other Provinces; he to wit, being Governor of Achaia, of that
true, and as Cicero calls it, mere Greece, which affectected to lay hold on
Images and shadows of Liberty.

18. And Paul after this tarryed there yet a good while. As much as to say,
Paul tarryed yet a good while at Corinth, after that Tumult, which was made at
Gallio's judgment Seat, gathering and confirming the Church of Christ.

Took his leave of the Brethren. That is, he did bid those whom he converted to
Christ at Corinth, farewell.

And sailed thence to Syria. That is, he loosed from the Port of Cenchrea,
being to Sail thence into Syria. Syria of old contained very many Provinces,
among which were, Assyria, Comagena, Adjabena, Mesopotamia, Phoenicia,
Palestine, judea and others. Lib. 5. Not. Hist. Chapter 12.
Hence it is said by Plinius, to have been of old the greatest part of the
Earth, and distinguished by many Names. Its situation is variously described by
Geographers, according to the number of the Regions they assigned it. The
Ancients divided it into three Syria's, Phoenticia, Palestine, and Caeles. The
head of this Region of old was Damascus, afterward Antioch, now a City which is
called Tripolis, Famous for the European Commerce. Its inhabitants were as well
by the Rom^ns as by the Grecians esteemed a Cowardous and Vile People, so that
they named their Slaves Syrians. M. Tullius Cicero says, Lib. 3. de Not. Deor.
that the Syrians worshipped a Fish. Hence the fearful Syrians, Lib. 2. fast.
v. 473.
esteem it a crime to set of this kind upon their Tables, neither do they
pollute their Mouth with Fish.

And with him Priscilla and Aquila. To whom he went in, when he came first to
Corinth, and tarrying with them occupied himself in the same Trade of
Tent-making with them.

Having shorn his head. See above v. 2, 3.
Grotius refers this to Aquila, but others to Paul.

In Cenchrea. Cenchrea was a Town of the Corinthians, having a Famous Port upon
the Aegean Sea toward the Fust or upon the Saronick Gulf, even as the other
Port Lechea was toward the West, upon the Chrissean Gulf, the distance in the
midst betwixt these two Ports is called Isthmus, and is five Miles in length.
See what we svid above, v. 1.
That there was a Church of the Corinthians at Cenchrea, is evident from Romans
16.1. Appt^l^ius, As. Am. Lib. 10. I pass thorough Cencnrea, in which City a
most noble Colony of Corinthians do reside, it is washed with the Aegean and
Saronick Sea, where also the Port being a most safe harbor for Ships, is
frequented with many People.

For he had a vow. That is, he put himself under a Vow. This Vow, says
Salmasius, cannot be meant for a Religious Vow, because the devoted hair was to
be laid aside at Jerusalem, and to be put under the Sacrifice of the
Peace Offering. It seems that it was a Civil vow, that either Paul or Aquila
took, such as the Jews did many times like it. I will not shave my hair before
I come to that place, which were the Pilgrims Vows. So Paul made a Vow to cut
his hair when he came to Cenchrea. Of this kind were the Vows or Curses which
they took upon themselves, not to take meat nor drink unless they did such a
thing. As they who bound themselves under a curse neither to eat nor drink
until they had killed Paul. Acts 23.12.
Yet there are many who understand this of the Holy Vow of the Nazarites, by
which some bound themselves for a certain time, as others did forever. For so
long as they were bound by this Vow, it was a heinous crime to shave their
hair. See Numb. 6.5. But whereas there v. 18. and 19. the Nazarite having
fulfilled his Vow, is commanded to shave the hair of his head at the door of
the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and to put it in the fire, which is under
the Sacrifice of the Peace Offering, and to offer Sacrifice unto God, This,
while the Jews possessed the Land of Canaan, ought to be done at Jerusalem
where the Tabernacle was seated. But, says Grotius, those Precepts with others
concerning Sacrifices, did not oblige them who lived without Jerusalem. Lastly,
others refer this vow not to Paul's shaving of his head, but to his Sailing into
Syria. He Sailed into Syria, says the Learned Samael Petit, that he might keep
the feast at Jerusalem, and it was that which St. Paul vowed, therefore a
little after, he told the Ephesians that he behoved by all means to keep the
approaching feast at Jerusalem. But why must he do that by all means? It was
not for that Law of Moses, that obliged all to celebrate three Feasts at
Jerusalem. For he tarryed almost two years at Gorinth, and three whole years at
Ephesus, and went not to Jerusalem to keep the Feast. What therefore Paul says
in this place, that he was put to it of necessity to go to Jerusalem to the
Feast, he was put to it by his Vow, not that he was now any more bound by the
Mosaical Law. But one may ask, why in the History of Paul's going to Jerusalem,
are these words inserted, And having shorn his head at Cenchrea, And what was
the reason why Paul did shave his head? We will easily give the reason, God
willing, it is therefore to be noted what was Paul's custom among the common
People, to wit, he became a Jew to the Jews, as under the Law to these who were
under the Law, 1 Cor. 9.1.
from this usual custom we doubt not but Paul so long as he was among the
Corinthians did make much of his hair, for among the Greeks this was a sign of
a Freeborn Man, as appears by the verse of Aristophanes which went in a
Proverb. Besides indeed thou being a servant has hair.
For as much as it belongs to free Persons to let grow their hair.


As the ancient Masters observe, but that the Jews had a contrary custom, not
to cherish their hair, but to shave it to the quick, appears from the
Nazarites, who for the Religion of their Vow, abstained thirty days from
shaving their hair, therefore they who were liable by no Religion of a Vow to
cherish their hair, they cherished it not, but were shaved again and again or
perhaps oftener every Month. Seeing therefore Paul, who let his hair grow
according to the custom of the Corinthians, was going from Corinth to
Jerusalem, before he would loose from the Port, laid by his hair, and shaved
his head to the quick, after the manner of the Jews. For he doubted not to have
to do with them at Jerusalem, therefore he who resembled the Corinthian, so
long as he was at Corinth, would also resemble the Jews, coming to Jerusalem
their Metropolis.

And he came to Ephesus. To wit, Paul with Aquila and Priscilla being gone from
Corinth came to Ephesus, the Metropolis of the Province which is most strictly
called Asia. See what we said above, Chapter 2. v. 9.

And left them. To wit, Aquila and Priscilla his Companions in his Journey.

There. At Ephesus, to wit, when he went from thence to C^sarea, below v. 21,
and 22.

But he himself. Paul thinking it an occasion offered to him, to turn Men to
Jesus Christ.

And reasoned with the Jews. As his custom was, concerning the truth of the
Christian Religion.

20 When they desired him. The Jews at Ephesus, who were not displeased at his
reasoning.

To tarry longer time. Supply with them out of the Greek Text, that they might
conser with them longer about Religion.

He consented not. To do then, what they desired, for the reason which he
presently brings.

21. But bad them farewell, saying I must by all means keep this feast that
comes in Jerusalem. An Instance not unlike this, is cut off with the like
answer, Luke 4.42, 43. But he says that he behoved to celebrate the Feast that
was then coming at Jerusalem, either for his Vow, as we said above, v. 18. was
the judgment of most famous Samuel Petit, or because he had so purposed, having
weighty reasors especially spiritual ones, that in such a confluence of Jews he
might advance the Gospel of Christ.

I will return again unto you. Having ended my proposed Journey, which promise
Paul fulfilled, below, Chapter 19.1.

If God will. Such a Caution St. Paul has used also elsewhere, not as it were
in a Proverbial way of speaking, but in Piety, as may be seen Romans 1.10.15.32.
1 Cor. 4.19.16.7. Heb. 6.3. and James puts us excellently in mind that this
caution is to be used. Jam. 4.15.


And he sailed from Ephesus. Toward Syria. See above, v. 18.

22. And when he had landed at Caesarea. That is, when he came to that
Caesarea, which is situated upon the Mediterranean Sea, of which above, Chapter
8.40. that he might from thence go to Jerusalem.

And gone up. Supply to Jerusalem, otherwise it does not appear from what
follows, when he performed that Journey to Jerusalem, to that approaching
Feast. That Verb to go up is frequently used of Judea, and especially of its
Metropolis Jerusalem, which in respect of the Maritim places are seated higher,
and also of the Temple, as Matthew. 20.17. Luke 2.4.18.10 and 31.19.28. John
2.13.5.1.7.8. and 10.11.55. above Chapter 11.2. below Chapter 21.15.24.11. and
elsewhere.

And saluted the Church. To wit, that principal Church of Jerusalem, that is,
Christ's disciples, who lived at Jerusalem.

He went down to Antioch. Of Syria. It is not probable that Paul having
departed from Caesarea, should pass Jerusalem, which was nearer to Caesarea, to
go to Antioch of Syria.

23. And after he had spent some time there. That is, when he had tarryed some
time at Antioch.

He departed. From Antioch to visit other Churches.

And went over all the Country of Galatia and Phrygia, in order. In which he
had been already, above Chapter 16.6.

Strengthening all the disciples. That is, confirming the Christians which
lived in those places in the true Faith and Godliness by his admonitions. Paul
was so received by the Galatians, as if he had been an Angel of God, or Christ
himself. As he witnesses, Galat. 4.14. And among other things he appointed
that the collection for the Poor should be laid by every Lords day. 1 Cor.
16.12.


24. Apollos. This name has an Attick termination, and is the same with
Apella, which is a Jewish name in Horatius, and Apelles, Romans 16. v. 10. as the
learned Grotius has observed.

Born at Alexandria. That is, at Alexandria in Egypt. This City was built by
Alexander the Great, from whom it has its name, and that there should nothing
be wanting to its Glory, they relate that its place was showed to Alexander in
a Dream. For it was the ancient custom of the Ethnicks to relate the original
of their Cities and Country to the Gods, that they might be the more noble and
happy, which things though they were very like Poetical Fables, yet they were
esteemed as true, such was both the foolishness of the common People, and the
craftiness of Men. There were diverse names given to the same place; for it was
not only called the Egyptian Alexandria, but also Libyssa, Rhacotis, Pharus,
Leontopolis, because that the Womb of Olympias the Mother of Alexander, for
Alexander's own Glory, was feigned to have been marked with the Image of a
Lion. The Romans called it A^^^ita, ulta, Claudia, Domitiana, after the names
of these Emperors. It was called by the Greeks (...), that is, preservative
against evil, and he^^ing. The air is so temperate in that place, that the Sun
is every day seen there. It was also by excellency called the City, that so by
fame it might be equal to Athens and Rome, who by an Antonomasia were known by
this name. Troy also is by Homer called the City without any Epithete. Hence
Alexander admirer of Homer called thus Alexandria, as Eustathius says. It was
the Royal Seat and Metropolis of Egypt. It had the Temple of Serapis, which was
the most Famous in the Ethnic World, except the Capitolium at Rome. Strabo
says: Lib. 17.
it was of old the greatest Fair town in the whole World, at whose Port Prolomy
(some ascribe it to Cleopatra) built a high Tower, which was called Pharos,
from an Island of that name near Alexandria: being in the night useful for
Ships by its lights, whence such Towers were afterward called by that name.
See above our annotations upon Chap. 6. v. 9.

An eloquent Man. Constantines Lexicon, renders the Greek word (...) eloquent,
prudent, learned, full of Words. Hesychius turns it, skilful in History,
Learned. Skilfulness in History begets Prudence, and so the Aethiopick renders
it here out of the Greek, a prudent or a wise Man, as famous Lud. de dieu, has
observed.

Mighty in the Scriptures. That is, very much versed in the Prophetical
Scriptures of the old Testament.

25. This Man was instructed in the way of the Lord. That is, somewhat
instructed in the Christian Religion. Instruction of any Doctrine is wont to be
called, the way, as may be seen above. Because, says Wozogenius, Chapter 9.2. and
13.10, etc.
by it we go any whither in a spiritual manner.

Fervent in the spirit. That is, burning with Zeal and desire of advancing Gods
Glory.

He spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord. To wit, according to
the measure of knowledge with which he was endued.

Knowing only the Baptism of John. That is, knowing no more of Christ, except
so much as might be understood by the Doctrine, which John the Baptist Christ's
forerunner Preached, and sealed with the Symbol of Baptism.

26. And he began to speak boldly in the Synagogue. That is, more freely to
utter all he knew of Christ, in the Holy assembly of the Jews at Ephesus, than
he used to do formerly in public assemblies.

Whom when Aquila and Priscilla had heard. Discoursing of Christ.

They took him unto them. To lodge with them.

And expounded unto him the way of the Lord more perfectly. That is, they
taught this great Man more exactly the Will of God, revealed unto Man by Christ.

27. And when he was disposed. Apollos being accurately and exquisitely
instructed in the Christian Religion, by Aquila a Tradesman, and his Wife
Priscilla, both lay Persons bearing no Office in the Church.

To pass into Achaia. That is, to pass from Ephesus, to that Region of Greece,
whose Metropolis was Corinth.

The Brethren. That is, the Christians of Ephesus, having exhorted Apollos to
perform quickly his generous purpose.

The Disciples. That is, the Christians living in Achaia.

To receive him. That is, that they might entertain him kindly, Hospitably and
Brotherly.

Who. Apollos.

When he was come. Into Achaia.

Helped them much. That is, was very helpful to them of the Achaians and
Corinthians, who were by Paul's means, Above v. 47.8. and 11.
converted to believe in Jesus Christ; whom being planted by Paul, Apollos
watered, as Paul wrote 1 Cor. 3.6. that is, they being by Paul instructed and
informed, were confirmed and advanced more in the Faith by Apollos. And that
seems also to be declared, says Wolzogenius, that when those Christian
Corinthians did with great pains contest with the obstinate Jews, Apollos
helped them greatly in confuting them.

Who had believed through Grace. The Syrian interpreter refers the Word,
through Grace, to the verb helped, that the sense may be that those Achaian
Christians, were not a little helped by Appollos, through the great gifts,
which God had bestowed upon him, which are above mentioned, and that God by his
favor and blessing gave success to his labors. v. 24, 25.
It may also be put with the verb believed, that the meaning may be, that those
Achaians were endued with Faith by the free favor of God.

28. Mightily, etc. As much as to say, He with strong arguments confuted and
convinced the errors of the Jews, demonstrating not by any uncertain tradition,
but by the most firm Oracles and Testimonies of the Scriptures of the old
Testament that Jesus of Nazareth is the Messiah promised of old by God, who
should save his People from their sins. From such things, says Wolzogenius, as
are here written of this Apollos, that he was an eloquent Man, and fervent in
Spirit, and mighty in the Scriptures of the old covenant, and that he valiantly
confuted the Jews; it seems a conjecture may be taken, that he is the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, being written so eloquently and clearly, beyond the
rest of the Writings of the new Testament, and with fervor of Spirit, also
frequent allegation and accommodation of the holy Scriptures of the old
Testament, that these Hebrews or Jews, which wavered in the Christian Religion
might be strongly confirmed.

CHAP. XIX.
1. WHile Apollos was at Corinth. Watering Christianity there, which was
planted by Paul and diligently promoting the work of the Lord.

Having passed through the upper Coasts. That is, Galatia and Phrygia,
Mediterranean Countries of the lesser Asia, and more Northerly situated.

Came to Ephesus. See above, Chapter 18.23.
From whence he departed and promised he should return again, above Chapter 18. v.
19. and 21.

And finding certain Disciples. That is, Jews believing in Christ, who came
from other Countries to Ephesus.

2. Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye believed? As much as to say,
Whether or no, since ye embraced the faith of Christ, were these great gifts of
the Holy Ghost powered out upon you, which according to Joels Prophecy, did
every where begin to be much used, and set by in the Church of Christ?

We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. That is, we have
not so much as heard it reported, that those gifts of the Holy Ghost, which
Joel foretold should in great measure be powered out upon believers, have
already every where been poured. The like saying is Jo. 7.39. for the Holy
Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. That is,
those Illustrious Gifts of the Spirit, with which the beginning of the Church
was to be by the Messiah endued, were not as yet fallen from Heaven upon any.
See what we have said above, Chapter 8.16.

3. Unto what then were ye Baptized? As much as to say, With what Doctrine were
ye instructed, when ye were initiated by Baptism? It was not doubted, says
Wolzogenius, but they were baptized in Water who were called Disciples, but
Paul asked in the Profession of what Doctrine?

Unto John's Baptism. That is, unto the profession of that Doctrine, which John
Preached and signed by Baptism. The answer is most pertinent, says Beza, by
which they meant that they in Baptism, professed the Doctrine proposed by John,
and ratified by Baptism administered to them; hence they acknowledged Christ,
but very slenderly, neither having heard Christ himself nor his Apostles, as is
also said of Apollos a little before: So that it is no wonder that they ( who
as appears by their own answer, that having only heard John, they were Baptized
and returned to their own Country) should be ignorant of this Holy Ghost, which
was not sent out into the Church but since that Day of Pentecost.

4. John verily. Famous Solomon Glassius, these adversative conjunctions, Gram.
Sacrtract. 7. Can. 14.
(...), verily, indeed, truly, and (...) but do in Speech mutually follow one
another, and necessarily one another as mutual correlatives. Mat. 3.11. I
indeed Baptize with Water unto Repentance; but he that comes after me, etc. 9.
v. 37. The Harvest truly is plenteous, but the Laborers are few. And thus the
Scripture speaks in many other places. See the Concordancies of the new
Testament. Hence it happears that Acts 19.4, 5. the words are connected
together and hold out one continued discourse of Paul's; connected by these
Particles (...) and (...). Then said Paul, John (...) verily Baptized with the
Baptism of Repentance, saying unto the People, that they should believe on him,
who should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus (...). But those that heard
this (John's report of Christ) they were Baptized, ( by John) in the name of the
Lord Jesus. The fifth verse then expresses not Paul's fact or any rebaptising,
but it follows in the sixth verse concerning Paul's fact, that he laid his hands
on those Disciples, etc. compare Chapter 8. v. 14, 15, 16. and 17. Bellarmin calls
this explanation, however witty, yet no wise pious nor probable. But why is it
neither Pious nor Probable? John's Baptism is mentioned in v. 4. therefore it
were superfluous to repeat it, v. 5. This is the strength of the Argument, but
it is no Superfluous repetition. For he first sets forth John's entire Ministry
in general, which consists in the Baptism of Repentance, which Phrase includes
both the administration of the Sacrament it self, and the Preaching of
Repentance. Compare Mark. 1. v. 4. Afterward he more particularly expresses
the order of his Ministry, that first he inculcated Faith in Christ, and then
his auditors being informed of Christ, he Baptized them in the name of Jesus.

Baptized with the Baptism of Repentance. That is, when he stirred up the
People to Repentance, to them who confessed their Sins and sincere Conversion
and amendment of Life, he was the first that administered Baptism, which is the
Symbol of Repentance. See Mat. 3.2, 5, 6. and seq.

Saying, etc. As much as to say, When he admonished them, to embrace by Faith
Jesus, who soon after him, was happily to enter upon his Office of Preaching
the Gospel, as the Messiah, or Christ promised in the Law and in the Prophets.

5. When they heard. The Greek has it, but they who heard, that is, they who
believed the Doctrine which John Preached.

They were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. That is, them, John
initiating by Baptism did dedicate unto Christ. Among others, Famous Drusius
observed, that this verse is taken, Lib. 1: Quaest. Ebraic. q. 8.3.
as if they were Lukes words, which they are not. The Apostle Paul, says he,
speaks of John's Baptism, which he proves to be the same with Christ's Baptism,
partly by his doings, partly by his sayings, as being one that Preached Christ
to come, and Baptized such as believed in him: And this is it which he says,
They were Baptized in the name of Jesus. Such as, to wit, while John Preached,
embraced the Faith of Christ, of which number those Disciples were: But because
those believers had not as yet received the gifts of the Holy Ghost, therefore
the Apostle asks them, by whose Baptism they were initiated, and when he knew
the matter, laid his hands upon them, and immediately the Spirit coming down
upon them they began to speak with tongues and to prophecy, even as Luke
mentions in the Context of this History. Moreover that John used to Baptize in
the name of Jesus Christ, that most ancient writer Gregory Bishop of
Neocaesarea in Pontus, surnamed Tharmaturgus, who flourished in the year of our
Lord two hundred thirtieth and third does witness. In Sermon. in S. Theophania.
He expounding these words of John to the Lord Jesus: I have need to be
Baptized of thee, Mat. 3.14.
and come thou to me? he brings in John speaking thus: While I Baptize
others, I Baptize them in thy name, that they may believe in thee coming with
Glory, but when I Baptize thee whom shall I mention? In whose name shall I
Baptize thee? Shall I in the name of the Father? but thou have the whole Father
in thy self, and thou art wholly in the Father? Shall I in the name of the Son?
but there is no other S^n of God by nature besides thee. Shall I in the name of
the Holy Ghost? but he is always together with thee, as Con-substantial to
thee, and of the same Will and judgment, and of equal Power and alike Honor,
and with thee he receive^ Worship from all Men.

6. And when Paul had laid his hands upon them. As both approving the Doctrine
Preached ^y John, which they received by Faith, and also the Baptism conferred
upon them, upon their confessing that Doctrine.

The Holy Ghost came on them. That is, the Illustrious Gifts of the Holy Ghost
came down from Heaven upon them. Laying on of hands, says famous Heiddegger in
his Historico-Theological Anatomy of the Council of Trent, upon the Canons of
the Seventh Session about that one question concerning confirmation, was freely
used by the Apostles, that the Baptized might receive the extraordinary Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, and that thereby the Gospel might be confirmed, Heb. 2.3, 4.
until it were so fortified and confirmed in the public knowledge of all, that
none but an obstinate and impudent Man could call its Divinity in question. But
it suffices us that by Faith we have received the Spirit of Sonship. Gal.
3.14. and 4.6.
See what we have noted concerning the laying of hands above, Chap. 8.17.

And they spoke with Tongues. To wit, strange Tongues, which they did not
learn, as the Apostles above Chapter 2.4. And Cornelius and his fellows, Chapter 10.44,
and 46.

And prophesied. Declaring at length and with Praises celebrating the great and
wonderful works of the Lord, as above Chapter 2.11. and 10.46. and perhaps
foretelling things to come, which is the most proper signification of
Prophecy. See Luke 1.67.

7. And all the Men, etc. Who were before Baptized by John, were at that time
by the laying on of Paul's hands at Ephesus, gifted with those extraordinary
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which are frequently called Holy Ghost.

8. And he went into the Synagogue. As much as to say, But Paul himself that he
might gain the Jews, who lived at Ephesus, to Christ, went into their Synagogue.

And spoke boldly for the space of three Months. That is, he published the
Doctrine of the Gospel to the Jews without fear openly, and without turning and
winding about for the space of three Months.

Disputing and persuading the things concerning the Kingdom of God. That is, by
solid reasons proving that this eminent and happy Kingdom is now raised up by
Jesus; which God had appointed that the Messiah should erect, of which Isaias
Chapter 52.7. Dan. 2.44. and Chapter 7.27. even as is said above, Chapter 3.21. all the
Prophets Prophesied. By the Kingdom of God, We know, says Calvin here, is
often meant that restoring which was promised to our Fathers, and which was to
be fulfilled by the coming of Christ. For seeing that without Christ, there is
a deformed and confused scattering of all things, the Prophets did attribute
this, not in vain to the Messiah, who was to come, that it should come to pass,
that he should establish the Kingdom of God in the World. And now because this
Kingdom does reduce us from our backsliding to the obedience of God, and of
Enemies makes us Sons, it consists first in the free forgiveness of Sins,
whereby God does reconcile us to himself, and adopteth us to be his People;
then, in newness of Life, whereby he conformeth us to his own Image.

9. But when diverse were hardened. Of the Jews, to wit, being by a wilful
obstinacy, disobedient to the voice of the Lord inviting them to Repentance.

And believed not. That is, contumaciously despised the Gospel Preached to them
by Paul.

Speaking evil of that way. That is, with railing words inveighing against the
Will of God revealed to Men by Christ. See above, Chapter 18.25, 26.
Thus also above, Chapter 13.45. the obstinate Jews did with Blasphemies against
Christ and the Christian Religion, oppose and resist the Truth Preached by Paul.

Before the Multitude. That they might discourage and withdraw such as were
persuaded of the truth of the Christian Religion from professing it.

He departed from them. Which with inflexible obstinacy did cry out against,
and rail at the Truth of the Gospel.

And separated the Disciples. That is, he separated the Christians, who as yet
were intermixed with those reproaching railers, and assembled in the same
Synagogue with the Jews who obstinately resisted the Gospel.

And disputing daily. As much as to say, And in presence of this company of
Christians separated from the refractory Jews, Paul not only upon the Sabbath
days or every Seventh, but every day without any intermission, declared the
things relating to Faith in Christ Jesus and true Godliness.

In the School of one Tyrannus. That is, in the School of a certain Sophister
whom they called Tyrannus. Perhaps, says Pricaeus, because that by the Force
of his Eloquence he thrusted down and lifted up his hearers. Some Greek Copies
add, from five a Clock till ten.

10. And this continued. As much as to say, And Paul continued his daily
exposition of the Christian Religion, in Tyrannus his School.

Which dwelt in Asia. To wit, more strictly so called, whose chief Metropolis
was Ephesus, as we have noted above, upon Chapter 2.9.

The Word of the Lord Jesus. That is, the Gospel of Christ Preached by Paul.

Both Jews and Greeks. That is, as well they which being descended of the
Hebrew Patriarchs, were reckoned among the People of God, as the profane
Nations, who before this were aliens from the People of God.

11. Miracles, etc. As much as to say, And that the truth of the Gospel
Preached by Paul might become the more Famous, God frequently confirmed it by
Miracles wrought by the same Paul.

12. From his Body were brought. To wit, Paul's.

The Sick. That is, weakened by Sickness.

Handkerchiefs. Which are appointed to wipe off the shot, the sweat, and the
tears.

Or Aprons. An Apron is a cloth that covers ones Belly, or as Augustine calls
it, a girding Garment, wherewith handicraftsmen, of whose number Paul was, as
is to be seen above, Chapter 18.3. used to cover the forepart of their cloths.
Women also are wont to use this Apron, and our Countrymen in France call it
Tablier and Devantier; but the Piccards calls it Demiceint.

And the Diseases departed from them. Upon what sick People, to wit, Paul being
absent, his handkerchiefs, or Aprons were put, that such as had never seen him,
might nevertheless in his absence reverently embrace his Doctrine. Calvin says
excellently. The Papists are blockish who wrest this place unto their Relics,
as if Paul sent his handkerchiefs, that Men might Worship them, and kiss them
in honor of him, as in Popery they Worship Francis his Shoos and Breeches,
Roses girdle, St. Margarets Comb, and such like trifles. Yea rather he did
choose most simple things, lest any superstition might arise by reason of the
Price, or Pomp; for he resolved entirely and fully to give all the Glory to
Christ.

And the evil Spirits went out of them. Out of their Bodies, which by Gods
permission they possessed.

13. Took upon them, etc. That it may the more certainly appear that by those
Miracles, just now mentioned, Paul's Apostleship was confirmed from Heaven,
Luke teaches now that when some did rashly take upon them, to do the same
things, they were grievously punished for such rashness.

Of the Vagabond Jews. Who did run about to and fro; and did creep into all
public places, being to show some great thing to the People, as Jugglers or
Mountebanks use to do.

Exorcists. The gloss in the Latin Manuscript, Exorcist, adjuring. Hence in
Ecclesiastical Writers to Exorcise, 8 Ant. 2.
is to expel Diabolical Force adjuring it by Divine things. Flavius Josephus
tells, that such adjurations were composed by Solomon, and that he in the
presence of Vespasian found the Copies of these adjurations, which had been
used by one Eleazar. See what we have noted upon Matthew. 12.27.

We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul Preaches. That, to wit, reverencing his
Divine Person ye remove far hence.

14. And there were. These juggling Exorcists or Adjurers.

Seven Sons. The Greek has certain seven Sons. So Apuleius says, certain seven
witnesses.

Of Sceva a Jew and chief of the Priests. That is, who was chief of one of the
twenty four Sacerdotal Families, in which Aaron's posterity were distributed by
David. See our literal explanation upon Matthew. 2.4. for neither is Sceva
mentioned in the Catalogue of the high Priests, nor is it probable that so many
Sons of one high Priest, should have lived so far from Jerusalem.

Which did so. That is, used such adjurations by Jesus whom Paul Preached.

15. And the evil Spirit answered. By the Mouth of that Man whom he possessed.

And said. Unto Sceva's seven Sons, God compelling him.

Jesus I know. To have the virtue to cast out Devils.

And Paul I know. To be the great Apostle of Jesus Christ, at whose Prayers,
that Power and Virtue which is proper to Christ alone, uses frequently to put
forth it self above the order of Nature.

But who are ye? That, to wit, ye dare adjure Devils, by Jesus the Son of the
living God, as if ye were endowed with an Apostolical right to expel Devils.

16. And prevailed against them. That is, Powerfully put forth his strength,
violently assaulting, tearing, and beating them with strokes.

So that they fled out of the house. In which either for praise or gain they
endeavored to drive away and expel the Devil. Otherwise the Lord Jesus would
not have him forbidden, who, Mark 9.38, 39. did in his Name cast out Devils,
because he did it for no evil intent, although he was not so addicted to Christ
as to be his Disciple.

Naked. That is, deprived of their Cloths.

And Wounded. That is, and Wounded in their Body.

17. For all the Jews and Greeks. See above, v. 10.

Fear fell on them, etc. As much as to say, All of them were taken with such
reverence to Christ, that they celebrated his Power over unclean Spirits with
Illustrious Praise.

18. And many that believed. That is, that by Paul's Ministry were persuaded of
the truth of the Christian Religion.

Came. To Paul and his Companions.

Confessed and showed their deeds. There are some who interpret the Greek word
here rendered Deeds, not of their Sins, but of the Miracles wrought by
believers; So Chrysostom. hom. 41. upon the Acts.
but let it be a confession of Sins, yet that it was made before, not after
Baptism, and therefore does nowise countenance the Sacramental and Auricular
confession of the Papists, Petrus Lintrensis, and Lorinus the Jesuit do
confess, and prove by evident Arguments, such as these are: that the Series of
the Narration from the eleventh to the twentieth verse, does evince this: That
in the like manner those that were Baptized of John, confessed their sins
before they were Baptized: Mat. 3.6.
that the Doctors of the ancient Church, namely, Basil, Eusebius, Augustine,
Beda, Arator expound this Text of Persons not Baptized: that none of the
ancient Divines, nay, not the Council of Trent it self did use this place to
prove the Sacramental confession; that also Cajetan, Michael a Palatio, Andreas
Vega think so: lastly, that it is not probable that those newly converted
Christians did so soon after Baptism, Paul with his companions being as yet
present and daily Preaching, return to their old Sins, and among them to their
Magical Arts, and to have gotten Magical Books and read them. Grant that
Confession to have been after Baptism, says most famous Heidegger, yet Cajetan
will answer for us, Upon the Council of Trent, Sess. 14.9.7.
that here are described some confessing their sins in general, or publicly,
and that it was not a Sacramental confession, but a profession of Repentance
for their former Life. That if they did also confess some special Sins, yet
they did not either mumble them over in the ear of any Priest as judge, nor
confess all their Sins with their circumstances, but those grosser ones or
curious arts, which are mentioned in the following nineteenth verse. See what
we have noted upon Matthew. 3.6. about Auricular confession.

19. Many also of them which used curious Arts. That is, who applied their mind
to the Study of Magic. So in Augustine, curious Visions seems to be put for
Magical Visions. 10 Confess. 42.
That the Ephesians were given to these damnable Studies, the ancient naming
the Ephesian Letters does show, by which certain Characters and small Magical
Words were signified, whereby the Magicians used to free those from the Power
of Demons, who were vexed with them. Plutarch in Alexandro makes mention of
the Magicians, which were at Ephesus. And about the beginning of Nero's Empire,
as Philostratus witnesses in his Life, Appollonius Tyanaeus a Famous Magician
set up a public School of Magic art at Ephesus.

Brought their Books together. In which, to wit, their curious things, or
Magical subtleties were written.

And burned them before all them. Freely, that they might leave it witnessed in
Men's Mind, that now being converted to Christ they willingly and heartily hated
those Magical Curiosities. But it does not follow hence, as some think, that
the Books which are accounted Heretical, are to be forcibly taken from their
Possessors, and with public censure burnt. For first it is harder to Judge of
Heresy and Errors, respecting heads of Faith, than of Magic which is plainly
Diabolical, and many ones judgment is condemned for erroneous and false,
because of diverse preconceived contrary opinions, which are evidently disproved
as false and erroneous. Further, there is a vast difference, in that the
Ephesians of their own accord and without any violence, burnt those Books,
which they themselves acknowledged unworthy of light or reading, and that Books
against the owners Will without being convicted of their impiety, should by
violence be forced from them, and cast into the fire. This they use to do who
cannot find out good reasons, to confute the Arguments of such Books.

And they counted the price of them. Of the Books to wit, which the Ephesians
who were sincerely converted to Christ, did consume with fire.

And found it fifty thousand pieces of Silver. The Greek has word for word,
They found it fifty thousand Myriads of Silver or Money. Silver is used by the
Greek interpreters as in Hebrew (...) for any Money, because, as Isidore says,
their Money was first Coined of Silver. So in the common French Tongue, Argent
signifies any Money, as Argentum in Plautus is frequently put for any Money,
while in other Authors of the Latin Tongue, as is commonly taken for any Money.
Therefore (...) Silver when Jewish Money is spoken of, as Matthew. 26.15. after
the Jewish custom denotes a Shekel of Silver, which was every way equal to the
Athe^^an Stater, and valued two Shillings six pence of the now English Money.
Lib. 4. Demonst. Evang.
Hence Eusebius transcribed that (...), which Matthew called (...), which are
three Pounds fifteen Shillings Sterling. But here (...) signifies the Greek
Coin and is of the value of an Attick Dram, which was the fourth part of a
Jewish Shekel, and of the same value with the Roman Penny, and with seven pence
farthing of our English Money. For the Greeks, says Learned Brerewood, numbered
the Sums of Money by Drachmaes, as the Jews did by Shekels, and the Romans by
Sestertios; but Ephesus, whose those Pieces of Money were, was a Greek Chy, a
Colony of the Athenians, as Strabo and Pansanias Write. Fifty thousand Attick
Drachmaes are equivalent to one thousand five hundred sixty two Pounds ten
Shillings English Money.

20. So mightily grew the Word of God and pr^v^^ed. That is, The Gospel of
Jesus Christ did daily get it self new Disciples, See above Chapter 6, 7. and 12.24.
who profited more and more in the obedience thereof.

12. After these things were ended. As much as to say, When the Christian Faith
had taken deeper roots at Ephesus.

Paul Purposed in the Spirit. That is, Paul gave his mind to it. The Spirit is
put for the Mind, as Joh. 13.21. Romans 1.9. 1 Cor. 2.11.5.5.6.20. and 7.34.
Ephesians. 4.23. Phil. 3.3. Col. 2.5. Yet it is not to be doubted, but Paul did
take upon him this resolution, by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, as himself
witnesses in the like matter, below, Chapter 20.22. and as at length the thing it
self does show, Chapter 20.1.

When he had passed through Macedonia. Wherein he planted Christianity in
Philippi, Thessalonica and Beraea, Above Chapter 16. and 17.
he would therefore return to see the Christian Inhabitants there.

And Achaia. A Region of Peloponnesus, whose Metropolis was Corinth, where also
Paul taught the Gospel long enough. Achaia here is by some taken for whole
Greece, the ancient Romans called all Grecians by the name of Achaei and
Achivi. Also the Proconsul of Achaia governed both Peloponnesus and Greece.

To go to Jerusalem. To visit the chief Church and to carry the Alms collected
in the Grecian, See Romans 15.25. and 26.
Macedonian, and Achaian Churches.

Saying. By the impulse of the Holy Ghost.

After I have been there. To wit, at Jerusalem.

I must also see Rome. That is, go to Rome, that also in this Metropolis of the
World I may gain some to Christ. See Romans 1.10.11.13 and 15.15.23.


22. So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him. As much as
to say, Having sent two of his helpers in Preaching the Gospel into Macedonia,
whither he himself was to go.

Timotheus. Of whom before Chapter 16.1. and 17.14 and 15 and 18.5. None liker Paul
for holding, adorning, professing, teaching and defending the Christian Faith,
then Timothy; hence the Apostle calls him his beloved Son, 1 Timothy 1.2.
or as the Greek text has it, his own Son in the Faith. Because, says
Chrysostom, of his exact likeness to him in the Faith, whence love arises.
For otherwise Paul had not made, but found Timothy a believer, as is clear from
2 Timothy 1.5.

And Erastus. It seems to be him of whom mention is made, Romans 16.23, and 2.
Tim. 4.20.

But he himself stayed in Asia for a season. To wit, at Ephesus, as appears
from what follows, which was the chief Metropolis of Asia, more strictly so
called.

23. The same time. To wit, when Paul stayed at Ephesus.

No small stir. That is, A great uproar.

About the way. That is, Because of that Doctrine of Christ, which Paul
Preached. So by occasion of good Doctrine, See above v. 9.
evil Men stir up evil Tumults, by which that Doctrine is opposed.

24. A Silversmith. Who works in cutting, ingraving and moulding of Silver,
such workmen from the excellency of the matter in which they work, we call
Goldsmiths.

Which made Silver shrines for Diana. That is, Little houses of Silver, wherein
Diana's little Images, which were commonly bought by them who visited Diana of
the Ephesians, were laid up. And perhaps, says Causabon, these little houses
resembled the cunning Work of the Temple of Ephesus. The Caskets or little
Boxes, in which the Images of the Gods or Goddesses were kept, were called
Aediculae, Shrines. Petronius: Moreover, I saw a big Cage in a Corner, in whose
Shrines were Silver houshold-Gods. Apuleius. I beheld at the middle Pillar,
Lib. 3. Miles.
which upheld the beams of the Stable, almost in the very midst, the Image of
the Goddess Hippona, 36. Not. Hist. 5.
dwelling in a shrine. Plinius speaking of the Image of Venus carved by
Praxiteles at Gnidos, says, While its shrine is opened, that the Image of the
Goddess may be seen round about, which is believed to have been made by her own
help, it is equally admired on every side. See also Juvenal in his eighth
Satyr. Tertullian. If you furnish its Temple, its Altar, or its Shrine, De
Idol. Cap. 8.
it is no matter whether you build or adorn it. Tibullus calls a Shrine, exigua
aedes, a little house. The wooden God stood in a little house; by Arnobius
these Shrines or little houses are called little Cottages, Conclaves, little
Cells, Tuguriola, Conclavia, Cellulae.

For Diana. The Daughter of Jupiter, by Latona, brought forth in the same birth
with Apollo upon Mount Cynthus, situated in Delos an Island in the Aegean Sea.
She is said for love of her Virginity, to have shunned the company of Men, and
that she might remove from her self the itch of lust, to have lived in woods
hunting, contented with the company of a few Virgins; she is in Hell called
Hecate, in the Woods Diana, in Heaven Luna, Phaebe, Delia, Cynthia. Laboring
Women invoked her, by the name of Juno Lucina. She had a famous Temple at
Ephesus, which is said to have been one of the seven wonders of the World,
whose Architect was Chersiphron, Lib. 14.
as Strabo says. Plinius says, that in four hundred years time, Not. hist.
Lib. 16. Chapter 40.
(all Asia building it) it was finished, and seven times repaired; but he
agrees not with himself, for Book 36. Chapter 14. he says it was finished by all
Asia in the space of two hundred and twenty years, there also he draws the
structure of it. This so sumptuous and Magnificent a Temple Herostratus burnt,
that the memory of his wickedness might spread his fame, as Solinus says,
whose words out of his 43. Chap. I will here subjoyn. The Temple of Diana, the
Ornament of Ephesus, the building of the Amazons, so Magnificent that Xerxes
when he burnt all the Temples of Asia, he spared this alone: But this Xerxes
his Clemency kept not the sacred house long from evil. For Herostratus that the
Memory of his wickedness might spread his fame, did with his own hands fire
this noble Fabric, out of a desire, as he himself confessed, of acquiring
greater fame. It is observed that the Temple of Ephesus was burnt the same day
on which Alexander the Great was born at Pella. Who as Nepos says, was born
when M. Fabius Ambustus, and T. Quinctius Capitolinus were Consuls, three
hundred ninety and nine years after the building of Rome. When the Ephesians
rebuilded this Temple for a more reverent Worship, Dinocrates was the chief
Workman over the Work, which Dinocrates, we told already, did by Alexander's
orders measure out Alexandria in Egypt. Timaeus said wittily in his History,
as Cicero relates, De Not. Deor. Lib. 2.
It is no wonder if Diana 's Temple at Ephesus was burnt the same night that
Alexander was born, because that when she would be at Olympias her labor, she
was from home.

Brought no small gain to the Craftsmen. That is, To the Masters of the same
craft with Demetrius.

25. Whom. To wit, his Colleagues.

With the Workmen of the like occupation. That is, With the Workmen which
Demetrius with his Colleagues, the Masters of the Craft, made use of, in working
those Silver Shrines for Diana.

By this craft. That is, by the gain of this Trade.

We have our Wealth. That is, We grow rich. So Riches is their Goddess, and to
this Goddess they spread their Sails under color of Diana's Sacredness.

26. Ye see. That is, ye see what is done in your presence before your Eyes.

And hear. What is done elsewhere.

That not only at Ephesus. Where we live and exercise our Trade.

But almost throughout all Asia. More strictly so called, of which our Ephesus
is chief Metropolis.

This Paul. This wanderer.

Has persuaded and turned away much People. That is, by his persuasion took
off very many from Worshipping their Gods.

Saying, etc. That is, denying that there was any Divine Virtue in Images of
either Gods or Goddesses, which are made with hands.

27. So that not only this our Craft. That is, our Trade by which we have our
gain.

To be set at naught. That is, become a reproach as if it were a Wicked and
detestable thing, to our great loss.

But also that the Temple of the great Goddess Diana should be despised. That
is, should be neglected and forsaken. Diana is called a great Goddess, because
that among the great and indefinite number of Gods, which the Gentiles
religiously Worshipped, she was of the twelve chief Gods, which Ennius
comprehends in these two Verses.

Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Jovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
And her Magnificence should be destroyed. That is, And the very Majesty of the
Goddess her self will be vilified.

Whom all Asia and the World worshippeth. Apuleius expressed this in these
Words, whose sole Diety is Worshipped through the whole World, though not under
the same name, or figure, neither with the same rites. This erroneous
Superstition and abominable Idolatry, did reign so far, that it was thought by
the Inhabitants of the habitable World the Catholic or universal Religion, as
Popery is this day.

28. And when they heard these things. From Demetrius.

They were full of Wrath. That is, the Tradesmen, Demetrius his Colleagues, and
the Workmen were stirred up with fury.

And cried out. They defend not their Idolatry with reasons, but with clamours,
as also the Papists do theirs this day.

And the whole City was filled with confusion. The whole multitude of the
People running together to such crying, as above. Chapter 2.6.


They rushed with one accord. That is, And they run in together with Force.

Into the Theater. Where Shows, Comedies and Tragedies used to be acted.

Having caught Gaius. This Gaius or Caius, is reckoned with the Macedonians,
because although he seems to have been born in Derbe, which is a City of
Lycoania, Below Chapter 20.4.
yet he dwelt in Macedonia.

And Aristarchus. A Thessalonian, of whom, below, Chapter 20.4. and 27.2. Col.
4.10. Philem. 24.

Men of Macedonia, Paul 's Companions. As much as to say, Who went from
Macedonia, that they might accompany Paul, See 2 Cor. 8.19.
who wandered and Traveled over diverse Coasts Preaching the Gospel.

30. And when Paul would have entered in unto the People. That with vehement
discourse he might defend his followers.

The Diciples suffered him not. That is, The Christians, which Paul by the
Doctrine, which he Preached, converted to Jesus Christ at Ephesus, dissuaded
his going into such a Tumult of the incensed and raging People, where he might
hazard his Life without doing any good.

31. And certain of the chief of Asia. These Asiarchae or chief Men of Asia,
were Men chosen by common consent of the Asiatick Cities, for managing their
public affairs. Strabo Lib. 14.
This Word is used in Law Books, as also of Syriarchs, for so were some Priests
called whose Office was to act Stage Plays, in honor of the Gods, whom
therefore Ruffinus in Eusebius interprets makers of shows, as C^jacius a
learned Lawyer observes. Their Office was called Asiarchia, as that of the
Bithynarchs, Bithynarchia, and Lyciarch Lyciarchia, they also were called
Presidents: Also Princes partly from their name, and partly from their Dignity,
which was more eminent and of greater honor; the same word frequently
signifies as well Princes as Priests. Hence at Athens the (...), at Rome the
King managed holy things. See Seldens Marmora Arundeliana.

Which were his Friends. Although they did not wholly assent to the Doctrine of
Christ, so as to join themselves to his Disciples.

That he would not adventure himself into the Theater. Whither the raging
multitude tumultuously did run together.

32. Some therefore cried one thing, and some another. As it uses to be in
Tumults.

For the assembly was confused. That is, a mixed multitude without any order.

33. They drew Alexander. That is, Some drew him out to a place whence he might
be heard by all.

Alexander. Some think this to be him of whom Paul afterward complains that he
made Shipwreck of Faith, 1 Timothy 1.20. 2 Timothy 4.14.
there he is called the Copper-Smith.

Out of the Multitude. That is, Out of the multitude of the People.

The Jews putting him forward. Some think this Man, being a Jew, as in the
following Verse he is called, that therefore he was by the Jews thrust forward
into the midst of the Assembly, that by pleading the common cause, he might
pacify the Multitude. But others that seeing he was of a Jew become a
Christian, and at that time Paul's Companion, the Jews being enraged against
Paul and the Christians, would expose him to the incensed Multitude to be
abused: and that they, though otherwise Enemies to the Idols of the Nations,
might show themselves averse from Paul and his Companions, and free from those
things which were objected against them. Lastly, others, that they would, that
he, to excuse the Jews in this matter, though in a common cause with the
Christians, should lay the whole accusation upon Paul, and the Christians his
Companions.

And Alexander beck'ned with his hand. See above, Chapter 12.17. and Chapter 13.16.

Would have made his defense unto the People. To take away the accusation.

34. But when they knew that he was a Jew. By birth, and as others also would
have it, by Religion.

All with one Voice cried out. That is, all the Ephesian Idolaters cried out
together.

For the space of two hours. That they might deafen such as opposed their
Idolatry.

Great is Diana of the Ephesians. See what we have said above, v. 28.

35. Clerk. That is, The public Notary of the City, or skilful in the Law, as
it were an Advocate, a Man of no small Authority among the Citizens, and as
appears by his Speech, both a Wise Man, and a Friend to Paul and his
Companions, V. 31.
as those Asiarchs of whom above.

Ye Men of Ephesus. So their Orators used to accost them.

What Man is there, etc. As much as to say, Ye have no reason to mutiny, seeing
none calls it in question, but that the Ephesians are the Wardens of the great
Goddess Diana, and of her Image, which was not made with hands, but fell down
from Heaven.

That the City of the Ephesians is a Worshiper. The Greek has it, (...) a City
of A diles, or the adorner of the Temple. It is so called because the care of
sweeping and cleaning the Temple was committed to its Citizens, from (...) a
Temple, a (...), to adorn or sweep with Beesoms. Cicero says of Enna a City in
Sicily, That they seemed not to me, Citizens of that City, but all of them
Priests, all of them Neighbors, all of them Rulers of Ceres. Grotius adds,
that the word (...) is also used in this sense, upon the Marbles of Arundel,
and often upon Coins.

Of the Image which fell from Jupiter. It is common with the Greeks to put
Jupiter for Heaven. Hence Horace said also, sub Jove frigido, which is rendered,
under the cold Heaven. The Idolatrous Priests, promoters of Diana's Idols,
feigned that its Idol, which was possessed and Worshipped in Ephesus, was not
made with humane hands, but that it miraculously fell from Heaven, as was
reported of the Trojan Palladium, or the Image of Pallas. Cicero of the Image
of Ceres at Enna says, It was such that Men thought, either they saw Ceres her
self, or an Image of Ceres, not made with humane hands, but fallen from Heaven.
Lib. 16. Not. Hist. Cap. 40.
Plinius admires that Mutianus who was three times Consul, says, That the name
of the Artist, who ingraved Diana's Image at Ephesus, was Demonicos, seeing he
said that this Image was not only ancienter then Father Bacchus, but then
Minerva also, whose figment they report, not being made by the hands of any
Artist, to have fallen from Heaven. Many of the Ancients doubted what matter
the Ephesian Idol of Diana was made of, many gave out that it was of Wood, but
differed about the kind of Wood. But Xenophon reported it was of Gold, which is
made the more probable, seeing that when Diana's Temple at Ephesus was burnt,
that Image was not consumed by the fire, neither was it ever changed, though
the Temple was seven times repaired.

36. Seeing then that those things cannot be spoken against. As much as to say,
Whatever be said of Images made with hands, cannot prejudice the Image of Diana
of the Ephesians, since it is manifest that it was made by the hands of no
Artist, but fallen from Jupiter.

You ought to be quiet. That is, to quiet the Multitude.

And to do nothing rashly. Without full discerning and clear knowledge of the
cause.

37. For ye have brought hither these Men. To wit, Gaius or Caius and
Aristarchus, of which see above, v. 29.

Neither robbers of Churches. To wit, of Diana's Temple, seeing they were never
within it.

Nor yet Blasphemers of your Goddess. To whose Image since it was sent from
Heaven its Worship is beyond debate, although it were granted they are no Gods,
nor to be Worshipped for Gods, which are made with hands, as has been said, v.
26.

38. Wherefore if Demetrius, etc. Most like to which, is that of Horace:

If any make lewd verses against any, there is Law and Judgment. The Law is
open. That is, there are times and places appointed, in which Justice is done,
and Controversies decided.

And there are Deputies. There used to be one Deputy in each Province, but here
are more mentioned, either because at diverse times one succeeded another; or
because that with the Proconsul his Vicar or Lieutenant judged.

Let them implead one another. To wit, Demetrius those Men which ye brought
hither, or they him. Quintilian: Declam. 13.
We have received Magistrates and Laws from our Predecessors for this end, that
every Man may not be judge of his own wrong, and the daily complaints of
mischief should refute themselves, if revenge resemble the Crime.

39. But if ye inquire any thing concerning other matters. That is, If beside
your private quarrel, ought else come in controversy.

It shall be determined. That is, The controversy shall be ended.

In a Lawful Assembly. That is, Not in a tumultuary concourse, but in an
assembly of the People lawfully called.

40. For we are in danger, etc. As much as to say, For it is to be feared lest
we be accused of Sedition for this days tumultuary concourse, being there is no
cause for it, which can in reason justify it.

He dismissed the Assembly. So by Gods providence this tumultuary convention of
the People is dissolved, and the tumult stirred up by Demetrius against Paul
and his Companions, vanished without effect.

CHAP. XX.
1. AND after the uproar was ceased. Which Demetrius stirred up in Ephesus
against Paul and his Companions.

Paul called unto him the Disciples. That is, Paul called the Christians, who
were at Ephesus unto him.

And embraced them. Having by that sign of Brotherly love wished them health,
and biding them farewell; and also, as is probable, (as was the custom of those
Nations) kissed them. Hence the Syrian, instead of embracing them, translates
here, kissed them. Neither is it to be doubted, but Paul being to depart from
the Ephesian Christians, did when he wished them health, exhort them to the
duties of Piety, and to constancy in the Faith of Christ, which they had
received.

And departed. From Ephesus.

For to go into Macedonia. In which at Philippi, Beraea and Thessalonica, he
had converted some to Christ.

2. And when he had gone over those Parts. To wit, the Cities of Macedonia.

And had given them much exhortation. To wit, To the Christians who lived in
Macedonia that they should retain the Faith and persevere in Godliness.

He came unto Greece. That is, To that part of Greece where Athens and Corinth
were. Greece, says Augustine Lubine Geographer to the French King, in his
Geographical Index to Vshers Annals, The most famous Country in Europe, which
of old was by its Inhabitants called, Hellas, containing Macedonia, Epyrus,
Thessalie, Achaia, which is properly called Greece, Peloponnesus and
neighboring Islands about it, is for its bounds enclosed upon the East by the
Aegean Sea, upon the South by the Sea of Crete, upon the West by the Ionian
Sea, upon the North it is parted from Illyria and Maesia by the Scardonian
Mountains, and from the Thracians by the River Strymon; it is now commonly
called Romeli by the Turks, to whom it is Subject.

3. And there abode three Months. That is, And spent three Months there.

And when the Jews laid wait for him. The unbelieving Jews being incensed
against him, for that he led away many from the Law of Moses to the Faith of
Christ.

As he was about to Sail unto Syria. Toward Judea.

He purposed, etc. As much as to say, To the end he might shun the snares laid
for him, he takes a very wife resolution, not to Sail directly from Achaia, or
Greece properly so called, unto Syria, but to take his way back again through
Macedonia, from whence he came to Achaia three Months ago.

4. And there accompanied him into Asia. Strictly so called, whose chief
Metropolis is Ephesus.

Sopater. This Sosipater, and by Syncope Sopater, is reckoned among Paul's
kindred, Romans 16.21.

The Son of Pyrrhus. This is wanting in the vulgar Greek Copies.

Of Beraea. Of the number of those noble men spoken of above Chapter 17.10, 11 and
12.

And of the Thessalonians. That is, those of Thessalonica a City of Macedonia.

Aristarchus and Secundus. The Syrian thinks that there were only these two
Thessalonians. Aristarchus also accompanied Paul not only to Asia, but even to
Syria also, yea and to Rome, below Chapter See also Col. 4.10.
27.2.

And Gaius of Derbe. Of this Gaius or Caius, see what we have said above, Chapter
19.29.

And Timotheus. Born, if we believe Gesnere, in the same City of Derbe. The
Syrian and Arabian interpreters add, Who was of Lystra. This excellent youth
Timotheus, See above Chapter 14.6.
of whom above, Chapter 16. v. 1, 2. Chapter 17.14, 15. Chapter 18.5. and Chapter 19.22. Paul
afterward left at Ephesus, that there he might oversee the Church in teaching
and governing it.

And of Asia. Strictly so called, and also its chief City Ephesus; for a most
ancient Copy, which most famous Beza used, has for Asians, Ephesians.

And Tychicus. This Man is commended by Paul Ephesians. 6.12. and Col. 4.7. is sent
to Ephesus, 2 Timothy 4.12. to the Isle of Crete, Tit. 3.12. The Supposititious
Dorotheus in his Synopsis of the Lives of the Prophets, and Disciples of Christ
writes, that this Tychicus was at last created Bishop of Chalcedon in Bithynia.

And Trophimus. Of whom below Chapter 21.29. and 2 Timothy 4.20.

5. These going before. Whither Paul was a going.

Tarryed for us at Troas. That is, waited for Paul and me Luke, the writer of
this History. This Luke who spoke otherwise in the foregoing Chapters, because
that perhaps he was sent by Paul somewhere else, shows that he was then
returned again to Paul to accompany him in his Journey, as also afterward in
the following.

From Troas. Troas in this place is not taken for that Country which was called
Teucris and Dardania and Xanthe, but for a City of the same Country which was
also called Troas. See what we have said above, Chapter 16.

6. And we. That is, I Luke and Paul.

From Philippi. A City of Macedonia, of which we have spoken above, Chapter 16.12.

After the days of unleavened Bread. That is, after the Jews feast of the
Passover, which as yet Paul with the other Jews who were Christians seems to
observe, that he might Lawfully accommodate himself to the Jews: and doubtless
he neglected not the occasion of Preaching Christ to the Jews at that Feast.

Unto them. Our fellow Travelers, who went before us.

To Troas. A City of the Country of the same name.

In five days. That is, Within five days.

Where we abode seven days. That is, we passed seven days in the City called
Troas.

7. And upon the first day of the Week. That is, That day, as Sozomen says,
which is called the Lords day, 1 Hist. Eccl. Chapter 8.
which the Hebrews called the first day of the Week, but the Greeks dedicated
it to the Sun. See what I have noted upon Mat. 28. v. 1. The Table of the
Canons lately published by the famous John Baptist Cotelerius. Chapter 4.16.
It was not before Christ's Resurrection called the Lords day, but the first
day, but after the Resurrection it was called the Lords day, the Lady of all
days and Festivities. We have the name of the Lords day in Rev. 1.10. In
Ignatius his Epistle to the Trallians and Magnesians, and sometimes in
Clement's Institutions, also in that place of Ireneus, which the writer of the
answers to the Orthodox in Justin Martyr has preserved to us. The edict of
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria: Both custom and honesty requires of us that
we should honor the Lords day, and celebrate it, because Christ our Lord upon
that day executed the eminent Office of his Resurrection. Lib. 5. Paschal.
operis Cap. 20.
Sedulius: In the mean time after that sad Sabbath, the happy day began to
dawn, which being most welcome to the triumphing Lord, did take its name from
his Majesty, called for this honor the Lords day; being a day that attained to
the Dignity to be the first that beheld the Original of the rising World, and
the virtue of Christ rising again. St. Epist. 119. Cap. 13.
Augustine: The Lords day has been by Christ's Resurrection declared not to the
Jews but to the Christians, Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost.
and from him it began to have its Festivity. And this day is called the Lords
day, because upon this day, the Lord rose again; or to teach by the very name
of it, that it ought to be wholly consecrated to the Lord. St. Maximus
Taurinensis: Hom. 3. in Pentecost.
The Lords day is therefore venerable and solemn to us, because upon it our
Savior, as the rising Sun having driven away the infernal darkness, shined
with the light of his Resurrection; and therefore by the common Speech of the
World, it is called Sunday, because Christ the Sun of righteousness being
risen, did inlighten it. The Roman order and Isidor: Lib. 2. de Eccl. Offic.
Cap. 24.
The Apostles therefore did with Religious Solemnity ratify the Lords day,
because upon that day our Lord and Redeemer rose again from the dead; and which
also is called the Lords day, that in it, abstaining from earthly works or
Worldly inticements, we should give our selves only to divine Worship, giving,
to wit, honor and reverence to this day, for the hope of our Resurrection,
which we have in him. Gregorius Turonensis: This is the day of the Resurrection
of our Lord Jesus Christ, Lib. 1. Hist. Cap. 22.
which we properly call the Lords day, for his holy Resurrection.

When the Disciples came together. From this place, and that which is written,
1 Corinthians. 16.2. is gathered that the Christians did then use upon the first
day of the week to keep solemn Meetings. Justin: Upon the day called Sunday,
Apolog. 2.
all that live in Cities or Country meet in one place.

To break Bread. To wit, that was consecrated to be a Symbol of the Body of
Christ, offered for us upon the cross. Hence the Syrian rendered it, That we
might break the Eucharist. The Arabic, That we might destribute the Body of
Christ. The Ethiopick, To bless the Table. All understood it of this holy Rite
by which the Lord Jesus would have the Memory of his bitter Death to be
celebrated by his Disciples. See what we have said above, Chapter 2. Luke 22.19. 1
Cor. 11.24 and 26.
v. 42. and 46.

Paul Preached unto them. The word of God, to wit, before they celebrated the
Eucharist, which is denominated from the breaking of Bread.

Ready to depart. From the City Troas.

On the Morrow. That is, The day immediately following.

8. And there were many lights. To wit, to dispel the Darkness of the night,
or, as Jerome says against Vigilantius, for their comfort in the darkness of
the Night.

In the upper Chamber. Which, as Juvenal speaks, the roof only covers. In this
as in the least esteemed part of the house, Men of mean fortunes used to live,
also in the time of the Apostles the Church assembled there, and in it
performed their Worship, not in Magnificently built Temples.

Where they were. To wit, The Christians of Text.

(...) ^^ll down from the third loft. That is, he fell from the third frame or
third floor. Servius. The houses of old were made de tabulis, (...) Eneid.
of Boards, whence at this day we say in houses, that are ^uildedhigh, the
first and second tabulatum, story: but the highest that which supports the
roof, whence what Juvenal calls tabulata tertia, Sat. 3.
the third story, or loft, is expounded by the Scholiast, upper rooms.

And was taken up Dead. As much as to say, And when some of them who saw
Eutychus fall, had run from that upper room of the house, to take him up, they
found him already destitute of all strength, and without Life.

10. And Paul went down. His holy discourse being interrupted, that he might
restore Eutychus to Life, who was by an unexpected fall, killed.

And sell on him. As Elias, 1 Kings 17.21. and Elisha 2 Kings 4.34. fell upon
them, whom they were about to restore to Life.

And embracing him. Eutychus by the middle.

Said. To them, who Lamented Eutychus being dead.

His Life is in him. That is, now his Body begins to grow warm and revive.

11. When he therefore was come up again, etc. As much as to say, When
therefore Paul was again gone up to that Loft, where he had Preached, and had
there celebrated the Rite of the Eucharist, and taken Meat, he with unwearied
Zeal, spent the rest of the night until-day light in Preaching.

So. That is, the Night being spent. After the same manner the Particle So, is
used as a note of what was done, above Chapter 7.8. Chapter 17.33. below Chapter 28.14.
Joh. 8.59.

He departed. From the City Troas and that on Foot, the rest being to go in a
Ship, as is told below, v. 13.

12. And they brought. They, to wit, who came down to take up Eutychus, who had
fallen from a window of the highest Frame of the House, brought him alive to
the rest of the Disciples, who were assembled in the upper room whence he fell,
to hear Paul Preach and to celebrate the rite of the Eucharist.

Alive. That is, Marvellously restored by Paul unto Life.

And were not a little comforted. As much as to say, The sight of so great a
Miracle brought great comfort to all.

13. But we. That is, I Luke with others of Paul's fellow-Travellers.

Went before to a Ship. To go before Paul.

And Sailed unto Assus. A fit Port for Ships. To this Sea-Town of the Country
of Troas, the way was but short from the City Troas, either by Sea or Land.
Strabo says, Lib. 13.
that this was a Famous City, and upon the side that looks to the Sea, Lib.
5. Chapter 30.
exceeding strong both by Nature and Art. Plinius mentions the same City was
otherwise called Apollonia.

There intending to take in Paul. To wit, into the Ship.

Minding himself to go a Foot. From Troas to Assos, a Neighboring City of the
same Country.

14. And when he met with us at Assos. To wit, Paul.

We took him in. Into the Ship.

And came to Mytilene. The chief City of the Island Lesbos, which Vitruvius
says was magnificently and stately built, Lib. 1.
but not wisely situated: in which when the South Wind blows, Men are Sick:
when the North West, they cough: when the North, they are restored to Health.
This City was Famous for Pittacus, one of the seven Famous Wisemen of Greece,
Alcaeus a Noble Lyrick Poet, the Famous Poetess Sapphus, and that excellent
Rhetorician Diophanes, who was Master to Gracchus, and to that Theophanes, who
wrote the exploits of Pompey the Great, and was very familiar with him, and
received of him the Freedom of the City, in an assembly of Soldiers, as Cicero
says, in his Oration for Archias a Poet of Antioch.

15. Over against Chios. Which is an Island in the Aegean Sea, about Nine
Hundred furlongs in compass, bordering upon Ionia, between the Islands Samos
and Lesbos. This Island was Famous for Wine, Figs and Marble. Lib. 13.
Its Wine was the best of all the Greek Wines, as Strabo and Horace do witness.
Epod. 9.
The Chian Fig is commended by Martial, who for its excellency calls it Chia. 7
Epig. 24.
Plinius commends the Chian Marble. Lib. 5. Chapter 31.
Also the Chian Earth is by him said to have the same effect in Medicine, as
the Samian Earth. It had Famous Men, Jon, Orchomenis's Son, a Tragical and
Lyrick Poet, and a Philosopher; Theopompus the Son of Damasistratus, both an
Orator, and a Historian; Theocritus of the same age as Theopompus and emulating
him in governing the Commonwealth. The Chians also challenged Homer as theirs,
by an argument from the Family of the Homerides Famous among the Chians, who
boasted they were of Homers Lineage; and also Prodicus the Philosopher, who
said that such things as were profitable for Man's Life, have been esteemed to
be among the number of the Gods, Lib. 1. de not. deor.
of which Strabo in the forecited Book and Cicero, are evident Witnesses.

We came to Samos. That is, we arrived at the Famous Samos over against the
Island Caria. Samos, says Thomas de Pinedo, Same and Samothrace or Samothracia
were different Islands, although of old Samothracia was also called Samos; for
Samothracia was in the Aegean Sea, Same in the Ionian near Zacynthus, but Samos
of which we now speak, lays in the Icarian Sea. And as Lemnus Worshipped
Vulcan, Delus Appollo, so Samos peculiarly Worshipped Juno as the Learnedest of
Poets does witness. Aeneid. Lib. 1. v. 20.
And therefore the Samians imprinted a Peacok, a Bird sacred to Juno, upon
their Coin, Lib. 14.
of which matter Atheneus is a clear witness. Bochart does most ingeniosly
deduce its Original from the Phoenician Language; but since the ancient Greeks
did call high Places (...), as appears out of Strabo, Lib. 10.
and Constantine Porphyrogeneta, 1 Them. 16.
there is no need to derive its Original from the Phoenician Language. In
Atheneus Lib. 7.
Archestratus the Poet, praises the Tunies which were taken about this Island.
Lib. 35. Chapter 12.
Pliny commends the Samian Tile, wherewith the Priests of the Mother of Gods,
which Priests were Surnamed Galli, from a River of that Name, cut off their
Genitals, neither could they do it otherwise without hurt, as the same Author
reports out of M. Coelius. Which I easily believe, for their knives made of
stone were fitter for Circumcision, then Iron ones, because of the swelling
which sometime happen, when the Wound is made with Iron knives. Therefore in
Joshua 5.2. (...) must be rendered, knives of Stone, which some wrongfully
render, sharp knives, for which you may consult, De Prado Pentecontarcho suo
Cap. 4.
D. Laur. Ramirez. The Samian earthen Vessels are also Famous, and the
Physicians say that the Samian Earth is fit for Medicine. In this Island
reigned Polycrates that Tyrant so happy, that when he threw the Ring that he
admired in the Sea, he afterward found it in the Midriff of a Fish. But none
can be called happy before his Death; forasmuch as this same Polycrates was by
Orontes Darius his General hanged, De finibus Lib. 5.
as Cicero says. But Pythagoras made Samos much more renowned, who therefore
was called the old Samian.

And tarryed at Trogyllium. Lib. 14.
Strabo mentions Trogilios the Promontory of Mycale. And the very Promontory
Trogilios, says he, is indeed the foot of Mycale stretched forth. But Mycale,
Lib. 1. Chapter 148.
says Herodotus, is a Promontory of the Continent toward the West Wind,
belonging to Samos, at which Promontory, the Ionians gathering together out of
all their Cities, Solemnized their Feast which they called Panionia.

And the next Day. That is, the day after we loosed from Samos.

We came to Miletus. A most Famous City in Caria of the Ionians, the first of
all Ionia in the Arts both of War and Peace, the Metropolis of eighty and more
Cities, and deservedly renowned for the excellent disposition of its Citizens.
To this purpose Apuleius says, Floridirum Lib. 2.
Samos is a small Island in the Icarian Sea, situated just against Miletus upon
the West side of it, neither is it divided by much of the Sea from it. Two days
gentle sailing will bring one to either of the Ports. Among the Illustrious Men
who were born in this City Miletus, the most Famous were, that Cadmus, Who, as
Pliny says, was the first that began to compose Speeches in Prose. Thales the
Son of Examius, the most Famous of the seven Famous wise men of Greece, Lib. 5.
Not. Hist. Cap. 29.
who was the first among the Greeks, that discoursed about Nature. He was the
first, who searched into the Secrets of Astrology. The first, (as Laertius
reports in his Life) who said that the Souls of mortal Men were immortal. And
Anaximander the Disciple of Thales, that first invented the Sphaere, as says
Plinius, Lib. 7. Chapter 56.
and the first that published a Geographical Map, as Strabo says. Lib. 1.
The Inhabitants of Miletus acquired great fame by the first called the
Branchides, then Apollo Didymaeus's Oracle, which Xerxes the Son of Darius and
Grandchild of Cyrus by his Sister Atosa burnt, as he did all the rest of the
Temples, that of Ephesus only excepted; and because that after Xerxes burnt the
Temple, they built it the highest of all, that for its height it remained
without a roof, and Strabo reports, that it was most sumptuously adorned with
gifts of diverse ancient arts. Lib. 14.
It was also Famous for its most precious wool, (of which Carpets were made)
which for their exceeding softness became a Proverb. Historians tell us that
the Milesians of old were stout Warriers: But afterward being addicted to their
pleasures, they lost their Warlike virtues, with their Riches and Reputation,
whence comes the Proverb, The Milesians were Stout of old. Hence also the
Milesian Speech is taken by Apuleius for a wanton and merry Speech: In Asino
auree.
But I will set out Various Fables for you in this Milesian Speech, and will
sooth your benevolent ears with a pleasant Whisper.

16. For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus. That is, beyond Ephesus.

Because he would not spend time in Asia. As much as to say, Lest if he should
go then to the chief Metropolis of Asia, strictly so called, he should by the
Christian Brethren Inhabiting there, be detained too long.

For he hasted, if it were possible for him. To wit, for the shortness of the
time, which was to Pentecost or the fiftieth day from the Feast of the
Passover, which day was Festival, and in it the first fruits were offered by
the Jews, to whom upon the same day the old Law was promulgated upon Mount
Sinai.

To be at Jerusalem the Day of Pentecost. That is, that he might be at
Jerusalem, against the frequent concourse of the Jews from diverse Coasts to the
approaching Feast.

17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus. Some one or more of his Fellows and
Companions.

Called. That is, sent for.

The Elders of the Church. That is, such as were set over the Government of the
Church of Ephesus, who were so called, because they were of greater age, or
because by the gravity of their manners, they did resemble old Men, when they
were set up like Senators to Govern the Christian Commonalty, without whose
advice the Church acted nothing. Jerome says, We have in the Church our Senate,
In Is. 3.
a company of Elders. See what is noted below, v. 28. and above Chapter 14.23. and
15.2, 4, 6 and 28.

18. And when they. The Elders of Ephesus having the same fellowship of Power
and Honor.

Were come to him. To wit, to the Apostle Paul.

He said unto them. To wit, Paul himself to the same Elders of the Church of
Ephesus.

Ye know. That is, Ye are Witnesses.

From the first day that I came into Asia. Strictly so called, whose chief
Metropolis is your Ephesus.

After what manner I have been with you at all Seasons. That is, how I have
behaved my self among you. See the like Phrase, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5 and 10.

19. Serving the Lord. That is, With all my might promoting the Glory of God,
in Preaching the Gospel holily, and performing duties of Charity toward God
and my Neighbors.

With all humility. That is, With perfect humility and such modesty of Mind, as
did not despise others, neither usurped any Dominion over my Brethren, over
which I was set a Teacher.

And tears. Breaking out from my heart, pitying those who were more negligent
in their Station.

And Temptations. That is, Vexations and Afflictions, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.
with which the Devil who is called by Antonomasia, the Tempter, uses by
Wicked Men his Instruments, to solicit and Tempt believers to fall away from
Faith and Godliness; by Gods permission such things come to pass to try and
prove the Faith and Piety of his own. Likewise by Temptations are understood
vexations and afflictions, Luke 22.28. 1 Cor. 10.13. Gal. 4.14. Jam. 1.2. 1
Pet. 1.6. 2 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 3.10.
or the things which are called adverse.

Which befell me by the laying in wait of the Jews. Obstinate and unbelieving
Jews, persecuting the Disciples of Christ with deadly hatred. See above v. 3.
and Chapter 9.24. Chapter 14. v. 2. and 5.

20. And how I kept back nothing. That is, hid nothing from you either for fear
of Dangers, or hope of Gain.

That was profitable unto you. That is, of such things as I thought to conduce
to your Salvation.

But have showed you. That is, I Preached unto you those wholesome Doctrines.

And have taught you. That is, and diligently instructed you in them.

Publicly. In the Assemblies of the Believers.

And from house to house. That is, And privately, while I visited the Believers
in every house.

21. Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks. That is, earnestly
teaching as well the Jews by birth, (who were long ago esteemed the Lords
People, but by their Sins were turned away from God, and would not acknowledge
Jesus to be the Messiah, nor believe in him) as them who were born of the
Gentiles, being aliens from the People of God, and were called Greeks, as above
Chapter 18.4.19.10 and 17.

Repentance toward God. That is, Conversion from an evil and vicious Life, to a
good and laudable manner of Living, pleasing God and conformed to his Precepts,
See below Chapter 26.20.
and meet of repentance.

And Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

That is, that all your confidence should be placed in that Jesus of Nazareth,
who is the Messiah promised in the Law and in the Prophets, now become the
Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Heb. 5.9.


22. And now behold, I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem. As much as to
say, And now the fourth time since my conversion to Christ, by a certain
Instinct and Command of the Holy Ghost, I go to Jerusalem. See above Chapter 13.4.
So Paul says of his other Journey to Jerusalem, that he went up thither by
Revelation, Gal. 2.2.
which to wit was made to him by the Holy Ghost. So our Lord Jesus is said, to
be led of the Spirit unto the Wilderness to be tempted by the Devil.

Not knowing the things that shall befall me there. Matthew. 4.1.
That is, Knowing nothing certainly of these Tortures, which I am to undergo at
Jerusalem.

23. Save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City. That is, In every City
where I came since I directed my course toward Jerusalem.

Witnesses. That is, Positively foretells me.

That bonds, etc. That is, That at Jerusalem, where of old I greatly persecuted
the Church of Christ, I shall for the same Church be bound in Chains, and all
manner of ways tortured.

24. But none of those things move me. As much as to say, There is no kind of
Torment which I must bear to perform my duty, that I shall either deprecate or
shun.

Neither count I my Life dear unto me. That is, Neither do I value the loss of
my Life. The Hebrews say, that unto him who spares this temporary Life, his
Soul is esteemed precious. No Man is so fearless of Death, as that Man that is
Crucified to the World, and has mortified his inordinate desire of Worldly
things. If in the whole course of our Life we give up our selves to the Laws of
Christ, if we exercise our selves to patience, and self-denial, to Meekness and
Long suffering, to Temperance and Chastity, to contempt of the World, and an
Heavenly Mind, we shall find it a very easy task, when we shall be required to
resign up our Mortal Life, for the sake of our Lord Jesus. He that obeys
Christ in all his Holy and strictest precepts, will be in great readiness and
preparation of Mind, to lay down his Life for him. He that dares kill his
Lusts, and crucify the old Man, will not think much to resign this Mortal
Life, that he may be clothed with Immortality. Thus much that most Famous Man
for his Learning and Piety, the reverend Canon of Norwich, Richard Kidder, in
Chapter 10. of his Book concerning the grounds of Christian Fortitude, which not
long ago, that pattern of an upright and godly conscience, the noble Lady
Vicountess Katharine Ranelaugh lent me.

So that I might finish my course with Joy. That is, That with that
cheerfulness and earnestness which becomes me, I might run toward the mark
which Christ the Judge has prefixed for me.

And the Ministry, etc. As much as to say, And might discharge my Apostolical
Office, which Christ from Heaven committed to me, that I might bear witness to
that joyful and happy Message of the exceeding great Grace of God toward Men,
to wit, of the most happy everlasting Life, which is to be received in Heaven
of the great and liberal God, through men's lively Faith in Christ Jesus without
the works of the Law. Joh. 1. v. 17. Romans 6.14 and 15. Heb. 12.15.13.9. 1 Pet.
5.12.
Hence the Gospel is called Grace.

25. And now behold I know. By Revelation from the holy Ghost, by whose impulse
I go from hence to Jerusalem.

That. After my departure from you now.

Ye all, etc. That is, None of you shall see me henceforth.

Among them I have gone. That is, Through whose Countries and Cities I have
traveled.

Preaching the Kingdom of God. That is, that most blessed and worthy State,
which by the Grace of God, Believers in Christ are to enjoy in Heaven.

26. Wherefore I take you to record this day. That is, I take you all witness.

That I am pure from the Blood of all Men. That is, That I am not the cause of
their Destruction, who among you have forsaken the Christian Faith and
Godliness. See what we have noted concerning this Phrase above. Chapter 18.6.


27. For, etc. As much as to say, For in my Sermons I unfolded to you all, and
every thing, which God commanded to be by Men hoped, believed, and done, that
through Jesus Christ the only Savior of Men, they might attain to eternal Life.

The whole Counsel of God. This universal saying must be restrained to his
Office of Apostleship, As much as to say, All Gods Commands revealed through
Jesus Christ about these things, which are necessary to be hoped, believed, and
done to Salvation. Thus Luke 7.30. Counsel of God is taken for Gods Commandment
made to the Pharisees.

28. Take heed therefore unto your selves. As much as to say, Therefore above
all, listen diligently to your selves how ye live, that ye decline not from the
true Faith and Piety, nor be careless in them. A most Learned Anonymus Author
in a Theological Treatise called The mischief of Impositions, p. 29. edit. 2.
observed that in the old ordination of Presbyters of the Church of England,
they were enstated in their whole Office by reading this verse.

And to all the Flock. As much as to say, Then be watchful and diligent about
the care of the Souls of the whole Company of the Disciples, that they may so
behave themselves as becomes them. The Church of Believers is by a Metaphor
called a Flock, as of Sheep, Luke 12.32. Joh. 10.16. 1 Pet. 5.2.
that from this Appellation we may learn, that Christ's Faithful ones, should
frequent the holy assemblies, and not to be wandering all alone.

Over the which the Holy Ghost has made you. That is, See above Chapter 14.23. 2 Timothy 1.6.
Over which by our Ministry and imposition of hands, he did set and constitute
you.

Overseers. Augustine says, De civit. Dei Lib. 19. Cap. 19.
Episcopus is a Greek Word, and thence brought, because he who is set over,
oversees them, over which he is set, to wit, taking care of them; for Epi is
over and Scopus is intention; therefore if we please, we way call the Office of
a Bishop in Latin Superintendere, to oversee diligently, that he may know he is
not a Bishop that delights to be over, but not to profit. Erasmus in his
Ecclesiastes: Lib. 1. p. 47.
Bishop is a name of an Office not of Dignity, also it is a Military Word,
hence derived, because he who professes himself the Captain of an Army should
(...), that is, look down that there be nothing wanting to the Soldiers under
his Standard. Whence also Homer calls Hector (...), Il. 2. v. 729.
Bishop. Further, they who above v. 17. were in the same City of Ephesus called
Elders or Presbyters; the same are now called Bishops, because in the Apostles
time a Bishop and a Presbyter or an Elder, were one and the same; and one was
the name of their Age, the other of their Office, as Jerome in his Commentary
upon the Epistle to Titus, and in his Epistles to Oceanus and Evagrius proves
from Act. 20.17 and 28. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 4.14. Tit. 1.5. Heb. 13.17. 1 Pet.
5.1, 2. 2 Jo. 1. and 3. Jo. 1. Therefore the most Learned and incomparable
Jewel Bishop of Sarisbury in his Apology for the Church of England against
Harding, Part. 2. Chapter 9. Page 173.
when Harding said, They were condemned of Heresy, who denied the distinction
of Bishop from Presbyter, he sets in the Margin, It is false, for then S.
Paul, Jerome and other good Men are condemned of Heresy. Neither is Bishop
Morton of Durham's answer in his Catholic Apology, Part. 1. Chapter 33.
unlike this. Jerome, says he, perhaps was of the same Judgment with Aerius,
neither did the other Fathers think otherwise. Lastly that Theodoret, Ambrose,
Augustine; also Chrysostom, Primasius and Sedulius had the same opinion as S.
Jerome about the equality of Elders, or Presbyters and Bishops, which opinion
was Condemned in Aerius, then in the Waldenses, and lastly in Wickliff, Michael
de Medina not only said in his Book of the original and continency of sacred
Men, Chap. 5.
Dissert. Lib. 1. de Episc Dignit. and Jurisdict:
upon which account he was miserably abused by the Jesuit Dionysius Petavius;
But also the same Medina affirmed the same openly in the Council of Trent,
neither did he stick (though many fretted at it) publicly to contend, that so
far Jerome and Augustine had a Heritical opinion, the matter, to wit, not being
altogether clear. Which as it moved others not a little: So, says the writer
of the History of the Council of Trent, this Doctor sticking close to his own
opinion, maintained it with his might. Neither is there ought that makes
against it in Storcas Pallavicinus his History of the Council of Trent, against
Paulus Venetus, published at Rome, Anno M. DC. LVII. Further, Petavius himself
does also witness, that Medina was not the only Man among the Papists, who was
of this Judgment, Theol. Dogm. Tom. 3. de Eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 8.
but that others also did ascribe the said Heresy to the forecited Fathers. And
Morton in the forementioned place of his Apology does adduce some of them,
Rivet also. Sum. Contr. Tract. 2. quaest. 22.
Therefore although according to the terms of honor, which the Church now
uses, as says Augustine in his Epistle to Jerome, the Episcopacy be greater
than the Presbytery, yet Richard of Armach said truly, There is no difference
found in the Evangelical or Apostolical Scriptures betwixt Bishops and simple
Priests, who are called Presbyters; Lib. 11. ad quaest. Arm. Cap. 5.
whence it follows that there is the same Power in both. Whether, says
Cassander, the Episcopacy ought to be put among the orders of the Church, is
not agreed upon betwixt the Theologues and the Canonists; but it is agreed upon
among all, Consult. Art. 14.
that in the age of the Apostles, there was no difference betwixt Bishops and
Presbyters; but that afterward, to evite Schism a Bishop was set over
Presbyters. But as Musculus in his common places says excellently of the
Ministers of the Word; Page 246.
Whether this Counsel whereby such Bishops are more by custom introduced ( to
use Jerome 's words) than by the truth of the Lords appointment, to be greater
than Presbyters, be profitable for the Church of Christ or not, has been
better manifested in the following ages, than when this custom was first
introduced, etc. See what follows there, Also Greg. Naz. Orat. 28. August. in
Psalm. 105. Whitaker quaest. 1. de pont. Romans Cap. 3.
and the History of Episcopacy written in English not long ago by that
indefatigable Preacher of Gods Word, the Reverend Richard Baxter Famous for
Knowledge and Piety.

To feed. That is, To rule as a Pastor does his Flock, and it is extended to
every part of managing the Flock, such as to Lead, Defend, Rule and Direct
them. The care of the Church is equally divided among many, says Jerome. For
as he says, before that by the instigation of the Devil, there were Parties
made in Religion, and it was said among the People, I am of Paul, I of Apollos,
but I am of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common advice of
Presbyters. Those spiritual Pastors set up by God to feed not their own Flock,
but the Flock of their Lord and supreme Pastor, ought to consult the good of
the Flock, and procure their Salvation, feeding the People with divine Oracles
and healthful admonitions, and by strong reasons refelling the opposers of the
Christian Faith.

The Church. See Tit. 1.9. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4.
That is, a company of Men professing the saving Doctrine of Christ. Behold
here, as also Phil. 1.1. the Church is distinguished from the Presbyters, who
had the oversight of it, which oversight is in the Greek called (...)
Episcopacy above, Chapter 1.20.
therefore the overseers of the Church, who are frequently called Presbyters in
the new Testament, and four times Bishops from their Office, are not alone the
Church, much less any Bishop of Bishops. 1 Cor. 1.2.10.32.11.16. 2 Cor. 1.1. 1
Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.


Of God. The Christian multitude is the Church or Flock of God, and the Church
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Beza witnesses that he read in five Copies, of the
Lord and of God. Matthew. 16.18. Romans 16.16.
Many other Greek Copies have only of the Lord, by which Lord after the
Apostolic manner of speaking is deservedly meant Jesus of Nazareth, because,
as it is said above, God made him Lord and Christ, Chapter 2.36.
which excellently agrees with what follows.

Which he purchased. That, to wit, it might be to him a peculiar People.

With his own Blood. Poured out upon the Altar of the Cross. But if by the Word
of God, be understood God the Father, it is the same as if he should say, with
the bloody Death of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ. Hence says Beza it is
read in one Greek Copy, By this Blood, of this his own, viz. Son. The strength
of that Article, says Beza, is to be observed, whereby the excellency of this
Blood, and the antithesis is declared, which is more copiously expounded, Heb.
9.12. For this Blood was truly holy, yea a truly purifying and Sanctifying
Blood, flowing out of him, See Ephesians. 1.12, 13. Col. 1.14. and 20. Heb. 9.12.
etc. 1 Pet. 1.18.19. Rev. 5.9.
who as he truly is a most pure Man, so is he also truly, and in the most
perfect manner God. We ought to make of what God has bought so dear.

29. I know. The Spirit revealing it to me.

That after my departing. The Greek Word (...) here used says Ludovicus de
dieu, is in the Glossary rendered, Arrival, departing, and is used in the Attick
signification by Demosthenes, as well as here.

Wolves. Heretical teachers, who with their false and deadly Doctrine, Corrupt
and Destroy the Flock of Christ, are so called by a Metaphor. See our literal
explanation Matthew. 7.15. Such spiritual Wolves are according to Christ's Command
to be once and again admonished, Matthew. 18.16, 17 and 18. if that do not avail,
we ought to break off familiar correspondence with them, but the Apostles
Institutions and Examples forbid to exasperate these false Teachers with
Curses, 1 Cor. 5.9. Tit. 3.10.
or to oppress them with carnal violence, or to put them to Death. See 2 Timothy
2.24, and 25.


Grievous. That is, Barbarously and intolerably cruel.

Not sparing the Flock. That is, Who shall have no pity upon the Flock. He goes
on in his similitude and Allegory begun v. 28. meaning by the Flock, the Church
or company of believers in Christ, who are frequently called Sheep.

30. Of your own selves. Lawfully called to the Pastoral Office, not only the
same Presbyters to whom the Pastoral charge of the Church of Ephesus is
committed, and to whom Paul then spoke, as appears from v. 28. are noted, but
also such of their Equals and Successors, as should even in other Churches
degenerate into Wolves.

Arise. That is, Spring up and appear in Public.

Speaking perverse things. That is, Teaching things contrary to the revealed
truth, and wresting the very Words of the Apostles into a bad sense.

To draw away Disciples after them. As much as to say, That they may draw away
such as embraced the Faith of Christ, to follow their own Fictions.

31. Therefore. The peril, to wit, of the Churches making Shipwreck of Faith by
those false Teachers who are to arise being at hand.

Watch. Lest Gods Flock be corrupted and destroyed by dangerous Doctrines,
while either ye sleep or neglect the care of the Church.

Remember that by the space of three years. About. To those two years, to wit,
says Ludovicus de Dieu, in which he taught in the School of Tyrannus, must
first be added the three Months, in which before these two years, he taught in
the Synagogue, Act. 19.8 and 10.
then that time also though short, in which he taught at Ephesus, Act. 18.19.
when he came thither with Aquila and Priscilla. For Paul was come a whole year
to Ephesus, with Aquila and Priscilla, before that space of three Months,
although Paul spent the most part of that year in that third journey of his,
wherein he went up to Jerusalem, thence he visited Antioch, Phrygia, and
Galatia, Act. 18.21, 21, and 23.
before he came to Ephesus the second time. Act. 19: 1.


I ceased not to warn every one, Night and Day. As much as to say, I left not
off for one Night or a Day to warn with tears every one of you of his duty,
pitying their lot who were negligent in their Pastoral care.

32. And now. Being to return to you no more.

I commend you to God. That is, I commend and commit you to the care and
protection of God.

And to the Word of his Grace. That is, To the Gospel in which the saving Grace
of God is declared unto Men.

Which. God by that Word of his Grace, or the Gospel.

Is able. That is, Is willing, for the Apostle does not here speak of an Idle
Power in God, but of an active, which by the inclination of his Will is bent
upon doing good.

Build you up. Adhering, to wit, to the Evangelical Institutions, which I
delivered unto you, to perfect and accomplish in you that holiness, which your
wonderful calling to the Faith of Christ requires.

And to give you an inheritance. That is, a firm Possession of eternal Life and
happiness in Heaven. Because that among the Hebrews, things only fallen by
inheritance could not be alienated, therefore they call every firm and
perpetual possession an inheritance, Upon Romans 4.13.
says Grotius.

Among all them which are sanctified. That is, Among all them, who are by the
grace of God separated from the rabble of profane for God himself, and
sanctified by his Spirit, that they might continue his obedient Sons, in
holiness of Life. The Saints are said to inherit Heavenly blessedness, Because,
says Grotius, Upon Ephesians. 1.18.
God will bestow upon them not only the Fruit, but the very propriety thereof.
See below Chapter 26.18. Ephesians. 1.18. and Col. 1.12.

33. Silver, etc. Abraham of old showed a great Spirit, coveting nothing for
himself of the spoil gotten in Battle. Genesis 14.22, 23.
But Paul as much greater, in that he neither required, nor would take any
Sallary from the Ephesians, to maintain himself and his Companions, for his
weightty and saving labors in Preaching the Gospel among them. So he
witnesses his own abstinence, 1 Cor. 9.12, 15, 18. 2 Cor. 11.9. Phil. 4.15. In
like manner Moses protested that he lived among the Israelites, without the
least appearance of covetousness. Also Samuel 1 Samuel Numb. 16.15.
12.3. Gracchus in Gellius being to leave the Province, I have, says he, so
behaved in the Province, that none can truly say, that I have gotten a Shilling
or more in gifts. Jerome being to depart from Rome, Let them tell, says he to
his slanderers, what they ever found in me otherwise then became a Christian.
Whose Money did I get? did I not despise gifts either great or small? Did any
Man's Money sound in my hand?

34. That these hands have Ministered. That is, supplied. It is Remarkable that
one Abdolonymus, a Poor Man in Q. Curtius, has spoken in the same very manner
that Paul does here. These hands, says he, supplied my want. Concerning Paul's
earning with the labor of his own hands a living for himself and his
Companions in the Preaching of the Gospel, see above Chapter 18.3. 1 Cor. 4.12. 1
These. 2.9. 2 These. 3.8. Why may not also the teachers among the Christians,
like this teacher of the Gentiles, when they can, earn their living by their
labor?

To my Necessities. Food and Raiment.

And to them that were with me. Rehearsed above, v. 4.

35. All things. By all things, Such a Phrase is in 1 Cor. 9.25.10.33. Ephesians.
4.15.
or in all things, or altogether.

I have showed unto you. In my self as a Pattern. See 2 These. 3.9.

How that so laboring. Night and Day unto weariness. See 1 Cor. 4.12. 1 These.
2.9.

Ye ought to support the weak. That is, To hold up as it were with the right
hand the scrupulous, who have not as yet a firm and strong understanding, or
have not as yet apprehended what is sound in the Faith, that they fall not. For
such Novices and young Men in Faith and Piety, are I know not how more
suspicious, and do easily believe that such as they mistrust, do all things for
bodily gain, and that for this end the Gospel it self is Preached by them.

And to remember the Words of the Lord Jesus. That is, The Apophthegm of the
Lord Jesus.

How he said. That is, used to say, as I have it by tradition from those, who
heard it from the Lord himself. Or he is said to have said it, because that
although it be not expressed in the same very words, yet that it was his
Doctrine is gathered from his sayings, which are mentioned by the Evangelists.

It is more blessed to give, then to receive. First because, To give is a sign
of abundance, but to receive a sign of want, as Augustine writes. Next because
to give is more honest and a mark of a virtue, to wit, bounty or liberality,
but to receive is no sign of virtue, but either of necessity or of
covetousness. Which Aristotle also observed when he wrote that it was more
proper for virtue to bestow a benefit than to have one bestowed upon it. Eth.
Nicom. Lib. 4. Chapter 1.
Lastly, chiefly because he that liberally gives help to the indigent, Luke 12:
33.16.9.18.22. 1 Timothy 6.19.
shall, for that he gave, have a great reward from God, but he who receives a
benefit shall for the receiving of it have no reward. But yet it is neither
unhonest nor unconvenient, if one shall receive a reward as due to him, for
that which by his honest labor he deserved, provided that this receiving may
be without offense. See Matthew. 10.10. and our litteral explanation there. Luke
10.7. 1 Cor. 9.14. 1 Timothy 5.17, and 18.

36. He kneeled down and prayed. It is a great sign of submission to God and
reverence toward him, that one who prays should kneel. Solomon prayed
fervently with bended knees. Also Daniel Dan. 1 Kings 8.52. 2 Chronicles. 6.13.
6.10. And Jesus Christ, Luke 22.41. and Stephen above Chapter 7.60. and Peter
above Chapter 9.4. and Paul here and below Chapter 21.5. and Ephesians. 3.14. But that to
pray standing was the most commonly received custom among the Jews is clear by
that in Nehemiah, Chapter 9.5.
the People are commanded to stand at Prayer; and Genesis 18.22. where it is in
the Hebrew, Abraham stood before God, the Chaldean renders it Prayed. Neither
is the Verb Standing, otherwise used in Jerem. 15.1.18.20. and Job 30.20. So
Mark 11.25. when ye stand praying. And Luke 18.11. The Pharisee stood and
prayed. See our literal explanation, Matthew. 6.5.

With them all. To wit, With the Elders or Bishops of the Church of Ephesus,
whom he sent for from Ephesus to Miletus to instruct them with wholesome
admonitions. Above v. 21.
Doubtless among other things, Paul in this Prayer to God prayed for Divine
assistance, that he would help the Elders of the Church of Ephesus to perform
these things of which he admonished them.

37. And they all wept sore. To show their sorrow for his future absence.

And fell on Paul's neck and kissed him. As a token of their affection to him.

38. Sorrowing most of all for the Words, etc. As much as to say, They were
affected with grief, that they could scarcely be comforted, for that discourse
of Paul's, by which he cut them off from all hopes of ever seeing him from that
time.

And they accompanied him unto the Ship. That they might see him and speak to
him as long as they could.

CHAP. XXI.
1. ANd it came to pass after we had lanched. I Luke and Paul and the rest of
his Companions in his Journey were carried forth in the Ship.

Having gotten from them. Either simply parted, as Luke 22.41. or as it were
forcibly taken from our Friends the Elders of the Church of Ephesus.

We came with a straight course unto Coos. Cous or Coos, or by a Synaeresis, as
Eustath will have it, Cos is an Island in the Aegean Sea, On Il. B. v. 667.
on the Confines of Caria, as Pomponius Mela affirms. L. 2. C. 7.
Its Inhabitants were anciently called Meropes, and the Island it self Meropis,
as says Stephen. It became Famous by the Birth of Apelle, In Merops.
that most excellent Painter: Whence he is called by Ovid, Art. Am. L. 3.
Coan. It was yet further nobilitatee by being the Native soil of that Divine
old Man (so do the Physicians call Hippocrates,) on whom there is extant a
Distich singular for its Antistrophe. Florileg. var. Epigr. l. 1. c. 39.
Pliny reports that Greece instituted Honors to this Prince of Physicians,
equal to those of Hercules. In this Island was that Famous Temple of
Esculapius, as also that of Juno, of whose Ornaments Theodorus wrote, as
Vitrurius declares. Lib. 1.
The Islanders were very eloquent; hence the Proverb, a Chian will not suffer a
Coan to speak, is applied to those, who being like the Chians addicted to
prating, with their talkativeness hinder others, that are eloquent in their
Speech from speaking. The finest apparel, which was wont to be made of Silk,
for the Ornament of Women, but not that which is consistent with modesty, is
said to have come first from this Island, and they were called substantively in
the Latin Coa, De Art: Am. L. 3. Horat. Sat. l. 1. Sat. 2. v. 109. Hist. An. l.
6.
in the Plural Number. Aristotle says, that Pamphila the Daughter of Latous,
of the same Island, was the Inventrix of these Garments. The reason why they
were invented was, Plin. l. 11. c. 22.
that Women might be as little covered with their Garments, as if they were
naked. Chap. 23.
To which Tibull seems to allude. And Pliny in the aforesaid Book says: Nor
were Men ashamed to make use of these Garments, by reason of their lightness in
Summer. So far are they from wearing Armor, that their very Clothes are a
burden to them. At this day this Island is called Lango.

And the following day unto Rhodes. A most Famous Island, which according to
Ptolomy lib. 5.2. is situated betwixt Icaria and Lycia. It was Renowned for
these Cities, Lindus, Camirus, and Rhodes, as Pliny relates, lib. 5.31. in
which the day is never so Cloudy, but the Sun shines bright some hour or other
of it, Hor. Car. l. 1. Od. 7. Lucan. Pharsal. 8.
witness the same Pliny lib. 2.62. whence the Poets called it bright. Rhode was
of old very rich in Shipping, as appears by Strabo. Its Inhabitants built
Parthenope, Lib. 14.
i. e. Naples among the Opici, and Rhoda in Spain. They first taught the
Spanish Mariners to make Ropes, and Maps, very useful for Man; they also first
imported into Spain Money beaten out of Brass, as Strabo in the forecited Book,
and Mariana testify. De reb. Hisp. l. 1. c. 14.
Rhodes was beautified with 100 Colossi, one of which was reckoned among the
seven wonders of the World. Now these Colossi were Piles of Statues exactly
devised, equal to Towers, for which cause, as many are of opinion, the Rhodians
were called Colossians, to whom the Epistle of St. Paul was written entitled
to the Colossians. Rhodes has been subject to several vicissitudes; after this
it was subject to the Romans; the Sarazens took it in the year of our Lord 615.
The Knights of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem recovered it in the year
1308. and kept it till the year 1602. In which year Solomon the Second defeated
them, and retook it; In lieu whereof, Charles fifth Emperor gave the Knights of
St. John the Island of Malta; whence they are commonly called the Knights of
Malta.

And from thence unto Patara. A City of Lycia, according to Hecataeus in his
Asia, which still retains its name, Geog. Asiae Com. 1.
as Niger affirms, describing the situation of Lycia, and, as he says, not far
from the Sea, where there is a Sea-Port-Town eleven Miles distant from it,
named Phoenix, very dangerous by reason of the rocks hanging out from the
Mountain Taurus. It was first called Sataros, as Pliny relates; afterward by
Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, L. 5. C. 27.
after he had enlarged it, it was named Arsinoe of Lycia, in honor of his
Wife: but the name it had from the beginning prevailed, says Strabo. From this
City Apollo had the Epithet of Pataraean; Lib. 14.
for that in the Winter half year, Ad. Aeneid. l. 9. v. 143. Vide Horat. 3.
Car. Od. 4.
he gave Responses here, as he did at Delos in the Summer, according to
Servius. His Temple made Patara a City of great note, being of equal esteem
with that at Delphos, both for its Riches and Veracity of the Oracle; L. 1. C.
15.
witness Mela. Hence possibly the Spaniards call Fictions Pataratas: for the
Oracles of the Greeks were mere delusions.

2. And finding a Ship sailing over. That is, Having got the opportunity of a
Ship that was about to cross.

Unto Phoenice. Or Phoenicia, a most noted Country of Asia, not far distant
from Rhodes, by the Ethnic Historians comprehended under Syria, but by the
Writers of the New Testament under the Land of Canaan. Hence Stephen affirms
that it was anciently called Chna, which is nothing else but the word Canaan
cut short. This is also confirmed by St. Augustine in his exposition of the
Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans: Whence our Countrymen, being ask't, what
Countrymen they are, while they answer in the Carthaginian Tongue Canani, with
the Corruption only of one letter, which in such cases usually happens, what
else do they say but Chanannites? The Learned are also agreed that the Poeni,
that is, the Africans or Carthaginians, were at first Inhabitants of Phoenicia,
though they differ much in their Etymology. Lib. de Mirabil.
Aristotle deriveth it from Phoenixai, which in the Lingua of the Perrhaebi
signifies to kill, because that when they first crossed the Seas, at whatsoever
place they arrived they put all to the Sword. But I, says the most Learned
Thomas de Pinedo, cannot assent to it, tho the Opinion of so great a Man, while
reason so loudly speaks against it. For if they were desirous of Commerce,
after they had spread their Colonies, it is not likely they would kill the
Inhabitants of the Countries they came to. And although for some time they were
Pirates, as Thucyd. affirms, Lib. 1.
yet it is not probable that they had that name from the Perrhaebi. Others,
among whom Callisthenes, whose Opinion I willingly embrace, deduce it from
Phoenix, which signifies a Palm Tree, which Aristotle opposes, tho against
reason; in which particular Fuller and Scaliger, tho otherwise very learned
Men, show themselves very ridiculous, while he derives that name of Phoenicia
from Phinesias, and the other from Pinnek. Stephanus deduces it from Phoenix
the Son of Agenor or Neptune by Libye. Dionys. Periegeta asserts, that the
Phoenicians owe their Original to a People that dwelt by the Red Sea; that they
first invented the Arts of Navigation, and Astronomy, and did Traffic, says
he in that never to be enough praised Treatise of his entitled Periegesis. In
steering their course they observed Cynosura, that is, the lesser Bear, whereas
the Grecians took their directions from Helice, that is, the greater Bear, as
Ovid has accurately expressed both of them. Fast. l. 3. v. 107.
The Phoenicians were the first Inveners of Letters. For Cadmus is reported to
have been the first that transported them from Phoenicia into Greece, witness
Diodor. Sicul. Of our Writers Pliny speaks thus of Phoenicia, and the
Inventions of the Phoenicians: Those who divide critically will have Phoenicia
to be encompassed by Syria, that it is the Maritim border of Syria, a part of
which is Idumea and Judea, then Phoenicia, finally Syria. All the Sea that lies
before it has the Name of the Phoenician Sea: The people of Phoenicia, were of
great account of old, for that they invented Letters, knowledge of the Stars,
Lib. 3.
and Naval and Military Arts. Hence Lucan, Phoenicians first adventured, if we
may credit Fame, To eternize the Voice, to grav't on an unpolish't Frame.

I am fully persuaded that those Phoenician Letters, were the same which of old
the Canaanites and ancient Hebrews, and the Samaritans at this day use,
whatever the Followers of the Jews Rabbis say to the contrary. Thus far Thomas
de Pinedo. See what we have said above. C. 11. V. 19.


We went aboard, and set forth. That is, Having got aboard that Ship we were
carried forth.

3. Now when we had discovered Cyprus. That is to say, When the Island Cyprus
appeared to us, or was within the reach of our sight. Of this Island, which was
inferior to none in fertility of Wine and Oil, and affluence of all
necessaries, see above.

Having left it on the left hand. C. 4. V. 36.
That is, Having left this Famous Island of Cyprus on our left hand.

We sailed into Syria. Which the Ancients divided into Phoenicia, Palestina and
Caele, as a certain Anonymus Author published by Gothofred affirms. Chap. 17.


And landed at Tire. The Metropolis. of Phoenicia. See what we have said of
Tire and Sidon.

For there the Ship was to unlade her burden. Mat. 11. v. 20.
That is, the Ship was to be emptied of her Goods wherewith it was laden, that
they might be exposed to sale in this flourishing Merchant Town.

4. And finding Disciples. That is, some Christians that dwelt at Tire, see
above. Beza conjectures that the word, Disciples, C. 11. v. 19. and 26.
denoted those that followed Christ, when they were dispersed, and had not yet
Churches appointed: But that the word, Brethren, signified those that had
settled Churches. But that this distinction is without any solid foundation is
apparent from Chap. 9. v. 26. and Chap. 11. v. 29. of the Christians of
Jerusalem; of those of Antioch, C. 14. v. 28. etc. 15. v. 1-10-36. Of those of
Philippi, C. 16. v. 40.

We tarried there seven days. Being not a little solaced with that intimate
fellowship we had with the Christians at Tire.

Who said to Paul through the Spirit. As if he had said, When by the Revelation
of the Holy Spirit they were informed what great hazards Paul would undergo if
he went up to Jerusalem being at the same time ignorant, that Paul was
constrained thereto by an impulse of the same Spirit, they dissuaded him from
going thither; not by the Indictment of the Holy Spirit, but only from a
Principle of Love to Paul.

And when he had accomplished those days. The seven above mentioned at Tire.

We departed. From Tire.

And went our way. That is to say, Proceeded on our Journey to Jerusalem.

And they all brought us on our way. The Christians at Tire, who had an entire
affection to Paul.

And we kneeled down. Seeing this done within that interval of time, which is
betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide, it plainly appears that it was after the times
of the Apostles, that the Primitive Church did introduce the custom of not
worshipping on their knees, as Tertullian and Hierom express it, all
Quinquagesima over, or the fifty days which interveen betwixt the Paschal
Feast, and Pentecost, as the most Learned Christoph. Justellus, Father to the
very Learned Henry, Ad Can. 20. Council. Nicaen.
has observed.

And prayed on the shore. On the Sea sand in a solitary place, apart from the
City: Occasioned indeed by reason of Paul's Journey, but also agreeable to the
custom of the Jews, who were wont on their Fasts to pray on the Shore, De
Jejun. and l. 1. adv. Nation.
as may be seen in Tertullian.

6. And when we had taken our leave one of another. Embracing one another, as
was usual, C. 20. v. 1.
with a kiss of Charity. See above.

We took Ship. We who were to accompany Paul further.

And they. The Christians who inhabited Tire.

Returned home again. Every one to their own Houses.

7. And when we had finished our course. That is, got further on our Voyage.

From Tire we came to Ptolemais. A Town of Phoenicia, formerly called Ace, or
with a Latin termination Aca. It is mentioned by Pliny in these words: L. 5. C.
19.
Ptolemais, which was formerly called Ace, was a Colony of Claudius Caesar.
Delecampius takes notice that it was named Acon in an ancient Manuscript, which
comes nearer the Original name of that Town Acho or Accho, which we read Judge.
1.31. in the Hebrew Text, and here in the Syriack Version. It is said by
Josephus to be a City of Gaillee, De Bell. Jud. l. 2. C. 7.
but that part of Galilee belonged to Phoenicia. And Phoenicia and Palestine,
were comprehended under Syria; whence Writers ascribed their Cities sometimes
to the one, sometimes to the other. It was an ancient and great City, which the
Persians made use of as a seat of War against Egypt, as Strabo relates. The
Coast betwixt this and Tire, Lib. 16.
was encompassed with Banks of sand, whence they were furnished with sand for
making of Glass, as Strabo and Josephus report in the forecited places; the
latter of whom calls it Arce and Actipus, Antiq. Jud. l. 5. C. 1.
which Fuller alleges ought to be utterly exploded as Monsters of Words;
Miscel. Sacr. l. 4. c. 15.
but without any solid ground; for according to Justus the Hebrew in Acho, this
City was likewise called Arce. Ace therefore and Arce was the same Individual
Town, as Dameshek and Darmeshek was the same City which the Latins called
Damascus. By Ptolemy it is called Arca, Geograph. l. 5. C. 15.
and reckoned among the Mediterranean Towns of Phoenicia. Elius Lamprid. in the
Life of Alexander Severus calls it Arca Caesarea and Arcena, who likewise says,
that this Emperor was born there, and that on his Birth day, there was seen in
the same City a Star of the first Magnitude from Morning till night. Eusebius
Bishop of Cesarea, in the first Book of his Chronicles reports, that Alexander
the Emperor, Son to Mammaeas was also born there, in which place he calls this
same City Arcas in the Plural Number. But Actipus is derived from the Hebrew
Kepitha, which was a part of the City Acho, as appears by the Jerusalem Talmud
in the Treatise entitled Shemuoth. C. 6. where you will meet with these following
words: Rabbi (that is, Jehuda Hanasi, or the Prince of the great Sauhedrin,
whom by way of excellency they call Rabbi without any Additament) was in Acho,
and there he saw a certain man ascend from Kepitha. Hence Josephus formed
Actipus, L 95. C. 15. l. 5. c. 16.
which is changed by Ptolomy and Pliny unto Ecdippa. It is true that the same
Pliny mentions Ace and Ecdippa as two distinct Cities, and Ptolomy Ecdippa,
and Ptolemais, and Arca as different Cities of Phoenicia. But in this case more
credit is to be given to Josephus, who affirms that Arce, Actipus, and
Ptolomais are one and the same City, in the Portion of the Tribe of Asher or
Asser. Bochartus says of the same City, The Neotericks call it Acre, which is
most known: Therefore it is read in Benjamen, From Tire it is a days Journey to
Acre, which is Accho, not to Acde, as vulgarly. In 3 Mac. Chap. last toward
the close it is called Ptolomais the Rosary, from the nature of the place.

8. But another day. That is, And the next day, as it is in the common English
Translation.

Departed. From Ptolomais In the Gr. is added here, as also in the English
Translation, They that were with Paul, that is, Paul and his Companions in his
Journey. The like expression is extant above, C. 13. v. 13. See our Commentary
there.

We came. A few days after.

Unto Caesarea, etc. Of Palestine, Of which see above, C. 8. v. 40.

And we entered into the house of Philip. Who had gone thither long ago, after
that he had Baptized the Ethiopian Eunuch above, C. 8. v. 40.

The Evangelist. That is, The Preacher of the Gospel. They are called
Evangelists in the New Testament, who having been set over no particular
Church, assisted the Apostles in spreading the Gospel of Christ. But in
succeeding times it grew out of use, so that they only were called Evangelists
who committed the Life and Doctrine of Christ to Writing. And of those four
Penmen of the Gospel, John is in a peculiar manner Surnamed the Evangelist, to
distinguish him from John the Baptist.

Which. Philip, a Preacher of the Gospel. See above, C. 8. v. 3.

Was one of the seven. Deacons, or Stewards of the Church Goods at Jerusalem,
chosen above C. 6. v. 5. see there.

And abode with him. That is, Were friendly entertained in his House.

9. And the same Man. Excellent Preacher of the Gospel.

Had. Not shut up in a Monastery, but abiding at home with him.

Four Daughters. Beyond all controversy procreated in and by lawful Marriage.

Virgins. Who at that time were not Married, but, that they were afterward
given in Wedlock, writes that incomparably Learned Man Clemens a Presbyter of
Alexandria.

Which did Prophecy. That is, Did foretell things to come by Divine
Inspiration, as Debora the Wife of Lapidoth, Judge. 4.4. and Holda or Hulda the
Wife of Sellum or Shallum 2 Kings 22.14. and Anna the Prophetess, Luke 2.26.

10. And as we tarried there many days. At Caesarea of Palestine, in the House
of Philip the Deacon, refreshing our selves after our late Voyage.

There came down from Judaea. That is, From the Province belonging to the Tribe
of Juda.

A certain Prophet named Agabus. See of him above. C. 11. v. 28.


11. Bound his own hands and feet. It was usual with the Prophets, that what
they predicted in words, to be perceived by the Ear, they also represented to
the Eye, by Obvious and palpable things; As you may see Isa. 20.2, 3. and Jer.
13.1.4.27.2. Ezekiel. 4, 5.-12.

Thus says the Holy Ghost. That is, The Holy Spirit has inspired me from
Heaven, to foretell these things to come.

The Man. That is Paul. This Prophecy of Agabus is eventually fulfilled below,
v. 33.

12. We besought. Luke, Aristarchus, Trophimus, and the rest of Paul's
attendants in his Journeys.

And they of that place. That is, The Christians who dwelt at Caesarea of
Palestine.

That he should not go up. To wit, Paul.

To Jerusalem. The cruel Murderess of the Prophets, and who stoned them with
stones that were sent unto her, Mat. 23. v. 37.

13. Then Paul answered. To give a check to their unseasonable affection to him
wards.

What mean ye to weep, and to break my heart. As if he had said, Alas! my heart
is rent, while I see you thus, tho to no purpose, endeavor to deter me from
going to Jerusalem.

Not to be bound only, but also to die. Not only to endure the bitterness of
Bonds, but even that of Death it self.

In Jerusalem. That is, At Jerusalem, where our Lord Jesus underwent the
infamous Death of the Cross for my Salvations Sake.

I am ready for the name of the Lord Jesus. That is, That I may glorify the
Lord Jesus by my Death. Ones name is usually put for one, as we have observed
before.

14. And when he would not be persuaded. That he should not go to Jerusalem,
and exposed himself to such imminent dangers.

We ceased. To wit, To dissuade him any further from this Journey.

Saying, The will of the Lord be done. Submitting our Affections to the Divine
Will; praying that the Event may be, not according to our Wills, but Gods. So
Epictetus divinely said, I had rather always what God wills come to pass, than
what I. I will be joined and cleave to him, as a Servant and waiting Man; with
him I long, with him I desire, and simply, and in a word, whatever God wills,
that I will.

15. And after those days. Which we passed at Caesarea of Palestine.

We took up our Carriages. Things requisite for our Journey.

And went up to Jerusalem. That is, Took our Journey to Jerusalem. Some think
that by the word [ascend] in Journeying toward Jerusalem, it is implied, that
Jerusalem lies higher than other places. But this word is used to denote a
simle Journey to any place whatever, as you may see, Genesis 35.1.45.9.46.29 and
31.

16. There went also certain of the Disciples. That is to say, Christians.

Of Caesarea. Of Palestine, where we lodged, at Philip the Deacons house.

With us. That accompanied Paul to Jerusalem.

And brought with them. That is, Were accompanied by him, who possibly had come
from Jerusalem to Caesarea, and was thence returning home to Jerusalem.

With whom we should lodge. That is, that I Luke and the rest of Paul's
Companions, and Paul himself should sojourn at his house at Jerusalem at the
Feast of Pentecost now approaching.

Mnason of Cyprus. Born in the Island Cyprus.

An old Disciple. That is, Who now for a considerable time had been a
Christian. Hence we may conjecture that all the Christians dwelling in
Jerusalem, did not sell their Houses above, for this Mnason, an old Disciple of
Christ, C. 4. v. 32 and 34.
who possibly heard Jesus Christ himself teach, seems to have had a house of
his own at Jerusalem, in which he could lodge a great many together.

17. The Brethren received us gladly. That is, The Christians that dwelt at
Jerusalem saluted us most lovingly, and congratulated our coming.

With us. That is, With me Luke and other Companions of Paul in his Journey.

Unto James. The Son of Alphaeus. Of whom see above, c. 12.17. and 15.13. See
also Gal. 1.9.2.12 and 19. There is no mention made of Peter here, nor of the
other Apostles; whence it appears, that they had before that gone from
Jerusalem unto other places, to Preach the Gospel to them.

19. And when he had saluted them. With Brotherly Embraces.

He declared particularly. That is, He gave an account of every thing in order,
or of all, one after another.

What things God had done among the Gentiles. That is, Among the Nations which
were Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel.

By his Ministry. Converting them to the Christian Faith.

20. And when they heard it. How great things God had wrought by the Ministry
of Paul among the Foreign Nations.

They glorified the Lord. That is, They gave thanks, and ascribed the praise to
God, the Author of those good things in propagating the Gospel, and bringing
Men to Salvation.

And they said unto him. To wit, Paul.

Thou see Brother, how many Thousands, etc. As if they said, You are not
ignorant, Brother, how great a multitude of Jews there is, who although they have
embraced Christianity, yet are all so fervently Zealous for the Legal
Ceremonies, that if there be any neglect of them, will be highly offended. Of
such Zeal or fervent Affection, See Romans 10.2. Gal. 1.14.

21. And they are informed, etc. As if they said, It has been reported to those
Zealous avouchers of the Mosaic Rites, that thou teach the Jews that dwell
dispersed among the Gentiles, that the statutes, that Moses appointed, are to
be rejected, nor are their Sons to be Circumcised, nor other Rites prescribed
in the Law to be observed. So they calumniated Paul that being instructed by
Christ, he taught, that the Legal Ceremonies, now when Christ is revealed, were
not necessary to Salvation, tho, in such things, now not necessary but
instituted by God of old, he thought fit for a while to bear with them, who
being not fully enlighted, did think that they were still in force, and
accommodated himself to them in such things by Christian Charity as you may see
above. C. 16. v. 3. 1 Cor. 9. v. 20. See above, C. 15. v. 2 and 8.


Neither to walk after the customs That is, Nor observe other Rites appointed
in the Law.

What is it therefore? Supply to be done, that the Affections of so great a
Multitude of Believers may be reconciled to thee.

Must needs, etc. That is, It cannot otherwise be, but that a multitude of Jews
converted to Christ will come together to visit you, when they have heard,
which cannot be concealed, that you are come hither to Jerusalem.

23. Four Men which have a vow on them. That is, Who have bound themselves with
a vow of a Nazarite. Of these Nazarites, see Numb. 6.

24. Them take, and purify thy self with them. That is, Add thy self a fifth
to these four Men, who of believing Jews have taken a Vow of a Nazarite, and be
thou with them a Nazarite to the Lord, or abstain from worldly business; the
Hebrew Nown Nazir signifies one sanctified, or separated and consecrated to
the Lord. Numb. 6. v. 2. and 5.


And be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads. That is, And
when the time of the said Vow of a Nazarite is fulfilled, add also thy share of
the charges for Oblations, which these four Nazarites shall offer to God, that
when they have offered them, Numb. 6. v. 18. and 19.
they may leave their Hair at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.

And all may know. Judaizing Christians, who by reason of their number ought
neither to be despised, nor offended.

That those things whereof they were informed concerning thee. That is, The
rumor, whereby it was reported to them that thou art an Enemy to the Law of
Moses.

Are nothing. That is, To be a lying and Malicious famation.

But that thou thy self also walk orderly, and keep the Law. Seeing thou
art an observer of the Rites of the Law.

25. As touching the Gentiles, etc. As if they said, There is no cause why you
should fear, lest, if thou observe these Rites of the Law, those of the
Gentiles who have embraced the Faith of Christ, should by your example be
persuaded, that they also are obliged to observe the Rites of the Law of Moses;
for, as you you very well know, we have sent unto them a Synodical Epistle by
the unanimous Judgment of the Church, wherein we have signified, that no Legal
Rites are necessary to be observed by them, save abstaining from things offered
to Idols, and from Blood, and from Strangled, and from Fornication. See what we
have said above. C. 15.1, 5, 20, 21, 22, 23, 28, 29 and 30.


26. Then Paul. Hearkening to the advice of the Brethren, that he might avoid
giving of offense.

Took the men. viz. Those four Nazarites, of which above v. 23.

And the next day purifying himself with them. That is, Being together with
them separated from them who were accounted common or unclean.

He entered into the Temple. Of Jerusalem.

To signify, etc. Declaring to the Priests in how many days the Vow of a
Nazarite taken by him and his Companions would be fulfilled, that having
finished it, the Sacrifices appointed by the Law might be offered for them.
Numb. 6.14, 15.


27. And when the seven days were almost ended. That is, When those seven days
were now near fulfilled, after which Paul and the other four Nazarites were to
quit their Vow of Nazarite.

The Jews which were of Asia. viz. Who had come from Ephesus, the Metropolis of
Asia, strictlier so called, to Jerusalem to celebrate the Feast of Pentecost
there.

When they saw him in the Temple. That is, Beheld Paul in the Temple of
Jerusalem.

They stirred up all the People. That is, The Multitude of People that were
there present.

And laid hands on him, crying. That is, And they laid hold on him violently,
thus complaining.

28. Against the People. Of Israel.

And the Law. Delivered by God to Moses.

And this place. That is, This holy Temple of Jerusalem.

Teaches all Men every where. This false accusation and reproach was thrown
upon Paul here and above, because he taught, C. 17. v. 6.
that not only the Jewish Nation were to be accounted the People of God, but
all who of what Nation soever believed in Christ, and lived soberly righteously
and Godly; that the Force and Obligation of Typick Ceremonies, or those which
were previous to the coming of Christ had ceased; that since the time that the
Evangelick Law began to be promulged, the Worship of God, who must be
Worshipped in Spirit and Truth, was not restricted to the Temple of Jerusalem.
On the same cause and occasion they accused and calumniated Stephen above. C.
6. v. 13.


And Greeks also. Profane, and Aliens to the People of God.

He has brought into the Temple. viz. Into that part of the Temple into which
it was lawful only for the Israelites, or those that were initiated in the
Israelitick holy Mysteries to enter: Otherwise there was an outer Court, which
was apart from the Temple, and that Court was open to Jews and Gentiles alike,
nor were any shut out of it, save Women lately delivered of a Child, and those
that were troubled with an Issue of Blood, or Monthely flowers.

And has polluted this holy place. That is, And so he has defiled and
profaned that stately Temple of Jerusalem, consecrated for the Worship of the
Divine Majesty.

29. For they had seen. viz. Some of those Jews of Ephesus, Paul's Accusers, or
rather Calumniators.

Trophimus an Ephesian. Known by them that he was a Heathen by Birth, nor had
he been initiated in the Jewish Religion. Of this Trophimus there is mention
made above. C. 20.4. and 2 Timothy 4.20.


In the City. viz. Jerusalem.

With him. viz. Paul.

Whom. Paul's very intimate Friend.

They supposed. viz. Being blinded with an insatiable desire of mocking and
Calumniating Paul.

30. And all the City was moved, etc. As if he said, In the mean while by the
outcry of those Ephesian Jews, the report of Paul's accusation, was come to the
Ears of almost all Citizens and Inhabitants, and those who at that time
sojourned at Jerusalem, whereby the People being incensed, run together, and
with a mad violence rush upon Paul, and draw him forth out of the Temple, with
design to kill him there, and lest the Gentiles should make an Irruption into
the Temple on his revenge, when they had drawn him out of the Temple, the
Levites, the Porters immediately shut the Gates of the Temple.

31. And as they went about to kill him. That is, But when the enraged
multitude attempted to beat Paul to Death.

Tidings came unto the chief Captain of the Band. That is, The Colonel of that
Regiment, which on Festival days, and therefore also in Pentecost, kept a Guard
in the Porches of the Temple, for the appeasing of all Tumults, See Job. 18.22.
if any should arise.

That all Jerusalem was in an Vproar. That is, In a furious Tumult.

32. Who. viz. The Governor or Colonel of the Regiment, or, as he is called by
the Greeks, Chiliarchos. It was an order in the Roman Militia, that the
Soldiers should meet together in the Morning to salute the Centurions, and they
the Tribunes or Colonels. Now Hecatontarchi, were called the Centurions, who
were set over an hundred Men: Pentecontarchi who were over Fifty: Decarchi or
Decurions who were set over Ten.

Ran down. Possibly from the Castle.

To them. viz. The Tumultuous Jews.

They left beating Paul. Being frightened with the coming of the Colonel who
had brought with him both common Soldiers and Captains for the appeasing of the
Uproar.

33. Then, etc. As if he said, But when the Colonel was come to that place in
which the Jews beat Paul, with so great an Uproar, having delivered him out of
the Jews hands, he commanded him to be bound with Chains, and he bound him hand
and foot, he asked who he was, and what he had done, that he might know the
cause why the Jews hated him so extremely, that they went about to kill him
with stripes, with so great a Hubbub.

34. He commanded him to be carried into the Camp. The English Translation
renders here the Greek word Parembole into the Castle, as Lud. de Dieu
interprets it. Castrum in the singular Number is a place fenced with Walls,
otherwise called a Castle or Tower; but Castra in the Plural denotes the place
where Soldiers fixed their Tents, or the Tents themselves in which Soldiers
lie. (...) signifies both, but since Camps use not to be set up in a City, it
seems here rather to signify a Castle, or that Castle which is said to have
been called Antonian, built by Herod the Great in Honor of Antony.

35. And when he came upon the Stairs. By which they went up to the Antonian
Castle.

So it was, etc. That is, By reason of the great Crowd of the multitude that
pressed after, and followed, he was rather carried by the Soldiers then led by
them.

For there followed. Paul.

Away with him. That is, Punish him with a deserved Death. Eusebius relates
that the Heathens used to cry out to the Judge against the Christians, 4 Hist.
14.
when they would have them speedily put to Death (...), Take away these wicked
Men.

37. And as Paul was to be led into the Castle. That is, While he was yet upon
the Stairs, in the entry of the Antonian Castle in a more open place.

He said unto the Captain. In the Greek Tongue. After the Macedonian Conquest
the Greeks having extended their Dominion over several Nations, the Greek
Language was become as it were common among the Nations of Asia and Egypt.

Who. The chief Captain hearing Paul ask in the Greek Tongue leave to speak.

Can thou speak Greek? In the Original it is curtly expressed, know thou
Greek? The full speech is extant, Neh. 13.24. And they could not speak Hebrew.

Art not thou that Egyptian. False Prophet.

Which before these days. In the beginning of Nero's Reign.

Made an Vproar. That is, Stirred'st up Sedition.

And leddest out into the Wilderness. Such Impostors used to draw men out into
desert places, that there they might safely join their Forces, as you may see
frequently in Josephus. See Mat. 24.26.

Four thousand Men. At the first indeed that false Prophet had but so many
Followers, but afterward they increased to almost thirty thousand, whom he led
from the Wilderness to Mount Olivet, promising himself, that at his Command the
Walls of Jerusalem would fall down, whereby he would have an easy entrance
into the City. But while he was thus puffed up with the vain hopes of those
Golden Mountains he promised himself, his Forces were routed by Felix his Army,
four thousand of them being slain, two thousand taken Prisoners, and the rest
together with the false Prophet put to flight. This story is related by
Josephus and Eusebius. 20 Ant. 6. 2 Bell. jud. 12.2. Hist. 21. and in Chronic.


Murderers. To express this, A Latin Word is made use of in the Greek Text,
derived from Sica, which word has great affinity with the Hebrew (...),
signifying a Knife; they were called Sicarii, who used to assail innocent Men
unawares, and run them throw the Breast with a short Sword. Some are of
Opinion, says the very well Learned Drusius, that the Sicarii, who were of the
followers of Judas of Galilee, did acknowledge no Lord but God only, Orig. Jud.
l. 18. c. 2. and Lib. 20. c. 7.
of whom Josephus speaks. Others will have them to be the same with the
Hessaei, of which number is Theophylact. It is possible that some of this Sect
were Sicarii. For the Hessaei did fight very fiercely against the Romans, and
rather than they would call Caesar Lord, did choose to undergo most bitter
Tortures, yea, made no scruple of losing their dearest Blood, and willingly
gave themselves over to Death. Of these Sicarii Scaliger writes. Animadve.
Eusebius. p. 177. Col. 1.
Josephus says that the followers of Judas; save in this, that they would give
no Man the Title of Lord, were in all other points Pharisees. On the other
hand, Rabbi Abraham Zacuth of Salamanca in the Book Johasin affirms that
Judas of Galilee was the Author of the Sect of the Essens, who are commonly
called Nazarites, that is, Holy, and Assideans, that is, Godly. And also that
it was by the Instigation of the Essens, that the Jews rebelled against the
Romans; for they said that God only had right to Dominion over Men, nor ought
any other to assume the Title of Lord, but God who alone is blessed and to be
praised.

39. But Paul said, I am a Man who am a Jew. And not an Egyptian.

Of Tarsus, etc. As if he said, But a Citizen of Tarsus a City of considerable
note in Cilicia. See what we have said above of Tarsus, C. 7. v. 58. etc. 9. v.
30.
and of Cilicia.

Suffer me to speak unto the People. C. 6. v. 9.
That I may vindicate my innocence as to the crimes they charge me with.

40. And when he. viz. The Chief Captain of the Regiment.

Had given license. To Paul to plead his cause with the People.

Paul stood on the Stairs. Of the Antonian Castle whither by the Chief Captains
order he was brought.

He beck'ned with the Hand to the People. That is, by the beck of his Hand
requiring silence.

He spoke. To the People of the Jews.

In the Hebrew Tongue. Which was then in use among the Jews, that is, the
Syro-Hebraean, as appears from a great many places in the New Testament, where
several sayings of our Lord Jesus and his Apostles are expressed in their Mother
Tongue. But it seems that Syro-Hebraean Speech, or the Hebrew mixed with the
Syrian Dialect, was not unknown at that time to the Jews, that were dispersed
among other Nations. For seeing very many used to come to Jerusalem on days of
greater Solemnity, they learned that Speech that was usual in that City, which
was the Metropolis of all the Jews, wherever their place of abode was.

CHAP. XXII.
1. MEN, Brethren and Fathers. See above, c. 7. v. 2.

Hear ye my defense which I now make unto you. That is, My defense, whereby I
vindicate my self from the accusation of my Adversaries.

2. And when they heard that he spoke in the Hebrew Tongue. See above, c. 21.
v. 40.

They kept the more silence. Because the Hebrew was more acceptable to them, as
being Hebrews.

And he says. Paul further continued his discourse thus.

3. I am verily a Man which am a Jew. Deducing my Original from Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob.

Born in Tarsus a City of Cilicia. See above c. 6.9.7.58.9.30.

Brought up. Not from his Childhood, which it is probable he past at Tarsus in
his own Country, but from his Youth; viz. that Paul having been from a Child
carefully brought up in the Greekish Learning, now become a Youth, came to
Jerusalem, in regard he was a Jew by Nation, that he might be there instructed
more fully in sacred Learning in the Company of Gamaliel, by him. Of this
Gamaliel see above c. 5. v. 34.

In this City. Jerusalem, the chief City of the Jews.

At the Feet of Gamaliel. A very modest self-extenuating of himself. For he
does not, as the excellently Learned Jo. Christoph. Wagenseilius observes,
arrogantly make his boast that he had been his Companion and Familiar, and had
participated with him in sacred and profane things as his Fellow; but rather
humbly professes that he was prostrate as it were at the feet of that great
Doctor, and whose Memory, being lately deceased, was in high veneration among
all the Jews, and that in this low state, he took his entertainment of him.
This is usual among the Jews, that speaking reverently of others, they lay
themselves as it were at their feet. Abigail is an excellent instance of this,
1 Samuel 25.41. And she arose, and bowed her face to the Earth, and said, Behold
let thine Handmaid be a Servant to wash the feet of the Servants of my Lord. To
the same purpose is that excellent saying of Jose Son of Joeser in Pirke Avoth,
Let thy house be a Receptacle for the Wise, and roll thy self in the dust of
their feet. For this saying has no other sense, than what the Commentators have
expressed it in, that is, by the words; and wallow thy self in the dust of their
feet, this is enjoined; Be humble and attend constantly on the Wise. Confut.
impii Carminis R. Lipman.
Thus far the Learned Wagenseilius.

Taught. Interpreters commit an error while they connect the words, at the feet
of Gamaliel, with the Word Taught, because it rather agrees with the foregoing
Words, brought up in this City, and Paul signifies, that he was fed and was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, but not that he was instructed in Learning
at Gamaliel's feet. The Syrian Interpreter takes the words in the same sense,
whence it is that he is so careful in leaving a difference between Paul's
Nativity, Education, and Instruction, by Copulative and Disjunctive Particles.
He translateth the words thus: I am a Man, a Jew, and was born in Tarsus of
Cilicia, but brought up in this City at the feet of Gamaliel: and I was
perfectly instructed in the Law of our Fathers. Furthermore, in Gamaliels time,
the Scholars stood as they were taught by their Masters, who used to sit. For
so the Rabbis deliver in Megilla, page 21. a. that from the time of Moses, to
that of Gamaliel, Scholars in no other postures save that of standing, attended
the Instructions of their Masters who taught sitting. But that after the Death
of Gamaliel, the World was more than ordinarily infested with diseases, and so
that custom was introduced for Scholars to sit by their Masters, as they
imbibed their Instructions. Whence it is said in Mishna, that after Gamaliel 's
Death the reverence of the Law vanished. But that this was a custom amongst the
ancient Jews, that the Teachers sat, and the Scholars and other Auditors stood
upright on their Feet, appears plainly from the Gospel, as you may see Mat.
5.1, 2, 3. C. 23. v. 2. and if we credit the Authority of the Syrian
Interpreter, Mar. 4.1. But since the time that it became a custom for Scholars
to sit by their Masters, to wit after Gamaliel's decease, a little before the
destruction of the second Temple, the Master used to sit in the head, and the
Scholars in time of teaching, used to sit by him on each side Semicircle-wise;
nor did any sit behind the back of the Teacher, that they might all behold
their Master, and hear his discourse, says Maimonides. In Hilchot. Talmud.
Tora. c. 4. Number. 2.
But tho none of the Pharisees or Scribes before the Decease of Gamaliel, used
sitting as a common posture both to Teacher and Hearer, yet that Christ
sometimes used it, and out of tenderness to his hearers, sometimes permitted
them contrary to the received custom, after they had stood longer than
ordinary, to sit down, that they might refresh their Limbs, that were fatigated
by long standing, that they might be able more attentively to give ear, appears
from Mar. 3. v. 32, 34.

According to the perfect manner of the Law of our Fathers. In the Greek it is,
as the Learned Beza Interprets it, according to the exact form of the Law of
our Fathers. Where the Learned Lud. de Dieu, extraordinarily well versed both
in the Holy Tongues and Learning, by the Law of our Fathers does not simply
understand that Law which their Fathers had received from God by Moses, but
that Tradition which they had received from their Fathers. It, says he,
denotes the Religion of the Pharisees, which in a great measure consisted of
the Traditions they had from their Fathers, of which Paul says, Gal. 1.14.
that in times past he was a great Zealot, and when he attributes strictness to
that Sect, he says the same as below, c. 26. v. 5. The meaning therefore is,
that he was instructed in Pharisaism, which is the most accurate Form of the
Law of the Fathers. Now this Gamaliel was a very Famous Master, among others,
of the sect of the Pharisees.

Zealous toward God. The vulgar Latin Interpreter reads it Zealous of the Law,
whereas the common reading in the Greek Text has it Zealous toward God. Paul
professes that he was a Zealot of God by a Hebraism very usual in Scripture,
that is, that he was moved with a hot Zeal against those who did not observe
the Law of Moses, as it is augmented by the Traditions of the Pharisees. See
Gal. 1. v. 14.

As ye all are this Day. Paul compares himself when in this hot Zeal, to the
Jews that were risen up against him; to whom also he attributes a Zeal of God,
Romans 10.2.
or ardent Study toward the observation of the Law, though not according to
knowledge.

4. This way. That is, the Christian Religion, for which I am now in Bonds. C.
9. v. 2. c. 18. v. 25, 28. c. 19. v. 9, 25.
So is way taken above.

I persecuted unto the Death, etc. That is, I contemned it, and abhorred it as
a loathsome and pernicious Plague, so that I cast the Professors of it into
Prison without regard to sex, and caused them to be cruelly murdered. See
above. C. 7. v. 48. c. 8. v. 1, 3. c. 9. v. 1, 2.


As also the High Priest. That is, The Prince of the great Sanhedrin. See
above, c. 9. v. 1.

Does bear me Witness. That is, who knowing these things very well, can bear
witness to the truth of them.

And all the Estate of the Elders. That is, And the rest of the Senators of the
great Sanhedrin. St. Luke, says Seldom, both in the Gospel, and also in the
Acts, made use of the Word Presbyterion, which the vulgar Latin Interpreter
renders Seniors or Elders to signify the great Sanhedrin. See Mat. 26. v. 59.
and Luke 22.66.

From whom, etc. See above c. 9. v. 1, 2.

I received Letters. That is, When I had received Letters or having received
Letters, whereby Power was given me to do that which I designed.

Unto the Brethren. That is, to other Jews and their Synagogues.

To be punished. That is, That they might be cruelly tortured and put to Death.

6. And it came to pass, that as I made my Journey. That is, Hurried on with a
Blind rage, I might bring my hot Zeal against the Disciples of Jesus to Effect.

And was come nigh unto Damascus. See above c. 9. v. 2, 3.

At Noon. The Greek has as the English Translation, about Noon.

Suddenly. That is, In a trice, beyond my expectation.

Shone from Heaven. Like Lightening.

Me. Supply from Chap. 26. v. 13. And those who were Journeying with me.

A great Light. Much surpassing the Noonday brightness of the Sun, as you may
see below c. 26. v. 13.

7. And I fell unto the ground. That is, But when I was stricken with that
sudden light, I fell to the ground. C. 9. v. 4.
See above.

I, etc. See above c. 9. v. 5.

9. And they that were with me. My Companions in that Journey to Damascus.

The Light. Which descended from Heaven, shined about me and them.

But they heard not the Voice. That is, They understood it not. See above c. 9.
v. 7.

10. What shall I do? That is, What would thou have me do. See above c. 9. v. 6.

Arise. viz. From the ground on which thou lie prostrate.

Go to Damascus. That is, continue thy Journey to Damascus, which thou
undertookest with design to deliver over to punishment, those who are addicted
to my Worship, changing only thy purpose thou had in thy Journey.

And there it shall be told thee. By Ananias my Disciple.

Of all things which are appointed for thee to do. That is, Which I have
revealed to him as by me constituted and ordained, C. 9. v. 6.
what thou should do. See above.

11. And when I could not see, etc. See above, c. 9. v. 8.

12. Ananias. Of him see above, c. 9. v. 10.

A devout Man according to the Law. That is, Who adores and worships God
rightly according to the Tenor of the Law delivered from God by Moses

Having a good report. viz. Of his Devotion to God.

Of all the Jews which dwell. Supply there, viz. At Damascus.

13. Came unto me. Into the Street of Damascus which is called Straight. See
above, c. 9. v. 11 and 17.

And stood and said unto me. That is, Having laid his hands upon me, as appears
above, c. 9. v. 17.

Receive thy sight. Which thou had lost, and look upon me.

The same hour. That is, The same point of Time. See c. 9.18.

I looked up upon him. That is, Having my sight, which I had lost, restored
again, I beheld him.

14. The God of our Fathers. That is, The true God who of old adopted our
Forefathers the Patriarchs, maintainers of his Worship.

Has preordained thee. The Greek, as the English Translation have, he has
chosen thee. For the Greek word properly signifies to take that in your hands
which ye would make use of, whether it have a reference to the Thing or Person.
Hence the Hebrew word (...) to take, is by the Greek Interpreters translated by
this word, Jos. 3.12. Take unto you twelve Men. See also 2 Mac. 3.7, etc. 8. v.
9. The Famous Beza is of opinion that this manner of speaking is borrowed from
Artificers, who take the thing that is to be made into their hands, having
before deliberated, what to make, and for what end. See above. C. 9. v. 15. and
beneath c. 26. v. 16.


That thou should know his Will. Revealed by Jesus Christ touching the
things which are necessary to be believed and done in order to eternal Life.

And see that just one. To wit, The Messiah promised in the Law and the
Prophets, risen from the dead, whose brightness did so dazzle thy Eyes, that
thou thereby becamest blind. See what we have said above. C. 3. v. 14 and 7. v.
52.


And should hear the Voice of his Mouth. Directed to you, while enlightened
with a heavenly light, in your Journey to Damascus, ye saw him.

15. For thou shall, etc. As if he had said, And for that end the Lord Jesus
exhibited himself, to be heard and seen by thee, that before all Nations
whither thou shall happen to go, or converse with, thou may bear witness
that he is risen from the dead, and was seen by thee in the splendour and
brightness of that heavenly light, which being darted on thee, did grievously
dazzle thy Eyes, and that by his own Mouth he Commanded thee to Preach that
Gospel, the knowledge of which thou receivedst from himself, among all Nations.
C. 26.17, 18.
See below.

16. And now, etc. As if he had said, Now therefore without delay be thou
initiated by Baptism, instituted by Christ, and by this dipping of thy Body in
Water, profess that by Faith in Jesus Christ, thou art washed, or to be washed,
from the inward defilements of thy Mind, or from the pollutions of Sin. See
what is said on c. 2. v. 38. Baptism is a dipping, and was celebrated of old
according to the import and Notion of the Word: Now only Rhantism is in use
with the generality in the West, not Immersion or Dipping, In Ep. ad Andr.
Colv. Script. Kal Jul. 1644.
says the Learned Salmasius.

Calling on the Name of the Lord. To wit, The Lord Jesus Christ. Those that
believe in Christ, and are obedient to him, and profess his Worship, are
described thus; that they are those who call upon the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as you may see above. Hence in the Invocation of the name of Christ are
comprehended, C. 9. v. 14. and 21. 1 Cor. 1. v. 2.
Faith in Christ, a Religious profession of his Worship, and an unfeigned
obedience to his Commands.

17. And it came to pass that when I was come again, etc. As if he had said, It
happened to me after I had returned to Jerusalem, on the fourth year after my
Conversion to Jesus Christ, that my bodily senses being benumbed, I had been in
a rapture out of my self, when embracing an occasion of conferring with the
Jews about Faith in the same Jesus Christ, I prayed in the Temple of Jerusalem,
in which the Solemn Worship of God used to be performed by the Jews. C. 9. v.
26 and 10. v. 10.
See above.

In a trance. This Ecstasy of his, must not be confounded with his rapture into
the third Heaven. 2 Cor. 12.2.

18. And saw him, etc. As if he had said, And so the Lord Jesus, whom I saw
while enlightened with Divine light as I was Sojourning to Damascus, appeared
again a second time to me, being as it were in a rapture beside my self, and
commanded me to depart quickly from Jerusalem, because the Jews the Inhabitants
thereof would stubbornly withstand my Preaching of him, and bearing witness to
his Apparitions to me. See above, c. 9. v. 29.

19. And I said, etc. As if he had said, But I being very desirous of Preaching
the Gospel there, where I had opposed it before, did urge that I might be
permitted to stay longer at Jerusalem; saying; Lord Jesus, may not some of the
Jews at Jerusalem attributing my Faith in thee to a great and just cause,
embrace it when Preached by me, seeing they all know that I was an inveterate
Enemy to thy Servants, that so far as I could or had liberty, I beat and
imprisoned them cruelly, and unmercifully in every Synagogue, or Juridical
Congregation. See above v. 4. and Grot. in Mat. 10.17.

20. And when the Blood of Stephen was shed. By Stoning him. C. 7.59.
Of which above.

Thy Martyr. That is, Who was the first of the Martyrs or Witnesses peculiarly
so called, who not only witnessed with a Verbal confession, as those did whom
the Ecclesiastic Historians called Confessors, but also Sealed and confirmed
their Testimony with their Blood, that was violently shed by their Adversaries
for their Testimony of Christ and his Doctrine.

I. Supply, As the Jews at Jerusalem know very well themselves.

Was standing by and consenting. That is, I stood by, not only as a Spectator,
but also as an aprover of what was done.

And kept, etc. As if he had said, And that I approved it, I plainly
demonstrated, in that I kept the Cloaks, See above c. 7. v. 58.
or upper Garments of those that stoned him, when they were laid down at my
Feet.

21. And he said. The Lord Jesus, reiterating his Command.

To me. Wrangling.

Go. That is, Be gone quickly from Jerusalem.

I will send thee far off unto the Gentiles. That is, I will have thee
presently to go to the Nations far distant from Jerusalem, as my peculiar
Apostle and Ambassador to them, that there thou may Preach the Gospel among
the Nations, Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, living without the Covenant
of God, without the Promises, destitute of the knowledge of Gods Will, and that
thou may convert them to me, who am rejected indeed by the Jews, but, the
Author of Eternal Life to all those that are obedient to me. See Gal. 1.16.2.8.
2.8. Ephesians. 2.12, 13.3.8. 1 Timothy 2.7. 2 Timothy 1.11.


22. And they gave audience unto this Word. That is to say, The Jews who were
there present were attentive, until Paul in the now mentioned words, had
intimated, according to the Prophesy of Moses Deuteronomy. 32.21. and Isai. c. 65.1.
that the Jews being rejected as unworthy because of their unbelief, the
Messiah, who is promised in the Law and the Prophets, would cull out to himself
a People out of those strange Nations, which they bore such a deadly hatred to.

And then lift up their Voices. As if he had said, But as soon as Paul had said
these things about the Conversion of the Gentiles to Christ, the Jews that were
hearing him could not refrain from exclaiming against him, out of a bitter
hatred and detestation.

And said. viz. To the chief Captain of the Soldiers.

Away with such a fellow from the Earth. That is, Punish this base and wicked
Villain with a deserved Death.

For it is not fit that he should live. That is to say, He is unworthy that he
should live a minute longer.

23. And as they cried out, etc. As if he had said, While these Jews, by their
Outrageous Outcrys, casting off their Garments like Madmen, and throwing of
dust into the Air, bewrayed Minds more than ordinarily provoked and enraged.

24. The chief Captain commanded him to be brought into the Castle. C. 21. v.
34.
See above.

And bad that he should be examined by scourging. That is, That they might
extort a Confession of the Truth from Paul, by inflicting of stripes on him.

That he might know. That is, That having wrested a confession from Paul, the
chief Captain might be informed.

For what cause. That is to say, Mat. 27.37. and Mar. 15.26.
For what Crime. Cause is frequently put for Crime.

They cried so against him. That is, The Jews cried out so madly against him,
when yet they could not charge him with any particular Crime.

25. And as they bound him with thongs. In the Greek it is, Stretched him out
with Cords. That is, but when the Soldiers had stretched forth Paul, according
to custom bound with Ropes. In the Talmud, Lib. (...) c. 3.
says the most Famous Lud. de Dien, where the Rites are described that were
used to be performed to him that was to be Scourged it is read, How is he
Scourged? Both his hands were bound to a Column on either side. That Column was
a piece of Wood fastened in the Ground, of the height of a Cubit and a half,
that he that was to be Scourged, might lie bent upon it. For as the Misna
expresses it, he was not beat standing or sitting, but bowed downwards, Deuteronomy.
25.2.
because it is written, the Judge shall cause him to lie down. And that the
Executioner might the more conveniently beat him so ordered, a Stone was set
behind the Criminal, on which the Minister of the Synagogue stood. By reason of
this Rite possibly Luke used this word (...), that the Preposition (...) may
denote, that Paul was so stretched out that with the upper part of his Body, he
lay prone on the Pillar. The Arabian, says the now cited Lud. de Dieu, seems
to have had respect to another Ceremony, also in use among the Eastern Nations,
with whom the Criminal being prostrate was so stretched out, that on both sides
the Officers did hold his head and feet, that he might not evade or decline the
stripes of him he was scourged by. Hence he translateth it. And when they had
stretched him out between the Lictors, some of whom, to wit, held the Criminal
with Cords at the head, others by the feet. Nor does the Aethiopick much recede
from it, And when having bound him they drew his feet.

Paul said unto the Centurion that stood by. Paul bound with Cords, and
stretched forth, straight ready to be scourged, repelled the injury by Lawful
helps administered by God, saying to the Centurion whom the Chief Captain had
left in charge with this Torture for the Extorting a Confession of the truth
from Paul.

If. That is, Whether, as elsewhere frequently.

A Man that is a Roman. That is, Who has a right to the privilege of the Roman
City. Tarsus, Paul's Native City, says Grotius, was not a Colony, but a free
City, according to the Testimony of Pliny. Appianus says this freedom was
conferred by Antonius. L. 5. C. 27. Civil. 5.
And Dion Chrysostomus, relates several privileges that Augustus bestowed on
the City of Tarsus, but not the right of a Colony, or Freehold, as belonged to
Roman Cities, nor does Ulpianus mention Tarsus among the Colonies of Cilicia.
It remains, therefore, that some of Paul's Predecessors procured that
Privilege to himself, in the Civil Wars, that happened betwixt Caesar
Augustus, and Brutus, and Cassius, or betwixt the same Caesar and Antony.

Uncondemned. Gr. Unjudged. That is, without knowing the cause. C. 16. v. 36.
See above.

Is it Lawful for you to scourge? The Porcian and Sempronian Laws exempted a
Roman Citizen from stripes in a Roman judiciatory, but not so in a Jewish, if
any of the Jews were to be beat according to their own Laws. Hence Paul who by
birth was a Roman Citizen, yet as a Jew he received of the Jews five times
forty stripes save one. 2 Cor. 11.24.
Learned Seldom proves that by the favor of the Emperors, Ex C. Tit. de Jud.
l. 8. Dion. l. 37. and Xiphilin in Pomp.
the Jews were allowed even in Rome to put some of their judicial Laws in
execution among themselves.

26. The Centurion. That is, The Captain of a hundred Soldiers, of whom see in
the preceding verse.

Went and told the chief Captain. The Prefect of a thousand Soldiers, C. 21. v.
31.
of whom above.

For this Man. Of whom ye commanded me to extort a confession by infflicting
stripes on him.

Is a Roman. Whom the Law forbids to be scourged.

27. Said unto him. viz. To Paul who was bound with Cords.

If. That is, Whether, as above. V. 25.
And frequently elsewhere.

A Roman. That is, endowed with the privileges of the Roman City. For the
Chief Captain knew very well by Paul's Speech that he was not born at Rome, but
at Tarsus.

28. I. Chief Captain.

With a great Sum. That is, With great difficulty, and not without paying a
great sum for it.

Obtained this Freedom. That is, The privilege of the Roman City. This
privilege that before used to be freely given, through the avarice of the
Claudian times, Lib. 5.
as Tacitus expresses it, began to be sold. Salvianus says, that the Title of
Roman Citizen was purchased at a great rate.

And Paul said; But I was free born. That is, It Is not a late purchase has
made me a Roman Citizen, but my very birth. For I am descended of Progenitors
that were free born Citizens. See what we have said above. v. 25.

29. Then Straightway. By the Chief Captains Command.

They departed from him. viz. From Paul, by Birth a Roman Citizen, and
therefore exempted from being scourged by the Porcian Law.

Which should have examined him. That is to say, Who by the said Chief Captin,
before he knew that Paul was a Roman Citizen, were commanded by scourging to
extort from Paul a Confession of his Crime, for which the Jews did in so great
a rage exclaim against him.

And because he had bound him. The word And redounds here. For the meaning is
not, that the chief Captain also knew, that he had bound Paul, for this he
could not be ignorant of: But that he feared, when he understood that Paul was
a Roman Citizen, lest he should be called to account, for that he had commanded
a Roman Citizen to be bound with Chains. C. 21. v. 33.
See what we have observed above.

30. The Certainty. That is, C. 16. v. 37.38.
The certain Truth.

He loosed him. That is, He commanded Paul's Chains to be loosed, with which
he, when he knew not that he was a Roman Citizen, had caused him to be bound.

And he Commanded, etc. As if he had said, And he called together the chief
Priests, and the other Senators of the Jewish Sanhedrin, and having brought
forth Paul, he set him before them, that he might determine of him and his
cause.

The Priests. In the Greek it is the Chief Priests.

Among them. That is, Before them, as it is in the common English Translation.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. AND Paul earnestly beholding the Council. That is, Fastening his Eyes
steadfastly on those Senators who were present at the Council. The Wicked flee
when no Man pursues, but the Righteous are bold as a Lion, Prove. 20.1.
and shall not be afraid.

Said. Being without doubt permitted to give in his defense to those things
which his Adversaries objected against him before the Council. See above
Stephen is brought before the Council, Chap. 6.
and accused. When his Accusation had been heard together with the depositions
of the false Witnesses, he was asked by the President of the Council, Cap. 7.
v. 1.
whether these things were true which were laid to his charge? Then Stephen
having liberty to plead his own cause, he vindicated himself in that admirable
Apologetick Discourse before the Council, of which St. C. 7. v. 2, etc.
Luke has related the substance above.

Men, C. 21. v. 1.
Brethren. See above. The Prophet Isaiah speaking of the Jews whom he forefaw,
would reject the Messiah promised in the Law and the Prophets with ungrateful
Minds, and stubborn obstinacy, he calls them the Brethren of those Jews who
were to embrace him by Faith. Hear, Isa. 66.5.
says he, the Word of the Lord ye that tremble at his Word, your Brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, etc. The African Fathers
had an Eye to this place, while they called the Donatists, the most malicious
Enemies of the Church, Brethren.

I. Paul, who now am brought before you as a Criminal.

Have lived in all good Conscience before God until this Day. I have so behaved
my self in my Ministry entrusted to me, that my Conscience bears me witness
before God, that I, whether in Judaism, or Christianism, have always until this
Day endeavored To know no Guilt; grow pale for no offense. See below. But how
Paul, now a Convert to Christianity, C. 24. v. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12 and 2 Timothy 1.3.
could Glory of his Life while in Judaism, and of a good Conscience that he had
kept in the time of his Ignorance, when notwithstanding he afterward
confesses, 1 Cor. 15.9. 1 Timothy 1. 13, 16. that he was a Blasphemer, a
Persecuter, yea the chief of Sinners, the Famous Curcellaeus has explained
most perspicuously and plainly, by distinguishing betwixt a Good and Right
Conscience. A Conscience may be good tho it be erroneous, and evil; tho it be
right, or follow a good Law in judging its Actions. Paul therefore appealeth to
his good Conscience, because he did that which his erring Conscience dictated,
he ought to do, to wit, that he should persecute the Christians, who, he was
persuaded, were Apostates and Revolters from the Law of Moses. Yet he was not
innocent, because when he had sufficient occasion of informing his Conscience
better, he neglected to do it. Wherefore he that will be free from Sin, must
take no less care that he instruct his Conscience about the Will of God, than
that he do nothing contrary to its Dictates.

And the High Priest. Offended possiby at Paul's Constancy, or that his Exordium
was more frank than the Pride of the Council, and the High Priest himself could
bear.

Ananias. This High Priest was the Son of Nebedaeus, than whom none was more
daring for any enterprise. Lib. 18.20.
Of him see Josephus.

Commanded them that stood by him. His Servants ready to obey his Commands.

To smite him on the Mouth. viz. Paul as if tutering Villainous and Notorious
Lies. This was an unjust act of Proud Tyrany, to cast such a reproach on a Man,
who was not yet judged, nor convicted of a Crime, before Sentence was
pronounced against him. To smite ones Mouth, or as Juvenal expresses it, to
give one a blow was by all People and in all ages accounted a great Affront.
Hence he is said to beat one with blows, or, as Terence speaks it, to give
one a box on the ear, See Mat. 5.39. 1 Cor. 4.11. 2 Cor. 11.20 and 12.7. 1 Pet.
2.20.
who vexes one grievously and spitefully. That inhumane false Prophet Zedekia
the Son of Chanaanah smote Michaiah the Son of Imla, the true Prophet of the
Lord on the Cheek, in the presence of two Kings, Jehosaphat and Ahab, because
he said, that a lying Spirit was in his, 1 King. 22.24.
and the other false Prophets Mouths. The spiteful Priest Pashur smote Jeremy
as he Prophesied Jer. 20.2. Finally that rude Servant of Caiaphas Officiously
smote our Lord Jesus, Joh. 18.22.
when he had no order to do so.

Then Paul. C. 8. v. 20.
As Peter, above, and Paul himself elsewhere, 1 Timothy 4.14. prompted by Divine
instinct, Genesis 9.25.
and a Prophetic Inspiration like Noah, Michaiah the Son of Imla, 2 Chr. 18.24.
Elisha, Jeremy, and David frequently in the Psalms.

Said unto him. 2 King. 2.24.
viz. That Spiteful, Barbarous and rude High Priest Ananias the Son of
Nebedaeus. Jer. 20.3 etc.


God shall smite thee. Mat. 7.2.
Who, according to the saying of Christ, uses to measure again unto Men the
same measure they mete out unto others. Exodus 1.22.
Exodus 14.28.
So Pharaoh, at whose Command the Male-Children of the Israelites newly born
were drowned, Judge. 1.7. 1 Samuel 15.32, 33. 2 Samuel 12.9.10, 11, 12 and 16.22.
was himself, together with all his Army drowned. The same instances of Justice
you may see in Adonibezek, Agag King of the Amalekites, David, Joab, in those
Men that cast Shadrack, Meshek, and Abednego into the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3.22
Daniels Accusers, and in that most invertrate Enemy of Mordecai, Haman. Dan.
6.24.


Thou Whited Wall. Esth. 7.10.
He upbraids Ananias's Hypocrisy with an Apostolic and Prophetic Authority
in the same kind of Speech, which Christ did that of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 23, 27.
when he foretold that they would be punished by a special Providence. 1 King.
18.18. 2 King. 3.13. Jer. 1.10, 17, 18. Ezekiel. 3.8, 9.
It is the duty of Prophets to reprove Vices and Sins whose soever they are, as
you may see. A whited Wall, says St. Augustine, in Psalm. 103. without is
Plaster, within Clay. Theophilact, on this place, he calls him a whited Wall,
because he had a fair aspect, as an assertor of the Law, and one who pretended
to judge according to the Law: But his Mind was full of Wickedness. Ep. 115.
Truly and elegantly said Seneca, We admire Walls covered over with thin
Marble, when we know what it is that is hid under it, we impose upon our Eyes;
and when we value things covered over with Gold, what else do we but delight in
a lie, for we know that under that Gold, base Wood is hid? Nor are Walls and
beams the only things that are set out with Ornaments: the seeming happiness of
all those who are exalted to high Promotion is but gilded: Look into them and
you will perceive how much evil lies hid under that thin Membrane of Dignity.

For thou. Among the Senators of the Council.

Do thou sit to judge me after the Law? That is, That thou may judge
according to the Judicial Law appointed by God in the Books of Moses. The
Judicial Law, says Grotius, was in force as long as the Commonwealth of Israel
was in being, and the Hebrew Judges were obliged to give Judgment according to
it, within those bounds of Cognizance, which the Romans allowed them.

And contrary to the Law. Unjustly beginning Process of Judgment at Execution,
whereas the Law enjoins to presocute that which is just justly, Lev. 19.15.
Deuteronomy. 1.16. and c. 16.18, 19.20.
and not to commit iniquity in Judgment.

Command. Acted by a Barbarous Cruelty and Tyrannical Rage against the
Professors of Christianity.

Me. Without hearing my cause.

To be smitten. Contumeliously, viz. On the Mouth.

4. And they that stood by. Possibly the very same Men, who were Commanded by
the High Priest Ananias to smite Paul on the Mouth.

Said. Vindicating the High Priests Honor.

Revilest thou Gods High Priest? That is to say, Thou Foul-mouthed railer, do
thou call him a Painted and Whited Wall, whom God has set over his Divine
Worship?

5. I wist not. Having been a considerable time absent from Jerusalem. Others
will have, I wist not, to import the same as, I did not consider; viz. being
hurried with a sudden perturbation of Mind, when Ananias commanded me, without
cause, to be smitten on the Mouth.

That he was the High Priest. That is, That this Ananias is now High Priest. It
is evident by Josephus, 20. Antiq. 6 and 7.
that at that time there was so great a Confusion in the Government at
Jerusalem, that at every turn the High Priests were deposed at the pleasure of
the Roman Governors, and others substituted into their places. Than which
Confusions, says the generally Learned Heinsius, as nothing was more
detestable, so nothing was more just, seeing that by the Faction, and lies of
the High Priests, the Truth was condemned, the hope of the Fathers was
condemned, our great High Priest was Condemned.

For it is Written, etc. As if he had said, If I had known or called to Mind,
that the Dignity of High Priesthood, now become cursory, had been conferred on
Ananias the Son of Nebedaeus, I would not in any wise have so sharply upbraided
him with Hypocrisy, as that my words should have been construed slander and
railing; Exodus 22.28.
for it is written:

Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. That is, Do not cast
reproaches upon the Life of him, who holds chief Place and Dignity among thy
People.

4. But when Paul perceived that the one part. viz. Of those of which the great
Council consisted.

Were Sadduces. Of these and the Pharisees, see what we have said in our
Literal explanation on Mat. 3.7.

And the other Pharisees. These two Sects, tho otherwise disagreeing among
themselves, agreed together to oppose Christ and destroy his Disciples. Paul
therefore when he saw they had conspired together to condemn him unjustly, he
wisely without prejudice to the Truth cast among them an apple of Contention or
Discord.

He cried out in the Council. That he might be heard by all the Senators of the
Council, and all the multitude that was present.

I am a Pharisee the Son of a Pharisee. Or as some Copies have it, of the
Pharisees. As if he had said, I have even from my Forefathers led my Life
according to the ordinances of the Pharisees. See after. c. 26. v. 5. Phil. 3.5.


Of the hope. Of the Reward which the just shall receive in the other World,
which the Hebrews call the Age of Retribution. For then every Man shall be
rewarded according to his deeds. The Sadduces denied that there was any such
state, who maintained that there were no Punishments or Rewards after this Life.

And the Resurrection of the Dead. Whom that they should be raised again to
Life the Old Saduces also denied.

Am called in Question. That is, Called to Judgment.

7. There arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadduces. While
those appoved of Paul's opinion that there should be a Resurrection of the
Dead; and these Condemned it.

And the multitude was divided. Both of the Senators, and the Standers by,
while some took part with the Pharisees, others with the Sadduces.

8. The Sadduces, etc. As if he had said, But the Pharisees and the Sadduces
were at great variance, and discord among themselves; for whereas the Sadduces
denied the Resurrection of the Dead, and stiffly avouched that there was no
Angel, and Spiritual or Incorporeal Substance; but that those things that went
under the Denomination of Angel or Spirit, were nothing else, but either the
Motions which God implanted in Men, or the Demonstrations he exhibited of his
Power; the Pharisees on the contrary stoutly maintained the Resurrection of the
Dead, and the Existence of Angels and Spirits, or substances distinct or
separate from Matter.

Nor Spirit. Some restrict this to the Spirit of Man, or the Soul; which also
elsewhere is called a Spirit, C. 7. v. 59 Mat. 27.50. Luke 23.46. Heb. 12.23.
as you may see above. This, say they, the Sadduces conjecture not to be any
spiritual Substance, which could subsist separate from the body, but only to be
a certain crasis and Temperament of the Body and its Humors, and therefore that
when a Man dies it is destroyed, vanishes and dies with the Body. Others by
Spirit here understand the Holy Spirit, as John 3.5.4.24. Romans 1.4.8.14, Haer.
14.
15.19. 1 Cor. 3, 4. Epiphanius truly writes thus of the Sadduces, But they
are ignorant of the Holy Spirit, for they are unworthy of him. And Theophylact
reciting these words of the verse immediately following: But if a Spirit or an
Angel has spoken to him, says, It is manifest that he was taught the
Resurrection either by the Holy Spirit or by an Angel. Joseph Scaliger
declares, that as Angel in this verse is put indefinitely for all Angels, so
Spirit is to be taken indefinitely. For Angel is the species, Spirit the Genus,
forasmuch as Angels are comprehended under it. St. Luke 's meaning, says the
most Learned Scultetus, according to Scaliger will be, They are so far from
believing the existence of an Angel, that they do not indeed believe there is
any Spirit. This opinion doubtless is the truest. For they who affirmed God
himself to be Corporeal, as Nicolaus writes, On Act. 13.
and Theophylact: Possibly they did not so much as know God, being too gross:
And therefore by Consequence must altogether deny a Spiritual Creature.
Theodor. Beza observes that there are some among the Jews who are not ashamed
to say that Angels are natural causes, performing the Will of God, or producing
good or evil Effects.

But the Pharisees confess both. viz. That there is to be a Resurrection of the
Dead, and that Angels, and the Soul of Man, or a Spiritual substance, subsist
separate from the Body. Because Angels which are a Species of Spirit, or
Incorporeal substance, and the Soul of Man are comprehended under the same
Genus, whosoever grants the existence of Angels seems by the same confession
acknowledge that of Souls, or of a substance separated from the Body.

9. There arose, etc. There being a great outcry among the enraged Multitude,
the Rabbis or Doctors and Interpreters of the Law, who maintained the opinion
of the Pharisees, rising up from their Seats, out of a hatred to their opposite
Sect the Sadduces, vindicated Paul's Integrety and Innocence to the utmost of
their Power.

Certain of the Pharisees. In the Greek it is, Those of the Scribes that were
of the side of the Pharisees. For there were other Scribes and Doctors of the
Law, who had espoused the Tenets of the Sadduces.

Strove. That is, Contended against the Pharisees.

We find no evil in this Man. To wit, Paul who was brought before their
Judgment.

If a Spirit. That is, Some Incorporeal Substance: Or, as Theophylact will have
it, the Holy Spirit.

Has spoken to him. That is to say, Has revealed something to him about the
Resurrection.

Or an Angel. In the Greek is added, as also in the English Translation, Let us
not fight against God, viz. by despising an Angel speaking in his name, things
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures. Here, says Beza, the word Angel, as more
familiar, seems to be added to explain the Word Spirit.

10. A great Dissesion. That is, A most fierce contention betwixt the Pharisees
and Sadduces touching Paul's Innocence.

The Chief Captain fearing lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces by them.
Chiding and Scolding one with another.

He Commanded Soldiers. That is, a Company of Soldiers.

Into the Castle. As being a place where he might be free from danger of the
Pharisees and Sadduces, who were contending most Spitefully and Maliciously.

11. The Lord stood by him. That is, The Lord Jesus, who has all Power in
Heaven and Earth given him, appeared to Paul unawares.

Be of good Cheer. That is, Trust with a firm confidence.

For as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, etc. As if he had said, For as
you have bore witness the day before to the Jews, of me and my heavenly glory,
at Jerusalem the Metropolis of Judaea, by far, the most Famous City of the
East, so must you give the same Testimony, C. 22. v. 6 and seq.
in the most Famous City of Italy, Rome, which at this day has extended its
Dominion over most Countries of Europe, Asia, and Africa. Hence, says the most
Learned Lightfoot, Paul had both Liberty and intimation of appealing to Caesar.
It was very seldom that a Jew appealed to an Heathen Tribunal, and it bewrayed
the height of Malice, that the Sanhedrin delivered our Savior to a Gentile
Judge: Paul therefore is instructed by this vision, what he must do, when he
saw no means or way of escaping.

12. And when it was day. But when the day was risen that succeeded that Night
in which Jesus said these things to Paul.

Certain of the Jews banded together. That is, some of the Jews, especially the
Sadduces, Paul's fiercest Enemies met and entered into a Conspiracy.

And bound themselves. With a curse, to wit, that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had murdered Paul, whom they Judged to be a vile Apostate from
the Law of God. The form of this Oath, as says Tertullian, was a Solemn
Imprecation of Divine Vengenance in these or the like words, God do so to me
and more also. 1 Samuel 14.44.20.13.25.22. 2 Samuel 3. v. 8 and 35.19.13. etc. The
Acts of St. Valerian and Tiburt. Number. 14. Then Maximus bound himself with a
Vow, saying, Let me be struck with Thunder, if, etc. o

13. Had made this Conspiracy. To kill Paul before they would either Eat or
Drink.

14. Of the Priests. That is, Of the Families of the Priests.

And Elders. That is to say, Some of the rest of the Senators of the Great
Council, or Sanhedrin.

With a Vow we have Vowed. A Hebraism; that is, as it is in the English
Translation: We have bound our selves under a great Curse. Josephus calls such
Imprecations of Divine Revenge, horrible Oaths.

That we will taste nothing. viz. Either of Meat or Drink.

Till we have slain Paul. Now was the time in the which they that killed the
Disciple of Christ did think they did God good service, as Christ himself had
foretold. John 16.2.


15. Now therefore ye. Chief Priests and Senators of the Great Council, who are
here present.

Signify to the Chief Captain. That you desire of him.

With the Council. That is, not ye by your selves, but together with your
Colleagues declare ye to the Chief Captain, that it was not requested of him by
the private Will of a few, but by the Unaminous desire of the Great Council.

That he bring him down unto you. In the Greek, as also in the English
Translation it is added To morrow. That is, that he would command Paul to be
brought down to you to Morrow from the Castle, or Tower which is called
Antonia, C. 22. v. 30.
as he did before.

As though ye would enquire something more perfectly concerning him. That is to
say, as if ye were desirous to learn, and be better informed as to the Truth of
those things, of which Paul was accused. It was usual for the Guilty now and
then to have a hearing, either that they might discover something new of him,
or that they might try whether he would be constant in the same answer to his
charge.

And we e're ever he come near. To your Council Chamber.

Are ready to kill him. That is, We will kill him by the way, so that ye can no
ways be charged with his Death. So Bloody Men, and those that are hurried by a
foolish Zeal, think they may lawfully assail those that differ from them in
Opinion with lies or Violence, and so they plainly discover themselves to be
the Children of the Devil, who is a Liar and a Murderer, John 8.44.
according to Christ's saying.

16. And, etc. As if he had said, But when Paul's Sisters Son, had notice of
the Ambush they had laid to take away his Life, he went to the Castle or Tower,
Antonia, where his Uncle was kept Prisoner, and declared unto him what his
Malicious Enemies had attempted and undertaken against him.

17. Bring this Man unto the Chief Captain. Paul prudently took care to
discover unto the Chief Captain what Conspiracy they had entered into against
him, by whom he hoped to escape that impending danger, according to the Roman
Equity. Hence it appears, that the Godly, although they have a firm confidence of
Divine Protection, may yet avert dangers by the honest service and Ministry of
Men.

18. So he. The Centurion who was called on by Paul.

Taking him. That is, Taking pters Sisters Son.

Brought him to the Chief Captain. Granting Paul's just and honest demand.

19. Then the Chief Captain took him by the hand. That is, When he had taken
the young Man, who was Paul's Sisters Son by the hand, as they use to do, who
will take any aside into a more secret place, and speak with them privately.

20. And he. Led apart into a more secret place.

21. But do not thou believe them. That is to say, Do not suffer thy self to be
persuaded by them to yield to their request.

For there lie in wait. To kill Paul by an Ambush while he is brought from the
Prison to the Council Privy Chamber.

Looking for a promise from thee. As if he had said, For they do not in the
least doubt but that you will promise to perform their request, to wit, that
you will Command Paul to be brought from the Prison to the Council Chamber.

22. Charging, etc. The Governor would have this secret that was declared unto
him, kept close, that the Jews might not have notice that their Conspiracy
against Paul was discovered, lest they should take new projects against him. It
is of great concern that secrets be kept, least they be divulged.

23. Make ready two hundred Soldiers. To wit, Foot.

To go to Caesarea. C. 8. v. 40.10.1.12.19.18.22.21.8.
Situate on the Mediterranean Sea, of which see above.

Spear-men. Gr. Dexiolabous, holding the right hand, that is, the Guards, who
guard ones right side, or who take those with their right hand who are ordered
to be apprehended, or who take and carry Arms with their right hand only, not
also with their left, as the Target-Men use, so that they were Spear-me^ To The
Syrian Interpreter seems to have read it, Dexibolous, throwing with the right
hand, such as the light-armed Soldiers are said to have been, who did throw
darts not with a Bow or Sling, but with their hand.

At the third hour of the Night. That is, Three hours after Sunset, that it
might not be done openly and manifestly, but clancularly, and so might escape
the knowledge of the Jews, Paul's Enemies.

24: To Felix the Governor. That is, Procurator, or Vice-Governour of Judea.
This Man who had been the late Servant of Claudius Caesar, was by the Emperor
made Governor of Samaria, and not long after, Ventidius Cumanus the Procurator
of Galilee, and Judea being sent into Exile, he was made Procurator of the same
Provinces of Judea and Galilee, and he held that Office of Procurator also
under Nero, Joseph. 20. Ant. 5, 6 and 7. and de Bell. Jud. l. 2. C. 11, 12.
Claudius's Successor, until Porcius Festus was substituted into his place. He
exercised the Royal Power according to his servile disposition with all cruelty
and libidinousness; he took into Marriage Drusilla, Niece to Cleopatra and
Antonius; so that Felix was Nephew-in-Law to the same Antonius, Nephew to
Claudius by his Daughter, says Tacitus. Lib. 5.
He Married successively three Wives of the Royal Race, as Suetonius declares,
who in the Life of Claudius, calls Felix, the Husband of three Queens. Josephus
and Suidas call him Claudius Felix, making an addition of this first name to
his name from Claudius Caesar, who of a Slave made him a Freeman. Tacitus
gives him the first name of Antonius, from Antonia, Claudius's Mother, whom he
had served. Pallas, Brother to this Felix, whowas made a Freeman by Claudius
Caesar before him, is reported to have had so great influence on Claudius
Caesar, that he could obtain any thing of him; he is also said to have been
richer than Crassus, by nineteen thousand five hundred thirty one Pounds five
Shillings Sterling. See Plin. l. 33. c. 10. Tacit. Annal. l. 12. Plin. Jun. 8.
Epist. 5.

For he feared, etc. What is here added in most Latin Books of the Vulgar
Edition, is not to be found in the Greek Copies, nor in the English Translation.

As if he were to receive Money. That is, As if, for that he had Money promised
him by Paul's Adversaries, he had no regard to the safety of a Roman Citizen.

25. Writing, etc. As if he had said, having written a Letter to Felix the
Procurator to this purpose.

26. To the most excellent. He gives the usual Title of Dignity to a
Magistrate, whereby they were used to be saluted. See what is said above, c. 1.
v. 1. On these words, O Theophilus.

Governor. The word Praeses, which the Greeks commonly render Hegemon in
general, being that whereby any Magistrates or Governors of Provinces were
called, but especially those who were set over them, with Power of inflicting
Capital Punishment. This Power was for the most part given to the Procurators
of lesser Provinces, tho their proper Office was to receive and lay out the
Emperors Money, as Dio expresses it. Such Procurators are said to supply the
place, and discharge the Office of a Governor.

Greeting. In the Greek chairein Rejoice. C. 15. v. 23.
See what we have said above. Horace saluteth Celsus Albinovanus in this form
of salutation that was usual with the Greeks. L. 1. Epist. 8.


27. This Man. To wit, Paul, whom I send to thee.

Taken of the Jews. Tumultuosly.

And like to have been killed by them. That is, Designed by them to a present
Death.

Having understood that he was a Roman. But he did not therefore deliver Paul
from the Jews that were attempting his Death, seeing he did not know that he
was a Roman Citizen, till after that he had commanded him to be bound and
racked, as you may see above. C. 22. v. 25, 27.
The Chief Captain therefore conceals that for which he might deservedly have
been reprehended, and turning aside from the Truth he seeks his own praise.
Except, says Beza, after [him] joining a point to it you read: But having
known, that he was a Roman, desirous to be informed, etc. But, continues Beza,
I neither dare, nor would I make any alteration by a mere conjecture.

28. The cause wherefore they accused him. That is, C. 22. v. 30.
The crime wherewith they charged him. See above.

29. Whom. etc. As if he had said, And so I found no such crime charged on Paul
by his Adversaries, as deserved to be chastised by Bonds or punished by Death,
but only a false Interpretation of the Jewish Law in points controverted, and
debate full among the Jews themselves.

30. When it was told me how the Jews laid wait for him. That is, had designed
against Paul. For their Conspiracy was discovered to the Chief Captain, when it
was only agreed upon, being not yet brought to pass, for it was not to have
been accomplished till the day after.

I sent him to thee. In the Greek is added, from that same, to wit, hour, that
is, immediately without delay I commanded Paul to be carried from Jerusalem to
Caesarea, to thee who dischargest the Office of Governor.

Giving also commandment to his accusers. To wit, Paul's.

To say. To wit, What they have against him.

Before thee. A Higher Judge than a Chief Captain is.

Farewell. The Chief Captain wishes Felix the Governor Health and Happiness in
that accustomed conclusion of Letters. C. 15. v. 29.
See above.

31. Brought him by Night. To wit, the same Night in the which they who were to
carry Paul to Felix the Procurator or Vice-Governour of Judea, Samaria, and
Galilee, set on their Journey from Jerusalem to Caesarea at the third Hour.

To Antipatris. The Apostle was ordered to be carried to Caesarea by the
Command of the Chief Captain, as above, v. 23. But because that Caesarea, which
is situate by the Sea, and is commonly called Caesarea of Palestina, and lies
within the Limits of the half Tribe of Manasseh, is distant from Jerusalem 30
Leagues, which could not be traveled over in one Night, they rested first at
Antipatris, 13. Ant. 23.
which was anciently called Capharsaba, as Josephus testifies, 1 Mac. 7.31.
and Jos. 12. Ant. 17.
and, as some will have it, it is the same City, with that called Capharsalama.
The same Josephus tells us, that the distance betwixt Joppa and Antipatris,
13. Ant. 23.
is 150 Furlongs, 16. Ant. 9.
that is, 17 Miles. He also says, that this beautiful and pleasant City was
built by Herod the great in a large Field called Capharsaba, in a watery ground,
and excellent Soil, encompassed with Trees and a River, and called Antipatris,
after the name of his Father. And Book 1. Chap. 16. of the Wars of the Jews,
speaking of the Cities and Edifices, repaired and built by Herod the great, he
says, as Ruffinus Aquileiensis interprets him, He built a City in the best
Field of the Kingdom, in Memory of his Father, very rich in Rivers and Trees,
and called it Antipatris. Antipatris which lies West from the River Jordan, is
mentioned by Ptolemy the Geographer, Lib. 5. c. 16.
among the Cities of Judea. I cannot therefore conceive, on what ground, and by
what Authority, they commonly ascribe it to the half Tribe of Manasseh, which
is on this side of Jordan, and will have it situate almost in the middle of
Samaria.

32. On the Morrow. To wit, Of that Night in the which Paul defended with a
Guard of Soldiers, was brought to Antipatris, when now they were got a great
way from Jerusalem, where they were who had entered into a Conspiracy to kill
Paul.

They left the Horsemen to go with him. To Caesarea. A Guard of Horse was
sufficient to defend him from the ordinary hazards that were incident in
Journeys.

And they returned. The 200 Footmen that were heavily armed, and the same
Number of Spearmen.

To the Castle. That is, To the Tower, which was at first built by the
Maccabees in the North-West Corner, contiguous to Mount Moria, or the Mount
whereon the Temple of Jerusalem was built; it was called Antonia by Herod the
great, in Honor of Marcus Antonius the Triumvir, whereas at first it was
called Baris. See Josephus 15. Ant. 14.

33. Who. To wit, the Horsemen that were left to carry Paul to Caesarea.

When they came to Caesarea. That Maritim City in which Felix resided as
Vice-Governour.

And delivered the Epistle. Written by Claudius Lysias.

To the Governor. That is, to Felix discharging the Office of Governor.

Presented Paul also before him. That is to say, They also brought Paul before
Felix, who was delivered from the Conspiracy of the Factious Jews, by benefit
of the Public Protection. The Fathers in the African Council, c. 83. Against
whose fury we may obtain defense which is neither unusual, nor repugnant to the
Holy Scriptures; even as the Apostle Paul, as it is to be known in the Faithful
Acts of the Apostles, avoided the Conspiracy of his Factious Enemies even by
Military Succor.

34. And when he had read. Felix had read the Epistle directed to him from
Lysias the Chief Captain.

And asked of what Province he was. To wit, Paul.

And when he understood that he was of Cilicia. That is, And when he was
informed that Paul was of Cilicia, Chapter 6. v. 9.
of which we have spoke above.

35. I will hear thee, said he, when thine Accusers are also come. That having
attentively heard both the Accusation and Defense, I may give Judgment.

In Herod's Judgment Hall. That is, Which Herod the Great, who repaired
Caesarea, caused to be built. The Latin word Praetorium, says the Learned
Grotius, has its name from the Roman Praetor, that is, Emperor; but as it
usually happens, the use of this Word was extended more largely, to signify
all the Houses of Famous Men. Praetorium is by Quimilian otherwise called
Augustale. With the Writers of Husbandry, it is that part of the Farm, where
the Lord uses to reside, when he is in the Country.

Him to be kept. To wit, by some Soldiers or other Keepers, that he might not
make his escape. Paul, as it seems, was kept at Caesarea in an honorable
place, not in a Prison.

CHAP. XXIV.
1. ND after five Days. Accomplished, viz. From the time that Paul was brought
into Caesarea.

Descended. From Jerusalem to Caesarea.

Ananias the High Priest. C. 23. v. 2.
Of whom see above.

With some of the Elders. That is, with the Elders of the Great Sanhedrin.

And Tertullus a certain Orator. That is, A most excellent Pleader of Causes.

Who informed the Governor against Paul. That is to say, they signified to
Felix, that they would prove Paul Guilty.

2. And when Paul was called. To Judgment by a Herald or Apparitor.

Tertullus began to accuse him. That is to say, Tertullus accused Paul most
grievously. In Holy Writ, often he is said to begin to do a thing who already
does it.

3. Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness. As if he had said, With a
full acknowledgement of thy worthy deeds to usward at every time and in every
place, we profess, that by your unparalled Vigilance and Wisdom, the
Robberies that used to be committed in Judea are quelled, the Murders are
repressed in many places, and Peace is settled through all the Province, which
you are set over. Felix indeed did overthrow Eleazar that Famous Robber, and
that Egyptian Impostor, mentioned above, C. 21. v. 8.
together with their Forces, to the unspeakable advantage of the Jews, as
Josephus declares. But otherwise he Governed Judaea with Covetousness and
Cruelty, he caused the High Priest Jonathan, Son to Annas to be Murdered by
Assassines, because he used frankly to reprove him when he did amiss; he also
suffered them to commit several Insolences upon the Jews without punishment,
as the same Josephus testifies in the place but now cited. And so the Mercenary
Tertullus seeks to get the favor of Felix by an intolerable Flattering.

Many things are amended. In the Greek is added, as also in the English
Translation, unto this Nation. As if he had said, The Outrageous Wickednsses
and Corruptions, which had crept into this Nation, are by thee amended and
rectified with great vigor and happiness.

We accept. That is, We acknowledge.

Most excellent Felix. He flattereth Felix with that Title that was usually
given to Magistrates, and those that were placed in Dignity. Hence they are
also called, Optimates.

4. Notwithstanding, that I be not farther tedious unto thee. As if he had
said, That I may not hinder thee more than is needful, with far-fetcht
Speeches, That I detain thee not with troublesome discourse, nor
Circumlocutions and tedious Exordiums; Lest I should trespass against the
public good, if I should take up thy time with a prolix Harangue.

I Pray. Thee encumbred with Multitude of businesses.

Briefly. That is to say, We being resolved to dispatch the heads of our
Accusation laid against Paul, in a few Words.

That thou would hear us. With a favorable Ear. The First thing requested
by an Orator is that he may have audience in a bad cause, says Donatus on
Terence.

Of thy Clemency. That is, With thy wonted Courtesy and Humanity. Readiness to
hear, does exceedingly commend a Judge. Cicero to Q. his Brother, Proconsul of
Bithynia, says, Ye must moreover conjoyn readiness to hear with lenity in
passing Judgment.

5. We have found. And deprehended.

This Man a pestilent Fellow. Orators frequently call that Man a Pest, who acts
perniciously to the Commonwealth. But this foul-mouthed slanderer was not
ashamed to asperse Paul with this Odious name, when notwithstanding he exhorted
all to forsake wicked Courses, and embrace earnestly the Virtues that lead to
Salvation. So at this day very many are called Plagues and Pestiferous, who are
falsely branded with the reproach of perverse Heresy, because they reject the
Doctrines and Commandments of Men, in matters of Faith and Divine Worship, that
they may stand fast to that alone most wholesome Doctrine, delivered in the
Holy Scriptures.

And a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the World. They falsely
accuse Paul of stirring up Sedition in all the Countries through which the Jews
were dispersed. But so it uses to be, that Truth, thwarting the received
Opinions and Customs of Men, when it is not received by Men who account nothing
unlawful, provided they can varnish it over with a counterfeit pretense of
Zeal, but is stiffly opposed, seems to stir up riotous Tumults and pernicious
Seditions. But those very Jews, that falsely accused Paul before Felix, did
frequently stir up Seditions against Paul, as you may see above, Chap. 9. v.
23.13.50.14.5.17.5 and 13.18.12.21.30, 31. Here we may appositely use that of
Juvenal Sat. 20. v. 24.

Who the Seditious Gracchi can sustain,
Of others for Sedition to complain?
And a Mover of Sedition. That is, a Leader and Standard Bearer of the rest
that profess the Religion of Jesus of Nazareth. So St. Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage, and a Champion for the name of Christ in the Africa Church in those
days, in the Proconsular Decree made against him, is called, the Author and
Ringleader of that execrable Name.

Of the Sect of the Nazarens. In the Greek, Heresy of the Nazarens. That is to
say, Those who follow the Sect of the Christians or embrace their Heresy.
Heresies are, as Tertullian defines them, the Doctrines of Men, and Devils,
springing from itching Ears. Heresy for the most part is said to be, that
Judgment and opinion which is chosen by any, whether it be invented by us, or
received from another: Yet use has prevailed now, especially among Christians,
that this word, that before was used either in a good or a bad sense, is for
the most part now used in a bad, to wit, for the choosing of a false and
perverse opinion plainly and altogether repugnant to the Word of God. See above
c. 5. v. 17. Gal. 5. v. 20. and 2 Pet. 2. v. 10. The Jews therefore abhorred
the Doctrine of the Christians, tho it was agreeable to the Law and the
Prophets, as Heretical and perverse, because it dissented from the common Faith
of the Public Church, which at that time was accounted the Church of God. So
also at this very day, they who follow the Appointments of Christ, are called
Heretics, if they vilify and reject the errors of formal Christians, that are
crept into the Church by custom. Moreover, as the Learned Lud. de Dieu very
pertinently observes, That Christ was called Nazaraeos or Nazarenos, and his
followers Nazaraioi, did not proceed from a mistake of the Common People, as
supposing him born at Nazareth, nor from the mockery of the Wicked, as
accounting it a reproach to him, but from God's own purpose and Will, and the
use of the Godly themselves. The purpose of God is manifest, Mat. 2.23. Where
Joseph, returning from Egypt with the Child Jesus, is commanded to fix the
seat of his habitation at Nazareth, that, according to the Predictions of the
Prophets, he might be called a Nazarene. And that the Godly delighted in the
use of this name plainly appears from Joh. 1.45. Act. 2.22.3.6 and 4.10. Yea
Christ also calls himself by this name, Act. 22.8. This doubtless was his
most glorious name, whereby he was declared to be (...), the Branch, promised
by the Prophets, who was brought up in the City called (...), Branch, and
brought forth thence to the discharge of his Office, he brought forth many
(...), Nazaraeans, that is, sprung out of the Branch, Nor will it avail any
thing to say that the x in (...) seems to evince, that it is derived rather
from (...) than from (...). For it is usual to change (...) into (...), as
instead of the Hebrew (...) just the Syrians say (...). For (...), whence
(...), Viands, the Syrians say (...), he gave Viands, (...), Provision. For
(...), little, the Syrians say (...).

6. The Temple. Of Jerusalem built by Herod, which surpassed in Dimension and
Magnificence, that of Solomon.

Has gone about to profane. That is to say, Endeavored to defile it, bringing
Strangers within that Pale of Stone, which was raised to the height of three
Cubits, Jos. 6. Bell. Jud. 6.
and had these words written on its Columns, That a Stranger ought not to enter
into the Holy place.

Whom we took. But with a Seditious and Tumultuous force. C. 21.17 and 30.
See above.

And would have judged according to our Law. They lie notoriously, seeing the
Jews went about, against all Justice and equity, to take away Paul's Life,
without so much as judging him, C. 21.31.
as ye may see above.

7. But the Chief Captain Lysias came upon us. Who resided at Jerusalem with
the Regiments of the Roman Soldiers.

With great violence. That is, With violent force.

And took him away out of our hands. From the time that Archelaus was banished
to Vienna of the Allobroges, under Augustus, to the time that Claudius Caesar
added Judea to the Kingdom of Agrippa, the Elder, and from the Death of the
same Agrippa even till the Destruction of Jerusalem, Judea was reduced into a
Province, and added to Syria, and was Governed by Procurators sent from Rome,
who had the Power of judging in Matters of Life and Death; which Power was
taken away from the Jews, as they themselves answered in express words to
Pilate when he sought an occasion of setting Christ at Liberty. Yet they had a
general Grant from the Romans to put a stranger to Death, Joh. 18.31.
that entered within the Partition of the Temple. They had also Power to
scourge the Criminals of their own Nation, as appears from Mat. 10.17. Acts
5.48. 2 Cor. 11.24. As also a Power to take Cognizance of, and judge those of
their own People, that were Guilty of any Capital Offense; otherwise they could
not have given an Account to a Roman Magistrate, why they required any to be
put to Death. So with the Roman Inquisitors, to whom the Roman Praetor had
committed the taking Cognizance of any Cause, they could determine, whether one
was Guilty or not, but the privilege of passing final Sentence was peculiar to
the Praetor. But if at any time any were put to Death by the Jews without the
Approbation of the Roman Magistrate, during that time that the Affairs of the
Jews were managed by Governor or Procurators deputed from Rome, that was done
by a popular Tumult, although sometimes it was preceeded by a rash Judgment of
the Sanhedrin, whereby they declared that the Parties were worthy of Death.

8. Commanding his Accusers. To wit, Paul's.

To come unto thee. Who doubtless art Procurator in the place of the Governor.

By whom. To wit, Paul.

Thou may. According to thy singular Sagacity in deciding of Causes.

Thy self judging. That is, Diligently and strictly enquiring into the heads of
the Accusation that are briefly mentioned.

Take knowledge of all these things. That is, Be certainly informed.

9. And also assented. That is, gave their Approbation to that false
Accusation, which Tertullus used against Innocent Paul. It was a custom amongst
the Ancients, that, when any Orator pleaded a Cause in his own and Fellows
name, they professed themselves his Astipulators. As Virg. Aen. 1. v. 163.

Ilioneus said, the Trojans with one mind gave loud applause. The Jews. To wit,
Ananias and the Senators, of whom above, v. 1.

Saying that these things were so. That is, Affirming that Tertullus had spoken
nothing that was false.

10. Then Paul answered. Being with his own Mouth to repel the Malicious and
Lying Accusations of his adversaries, brought against him by their Advocate.

After that the Governor had beckoned unto him to speak. That is, Having
obtained liberty to speak of Felix, who would not pass Sentence without hearing
both Parties.

Forasmuch as I know, that thou have been of many years, a Judge unto this
Nation. As if he had said, Being persuaded that you are well seen in the Jewish
Affairs, seeing now for several years, thou have ruled Judea. This was now the
tenth year of his Administration of Judea, according to the universally Learned
Usher Archbishop of Armagh. See our Annot. above on c. 23. v. 24. But Felix,
who was Procurator of Judea, Samaria, and Galilee, is called by Paul a Judge,
according to the Hebrew custom of speaking, who call any Governor, especially
one that was endowed with Power of Life and Death, Judge. So of old, they who
had the Supreme Power over the People of Israel, before the Institution of
Kings, were called Judges. And Shaphat, to Judge, is by the Hebrews used to
signify to Govern.

I do the more cheerfully. That is, Boldly and Freely.

Answer for my self. That is to say, I will defend my self who am hunted with
Calumnious Accusations, with the Protection of Innocence.

Because that thou may understand. That is, search the matter by Witnesses.

That there are yet but twelve days. Completed but this very day wherein I
plead my cause before thee.

Since I went up to Jerusalem for to Worship. That is, Since I went from this
Maritim Town Caesarea to Jerusalem, to celebrate there the Feast of Pentecost,
and to worship God, with the rest of the Jews, in the Temple reverently and
holily. There were but twelve days intervened from Paul's Arrival at Jerusalem,
till that very day which was the next after his accusation arrived at Cesarea,
wherein he pleaded before Felix, they being to be reckoned from Chapter 21. v. 17,
18 and 26. c. 22. v. 30. c. 23. v. 12 and 30. c. 24. v. 1.

12. And they neither found me in the Temple. As if he had said, Not only in
these so very few days, which I as a Stranger and Sojourner past at Jerusalem,
there could not be any such Sedition stirred up by me, as they falsely accuse
me of, but not so much as the suspicion of it agrees to me; nor can any without
prejudice to the Truth say, that I at Jerusalem, either stirred up the People
any where to tumultuous Assemblies, or gave occasion to any Tumult, in the
Synagogues or Schools or Disputations of the Jews held either in the Temple, or
without the Temple, or in any other place of the City.

13. Neither can they prove, etc. As if he had said, And before the faces of my
Accusers I affirm, that they have no plausible Arguments, whereby they can
demonstrate and evince, that it is either probable or likely, that either I
stirred up Sedition, or brought Strangers into the Temple, as they now falsely
accuse me before you.

14. But I confess, etc. As much as to say, But I acknowledge and profess that
I follow that way of worshipping God, which my Accusers brand with the name of
the Heresy or Sect of the Nazarites or Nazarens. Epiphan. Haer. 29. All the
Christians were then called Nazarens. But it came to pass, that for a little
time the Disciples were called Jessei, before they began to be called
Christians at Antioch. Aurelius Prudentius Clemens (...). in his fifth Hymn
induces Datian thus accosting the Christians; You Nazarenes be ready bent,
Your Clunish rigidness relent;
Ye Deities the Prince invokes,
Appease with Offerings and Smokes.


Sect. Gr. Way. That is, The Religion, or manner of Divine Worship.

So I Worship my Father and God. In the Greek it is, as also the English
Translation So Worship I the God of my Fathers. That is, I devoutly and holily
Worship God, whom our Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the rest from whom I
derive my Original, the Forefathers of the Israelites long since Worshipped.
Paul elsewhere also mentions this Holy Worship performed by him to God, as
Romans 1.9. 2 Timothy 1.3.

Believing all things. Without any Exception.

Which are Written in the Law and the Prophets. That is to say, Which Moses and
the Prophets that came after him have sealed with their Writings. See below,
Chap. 26. v. 22. Paul does not challenge them to some uncertain Traditions
proposed only by word of Mouth, and delivered down to Posterity by the hands of
Men, not to be confided in; but lays the Holy Scripture, as a sure Rule, for
the foundation of his Faith. Athanasius in his Treatise of the Synod of
Ariminum and Seleucia, says, In vain running up and down do they pretend that
Synods were called together for the Faith: For the Holy Scripture is more
sufficient than they are all. The same Athanasius against the Gentiles, The
Holy and divinely inspired Scriptures are indeed sufficient for the declaration
of the Truth. The same Father in the same place, If ye will speak other things
than these that are Written, why do ye contend with us, who will not endure
either to hear or speak any things save those things that are Written? Eusebius.
Pamph. to a Philosopher in the Acts of the Council of Nice, part. 2. c. 19.
Believe those things that are Written: what are not Written neither heed them
nor search after them. Chrysostom. Hom. of the false Prophets Tom. 7. The Holy
Scripture has left out, nor concealed any of those things which are profitable
for us. Theodoret, Quaest. 4. against the Gentiles. It seems to me a
presumptiuous thing, to affirm any thing of those things, of the which the Holy
Scripture delivers nothing expressly. Cyril Lib. 2. Glaphyr. in Genesis How, I
pray, shall we receive, and reckon among the Truths, that which the Holy
Scripture has not spoken of? See our Annotations above on Chap. 17. v. 11. and
our Epistle written in French and English to the honorable Robert Boil Esquire a
Gentleman excelling in all manner of Learning and Virtue.

15. Having Hope. As much as to say, And God himself quickens me with a
lively hope, to expect a general Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, which
also the greatest part of the Great Sanhedrin themselves who are come hither to
accuse me, do likewise look for the accomplishment of. Hence we may gather,
that the Pharisees who were at variance with the Sadduces, and declared Paul
innocent above, c. 23. v. 9. were now become friends with them again, that they
might hasten Paul's Death by their most execrable Conspiracy. Possibly this
Reconciliation of them to friendship was effected by those Men who had cursed
themselves, if they would either eat or drink till they had killed him. C. 23.
v. 12, 13, 14, 15.
See above.

That there shall be a Resurrection of the Just and Unjust. Amongst the Jewish
Rabbis, there is one of the Ancients Rabbi Eleazar a Capernaite, who in the
Decisions of the Fathers in express words taught, That all the Dead, whether
Just or Unjust shall be called to Life again. His words are these: Those who
are born, are born that they may die, those who die, die that they may live
again; those who live again, live again that they may be Judged. Christ
himself, without any far fetched speeches, taught this General Resuscitation of
the Dead to Judgment, from which some were to be conducted to everlasting
Beatitude, Joh. 5.28, 29. See also 2 Cor. 5.10. and Rev. 20.12, 13.
others to perpetual and endless Punishments.

16. In this. A Hebraism; that is, for this; to wit, because I have a certain
expectation, that all the Dead shall be raised to Life again; the just indeed
to a Heavenly, everlasting and every way blessed Life; but the Unjust to
Punishments that are to be inflicted on them by the infinitely just God, for
that they obstinately despised his Will revealed to them, and were unreasonably
injurious to the lovers of Truth and Holiness. See 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. Rev. 16.5,
6.18.20.19.1, 2, 3.

Do I exercise my self, etc. As if he had said, With my whole Soul, and all the
vigor of my Mind, I endeavor after this, that in my Religious and Civil
Duties I may never depart a hairs breadth from a right Conscience. By these
words, Paul declares himself Innocent of that profanation of the Temple, and
stirring up of Sedition, of which he was falsely accused above. V. 5, 6.
It is necessary that a Christian, to a true and good Faith add also a good
Conscience, that providing things honest not only before the Lord, but also in
the sight of Men, 2 Cor. 8.21. he may be charged with no crime, but most
falsely, by that hatred of the Godly, that is seared in Reprobate Minds. See 1 Timothy 1.19. 1 Pet. 3.16.

17. Now after many Years. That is, After I had been several years a great way
absent from Jerusalem.

Alms, etc. As much as to say, I returned thither, not with a design to move
Sedition, or to prosane the Temple, but to relieve my poor Brethren, with
contributions that I had gathered among other Nations, and to offer sacrifices
to God on the Solemn Feast of Pentecost, in the manner appointed by the Law.

18. And Vows. Being to pay Vows I made to God. These two words are not read in
the Greek Text, nor in the English Translation.

In which. That is, which things while I was busied with, as below c. 26. v. 12.

They found me purified. That is, bound by a Vow of Nazarite to abstinence from
Wine, and other things forbidden the Nazarites. See above, c. 21. v. 24, 26.

In the Temple. To wit, when the seven Days appointed by me to my Vow of
Nazarite were now almost fulfilled. See above, c. 21. v. 27.

Neither with Multitude. That is, without any Train of Attendants.

Nor with Tumult. That is to say, And without any Seditious concursion. See
above v. 12. It follows, says John Mariana, in some Books, And they laid hands
on me, crying, and saying, Take away our Enemy. But this is not in the Greek,
nor in the vulgar Latin. Therefore it is rejected.

Certain Jews from Asia. Supply, Are. See above c. 21. v. 27.

19. Who. As being Authors of the outrage committed against me in the Temple.

Ought to have been here before thee. That is, It was meet that they as being
the principal Actors, should have appeared before thee.

And object if they had any thing against me. To wit, That was not a crime
feigned against me through Calumny and Malice.

20. Or. Supply, that the absence of those Asian Jews, who were the Authors of
the Outrage committed upon me, from thy Tribunal, be not suspected.

Let these same Men. My Adversaries, the Priests and Senators of the Jews, who
are here present and were not present at the beginning of the Outrage done
against me, but took on trust from others the Accusation brought against me.

Say if they have found any evil doing in me. That is, Let them openly declare,
if they have found any thing wherein I have done amiss.

When I stood before the Judgment. In the Gr. I standing. The Vulgar and
Erasmus render it, While I stand: As if Paul had spoke of their then present
hearing. But the matter it self plainly declares that it is to be understood of
the former Judgment, when he was brought by the Chief Captain before the
Council of the Elders, as above, c. 22. v. 30. and so it is to be rendered, When
I stood. The meaning is the same, as if Paul had said, When Lysias the Chief
Captain had brought me before the Sanhedrin, being desirous to be certainly
informed as to the Accusations brought against me by the Jews.

21. Except it be for this one Voice. That is, Unless perhaps this true and
innocent word be blameworthy in me.

That I cried standing among them. That is, When I stood among them. See above,
c. 23. v. 6.

22. Felix deferred them. In the Gr. is added, as also in the English, Hearing
these things, or rather, When he had heard these things. As if he had said, But
when Felix had heard Paul acknowledging that he was of that Sect which was
called Nazarens, and defending himself from the Crimes of profaning the Temple
and making an Uproar, objected against him, by denial, he was afraid to give
Sentence, and deferred the Judgment by putting it off to another time.

The uttermost. In the Greek it is more certainly, more exactly. The
construction is somewhat obscure by reason of the trajection of the Participle,
saying, which will be more plain if it be thus paraphrastically digested into
order: Saying, when I shall be better and more fully informed what this
Doctrine is, which is objected against Paul under the name of the Heresy of
the Nazarens, above v. 5. and the Chief Captain Lysias shall come down from
Jerusalem to Caesarea, I will again hear you who are Accusers with the
Defendant, and will then pass Sentence on the cause when debated by both
Parties.

Having knowledge of that way. That is, Having further made an enquiry into,
and more fully been informed of that Way and Sect, which when objected to Paul,
he confessed he followed, above v. 14. They are the words of Felix delaying to
Pronounce him Guilty. But frequently in the New Testament the Doctrine of the
Gospel, or the Christian Religion is signified by this Expression, This way, as
ye may see above c. 9. v. 2. c. 19. v. 9.23. c. 22. v. 4.

Saying. There is no reason, says the Learned Beza, why any should think that
the Trajection of this Participle is wrested and forced. For neither use these
Particles (...) to be taken in another sense in Plato 's Dialogues; and with
the Latins, I say, and, he says. But also ye may find instances of the like,
or even a more harsh Transposition in the same Verb below, c. 25. v. 5. Luc. 5.
v. 24 and 7. v. 42. Yet I confess that this Trajection for the most part occurs
in the middle of a Sentence, whereas here it is used betwixt two Sentences; but
that exact nicety of Speech is not to be expected in inspired Writers; and the
perspicuity of the Sentence seems enough to confirm this Exposition, although
there were no other proofs for it.

When the Chief Captain Lysias. Who, To wit, being acquainted with all things
done at Jerusalem, can fully satisfy me, whether this Man who denies that he
stirred up Sedition, and profaned the Temple, be guilty or not.

Shall come down. To wit, from Jerusalem to Casarea.

I will hear. To wit, to decide the Controversy.

You. To wit, The Accusers and Defendant in both Causes.

23. And he Commanded. As if he had said, And having deferred the cause, he
ordered a certain Centurion of Caesarea, that he would keep Paul in safe
Custody, but yet that he would let his Friends have free access to him, to
assist him with their Advice, and Estates.

And have liberty. Gr. Releasment, To wit, from Bonds, and closer confinement.

Nor any of his Acquaintance. That is, Of those who were his intimate Friends.

Forbid to minister unto him. In procuring things necessary for him. In the
Greek, as also the English, it is added, or to come to him: To wit, to confer
with him, or comfort him. Antonia the younger Daughter to Antonius the
Triumvir, the Wife of Drusus, and Mother to Germanicus and Claudius, and
Grandmother to Caius Caligula (who as Pliny says, 7 Hist. Not. 19. never did
spit) obtained the same privilege from Macro Prefect of the Roman Soldiers by
her Petition, for Agrippa the elder Nephew to Herod the great by Aristobulus,
when he was cast into bonds by Tiberius Caesar, as you may see in Joseph. 18.
Ant. 8.

24. And after certain days when Felix came. To the place where Paul was kept
largely and at liberty.

With his Wife Drusilla. The fairest of Women, Daughter to Agrippa the Elder
(who above, c. 12. is called Herod) by Cyprus the Daughter of Phasaelus, whose
Uncle Herod the great was, as ye may see in Josephus. 18 Ant. 7 and 19.7.
This Felix had another Wife of the same name, who was Daughter to Juba King of
Mauritania, and Niece to Anthony the Triumvir and Cleopatra Queen of Egypt.
This Drusilla the Daughter of Agrippa the Elder by Cyprus was six years of Age,
when her Father yielded up the Ghost, above c. 12. v. 23. Epiphanes Son to
Antiochus King of Commagena, to whom she was espoused by her said Father
Agrippa the Elder, refused her Marriage, because, that having altered his
resolution he would not embrace the Jewish Religion, as he had promised to her
Parents. Whereupon King Agrippa the younger, Son to Agrippa the Elder, and
Brother to the said Drusilla gave her in Marriage to Azizus King of the
Emessens, who was Circumcised. But Felix Procurator of Judea deeply in love or
rather lust after Drusilla, sent to her his Friend Simon by Birth a Jew of
Cyprus, who gave himself out for some great one, who solicited her to forsake
her Husband Azizus King of the Emessens, and be Married to Felix; promising
that she should be blessed, if she did not set light by him. She being one of
no great foresight, and desirous to be freed from the disturbance of her Sister
Bernice, who envied her by reason of her excellent and surpassing beauty, she
consented to tread under foot the Religion of her Fathers, and to be Married to
Felix. See Joseph. 20. Ant. 5. and Wars of the Jews l. 2. c. 10. and our
Annotations on c. 23. v. 24.

Which was a Jewess. That is, whose paternal Religion was that of the Jews.

He sent for Paul. That he might inquire diligently of that Sect, which was
objected to Paul as a Reproach and Crime, above, v. 5.

And heard him concerning the Faith in Christ. As if he had said, And Paul
perceiving he had a door of utterance opened to him, nothing afrighted with
dangers, declares to Felix in order, what Doctrines the Christan Religion
requires to be believed, what good things to be hoped for, what evils to be
feared, and finally, what things it requires us to do, and what to eschew.

25. And as he reasoned of Righteousness and Chastity. In the Gr. as also the
English it is, and Temperance. That is, As Paul was declaring the Doctrine of
the Christian Religion, concerning its reverence to all Virtues, and abhorrence
of all Vices.

And of Judgment to come. Wherein the Lord Jesus, who is constituted by the
Father Judge of the Quick and the Dead, will righteously Judge all Men, not
excepting the Potentates, and those who now sit judging others, then standing
before his Tribunal, and will render unto every one due rewards; to the just
everlasting, and inestimable Joys, to the unjust deserved, terrible, and never
to be ended Punishments. Paul also concluded his Oration before the Athenians
in Mars-hill with this tremendous Judgment of the Quick and the Dead, above c.
17. v. 31. As also the Preaching of this Judgment is reckoned one of the chief
fundamental points of the Christian Religion. Heb. 6.1, 2.

Felix trembling. For the Punishment that he was at length like to undergo for
his wicked Actions, which before he believed he would never account for, as
trusting to his Power that was so great, as Tacitus writes of him, Annal. l.
12.

Answered. Confounded with the Guilt of his Wickedness.

Go thy way for this time. That is, At present I am not at leisure to hear you
reason of these things.

When I have a convenient time. That is, When I shall have respit from other
business.

I will call for thee. To confer with thee.

26. He hoped also that Money should have been given him of Paul, etc. As if he
had said, Being an unsatiably covetous Man, he hoped that Paul would have
redeemed himself with Money, and therefore sent for him more frequently on
pretense to confer with him.

27. But after two Years. As much as to say, But when Paul had been kept in
free custody by Felix for the space of two whole years.

He had. From Nero Caesar.

A Successor. In the Office of Procurator of Judea.

Felix. Accused for his Wickedness, as Tacitus testifies.

Porcius Festus. Porcius was the Surname of the whole Race of Cato's, derived
from the Word Porcus signifying a Hog. Varro of Husbandry, Chap. 1. says, We
have many Surnames from both sorts of Beasts, the bigger, and the smaller: from
the smaller, Porcius, Ovinius, Caprilius; from the bigger, Equitius, Tanrus.

Willing to show the Jews a pleasure. That is, That he might ingratiate himself
to the Jews, whom he had incensed by many Oppressions.

He left Paul bound. That is, kept in open Prison. See above v. 23. But this
did nothing avail Felix. For the Elders of the Jews that dwelt at Caesarea,
went to Rome, and accused him before Nero the Emperor for the many injuries he
had done them. Whereupon his Successor Porcius Festus sent him bound to Rome to
Nero, who would have put him to Death, had not, as Josephus testifies, his
Brother Pallas, who then was in favor with the Emperor, procured his pardon.
Although Pallas himself is thought to have been poisoned by Nero not long
after, For that he held a vast Treasure in a long old Age. Tacit. l. 14. Annal.

CHAP. XXV.
1. NOW when Festus was come into the Province. To wit, Judea, committed to his
Administration by Nero Caesar.

After three days he went up to Jerusalem. The Metropolis of that Province,
that there he might enter upon and discharge his Office of Governor.

From Caesarea. Where by reason of the convenience of the Sea, those who were
Deputed by the Roman Emperors to Govern Judea, used to have their residence, as
Tacitus testifies Annal. lib. 18. As also it was the first Port, as they
Sailed from Italy to Judea.

2. And the High Priest went unto him. He seems to be the same Ananias that is
mentioned above, c. 23. v. 2 and 24.

And Chief of the Jews. These heads of the Jewish People are above, c. 24. v.
1. called Elders, that is, Senators.

Against Paul. That is, That they might with more advantage accuse Paul before
the new Governor.

And besought him. To wit, Festus.

That he would send him to Jerusalem. And there pass a final Sentence against
him. The Roman Magistrates did not always give Judgment in one particular City,
but wherever they happened to be.

Laying wait. As if he had said, Intending to kill Paul by Ambush in his way
from Caesarea to Jerusalem.

4. Should be kept at Caesarea. As if he had said, There is no necessity that
Paul should be brought from Caesarea, where he is in Custody, hither to
Jerusalem, to be judged by me here, seeing I my self am to go shortly into
Caesarea.

5. In you. That is, Among you, as it is in the English Translation. In is
frequently put for inter among, as above c. 7. v. 44. c. 18. v. 11. c. 24. v.
21.

Who are able. Supply, To convict Paul of his Crimes by solid and strong
Arguments. As if he had said, says Joh. Pric. The Accusations of the confused
multitude are not worthy the taking notice of, the disordered rabble does
destroy the very appearance and form of Judgment. Let Men therefore be
delegated that are more skilful in managing Impeachments.

Go down together. As if he had said, Let them go down with me from Jerusalem
to Caesarea, and accuse Paul of his Crimes.

6. Among them. To wit, Among the Jews of Jerusalem.

The next Day. That is, the next day after that Festus returned to Caesarea.

Sitting in the Judgment Seat. To give Judgment.

He Commanded Paul to be brought. That he might judge his Cause.

Many and grievous Complaints, etc. That is, They laid many grievous Crimes to
his Charge, which yet they could not fix upon Paul by any plausible proofs.
Excellent is that of Apuleius, Any innocent Man may be accused of a forged
Crime, but none but a Guilty Person can be convicted.

8. While Paul answered for himself. That is, While he vindicated his own
Innocence by most solid and convincing Arguments, as above, c. 24. v. 10. and
seq.

Against the Law of the Jews. That is, Against the Law given by God to the Jews
through the Ministry of Moses.

Against the Temple. Of Jerusalem, which my Adversaries calumniate me that I
went about to profane.

Against Caesar. Those Accusers of Paul seem to have laid the same things to
his charge, that the Jews of Thessalonica and Corinth did, above, c. 17. v. 7.
etc. 18. v. 13.

9. To do the Jews a pleasure. That is, To curry favor with the Jews.

And there be judged of those things before me. That is, Be judged by the great
Council of the Jews in my hearing. The Sanhedrin, says Grotius, had some Power
of executing the Law, but the right of the Roman City, was greater than that of
the Sanhedrin, therefore Paul could not be compelled to acknowledge them for
Judges. The Governors used sometimes to be present with the Senate of the City.
L. 1. sed etsi D. quando appellandum sit.


10. But Paul said. To wit, When he understood on what design and intent Festus
put that Question to him, and fearing ambushes laid by the Jews.

I stand at Caesar 's Judgment Seat. He calls that Caesar's Judgment Seat,
which the Governor held in the Name, and by Authority of Caesar. Vlpianus Book.
1. of the duty of Caesar's Procurator, says, What things are acted and done by
Caesar 's Procurator, are so approved of by him, as if they had been done by
Caesar himself.

Where I. Seeing I am a Roman Citizen.

To the Jews. To wit, Those mine Accusers, to whose importunity you seem to
yield.

I have done no wrong. That is, in nothing, have I given them just cause of
offense.

Better. The Comparative is put for the Positive well, or the Superlative, as
it in the English, very well.

11. I refuse not to die. Terent. Phorm. Act. 1. Sc. 5. If, Uncle, Antipho has
committed so great a trespass against his own Interest, I plead for no favor
for him, but that he may suffer according to his demerits. On which place
Donatus says, It Is a Rhetorical Theorem, which he uses who is entrusted with a
cause proposed: If this or that be, I beg not pardon, I deprecate no punishment.

But if there be none of these things. Supply, Wherein I have offended, as I
said above, v. 8.

Which these accuse me. A Graecism, For in Latin it is more proper to say, Of
which or whereof they accuse me.

No Man may deliver me unto them. That is, No Man has Power to grant this
liberty to the Jews to judge me against my Will. It was, says Grotius,
contrary to the Roman Laws to deliver up a Roman Citizen, and that against his
Will to Men of a Province, to be judged by them. Pliny in his Epistle to
Trajan, of the Christians, says, There were others possessed with the like
madness, whom, because they were Roman Citizens, I ordered to be sent back into
the City.

I appeal to Caesar. That is, as Grotius interprets it, If ye will deliver me
to be judged by the Sanhedrin ( for Festus seemed to intend it) I appeal to
Caesar Nero. This was allowed by the Roman Laws in such a case. For before
Sentence Appeal may be made, If the Judge has pronounced an Interlocutory on a
Question to be discussed in a Civil Action, or does it contrary to Law in a
Criminal. L. Ante. D. de appel. recip.


With the Council. That is, With the Conciliary Assistants.

Conferred. That he might ask their Judgment as to this Appeal of Paul's to
Caesar, whether it should be admitted, or not.

To Caesar thou shall go. Festus grants that to a Roman Citizen, which if he
had not granted, he had been guilty of open violence, before Caesar, whose
honor, that was advanced by that Appeal, he should have seemed to suppress and
make light account of.

13. And when a few days were past. That is, a few days intervening.

Agrippa. The Younger, whom Herod Agrippa Aristobulus's Son, begot of Cyprus
Daughter to Phasaelus.

King. The last of the Jews, but not of the Province of Judaea or Jerusalem, or
any part of the two Tetrarchies of Archelaus his Grand Uncle, but of the
Tetrarchies of his other Grand Uncle Philip, and of Lysanias, of whom mention
is made Luke 3.1. Claudius the Emperor at first would have had this Agrippa the
lesser, then a young Man, to succeed his Father Agrippa, but afterward looking
on him as incapable to govern so great a Kingdom, he made Cuspius Fadus
Procurator of Judaea and of the whole Kingdom of Agrippa the Elder (which was
larger than the Kingdom of his Grandfather Herod the Great.) And so Judaea was
again made a Province, as it was before it was added to the Kingdom of Agrippa
the Elder by Claudius Caesar, since Augustus had banished Archelaus, Uncle to
the same Agrippa, who was accused of Tyranny, to Vienna of the Allobroges. But
in the fourth Year from the Death of Agrippa the Elder, which was the eighth of
the Reign of Claudius, Herod Brother to the same Agrippa, King of Chalcis in
Syria, died, and Agrippa the younger was by Claudius substituted in the room of
the deceased; and together with the Kingdom of Chalcis, he was also invested
with Power over the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Holy Treasury, and with the
right of choosing High Priests, which the same Emperor had granted to his Uncle.
This was the beginning of Agrippa the younger's Reign. But when he had governed
Chalcis four Years, Claudius, after the twelfth year of his Reign, took it from
him, and transported him into a greater Kingdom, constituting him King of the
Tetrarchy (which was his Grand Uncle Philip's) to wit, of Batanaea, and
Gaulanitis, or Auranitis, (which Countries seem to be the same with Ituraea,
Luke 3.1.) and Trachonitis; adding moreover the Principality, which is Surnamed
Lysania's, because it was of old possessed by Lysanias Ptolemy's Son, of whom
Josephus writes, 14 Ant. 23. and 15. Ant. 4.
and more recently by the Tetrarch Lysanias, whom Luke makes mention of. To
this greater Kingdom of Agrippa the younger, Nero added Tiberias and Tarichaea
Cities of Galilee, and Julias in Ituraea, situated beyond Jordan, with fourteen
Villages conterminous to it. Jos. 20 Ant. 5.
Eusebius in his Chronicle declares that this Agrippa reigned 26 years, to
whom all Chronologers give credit. But Eusebius committed two mistakes; First,
in that he says that Agrippa the younger reigned immediately after his Fathers
decease, contrary to what Josephus asserts: 19 Ant. 7.
And also in that he is of opinion, that the Kingdom of this Agrippa ended
together with the miserable destruction of Jerusalem: As if, because 26 years
intervened between the beginning of the same King and the overthrow of
Jerusalem, the King himself had been also destroyed together with the Temple
and City. But, says the Renowned Scaliger, that Agrippa the younger died in
the third year of Trajan, Number. MMCXVI. of Eusebius's Chronicle, as Justus of
Tiberias testified, who presented his Chronological Works to King Agrippa
himself. None therefore could more certainly pronounce about this Kings Death,
than he who dedicated his Work to him. Phocius says of Justus of Tiberias: He
begins his History from Moses, and continues it even to the exit of
Agrippa, the seventh of Herod 's Family, and last of the Jewish Kings: Who
received his Kingdom under Claudius, increased it under Nero, and further under
Vespasian: But he died in the third Year of Trajan, at which time his History
likewise concludes. But there was no cause, says the same Scaliger, why
Eusebius should limit the Kingdom of Agrippa the younger with the Destruction
of Jerusalem. For neither was he King of Jerusalem, nor had he any Authority
over any part of the Tetrarchy of Archelaus. For Caesar 's Procurator was
always sent to the Patrimony of Archelaus, and Jerusalem, who was called
Epistropus of Judea. Thus Joseph Scaliger in his Animadversious on Eusebius's
Chronicle. With whom notwithstanding the most renowned Scultetus cannot agree
in this, that he says, That there was always a Procurator sent to the Patrimony
of Archelaus and Jerusalem. For when Agrippa the Elder reigned and governed
Judea it self, he is of opinion that the Jews paid Tribute, not to the Romans,
but to their own King; nor that any Procurator came from Rome to Jerusalem. The
same Scaliger on Euscbius, Number. MMLXXXVI. Agrippa the younger the seventh and
last of the Kings of the Race of Herod, lived 30 years after the Destruction of
Jerusalem, his Kingdom continuing safe, which he possessed 26 years, and
increased by the accession of some Towns through the favor of Vespasian. So
far was the Fortune of Jerusalem from causing any alteration in his Kingdom.
What therefore did Eusebius mean? Whether that after the Destruction of
Jerusalem, Agrippa continued in the Station of a private Person, or that he was
destroyed together with Jerusalem? But these things are both already confuted,
as also they are with this Coin. AYTOKPATOP. OYEPAIANO. KAIAP. IOYDAIA.
EALOKIA. ETEI. KA. AGPIPP. Agrippa remained King after Judaea was taken.
Elsewhere it is ETOYS K. Eusebius has licentiouslly enough indulged himself in
this Fiction. But both the Ancient and Modern Jews are mistaken, who say that
their Power of Judgment was taken away from them by the Romans 40 years before
the Destruction of Jerusalem, that is, in the fifteenth year of Tiberius
Caesar. Which is ridiculous. For this befell them 61 years before the burning
of the Temple; about the time that Archelaus was banished to Vienna. Whence is
that, It is not lawful for us to kill any Man. For Caesar 's Governor or
Procurator, devolving all the Power on himself, left very few things, and those
of very small moment to the Consistory of the Jews, with these moreover, which
belonged to their Laws, Rites, Ceremonies and Songs.

And Bernice. Sister German to King Agrippa the younger, Widow of Herod King of
Chalcis her Uncle. When a rumor went abroad that she lay carnally with her
Brother German Agrippa, she advised Polemon King of Cilicia, that he would
first be circumcised and then marry her, thinking that in so doing she would
make it appear to be a Lie. Nor did Polemon deny her, being especially induced
thereto by her riches; yet that Marriage was not of long continuance, by reason
of intemperance, as it is said, Bernice departing from him. Who presently after
he was deserted by his Wife, deserted the Jewish Religion. Joseph. 20 Ant. 5.
The same Bernice, or Berenice, or Beronice, Joseph. 2. Bell. Jud. 15.
came to Jerusalem barefooted and her Head shaven to pay her Vow to God for her
safety. Juvenal Sat. 20.

And the Rich Diamond that fairer showed,
On Berenices finger, this bestowed
The barbarous Agrippa, he to his
Incestuous Sister once presented this,
Where barefoot Kings the sacred Sabbath hold,
And ancient Pity lets the Hogs grow old.
Came down. Gr. came unto, as it is in English.

Caesarea, to salute Festus. That they might pay their Respects to the new
Governor or Procurator. For those who depended on the Roman Emperors as
Vassals, they officiously insinuated themselves into the Favor of the Roman
Procurators.

14. Had been there. That is, Agrippa and Bernice had tarried at Caesarea.

Unto the King. Agrippa.

Declared Paul 's Cause. That is, He related in order all Paul's concern, in
what case it was.

Desiring against him. As if guilty of a Notorious Crime.

Judgment. Without telling the cause why. Gr. (...), Sentence, that is, a
Juridical Condemnation, as appears by Festus's Answer subjoyned to it. (...),
says, Ribera on Hos. 13. is a Law-term, and signifies a cause which is
pleaded before the Judge, and Decree of the judge and right or an Action to do
or ask any thing, and the Punishment which is inflicted, which also the Latins
sometimes call dica, using a Greek Word for one of their own. Some Greek Copies
instead of this simple Word (...) have the Compound (...), which signifies
Condemnation.

16. It is not the manner of the Romans. Like to Barbarous Cruelty, or
Tyrannical Impotency, as Apuleius speaks.

To deliver any one to die. In the Greek it is, To gratify one with another
Destruction, to wit, at the request of any.

17. When therefore they were come. The Elders of the Jews intending to
prosecute Paul with all severity.

Hither. To Caesarea.

I Sat on the Judgment Seat. To give Judgment.

I Commanded the Man to be brought forth. To wit, Paul, who was in Prison.

18. When they stood up. Gr. (...), standing, that is, when they stood before
the Judgment Seat.

They brought none. As if he had said, I suspected, that they should lay some
heinous Wickedness to Paul's charge, but they had nothing to say against him
but some frivolous things, I know not what, concerning their own Superstition.
Gallio Deputy of Achaia spoke to the same purpose in Paul's cause, when he was
accused by the Jews, above, c. 18. v. 14.

19. Of their own. To wit, Jewish.

Superstition. Superstition is a vain and ridiculous Worship of God, as also an
anxious and excessive dread of him, when he is thought to be offended at those
things which yet he is no ways offended at. This profane Man speaks impiously
of that Worship of the True God which the Law of Moses appoints, Nothing,
says the Renowned Beza, reverencing the presence of King Agrippa. For these
Governors of Provinces used to prefer themselves even to Kings by reason of the
greatness of the People of Rome, and it is probable also that this Agrippa,
following the Footsteps of his Fathers, did so profess the Jewish Religion, as
that he should not offend the Romans.

Against him. To wit, Paul.

And of one Jesus which was Dead. And that inhumanely murdered.

Whom Paul affirmed to be alive. Raised up from the Dead.

20. And because I doubted, etc. Here, says the Famous Beza, Festus palliateth
his Sin, and bewrays himself. For why did he not absolve a supposed Criminal
against whom nothing could be proved? Or what occasion was there for his
doubting? Therefore if he had declared the plain truth, he would have
confessed, that he would therefore have had Paul carried up to Jerusalem, that
he might ingratiate himself to the Jews, and expose an Innocent person to the
cruelty of his Enemies, to be murdered by them either by the way, or in the
City: Wherefore he gave just cause of appeal, seeing the right of appeal of old
granted to the People, but afterward to Caesar, was granted to a Roman Citizen
by most firm Laws.

21. But when Paul had appealed to be reserved to the hearing of Augustus. That
is, That he might remain in Custody until Nero the Roman Emperor could cognosce
of his Cause and Defense, and determine thereupon. Now all the Roman Emperors
were called Caesar's from the first of their Emperors Caius Julius, whose
families Surname was Caesar; and from their Second Emperor Octavianus Caesar
all his Successors to this very day have the name of Augustus. But Octavianus
himself, for his singular Virtue, and many good deeds to the Commonwealth, in
the 36 year of his Age, according to the Opinon of Munatius Plancus, but the 16
year of his Empire, which he happily governed 56 years, was called Augustus; an
excellent and very honorable Title, which signifies one that is venerable, and
to be sacredly revered as God.

22. I would. That is, I have a great desire.

23. But on the Morrow when Agrippa was come. To wit, into the Judgment Hall.

Agrippa and Bernice. That is, Together with his Sister German Bernice, of whom
above, v. 13.

With great Ambition. Gr. With great Fantasy, that is, with most sumptuous
Clothing and Royal Ornaments, or as it is in the English, with great Pomp, as
the Gr. Author speaks 1 Mac. 9.37. where also the Vulgar Latin Interpreter
renders it, with much Ambition, that is, vain ostentation.

And entered the place of hearing. That is, Into the Conclave appointed to take
Cognizance of, and judge Causes.

With the chief Captains. To wit, Military, who were set over 1000 Soldiers.

Principal Men of the City. That is, The Nobility and Gentry of Caesarea.

Paul was brought. From Prison to the said Conclave.

24. And Festus said. Addressing himself to the Assistants.

Jerusalem and here. To Wit, At Caesarea. See above v. 6, 7.

Crying. Gr. Crying aloud. To wit, At Jerusalem before Claudius Lysias the
chief Captain, above c. 22. v. 22. But at Caesarea before Festus the
Procurator, where above, v. 7. the Jews accused Paul of heinous Crimes without
Cause.

But when I found, etc. The like Testimony the Pharisees also bare to Paul of
his Innocence, above, c. 23. v. 9. King Agrippa and his Sister Bernice below c.
26. verse. 31.

To send him. To wit, Paul to Domitius Nero Caesar. See above v. 21.

26. No certain thing. That is, Known and determinate.

To write to my Lord. That is, To the Emperor. Octavianus Caesar Augustus by an
Edict prohibited the Title of Lord to be given to him, which had its Rise from
Parasites, and indicated according to the import of the related Words, as if
the Roman Citizens were the Emperor's Servants; witness Dion and Suetonius. But
after his Decease the Custom became Universal, and that even among good Princes
and Emperors, of not refusing this Title, as appears from Pliny's Letters to
Trajan.

I have brought him forth before you. Who are now come here together.

Especially before thee. As being well seen in the Jewish Laws and
Controversies.

Examination had. Or, as Pliny speaks, Inquisition made.

27. Unreasonable. That is, Foolish and Absurd.

To send Prisoner. To Rome, to the Emperor.

And not to signify. Supply, by Letter.

The Crimes laid against him. That is, The Accusations brought against him, or
Misdemeanors laid to his Charge.

CHAP. XXVI.
1. THou art permitted. By Festus the Governor and me.

To speak for thy self. That is, To Plead and Defend thy Cause.

Stretched forth his Hand. As they use to do who are to make a large Oration,
or a long Discourse; not so much that they may procure Silence, as that their
Freedom and Ingenuity may thereby be more evident.

Answered for himself. That is, He began thus Courageously to defend his
Innocence from the Calumnies of his Adversaries.

2. I think my self happy. This Ovid would have expressed, I am glad at this
with all my Heart. Apuleius also in the beginning of his first Apology to
Maximus the Proconsul: I rejoice, that while thou art Judge, I have both Power
and Liberty granted me, to purge Philosophy among the Unskillful, and approve my
self.

3. Questions. Which, to wit, are Controverted. What Paul says here of Agrippa
the younger, he affirmed almost the very same of Felix the Governor, above, c.
24. v. 10, 11.

4. Life. That is, My Custom of Life and Living, as Cicero speaks. So
Apuleius and Plinius the younger used the Word Vita, Life. This l. 3. Ep. 20.
speaking of a certain Candidate: he himself spoke for himself, he declared his
Life. The other, Apolog. 2. What more copious Commender, what more sacred
Witness of my Life can I produce?

Among my own Nation. That is, Among the Jews.

Know all the Jews. Especially they of Jerusalem.

5. Which knew me from the beginning. That is, To whom I was very well known
long ago.

If they would testify. To wit, Of my bypast Life.

After the straitest. That is, Famous above all the other Sects of the Jewish
Religion, for the Commendation of Wisdom and Skilfulness in the Law of God. See
what we have said on Mat. 3.7.

Sect. Gr. Heresy. See what we have said on this middle or indifferent Word
above, c. 24. v. 5.

Of our Religion. That is, Of the Jewish, in which besides the sevenfold Sect
of the Pharisees, there were the Sects of the Sadduces and Essens. Josephus 14
Ant. 9. calls Heresies, and l. 18. c. 2. Philosophies. Hierom against Jovinian,
l. 2. c. 9. Calls them Dogmata, Opinions. They might also be called Parties, as
the Renowned Drusius observes. For, says he, (...), Party, Sect, that is (...),
Act. 23.6. and (...), Nations. Truly in the Commentators on Aboth, where
speaking of the Sadduces, They were made a Nation by themselves, (...). The
Nation of the Sadduces, as, the Nation of Gramarians, etc. The Hebrews properly
call a Sect (...), and a Haeresie, (...), whence (...), Heretics, and from
thence Minaeus, that is, (...). Sect also in the Acts is called (...), that is,
Way, and in Jochazim (...), that is, Use, Custom.

I lived a Pharisee. Paul testifies the same of himself above, c. 23. v. 7. and
Phil. 3. v. 5.

6. And now, etc. As if he had said, But now I am Accused, because I maintain
the Hope of the Promise made to our Fathers. By Hope, Says Wolzogenius, he
seems to understand metonymically the things hoped for, as appears by what
follows. Some expound that hope of the Resurrection of the Dead, of which
above, c. 23. v. 6. etc. 24.15. But others take it for the Hope of the
Deliverance of the Jews by the Messiah, or of Salvation to be obtained by
Christ. Nor without reason; for although here below, v. 8. there is expressly
mention made of the Raising of the Dead, yet that does not militate against
this Opinion, which may be seen there. Again, The raising up of the Just that
are dead, is comprehended in that hope of Salvation by Christ, as being of
larger extent. Moreover, it cannot be clearly shown, that the Promise of the
Resurrection of the Dead was made by God to the Fathers of the Jews, which is
here immediately subjoyned. But it is manifest that it was made of Christ, not
obscurely, but expressly, as we shall straight see. To pass by that, what is
spoken in the following Verse, can scarce be rightly said of the hope of the
Resurrection, to wit, that the twelve Tribes of Israel hoped that they should
come to it; seeing there were many among those twelve Tribes, who had no
persuasion of the hope of the Resurrection of the dead, as the Sadduces, and
those who favored their Opinion.

To our Fathers. To wit, The Ancestors of the Jews.

Of the Promise. To wit, Of the Messiah, or Christ the Savior.

Made of God. To Abraham, Genesis 22.18. To Isaac, Genesis 26.4. To Jacob, Genesis
28.14. To Juda, Genesis 49.10. To the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 18.15. To David. 2. Sam.
7.12. Psalm. 132.11. Isa. 7.14.9.6, 7.11.1. Jer. 23.5.33.14, 15. Ezekiel. 34.23,
24.37.24, 25. Hos. 3.5. Mich. 5.2, 7, 20. Paul, says Wolzogenius, every where
preached the Messiah promised by God of old, and then as yet hoped for by the
Jews, but really already shown, and that that Messiah was Jesus, whom God
raised up after that he was Crucified by the Jews: and for this very reason was
he persecuted by the Jews.

I stand and am Judged. This Vlpianus would have said, I appear personally in
Judgment.

7. Unto which. That is, For the obtaining of which Promise. The Sense of this
whole Verse, is the same as if he had said; But whosoever of our Nation
carefully worship God, and exercise themselves Night and Day in the Duties of
Godliness, they are inflamed with this Hope, that they will sometimes obtain
that everlasting Salvation, and blessed Immortality, which the Messiah, the
Author of Salvation, will bestow on all them that obey him.

Our twelve Tribes. So are the Posterity of Jacob called, who was Abraham's
Grandchild, named Israel, from whose twelve Sons the twelve Tribes of the
Israelites are propagated. And although the ten Tribes that were long ago carried
into Assyria, 2. Kings 17.23. and 18.1. did not all return together with the 2
Tribes of Benjamin and Juda, yet that not a few of them were scattered among
the two Tribes that returned from the Babylonish Captivity, is declared Ezra
6.17. and 8.35. See also Kimchi on Jer. 50.4.

Night and day. That is, Without Intermission.

Serving. To wit, The living God. In the Gr. is added (...), which is the same
as (...), 1 Pet. 1.22. Earnestly, Instantly, Fervently.

Hope to come. Or, To attain.

For which Hope I am accused of the Jews. As if he had said, It is imputed a
Crime to me by the Jews, because I declare that the Hope which they all have of
Christ, from the Promises of God, is already fulfilled, and that the promised
Christ is already exhibited by God, and that he is that very Jesus of Nazareth,
whom after he had suffered a cruel Death, God raised from the Dead; and gave
him all Power in Heaven and Earth.

8. Why? So, says Beza, the Greek Annotations distinguish: Nor do I doubt but
this is the Genuine Reading: but besides that otherwise the Sentence would be
incoherent, this Speech is also full of solid Gravity. For it strenuously and
nimbly anticipates their tacit Objection, who among his Hearers were either
Heathens or Sadduces; for they might imagine and say; Thou Preachest that Jesus
of Nazareth, after that he was slain by a cruel Death, resumed life again,
which cannot be believed.

Should it be thought a thing uncredible with you? Judging by the mean Capacity
of Human Intellect.

If. That is, That, as below, v. 23. (...), if, says Daniel Brenius for (...),
that, as (...) with the Hebrews, Genesis 47.9. Number. 3.30. Psalm. 63.7.139.10. Isa.
4.5.

God. Whose Immense Power is not bounded within the narrow Limits of Human
Understanding.

Should raise the dead? To wit, by his Efficacy, or as the vulgar Latin
Interpreter speaks, Phil 3.21. according to the working of his Power, whereby
he is able to subdue all things unto himself. See that Golden
Physico-Theological Treatise of the Possibility of the Resurrection, written by
the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire a very great Man by the Suffrages of all.

9. I verily. Before that I certainly knew that Jesus who was Crucified, lived
again, and that he is the Messiah promised in the Law and the Prophets.

Thought. By a preposterous Zeal for the Law of Moses, and burning with a
pertinacious and mad Rage. Lactantius the most famous for Eloquence amongst the
Assertors of Christian Verity; thus refels the Gentiles who defended their
Religion by tormenting those that dissented from them. But, say they, Instit.
l. 5. c. 19.
Sacred Rites publicly professed are to be defended. O with how honest a
Desire do these miserable men err! For they think that there is nothing in
humane Affairs more excellent than Religion, and that it must be defended with
the utmost Power; but as they are mistaken in the Religion it self, so are they
in the kind of Defense. For Religion must be defended not by killing, but by
dying; not by Cruelty, but by Patience; not by Wickedness, but by Faith. For
those are the Deeds of Evil Men, these of Good; and it is necessary that good
be practiced in Religion, not evil. For if ye will defend your Religion by
Blood, if by Torments, or Evil, it will no more be defended, but polluted and
violated. For there is nothing so voluntary as Religion, in which, if the Mind
of its Professor is averse, it is straight vanished, it is now none. There is
therefore good Reason, that ye should defend Religion by Patience or Death, in
which if Faith be preserved, it is both well pleasing to God, and adds
Authority to Religion. Socrates Relates, 3 Hist. 21. that Jovinian the Emperor
was mightily commended, because he permitted every man to profess Religion as
he thought fit, and every one to worship as he pleased. So Flavius Josephus in
his Life writes, that every one ought (...), according to his own Choice
worship God, (...), but not by constraint, neither ought we to act so as to
give cause to others to repent that they came over to us on the account of
Security. Athanasius Apol. 2. Deaths and Bonds are far from being allowed by
our Religion. Tertullianus to Scapula c. 11. We worship one God whom ye
Naturally know, at whose Lightnings and Thunder ye tremble, at whose Benefits
ye Rejoice; ye also fancy the rest to be Gods, which we know are Devils. Yet it
is of humane Right and natural Liberty, that every man Worship what he thinks
fit, nor does ones Religion either incommodate or advantage another. But
neither is it the duty of Religion to impose Religion, which ought to be
embraced willingly, not by Constraint. Council of Tolet. IV. Can. 56. As Man
died by obeying the Serpent out of his own Free Will, so, in the Call of the
Grace of God every Man is Saved, through Faith, by the Conversion of his own
Mind. Wherefore the Jews are not to be compelled by force, but are to be
persuaded, that they may be Converted out of their own Free Will. Nicolas the
first Roman Bishop of this Name answering the demands of the Bulgarians, c. 41.
But as concerning those who refuse to embrace the Christian Religion, and
Sacrifice, and bow their Knees to Idols, we can write no other thing to you,
but that ye convince them to embrace the true Faith by Admonitions,
Exhortations, and that ye endeavor to persuade them that they are vainly wise,
rather by Reason than by Violence. See what is said above, c. 5. v. 39. etc.
17. v. 3. and 17.

With my self. Gr. (...), in, or to my self, which the Syriack, Arabic, and
the famed Beza construe with the Verb immediately going before (...), as if it
were put for (...), so that the Sense is, I judged with my self, or as the
vulgar Latin Interpreter, I thought. But the said vulgar Latin and Erasmus,
refer it to the Verb (...), I behoved or ought, which follows. The most learned
Lewis de Diu, is of Opinion that this is not to be altogether despised. For
although, says he, it is more usual to say (...), yet the Dative Case is
sometimes used even by the most approved Authors. Aristotle in his Problems,
(...), it is necessary that Salt undergo the Fire.

Contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. Name is here taken either for his
very Person whose Name it is, as above, c. 4. v. 12. or for the whole
Profession of the Gospel or Religion delivered by Jesus, as above, c. 5. v. 41.
Mat. 10.22. 1 Pet. 4.14. Rev. 2.3.

Ought. As of bounden Duty, in regard I thought that Jesus was a Seducer,
Impostor and grand Adversary to God.

To do many things. By vexing, afflicting and persecuting them, who professed
themselves the Disciples and Worshippers of Christ.

10. Which thing I also did. With an Impetus of blind Zeal, and inflexible
Obstinacy.

In Jerusalem. In which Metropolis of Judea and of all the East, I was taken
and cast into Bonds.

And many of the Saints. That is, Of those who follow the Way and Doctrines of
Jesus of Nazareth, who are called Saints, because they are separated from the
profane Multitude of Men, by the Profession of that Religion and Doctrine which
Christ delivered to them. But when Paul Persecuted them with outrageous
Violence, he accounted them Profane, and every way detestable Villains. See
above, c. 8.3. and 22.4.

And when they were put to Death. To wit, The Christians by the unbelieving
Jews.

I gave my Voice. That is, I gave my Approbation to the Madness of those
unbelieving Jews, and by my Suffrage, approved of their bloody Cruelty whereby
they destroyed the Christians. See above, c 8. 1. c. 22. 20.

And in every Synagogue. By the name of Synagogue are usually denoted the
Places where the Jews made their public Prayers, as also frequently their
Juridical and Civil Conventions, as, 1 Mac. 7.12. the Additions to Daniel
13.41. It is also used for Christian Assemblies met to perform Divine Service,
Jac. 2.2. Here therefore by Synagogues may be understood, either those Meeting
Places of the Christians, into which Paul sometimes violently broke in, and
haled them forth to insupportable Torments; or the Juridical and Civil
Assembling places of the Jews, before whom the Christians that were apprehended
by Paul were brought; or finally, the Places appointed for Prayer, in which, it
is not improbable, that sometimes the Punishment decreed against the Guilty,
was put in Execution. For Epiphanius makes mention of a certain Jew that was
scourged in a Synagogue, when he was deserting the Jews and turning over to the
Christians. And in Eusebius, Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 15. a Book is cited written
against the Montanists in the Reign of Commodus, where it is said, that no
Woman of that Flock, was either punished with Stripes, or stoned in the
Synagogues of the Jews.

I punished them often, and compelled them to blaspheme. That is, I frequently
caused the Christians to be put to Torments, that by the sharpness of them I
might drive them to curse Christ. That this was done in the time of the
Persecutions by some, that were not sound Christians Pliny witnesses Lib. 10.
Epist. 97. to Trajan the Emperor.

And being exceedingly, etc. As if he had said, But further, my mad Rage
against the Christians increasing every day, I was not satiated with tormenting
them all manner of ways at Jerusalem only, but carried on that Inhuman
Prosecution of them further, even to Cities situate without Judea.

12. Whereupon. That is, In the mean while that I was a doing these things, or
exercising my self in these things, as above, c. 24.18.

As I went. Gr. (...), and going, that is, Whiile I went with that purpose or
Mind.

To Damascus. The Metropolis of Syria, of which above, c. 9 2.

With Authority. As if he had said, Having obtained from the Chief Priests
Letters of Proxy, whereby I had full Authority, and also the Care was committed
to me of doing that which I went about. See above, c. 9.1, 2 and 14. and 22.5.

Commission. Gr. (...), Permission.

13. At mid Day. That is, About Noon, as it is the Gr. Text above. c. 22. v. 6.

In the way. To wit, When I was not far from Damascus. See above, c. 9. v. 3.
and 22.6.

I saw, etc. See above c. 9. v. 3. and 22. v. 6.

14. I heard, etc. See above, c. 9. v. 4. and 22. v. 7.

15. I, etc. See above, c. 9. v. 5. and 22. v. 8.

16. But rise, and stand upon thy Feet. Because both he and all those who were
present with him, Companions in his Journey, being dazzled with the Brightness
of the Light, which exceeded that of the Sun, were fallen down upon the Earth.
See above, v. 14.

For I have appeared unto thee for this Purpose. That is, For this end have I,
who am taken up into Heaven, and there sit at the Right Hand of God, whom the
Heavens must contain until the times of the Restitution of all things, and who
must at the last day come down from Heaven; I, I say, Jesus of Nazareth, whose
Countenance while I was on Earth, shone as the Sun, Mat. 17. v. 2. now reigning
in Heaven, have shown my self to thee in the brightness of Light more
resplendent than that of the Sun.

To make thee. Gr. (...), that I may take thee in my hands. See what we have
noted on this Greek word above, c. 22.14.

A Minister and a Witness, etc. As if he had said, As him whom I will employ
for a Preacher and Witness, both of those things which thou have now seen, and
also of those things which shall afterward be showed thee by me. Paul 's many
Visions, says Grotius, are had respect unto above, c. 18.9.23.11. and 2 Cor.
2.2. See what we said above, c. 22.15.

17. Delivering thee from the People and the Gentiles. That is, Promising my
Protection, whereby thou shall be delivered from those Dangers which shall
attend thee from the Jewish People, and strange Nations, for the discharge of
that Ministry.

Unto whom now I send thee. First indeed to the Jewish Nation, but especially
afterward to the Gentiles, of which I peculiarly make thee an Apostle. See
above, c. 22.21.

18. To open. That is, That by the Preaching of the Gospel thou may open.

Their Eyes. Not of the Body, but of the Mind; a Metaphor taken from the Body,
as Isa. 42.7. Ephesians. 1.18.

To turn them from darkness. To wit, Of Ignorance and Wickedness. See Col. 1.13.

To light. That is, To the perfect Knowledge of Gospel Truth, and Godliness
flowing thence. In the Gr. in is again put for ad, as in the Verse immediately
preceding.

And from the Power of Satan. Which wicked and envious Spirit, while he
maliciously fights against God and Men, by his Errors that he sows, and Vices
that result from them, he keeps Men, that are ignorant of the Truth Revealed by
God, in his own Power and Dominion, as under Tyranny in miserable Slavery,
drawing them into utter Destruction.

To God. That is, To the true and sound way of worshipping God.

That they may receive, etc. As if he had said, That Believing in me, they may
receive a free Pardon of their Sins, and be Partakers of the everlasting
Inheritance which God has appointed to those who are separated from the
Multitude of the Profane.

Lot. That is, As it is in the English, Inheritance, because Inheritances used
to be distributed by Lot. By that Lot or Inheritance is understood everlasting
Communion in that Heavenly Beatitude which God himself enjoys.

Among the Holy. Gr. In the Sanctified. That is, as it is in the English, Among
them that are Sanctified, or among them who by the Efficacy of the Holy Spirit,
are separated to God from the Ungodliness and Ignorance of worldly Men.

By Faith. Excellently says Calvin, Some read wrong in one Context, Among
those that are Sanctified by Faith; because this Particle is extended to the
whole Complex; therefore the meaning is, That by Faith we come to the
Possession of all the good things that are offered in the Gospel.

That is in me. Faith in Jesus Christ, or Confidence reposed in him as a
Savior, and in his Promises, and that lively and working by Charity and
Obedience to his Commands, joined with a sincere Repentance of their bypast
Life, of which below, v. 20. and above, c. 20. v. 21. This Faith, I say, is the
Means by which through the Grace of God are obtained those excellent Benefits
above mentioned, viz. Remission of Sins, deliverance from the Punishments
deserved by them, especially from the second or everlasting Death, the Gift of
the Heavenly Inheritance and everlasting Life. See Gal. 5.6. Jam. 2.17, 22, 26.
Joh. 3.23. But that Faith in Christ, and Hope joined therewith, through Christ,
goes to the same God whom the Jews profess themselves to be Worshippers of.
See Joh. 12.44. and 1 Pet. 1.21.

19. Whereupon. That is, Wherefore, as Heb. 3.1.7.25.

Incredulous. In the Greek, as also the English it is, Disobedient, to wit, By
Stubbornness and Inflexible Obstinacy. As powerful as that Call was, says
Grotius, yet it did not take away the Power of Resisting. God will have
voluntary Obedience, not forced. See Isa. 50.5. Psalm. 95.7. Heb. 3.7, 8, 15.
and 4.7.

Unto the Heavenly Vision. That is, The divine Will, which I learned from
Christ showing himself to me, above v. 16.

20. But. Obedient to the Heavenly Revelation in all things.

First unto them of Damascus. See above c. 9.19, 20, 22.

And at Jerusalem. Ibid. v. 28.

And throughout all the Country of Judea. That is, Through other Cities of
Judea, besides the Metropolis; yea, also without Judea, among the Jews that
inhabited other Countries. See above, c. 13.5, 14, 16.14.1.17. 2, 10.18.4,
19.19.8.

And the Gentiles. Strangers to the Jewish People. See above, c. 13.42,
48.14.1, 15, 21, 25, 26.15.35.16.13, 32.17.17, etc. 18.4.19.10.

Declared. The Evangelical Doctrine of Christ.

That they should Repent. That is, That they might be sorry that they have
offended God.

And be turned. To wit, From the Wickedness of their Ways.

To God. To wit, The true God who is to be worshipped devoutly and piously.

Works meet for Repentance. That is, Works agreeable to Virtue, and becoming a
Person who repents sincerely of a Vicious and Flagitious Life. See what I have
said on Mat. 3.2 and 8.

21. For this cause. That is, Because I Preached these things among the Jews
and other Nations.

The Jews caught me while I was in the Temple. See above c. 21. v. 27, 30.

Went about to kill me. Gr. (...), they attempted to kill me with their hands.
That is, by Force and violence to kill me uncondemned.

22. But having obtained help. Gr. (...), therefore, as also the English,
instead of the adversative Particle but, as Mat. 12.12.

Of God. Who verily, according to Christ's promise above, v. 17. having a design
to deliver me from the snares that were laid for me, out of his Mercy provided
those means for me to escape out of the hands of my Enemies, of which see above
c. 21. v. 31, 32, 33.22, 23, 24.23, 6, 9, 10, 16, 24.25.10, 11.

I continue unto this day. Safe and Sound.

Witnessing both to small and great. That is, instructing and teaching all
ranks of Men from the highest to the lowest, those things that I have known of
Christ.

To the lesser and greater. Gr. as also the English, small and great. A
Hebraism, as Deuteronomy. 1.17. 1 Samuel 30.2.5. v. 9.30. v. 2 and 19. 1 Kings 22.31. 2
Kings 23.2.

Saying none other things. Of Christ.

Than what the Prophets did say should come. And set down in their Writings.

And Moses The principal of all the Prophets, both by his Prophecies, and also
by his Types and Figures inserted in his Pentateuch, has foretold of the
Messia, See Luke 24.27.

23. If. That conditional Conjunction is taken in this place affirmatively, and
signifies that, as above v. 8. Paul therefore explains those things which
Moses, and the Prophets foretold were to come of Christ, to wit, that he should
suffer very great pains, and should rise first to immortal Life, and would
bestow the Light of Truth on the Jews first and then also on the Gentiles.

Should suffer. That is, Was designed to undergo the utmost Torment. All the
Sacrifices of the Old Covenant, and all David's Calamities did typifie this.
David Prophesied the same Psalm. 22. As also Isaiah, c. 53. and Daniel c. 9. v.
26.

If. That is, That, as immediately above.

First of the Resurrection of the Dead. That is, The first that should be
raised from the Dead to immortal Life. See Psalm. 16.10.22.32. Isa. 53.10. The
Prophecy of Jonah has also a reference hereto, Mat. 12.40. Hence Christ raised
up to Perpetuity of Life, 1 Cor. 15.20. is called the First Fruits of them that
Sleep. and Col. 1. v. 18. the first begotten among the Dead, and Rev. 1.5. the
first begotten of the Dead.

Light. Of most sound Doctrine and true Godliness. See Mat. 4.16. Joh.
1.4.8.12. 2 Timothy 1.10.

Should show. That is, Christ himself after he is risen will show it by the
Ministry of the Apostles Preaching, according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, c.
42.6. and 49.6. See Ephesians. 2.17. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19.

Unto the People. Of the Jews first.

And to the Gentiles. That is, And then to the rest of the Nations. See above
c. 13.46, 47. and Luke 2.32.

24. And as he thus spoke for himself. As if he had said, But when Paul
defended his cause by the lively Oracles of the Law of Moses and the Prophets,
and proved his defense by the evidence of his reasons.

Festus. Procurator of Judaea, unwilling to be persuaded that the Doctrine of
the Gospel was divine, lest afterward his Conscience should endite him, that he
must lead his Life according to its Prescript, and Torment, and prick him, when
he was negligent in his duty.

Said with a loud Voice. That is, Cried out.

Paul, thou art beside thy self. Worldly Men who are addicted to fleshly
pleasures, and this Life, and therefore refractory to the Gospel, think it a
madness to profess the Religion of Christ, and the Doctrine of so contemptible
and abject a Man, who was crucified even by his Countrymen, and put to so
infamous a Death; to acknowledge him for a Heavenly King and Lord and Worship
him, even when he is risen from the Dead, and on his account to despise all
things, and suffer hard things, and finally to expect from him the reward of
everlasting Life and Glory. See 1 Cor. 1.18, 23.2.14.

Much Learning. That is, Most profound Erudition and Science.

Does make thee Mad. Or drives thee to madness. Those who sequestring
themselves from the care of other things, give themselves wholly over to study,
use sometimes, Melancholy being thereby increased in their Bodies, to be
reduced to Madness and Phrensy. See Aristotle's Problems, Sect. 30.

25. Most excellent Festus. See what is said above c. 23. v. 6 and 24.3. Paul
gives Festus the Procurator most honorable Titles, although he opprobriously
twitted him with his mad Wisdom. Let us learn hence to give Magistrates their
due Honor, even then when they take away our good name, tho undeservedly.

I speak the words of Truth and soberness. A Hebraism. That is, I speak true
words, and which flow from a sound Mind.

26. For he knows of these things. To wit, Of the undeserved Death of Jesus
Christ, and of his Glorious Resurrection to Immortality, and of the Preaching
of his Evangelical Doctrine, that was made Famous by the Miracles which were
wrought by his Disciples.

The King. To wit, Agrippa the Lesser or Younger, Son to Agrippa the Greater or
Elder who is here present. It was reckoned by Orators to be the best defense
Criminals could make, to appeal even to the Conscience of their Adversaries, or
the Judges. Paul had recourse to this Succor here, and above, c. 25.10.

Before whom also I speak freely. As if he had said, And on this confidence, to
wit, that the King is ignorant of none of these things I speak, I freely appeal
to his Conscience.

For this thing was not done in a Corner. To wit, Any of these things which I
said of Jesus of Nazareth was not done in secret, but all were brought about in
very noted places. And although Christ, after he was raised from the Dead, was
not shown but to his Disciples, yet it seems very likely from what happened to
the watch of his Sepulcher, who being astonished at the admirable approach of
the bright Angel to his Sepulcher, at the time of his Resurrection, told what
was done there to the Chief Priests, and afterward being bribed with Money,
denied it, Mat. 28.4, 11, 15. that afterward by degrees the report of this
matter spread amongst Men, that the same was carried a great deal further by so
many of Christ's Disciples, who spoke it openly very confidently and
constantly, as being Eyewitnesses thereof, nothing terrified with the vehement
Afflictions they by reason thereof exposed themselves to.

27. King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? Who have plainly Prophesied to
us those things of the Messia a long time before, which I my self affirm are
fulfilled in Christ Jesus, with all asseveration.

I know that thou believe. It is a frequent Custom both in Civil Affairs, and
common discourse to ask one and to answer for him. Plinius the Younger, Lib. 9.
Epist. 12. says, Hark ye, did ye never do that, which you Fathers could
reprove you for? I say ye have done it. Cic. 1. de Not. Deor. Do ye think God
such a one as I or you are? Certainly you don't.

28. But Agrippa unto Paul. Supply, out of the Gr. Text, said.

In a little. That is, As it is in the English, Almost. It is, says Grotius,
an elegant Greek Speech, For even Plato said in his Apologetick, (...): In a
little, that is, almost, I have known the same of the Poets.

Thou inducest me to be a Christian. That is, As it is in the English, thou
perswadest me to be a Christian. Nothing stood in the way of it, why he did not
receive the Doctrine of Christ more fully, but his Vices, which Agrippa would
not part with: Not unlike to his Grand Uncle Herod Antipas who feared John the
Baptist, and sometimes heard him gladly, Mark 6.20. but would not obey him when
he enjoined him to put away Herodias his Brother Philip's Wife. Paul 's
defense, says Daniel Brenius, did so far prevail with Agrippa, that although he
did not embrace the Christian Religion, yet, as Ecclesiastical Histories
relate, he granted to the Christians, who during the Roman War against the
Jews, fled into Cities subject to his Government, liberty to stay there and
have their meetings without molestation. Yet it is very like that this was
spoke in a smiling way by Agrippa to Paul, and that by a Politic craft, lest
Festus and the rest that were present, should judge him to be mad with Paul,
whom the same Festus had but now in plain and express terms upbraided with
madness.

29. And Paul. Answering Agrippa with a sedate Mind says.

I would to God. That is, I pray God who is the turner of hearts.

Both in little and great. That is, not only almost, but plainly and altogether.

Not only thou. Who have said this.

But all that hear this day. Me discoursing of Jesus Christ.

Be such as I am. That is, Become the Disciples of the same Jesus Christ, like
to me in all things.

Except these Bonds. That is, Save in my Prison and Keepers that are set about
me. For Paul was kept free from bonds in open Prison, see above, c. 24.23. But,
as Grotius well observes, Vulgar Speech did not take Bonds in so strict a
sense, as Lawyers. Such is that of Virgil, Aeneid. 8. v. 651.

And Clelia escaped from bonds the River took. For Pledges are never bound,
says Servius. Excellent here is that of Calvin, as for most part his use is,
Truly it is very requisite that all the Godly be endowed with this Meekness,
that they may calmly bear their Cross; but that they may desire that others do
well, and as much as in them lies endeavor to ease them of all their trouble,
but that by no means they envy their rest and joy. This mild Temper and
Moderation is very far different from the bitterness of those, who by wishing
their evils may befall others, comfort themselves with the thoughts thereof.

30. And. Supply out of the Gr. Text, When he had thus said, to wit, Paul, as
it is also in the English.

The King rose up. Agrippa from the place whereon he sat attentively and
patiently hearing Paul's strong and irrefutable defense.

And the Gevernour. Festus Procurator of Judaea. See our Annot. above, c. 23.
v. 26.

And Bernice. Sister to K. Agrippa. Of whom above, c. 25. v. 13.

And they that sat with them. The Chief Captains and Principal Men of
Caesarea. Of whom see above, c. 25. v. 23.

31. And when they were gone aside. Into some place where they might consult
what to do with Paul, apart, and where none might over-hear their discourse.

Bonds. That is, Prison. See above, v. 29.

This Man. To wit, Paul, whom they had just now heard plead his cause. That
Paul, says Calvin, was absolved by the Judgment of all, did not a little tend
to the credit of the Gospel. And Festus assenting with the rest condemned
himself, as having cast Paul into these straits by his Injustice, in betraying
his Life to the Plots of his Enemies, under pretense of changing of place. But
although an appeal seems to be dangerous to the Holy Man, yet, in regard this was
his only shelter to save him from Death, he rests contented, nor goes about to
extricate himself out of that Trap: not only because it was not candid for him
to do so, because he was admonished by a Vision, that he should be also called
by God to bear Testimony at Rome. See above c. 23. v. 11.

This Man might have been set at liberty. Freed from his Confinement, as being
Innocent, and not convicted of any Crime.

If he had not appealed unto Caesar. By Appeal, the Power of the Judge from
whom the Appeal is made, becomes is altogether null, not only to condemn, but
also to absolve, that the whole cause may be reserved to the Cognizance of the
Superior Judge to whom the Appeal is made.

CHAP. XXVII.
1. BUT when it was determined. To wit, Festus Governor of Judaea now also
decreeing it, as he did before, c. 25.12.

That he should Sail. The Vulgar Gr. Codex's have (...), We. That is, that Paul
should set Sail from Caesarea, together with his Companions, to wit, Luke who
committed these things to writing, and Aristarchus the Macedonian of the City
Thessalonica, who is mentioned in the immediately following verse.

And to deliver Paul. That is, And that Paul should be delivered, Gr. (...),
and they delivered Paul, to wit, they who kept him in open Prison.

Into Italy. That Famous Country of Europe, in whose Metropolis Rome, Caesar
whom Paul appealed to, had his residence. See what we have said of Italy,
above, c. 18. v. 2.

With other Prisoners. That is, With some others who were kept in Custody, and
by reason of the Intricacy of their cause that were to be cognosced, were sent
to Rome to Caesar.

Of Augustus Band. That is, Of the Band of the Augustan Legion. For, says
Grotius, Augusta was the Name of a Legion in the ancient Stone, in Lipsius on
the second Book of Tacitus Histories. A Legion under the Caesar's was divided
into Ten Regiments, every Regiment, into three Maniples, and every Maniple,
into two Companies. This Legion therefore consisted of 6000 Soldiers, and it
had 10 Regiment, 30 Maniples, 60 Companies. See Salmasius of the Military
Affairs of the Romans, c. 2 and 3.

2. And entering into a Ship of Adramyttium. As if he had said, But seeing there
was no Ship there, which was bound straight for Italy, we went abroad of a
Ship, which set forth from Adrumetum, or, as the Gr. Text has it, Adramyttium
to traffic on the Coast of Judaea. Adrymes, or Adrymetus, or Adrumetum was a
City of Libya; Pliny makes mention of it, l. 5. Not. Hist. c. 4. Strabo, l. 17.
calls it, Adryme. That it was a fortified City, appears out of Diodorus
Siculus, l. 20. of his Historical Library, seeing Agathocles laid Siege to it;
While, says he, these things were in hand, Agathocles now having the Plains in
his hands, he took the Castles near Carthage by force, and brought the Cities
over to his side, some through fear, others by reason of their Hatred of the
Carthaginians, and having fortified his Camp near Tunis, and left a sufficient
Garrison, he advanced to the Cities near the Sea, and having taken a new City
at his first assault, he showed himself very merciful toward the Captives,
whence going forward to Adrymes, he besieged it. But Adramyttium was a City of
Mysia, near Caicus a River of the same Mysia, as Pliny testifies, l. 5. c. 30.
Ptolemy, l. 5. c. 2. of his Geography, reckons Adramyttium among the Cities
of the greater Phrygia; now Phrygia the greater was conterminous to Aeolis,
which in ancient times was also called Mysia. Adramyttium was a very noted
City, a Colony of the Athenians, it had a Harbor and Road for Ships, as Strabo
has committed to Memory, l. 13. where he says the Famous Orator Xenocles had
his Birth.

Meaning to Sail by the Coasts of Asia. As if he had said, Which Ship was bound
for the Maritim Towns of Asia the lesser, of which Mysia is a part. The Gr.
Vulgar Codex's have (...), beginning to Sail, or, as Beza renders it, about to
Sail.

We lanched. Gr. (...), we were carried away, as above, c. 16.11.18.21.20.3.
and 13. and below, v. 4.

One Aristarchus being with us. This Man had accompanied Paul from Macedonia
even to Judaea, above, c. 19.29. etc. 20.4. The same Man would freely accompany
Paul now in Custody out of love to him, and to the Truth he Preached, and was
the first that assisted him at Rome, Philem. 24. and became his fellow
Prisoner, Col. 4.10.

3. And the next day we touched. Gr. (...), we were carried.

Sidon. That Famous City of Phoenicia, of whose largeness and Antiquity the
sacred Scriptures will have us in nowise doubt, for Jos. 19.18. it is called
(...), Sidon the large. See what we have said of Sidon and Tire in our Literal
Explanation on Joel 3. v. 4. and Mat. 11.21.

Gave him Liberty, etc. At Paul's entreaty he gave him liberty to go to visit
his Christian Friends in that part of Phoenicia at his pleasure, that they
might take care and provide what was necessary for him.

4. And when we had lanched thence. That is, Parted from Sidon.

We Sailed unto Cyprus. If the Wind had favored, they would have steered their
Course straight from Sidon to Myra above the Island Cyprus, leaving it on the
Right Hand. But now they must fetch a compass, and turn under the Island,
leaving it on the left hand, and so in a manner compass the Island. Hence the
Syriack and Arabic render it, we compassed near Cyprus. Which the Syriack
renders more plainly below, v. 7. where (...), the Syriack has, and because the
Wind suffered us not to go the nearest way, we tacked about near Crete: That
is; when we could not by reason of the Wind go a straight course from the
Island Cnidus into the Adriatic Sea, above Crete, and leaving it on the left
hand, we turned below it, and so having it on the right hand, we encompassed
it. These Phrases, says Lewis de Dieu, are still in use with Mariners, that as
they Sail by any place that is in their view; they are said to Sail above it
when they are carried a straight course, under it, when they are forced to
decline and tackle. The former is signified in Gr. by the Word (...), the other
by (...). And therefore we applaud the most renowned Beza, who below, v. 16.
renders, (...), and carried under a certain little Island. See what we have
said above of the Island of Cyprus, c. 4. v. 36.

Because the Winds were contrary. That is, Because we could not keep a straight
course by the Island of Cyprus for the Wind.

The Sea of Cilicia and Pamphilia. Gr. (...), and having Sailed over the Sea
that is by Cilicia and Pamphylia. See what we had said of Cilicia above, c. 6.
v. 9. and of Pamphylia, c. 2. v. 10.

We came to Lystra which is of Lycia. Lystra is not a City of Lycia but of
Lycaonia, situate in the continent far from the Sea; and therefore the Vulgar
Latin Edition should be amended, and should be read, we came to Lymira, or
Limyra, or Lamira, or Myra. Pomponius Mela makes mention of a River called
Lymira, L. 1. c. 15.
and a Town of the same name in Lycia near the Sea, and Pliny, 5 Not. Hist. 27.
Lymira a City of Lycia having its name from the River Lymirus, which it is
si^uate by, is mentioned by Strabo, l. 14. by Ptolemy, l. 5. c. 1. by Scylax in
Lycia, and by Stephanus Byzantius, who also writes of Lamyra a City of Lycia
in its own place, but seeing this Author uses of one and the same City to make
several, I easily believe that it is the same Town. Finally, the Metropolitan
City of Lycia, situate near the River Lymira, and a Town of the same name on a
Hillock, distant twenty Miles from the Seashore, commonly called Strumita, by
Ptolemy l. 5. c. 3. (...), by Pliny and others it is called Myra in the
Neutr-Plural, Myroi in the Rationary, and by Stephanus (...). Lycia was a part
of the Asian Province. "First it was governed by the Emperors Lieutenants, then
under Justinian it was reckoned among the Consular Provinces, being divided
into the Inner and Outer or Maritim; it had on the West Caria, on the North a
part of Lydia, and of Pacatiana the Southerly, on the East Pamphylia, on the
South the Rhodian Sea, says Frid. Spanhem. in his Introduction to sacred
Geography. Besides Stepan. Mela testifies that this Province had its name from
King Lycus, Son to Pandion. L. 5. c. 15.
The Monster Chimaera was feigned to be on Cragus the most famous Mountain of
this Country, which frequently casts up Fire, as Aetna of Sicily does, which
the Father of Poets graphically describes Il. 6. v. 181. which description
Lucrece has thus imitated, lib. 8. A Lions Head, a Dragons Tail, its middle the
Chimaera it self. Where Lucrece has imitated, and rendered more to the Life,
Homer's description, than Ovid Metam. 6. On whose tops Chimera fed, her parts
who takes,
Middle of Buck, upper from Lion, tail of Snakes.
That Mountain gave occasion to the Poets of feighning this Monster, in whose
top Lions abode, in its middle Goats, at bottom of it Serpents, whose Fable
they applied to Love, which invadeth one as a Lion, nor does it leave one till
Lust be satisfied, which the Goat, being a libidinous Animal, represents, but
in the end it leaves the bitter Sting of Remorse, which is like to the biting
of a Serpent. They fable that this Monster was killed by Bellerophon, whose
Description see in Strabo l. 14. and Ptolemy l. 5. c. 3. Stephanus makes
mention of an other Lycia by Cilicia, in which, says he, Sarpedon Reigned. But
Strah. l. 12. Where he mentions two sort of Lycians, he places neither of them
near Cilicia. For he calls the one of them Troicks, and the other Inhabitants
of a Country near Caria. Moreover the two sorts of People called by the Name of
Lycians, give grounds to suspect that the same Nation, either of the Troicks,
or of those that dwelt upon the Borders of Caria, sent Colonies into the other
so called. ad Per. v. 857.
Eustathius declares the same. It is probable that Virgil speaks of Troick
Lycia, Aen. 4. v. 143. when he says, Returning from cold Lycia, so appears
Phoebus, when he to native Delia goes.
But Servius knew nothing of Troick Lycia, nor of that of Cilicia, and he
Interprets that of Lycia absolutely so called, as also does La Cerda. Lycian
Arrows and Quivers are also made mention of by the Poets, of which see the same
Author on Virgil's Aeneid. l. 7. v. 814.

Her Royal Habit wondering to behold,
Her Tresses plated with a Jem of Gold.
Then how her Lycian Quiver she did bear.
And there the Centurion finding a Ship of Alexandria. That is, A Ship which
was come thither from Alexandria in Egypt. See what we have said of this City
above, c. 6. v. 9. etc. 18. v. 24.

Sailing. Straight.

Into Italy, Whither frequently both Victuals and much Merchandise were
transported from Egypt in Alexandrian Ships.

He put us. From the Adrumetin or Adramytten Ship, which we had gone aboard of,
above, v. 2.

Into her. Which was going straight to Italy, nor was she to touch any where by
the way.

7. And when. By reason of contrary Winds.

We had sailed slow many days. That is, When we beheld how small a Space of the
Sea we had got over in so long a time. Nor was it any wonder, says Pricaeus,
that they complained of this, who compassed the Bays, seeing they, who have
favorable Winds, think they make small enough Progress. Even swift Passage
seems slow to those that are Sailing, says Servius on Aeneid. 5.

And scarce were come over against Gnidus. That is, Come near Cnidus, or Gnidus
a Maritim Town in Doris, a Peninsula of Caria, and situate on a Promontory,
over against the Island of Crete.

The Wind not suffering us. Supply out of the Syriack Interpreter, To go a
straight Course.

We Sailed to Crete. Gr. (...), We sailed under Crete. See above, v. 4. Crete,
a very great Island, which is now commonly called Candy, was in ancient times
famous, by reason of many Fables, as the Arrival of Europa, the Loves of
Pasiphae and Ariadne, the Cruelty and Fate of the Minotaur, the Works and
Flight of Daedalus, and the Sepulcher of Jupiter, whereon the Inhabitants
showed his Name Engraven, as Mela lib. 2. has committed to Memory. Therefore
Sallustius in Servius on that of Virgil, Aen. 8. v. 349. Then did a reverential
Terror move,
And Rusticks Tremble at the Rock and Grove.
Says, that the Cretians first found out Religion, because that Jupiter is
fabled to have been born among them. It was called by Writers Hecatompolis,
because it contained a hundred Cites, which Horace calls Towns. And therefore
Paul left Titus in Crete, that he might ordain Elders (...), in every City, or,
as Erasmus renders it, Town by Town. According to Ptolemy. lib. 3. c. 17. It
was bounded on the West by the Gulf of Venice, on the North by the Cretian
Sea, on the South by the Lybick, on the East by the Carpathian. Its principal
Cities were Gortyna, Phalasarna, Cydonia, Cnossus, the Palace of Minos. Virgil
3 Aen. v. 104. Jove 's Birth Place Crete lies circled in the Main,
There is Mount I Would the Nursery of our Race;
A hundred Cities has this wealthy Place;
Our Grandsire first has not my Memory failed,
Teucrus from thence to Rhoetian Confines Sailed.
For it was accounted a certain Truth, that the Trojans departing from the
Island of Crete, under the Leading of Teucrus, came into Phrygia, and gave Name
to Ida a Mountain in Troy, from Ida a Mountain of Crete, in which Mountain,
Varro affirms in his Book, which he composed of Maritim Places, that even in
his Days Jupiter's Sepulcher was visited there, as Solinus reports c. 17. In
Testimony whereof they said that Teucrus consecrated a Temple to Sminthian
Apollo. For the Cretians called a Mouse Sminthus, which the Trojans had in
great Reverence, as Strabo affirms, l. 13. Crete was also Renowned for that
most famous Labyrinth framed by Dadalus at the Command of Minos. Minos and
Rhadamanthus have made it famous, who for their extraordinary Justice, were
fabled by the Poets to be Judges of the Infernal Regions; of whom Minos also
gave Laws to the Cretians. Lycurgus also, the Lacedemonian Legislator, extended
its Fame by his Voluntary Exile. Epimenides, and George the Trapezuntian, a
famous Philosopher, were also Cretians; the former wrote of the Nature of
things in Verse, as Lucrece did amongst the Latins, George the Trapezuntian,
although he was born in Crete, yet he would rather have his Name from Trapezunt a
City of Capadocia, whence his Fathers Family had their Original; he very much
admired Aristotle, but made light Account of Plato; he Translated many Pieces
out of the Greek into Latin, nor did he write a few in Latin. They say that in
his utmost old Age, he forgot all things, even his own Name, of which see
Vossius of the Latin Historians, l. 3. c. 8.

Overpast Salmon. The Eastern Promontory of Crete, over against Gnidos and
Rhodes, which otherwise they call Salmonium. Therefore, says Beza, they were
forced to turn aside to the left hand, that they might turn in from the
Eastearn Point of Crete to the Southern Coast.

8. And scarcely. That is, And with great difficulty, by reason of contrary
Winds.

Sailing near it. That is, Sailing or passing by that Promontory. Gr. (...),
coasting by. (...) is a Word used Mariners. Virg. Aen. 3. v. 127. crebris
legimus, etc. Pass through Seas sowed thick with Isles. Where Servius,
Praeterimus. We pass by. A Speech drawn from Mariners, because that by hailing
up their Cable, that is, by gathering it in, they escape rough places.

We came to a certain place. Of the said Island of Crete.

Which is called the good Havens In Gr. As also the Eng. It is fair Havens.
Cale Act, That is, l. 3. c. 15.
Pleasant Shore, a City of the Cretians, as Stephan and Ptolemy say, of Euboea
as Herodot. l. 6. c. 23. Of Cicilia, which by Cicero is called Calata, and its
Inhabitants Calatini.

Nigh whereunto was the City Thalassa. Gr. (...). There is no Mention, says
Beza, of the City Lasaea in any Geographers that I ever read. Pliny reckons
Lason also among the Cities of Crete, but an Inland Town. Ptolemy also calls
a certain City Lisson, but next to the Eastern part of it. The Vulgar Latin
instead of Lasaea has Thalassa, which Jerome says, is corrupted, and would have
it read Laraea. But what if this, as well as that, be corrupted? For in Stephan
I find the City Thalassa, but its Situation is not described. I had rather
therefore read it Elaia, which is reckoned by Pliny among the principal
Maritine Cities of Crete.

9. Now when much time was spent. Past in slow and incommodious Sailing,
contrary to the expectation of Mariners and Passengers.

And when Sailing was not safe. As if he had said, And Sailing began to be
dangerous.

Because the Fast was now already past. Luke describes the Time according to
the Custom of the Jews, and uses the Fast for the time that the Fast was kept.
But seeing, says the Famed Heinsius, it is said absolutely Jejunium Fast,
there is no doubt but that it is to be understood of that Fast which is called
great, or (...); which is also called (...), Fast Day, absolutely and
compendiously (...), which is, (...), Day of Purification, or Expiation. On
which day the Jews gave themselves over to very great Lamentation, so that for
above the space of 24 Hours, they, clothed with white Garments, Pray and Fast
without Interruption: that so they may detest the memory of that horrid Sin, to
wit, that of making the Calf, and may avert the Punishment due to so great a
Wickedness. Which Fast falls on the tenth Moon of September; in which Month,
as the seven Stars called Pleiades set, so also the Sea begins to be
Tempestuous. Of this solemn Annual Fast of the Jews, see Lev. 16.29, etc. c.
23.27, etc.

Encouraged. Gr. (...), Exhorted, Admonished, To get the Ship into some Harbor,
and make a little stay in their Course.

10. With hurt. That is, Not without much Damage.

Not only of the Burden. Wherewith the Ship is laden.

And of the Ship. Which by being tossed with Tempests and Storms, will be
endamaged.

But also of our Lives. Which will be endangered.

This Voyage begins to be. In the Gr. These Words are expressed by the
Infinitive (...), the Voyage to be, for (...), the Voyage will be. Hence it
appears that the word (...) put after the Verb (...) in the beginning of this
Verse is either redundant, as Mat. 26.72. Mar. 12.19. or is taken for the
affirmative Particle Vtique certainly, as 1 John 3.20.

11. But the Centurion. Julius, of whom above, v. 1. and 3.

The Master. That is, He who directed the steering of the Ship.

And owner of the Ship. That is, Who was set over the Ship, and appointed every
Mariner his Office. He that discharges this Naval Office, is by Cicero called
Naviculator, and Navicularius.

Believed more. That is, Thought it more reasonable to harken to them, as being
expert in Naval Affairs.

Than those things which were spoken by Paul. By Divine Presage.

12. The Haven. Which they call, (...), Fair or Good Haven, or (...), Pleasant
Harbor. See above, v. 8.

To winter in. That is, To pass over in that place the Winter Season, no ways
convenient for Sailing.

The more part advised. That is, It was determined by the Advice of the
greatest part.

To depart thence. That is, To loose from that Harbor, very inconvenient to
winter in. Supply, being desirous to try.

If by any means they might attain to Phoenice. Gr. (...). Ptolemy, says Beza,
calls the Town it self so, but the Harbor he calls (...), in the Southern Shore
of Crete. See Ptolemy l. 3. c. 17.

To winter. That is, To pass over the Winter time there.

An Haven of Crete. An Island, of which above, v. 7.

Lying toward the South-West. That is, The Wind from Africa or Libya, which
blows betwixt the South and the West.

And to the North-West. That is, The Wind that blows betwixt the West and the
North. If, says Lewis de Dieu, we believe the Maps, that Harbor lay in that
part of Crete, which looked directly to Africa, and therefore to the South. How
then did it lie to the North-West and South-West, which are two Western Winds,
the one composed of the West, verging to the North, the other to the South? I
answer, that the Harbor was full of windings and turnings, which if ye look to
it wholly in itself, lies directly to the South; but if ye have respect to its
windings and use, it is toward the South-West, that is, that Point of Western
Meridian, where the South-West is opposed to the North-West in a direct Line,
and therefore this Harbor was very convenient for their Voyage; for that Way
had a straight Course into the Adriatic Sea.

13. And when the South Wind blew. As if he had said, When a most gentle South
Wind blew very fair for us.

Supposing that they had attained their Purpose. That is, The Mariners now
nothing doubting but that all things were according to their Desire.

Loosing thence. Their Anchors, or, when they had loosed from the Harbor, as
it was agreed upon by most of them, above, v. 12.

They Sailed Close. Gr. (...), Without any Preposition, which sufficiently
indicates that Asson here is an Adverb signifying close, and not a little Town
of Crere, which by Stephanus is called (...), Asus with a single Sigma, or that
Inland Town, which by Pliny is ranked among the principal Cities of Crete, and
is by him called Asum in the Neuter Gender, l. 4. Not. Hist. c. 12. much less
that City called Asson, that is near Troas, very far distant from the Island of
Crete, whose Coast they were now Sailing by, of which above, c. 20. v. 13.

By Crete. That is, As above, v. 8. They Sailed along Crete, or Sailed along
the Coast of it; but, as is said, (...) close, so that they as it were shaved
the very Coast of Crete. As being in no wise afraid lest they should dash upon
the Shore, Sailing as near as could be by it, because the South Wind breathed
very gently, as appears by what is said immediately before.

14. There arose against it. That is, Beat in upon the Island of Crete, or
rushed violently upon it.

A Tempestuous Wind. A violent and raging Whirlewind.

Called Euro-aquilo. Gr. Euroclydon. Eurus is the East Wind, flowing from the
Winter East, from whence this compound Name, adding the Word Clydon, which in
Greek signifies a Wave, because this Wind raises up huge Waves by its Blast.
In the Vulgar Interpreter it is Euroaquilo, North-East, as it were, the East
Wind, inclining to the North. Whether, says Beza, that he read it (...), For
so likewise Luke calls Aquila (...); or that he thence judged that this was
North-East, or a Wind blowing from the East toward the Summer Solstice,
because the Ship was driven from the Shore of Crete, partly toward the West,
and partly toward the South, to wit, toward Malta, which lies between Africa
and Sicily: Especially seeing they are said to have feared, lest they should be
driven in upon the quick-sand toward the South. Therefore this Conjecture does
not altogether dissatisfy me, seeing Virgil also calls the East Wind
Tempestuous, and this Wind is very suitable to the Winter Season. Yet I have
retained the Word Euroclydon, which I have found in all Greek Copies I met
with: whence it is understood that this was an East Wind, and that very Stormy.
For the Greeks calls Wave (...). This therefore is that which the Hebrews call
(...), the Latin Poets, Watery, Cloudy, Black, Raging, Thundering. Therefore
although the East Wind did drive the Ship toward the West, that is, into Italy;
yet it is no wonder that in so great a Storm they could not keep a straight
Course, but were driven hither and thither by the force of the Waves. But if
this Wind was North-East, it beat them back from Italy; and it was a wonder
that the Ship was not driven in upon the Coasts of Africa. The Syriack retained
the same Greek Names: The Arabic cancelled the Word Euroclydon, as being a
Word altogether unknown to him.

15. And when the Ship was caught. To wit, By the most violent Whirlpools,
whereby the tossed Ship was driven crookedly, ungovernably, as Quintus Curtius
expresses it, l. 9.

And could not bear up unto the Wind. That is, Withstand the Wind, as the
Syriack renders it. Gr. (...), stand before the Wind. (...), properly
signifies, according to H. Stephan. I look upon one that beholds me: (...), I
look over against me, as Suidas has it. Gaza in Scipio's Dream, interpreted
Solemn adversum intueri, to look upon the Sun over against them, (...)
metaphorically is, to Resist, to Strive against. Eccles. 19.5. (...), that is,
as Drusius Interprets it, But he that resists Pleasures, crowns his Life.
Also Grotius observes that (...) is frequently so used by Josephus. The
Original of the Metaphor seems to be hence, that he who opposes any, turns his
Eyes on him, and a Ship going against the Wind, has its Prore turned toward
it, a certain part whereof is called (...), the Eye, as the Famous Beza has
noted out of Pollux. Virg. Aen. 5. v. 20.

Gusts rifing shift, the black West grows more Loud,
And the whole Air condensed into one Cloud.
We let her drive. Not whither we would, but whither the impetuous Violence of
the Wind drove us.

16. And running under a certain Island. Gr. Being carried under a certain
little Island. See what is said above, v. 4.

Which is called Clauda. Gr. (...). In some Copies (...). So also some Copies
of the Vulgar Latin Edition have Cauda. The Arabic (...) Iclauda. The Syriack
(...), Cauro, but the Famous Bochart will have us read it (...), Caudo. Suidas.
Caudo is an Island near Crete, wherein are brought forth very great Wild Asses.
But that this Island was by Mela, l 2. c. 7. and Pliny l. 4. c. 12. called
Gaudon, by Ptolemy Claudon, after Joachim Vadian the now cited Bochart
observes. There was also another Island, which by Strabo l. 6. is called
Gaudos, but by Stephan and others Gaulos, in the Sicilian Sea toward Africa,
as Mela declares l. 2. c. 7. one of the three Islands, in old times Inhabited
by the Carthaginians, which, according to Scylax, were, Melite, Gaulus, and
Lampas. Solinus, c. 32. reports almost the same of this Gaudo, or rather,
Gaulus of the Carthaginians, as Pliny says of the Island Galata, near to the
said Gaulus, that neither is any Serpent brought forth there, nor if it be
transported thither does it live, wherefore the dust of this Island being cast
upon any other ground, drives away Serpents, and being thrown upon Scorpions,
it immediately kills them.

We had much Work to come by our Boat. That is, We could hardly take in our
Ship-Boat tossed with the Winds from the raging Waves, lest it should be beat
to pieces on the Ship. Scapha, a Ship-Boat is called a small Vessel, which was
drawn after the Ship, whereby, if necessity so require, they Sail where a great
Ship cannot come. It was called Scapha (...), a Verb signifying to make hollow,
because they first were used to be made of a whole great Tree, by making it
honow.

17. Which. To wit, Ship-Boat.

When they had taken up. To wit, From the Sea into the Ship, to which it was
fastened. They are contraries, says Grotiu^, (...) to take up the Ship boat,
and (...), to let it down.

They used helps. To wit, Of the Mariners, or, as some will, of Ropes, Chains,
and Hooks.

Vndergirding the Ship. To wit, putting Ropes on both sides, underneath the
Boat, and so binding the sides of the Ship on (...) sides that it might not be
beat to pieces by the force of the Winds and Waves.

And fearing lest they should fall on the quick Sands. That is, Lest the Ship
together with them, should be driven upon shallows and the Syrtes, and should
stick fast thereon, and be overwhelmed with a Heap of Sand. Syrtes or quick
Sands, are called all Shallow places, which as it were draw the Ships that are
driven on them, and keep them fast, and at last swallow them up. Lucan has
described the nature of these Syrtes, l. 9.304. Which is thus Englished by Sir
Arthur Gorges; When Nature did at first dispose,
These Syrts and shaped their Figure out,
She left it to the World in doubt,
Whether it should be Land or Seas;
For utterly it does not please,
To Sink it self beneath the Main:
Nor yet the Land cannot restrain
The Waves, but they will have a Share,
And such a dangerous place prepare,
That there to travel none shall dare.
For here the Sea does Channels strain,
And there the Lands do rise again.
Here is a long stretched Tract of Shore,
And there the swallowing whirlpools rore,
So nature wretchedly designed,
This portion of her proper kind.
Unto no use, or else of Old,
Those Syrts more Waves in them did hold,
And with the Seas were over-roll'd.
But that Attractive Titans Beams,
(Feeding upon the Oceans Streams,
That to the Torrid Zone were nigh)
Some of the weltring Waves did dry.
And yet the Ocean in despite,
Resists Phoebus parching might.
But yet his beams (as they draw near)
And wearing time those Seas will clear,
And make the Syrts firm Land appear.
For scarcely now a little Boat,
Can on the Superficies float,
Of those drowned Sands where Water stays,
And more and more that Sea decays.


They are the most famous of the Syrts which Sallust describes thus. There are
two Gulphs almost toward the utmost parts of Africa of unequal bigness, but of
the same nature, of which those that are next the Land are very deep, but the
rest, as it chances at one time are deep, at another Shallow. For when the Sea
begins to swell and rage with the Winds, the Waves draw Slime, Sand and great
stones together in heaps; and so the figure of these places is changed together
with the Winds. They are called Syrtes from drawing. From these two Syrtes that
part of the Lybian Sea, which flows by Africa properly so called, is named
the Syrtick Sea, in Seneca, lib. de vit. beat. See more concerning these in
Mela, l. 1. c. 7. Plin. l. 5. c. 4. Solin c. 30.

Letting down the Vessel. That is, When we had taken down the Sail-yard with
the Sail fastened to it. For, as says Seneca, when the Wind is grown too
strong, and too great to bear Sail to, the Yard is taken down. Hence that of
Ovid, The Yard let down escapes the Winter Storms. It is a Hebraism very
frequent in the Scripture, whereby any moveable thing is called a Vessel.

So. To wit, having taken in our Sails from the Storm.

Were driven. That is, floated on the Waves, whithersoever their force drove us.

18. And we being exceedingly tossed with a Tempest. As if he had said, But
when our Ship tossed with the furious Tempest, now was lifted up as it were to
the Heavens, anon was tumbled down between the gaping Waves, as it were into a
Pit or Gulf. See a lively description of a dreadful Tempest, Psalm. 107.25, 26.
which Virgil imitating has elegantly expressed in these words, Aen. 3. v. 564.

At Heaven we tilt, then suddenly we fell,
Watery Foundations sinking low as Hell.
The next day they lightened the Ship. That is, The Mariners cast out of the
Ship the heaviest Lading, and the more weighty Merchandise, that the Ship,
being lightened of its burden might draw less water, and so might not so easily
be overwhelmed by the Waves.

19. And the third day. To wit, From the rising of that dreadful Tempest.

They cast out with their own hands the tackling of the Ship. Gr. as also the
English, we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the Ship. To wit, we
who were Passengers in the Ship together with the Mariners. Some Copies have
(...), they cast out. To wit, the Master and Mariners. Now all Marine Utensils
wherewith a Ship is accoutred, as the Mast, Yard, Oars, Cables, and such like,
are called the Tackling.

20. And when neither Sun nor Stars appeared. As if he had said, But when the
Firmament was darkened Night and Day with a black Fog. An usual description of a
very great Storm. So in Virgil, Aen. 1. v 92.

When from the Trojans sight dark Clouds restrain
Heaven and the Day, black Night broods on the Main.
In many days. Without intermission.

And no small Tempest lay over us. That is, Lay upon us. As if he had said, And
when a Turbulent and Thundering Tempest did now afflict and distress us.

All hope that we should be saved was then taken away. Grotius excellently
observes, that this was spoken according to all humane probability, such as
are many other things in Holy Writ. The meaning therefore is the same, as if he
had said, All hopes seemed to be cut off, of escaping Death, which now all
appearances portended to be impending over us.

21. But after long abstinence. That is, And when they who were in the Ship,
being tossed with the Tempest had endured a long hunger through want of
Appetite, but not through scarcity of Food, as appears afterward, v. 36 and 38.

Paul stood forth in the midst of them. With whom he was aboard in that tossed
Ship.

You should have hearkened to me. By giving heed to me when I presaged this
storm we are now tossed with.

Not have loosed. Supply, Anchors.

And to have gained. That is, have prevented. He that evites the damage that he
was like to sustain is said to gain, and be fortunate, according to Aristotle,
l. 2. Mag. Moral. c 9. Hence by Pliny, 7. Not. Hist. 39. Sutorius Priscus is
said to have gained an injury, which he committed unpunished, and suffered no
punishments for inflicting it.

This harm. That is, This boisterous rage of the Winds.

And loss. To wit, of the Merchandise, and Tackling or Furniture of the Ship.

22. And now. That is, Now therefore, as above, c. 5. v. 38. or, but now, to
wit, seeing that, as Silius expresses it, the cruel storm grows worse and
worse.

I exhort you to be of good cheer. I again and again beseech you, who by the
event have had experience of the Truth of my former sayings, that ye be not
dejected in your Minds.

For there shall be. In this Voyage, how dangerous soever.

The loss of no Man's Life. That is, Person, as above, v. 10.

Among you. To wit, as appears below, v. 31. if ye hearken to me, otherwise
than ye did before. Such Speeches, says Grotius, are every where in the Holy
Scripture, which contain in them a tacit condition, easy to be understood,
either from the words preceding and subsequent, or from the Nature of the
thing it self, 1 Samuel 2.30.13.13, 14.

But of the Ship. That is, But the Ship only shall be cast away. An exceptive
particle, says Grotius, instead of an adversative, as, Luke 23.28. John 8.10.
in the Greek, 1 Cor. 11.11. Phil. 1.8.3.16.4.12. Rev. 2.25.

Whose I am. That is, To whom I am devoted.

And whom I serve. That is, And whom I worship with true Piety. Jonas said the
same of himself of old, when he Sailed in the Company of Heathens, Jon. 1.9.

24. Thou must be brought before Caesar. As if he had said, Thou shall be
presented alive before Caesar, to whom thou appealedst above, c. 25.11.

Lo, etc. As if he had said, God has so liberally granted thy request, that not
one of them that are carried with thee in this Ship shall perish, provided they
obey thy wholesome advice, and use all means that in them lie for their
preservation. See below v. 31. The Verb give is taken in another contrary sense
above, c. 25 v. 11. but is used in a like sense to this above c. 3.14.

25. For I believe God. Without the least doubt or hesitation.

26. Howbeit we must be cast upon a certain Island. Gr. (...), fall on. How
this praediction was fulfilled is declared below, c. 28. v. 1.

27. Fourteenth Night. To wit, From the raising of the storm by the Winds.

As we were Sailing. Gr. (...), driven up and down, as it also is in the
English, tossed hither and thither. Plutarch, says Grotius, has used (...),
for to be carried hither and thither.

In Adria. That is, In the Adriatic Gulf or Sea, which is described by the
Poets as very tempestuous. Adria or Hadria, a City belonging to the Picentes or
Piceni according to Ptolemy, Geog. l. 3. c. 1. was a Colony of the Tuscans, who
before the Romans attained the Government, commanded all by Land and Sea, as
Livius records in his Book 5. c. 3. Adrian C^sars Progenitors had their
Original from this City, as Aelius Spartianus in his Life declares. The same
City, after the Tuscan Empire was buried in Oblivion, was made a Colony by the
Romans, as you may see in the Epitome of Livy, l. 11. From this City also the
Sea, which by the Greeks is called, (...), or (...), the Latins call the
Adriatic or Adrian Sea or Gulf. The Poets also call it Adria after the manner
of the Greeks, and Adriacum, which anciently was called Atriacum, as also the
City Atria, as Pliny reports, l. 3. c. 16 in these words. The Tuscans began to
make first out of Sagis all these Rivers and Ditches, diverting the Impetus of
the River into the Adrian Marshes, which are called the seven Seas, and made a
famous Haven of Atria, a Town of the Tuscans, from whence that was before
called the Atriatick, which now is called the Adriatic Sea. Pliny speaks of
the River Po, which the Greeks call Eridanus, which emptied twenty Rivers with
it self into the Sea. But whether Adria and Atria were the same City we leave
to the Learned to judge. Stephan. Byzantius thinks that they were different
Cities, for he mentions each of them in their peculiar place; but it is usual
with him to make two of one and the same City, as Thomas de Pinedo has
observed. But this is certain from Strabo, Ovid, Statius, and Ptolemy, that not
only that Gulf which-lies betwixt Venice and Corcyra is called Adria, or
Adrian, and most usually Adriatic, but that that name is extended even to the
Ionian Sea. Therefore, says Grotius, Procopius calls the Sea reaching from
Methon to Sicily, and elsewhere from Cephalenia to Calabria, by the name of
Adria, and in another place he makes a part of it, the Gulf of Adria; and
expressly in his first of the Vandals, he places as well Gaulon as Melite in
Adria.

That some Country appeared to them. In the Gr. (...), that some Country drew
near them. A kind of Speech peculiar to Mariners, because to their sight, when
Sailing, the Land seems to come near, or depart from them, when they in their
Voyages, draw near to Land, or make from it. Such is that of Virgil, Aen. 3. v.
72.

-- We lanch, and fill the Strands,
And Sail from Cities, and retreating Lands.
28. Who also leting down their line. Bolis is the Seamans Plumb-line, or Lead
fastened to the end of a Rope; by throwing of it into the Sea, which by reason
of its weight moves quickly downward, the Mariners search out the depth
thereof, and they besmear it with Fat, when they have a mind to try whether the
Ground is Rocky or Sandy.

Found it twenty Paces. Gr. (...), Fathoms. A Fathom is a measure very well
known to Mariners when they search out the Shallows, containing so much bounds,
as when both Arms are stretched out aside, may be comprehended between the tip
of one middle Finger to that of the other Hand. This Interstice, says Beza,
consisting of five Roman Foot, among the Greeks consists of six of their own
Foot, that is, 6 Roman. Passus, Paces, therefore used twice in this Verse for
the Gr. (...), is taken for the interval of the Arms when stretched out, but
not for the interval of the Feet when stretched out in walking.

29. Should have fallen on Rocks. Gr. (...) or (...), we should have fallen
off, or they should. That is, lest the Ship should dash upon rugged or Rocky
places.

Out of the Stern. That is, The hinder part of the Ship.

Casting four Anchors. To wit, that the Ship being kept steadfast at the four
Corners by the four Anchors, might not be driven by the Waves.

They wished for the Day. The Light is most desirable to any that are afflicted
with any evil. Suetonius says, Caligula, sometimes sitting upon his Bed,
sometimes wandering through very long Galleries, he used frequently to Invocate,
and desirously wait for the Light. Curt. l. 5. The much desired Day diminished
the frightfulness of all things, which the Night rendered more Terrible. But the
Words of Germanicus in Arataeus, are very pertinent to this Purpose.

And when black Night the Seaman's Fears encreast,
He in vain beheld the much desired East.
30. And as the Mariners were about to flee out of the Ship. That they might
escape the impending Danger of Shipwreck. Cic. l. 2. de Invent. Afterward also
the Storm began to toss them more vehemently, so that the Master of the Ship,
who was also the Director of its Course, fled into the Ship-Boat.

When they let down the Boat into the Sea. Which they had taken up out of the
Sea into the Ship, above, v. 16. and 17.

Under Color, etc. As if he had said, They pretended that they had let down
the Boat, that they might go into it, and cast Anchors also out of the
Forecastle, or Forepart of the Ship, for they had need of many Anchors when the
Sea was Boisterous.

31. Paul said. Being sensible of the rash Resolution of the Seamen, and the
Promise of God made to him Conditionally, above, v. 22.

To the Centurion. Julius, of whom above, v. 1.

And to the Soldiers. Who knew no more of the intended Flight of the Mariners
than the Centurion did.

Except these Men abide in the Ship. That is, Unless ye prevent the Flight of
the Mariners out of the Ship.

Ye cannot be saved. Paul indeed, and those who were in the Ship with him, were
not saved by the Mariners Industry, which could not preserve them from
Shipwreck; yet it was not without its own Advantage, because they brought the
Ship so far, that it was very near Land, so that after the hipwrack they might
all get safe to it. Which could not have been, had the Mariners fled in the
Boat when they designed it, and were yet a great way from Land. Hence it
appears, that although we must not lay too much stress on second ^auses, nor give
our selves over to Desperation, it by the Providence of God we are deprived of
them, yet that they ought not be neglected for our Preservation when they may
be had.

32. Then. To wit, When the Centurion and Soldiers understood by Paul's Words,
how disadvantageous the Flight of the Mariners might prove to them.

The Soldiers cut off the Ropes of the Boat. By which it was as yet made fast
to the Ship, that they might go out into it.

And let her fall off. That is, Drive far into the Sea, lest the Mariners
should make that bad Use of it, as to get away.

33. And while the Day was coming. That is, In the Morning Twilight.

To take Meat. To recover the Strength of their Bodies.

This is the fourteenth Day that ye have tarried and continued Fasting. That
is, This is the fourteenth Day since you, tossed with the Storm, have continued
without taking that Sustenance that is requisite for upholding your Bodies.

Having taken nothing. To wit, That was sufficient for repairing your Strength.
This is a Hyperbolick Speech, for without the use of all Food, in a Body
otherwise Sound, a Man cannot according to the ordinary course of Nature
protract his Life above seven Days. By the like Hyperbole, John who abstained
from ordinary Meat and Drink, is said, Matt. 11.18. Neither Eating nor
Drinking. See what we have said in our literal Explication on that place.

34. Wherefore, etc. Here Paul's Exhortation is expressed, from whence we may
again observe, that his Judgment was, that Means were not to be neglected, but
were to be made use of, although he nothing doubted but that God, as he had
bountifully promised, would preserve all those who were in the Ship with him by
his Favors, so that not one of them should Perish in the Shipwreck.

For your Health. That is, That your former Strength that is impaired by you
Fasting, may be repaired. If they had not refreshed their Strength with Food,
they had not been able to endure Labor, nor to swim out in the approaching
Shipwreck.

For. If ye follow my Advice.

There shall not a Hair fall from the Head of any of you. A proverbial kind of
Speech, whereby it is signified, that they should not suffer the least Damage.
The like Speech is to be seen 1 Samuel 14.45. 2 Samuel 14.2. 1 Kings 1.52. Luke
21.18.

35. He took Bread. As if he had said, Paul, that he might invite them by his
Example to shake off the fear of Death, and take Food convenient for keeping up
their Strength; He took the Seamen's, or common Bread into his Hands; and when
he had taken it:

He gave Thanks to God. God has granted Man Food for the keeping up his Body,
on this Condition, that he may show himself thankful for so great a Mercy, and
not come near to take it without first giving Thanks for it, as Paul himself
Exhorts, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. Hence we read that even Christ himself when he
went to eat gave Thanks, Mat. 14.19.15.36. John. 6.11.

In Presence of them all. Showing an Example which they might follow.

And when he had broken. That Sea or course Bread; which being broad and not
very thick, was rather broken then cut with Knives, as Mat. 14.19.15.36. Mar.
8.6-19. Luke 24.30.

He began to Eat. That is, Heat; a Hebraism very usual in Scripture, of which
we have spoken above, c. 1. v. 1.

36. Then were they all of good Cheer. That is, When they were encouraged by
Paul's Words and Example, of the Truth of whose Predictions they had already
had Experience, laying aside all Cares, and removing Sadness a little from
their Hearts.

They also took Meat. To Appease their craving Stomachs. Pertinently says
Petronius, None unwillingly hears when he is either urged to take Meat, or to
Live.

37. We were in all Two hundred seventy six Souls. That is, Persons, as above,
c. 2. v. 41. and v. 10. and 22. of this Chap.

38. And when they had eaten enough. That is, As Virgil expresses it, Aen. 1.
v. 220.

When Hunger was allayed and Boards Removed. They lightened the Ship. That is,
They cast out the Ships Lading, that the Ship sailing more Light, they might
get the nearer to Land, and so easiler escape to Shore.

Casting out the Wheat into the Sea. It appears that this Alexandrian Ship
carried Corn or Wheat from Egypt into Italy, and that she was laden with that
Merchandise. But this Method is used in lightning a Ship, which also we have in
this History. First, the more weighty Fardels and ponderous Goods are cast out,
as above v. 18. then the Furniture, or Materials of the Ship, as above v. 19.
and finally, the Food, as in this 38. Verse.

39. And when it was Day. And the Sun Beams had expelled the Darkness.

They did not know the Land. That is, The Mariners knew not what Climate they
were in, or how that Land was called, to which they suspected that they were
come near, above, v. 27. but now they saw that they were upon it.

But they discovered a certain Creek with a Shore. That is, But they perceived
a certain part of the Sea that was not beset with steep Rocks, but intercepted
by Shores not far distant one from another. (...) in the Greek, says Grotius,
in Latin Sinus, A Bay or Creek, sometimes is spoken of the Sea, sometimes of
the Land, as here; for it is distinguished from the Shore. But these are some
Bays of the Sea, which have no shore, but are encompast with steep Rocks.

Into which. Seeing the Gr. Word (...), which signifies the Shore or Border of
the Sea, is of the Masculine Gender, the Relative Pronoun, may as well here be
referred to Sinum, Creek, as to Littus, Shore. The Seamen indeed were desirous
to get the Ship to the Shore, as is declared in the next Verse, but possibly
they first desired to get to that Creek of the Sea that was encompassed with
Shores.

They thought. Gr. (...), They were minded. That is, They unanimously
determined.

To thrust in the Ship. That is, That they might get free of the Tossings of
the Sea into a safe place.

40. And when they had taken up. Cutting the Ropes to which they were made fast.

The Anchors. The four that were cast into the Sea, above, v. 29.

They committed themselves unto the Sea, Gr. (...), they let into the Sea. It
seems to signify that their Anchors that were cut off were left in the Sea, or,
as Grotius says, It is a compendious Speech for, (...), They let their Ship go
in the Sea, to wit, That which was betwixt the Place where their Ship was and
the Land.

Loosed the Rudder-bands. That is, The Bands wherewith the Rudders are joined
and fastened to the Ships. When these Bands, says Grotius, are loosened, then
the Rudders fall down into the Waters, and by their Weight keep the Ship from
being overwhelmed with the Winds. As also when the Junctures or Rudder Bands
are loosed, the Mariners can with greater ease drive the Ship whither soever
they will. Moreover they are called here Rudders by Luke in the Plural Number,
either, because in general, the Rudders of any Ships are designed, or because,
as Grotius has noted, ancient Ships had two Rudders, one in each side of the
Stern.

And hoising up the main Sail to the Wind. That is, And spreading out the small
Sail to a Gale of Wind, that the Ship might go softly and easily. Luke here,
says Grotius, calls that Sail that is next to the Forecastle, ( which Pollux
calls Dolon and Livy in two Places) Artemo, (...), L. Malum de verb. Signif.
because it is hung up. It is rather an Additament to, than a part of the Ship,
says Javolen. Mariners make use of it, when they fear lest the greater Sails
should take in too much Wind, and overset the Ship. But it was here so much the
more necessary, because we have heard above that the Mast was cut down.

To the Wind. For these three Words, the Dative Case of the Participle
Feminine, is in the Gr. (...), blowing, and (...), or (...), blast, is
understood. Nor, says Grotius, is it less incongruous to say (...), to blow a
Blast, than (...), to Sail a Ship.

Made to Shore. Gr. (...). Pliny, Herodotus, and Plutarch, says Grotius, use
(...) for to make toward.

41. And falling into a place where two Seas met. That is, Into a double-Sea'd
Isthmus, or into Land rising in the Sea like an Isthmus, which was washed on
both sides by the Sea.

They ran the Ship. On a long Row of Rocks, which usually are in great Numbers,
says Grotius, not far from the Shore, yet so as that the Sea flows betwixt
them and the Shore. Of these sort of Rocks, Pliny says in his Proem to his
natural History, The numerous Rocks of the white Shallow frighten the Ships.

And the Forepart stuck fast. That is, And the Forepart of the Ship indeed,
seeing it stuck fast on the Rock.

Remained unmovable. That is, Tho beat upon by the stormy Sea, yet it was not
so much as moved.

But the Hinderpart was loosed by the force of the Sea. That is, But the
hinder-part gaped with chinks, and was broken by the beating of the Waves into
Planks and Boards, of which it was made up.

42. But the Soldiers. Who guarded those who were sent bound to Rome.

Counsel. That is, Purpose or Design.

Lest any. To wit, Of the Prisoners, or Fettered, if their Bonds were loosed,
should swim to Land.

Should swim out and escape. And so escape their deserved Punishments.

43. But the Centurion. Julius, of whom above v. 1.

Willing to save Paul. Toward whom he had shown himself Kind and Courteous,
above v. 3.

Kept them from doing it. That is, He forbid his Soldiers to kill the
Prisoners, or Chained.

Who could Swim. That is, who were skilled in swimming, and were of Strength
enough to perform it.

Should cast, etc. That is, Should jump off the Ship into the Sea, that they
might swim out to the Shore, that was not far from them.

44. And the rest. Who had not Skill or Strength to Swim.

Some on Boards, etc. That is, They got to Shore on Joists or Planks, which use
to be had in Rowers Seats, Hatches of the Ship, or place where the Oars are
fastened.

Some upon those which were of the Ship. That is, But others they saved from
the Shipwreck, on broken pieces of the split Ship.

And so it came to pass that all the Souls. That is, The Two hundred seventy
six Persons which were in the Ship, as is said above, v. 37.

Escaped to Land. Safe and Sound, as Paul had foretold above, v. 24 and 34.

CHAP. XXVIII.
1. AND when we were escaped. From the dreadful Shipwreck to Land.

Melita. It was already foretold by Paul Cap. 26. v. 26. that the place of
their Escape, after the violence of the Storm driving them thither, in their
designed Voyage, should be an Island which is now called by its Name Melita.
There are two Islands recorded of this Name, one being attributed to Sclavonia,
or to Dalmatia, a part of Sclavonia, and the other to Africa, Pliny makes
mention of the former, lib. 3. cap. 27. (Whence he alleges that Callimachus
calls little pretty Dogs for Women to play withal by the Name of Catuli
Melitaei) and says that it is situate betwixt Corzola, or Melena, and
Sclavonia, but Scylax places it near Corzola. The latter lies betwixt Sicily
and Africa, and that from thence little pretty Dogs are called Melitaei Catelli
is asserted by Strabo in his sixth Book, where he says, That before Pachynus a
Promontory of Sicily, Melita is to be seen, whence little Dogs are called
Melitaei. This Expression, Catelli Melitaei, Malta Bitlings, became a Proverb,
applied to things that men purchase to themselves merely for Pleasure, without
respect to any serious Matter, as being of no use thereto. The African Melita
far surpassing that of Dalmatia or Sclavonia, passes now somewhat corruptly
under the Name of Malta, the Habitation of the Cross-bearers, called the
Knights of St. John, which Charles the first King of Spain Vouchsafed them,
after they had been expelled Rhodus their former Residence, by Solomon the
Emperor of the Turks. It appears by Diodorus Siculus lib. 4. Bibl. Hist. that
it was a Colony of the Phenicians. Wherefore Bochart in his first Book of the
Phenician Colonies cap. 26. ingeniously derives it is Etymology from the Hebrew
Word (...) Malat, whence arises (...) Melita, That is to say, evasion, Refuge,
in regard that it was a place of Refuge for the Phenician Merchants, as
Diodorus does attest in the places we just now cited, declaring, That this
African Isle Malta is a Colony of the Phenicians, whose Traffic being
propagated even to the Western Ocean, had this Island for a Refuge, since it
had a most convenient Harbor, and was situate in the middle of the Sea. This
Island was also Melitan, that is, a Place of Refuge to Ulysses, if Melita be,
as Cluverius endeavors to prove at large, not distinct from Ogygia Calypso's
Island. Besides, Ovid lib. 3. Fast. gives us account that Anna Sister to Dido,
that died at Carthage, being driven thence, withdrew to this Island, which long
since had been the King's dwelling Place. Again, it is commonly believed that
Paul arrived hither after Shipwreck. Indeed Constantine surnamed
Porphyrogonnet, thinks that the Sclavonian or Dalmatick Melita, was the place
of Refuge to Paul in his Shipwreck. This Opinion, says Bochart, in the Place
above quoted, seems to some probable. First, Upon Consideration that Paul is
driven up and down in Adria before his Arrival to Melita, Act. 27. v. 27. Hence
they conclude that mention is made of an Island in the Adriatic Sea. Secondly,
Forasmuch as Barbarians Inhabited the same, Act. 28. v. 2 and 4. Whileas the
Greeks had the African Melita in their Possession long ago. Thirdly, Because
Luke makes no mention of any Town in the Island Melita, and yet in the African
there is a Town of the Island's Name remaining to this very Day. But these small
Objections are not of such weight, as that thereby the Assent of any Man should
be denied to the common Opinion confirmed by the most solid Arguments.

For, in the first Place, while Paul was sailing close by Crete, as you have it
Act. 27. v. 13 and 14. There arose a tempestuous Wind, called Euroclydon, or as
the vulgar Latin Interpreter reads it, Euroaquilo, That is, The North-East
Wind: which reading being admitted, the Conclusion is plain, for the Ship could
not be driven by the North-East Wind from Crete into Sclavonia. The Situation
of the places makes evident that this could have been brought about by the
South-East Wind, and not by the North-West directly opposite to the former. But
Read it which way you please, it is plain that this Wind Euroclydo drove them
rather to the South than to the North, seeing that the Mariners feared to be
cast upon the Quicksands of Africa by the Violence of this Wind, Act. 27. v.
17. Now there had been no Grounds for such a Fear, supposing the Ship to be
driven by this Wind to Sclavonia, a Coast opposite to Africa, and the
forementioned Quicksands.

Secondly, Act. 27. v. 41. Having fallen into a place where two Seas meet, they
ran the ship aground: into a place where two Seas meet, that is to say, into an
Isthmus; hence is that of Horace Od. 7. lib. 1. To Ephesus or the strong Walls
Of Corinth where an Isthmus swells.
Ovid also Eleg. 10. lib. 1. Fast. We sailed by the Isthmus where two Seas
Meet. This Isthmus lies to the summer East of the Island, and at this Day
passes by the Inhabitants under the Name of la cala di S. Paolo, which being
interpreted, is St. Paul's Arrival.

Thirdly. Act. 28. v. 7. In the same Quarters were Possessions of the First of
the Island, whose Name was Publius. Him I take to be whom the Romans made
Governor of the Island. For it may be gathered from this Place, that the chief
Governors of this Island were commonly so called, as also from an ancient
Inscription which Quintinus reports himself to have seen at Malta written in
Greek on Marble. L KA. YIOS. KYP. IGGEYS. POAION. GPOTOS. ELITAION. L. Ca. the
Son of Cyrus a Roman Knight, the First of Malta. The Carthaginian Governors
had certainly before the same name, being styled by a Phrase peculiar to that
place (...), the First. So Dan. 10. v. 13. Michael is reckoned one of the First
or Chief. Therefore (...) Head, General, Prince, and (...) First, are words of
one Original and Importance. And in this very place for First, the Syriack has
(...), and the Arabic (...) head. A further confirmation of this, is, that as
(...) signifies in the Arabic, the, first, thus (...) denotes to set over,
also to Govern a Nation, as if one should say, to be the First.

Fourthly. Paul with the Centurion and the rest tarried in that Island three
whole Months, Act. 28. v. 11. the number of the Men was two hundred threescore
and sixteen Souls, Act. 27. v. 37. this hardly any person can believe to be
said of Dalmatian Melita, which is but four Miles distant from the main land,
and having Epidaur a most famous harbor and most convenient for strangers
within sight, The Roman Centurion had rather steer his course thither, than
take up his Winter quarters in a pitiful Island, where it was impossible for so
many strangers to be entertained without great incommodities.

Fifthly. The account of their being carried to Puteoli in a Ship of Alexandria
that wintered in the same Island, Act. 28. v. 11. is inconsistent with its
being understood of the Dalmatian Malta, since it is almost impossible to avoid
the African Malta, when ye Sail from Egypt to Puteoli. But whosoever Sailing
from Alexandria to Puteoli, directs his course to Dalmatian Malta, he may be
said to wander out of the way, if not so far as Heaven is removed from the
Earth, yet at least the breadth of the whole Sea.

Sixthly. This is further affirmed by Luke declaring that after their setting
forth from Malta, they arrived first at Syracuse, and then at Rhegium, Act. 28.
v. 10 and 13. which way as it is straight upon the supposal of their setting
Sail from the African Malta, so it will prove preposterous and full of
wanderings, if it be once granted that they departed from the Dalmatian Malta;
for Rhegium being nearer to the Dalmatian Malta, than Syracuse, the way is
rather by Rhegium to Syracuse, than by Syracuse to Rhegium.

Seventhly. Now if we will dispute by Authority, Constantin Porphylogonetta is
not comparable for antiquity to Arator Subdiaconus, who in the second Book of
his Apostolical History says, that Melita into which Paul was cast, when he
suffered Shipwreck, is the Isle Malta by Sicily. Neither is it a work of any
difficulty to dissipate what may be objected to the contrary. For the Ship
arriving at Malta is said to be tossed in Adria, Act. 27. v. 27. Yet not in the
Gulf of Venice, the Adriatic Sea having far greater extent than that Gulf;
for the Gulf of Venice ends with Sclavonia, but the Adriatic Sea comprehends
all that part of the Mediterranean Sea, which is called Ionian. Hesychius:
Ionium, a Sea now known by the nama of Adria. Juvenal 's ancient Scholiast:
Being about a tedious Voyage from the Sea of Thuscany to Adria: made use of
Adria for Ionium. For Juvenal expresses himself thus: He underwent the raging
Thuscany,
And likewise the fierce Ionian Sea.
Hence Ptolemy affirms that the Adriatic Sea boundeth Sicily on the East,
Epirus and Achaia on the South, and Peloponnesus, and consequently Crete on the
West. Ovid also makes frequent mention of the Archipelago 's being divided from
Adria by the Corinthian Isthmus. Thus he speaks, lib. 4. Fast.

Wide Adria, and Corinth where the Land
An Isthmus hides, and dreadful makes by Sand.
And in the first Book of his Trist. and tenth Elegy.
When the blustering storms of Winter tossed me sore
In Adria, the Muses I implore.
Or after that the Isthmus danger's past,
And one Ship's used for saving us in have.
In pursuance hereof Philostratus lib. 2. Imaginum in Palemone, attests that
the forenamed Isthmus is betwixt the Egean and the Adriatic Sea. Again the
same Author in his Apollonius lib. 4. cap. 8. records that Nero had a Mind to
cut this Isthmus, to the end that Adria might disburthen it self into the
Archipelago. The same appears by Suidas on the Word Alpheus, and again on the
Word Arethusa, saying, that the River Alpheus does flow from Peloponnesus into
the Fountain Arethusa of Sicily, entering into the Main Sea through the
Adriatic Sea. Hence Pausanias in his Arcadicks says of the River Alpheus:
Neither could Adria stop its course. See more at large there. Moreover the
Adriatic Sea has its extent even to Africa, if credit may be given to Aethicus
and Orosius, by whose testimony the Province of Tripolis, where be Arzuges and
Leptis the great, has the Adriatic Sea on the North, and on the South Crete is
bounded with the Lybian Sea, which is also called the Adriatic. Jerome also in
the Life of Hilario is of this opinion, where its said that such as purpose to
arrive at Pachynus in Sicily from Paraetonium in Egypt sail through the midst
of the Adriatic Sea. But Procopius in his Vandalicks lib. 1. makes most of all
for our purpose in asserting that the Islands Malta and Gaul divide the
Adriatic and Thuscan Sea. The sacred Writer therefore wittily and answerably
to the constant verdict of Geographers asserts, that after their being driven
from Crete to Malta, they were tossed in the Adriatic Sea, by the violence of
the imminent Winds. Moreover we observed that the Inhabitants of Malta were
styled by the name of Barbarians from a remnant of Carthaginians that inhabited
their Fields. Luke makes no mention of the Town of Malta, it being altogehter
needless. Even so, Act. 21. v. 1. Paul is said to have arrived at the Islands
Choos and Rhodus without the mention of any Cities, tho in each of them there
were Cities of the Islands name.

2. The Barbarous People. That is, The Carthaginians that came from Africa to
Malta, or the Inhabitants of Melita descended of the Carthaginians. By the
ancients all such as were not Greeks by Birth or Language, were called
Barbarians. Whence Plautus, according to Festus, called Naevius the Latin Poet
a Barbarian. And in his Prologue of his Comedy termed Asinaria, Marcus vortit
Barbare, That is, Plautus rendered it into Latin. And in the Capteiveis you may
read the Barbarian Law, for the Latin Law. After the same manner the Latin
Authors, called all that used not the Roman Tongue Barbarians, as Cicero in his
Epistles to his Brother Quintus denominates the Africans, French, and
Spaniards. Moreover it is observed by Eustathius on the third Iliad, that the
Lacedaemonians called all Guests, and Strangers, Barbarians. The Greeks indeed
and Romans were wont to give this name to other Nations, because of the harsh
and confused sound of their Words; for Barbar denotes a Mumbling or Muttering
Noise, as Julius Caesar Scaliger a Man of an accurate Judgment and Universal
Learning relates; Or, as the same worthy Author conjectureth, they were
therefore called Barbarians, because they inhabited the Deserts, living after
the custom of Wild Beasts; for Bar signifies a Desert in the Arabic. The
Apostle 1 Cor. 14. v. 11. calls him a Barbarian that uses a strange and
unknown Tongue, in which sense the Author of the Chaldaick Translation uses the
word Ps. 104. v. 1. In the Syriack Bar imports without; hence in the opinion of
Drusius arises Barbar by doubling the Syllables, as from Rab, rabrab. Ovid
Amorum 3. Eleg. 7. takes Barbarity for Clownishness or Rudeness.

Of old Wit was prized above pure Gold: But now to be poor is reckoned the
greatest Clownishness in the World. That is to say, He Is esteemed Rude and
Clownish that is Poor.

Showed us no little Kindness. As if he had said, We met with kind Entertamment
at their Hands, beyond their barbarous Custom, since we were Strangers and
Shipwrack'd Guests.

For they kindled a Fire. That is, A Bundle of Sticks. Among the chief Acts of
Kindness usually Demonstrated, especially in the Winter Season, is the
presenting of Fire to warm Men.

And refreshed us. Gr. (...), they received. That is, They kindly admitted us
to the use of the Fire, that we might be warmed.

Because of the present Rain. That is, Which violently assailed, and sorely
vexed us.

And the Cold. Wherewith we were Chilled by reason of the winter Season of the
Year, as also, because we not only Sailed, but were likewise constrained to
swim in the cold Waters, and were at last exposed to the Violence of the
present tempestuous. Rain.

3. When Paul had gathered. Gr. (...), when he had rolled round together.
Either that he might gather into a Bundle the small Sticks scattered up and
down, or that being once gathered, he might roll them to the Fire, seeing Paul
was not able to carry the Bundle.

Of Sticks. Gr. (...), of Brush-Wood, so called because of their aptness to
Burn, Being they easily catch fire and produce a Sparkling, tho short lasting
heat. This Name is not only attributed to Sticks and superfluous shrubs of the
rank Vine, but also to any kind of Twigs, dry and ready to take Fire. Basil in
one Word calls a gatherer of Brush-Wood (...), which in the Hebrew would be
(...), as it is Number. 15. v. 32. whose Feminine (...), we read 1 Kin. 17. v. 10.

And laid them on the Fire. That is, When he had thrown into the Fire the Twigs
or Sticks once gathered, to the end that by the grater heat thereof, both the
Bodies of those that did swim out of the Waters might be warmed, and their wet
Cloths dried.

A Viper. This poisonous and noisome kind of Serpent is so called, because it
brings forth by Violence as it were, or rather, for that it brings forth young
ones alive; for the Vipers Travel is therefore the harder, because she brings
forth living or quick Brood, while other Serpents lay Eggs only.

And coming out of the Heat. It is very well known that Vipers, and other such
like Serpents use to leap violently out of Bushes and Twigs. Hence in
Palladius's Lausiakes cap. 20. Macarius digging a Well, was bitten by an Asp
nigh the Rushes and Shrubs, or Twigs that lay there. And Lucian in his
Philopseudes, gives us account that Midas the Vine-dresser laid dead after he
was bitten by a Viper. For while he was a tying the Vine-branches, and
supporting them with Forks, says he, a Beast creeping out from thence, did
sting the great Toe of his Foot. Thuanus de vita sua lib. 3. When we came the
next morning from the Church, every one approaching in all have to the Fire,
not thoroughly kindled as yet, there leapt a Serpent out of a Bundle, moist
either by reason of the Rain, or the low Celler whence it was brought, and
after its being exposed to open view, we had well considered it, we thought it
like an Amphisbaena, a Serpent which has an Head on both ends, and goes both
ways. In like manner Paul's Viper broke out of the Twigs, neither did she
assail him while he was gathering the Sticks, being then benumbed with Cold; for
it was Winter. Hence Prudentius in the Preface of his first Book against
Symmachus, v. 28.

While Paul of Twigs an Heap did make,
To dissipate the Cold.
He to the Fire the Shrubs did take,
To cause the Flame wax bold.
He carelessly his Hand did set,
Into the heap of Wood;
In which a Viper cold, did get
A place for her abode.
But when Paul cast the Twigs or Sticks, in which the Viper did lurk, into the
Fire, she being either refreshed by a gentle Heat, or exasperated by the excess
thereof, assailed Paul. Thus Phaedrus lib. 4. fall. 18.

One having brought a frozen Snake to life,
By heat's approach; he made himself a Knife,
To cut his Throat. For when the Heat she smelt,
Her poisonous Smart the patient Soul soon felt.
Assailed his Hand. Gr. (...), That is, as the english Translation renders it,
Fastened on his Hand, to wit, that she might sting with her raging Tooth. The
Aethiopick reads it, hung on his Hand. The Syriack, and both Arabicks, did bite
his Hand; of which Opinion were some of the Fathers. To this purpose,
Tertullian speaking of Paul, in his Book entitled Scorpiacus or little
Scorpion: He set at naught the Viper's Sting. And Ambrose in his Hexaemeron
lib. 6. cap. 6. A Viper did bite Paul. Prudentius also in the forecited Place.

The smoke of the Fire revived the Viper's Sense,
Whence stretching forth her Neck, she does commence
A demonstration of her Rage; the Hand
Of Paul she stings, and sticks close to the Wound,
That all might hear the Poyson's hissing sound;
So that each one at this amazed did stand.
And Arator in his second Book of the Apostolical History.

-- On whom the Snake
Her devlish Darts at the Fires approach did shake,
A Wound by wonted Rage and Poison cold,
His Hand sustains as all behold.
Oecumenius also: A Viper having thrust her Teeth into the Apostles Hand. But
the most famous Bochart, is (with far greater probability) of Opinion, that the
Viper was restrained from fastening her noisome Teeth into the Apostle's Hand by
the same God, that by his Angel shut up the Mouths of Lions, insomuch that they
could not hurt with their Teeth the Prophet, Dan. 6. v. 22. Which, says he,
Hierozoici p. 2. lib. 3. cap. 3. The words of Luke seem plainly to declare,
(...), he sustained no Hurt. For he could not be said to sustain no hurt, that
was stung by a Viper. Neither, for ought I know, does (...), import to bite or
sting, nor to assail or hang, but to fasten, as the simple Word (...). Having
proved by diverse Authorities, which you may see cited at large in the Latin
Edition of this literal Explication on the Acts of the Holy Apostles, he
concludes thus. Wherefore, Stephen adds (...) to the Words of Luke (...),
rendering it thus, she tied herself to his Hand, or fastened on it. So Basilius
thought good to say, while he gives account of the same Story in his ninth
Homily on the Hexaemeron, or six Days, (...), understand (...), The Viper
having fastened on Paul while he was a gathering of Sticks. Nevertheless by
othersit is rendered, hang, because (...) and (...), signify to hang by or on:
and here it is imme^^ ately subjoined, when the Barbarians saw the venomous
Beast hang on his Hand. Others again choose rather to say, did bite or Sting,
as if it should be read (...). For (...) in the passive Conjugation is to bite,
yet not with Teeth, but with Cavils and scoffing Taunts. And indeed Chrysostom
on this place, for for reads (...). Which notwithstanding he takes in another
Sense, to wit, for simple (...), that is, assaulted, set upon. For he
expresses himself to this Purpose in the subsequent Exposition: A Viper coming
out of the Fire set on his Hand: What follows makes it manifest that he was
assailed. By all means Chrysostom must be so rendered. In regard that (...), is
to assail a Man, as Stephanus makes apparent out of Plato, Thucydides and
Plutarch. Whence it is that a great many render (...), assailed his Hand, as if
(...) or (...) were not distinct from (...). But there is no need to change any
thing, nor to add strange unusual Notions to the common Word, since it is most
pertinent to say that the Viper fastened on Paul's Hand. For a Serpent is said
to tie whatever is compassed with her Windings. Hence the Prince of Poets Two
Serpents fierce Laocoon assailed,
And bound him fast by Windings that prevailed.
Nicander likewise in his Thieriacks or Antidotes against Poison v. 475.
advises to take care that the little spotted Serpent burn thee not, tying fast
thy Body by the strokes of her Tail. Leo Byzantius also in Boeoticis by the
Testimony of Plutarch in his Book of Rivers, speaking concerning the Boy
Cythaeron, insinuates that he was killed by a Serpent that tied him with her
windings. And Cicero of Roscius in his first Book on Divination: The Nurse in
the Night being awakned by the Light that was brought, saw a Serpent winded
close about the Child. Again in his second Book: It may be an Untruth that
Roscius himself was tied fast by the windings of a Serpent. This is farther
confirmed by Aelian, in the sixth Book, cap. 21. of his History, where he
asserts that the Dragon that set upon an Elephant, having crept up to his Neck,
and striking him with one part of his Tail, and binding him fast with the
other, strangled the Beast with an unusual Halter. Macrobius in the Description
of Hercules 's Knot, lib. 1. Sat. cap. 19. Those Dragons tie one another
toward the middle by a Knurle called Hercules's Knot.

4. And when the Barbarians saw. That is, The Inhabitants of Malta. Those Men,
says Bochart, were accounted Barbarians, because the most of them who inhabited
the Island Malta, were neither Greeks nor Romans, but Phenician or Carthaginian
Inhabitants, as is proved elsewhere by the Testimonies of Scylax, Diodorus, and
Stephanus. Wherefore if Credit may be given Orosius in his fourth Book cap. 8.
Atilius the Roman Consul in his Sea-Expedition against the Carthaginians in
time of the first Punick War, passing through Sipara and Malta, noble Islands
of Sicily, quite overthrew them. And at the second Punick War, T. Sempronius
sailed over from Lilibaeum now called Mazara, into the Island Malta possessed by
the Carthaginians. As soon as he arrived, Amilcar the Son of Giscon, Governor
of the Garrison, together with two Thousand Soldiers, or thereabouts, and the
Town of the Island were surrendered to him. Thus Livius in his first Book of
the third Decade. Besides, we observed already that Melita is a Carthaginian
Name. It remains then that the Inhabitants of Malta, as also the other
African-Carthaginians, were a part of the Barbarians, from whom the Country
itself was at length named Barbary.

The venomous Beast hung on his Hand. On which, to wit, she had fastened.
Bochart says that (...) denotes not only a Beast in general, but also a
Serpent, or Venomous Beast. Ecclesiast. c 12. v. 17. Who should show Pity to an
Enchanter bitten by a Serpent, or any such as approach to Beasts? understand
Venomous, that is, Vipers, or Serpents. Dioscorides l. 1. c. de vitice, or
Park-Leaves, (...), which Pliny renders thus, lib. 24. cap. 9. The Leaves once
perfumed or strow'd drive away venomous Beasts. Hence in the Books of
Physicians (...), and (...) are every where spoken of one bitten by a Serpent,
and (...), are such Medicines as cure Men of Serpents Venom. In this Sense
Josephus in the second Book, and fifth Chapter of his Antiquities, calls
Ethiopia (...), because it brings forth many Serpents. And the Marsi that feed
on Serpents, are by Galen styled (...). Likewise Dionysius Halicarnasseus calls
the Greek (...), a serpentine Letter, because it resembles Serpents hissing.
Moreover the word (...) importing any wild Beast to the Hebrews, is a Serpent
in the Arabic Language. Neither observe the Chaldees much difference in the
Words (...) and (...), the former signifying a Beast in general, and the latter
a Serpent. So that Luke's (...) is a Serpent, and consequently a Viper.

A Murderer. That is to say, One guilty of Slaughter, or some other great
Offense. The particular, says Bochart, is here put for the general. By which
Figure one of the Furies gets the Name of Tisiphone, from (...), punishing
Murderers. And yet she was not thought an avenger of Murder alone, but also of
all other Offenses.

Vengeance. Gr. (...), Justice the Goddess. Dice was the Name the Ancients gave
the Goddess Justice, says Bochart. Hesiod in his Husbandry, v. 254. Dice is a
Virgin descended of Jupiter, famous and venerable in the Eyes of the Gods
inhabiting Heaven. And whenever any revile her unjustly, she forthwith tells
her Father Jupiter the Son of Saturn, the Evil Thoughts of such Men. Orpheus v.
349. of the Argonauticks, v. 344. Let the Governess Dice with the avenging
Furies be witnesses to this Oath. In Euripides his Medea, Jason curses Medea,
whose Hands were polluted with the slaughter of the Children with this
Imprecation, v. 1389. But may Erinnys the Avenger of slain Children, and Dice
of Slaughter, destroy thee. Aristotle, or whoever passes by that Name, in the
Close of the Book De mundo, speaking of the great God, observes that he is
attended by Dice the Avenger of the Transgressors of the Divine Law. In Orpheus
his Hymn on hours, Dice is one of the Daughters of Themis and Jupiter the King.
We are presented with a curious and exact picture of her by Chrysippus in
Gellius lib. 14. cap. 4. She is said to be a Virgin, which betokens her being
undefiled, and unexorable by the wicked, suffering no specious Oration or
Prayer, or flattery, or any such like thing. Wherefore she is deservedly
painted with a grave and frowning countenance, that she may be a terror to the
Wicked, yielding hope and confidence to the Just, since such an aspect is
pleasant to the Just, and grievous to the Unjust. Plutarch in his Book of the
late divine Vengeance, If there be any that suffer not condign Punishment, for
their misdoings in this Life, they are given up to Dice after Death to be
punished more severely. In Aratus's Phoenomena she is said in the Golden age to
have lived familiarly with Men; and also in the Silver Age, tho more seldom;
but in the brazen Age when they began to eat the working Oxen, she withdrew her
self to Heaven. First they began to eat the laboring Oxen;
Then Dice hating the vain Race of Men,
Went up to Heaven.
Nazianzen alluding Hereunto in his third Metree. Virginity leaving ye shall
return to Christ, as Dice did of old after the slaughter of the plowing Ox. Nor
is it to be wondered that the fame of the Greek Goddess should come to the
Inhabitants of Malta, the most of whom were Phenicians: Forasmuch as before the
Romans invasion of Malta, the Government of the Island did change by courses so
among the Greeks and Phenicians, that sometimes the one, sometimes the other
commanded in chief, as we have made appear elsewhere by the testimony of
competent witnesses. The Worship therefore of this Goddess being borrowed from
the Greeks, they attribute to her that Paul being delivered from the peril he
was in upon the Sea, sell into another danger no less than the former. Their
opinion is so far allowable, as they hold it impossible for transgressors to
go unpunished. Plato spoke a great truth in his fifth Book of Laws, where he
says that all injustice is attended with Punishment. And Horace in the second
Song of his third Book. The Wicked Man that walks with braz'n Face,
Is seldom left by Vengeances halting Pace.


Further, that Vipers are used by God for the Punishment of the Wicked is
recorded, Eccles. 39. v. 35, and 38. The teeth of wild beasts, and Scorpions,
with Vipers, and the Sword that dispatcheth the Wicked. The Egyptians were
fully of the same mind with reference to the Asp named Thermuthis, Aelian lib.
10. cap. 31. They say of her, that she does no hurt to the good, while as she
kills the wicked. Which if it be so, says Aelian, the justice of the Universe
has highly honored this Asp. That is, The Goddess Dice, that punishes a great
many by this instrument. Therefore there was something in the Barbarians
Judgment of Paul not altogether to be despised. But yet it is manifest that they
judged amiss in many respects. As first in that they do not attribute the
Punishment of the Wicked to the true God, but to an Idol the Work of Men's
hands, which by some is named Dice, by others Themis, by other some Astrea, or
Erigone, as also Nemesis, or Adrastia. Secondly, because by this course they
hold that the wicked are always punished in this Life, while as they are very
often reserved for the future, where God makes up the slowness of his Judgments
by their Weight. Thirdly, because they think none falls into any heavy
Calamity, but he is proportionably Guilty: not knowing or considering that
affliction is the lot of the best, as we find in the instances of Job, and him
that was born blind, though neither he, nor his Parents were guilty of any
notorious Sin, Jo. 9. v. 3. Wherefore Prosperity nor Adversity are not to be
reckoned as the measures of any Man's Virtue or Wickedness. But the Judgment of
what is unrevealed must be left to God alone the great Judge of all Men.
Fourthly, they also sinned in their rash Judgment of Paul, without expecting
the event. Whereupon they conclude him utterly undone, with no less confidence
than if they had seen his death in the event. Whence they say in the preterit
tense, Justice or Dice has not suffered him to live: As by others it was said
of David, Ps. 41.8. An evil disease cleaves fast unto him, and now that he
lies, he shall rise no more. Nevertheless David rose out of his Bed beyond
their thoughts and expectation. Even so it befell Paul at this time. For he died
not of the Vipers bite, which the Barbarians saw hang on his hand.

Suffers not him to live. Gr. (...), suffered, in the Praeterit. See what we
have but now observed. A certain Man suffering Shipwreck, got safe to Land in
Libya; where sleeping on the Shore he is said to have been killed by the biting
of a Viper. Of whom Statilius Flaccus has a very eloquent Poem, Antolog. l. 3.
c. 2. to this purpose. From raging Sea one Shipwrackt seapt to Land,
And laid him down upon the Libyan Sand,
Close by the Shore dead Sleep did him 'oretake,
Naked, and wearied after his dire Wrack;
Where he was killed by a Deadly Snake.
Why did he vainly with the Waves contend?
On Land he meets with his deserved End.
An accident very like this happens to Paul. For a Viper assails him when he
scarce had escaped from Shipwreck into Malta an Island near Libya; but with a
very different event. For this Encounter was no ways fatal to Paul, but to the
Viper, as immediately follows.

5. And he shook off the Beast into the Fire. If we will give credit to
Oecumenius, the Viper of its own accord threw it self into the Fire, as
punishing itself, for that it had set upon a Body, it ought not to have meddled
with. It leapt, says he, into the Fire, as acting revenge on it self, because
it had invaded a Body that did not at all belong to it. But Luke expressly
affirms, that Paul shook it off, and that into the fire that was near, not far
off into the Air, as it is asserted in Prudentius's Preface to Book 1. against
Symmachus. He shook a great way off the Venomous Snake:
It thus beat off its way through the Air did take.
This by some is referred to the old Serpent, to wit, the Devil, who in vain
setting upon the Faithful is at last thrown into Hell Fire. Arator in his
Apostolic History, l. 2. " -- For the Beast hanging on his hands,
Shook off is thrown into the burning Brands;
It Is rightly cast into the Fire which it
Occasioned first, which Sin did first commit,
A Fire which heated has the Infernal Pit.


Felt no harm. That which Christ promised to his Apostles, Mar. 16.18. that
they should destroy Serpents, was fulfilled by this Miracle unexpected by the
Barbarians. And it seems, says Bochartus, that that Serpent fastened it self
on Paul 's Hand, not with design to hurt him, but to adorn him. For a Serpent
twisted about the Wrist, or Arms, was by the ancients used among the kinds of
Bracelets, which is recorded by Nicostratus in Athenaeus, Philostratus in his
thirty ninth Epistle, Hesychius and others: as by Nonnus l. 5. Dionysiac. a
Bracelet is described, which Like Serpents had its Body twisted round.

But they thought that he should have swollen. That is, That Paul would swell
to a vast bigness. The Gr. Word (...) properly is, says Bochart, to burn and
be inflamed; as also, to be blown up and swell by reason of heat. Hesychius,
(...), to inflame, to puff up, to burn. Aelian, l. 1. c. 57. says that the
People called Psylli cure easily those that are bitten by a Serpent, having
horns like a Ram, and a little Body, provided they are called, before the whole
Body is swollen. For Dioscorides writes that the whole Body of those that have
been bitten by such a Serpent, rises into a Tumor like that of the Varix's.
The Etymologian, speaking of Buprestis a kind of Herb, says, Buprestis is so
called, as they say, because those who eat of it do swell exceedingly, which in
the Greek is (...). And Nicander says of the Animal Buprestis in the 344 verse
of his Alexipharmacks. Sometimes the Heifers, sometimes gor-bellied Calves, She
does inflame. And in his Theriacae speaking of the Haemorrhons, v. 306. When
she does bite, the gums all over are huge raised, or also inflamed. For so the
Scholiast, (...), it is inflamed, burnt and scorched. And a little after (...),
they grow fiery and boiling hot. Nor is it otherwise taken in Lucian, when
speaking of the Dipsas a kind of Serpent, he says, (...) makes it inflamed.
For it follows, And they cry out, to wit, those who are bit, as those do who
are lying in the Fire. It may therefore be rendered either way in Luke. And
therefore one of the Arabicks in this place has, they expected that it would
burn. And, Castalio, While they expected that it should burn. But Jerome, They
thought that he would be turned into a tumor, that is, that he would swell.
Which Arias and Beza follow, and many other of the Neotericks. Nor without
reason, seeing this is one of the principal and most notable Symptoms, that
attend the stinging of Serpents, that the part stung immediately swells.
Dioscorides l. 6. says, Those who are bit by a Viper, their Body swells, and
is exceedingly dried up. Nicander, speaking of those that are stung by a Viper
in his Theriaca, v. 240, says, Noisome Tumors bubble up, as if the Body were
burnt with Fire. So also Paul Aegineta, Blisters break forth in the part that
is bitten, as in those that are burnt. And Aetius writes of a Wound inflicted
by a Viper, that a bilious tumor ensued, very hot full of Bubles, somewhat
red, etc. And Avicenna in the Chapter of the biting of Serpents toward the
bottom of Page 137. says, Then appears a hot tumor red, full of Pimples and
Pushes as from the burning by fire. Thus far Bochartus. The Learned, says Joh.
Price, dispute, whether the word (...) denote a Tumor or Inflammation. I think
it signifies both. Excellent is that place of Lucan to this purpose, and so
far as I know, untouched, l. 9. v. 780, etc. Thus Englished by the above
mentioned Sir A. Gorges. The fiery Prester (with his sting)
Nasidius to his end does bring.
Nasidius that (with his Plough shares)
The Marsian fields for grains prepares.
His face is colored Fiery red.
His puff't swollen skin at large is spread.
All form and shape his looks has lost,
The tumor so his Corpse imbost.
And so his Veins the Poison feeds,
That humane measure he exceeds.
One lump does all his parts confound,
Within a formless body drowned.
His harbergeon was not of space,
His swollen Carcass to embrace.
The boiling Caldrons frothy Scum,
Does not in Bubbles rise so plum;
Nor yet the Sail does swell so Fast,
When it is puff't with windy blast.
The mishap't Corpse could scarce contain,
The Limbs that so with swelling strain.
And that same Trunks confused heft,
They durst not to the Funeral weft,
But to the Fowls untouched it left,
And for a Prey unto wild Beasts,
If thereon they durst make their Feasts.
The import of that Word (...) could not be more accurately set forth. Even
from that place (besides the so clear description of both the Symptoms) you may
see, how emphatically the ancient Latin Interpreter translates here, should be
turned into tumor; to wit, that he is no more the same Man, but altogether a
Tumor; or, to use the words of Lucan, that his form and shape should be lost.

Or suddenly fall down and die. That is, That he should suddenly fall down
dead. Avicenna says that the greatest part of them who die by the biting of a
Serpent, die the third day, and sometimes continue until the seventh. Aetius
says that for the most part they die in seven Hours space. In Pliny, l. 11. c.
53. The Scythians dip their Arrows in Vipers Poison and humane Blood; that
irremediable wickedness brings instantly death at the lightest touch. And in
the Baeoticks of Pausanius it is declared by a certain Phoenician, that a Man
to escape the assault of a Viper that was pursuing him, quickly got up upon a
certain Tree, whither when the Viper came a little after, that it discharged
its Poison on the Tree, and that thereupon the Man died. So there is a sort of
Serpents among the Arabians called Giaria, which immediately kills. Whence
Muhamed Addamirius, who is commonly called Damir, in his Proverbs of the Viper
says, God has given him over to the Serpent Giaria, is as much as to say, He
has exposed him to an irremediable evil; because whosoever is bit by this
Serpent dies in the very Moment. Indeed the biting of a Viper is more
pernicious, by reason of the Nature of the place or aliment, and if it bites
fasting, or in the hottest Weather, and when it is provoked. For then its Bile
being stirred up, the Poison is much stronger. Besides, some Bodies, and in one
and the same Body some Parts less resist the Poison. Seeing therefore there are
so many causes, why Vipers kill either quicker or slower by their biting, the
time of their Death cannot certainly be determined. But that Serpent that
assailed Paul might be supposed to have most ready Poison, because it broke out
of the midst of the Fire more stirred up and provoked.

After they had looked a great while. As if he had said, But when these
Barbarians had a considerable time expected, that Paul's Death would ensue upon
the biting of the Viper.

And saw no harm come to him. That is, And saw that no hurt befell him, whence
he could be accounted Guilty of any Crime, as they suspected.

Changing their Minds. That is, passing from their former into a contrary
Judgment; as, The Clownish rabble cannot hold the mean,
and
Fools shunning one Vice run into a worse.


They said he was a God. Whom before they concluded to be a Murderer. But as
Paul was not a Murderer, so neither was he a God, but a faithful servant of
God, whom when they judged a Murderer, they were Guilty of a breach of Charity,
when a God they sinned grievously against Faith. For, as Oecumenius observes,
the Gentiles used thus to account any a God, when they did any thing above the
reach of ordinary Men. So above c. 14. v. 10 and 19. those of Lystra appointed
Divine Worship to be performed to this same Paul, because he had healed a lame
Person: but afterward the very same Persons stoned him.

7. In the same quarters. Gr. In those that were about that place. That is, In
that place, as the Syriack rightly renders it, or, of the Country near that
Coast. (...) is put for (...), as by an elegant Phrase of the Greeks (...) is
said for (...), above, c. 13. v. 13. says Lewis de Dieu.

Were possessions of the Chief Man of the Island, etc. That is, A certain Man
had Lands, whose name was Publius, or, as others read it, Poplius, whom the
Romans had set over the Island Malta. See what we have said on v. 1. out of
Bochartus.

Who received us and lodged us three days courteously. As if he had said, Who
being very Rich and civil, lodged us all, for as great a number as we were,
three days, and very lovingly bestowed upon all, those things that were
necessary for our sustenance.

8. He prayed. On his knees, as above, c. 20. v. 36. and 21.5. See our
Annotations on the same places. Eusebius. 5. Hist. Eccl. 5. says that the
Christian Soldiers, who under the Emperor Marcus Aurelius obtained rain by
their Prayers, prayed with their knees bended even to the Earth, according to
that gesture of Prayer peculiar to Christians.

Saved him. That is, healed him, according as Christ when he was risen again
from the Dead had promised to his Disciples that believed in him, Mar. 16.18.
They shall lay their hands upon the Sick, and they shall recover. Now
imposition of hands is a visible sign of Prayer, which James makes mention of,
c. 5.14. Paul therefore conjoined the sign with the thing signified, that is,
Imposition of hands with Prayer, when he restored to health Poplius or
Publius's Father, who was Sick of a Fever and bloody Flux. Moreover every
promise that belongs to the Body is conditional, and has the exception included
in it, except God shall see it fitting otherwise for just causes, although
unknown to us. For not the Apostles themselves indeed, although present, could
restore to health all that were Sick in the Church after the manner prescribed
Jam. 5.14. as you may see Phil. 2.26, 27. 2 Timothy 4.20. For health of Body
sometimes prejudices that of the Mind, and Sickness of Body sometimes is the
means to attain soundness of Mind, and, as Seneca of Providence says, c. 4.
Calamity is the occasion of Virtue, or as Minucius Felix expresses it,
Calamity is frequently the Discipliue of Virtue. Hence Salvianus Presbyter of
Massilia, of Gods Governmet l. 1. We must not be grieved at the Affliction of
Infirmities, which we understand to be the Mother of Virtues.

9. When this was done. That is, When Poplius or Publius's Father was restored
to health by Paul's Prayers, when he laid on his Hands on him.

Others also which had diseases in the Island. That is, All the rest also which
were afflicted with Sickness in this Island of Malta.

Came. To Paul, That he might lay his hands upon them, and implore the help of
God for healing them.

And they were healed. At the Prayers of Paul who laid his hands upon them.

Who. Those that were recovered from their Sickness.

10. Honored us with many Honors. As if he had said, Having a grateful
remembrance of their Miraculous Recovery, not only did they highly honor Paul,
at whose Prayers they were freed from their Diseases, but also me Luke the
Writer of this History, and the rest of Paul's Attendants.

And when we Sailed. As if he had, And when we loosed from the Island Malta, to
Sail further.

They put. Into the Ship.

Such things as were necessary. That is, Large and Liberal Provision.

11. And after three Months. Of the Winter, elapsed from the time of our
Arrival at the Island Malta.

We set Sail. That is, We were carried forth.

In a Ship of Alexandria. As also before we were carried from Lycia in a Ship
of Alexandria bound for Rome, above c. 27.6.

Whose sign was Castor. That is, Castor and Pollux, who are called (...), that
is, Jupiter's Sons by Leda Daughter of Thestius, Wife to Tyndarus King of
Laconia; both have the name of Castor's from one of them. Whence Pliny, l. 10.
c. 43. Above the Temple of the Castors. Arnob. l. 5. against the Gentiles, The
Castors, Sons of Tyndarus, one used to tame Horses, the other was a good
Champion, etc. Minutius Felix, Castor and Pollux die by courses, that they may
live. They, when first they grew to Men's years, scoured the Seas of Pirates,
and for that reason were accounted Gods of the Sea, whom Mariners use to
invocate in storms. Afterward they went into Colchos with the Argonautae: in
which expedition Pollux killed Amyrcus King of the Bebrycians who laid an
Ambush against him. Then returning home they took back their Sister Helena, who
was ravished by Theseus, when they had stormed the City of Aphydna in the
absence of Theseus. At length when Castor died, they say that Pollux, who
having been born of the same Egg with Helena, was immortal, out of Love to his
Brother, begged of Jupiter, that he might share his Immortality with his
Brother, which having obtained, they are said to die alternatively and live
again. Which Fiction arises from hence, because as Servius says on Aen. 6. the
Constellation Gemini, that is assigned to them, is so, that when one Star of it
sets, the other rises. Yet Macrobius, Saturnal. l. 1. c. 21. as he
refers all the other Gods, so them also to the Sun, when he says, But the
Gemini, who are supposed to die and live by courses, what else do they signify
but one and the same Sun, now descending into the lower Hemisphere, anon
mounting to the highest altitude of this? Moreover the Castors, or Castor and
Pollux were usually painted, like handsome young Men, most decently apparelled,
and sitting on Horseback, says the Famous Lightfoot. And they appeared thus
Equipped if you will believe the Relator, in the Engagement at the Lake Regillus,
leading on the Roman Cavalry, and defeating the Enemy, so that the Victory was
obtained by their Conduct, Dionys. l. 6. Roman Antiq. Yet sometimes they are
drawn on foot. But that the Ships of Alexandria used to have the Effigies of
Castor and Pollux on their Snout, that notable place of Cyril indicates, which
the most renowned Heinsius cites out of Catena patrum upon Isaiah not yet
published. But also, says he, the Author of the Acts of the Apostles, says,
that they who were with him went aboard of a Ship of Alexandria, whose sign was
Castor and Pollux. For it is usual for Alexandrian Ships to have such Ensigns
painted on the right and left side of their Forecastle. Moreover we may observe
that Paul did not refuse in case of necessity to make use of that Ship, which
has the Image of an Idol upon it. For seeing an Idol has no Virtue to pollute
things consecrated to it, a Christian making use of these things in case of
necessity, where there is no just cause of offense, is not defiled, if they be
referred to Civil uses. See 1 Cor. 8.4, 7, 8, 9, 10.

12. And landing at Syracuse. Syracuse, or, as it is commonly used in the
plural Number, Syracusae, the most Famous City of the Island of Sicily, a
Colony of the Corinthians, was built by them together with the Dorick Grecians,
under the Command of Archias the Corinthian, above 700 years before the Birth
of our Lord, about the same time that Naxus and Megara, Cities of Sicilia were
built, as Thucydides, l. 6. Strabo, l. 6. and others have left on Record. It
had its name from a Marsh that lies near it, called Syraco, of which Stephen
speaks when he treats of Syracuse. Marcianus Heracleota in his Periegesis,
The Dorians inhabited the West side
Of Italy, whom Archias of Corinth bid
To come to him, who did their labor use,
Building the Famous City Syracuse,
Its name from the adjacent Marsh they choose.


It was, says Thomas de Pinedo, of old divided into four parts, according to
Cic. in Verrem, l. 4. One, which Strabo calls Ortygia, l. 6. was by them called
Nasos (that name in the Dorick Dialect, which the Syracusians used, signifies
an Island) Famous for two Harbors, and the Royal Palace of Hieron, where the
Praetors had their residence. In this part of the City there were many
consecrated Temples, two whereof surpassed the rest, to wit, Diana's Temple,
and Minerva's. There was also a Fountain of Sweet Water, whose name was
Arethusa, of incredible largeness, celebrated not only by Poets, but also by
Prose-Writers, very full of Fish, which would have been wholly covered with the
Waves, had it not been parted from the Sea by a fortified Wall, and certain
heaps of Stones. The second part was called Acradina, wherein were a very large
Market place, stately Galleries, a public Hall extraordinary well adorned, a
very spacious Court, and a most excellent Temple of Jupiter Olympius. The third
part of the City was named Tyche because in it was an ancient Temple of Fortune
(so the Greeks call Fortune) in which there was a spacious College, and very
many consecrated Houses. But the fourth part, because it was built last, was
called Neapolis, in which there was a large Theater, and two stately Temples,
the one Ceres's, the other Proserpina's, and that surpassingly beautiful and
big Image of Apollo, which they called Temenites. These four parts of Syracuse
were of that extent, that Cicero, in the above cited place, calls every one of
them a City, and therefore Ausonius in his Poems, which he made of the most
considerable Cities of the Roman Empire, calls Syracuse Quadruple. Epipolae
also, wherein were Eurylcus, Labdalum and Temenus, of which we have spoke in
their proper places, is by others mentioned among the Parts of Syracuse, but we
have followed the most Learned of Romulus's Offspring, from whose Fountain we
have watered these Gardens. In Epipolis was that Famous Prison called Latomia,
a large, and stately work of Kings and Tyrants; it was all of a Rock dug to
a mavelous depth, according to Cicero's Oration against Verres, l. 5. who in
the same Oration avers, that it was made by Dionysius the cruel Tyrant. The
pleasantest of these Caverns had its name of Philoxenus the Poet, wherein he is
said to have composed Cyclops, the choicest of all his Poems, as Aelian
reports, Hist. var. l. 12. c. 44. Sueton says in Tib. c. 74. that that Image
of Apollo, called Temenites, so much commended by Cicero, was transported from
Syracuse to Rome. The Romans made themselves Masters of this most Opulent and
Famous City when Marcellus was their General, after that they had sacked it, as
Livy in his 25 Book, and Florus, l. 2. c. 6. sufficiently testifies; the Words
of the latter I thought fit to insert here. Sicily that was committed to
Marcellus did not long hold out, for all the Island was overcome in one City.
That great, and before that time invincible Metropolis Syracuse, tho it was
defended by Archimedes's wit, at last submitted. Its tripple Wall, the same
number of Castles, that Marble Haven, and celebrated Fountain availed it
nothing, save only to procure compassion, that being overcome it might be
spared for its beauty. Strabo, l. 6. says, that Augustus Caesar repaired it.
It was anciently the Metropolis of all Sicily, as also the greatest and most
powerful seat of Tyrants, now a Bishops Seat, between Catina, and the
Promontory Pachynus; it retains the same situation at this day, and its name is
a little altered, for it is commonly called Saragossa. Its Citizens by the
Latins were called Syracusans. It has produced several Men Famous for
Learning, amongst the rest Flavius Vopiscus, the Famous Historian, Philemon the
Comic Poet, but Archimedes the Geometrician and excellent Mathematician has
surpassed them all in Fame, whose Sepulcher Cicero, Tusc. Quaest. l. 5. makes
his boast that he found out among Briers and Brambles, when it was unknown to
the Syracusans. But I know not on what account he calls so admirable a Man
contemptuously, vile little Man. If ye desire to know more of this City,
consult Cluverius l. 1. Sicil. Ant. c. 12. and Goltzius on Syracuse.

We tarried there. To wit, at Syracuse.

13. Thence. That is, When we had tarried three days at Syracuse, we parted
thence.

We fetched a compass and came to Rhegium. A City of Greeks, built by the
Inhabitants of Chalcidia, as Strabo testifies l. 6. Hence Solinus c. 8. It is
well known that Rhegium was built by the Chalcidians. It retains the name at
this day, for it is called Reggio by the Italians; it was of old the Chief City
of the Brutii, now of Calabria the farther in the Kingdom of Naples. It is
situate on the border of the Sicilian streights over against Sicily; it is
dignified with a Bishops Seat according to the testimony of Alexandrinus and
Michael, Antonius Bandrand of Paris, on his Geographical Lexicon. Authors are
not agreed as to the Etymology of its name, some say that it was so called
because it was a large City, and as it were Royal, but others (...) that is, to
be broken, because that before, that I may use Virgils Words, Aen. 3. that Land
and Sicily Divided were, land that conjoined was,
A huge Flood did with violence divide
Parting Sicilia from Hesperia 's side;
Cities and Fields retired with swelling Waves,
A narrow Sea their Margin interlaves.
Strabo in the forecited sixth Book, and Eustathius on Dionysius's Perieget. v.
345. are my Authors for both the Originations. Strabo in the same Book
reports that it was destroyed by Dionysius the first of that name King of
Sicily, and repaired by his Son, and called Phoebia, and that it was augmented
by Augustus Caesar out of his own Navy, when it was but thinly Peopled. It is
called Rhegium Julium by Ptolemy, l. 3.1. either for that Julius Caesar sent a
Colony thither, or because Julia the Daughter of Augustus by Scribonia being
banished into Rhegium for her lewdness died there, as Tacitus testifies, Book
1. of his Annals. If any desire to know further of this City, let him consult
Leander Albertus his Description of Italy dedicated to Henry 2. King of France,
Cluverius and others.

And after one day. To wit, past at Rhegium.

The South Wind blowing the next day. After our departure from Rhegium.

We came to Puteoli. In the Gr. the Latin name being a little corrupted it is
(...). Varro Book 4. of the Latin Tongue, From the Word Putei, Wells, the City
Puteoli has its name, because about that place are many cold and hot Waters,
except it be rather called so from Putor, stench, because it has often a
noisome smell of Brimstone or Alum. This City of Tuscany, that is, Hetruria,
is called by three names, by Stephen Byzantius in their proper places. For by
him it is called Dicaea, Dicaearchia, and Potioli. In Potioli he says that it
was built by the Samians, and in Dicaea that it was a Colony of the Ionians. S.
Jerome in Eusebius. Chron. Lib. 2. Olymp. 64. A. 4. The Samians built Dicaearchia,
which is now called Puteoli. Strabo says of this City after his Description of
the Lakes Lucrinus and Avernus, Next are the Shoars, or the Coasts about
Dicaearchia, and the City itself. It was once a Dock of the Cumans, built on
the Brink of the Shore. But about the time of the War with Annibal, the Romans
sent a Colony thither, and changing its former name Dicaearchia, they called it
Potioli, from Putei, Wells. Others from Putor, stench, because of the stench of
its Waters. The same Strabo a little after. But the City was made a great Mart
Town, having Artificial Harbors for Ships, by reason of the natural convenience
of the Sand. Dicaearchia, as for most part it is called by the Greeks, is by
Pliny, l. 3. c. 5. called the Colony Dicaearchia. It appears from the thirty
fourth Book of Livy, that Puteoli, Vulturnus and Liternus, were made Colonies
of Roman Citizens, when Publius Cornelio Scipio Africanus was Consul for the
second time in the Consulship of Titus Sempronius Longus, and that 300 Men were
sent into each of them. If Puteoli did not afterward lose its right of Colony,
Cornelius Tacitus was mistaken, when he said, Book 14 of his Annals; Puteoli an
ancient City in Italy obtained the right of a Colony and Surname from Nero.
Benjamin Tudelensis says in his Itinerary, but without any Author for it, that
this City was anciently called Surento, and that it was built by Hadarezer, who
is made mention of 2 Samuel 8.3. when he fled from before the face of David, as
the Hebrews express it, which fable the counterfeit Joseph Ben. Gorion also
relates l. 1. c. 3. but the contrary appears from Ptolomy, with whom Chap. 1.
of his third Book of Geography Puteoli and Surentum are distinct Cities.
Puteoli is now by the Italians called Pozzuolo, which is the same name a little
corrupted; C. Caesar Caligula joined Baiae to its Bulwark by a Bridge, which
were most four Miles distant, either in aemulation of Xerxes, who bridged over
the Hellespont, or that he had a mind to terrify Germany and Brittany, whom he
was invading by War, with the report of this huge Work; or rather, because
Thrasyllus the Mathematician had foretold, that Caius the Emperor should not
more be Emperor, than he could ride upon Horses over the Bay of Baia, as
Suetonius relates in his Caeligula. Marcus Tullius Cicero, says Thomas de
Pinedo called his Village Puteolanum, because it was near Puteoli where Aelius
Spartianus in the Life of Adrian the Emperor says that this Emperor was
interred; in which Antoninus Pius his Successor made him a Temple ins^ead of
his Sepulcher, and a Game every five years like to the Olympian, and Priests,
and Colleges, and many other things which belonged to the Honor as it were of
a God, as the same Spartianus declares. In the middle of the City there is a
most ancient Temple to be seen, somewhat defaced by the violence of
Earthquakes, of old consecrated to Augustus, but now to Saint Proculus, where
Men's bones are to be seen of a vast bigness, as Leander Albertus an Eyewitness
testifies in his Campania. For he places this City in that part of Italy.

14. Where we found the Brethren. That is, The Christians, who possibly were
converted from Judaism to Christianity. Josephus makes mention of the Jews that
dwelt at Dicaearchiu, that is, Puteoli, Ant. l. 17. c. 4.

And were desired. By the same Brethren.

To tarry with them. Gr. (...), says Lewis de Dieu, is seldom, put for (...),
at; yet it is not altogether out of use, as, (...), at the doors, at the Gate,
is in use almost with all Wriers, and in Thucidydes, l. 3. (...), it was
situate by the River.

Seven days. To wit, as many as Julius the Centurion had appointed to stay at
Puteoli, who had shown him self extraordinary civil to Paul: as ye may see
above c. 27. v. 3 and 43.

And so. After those fourteen days spent at Puteoli.

We came to Rome. That is, as it is in the English, we went toward Rome, for
then they were not yet come to Rome, as is understood by the verse immediately
following. To come in this place signifies nothing else than to go, as Luke
15.20. Joh. 6.17.

15. And from thence. That is, From the City of Rome.

When the Brethren. That is, The Christians who then dwelt at Rome, to whom
Paul had written an Epistle before, which is superscribed To the Romans.

Had heard. That Paul was going a Prisoner from Puteoli to Rome, accompanied by
Luke and Aristarchus.

They met. That is, Many went out to meet.

Us. To wit, Who were on our Journey for Rome.

As far as Appii-forum and the three Taverns. As if he had said, some indeed
met us at Apii-forum, but others who set later out met us at the three Taverns,
which were nearer to Rome than Appii-forum. Zozimus l. 2. makes mention of the
three Taverns, and that Severus Caesar when he was going to Rome, when he came
to that place, which was called the Three Taverns, he was seized by the Ambush,
which Maxentius had set against him in that place, and put to a cruel Death,
having had his neck broke with a Halter. Jerome thinks that Appii-forum was so
called from Appius a certain Consul; from whom also the way called Appian had
its name. It was a Town further distant from Rome than the three Taverns, as
Cicero shows Ad Attic. l. 2. Epist. 10. From Appii-forum at four a Clook; I
had given another a little before at the three Taverns. Behind the Mountain
Albaenus in the Appian way, there is a City called Aricia, which Strabo l. 5.
says is distant from Rome 160 Furlongs, but Dionysius l. 6. and Philostratus
l. 3. of the Life of Apollonius, say it is only 120 furlongs distance from it.
But these Verses of Horace plainly prove that Aricia was nearer Rome then
Appii-forum, Sermon. 1. Sat. 5.

From stately Rome I walked a little way,
And reached Aricia first, and there I lay;
My Company as good as Man could seek
The Lawyer Heliodore a Learned Greek:
Then Forum Appii, that is a Paltry Town,
With Mariners and Pedlers thronged, and those alone.
Which when Paul saw. Coming out to meet him.

He thanked God. Whose bountiful Providence had at last granted him the
happiness of speaking with the Christians that dwelt at Rome, which he had
always so begged of God in his Prayers, that he could not have asked it more
earnestly, Romans 1.10.

He took Courage. That is, He began to hope that his confession of the Faith,
would not be destitute of its fruit among the Romans, and so he hastened to Rome
more cheerfully, because of the defense of the Gospel he was to make there.

16. And when we came to Rome. In the Gr. is added, The Centurion delivered the
Prisoners to the Governor of the Army. Who, to wit, was otherwise called the
prefect of the Praetorium, and was over the Praetorian Soldiers, who were
always present at Rome for the Emperors use. It is evinced by many places of
Tacitus, says Grotius, that the keeping of the Prisoners was committed to this
Prefects charge. Burrhus Afranius is thought at that time to have been Nero's
Prefect; this excellent Soldier, Tacit. l. 12. his Jaws swelling by degrees,
and the passage of his breath being stopped, died, in the Consulship of P. Marius
and L. Asinius, Tacit. l. 14.

But Paul was suffered. Whom possibly Festus Procurator of Judaea, had
testified by his Letters, since the time that he was sent to Rome, that he was
guilty of no Crime.

To dwell by himself. That is, Apart from other Prisoners, where he would.

With a Soldier that kept him. To wit, To whose left Hand Paul's right Hand was
fastened after the manner of the Romans with a long Chain, which Paul holding,
below v. 20. makes mention of, also Ephesians. 6.20. The Scholiast upon Juvenal
says, That it is called a Camp Prison, when the Captives are delivered
Chained, so that the same Chain fastens both the Prisoner and Soldier. See what
we have said above c. 12.6.

17. After three Days. From Paul's arrival at Rome.

He called the chief of the Jews together. That is, Paul not only entreated,
but also persuaded, those of the Jews at Rome, that were eminent for Dignity
and Learning, that they would come and visit him.

I have done nothing against the People. That is, I have done no wrong to the
Nation of Israel.

Or Customs of our Fathers. That is, Neither have I in any thing transgrest the
Laws that were delivered by Moses to our Ancestors. For Paul did not hinder
those that were born in Judaism from observing the Legal Ceremonies, but only
taught, That the Gentiles who were converted to God and his Christ were not
obliged to the observation of them.

Prisoner from Jerusalem. That is, Since the time that the Jews would have
killed me at Jerusalem, as a Wicked Man, and one unworthy to live. See above c.
21. v. 31 and 33.

I was delivered into the Hands of the Romans. Who governed Judaea. See above
c. 23. v. 24.

Who. To wit, the Roman Procurators of Judaea, viz. Felix, c. 24. and Festus c.
25.

When they had examined me. That is, When they had made Inquisition into, and
taken Cognizance of my Cause.

Would have let me go. Gr. (...), would have absolved, or, set me at liberty.
That is, they were strongly bent to set me free, as before Pilate was to set
Christ at liberty, when he was delivered to him. See above c. 24.28.25.18 and
25.

Because there was no cause of Death in me. That is, Because they acknowledged
that I had done nothing worthy of Death. Claudius Lysias the Chief Captain
acknowledged above, c. 23. v. 29. that Paul had done nothing that deserved to
be punished by Death. As also Felix Governor of Judaea, when he treated him
kindly, above, c. 24. v. 24. Festus the Governor, who succeeded Felix, c. 25.
v. 18 and 25. King Agrippa the younger, c. 26. v. 32. So the Servant, no less
than the Lord, had a Testimony of his Innocence from these Unbelievers.

19. But when the Jews spoke against it. Who dealt with Festus to send me from
Caesarea to Jerusalem to be there judged by the Sanhedrin, that they might have
a fit opportunity to kill me by the Way. See above c. 25. v. 3.

I was constrained. Lest I should have been sent from Caesarca to Jerusalem by
Festus who was willing to gratify the Jews. See above c. 25.19.

To appeal to Caesar. See above c. 25. v. 11.

Not that, etc. As if he had said, Yet not upon this account, that I might
accuse the Jews, that without cause troubled me, of any Crime, before the Roman
Emperor, but only that I might vindicate my own Innocence. Beza has here
supplied the Ellipsis of the Particle, Yet, rendering, yet not that, and he has
taken notice of the like Ellipsis of the same Particle, Mat. 2.6.

20. For this cause therefore. As if he had said, Lest ye should think I am
disaffected toward my own Nation.

Have I entreated to see you, and speak with you. That is, I have humbly prayed
that ye would visit me, that I might have occasion to discourse with you.

For the hope of Israel. That is, For the Messiah, who is hoped for and desired
by the Israelites. As if he had said, Because I teach and bear Witness, that he
who is hoped for by the People of Israel, has been already exhibited, when
Jesus of Nazareth was exhibited, whom with all asseveration I affirm to be that
Messiah who is promised in the Law and the Prophets, and who is desirously
looked for by the Israelites, I am bound and fastened with this Chain which ye
see, as if I had been a Wicked and flagitious Fellow. Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1.1.
is called our Hope, because we hope through his Merits to obtain the free gift
of Eternal Life. See also Col. 1.27. See above c. 26. v. 6, 7. Paul, says
Wolzogenius, taught and confirmed, that this Hope or thing hoped for, is now
completed after so many Ages, while the Messiah is really exhibited who is
that Jesus of Nazareth. By this hope may also be understood the Resurrection of
the Dead, which Paul confessed above with the Pharisees against the Sadduces.
See above c. 23. v 6. c. 24. v. 15 and 21. But this was also to be accomplished
by the Messiah. That the former of them is chiefly here hinted at, seems to
appear, both from that place, c. 26. now cited, and by the Words of the Jews
below, v. 22.

With this Chain. Wherewith I am tied to this Soldier. See above, v. 16.

I am bound. As if I were guilty of some notorious Crime.

21. But they. To wit, The Jews at Rome.

Said to him. To wit, to Paul the Prisoner.

We, etc. As if they had said, There is nothing written against thee to us by
those Jews who dwell at Jerusalem, nor has any of them who are come hither to
Rome accused thee to us.

22. But we desire. Gr. (...), we vouchsafe. That is, We do not refuse when we
shall have leisure.

To hear of thee what thou think. That is, What thou can bring in defense
of thy Opinion about Jesus of Nazareth.

For as concerning this Sect. To wit, That professes that Jesus of Nazareth is
the Messiah promised in the Law, and the Prophets.

We know that every where it is spoken against. To wit, Because of the Crimes
that are laid to the charge of the same Heresy or Sect of the Nazarens, as
they call it, by Letters sent from the Sanhedrin to the Synagogues of the Jews
that are dispersed through the several Countries of the World, a little after
Christ's departure from Earth. The Jews say, says Grotius, that a Copy of those
Letters is kept in an ancient Synagogue at Barbetomagum of the Vangiones, or as
it is called at this day, Worms. Justin against Trypho reports, that there
were Messengers sent from the Jews of Palestine to the Synagogues after the
Death of Christ, publishing that a certain Wicked Sect, and contradicting the
Law, was raised up by a certain Impostor Jesus of Galilee. Thus the event has
fully proved the veracity of Simeon's Prophesy of Jesus Christ, That he should
be for a sign that should be spoken against, Luke 2.34.

23. And when they had appointed him a day. Whereon they should come to him,
and hear his discourse.

There came to him. On the day appointed.

Into his lodging. That is, The House where he tarried.

Very many. Besides those who had seen him before.

To whom he expounded and testified. That is, He declared with great
Asseveration, as a certain Evidence. See above c. 18. v. 5. and Luke 16.28.

The Kingdom of God. That is, That the Kingdom that was to be erected to God by
the Messiah, did not consist in ease, delight, or abundance of other transitory
goods, as most of the Jews dreamed, but in the chief Beatitude, whose beginning
is holiness or newness of Life upon Earth, and its consummation blessed
Immortality in Heaven. See Luke 17.20.

Persuading them. That is, And proved it to them by persuasive Arguments.

Concerning jesus both out of the Law and Prophets. That is, All things that
were foretold or praefigured in the Law or the Prophets, of the Messiah the
Savior and Deliverer of the World, are fulfilled and accomplished in Jesus.
See above c. 3. v. 18 and 24. c. 13. v. 27. c. 15. v. 15. c. 16.22. and Luke
24.27.

From Morning till Evening. That is, For a whole day without intermission.

24. And some. As if he had said, But as it usually falls out, some of those
Jews who then heard Paul Preaching Christ, were persuaded with Paul's
invincible Arguments that Jesus of Nazareth was the same Messiah that was
foretold and prefigured in the Law and the Prophets, but others rejected these
Arguments of Paul's with an obstinate and bitter Spirit. In like manner the
different effects of the Preaching of the same Paul, are mentioned above, c.
14. v. 4. c. 17. v. 4 and 5, and v. 32, 34. of the same Chap. c. 19. v 9. So
the same seed of the Word of God, when it is sown in different Minds, or falls
on different parts of the Earth, to some it is the favor of Death unto Death,
to others the savor of Life unto Life, as the same Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
2.16. See also Luke 7.11, etc.

25. And when they agreed not among themselves. That is, The Believing and
Unbelieving Jews disagreed and discorded among themselves. Excellently says
Calvin, The Malice and Wickedness of Unbelievers is the cause, that Christ, who
is our Peace and the only Bond of Holy Unity, becomes the occasion of
dissension, and sets them by the ears, who before kept up a mutual
Friendship. For lo when the Jews came together to hear Paul, they were all of
one mind and one Mouth, they all professed that they embrace the Law of Moses.
But when they had heard the Doctrine of Reconciliation, a dissension arises
among them, so that they are divided into several parties. Yet we must not
think that that Dissension arises from the Preaching of the Gospel; but that
private Enmity which before lay hid in wicked hearts, then began to discover it
self; as the brightness of the Son does not create new Colors, but show the
difference, which in the darkness was none at all. Therefore, the Gospel, which
enjoins the most perfect Love amongst all Men, does turn the hearts of
Believers to Peace and Concord, but the Incredulity of them who follow the
dictates of the Flesh, and have no relish of true Godliness, and of the Virtues
which the Gospel requires, rebelleth against God, and is the Mother of
Dissension. See our Literal Explanation on Mat. 10.35.

They departed. G. (...), They were dissolved. That is, they went from Paul to
their own Houses, or they began to break up the Assembly.

After that Paul had spoken one Word. That is, After that Paul had added, for
an Epilogue or Conclusion to his preceding Sermon of Christ and his Kingdom,
this notable saying, to denote the stubborn contumacy of the unbelieving Jews.

Well spoke. As if he had said, Not hyberbolically, but most truly.

The Holy Ghost. To wit, when he foretold this contempt of the Gospel, which I
now behold, Isa. 6.9, 10.

By Esaias the Prophet. Who was purged with the Fire of the Spirit, and
obtained the Gift of Prophesy. Isa. 6, 7.

To our Fathers. Contemporary with Isaiah, who thus set a brand on their
Malicious hearts, yet so, as that in a Mystical sense he rather denoted those
of their posterity, who with a greater degree of Malice would reject the light
of the Gospel when offered unto them. See Joh. 12.40.

26. Go unto that People. As the Messenger of the Lord, who appeared to thee in
an August Appearance and full of Majesty, as a Judge sitting in an exalted
Throne, Isa. 6.1. But these are the Words, says Pis^^tor, of one highly
provoked, He does not say, to my People. But he accounts them strangers,
because they had estranged themselves.

And say. Not solicitous how the Hearers will entertain thy discourse, only do
thou discharge thy Message faithfully, committing the rest to me. As if he had
said, says Curcellaeus our Country Man, I know the perverse Disposition of
this People, and that they will not be moved to Repentance by thy Exhortation,
but will rather thence take occasion to confirm and harden themselves in their
Malice. But although it fall out so, and that they become more Blind, Deaf, and
hard-hearted by my Word which thou shall speak unto them, do not thou therefore
cease from discharging the duty entrusted to thee, and admonishing them of
their duty, if ye can gain nothing upon them by reason of their obstinate
Malice, yet it may at lest serve for their Conviction.

Hearing ye shall Hear and shall not Understand. That is, Ye shall clearly,
perspicuously and often hear the Ministers of God exhorting you to repent in
his Name, but ye shall not understand them.

And Seeing ye shall See, and not perceive. That is, and constantly ye shall
see benefits and Miracles performed by God, and that by reason of the horrible
blindness of your Minds ye shall not see your selves led to Repentance by the
Goodness of God, being by the alone goodness and long suffering of God, and not
by some operation of his hardened. These words which are here expressed by
Futures of the Indicative, are in the Hebrew Text of Isaiah expressed by
Imperatives, In hearing hear ye, and understand not, and in seeing see ye, and
perceive not. On which place of Isaiah excellent is that of Hen. Moller. Pat.
Hamburg. It is not commanded that they should stop their Ears in the Assembly,
or that all their senses should of their own accord be stupefied, but it is a
most sad complaint, which is expressed after the manner of Men with a kind of
Indignation and Imprecation. As if he had said, Continue, ye Hearers, to Hear,
and yet not understand, and despise my Teachers and their Threatenings, as
hitherto ye have done, and see what will be the result of these things. For ye
shall do nothing else by your stubbornness, but bring upon your selves
lamentable Overthrow and Destruction. This is the meaning of this Verse, so
that it is a complaint and sad expostulation, because they knowingly and
willingly opposed the Word of God. For the Imperatives do not so much command
them to do those things, as they upbraid them, as done already, or to be done
at all times, and they have the force of a threatening Prophesy. Therefore the
Seventy Interpreters, as also Christ in his discourse to his Apostles Mat. 13.
resolve them into Verbs of the Future Tense. In Hearing ye shall Hear, and not
Understand. Also, The Heart of this People is made fat. And Paul, Acts 20
refers what is attributed to the Doctrine here, to the corrupt affections of
the Nation, while he says that the Jews petulantly rejected grace when
offered. Therefore Clemens 1 Strom. says rightly, where he explains the saying
of Christ, That seeing they should not see, and Hearing they should not hear,
Mat. 13. They are ignorant, not that ignorance is wrought in them by the Lord,
(for it is not lawful to think so) but a Prophetical discourse of that which
was to be, and signified that they would be inadvertant, not heeding those
things that were spoken. For neither does the Prophet Blind any People, nor
does God, when he causes Blindness in them do this efficaciously. But seeing
he daily showed them his Will, and moreover did many and that stupendous
Miracles, yet they despised and made a mock of them all, God provoked with
their stubbornness, withdrew himself from them, and so suffered them to wander
and perish blindfolded in their Darkness, and that by his just Judgment. He
therefore upbraids them with this, that the Justice of God may be conspicuous
in punishing and casting off the People. But what befell Isaiah, to wit, that
the Jews stopped their ears to his Prophesying, the same Christ foretold would
be his own lot, when he came in the Flesh. For Isaiah and the rest of the
Prophets are a Type of Christ, as to the Office of Teaching. See our Literal
Explanation Mat. 13.13, 14.

27. Waxed gross, etc. See our Literal Explanation, Mat. 13.15.

Lest. That by the Hebrew Particle (...) and (...) and (...), that, lest
perhaps, or lest at any time, as the sacred Writers render it in the the New
Testament, does not always signify the intent or purpose of the thing done, but
sometimes the Event, appears from Romans 11.11. 2 Timothy 2.25, etc.

28. Be it known therefore unto you. That reject the Doctrine of Salvation,
lest hereafter you should complain that you were not forewarned of it.

That the Salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles. That is, That Gospel of
Everlasting Salvation that is to be attained by the Grace of God through Faith
in Christ, and Obedience performed to him; I say, that Gospel that was first
sent to the Jews descended of the Holy Race of Abraham, is now for their
Incredulity sent to the Profane Gentiles.

And they will hear it. That is, they will be attentive and obedient to the
Gospel. Here respect is not had to the Agreement of Words, but of Things, and
the meaning, when a Pronoun of the Masculine Gender is added to a Nown that is
of the Neuter Gender in the Gr. and of the Feminine in the Latin, as frequently
elsewhere. See above c. 26. v. 17. Mat. 28.19, 20. Romans 2.14. Yet the Apostle
does not, says Calvin, when he says that the Gentiles will hear, make Faith
common to every one of them without exception. For he had sufficiently
Experience, how many even of the Gentiles wickedly rejected God, but he opposes
to the incredulous Jews as many of the Gentiles as believed, to move them to
Jealousy, as it is expressed in the Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.21. In the mean
while, it signifies that that Doctrine that was rejected by the Jews, should
not be without Success.

29. The Jews departed. That is, They went out of Paul's lodging to their own
Houses.

And had great reasoning among themselves. That is, Controversy about those
things that were spoken by Paul, some defending and stoutly maintaining them,
others on the contrary rejecting and despising them. It is not the Gospel, but
the contempt of the Gospel that is the cause of Dissension.

30. Two whole Years. Which being fulfilled, if we may give credit to
Ecclesiastic Writers, Paul was set at liberty by Nero; when he was now set
free, they say that he Preached the Gospel throughout Italy, France, and Spain,
for the space of almost ten years; that he was afterward called back by Nero,
and beheaded at his Command. See Eusch. 2 Hist. Eccl. 24. Jerome in his
Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers.

In his own hired. That is, In a Lodging, that Paul himself had hired with his
own Money, to dwell in.

And received all that came in unto him. To wit, Being mindful that he was no
less an Apostle of Christ and Preacher of the Gospel in Prison, than if he were
free and at liberty, he thought it was not Lawful for him to withold himself
from any that was ready to learn, lest he should neglect an occasion that God
had put in his hands.

31. Preaching the Kingdom of God. That is, The Gospel of the Kingdom of God,
that was restored among Men by the Messiah who was promised in the Law and
Prophets, and was to be further enlarged. See above, v. 23. and Mar. 15.43.

And teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ. Excellently
says Calvin according to his custom, He does not separate the Kingdom of God
and those things which concern Christ, as if they were different things, but
rather adds this second as an Explanation of the former, to the end we may know
that the Kingdom of God is founded and comprehended in the knowledge of our
Redemption purchased by Christ. Paul therefore taught, that Men are Strangers
and Exiles from the Kingdom of God, till being purged from their Sins, they are
reconciled to God, and renewed by the Spirit unto Holiness of Life; and that
then only the Kingdom of God is set up and prospers among Men, when Christ our
Mediator unites to the Father those, who have received a free Remission of
their Sins, and are begotten again unto Righteousness, that beginning a
Heavenly Life upon Earth, they may have their Eyes fixed on Heaven, where they
shall have a full and solid enjoyment of Glory.

With all confidence. That is, No difficulties could deter him from continuing
to use his endeavor to teach all that he met with.

Without Prohibition. That is, No Man forbidding him. Luke shows, says
Calvin, that it was the singular Mercy of God that Paul had so great liberty
granted him. For it was neither through the connivance or dissimulation of them
that could hinder it, seeing they abhorred Religion; but because the Lord shut
their Eyes. Wherefore Paul does not Glory without reason, 2 Timothy 2.9. that the
Word of God was not bound by his Bonds. Paul also writ many Epistles when in
Bonds, to the Galatians, Ephesians, the second to Timothy, to the Philippians,
Colossians and Philemon. Thus far Luke has deduced his account of the things
done by Paul in this his noble Book, which by Gregory Nyssen against Eunomius,
and on the Psalms, and by Theodoret. Heret. Fab. l. 1. c. 21. is called (...),
the History of the Acts, to wit, of the Apostles. But by the Writer of S.
Thecla's Life, it is called (...), A memorial concerning the Apostles. Now
Memorials are uninterrupted, and exact Relations of things, but naked, and
without any Ornament of Figures. Whence Cicero in Book 5. of his Familiar
Epistles, in a very elegant Epistle to the famous Historian L. Lucceius
Quintus's Son, says that he will make a Memorial of the Transactions in his
Consulship, to the end that Lucceius might compose a History of them.

To the All-merciful God be praise for ever and ever Amen. FINIS.
Fridericus Spanhemius Filius HIS Disputation on Baptism For the DEAD,
Mentioned 1 Cor. 15.29.
IF there be any place in St. Paul's Writings much controverted, if any that has
much puzzled the Wits of the Learned, if any that is hard to be understood, this
undoubtedly is one, wherein the Apostle of the Gentiles, when he is about to
prove the Resurrection, argues thus: 1 Cor. 15.29.
Otherwise what shall they do (if the dead are not at all raised) who are
Baptized (...), for the dead, or because of the dead, or on the dead, or
instead of the dead? And again repeating his Argument, why are they yet
baptized, (...), for the dead? Whence a twofold difficulty arises; 1. What is
that Baptism (...). for the Dead: 2. How the Resurrection is demonstrated
thence.

In handling this difficult point, we shall use this method; to wit, first set
down the different Opinions. 2. We shall subjoin our own Opinion, what we think
the true meaning of the words, and the force of Paul's Reasoning. As to the
former we shall reduce the Interpretations, both of the Ancient and Modern,
into three Classes.

CLASS 1. Of those who understand the word (...) of Baptismstrictly so called,
or the Sacrament of Baptism, variously divided among themselves.
I. NOr are Interpreters of the first Class agreed among themselves; for some
Neotericks, among whom Luther, The Opinion of Luther, Hunnius Piscator, etc.
Hunnius, Gerhardus, the Lutherans, Piscator, Amyraldus, etc. were of opinion
that the Apostle in this place, had respect to the place where Baptism was
administered to many, to wit, upon the dead, that is, upon the Sepulchers of the
dead, the Tombs of the Martyrs, or Burying Places; and that for a public
Testimony that they were not afraid of Death, having a certain hope of the
Resurrection.

II. There is no doubt, but that if there were any certainty of such a practice
either among the Corinthians, or elsewhere, in the first age of the Church,
Paul's reasoning would have been most plain. But there is nothing to evidence
the use of this Rite in the Apostolic Age, Paraph. in loc.
as Amyraldus himself grants. There is no appearance of this practice in the
History of first Antiquity. And he himself says, that some such practice
should be supposed. But that is not enough, while there is no sufficient proof
for it. It is certain that they then used to Baptize, wherever there was
plenty of Water; hence sometimes they Baptized in Rivers, sometimes in the High
way, in Houses, in Prison, etc. without any difference of places. So the
Ancient Church used to Baptize first in Rivers, Lakes, Fountains, but
afterward in Fonts, Temples, Oratories, sometimes in the Beds of the sick.
Indeed in the succeeding Age, as appears by Tertul. and Eusebius. etc. the
Christians took the Relics of the Martyrs from their Murderers, carefully
interred them, and met at their Tombs, and prayed, and celebrated their
Memories; but no Writer, says a word of Baptizing there, even of that Age, much
less of the Apostolic. 2. But further, Neither was there Water enough for
Dipping their Bodies at the Tombs, nor could they build Fonts there more than
Oratories. Besides, the Martyrs in those days, when the Apostle wrote to the
Corinthians, were fewer than that in every place they could meet at their
Tombs; nor were Public Meetings allowed in those days. It may be objected,
That the Burying-Places of Christians were places underground, where they
might secretly perform these Rites. But neither is there any evidence of such
spacious Burying-places among the Corinthians, nor were these places made use
of for meeting in, or that the Christians went in unto the Burying-places till
long after, when the Persecution raged, whence they were called Twilight
Meetings. 3. If this had been a Practice among some Christians, it would have
been altogether singular, not to say superstitious, to restrict the Sacrament
of Baptism to the Sepulchers, without either Precept or President of the
Apostles for it. Neither would the Apostle from such a practice have drawn a
general Argument for the Resurrection of the Dead. Lastly, Neither would the
Apostles words have been pertinent in this sense, (...), for the dead; he would
have said more properly, (...), by the dead, or (...), at, or in the
Burying-places, or (...), over the dead, over the Tombs.

III. The Opinion of some of the Ancients, and of Scaliger, Casaub. Gretius,
etc.
The next is the Opinion of those who thought that respect is had in these
words to those who were baptized, (...), that is, in stead, and place of the
dead, as the Syriack has it, for them, or in their name, as Epiphanius. And
that because they thought that such as died before they were baptized either
did not rise at all, or had not a happy Resurrection. Hence they ascribe that
practice to some Corinthians, who were of some Note and Authority, and who
performed this Vicarious Baptism for their Friends and Kinsmen that died
without Baptism, either under the deceaseds Bed, or within his Sepulcher; and
they thought that the deceased enjoyed thereby some comfort till the day of the
Resurrection; and hence Grotius says, that Custom of the Ancient Church, of
praying for the dead, had its Original. Now the force of the Argument is this,
that such had undertaken this pains in vain, yea foolishly, if the dead had
been to continue so. Whence Jonas Schlightingius uses this simile v. Com. ad
loc.
: Who would dig up the Bowels of the Earth if there were no Gold to be had,
etc? Now that this was the practice of some, from whom the Apostle
distinguishes himself and his Followers, they say is plain by the Testimony of
Irenaeus, especially of Epiphanius Haer. 28.
, who attributes it to the Corinthians, and Tertullian, who charges the
Marcionites with it. Yea Jos. Scalig. says, that even the Faithful, who were
more simple, who had not the knowledge of God, as v. 34. practiced it.

IV. But notwithstanding that this Opinion is patronized by so many Learned
Men, yet there are not a few, and that very weighty Reasons, why we should not
believe that St. Paul had respect thereto. And first, That Vicarious Baptism is
of very uncertain Tradition. For Epiphanius relates it as from the Report of
others, being often too credulous. But Irenaeus speaks of no such thing,
whatever they unwarily allege of him, nor those who were before him, Clemens
Romans Hermas, Justin, Clemens Alex. Nor is Tertullian express of the like
practice of the Marcionites. But Learned Interpreters, and among them Ph.
Priorius Ad Tertul. de Res. c. 48.
, think that Tertullians words may be interpreted of the washing of the Body,
or some other Rite, for the dead, used by some after the manner of the
Heathens, which Custom he compares to that of the Heathens, whereby they prayed
for the dead in Marc. l. 5. c. 10.
, and celebrated the Feast of All Souls; which words Scaliger has rendered of
the Baptism administered on the first of February, on which day they thought
Christ was baptized. Chrysostom is the first that makes express mention of
that Marcionitick Baptism: Having hid a living man under the deceaseds Bed,
they came to the deceased, and asked him whether he would be baptized? Then he
that was hid under the Bed answering for him, etc. For possibly in Chrysostoms
Age some had arrived to that height of madness. 2. Whereas Scaliger has
ascribed that Vicarious Baptism to some of the Faithful, he did it without any
Authority, for neither was that conjecture of Souls detained in Prison till the
day of Judgment, which he says it was founded upon, at the time when Paul wrote
these things, but that it was in the succeeding Age, Guil. Rivet. Blondel and
others have demonstrated at large from the Sybillin Writings, and Irenaeus,
Justin, etc. But Paul would not have suffered either that Hypothesis, or this
Vicarious Baptism, both grievous Errors, to have thus grown up among the
Corinthians, without rebuke. For can it be supposed that he that was so careful
to prevent Errors, that he would not suffer the least to go without a sharp
Reproof, even those that only infringed decency and order, would have silently
passed by such Errors as these, which shake the very Foundation? For those whom
he says had not the Knowledge of God, are the same whom he describes, v. 12.
who opposed the Resurrection, to wit, the Sadduces and Philosophers, not those
weak Christians. 3. Whatsoever we think that this Error crept in in Tertullians
days, or rather Marcions, or Cerinths, yet there is no certainty that that
Practice was in Paul's days, much less in the Church of the Corinthians. Now
this to the Corinthians is one of the first of Paul's Epistles, dated at
Ephesus, as appears thereby c. 16.5, 18. Acts 19.10, 22.
, not at Philippi, as the subscription bears. Now at that time, that is, in the
year 53. or 54. or as Blondel, 52. in the Reign of Claudius, that the
Cerinthians were known to them, or this practice of theirs published, is
altogether contrary to History to affirm. Marcion, says Crellius on the place,
arose in the days of John, that is, in the close of the First Century: Now how
could Marcions Phrensies be known by the Corinthiians, whom the Apostle wrote
to half an Age before. For Marcion is said to have been Contemporary with
Polycarp and Anicetus, by Irenaeus and Eusebius, or with Hyginus, according to
Epiphanius, a Haeresiarch in the middle of the second Age. But we learn from
Tertullian and Chrysostom, that the Marcionitick Baptism sprung from a wrested
Interpretation of these words of the Apostle. Why might not, says Dallaeus l.
de Poen and satisfact. c. 17.
, this practice spring up in Paul's days, seeing Cerinthus, according to
Epiphanius, lived in the Apostles days and opposed Peter at Jerusalem; which
fault of Epiphanius's Chronology, I wonder it should have escaped the Pen of so
accurate a Writer: For Cerinthus is related to have vented his Heresies toward
the close of John's days, according to Irenaeus, Dionisius Alex. Fourthly, It
might have been an easy thing for those who had not the knowledge of God,
profane Traducers of Paul's Doctrine, to have replied to this Argument, that it
was of little significancy what Frantic men either intended or did; and so to
Paul's Question, What shall they do? The Answer would have been very easy, that
they were beside themselves, and fed themselves with fancies; after the same
manner as if one that were going about to prove that Gold is made by Chemical
operations, should prove it thus. If it is not so, in vain do Chemists spend
their substance and life about Furnaces; to which undoubtedly the denyer would
answer, that such men are not in their right wits. 5. Those Similies of
Schlightingius are very far from the purpose; That Paul argued the same way, as
if one should say, What should they do who search into the bowels of the Earth,
build Ships, etc. if there be no Gold to be had in it, if we could not sail
over the Seas, etc. For the Argument is drawn from a necessary, only, and
lawful Medium, to an end plainly following, obvious to the senses, and of means
very costly and laborious, which to undertake without certainty of attaining
the end, were extreme madness. But can it be supposed that that Vicarious
Baptism is such a means for procuring a happy Resurrection for the dead? 6. Nor
is Grotius's conjecture more true, who alleges that the custom of the Church
of praying for the dead, sprang from hence. Tertullian indeed is the first that
makes mention of these Prayers about the Year 200. If there be any appearance
of them among the Christians before, you will find them first in the
Pseud-Sybillin Writings, when the second Century was far spent; but the
foundation of these Prayers, was an Opinion, that all Souls went down into
Hell; hence sprung Prayers for the deceased, not for the Resurrection of the
Body, but for the rest of the Soul, that at their departure out of this life
they might not fall into the hands of evil Angels. But what dependence had
these Prayers of the succeeding Age on that Baptism which they ascribe to the
Corinthians about the year 50. Suppose the Church prayed for the Dead in
Tertullians days; were there therefore in Paul's days, some that Baptized
themselves for the Dead? These and other things the Learned Grotius was pleased
to suppose which much tend to the support of Popery.

V. The Opinion of Epiphan. Calvin, Martyr, G. J. Vos. Capel, etc.
The third Opinion says, that the Apostle had respect to those that were
bed-ridden and on sick beds, who were baptized (...), for dead, that is, as if
dead, about to die, at the instant of Death, and that in hopes of the
Resurrection: Or, (...), for the state of the dead, that it might go well with
them, that they might have a happy entrance thereupon. Which Interpretation is
first to be read in Epiphanius, But others rightly interpret this saying of
those who at the Instant of Death, if they were yet Catechumens, were before
their Death washed with the Holy Laver, in this hope of the Resurrection.
Several other learned men, both Ancient and Modern have patronized this
Opinion, whom for Brevities sake I omit. Now that they were not of one sort who
were thus baptized, may be gathered from the same persons; for some were thus
baptized out of necessity, Death preventing a Further proof in such
Catechumens, or those lately converted, or diseases also hindering their
dipping, and performing the wonted Rites of Baptism; others of purpose
differred it, imagining that by Baptism only the sins committed before it was
administered were washed away; which the Ancients have also reported of the
Emperors Constantine the Great, Constantius, and Theodosius the Great.

VI. But we conceive that the Apostle intended no such thing. For 1. It is a
mere conjecture, that that sprinkling of Bed-ridden Persons, or those
departing, had obtained at that time when Paul thus reasoned, and that among
the Corinthians. 2. So Paul had tacitly approved that custom, that in this
respect was very vicious, in that it sprung from a false principle, as if
either there were absolute necessity of Baptism, or its effects were restricted
to sins committed before its administration. Hence the Ancients scarce
accounted it Baptism. 3. It would have been a very dark expression of Paul's,
Cornel. Romans Epist. ad Fab.
had he understood it thus. For such were never said to be Baptized for the
Dead; they might well have been said to be sprinkled, because of their disease,
or in their sickness, or those that were sick, as the Canons always express it.
The Apostle might have as easily said, They who are Baptized in their Beds, in
the instant of Death, sick and ready to die, or before they depart or remove
out of this Life. 4. Vossius's. Interpretation, that the Phrase may be rendered
for the Dead, that is, for the state of the Dead, to wit, that then it may go
well with them, does not much strengthen this Opinion; for who can believe that
Paul would have spoken so obscurely? Would not he rather instead of (...) used
the final Preposition (...), or (...), and so it would have run thus, in hope
of the Resurrection to Life Eternal. Besides, that the Article would have been
very harsh in this sense. But these words would also have been superfluous, and
the Argument would have concluded as much from Baptism in general, why are we
Baptized? What better are we by being Baptized? The Apostle might also have
raised a stronger Argument from the Sacrament of the Eucharist, whose design is
to beget Communion with Christ, and hence of his Life and Resurrection: Hence
it was called (...), or Viatick, etc.

VII. The Opinion of Theodoret and other of the Ancients, and Lyranus,
Rigaltius, E piscopius, etc.
The fourth Interpretation is theirs, who rendered (...), of the Rite of
Baptismal Immersion, (...), understand, for Dead, to wit, sins or works, to be
washed away by this means, in hope of Eternal Life: or also (...), for their
dead Adam, while they professed themselves to die to sin, and to the World: Or
finally, (...), so that it imports as dead, or dead together with Christ, by
that dipping, they are immediately brought out of the Water, by the same
Baptismal Rite, for a Symbol of their Resurrection with Christ, both Spiritual
and Bodily. So among the Greeks Theodoret, in his Commentary on the place, and
elsewhere, says that Baptism is a Type of our future Resurrection. Among the
Latins several have preferred this Interpretation to others; Aquinas,
Primasius, Seduliu^, etc.
save that some of them inclined a little to the forementioned of Vicarious
Baptism. Of the Modern the most Learned Rigaltius does thus paraphrase in his
Notes on Tertullian; As if he had said, With what Countenance, Ad. c. 14. de
Res. c. p. 335. Par. 1664.
with what reproaches will they upbraid us, who are Baptized on their dead
Adam? We impose upon them when we say that they are dead in Adam, and must of
necessity be Baptized, if they do not, being buried together with Christ,
likewise rise again with him? If the dead rise not again, why are they Baptized
that the dead may rise again, etc. Simon Episcopius says that this sense is
plain and obvious; R^sp. ad Q. 35.
he renders it thus: In vain will they do all that they promised, to wit, to
die to the World, etc. If there be no Resurrection. He adds That there are
great difficulties that urge it, but grammatical, but that the sense is very
satisfying, so that he thinks they are not of such Moment, but the sense may be
embraced.

VIII. But this sense seems altogether wrested. For 1. It is too harsh an
Interpretation of (...), to render it for dead, to wit, sins. Sins are never so
termed by St. Paul, without some Epitheton. But he would also have used the
word (...) very aequivocally in the same verse, both for dead men and dead
works. Nor is there any elegant Antithesis here, but an expression very
elliptick, unusual, and most obscure. So, who can think that that of Kigaltius,
who are Baptized on their dead Adam, in its simple signification, as he will
have it, does correspond to that Phrase (...)? Nor is Episcopius's notion
better, that they may die, to wit, to the World, which should be (...). He
destroys his own conjecture, granting first, that (...) in this place, has an
acception different from its usual, and after the manner of the Latins, with
whom pro mortuis, for the dead, might be used for, quasi mortui, as Dead. He
grants. 2. That the Superior difficulties are great, but Grammatical, that is,
that that meaning indeed is not consonant to the Words, or Letter of the Text,
but aptly devised. Which to admit would be a very bad president. 2. Nor does
(...) signify the same with the Greeks, as quasi mortui, as dead, or in signum
mortis, for a sign of Death, as is observed above. Besides, there is an
Emphasis in the Article (...), which cannot be referred to the Persons
Baptized, but to another Subject, distinct from those who undertook Baptism.
Episcopius says that the Article is often redundant; but I must needs say, that
it is a begging of the Question, unless Paul trifled in this place, with an
obscure way of writing and reasoning. He adds that another Subject may be
admitted without detriment to this Interpretation; seeing, says he, the
Baptized supply the place of all those who are already dead and buried. And
this is his plain and easy sense; which who does not see to be most obscure? 3.
But the Type of our Resurrection, which appears in the Ceremony of Baptism, did
not consist in the Immersion, but in the Emersion, or being brought up out of
the Water again; therefore Paul would not have said, why are we dipped as Dead?
But why when we are Baptized are we brought up out of the Water as alive from
the Dead? Or, why being Baptized do we arise again with Christ? For so Paul,
and so the Ancients used to express themselves.

IX. The Opinion of Chrysostom, Pelusiot, Theophyl. etc. also of Peter Martyr,
J. Forbes Dr. Hammond, etc.
The 5th Interpretation is of those who say the words have allusion both to the
Rite of Confession that was previous to Baptism, and to a Type of the
Resurrection represented in Baptism; in which Exposition Chrystom is at a great
deal of pains: A Breviate of which take briefly. First he thinks that Paul had
respect to the Confession that was previous to Baptism, which the Teachers
required of those that were to be Baptized. In which Confession those that were
to be initiated in these Holy Rites, having first said over the Articles of the
Creed, in Conclusion did also profess their belief of Remission of sins, and
the Resurrection of the Dead. Which Confession when they had made they were
Baptized into the same Faith. The other thing which he thinks the Apostle had
respect to, was a most plain representation of the Resurrection of the Dead, in
the very act of Baptizing; he calls it an Image, Sign, Symbol: That after the
same manner as those that were to be initiated professed by their words their
belief of the Resurrection, so they might understand the very same thing by the
very Rite of Baptizing, or by the act of Immersion first, and then Emersion out
of the Baptismal Water; which were a plain Type of the Resurrection of the
Dead. Whence he thus illustrates both St. Paul's meaning, and the words
themselves. 1. It Is certain that sin brought in Death, whence sin being done
away by Remission, Death is so also, for in as much as he that is to be
Baptized professes his belief of the Remission of sins, he must of necessity
acknowledge the Resurrection. 2. Besides, there is another Confession, to wit,
I believe that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, which if it were not,
what we are asked and answer there would be a mere delusion. 3. Hence it is
added in the same Confession, and into Life Everlasting, lest it should be
thought that it should tend to Death, again, as Lazarus's did. 4. But that Rite
of Immersion, and Emersion or coming out of the sacred Font again, was for no
other end but to be a Symbol of their going down into the Grave, and returning
out of the same. Hence the said Chrysostom thus Paraphrases the words of the
Apostle. 1. If there be no resurrection, what shall they do that are Baptized,
that is, to what purpose are they Baptized? What need was there at all of that
Confession, when the deed did not follow? All, says he, were a mere scene,
illusion, deception. Also, if there shall be no Resurrection, how can we
Command them to believe those things which we do not grant? Again, if there
were no such Resurrection, to what purpose is that Type, that Baptismal Symbol,
whereby they are dipped into the Water, to be presently brought up again? 2.
That that (...) is put for (...), for dead Bodies, viz. that are to be raised
again, and represented by that Rite of Baptism: Or also, that it imports the
same as to be Baptized (...) in the Faith, the Refutation of the first Member
of this Opinion
or to the Confession of the Resurrection of the Dead; for this, for this very
thing.

X. But by the leave of so many Learned men, we think that the Apostle had
respect to no such thing; neither to the praevious Confession, nor to the Rite
of Baptism it self. And that the Apostle had no respect to the former, to wit
previous Confession, appears by the following Reasons. 1. Chrysostom supposes
the same use of the Apostles Age, and that of his own. Indeed in Chrysostoms
days there was a Symbol in that form; there was then praerequired to Baptism
such a solemn Recitation; therein also there was express mention of the
Resurrection of the Dead. To which were added by a praevious Rite, a
Renunciation of the Devil, and of Pomp, Exorcism, Insufflation, Inunction,
Praegustation of Milk and Honey; add the time when Baptism was administered,
which Chrysostom says was on the Eve of Easter or Whitsuntide. And these he
calls in the same place things not to be spoken, and tremendous, and hence that
he durst not express the Apostles mind, because of those that were not
initiated. But there is no certainty of the use of any such Rites in the
Apostles days. Many Articles were successively inserted in the Creed, by reason
of Heretics. In their days there was only a Confession of sins, then a
Confession of Jesus, and of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as appears by
the Writings of the Apostles, and Justin Martyr. 2. But neither from a belief
of Remission of sins, was the Resurrection of the Dead necessarily inferred:
And the Pseud-Apostles might easily have replied, that hence indeed followed
Abolishing of sin and Everlasting Death, Peace of Conscience, Felicity of the
Soul, and consequently the first Resurrection, but by no means that of the
Body. 3. Paul also seems not to speak of a Rite of Baptism Common to all, but
of a Baptism that was singular and peculiar to some. Hence he does not say in
the first Person, What shall we do? Why are we Baptized for the Dead? As he
uses at other times, when the Predicate is such as concerns all, as even in
this very Chapter, Our Preaching is vain; your Faith is vain; We are of all Men
most miserable, etc. But here he speaks in the third Person, What shall they do
who are Baptized, etc. 4. Neither will any say that (...), and (...) are
equivalent, How could Paul have made use of so obscure and forced an
expression? might he not have expressed it more plainly the latter way? For
this is Paul's style in that very Argument, Acts 23.3.
(...), or (...), etc. Could he have significantly said there, (...), I am
Judged for the Dead?

XI. But the Learned Hammond replieth, Hammond replies.
1. That the word (...), dead, is in this place as it were a Title or Sum of
that Article of the Creed (...), touching the Resurrection of the Dead, and so
the Proposition (...) answers to the Hebrew (...). 2. That hence Paul spoke
compendiously after the manner of the Hebrews, For the Dead, that is, for the
Resurrection of the Dead, for that Article, etc. That we must look back to
verse 12. Some of you, viz. Who are Baptized into that Faith: For seeing some
of the Corinthians doubted of this Article, it was necessary it should be
expressly professed in Baptism, and was the last thing to which they should
assent.

XII. But these Notions seem more learned than solid: Yet we grant, 1. That the
Praeposition (...) answers to the Hebrew (...). 2. We grant that Abbreviate,
Elliptick speeches are not only usual with the Hebrews, but with the Arabians,
Greeks and Latins. But that St. Paul here used this Elliptick kind of
speaking, may be alleged, but cannot be proved. The Examples he produces from
the Hebrews are wide of the purpose; for they often in one word comprehend a
whole Book, Section, Chapter and Precept. But the sum of the whole Article of
the Resurrection, should not have been expressed by the word (...), but by the
foregoing word (...), which only expresses the import of the Article. 3. We
grant likewise that the 12th verse borrows light both from these words, and
Paul's whole Dispute against some of the Corinthians. But to say that those are
the same, whom v. 29. he says were baptized for the dead, is not only a begging
of the Question, but evidently false. For he now draws an Argument against
those profane persons from their practice, who were baptized in hope of the
Resurrection. Those denied the Resurrection; these, because they believed the
Resurrection, were initiated by this Baptism.

XIII. The second member refuted.
Nor is Chrysostoms other Interpretation (which Theodoret, Balsamo, etc.
maintain) much better, which has respect to the Rite of bringing up again out
of the Baptismal Water, for a sign or representa-of the raising up of bodies
from death. For 1. This Rite of Immersion and Education was common and
promiscuous in the Apostolic Age. Whence the Apostle elsewhere Romans 6.11. Col.
4.11.
alludes to it as a Rite common to all Christians. But Paul (as is
demonstrated) had respect to a Baptism peculiar to some persons, 2. So the
Apostles phrase would have been most obscure, and altogether new. To be
baptized for the dead, would have been to him to be in the baptismal Rite of
Eduction or Emersion, for a Representation of the Resurrection of dead Bodies.
Who of the Corinthians could easily reach this meaning? We do not deny but
(...), may be rendered Dead Bodies; the word is often so in the New Testament,
and that from the use of the Greeks; but it is harsh, yea unusual, that (...),
for dead Bodies, should signify, for a Representation of dead Bodies; neither
the Greek nor Latin phrase will admit of this sense. Add, That seeing Baptism
is a Figure of the Resurrection, that the Body is not then represented as dead,
but as rising again from death. 3. Why might not the Apostle speak plainly as
he uses; Why then are we in Baptism brought up out of the Water, as if rising
from the Dead? Or, Why are we baptized in resemblance of the Resurrection of
the Dead? Or, Why are we raised from the Dead in Baptism? Or Why are we raised
together with Christ, as alive from the Dead? etc. For the Apostle plainly uses
these forms of speaking when he elsewhere speaks of Baptism, its Representation
and Efficacy, Romans 6.4, 5, 13. Col. 2.14.

XIV. Heinsius's Opinion.
The 6th Interpretation is that of the Learned Heinsius, in his Sacred
Exercitations, to wit, that Paul here had respect to a Christian custom,
whereby Names were given to their Children Infants in Baptism, and that for the
most part the names of deceased persons, as of Apostles, Martyrs, etc. by a
custom derived from Circum^^sion; and that such were said to be baptized (...),
for the Dead, that is, in honor and memory of the Dead; that thus the name of
the deceased was in some manner raised up, as was usual with the Jews in
another case. And that they did this, because they looked upon those dead
persons as alive, and hence also that they would rise again; and hence
whosoever so baptized their Children, did thereby testify that they believed
the Resurrection.

XV. But these things do neither agree to the custom of that Age, nor the
Argument of this place, nor the Apostles words. 1. This Learned man has respect
either to the deed of them that were baptized, who took upon them the name of
some deceased person in Baptism; or to the deed of Parents, when they brought
Infants to the Sacred Font. If the former, there is no proof, that such changed
their former name, and took another, to wit, that of a deceased Apostle or
Martyr. But if this Learned person say that the Parents used to name their
Children that were baptized, after the deceased Martyrs, there is no more
certainty of that practice in Paul's days; the greatest part of them that were
then baptized, were adult persons; and if there had been any Infants baptized,
when whole Families were, had they no name before? Yea, the Jewish Infants had
their names immediately after Circumcision, and those of the Gentiles the
first, second, third, etc. days from their Nativity. Indeed Dionys. Alex.
reports, that in his days some named their Children after Peter and Paul
E^seb. Hist. l. 7. c. 25.
, but he does not precisely say that that was done in Baptism. 2. The same
Heinsius precariously asserts, that they did that to profess their Faith of the
Resurrection; for they might have professed that Faith by more plain proofs
than that. There were also other causes why they named their Children after
Saints, as appears by Eusebius Ibidem.
and Chrysostom Hom. 21. in Genesis T. 1.6.
, to wit, that their memory (...) be preserved, and that they might take
Example by their Virtues. Which thing was also practiced among the Heathens,
who did not so much as dream of the Resurrection. 3. But how obscure would this
Expression have been, that, to be baptized, (...), for the Dead, should be used
for to receive the name of the Dead in Baptism? And what means this, to be
baptized on the account of the Dead? and that while they were called after
their name. If he means of the Parents who gave the names of the deceased to
their Children, should not he rather have said, What shall they do, not who ^^e
baptized, but those that name the baptized? 4. What he adds of the Jewish
practice is very far from the purpose; for though Baptism succeeded
Circumcision, yet that Rite of giving a name to the baptized did not succeed as
in Circumcision. For those that came to be baptized had their names before,
which were afterward to be set down in the Baptismal Register. That which he
says of raising up Seed to the Brother, is also very far from the purpose;
which certainly had respect to somewhat else than the Resurrection.

XVI. The Opinion of Lewis de Dieu.
The 7th Opinion is that of Lewis de Dieu. He supposes, 1. That the Dead are
not here indifferently designed, but such as died in the Lord. And 2. That
Baptism is a Seal of the Resurrection, as also of the Covenant that is made
with the Living, according to that of our Savior, Mat. 22.32. Luke 20. And
finally, that it was such a Seal, even to the Dead, the Church triumphant, in
so far as it still expects a full accomplishment of the Promises in the blessed
Resurrection. Whence he says the Apostles meaning was this: As many as are
baptized in the Church, are not only baptized for themselves, but also for the
Dead, not indeed to procure them any advantage by their Baptism, but yet to
establish continually the Promises of the Covenant, and to renew that Promise
made to the Dead, That God is their God, and hence, That they live by the
Promise, and that they shall sometimes actually live by the Resurrection. If
therefore, says he, the Dead were not to rise again, in vain would the Living
be baptized for them.

XVII. But these suppositions are more ingenious than satisfactory, and neither
agree with simplicity of speech, nor the force of Paul's Argument. We grant
indeed, that the Dead spoken of there, are those who died in the Faith of
Christ, and consequently of the Resurrection. Nor do we deny but Baptism in
some manner is a Seal of the Resurrection, or that thereby the Promise is
established, that God will be their God. But 1. The Pseud-Apostles might have
rejoyned, that Baptism is indeed the Seal of the Remission of sins, and
consequently of the first Resurrection, but by no means of that of Bodies. 2.
Paul would then have spoken of a Baptism common to the whole Church, which we
have already proved to be false. 3. The Church Triumphant had no need of that
daily Seal applied on Earth: She now in a great measure enjoys the Promises,
living actually, not only by Promise, and sufficiently assured of the
accomplishment of its glory by Unition with the Body, by its fruition of
Inchoate Glory, its continual beholding God, the Angels, and Christ its
Redeemer, and who at last will be its Judge. 4. Had the Apostle intended any
such thing, he might have expressed it much more plainly thus: What do we, who
are baptized for this end, that we may seal the Promise of the Covenant, that
God is the God of the Living? Or, Why are we baptized for a confirmation or
seal of the Resurrection of the Dead, of those who are asleep in Christ?

XVIII. The Opinion of Arias Montanus.
The Eighth Opinion is that of Arias Montanus, in his Annotations on this
place. He supposes that the Apostle speaks of those, who before they were
baptized with Water, had received that of the Holy Ghost, or were already
regenerate, etc. such as Cornelius, Saul, etc. Viz. That those had no need of
the Baptism of Water, in order to the first Resurrection; but yet that they
came also to this Baptism, in view of the Resurrection of Bodies; that by that
very Baptism, which is performed by Immersion and Emersion, they might profess
their hope and belief of the future Resurrection. Hence, Why are such yet
baptized with Water, for the Dead, whose Resurrection they believe, if there be
no such Resurrection?

XIX. It Is Refuted.
But 1. That expression, What will they do who are baptized? And why are they
baptized? does denote a vain and fruitless Action, provided there were no
Resurrection; but the Apostle would not have pronounced that Baptism of Water
vain, which Cornelius, Saul, etc. underwent, without any respect to the
Resurrection. For there was necessity of Praecept for it, as commanded by
Christ; there is also, as the Papists speak, that of means. 2 Neither can that
phrase, for the Dead, without great wresting signify in hope of the
Resurrection. 3. It is false also that the principal or only use of Baptism, is
a Representation of the Resurrection. For it was a Symbol of Regeneration, and
washing away of sins. 4. If the Apostle had respect to them in special, who
before their Baptism with Water were dead to sin, and restored to the life of
Righteousness, why did he so generally design them, who are baptized? Why might
not he rather have said, What shall they do, who having before been restored to
a life of Righteousness, were yet afterward baptized, by reason of their hope
of the Resurrection of Bodies, etc.

XX. Finally, The Opinion of John Cloppenburgius.
the Ninth Opinion is that of Cloppenburgius in his Syntagm of Select
Exercitations, Disput. 6. Jan. 1642. who says, that Paul's discourse was only of
the Sacrament of Baptism, which many earnestly desired, for the Dead, that is,
to the memory of the Dead, for their Honor, as a Duty of respect due to the
Dead, from whom they gloried that they learned Christ. That this duty was as it
were that Commemoration more than once mentioned in the Gospel. Matthew. 25.13.
Luke 1.48.
That they presented themselves to be thus baptized, as Maintainers and
Defenders of the Cause of the Dead. And that hence sprung the Superstition of
celebrating the Memories of the Martyrs in their Burying-places.

XXI. Which truly agree sufficiently with the words of St. Paul, without any
wresting, as it seems. It is also certain, that many of them who presented
themselves to be baptized, were stirred up to it by the Institution, Example
and Constancy of the Martyrs. But 1. It is not true of some only, but of all
that were baptized, that they confirmed the Faith and Cause of the Dead by
their Baptism. But Pa l seems to have had respect to some in special. 2. Nor
could the Baptism that was received by Believers, have been called an Office
due to the Martyrs, or undertaken for the Dead, that is, to their Honor,
Veneration and Memory; which is altogether superstitious. Yea, it was rather
after their Example, in commemoration of the Blood of Christ, for a Seal of the
washing away of their sins. 3. But neither could this Baptism be accounted the
Original of that Commemoration of Martyrs, which afterward obtained in the
Ancient Church. This had its Original in the heat of the Persecutions, by
reason of the Multitude, Courage and Constancy of the Martyrs, out of their
singular affection to them, and that they might provoke them to Emulation, by
Baptized Believers, that met at their Burying-places to pray, and not to be
baptized. Of the Original of which Superstition, some have spoken at large; as
we shall also elsewhere. And so much of the difficulties of their
Interpretations, who have taken the word (...) in a strict and proper sense.

CLASS 2. Of those who have taken Baptism in a proper, but more lax sense, to
wit, for Ablution, Purging, etc.
I. THose of this Class have not explained the Apostles meaning the same way.
For some were of Opinion, The Opinion of Beza, Paraeus, Chamierus, etc.
that he had respect to the Rite of washing the Dead Bodies with Holy Water;
Apuleius called it the last Bath, Plautus the Funeral Ablution. The Gentiles
indeed performed this out of ancient Superstition, but the Jews in hope, and as
a Symbol of the Resurrection, which they observe till this day. Yea, the
Christians retained it from the Jewish Discipline, or after the Example of the
Apostles, who washed the dead Body of Tabitha. By which Ceremony they
signified, that the Body, though vile and base, will be transformed by a
glorious Resurrection. This Interpretation is the Reverend Beza's, as also
Bullinger's, and Paraeus's, etc.

II. Yet they do not all in the same manner construe the Apostles words. Beza
indeed takes (...), for those that use Baptism, What shall they do. (...), who
perform Ablution, on the Dead, to wit, Bodies? Or if (...) be taken in a
Passive sense; What shall they do, or, what will become of them, who are washed
with the Ablution that was used to the Dead? But Paraeus thus; What shall they
do who are purged, or washed, for the Dead, that is, already dead, or after
Death? Others understood it of the washing for the Dead, on the Sepulchers or
Burying-places. Bullinger rendered the word (...) actively, by Enallage of the
Passive, who baptize, purge, etc. (...), that is. (...), on the Dead, with
respect to the Custom of the Heathen.

III. To recount which is enough to refute them. 1. We grant that that Rite of
washing the Dead was sometimes in use. It was formerly usual among the
Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, as appears by Homer, Plato; etc. Anna in Virgil
speaking of Dido's dead Body, says, Water to bath the wounds. It is certain
that the Jews and Mahumedans at this day are very stiff holders of this Custom,
whether they wash at home, or in the Burying-places. The Benjanenses carefully
wash the dead Bodies with Water, as in H. Lord, and T. Herbert. Those of Pegu,
as Balbius says, Those of Siam, as J. Schouten, the Chinenses, as Mendoza, the
Formosans, according to late Relations; Those in Southern Africa, in Congo,
Angola, etc. as T. Herbert; besides Lotion they used also Unction, even in
barbarous Nations, whence Perfuming and Embalming, as the Chinneses sometimes
preserve Bodies that are not buried till three years after. They added also
Abrasion, which is even at this day in use in Siam, and other Idolatrous
Places. Now we cannot understand by any proof, that these had respect to the
Resurrection, especially being used by those who knew nothing of it. Why
therefore might not that washing be used as the last Testimony of Honor to the
deceased, for the Ornament of their Bodies, and seemly sight, and longer
Preservation of them, especially as a Symbol of the Purity of their Minds? So
also many believed that they were purged from the remaining Uncleanness
contracted from the Living, that so they might be presented pure to the Gods.
Moreover, that of the Disciples to Tabitha was rather out of Jewish Custom,
than out of any Christan view of the Resurrection. Whence the Apostles Argument
would have been less stringent, especially among the Greeks and Philosophers.
For to the Question, What shall they do who so purge dead Bodies? the Answer
might have been obvious, that there were several Reasons, without respect to
the Resurrection, and they might have produced the forenamed. 3. If (...) be
taken passively for Bodies that are washed, it were absurd to say of them, What
shall they do? For an Action of the Living left behind, and that on the account
of the Dead is pointed at. Nor is this Question of the Apostle to be confounded
with the other, What shall become of them? He might have said significantly,
Otherwise to what purpose are the Dead washed, baptized? 4. Nor is that less
wrested to render, (...), as Dead, or, after Death. Why might not the Apostle
have expressed the latter by an usual speech? But none of the Greeks ever
expressed it so. By the like wresting (...) is the same with (...), confounding
(...) as it governs the Genitive, and as the Accusative; in which latter case
it only denotes a passive Subject. 5. Where did ever Bullinger and Beza read
(...) in the signification of the Verb Medium, or Active? I grant by an
Atticism, the Passive is frequently put for the Active, and contrarily. In
Homer also the Passive is frequently put for the Active. But besides that,
there is a different manner of Poetical Phrase and License, that Anallage is
seldom used in Prose by the Atticks, except in the Future. But here Paul speaks
in the Present. But why should he affect such an Atticism in this one place in
that word which he never used in that Form, but in a Passive signification?
where he, or any of the Writers of the New Testament intend an Active sense,
they always use (...); hence Paraeus has rightly observed that it does not
admit the former sense of the words, otherwise agreeing with Beza as to the
meaning of the place. There is a place produced, Mark 7.4. (...), unless they
wash, but it is plain that that is spoken passively, unless they are washed, or
in a Reciprocal signification, as in the Hebrew Hithpael, except they wash
themselves. 6. But grant that (...) signified to wash, why might not Paul have
spoken simply, (...), or (...), baptizing the dead? Why would he say
ambiguously and barbarously, (...), for the Dead, if he understood the washing
of the dead Bodies?

IV. The Opinion of Estius and others of a Vicarious Ablution.
But admitting that the word (...) signified to be washed, purified, another
Interpretation will take place much more probable than that former. I omit, for
brevities sake, that which Estius approved of before others, and which others
have mentioned on this place: To wit, that Paul argues from a Practice of the
Jews, to wit, some Lotion of the Pharisees. For they say that it was a Custom
amongst them, if any were dead in Legal uncleanness, to wit, by touching the
dead, that another person washed for him, for purging it. By which Practice
they testified the Belief of the Immortality of Souls, Refuted.
and Resurrection of Bodies. But that is too absurd: For neither is there any
Evidence in the Writings of the Jews for such Practice; nor could the ignorant
Corinthians have knowledge of it, being for the greatest part Greeks; nor could
it have been of any force to prove the Resurrection, it being a superstitious
practice.

V. The Opinion of the Ablution used to those that touched the dead.
The next Conjecture is of the Legal Rite of Ablution, or Levitical Lustration,
which the Apostle might have respect to. It is described, Numb. 19.11, 12, etc.
and the sum of it is this; They were declared unclean by the Law, who had
touched the dead, either its Body, Bones, or Sepulcher, or entered into that
House or Tent where it was. Hence a Legal washing was appointed, which being
performed, they might enter into the Tabernacle of God. Moreover, none will
deny but this Rite was Mystical, and why might it not represent the
Resurrection? And some of the Rabbis understood this very Mystery of the
Jewish Rite, R. Bechai Cit. Lightf. ad h. l.
expressing on this matter, that the Legislator by this Institution had respect
(...), to the Resurrection of the Dead, as also others. Whence not a few
Interpreters have confidently avouched, that Paul in this place had respect
thereto, among whom are Bertram, Cloppenburgius c. 8.
, Lightfoot Hor. Hib. in 1 Cor.
, Sebastianus, etc. And to pass by others, Joh. Cocceius, whose words in his
sum of Theology are these; That Baptism which is enjoined, Numb. 11.19. by
which they were admitted to Holy things and Places, could signify nothing else
but a Return from Death to Life, even as the Legal Pollution contracted by
touching a dead Body, signified the common Law of Sin and Death, and exclusion
out of Heaven by sin, from whence death issues. That which the Son of Syrach,
c. 31. v. 27. expresses (...), is here by the Apostle denoted by (...), both of
them (...), or this (...), that is, for.

VI. Nor do they all explain the Apostles meaning the same way. Sebast.
Schmidius Disput. An. 1656. These. 37.
is singular in this; he thinks that this Mosaic Rite was instituted, because
sometimes the dead were undecently used by the Living, especially by the
Gentiles, who did not believe the Resurrection. That God therefore would forbid
his People from this dishonouring of the dead, that the only Foundation was the
Resurrection of the Dead, by which there is a very great difference betwixt
common Earth, and the Body of Man. Whence is shown by the Law of Purification,
how grievously they sinned, who offered Indignity to the Bodies or Ashes of the
Dead: At least that they testified, that they did not touch the Dead out of
lightness, but by chance or necessity; and that hence they did pray to God,
that as they washed his Body, so God for the Messia's sake, the only Mediator,
would purge his Body and Soul from all sin. And hence the force of Paul's
Argument was this What shall they do, (...), who wash themselves (...), for the
Dead? To what end was that washing for them in the Old Testament, and their
decent Sepulture? These things are in vain, if the Dead rise not.

VII. We will not now examine Paul's respect to this Legal Rite. But whether
this was the reason of its Institution, which this Learned man asserts, is more
doubtful. He supposes it to be instituted on this account, because the Dead
were irreverently treated by the Living; which was neither evident of those
Israelites, to whom Moses gave out the Law, nor of the Egyptians, nor any
Civilized Nations; yea on the contrary, they showed them all reverence, as
witness their washing, anointing, embalming them, etc. especially the
Egyptians, from whom the Israelites came forth. 2. Neither did this Reverence
to them among the Gentiles, proceed from any knowledge of the Resurrection: For
they did not believe it. 3. The truest cause of this Legal Expiation was a
Ceremonial Uncleanness contracted by any touching of a dead. Body as a thing
unclean, to in^^rint a horror of Death, and hence of Sin the cause of it, and
to shadow out the Necessity of Spiritual Cleansing. What Schmidius assigns for
the cause of it, it merely precarious. But 4. They were also Unclean according
to the Law, and were to be purified who touched the Carcasses of Beasts. Was
that because they should be also reverently used? Or were these also to rise
again? He will say that that was not done for Beasts, but for Men. But this is
ridiculous, for then the Legislator would have shown in this how much the dead
Body of a Man differs from that of a Beast, and suffered this to be so used
without Expiation. 5. If this Baptism was instituted for this end, to expiate
sin, and to have pointed at the Expiation performed by Christ, it could not be
said to point out only the Resurrection, and so would not have been in vain if
there had been none: And so to Paul's Question, What shall they do who are
baptized? To what purpose? it might be answered, they expiate sin, or typifie
the Expiation that. Christ shall make for it.

VIII. Some seem to have more simply stated this Allusion of Paul's: To wit,
that those who were defiled by the Dead, were legally accounted as dead
themselves, and that defilement was a kind of Civil Death, a Symbol of
Spiritual Death, and pollution by sin: That the Tabernacle of God, to which it
was not lawful for the thus polluted to approach, was a Type of that Tabernacle
not made with Hands, the House above, from whence we are excluded by sin; that
that washing after which they might enter the Sanctuary, typified the
Resurrection, or Glorification of Bodies, whereby the Bodies, being as it were
purged, and sin expiated, have entrance into that Heavenly Temple. Which
Opinion, because we do not altogether disapprove, we shall give you our
Judgment of it afterward, when we subjoyn our own Opinion.

CLASS 3. Of those who have rendered Baptism in a Figurative sense for the
Baptism of Blood, Afflictions, the Cross, Martyrdom.
I. The Opinion of Figurative Baptism.
THose of this Class differ among themselves, as well as the former. Some of
the most renowned of the Papists, as Turrian, Stapleton, Bellarmine, and other
Jesuits, render (...), to baptize themselves, or to afflict and macerate
themselves by Repentance, Tears, Prayers, Fasting, Alms, (...), for the Dead,
to wit, to help them, and terminate the Punishments of Purgatory. But that the
Jews and Christians would have done no such thing, had they not believed the
Resurrection.

II. But the more considering among the Papists were ashamed of so frantic an
Interpretation; they knew well enough, that to say there was such Baptism for
the Dead, (to wit, for their Releasement) in the Apostles days, was a mere
supposition without any ground; also that the Apostle would then have said in
this sense, What shall we do? as who gave himself more to Prayer than any: And
finally, that this Rite, if any such had been, had rather respect to the rest
of Souls, than to the Resurrection of Bodies. But seeing the ground on which
they build this Opinion, has been so often overthrown by Protestants, I think
it not worth the while to say any more of it.

III. Their Interpretation is much sounder, who have referred the words to the
violent sufferings of the Martyrs or Confessors for the Dead, or for the Faith
of the Resurrection of the Dead, or for the Hope of the Dead, and their
Resurrection publicly owned; or for the Dead, viz. Jesus, by Enall^^e of
number. The most excellent Interpreters on both sides have embraced this
Opinion. Among the Romanists Claudius Guilaudus, a Parisian Doctor, and Joh.
Maldonate; of our side the English Annotators, Dan. Tilenus, and Rivetus, J.
Lightfoot, Al. Morus, and Junius, who renders the words (...), besides the
Dead; as if the Apostle had said, If the Dead who were baptized long ago in the
name of Christ, are frustrate of their hope, why do the Living still besides
those Dead, besides their vain hope, render also their own vain by that Baptism
of Afflictions? Why do they suffer themselves to be superadded to the Dead? The
most acute Petrus Launaeus renders it, be baptized, that is, afflicted, beyond
the Dead, that is, beyond what the Dead of the Old Testament suffered? Finally,
most ingenious is that of the most famous Dutch Lady Anna Maria Schurman Epist.
Respon. ad Jac. Lyd.
, That the Apostle here speaks of Baptism of Afflictions for the Dead, or, on
the account of the Dead, to wit, the Faithful, Elect, though yet alive, but
Ironically called dead by the supposition of those who denied the Resurrection,
that the Apostles words import this: If there is no recompense for sufferings
at the coming of Christ, no hope of Glory, the Ministers of the Gospel are
foolish, who suffer so much daily for the Dead, that is, for the Church, the
Elect, by the Adversaries accounted for dead; for whose Edification,
Confirmation in the Faith, or Salvation, they are every day baptized, or
oppressed with most grievous Afflictions.

IV. All these agree that the Apostle argues from the absurdity of those, who
with invincible courage received Martyrdom, etc. for the Faith either of the
Resurrection, or the Gospel. Which Gloss the following Arguments seem to
confirm. 1. There is frequent mention of that Figurative Baptism in the Gospel
Mat. 20.22, 23. Mark 10.38. Luke 12.50.
, by a Metaphor familiar with the Hebrews, who often compare Afflictions to
Waters wherein we are plunged. 2. The use of the Preposition (...), which
sometimes signifies for, because of, as 1 Cor. 1.6. and elsewhere, also above,
besides, moreover, according to Junius. Also beyond, as (...), beyond the
iniquity of Sodom. Lightfoot adds, it answers to the phrase of the Hebrews,
(...) in ones name, which in Greek will be (...). 3. The Ellipsis is not so
unusual, but the word (...), may be understood, or after (...), the word (...),
in as much as these dead are conceived to rise 4. Its connection with the
following verses 30, etc. Why are we in jeopardy every hour? I die daily,
undergo the hazard of death. If also I fought with Beasts at Ephesus, and there
be not Resurrection of the Dead, what does it profit me? Whence it is manifest,
that this Argument is drawn from absurdity, which the Apostle further
expatiates. Several other Arguments might be set down, which for brevities sake
are omitted.

V. But notwithstanding the Arguments for this Opinion, the following
difficulties hinder me from assenting thereto. 1. It seems a very great doubt,
why the Apostle used (...) in that Figurative sense, for to be afflicted, which
he is never found to have done elsewhere? Why might not he have used the usual
words, (...), etc. as he does in other places? especially when his Speech was
directed to the Corinthians, who were not accustomed to that kind of speaking,
in that Epistle, in which it frequently occurs in its proper signification, and
on that Argument in which nothing should have been spoken ambiguously, or which
might be liable to the cavils or wrestings of Seducers. 2. Besides, the word is
never used in this sense without something to explain it. So Christ adds the
Verbale, to be baptized with his Baptism; (...). when it is used by the Hebrews
for (...), to be dipped, in a Metaphorick sense, has these words added to
explain it, in Water, Mire, etc. So also the Fathers call Baptism in that
sense, but add (...) laborious, (...), of Tears, Repentance, Fire, Blood, etc.
The Greeks also translate (...), to be overwhelmed, but they add exegetically,
(...) etc. with Debt, Wine, or the like evil. And although it may be said, that
the Noun is virtually contained in the Verb, and sometimes is omitted by the
Hebrews, yet there is a different Reason of an Aequivocal Verb, which taken
simply denotes any thing else, and cannot be drawn to this singular sense,
without some such restrictive Noun added to it. 3. Add, that that is the very
thing in Question, whether the Apostle in the following verses uses the same
Medium or Argument. There is no necessity of it either in the words or the
connection of them: And why might not the Apostle argue first from other men's
deeds, which would have been vain if there had been no Resurrection, and then
from his own sufferings, which without it were, 'twould have been mere madness
to have undergone. And in this all the Ancients and Modern agree. And the
Apostle who before had drawn his Argument from others, now draws it from
himself, Why are we in jeopardy? Else he would have said, Why are we also
baptized with the same Baptism? 4. Also they are very much different
expressions, for the Dead, and for the Faith or Hope of the Resurrection of the
Dead. And why might not Paul have expressed it better without any ambiguity?
What Junius says, that (...) with the Genitive signifies besides, moreover, is
altogether without Example. Also when it is beyond, it is always put with the
Accusative Case, even by the Hellenists, and answers to the Hebrew (...). 5.
Lightfoot is also mistaken, who will have (...) in this place answer to the
Hebrew (...), as when any is said (...), to be baptized into the name of
Proselyte, (...), which he renders (...). For that to be baptized into the name
of Proselyte, Libertine, signifies to attain that state. Thus (...), would be
to be baptized into the state of the dead, that they might be dead, for death.
Why might it not have been said more truly, for the Resurrection? If also (...)
be with him to undergo death, what Tautology is this, to undergo death for
death? (...) therefore more simply answers to the Hebrew (...) or (...). And
these Arguments shall suffice for refuting this Opinion. What our own is we
shall now declare.

The Judgment and Opinion of the Author.
I. OF all the foregoing Interpretations, two seem to me more probable than the
rest. One of which is that of Baptism of the Cross, Afflictions, etc. but so
that (...), be rendered on the account of the Dead, to wit, for their Cause, and
the Doctrine of their Resurrection. Nor would I have receded from this Opinion,
save on the account of the difficulties I now showed.

II. The other is that of the Legal Washing for the Dead, by touching whom they
were defiled. Of which Interpretation we shall now give our Judgment briefly.
Take it thus: If there is no Resurrection, what shall they do who are baptized,
or washed, etc. for the Dead, by touching whom they were defiled, and accounted
as dead? What means that Rite of Purifying them seven days before they could
enter the Sanctuary, or Temple? If the Dead are not raised, if that Rite was
not a Type of the last Resurrection, or the Glorification of Bodies by which
they are admitted into the Heavenly Temple?

III. And so there seems nothing in the Apostles speech either forced or
wrested. For, 1. The word (...) and (...), are frequently used by the
Hellenists for to wash, as also in the New Testament: Hence Mark says of the
Pharisees, (...), unless they be washed, they eat not; so the Legal washings are
frequently called (...) 2. (...) with the Genitive frequently denotes the
Cause or Occasion of a thing. So the Heb (...), is often the same with (...) in
a Causal signification. And so (...) is, for, or by reason of the Dead. 3. Nor
is that unusual, (...), What shall they do? when the Argument is drawn from
absurdity; nor is the use and end of a thing otherwise understood. So Paul in
another place, (...): to what end do ye weep? Tertullian toward the end of his
Book of the Resurrection c. 48.
, says, What shall they do who rise first? Shall they not have wherewith to be
transformed? And the Apostle in this same way of arguing says, What
advantageth it me?

IV. Add, that if Paul had respect to any Rite, there is nothing more fitting
than to say, he had respect to one of Divine Institution. And so much the more,
because then there is some manifest Analogy with the Resurrection. And why
should he have alluded to a Rite merely Humane, or superstitious, or uncertain,
or in which there is no such Analogy to be seen? Yea Paul himself says, that
these different Washings under the Law were nothing else but a shadow of the
good things to come, and Types of Heavenly things.

V. Yet there are not a few things that may be objected to the contrary. For,
1. When the Apostle speaks of such Ablution, he expresses it by the words
(...), etc. never (...). Hence a doubt arises why the Apostle used the
ambiguous word (...) that he never made use of in this sense. But espe ^^y that
when he has respect to this Rite elsewhere^^^ uses the word (...), to sprinkle,
(...), to sanct^^^^ (...), to purify.

VI. The same Paul (...) these words to the Corinthians, who were for the
greatest part converted from Greeks and Gentiles who were very prone to things
offered to Idol^^ (...) wavered in the belief of the Resurrection. They seem
not to have been so well versed in the Law, that by that obscure and ambiguous
phrase of the Apostle, they could readily discern the force of his Argument.
Certainly Paul would have insisted more particularly on its design. And if he
had a mind, he might have had more plain Symbols, or Testimonies, or Examples
out of the Old Testament than that to prove the Resurrection.

VII. There is no sufficient certainty that that Rite of Sprinkling was
instituted to point out the Resurrection. And considering all its
circumstances, which are described Number. 19. it appears, that it typified both
the Sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, and the Purging of the Conscience from
dead works, or from the Pollution contracted by sin. And the Apostle himself
declares this Heb. 19.13, 14.
. Whence also there are so many allusions of the Prophets, David, Paul and
John, to those kinds of Sprinklings, all referred to the purging of Souls by
the Blood of Christ. And although from such purifying of Souls, the
glorification of Bodies may be mediately inferred, yet Paul would scarce have
immediately deduced it from that Rite, as if it had reference to nothing else,
and that by this form of speech What shall they do? For what other use, etc?

VIII. 4. It is certain that the Gentiles also every where accounted that
touching of the Dead as a thing unclean, which was to be expiated by Ablution.
And to say nothing of others, the Ancient Persians especially, whom it is
certain that they held nothing more Sacred than to shun all pollution from
contact of the Dead, and to separate the polluted nine days, and purge them by
Ablution of their Body, as H. Lord has set down at large out of their Persian
Ritual (which they call Zundavastaw) in his History of the Religion of the
Ancient Persians; the same also was generally observed by all the Gentiles; yet
it is certain that in that Rite they had no respect to the future Glorification
of Bodies, but intended only the Purification of their Souls.

IX. 5. That Question of the Apostle, What shall they do? seems also to answer
to the foregoing verses, Then they are perished v. 18, 19.
; we are of all men most miserable: So that it is an Argument not only from the
absurdity, but also from the hurt and misery that abides such. But that Legal
Ablution inferred no misery or hurt, though the Dead did not rise. For it had
both its external and politic use, both spiritual and mystical. Besides, if
the Apostle had designed that Ablution, he would have spoke more plainly, after
the manner of the Hellenist Interpreters, What shall they do who are washed,
purified, etc.

X. These are the difficulties which overturn an Opinion otherwise sound
enough, without which we would have approved of it, as the soundest and truest
of all the rest. But a more simple has lately offered it self to me, and that
obvious enough, tho it is either mentioned obscurely, or not at all, in the
Commentations of so many Learned men.

XI. We suppose, which none can easily deny, that it is most likely that (...)
that is twice repeated in this sentence, should rather be rendered in its usual,
ordinary, and proper signification, than in any other less usual, in regard the
former is more constant with Paul; nor does he use that word in another sense,
both in all this Epistle (which it may not be amiss to have observed) and also
in his other Epistles, unless ye except that its derivative Noun (...) is once
used to signify the Levitical Ablutions, in his Epistle to the Hebrews.
Wherefore this one thing remains, whether the words can be rightly explained
re^aining that signification? whether it be true of some that were then
baptized in the Church, that they took upon them that Baptism, (...), or (...),
for the Dead, and that on the account of the Prospect they had of the
Resurrection?

XII. And first it needs not seem so strange or unusual an Enallage of number
if (...) be put for (...), that dead, Christ Jesus, he who was put to death,
crucified, etc. as frequently in the N. Testament, And hence that (...) may be
the same with (...), for him who was dead; so it is said of him elsewhere, I
was dead. Hence he is called the first begotten of the dead. And in this sense
such as were baptized may be said to have come to the Holy Font, because of him
who was dead, or as beholding him who was dead, in as much as death could not
hold him, nor did he continue under it, being raised the third day, as is
apparent by so many undeniable Testimonies. And this begot an assured
confidence in those who were ingrafted in Christ by Baptism; that as he had
conquered Death by his Resurrection, so they also by virtue thereof should
obtain victory over Death by theirs 1 Cor. 15.20, 57.
. I grant that the Apostle might have said more expressly, (...), or (...) in
the singular, or also (...), for that living one, into the communion of whose
Life and Resurrection they were baptized. But it may be replied, that this
first did not please him, because in Christ he principally had respect to his
Death, as gloriously triumphed over, whence a certain confidence was wrought in
the baptized of the likeness of his death, as being one with him. Nor would he
use that other (...), Romans 6.5.
because of the excellency of that dead one, and the Enallage familiar in that
case, because all the baptized are accounted as dead in him who was dead. Nor
was it necessary to say the third, (...), seeing it was usual with the Apostle
to rouse up the faithful with the hope of the Resurrection, from thence, that
they were baptized into the death of Christ, or into the faith, participation,
Romans 6.3, 4.
or likeness of his death. Yea by this word (...) throughout this chapter, the
dead are designed with respect to Life, and the Resurrection. And who can deny
that the Belief of the Resurrection or future Immortality was implied in the
Faith of him who was crucified and dead?

XIII. But to return to the Enallage of the plural for the singular, Al. Morus
our Countryman had a little before smelt it out, but he rather we^kened it by
inapposite Examples, in which the Enallage seemed to be merely supposed, as
Exodus 4.19. 2 Chronicles. 24.25. Mat. 9.8. Besides that, he wrested the word
Baptize, and the Apostles whole sentence, to a figurative sense, to those who
are baptized with the Baptism of Christ. So that it is no wonder that Amyraldus
dissents from him in his French Exposition of this Chapter. But this Opinion of
ours is much better, and more easily understood, wherein also Amyraldus
Objections are fully answered. It remains therefore that we speak further of
this Enallage of Number, whether the like Example is exstant, especially in
Paul's Writings? and this indeed is obvious, that it has place when one is
discoursing of any eminent Subject, as here an eminent dead person, as it was
said of Herod the Great, they are dead. Nor do we need Examples of Greeks,
Latins or Hebrews, when speaking of any notable Subject, in the third person;
for Grammarians are full of such Examples. But to return to Paul, he uses the
same word (...), Heb. 9.17. for the singular, of the dead Testator. For in the
same Verse he opposes (...), to (...), and he speaks in the singular, (...), of
the Testator. V. 23. he expresses the Sacrifice of Christ plurally (...); so
the promise of the New Testament plurally, (...); the Holy of Holies, (...),
the Angel that gave out the Law, (...). In the New Testament frequently a
Plural Form is used when the sense is singular, as, (...), the Sabbath, (...),
the Holy Spirit, (...), of one Prophet, (...), of one Disciple, (...), of one
of the Thieves, and a great many such. In the Old Testament it is also very
obvious; so Lot is said an Inhabitant of Cities, Jeptha to be buried in the
Cities Gilead. Also in Greek Writers ye will read very frequently the Plural
put for the Singular, as the Scholiasts have frequently observed; so that that
manner of speaking could not be strange to the Corinthians.

XIV. Yet one thing may be more objected, That this Baptism was common to all
Believers, whereas the Apostle here speaks of one peculiar to certain persons,
who were so baptized, (...). Yet I need not say any thing to it, save that
possibly there were some among that multitude of baptized persons, who more
openly and plainly professed that Dead, that Crucified Person in Baptism, as
the Sanctifier of their own Death, and the most certain Pledge of their
Resurrection: Although some are not pleased to restrict that general Phrase of
the Apostle's ((...)) to some few baptized persons. But we do not hinder, if
any think this a weighty difficulty, or the foregoing Enallage harsh. And
therefore the following Interpretation may be judged plainer, it being also
ours, which we prefer as the most simple, and not laboring under any of the
former difficulties.

Take it therefore briefly thus: Those dead persons on whose account some may
be said to have been baptized, to wit, many Martyrs, and other Saints deceased,
who received with a courageous, constant and cheerful mind, all kind of
punishments, yea death it self, whether violent by persecution, or natural by
sickness, in hope of a blessed Resurrection. Which fortitude and constancy of
mind in these dead who so died in the Lord, while many beheld with their Eyes,
and ^evolved in their Minds, observing no such thing in their Gentiles, they
were thereby induced to embrace the Faith of Christ, and desired to be
baptized. Hence Paul, What shall they do who are baptized for the dead? whose
Triumph over Death they observed?

In which Interpretation there is 1. Nothing remote from the Words and Phrase
of the Apostle. For so Paul's speech is most plain and simple; Those who are
baptized initiated by Baptism, for the dead, on their account, by their
Impulse, or for those Examples of Hope and Constancy which they admired in the
departed Saints. For (...) frequently signifies, on the account of; (...), etc.
in Paul's Writings. Likewise in Justin Martyrs Answers, (...), for the Doctrine
of the Resurrection. In like manner as the Hebrew (...), to which (...)
answers, is most usually for. Add, that the Adjection of the Article (...), is
Emphatical and Restrictive; so that all the dead are not here designed, but
those who were Illustrious. 2. Nor is there any thing alien from Paul's Scope
and Argument: For neither was there any greater comfort to those who were a
dying, either to Christ, or for Christ, amidst their most grievous bodily
Torments, than what proceeded from the hope of the Resurrection. Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Cyprian, etc. teach us this. With this hope, they were cheered up,
as Job was of old, and Paul in that place fills the hearts of the Corinthians
with comfort, as also the Romans, Thessalonians, etc. Whence both their Hope
would have been in vain, and their Imitation of others that were baptized, if
there had been no Resurrection. Hence he says, (...), What shall they do? or
wh^^ advantage shall they reap by their Baptism, which they took upon them on
this account? Insinuating that such were not only foolish, but also miserable,
if those dead who slept in Christ, by beholding whom they were brought over to
the Discipline of Christ, perished. Their misery proceeded hence, because out
of a vain Opinion, and vain Hope of the Resurrection, they must undergo all
kind of Afflictions in this life, when once they are bound with the Sacrament
of Baptism. The following words also agree singularly well; for continuing his
Argument, he immediately says, Why are we in Jeopardy? Why do we expose our
selves to the same dangers with those dead, and which are the common Lot of all
that are baptized. Justin Martyr, (as is believed) says in his Answer to the
Questions about the Resurrection, If, according to your Opinion, the Doctrine
of the Resurrection is not true. how comes it to pass that because of it the
Martyrs postpone their Life to death? 3. There is nothing in it contrary to the
Truth of History. For we do not preca^iously suppose any practice. Some indeed
may doubt whether at that time when the Apostle wrote these things, Martyrdom
was so frequent and solemn, that many were thereby induced to embrace the
Christian Faith? But who can deny the famous Examples of Stephen and James the
Elder? Who can doubt but that amidst so many Persecutions, so many Uproars
stirred up by the Jews and Gentiles, in all places where there were Christians,
many died for the Faith of the Gospel. For when Paul wrote this Epistle to the
Corinthians, about the Year of our Lord 56. 'twas above twenty years after the
Protomartyrs Death. Hence many of the Disciples and Apostles are said to have
then received their Crown of Martyrdom. Nor are Paul: Exhortations to suffer
Persecutions, and to endure the utmost Extremities, with an undaunted Mind,
from any other reason, but because Martyrdom was then frequent. Yea in this
very Chapter he calls them False Witnesses, if there were no Resurrection, not
without allusion, even to that last Testimony already sealed, or to be sealed
by death, from whence they were called Martyrs. Again, that by those Examples
of Constancy and Confidence of the Resurrection; the like hope was kindled in
many of the Jews, especially of the Gentiles, and that this occasioned their
desire of being baptized, several Fathers testify; Clemens and Hist. l. 11. c.
9.
Eusebius say, that the Accuser of James the Elder, was so amazed at his
Constancy, that he immediately turned Christian, and became a Martyr; both
therefore were led out together to their Execution. And Tertullian in his
Apologetick says, We are increast in number as often as we are led out by you.
Words find not so many Disciples, as Christians do when they teach them by
their deeds. That very Obstinacy which you upbraid is a School-Mistress. For
who is not, by the Contemplation thereof, stirred up to search what there is
within? Who when he has enquired does not come over to us? Who when come over,
does not desire to suffer? But neither is it needful to understand only the
Martyrs by the word (...); but those also who died (whatsoever way it were) in
the thorough Faith of the Resurrection. Under this Notion therefore are
comprehended there all those who (abstracting from the case of Martyrdom)
received death with a cheerful Mind, constant Faith, and certain hope of the
Resurrection, to wit, that that which died would live again, and that which
fell should rise again. Nor is there any doubt but many of the Gentiles who
beheld this in them, would thereby be induced to embrace the Christian Faith,
and consequently Baptism.

XVI. And this is our Opinion, if the word (...) be taken in its simple and
ordinary signification. Nor is there any thing in it forced or violent, or
unusitate. Whence I do not a little admire that in so great a Cloud of
Interpreters, they turned aside so much to Foreign and far-sought things, not
taking notice of the most obvious.

FINIS.

