AN EXACT SURVEY OF THE UNITED PROVINCES OF THE NETHERLANDS.

OF Their Cities, Castles, Fortresses, and other their Dominions there: With
some Remarques of their Government, Antiquities and Memorable Actions.

Together with an Exact Map of the SEVEN PROVINCES: Which is also to be Sold
alone.

Collected by T. W.

Vade Liber, verbisque meis loca grata saluta. LONDON: Printed for Edward Berry
and William Berry, and are to be Sold at their Shops in Holborn-Court in
Grays-Inne, near the Hall-door; and at the Globe in the Strand, betwixt
York-House and the New-Exchange. 1673.

To the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven, Viscount Craven of Vffington,
Baron Craven of Hamsted-Marshal, one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Middlesex and
Borough of Southwark.
My Lord;
THe Belgic Provinces for the last Century have been such a Theater of Mars,
that all the Princes of Europe have little reason to thank the Spaniard for
enforcing the States of Holland to know and use their own power and strength;
and therefore it was gravely expressed by a sober Person, that to have all the
Low Countries governed by a few States, or by one Prince, wholly depending upon
the King of Spain, would be equally dangerous: but it does most comport with
the interest of England, in Wisdom and Policy, to erect and establish such a
Prince as should neither altogether depend upon France, or be wholly devoted
unto Spain; or else to divide the Seventeen Provinces into diverse several
Cantons, whereby some of them being induced to affect England, and others to
favor Princes of their Religion, they could not render themselves so
formidable.

How prudent an expedient this would be for the security of England, and to
establish peace in Christendom, I submit it unto your Lordships grave
judgment, who is perfectly acquainted with all the Criticismes of State. But
that which is the just admiration of all wise men, the lesser moiety of these
Provinces has far exceeded even the whole, and seven Provinces are become
greater and more potent then Seventeen: In Riches and Power they have outdone
some of the greatest Princes in Europe. Their Cities are many and splendid; and
yet there are more Sects among them then Cities, and as many Creeds as Heads:
but if they had imitated your Lordship when you did them the honor to live
amongst them, (the regularity of your Devotions being with such reverence) you
had made all their Provinces Canonical: yet they have learned to vernish their
lucre with Devotion, and to make godliness a Page to their private Interest,
and to be so wise in any of their meetings never to discourse of Religion;
their Opinions therein, being as opposite as the sides of the Diameter; but
they all concentre in this one Ecliptic line, to darken the Authority of
Princes.

Your Lordship (being so great an Artizan of State) understands all their
Arcana and Mysteries; and so great a Captain, as (this AGE with much difficulty
has not produced a greater) you know all their Policies and Stratagems of War;
by the first your Lordship has much engaged your own Nation; by the other, you
may live to oblige all Nations of the World. I do beg your Lordships pardon for
this interruption, leaving the Grandeur of your Actions, and the Glory of your
Name, to be blazoned by the Heralds of Time, and celebrated in the lasting
Chronicles of after-Ages. I am

Your Lordships Humble Servant, T. W.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
LEst thou should have cause (Gentle Reader) to Quaere this present Edition
of the Exact Survey of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, considering the
many Essays written of that Subject; at the instance of the worthy Author of
this excellent and useful Discourse, I was desired to advertise thee, that some
honorable Friends of his put him upon this present work, which in their noble
conceptions would be very acceptable to the Public. By this Topographical
Discourse thou art brought to more familiar acquaintance with the site,
strength, present state and condition of those Belgic Countries, which for
this last Century had so bravely quit themselves, maugre the utmost Policies
and Hostilities of their great and formidable Enemies: and when you hear of
this or that other Town or Castle of theirs either taken or besieged, upon a
slight perusal of it, upon all occasions, you may be able to judge of those
matters. The Author hereof has seriously consulted with most of the Grave
Writers both Cosmographers and Historians, and others of the greatest note
which have hitherto written of those Countries and Provinces, from whom
(besides his own observations) he has received no small light and assistance:
and having brought this Web out of the Loom, he here presents it to the
judicious Eye of the Candid Reader, wherein, without much trouble or cost, he
may behold the sad face in its full dimension, of the late most High and Mighty
States of the United Provinces, that seemed so lately to eclipse and shadow
much of the Grandeur and Glory of the most Potent and absolute Princes, now
lamentably it self eclipsed, and rent in pieces; and Peace, the fairest flower
in Paradise, and the pleasantest Fruit upon the Tree of Life, is here in Exile:
so that you may say of them, as the Poet of Rome: Qui miserandae videt veteris
vestigia Romae,
Ille potest merito dicere Roma fuit.
They who the Ruins of first Rome behold,
May say, Rome is not now, but was of old.


If in Anno 1584, the poor distressed People of the Low Countries was their
Epithet in all their humble Addresses to the then Queen of England, what they
then spoke as Politicians, possibly the same they may now say as Realists. But
Pride will have its Fall sooner or later; Perfidiousness and Ingratitude will
never go long unpunished.

And truly three of the hardest things in the world are, To Quadrate a Circle;
to find out the Philosophers Stone; and to make the Dutch grateful. The first
Office of Gratitude is to receive a good turn Civilly, then to retain it in
Memory, and acknowledge it; and lastly, to endeavor a requital. How far they
are from these, their Insolences to the English Nation will easily tell you;
they daily do heap injuries on the English whom they have so highly wronged, as
if the latter injuries would give countenance of Justice to the former: and to
speak truly, if we should be left to their mercies, we should be stripped as bare
as Diogenes did Plato's Man.

'Twas England that first raised them, and it was the King of Great Britain
that under God would have preserved and protected them, if they had kept their
Ancient Boundaries, and not been too ignorant of their true Interest. At
present they seem to the world a lost People, full of intrinsic confusions,
and upon the point of Ruin; and they that have been reckoned for Great and
Dominical Letters in the Worlds Alphabet, are now almost blotted out.

For their Country, it was in the General for its dimensions, fuller planted
with People, Cities, Great Towns, Castles, Fortresses, Bulwarks, Forts,
Garrisons, and for Military Defense, then any other Country in Europe. Their
Naval Forces were prodigious, befitting Wonder rather then Words, even a
Terror to the Great Princes of the World. For their trade, it far exceeded
that of the Neighboring Princes; and in the Economy of it more prudently
managed. To every town they assigned some Staple-Commodity; As to Dort the
Germane Wines and Corn: To Middleburgh the French and Spanish Wines: To Trevere
the Scotch Trade: In Leyden, in respect of her long Siege, was erected an
University: to Harlem Knitting and Weaving; and to Rotterdam formerly (now
Dort) the English Cloth: this makes their Towns so equally rich and populous.

The Hollanders (the best Copy of Thrift in Christendom) teach their little
Ditches to bear Boats; not that their Waters are more docible in this kind
then ours, but they are the more ingenious and industrious Schoolmasters of
the lesson of public advantage, making every place in their Provinces to have
access to others therein, by such cheap transportation: A thing much to be
desired in England; and certainly this great Metropolis, and other Cities here,
would attain to much more grandeur and riches, if more navigable Rivers were
made unto them: for nothing can more advance Trade, or raise a better Nursery
of Seamen.

Their Buildings are Splendid and Magnificent. In many places, as in Amsterdam,
the Foundations of their Houses cost more then the Superstructure; for the
Ground being low and spungy, they are constrained to ram in huge stakes of
Timber till they come to a firm Basis; so that one said, Whosoever could see
Amsterdam under Ground, should see a huge Winter-Forest.

But of these, as of their more Ancient and Noble Families, the Famous Men of
their Countries for Learning and Exploits of War, their rare Monuments and
other admirable Rarities to be found amongst them, with many other remarkables,
which for thy more ample satisfaction I shall refer thee to the following
discourse, wherein our Author has gravely and judiciously with singular method
and brevity set each memorable particular to thy View, in which thou will meet
with many Occurrences worthy of thy admiration; having not only equaled the
best of such Writers as have hitherto treated on this Subject, but far outdone
them all: And therefore I shall no ways doubt of thy candid Interpretation of
this his very laudable and worthy Enterprise; assuring thee that thy friendly
reception of these his present Labors, will strongly invite him to commend
unto thy judicious consideration another Political Discourse, discovering their
Arts and Intrigues by which they have attained to their Grandeur; a Book which
will be of great concern and advantage to the English Nation.

Of the great pleasure and utility, and the excellent use that will be found in
the serious perusal of Books of this kind, I shall need to say nothing, though
I first principally intended it, it being a truth so generally received amongst
all Judicious Readers; only I shall tell thee, thou have here Magnum in parvo,
or Iliades in nuce, or the late High and Mighty States of the United
Netherlands with all their Provinces, brought thee even to thine own home: But
I shall not enlarge, knowing Verbum Sapienti sat est.

Yours to serve you, T. W.

An Exact SURVEY OF THE United Netherlands.
BELGIVM, or the Netherlands, are Bounded on the East with Westphalen, Gulick,
Cleve, and the Land of Tryers, Provinces of the higher Germany; on the West
with the main Ocean, which divides it from Britain; on the North with the River
Ems, which parts it from East-Friesland; on the South with Picardie, and
Champaigne, two French Provinces; upon the South-East with the Dukedom of
Lorrain.

The chief Rivers here, are: 1. The Rhene; 2. The Maes; 3. The Ems; 4. The
Scaldis, or Schelt. 5. Lis, or Ley.


The Rhine is divided about the confines of Gelderland into four Channels:

Of which the first is called the Wael, which running through Gelderland by
Nimmegen and Bommel, loses it self in the Maes.

The Second, which keeps the name of the Rhene, passes by Arnhem; from
thence in a contracted channel to Vtrecht, and so through Holland.

The Third, called the Leck, takes his course through the Provinces of Vtrecht
and Holland, and so into the Sea 'twixt Dort and Rotterdam.

The Fourth, called the Yssel, passing by the Towns of Zutphen and Deventer,
'twixt Gelderland and Overyssel, emptieth it self into the South Sea.

The Maes runs by Ruremond and Venlo, two known Towns of Gelderland; where
turning toward the West, it takes in a part of the Rhene; and from thence
passing to Maestricht, divides Brabant from Holland, watering the Town of Grave
in the one, and of Dort in the other; and falls into the Sea not far from Brill.

Ems, which divides the two Frieslands.

Scaldis or Schelt, which arises in Picardy, and runs through Artois, and
between Hainault and Brabant, meets with the Sea a little above Antwerp.

Lis, or Ley, which runs through Flanders.

Besides which Rivers, and others of inferior note, here are great store of
Lakes, Pooles, and Marshes, which do both fortify the Country, and provide it
of Fish.

Belgium is divided into 17 Provinces: Whereof there are 4 Dukedoms.
1 Limburg. 2 Luxemburg 3 Gelderland 4 Brabant.


One Marquisate, viz. of the Holy Empire.

Seven Earldoms.
1 Flanders. 2 Artois. 3 Hainalt. 4 Namur. 5 Zutphen. 6 Holland. 7 Zealand.
Five Baronies.
1 West-Friesland 2 Vtrecht. 3 Overyssel. 4 Machlin. 5 Groninge.
Of these 17 Provinces, only two did acknowledge the Sovereignty of the Kings of
France, viz. Flanders and Artois; the Earls of which were Homagers to that
Crown at the Treaty of Cambray, Anno Dom. 1550, when they were quitted by Henry
the Second of France to Philip the Second King of Spain, and to his Successors:
the rest were held originally of the Germane Empire: Nine of which Provinces
are under the King of Spain; 1 Flanders. 2 Artois. 3 Hainalt. 4 Namur. 5
Luxemburg. 6 Limburg. 7 Brabant. 8 Marquisate. 9 Machlin.


Under the States General are 1 Holland. 2 Zealand. 3 West-Friesland 4 Vtrecht.
5 Overyssel. 6 Gelderland. 7 Zutphen, and 8 Groaning.


With some Towns in Flanders and Brabant.

HOLLAND
Has on the East the Zuyderzee, Vtrecht, and some part of Gelderland; on the
West and North, the Germane Ocean; on the South, the Islands of Zealand, and
some part of Brabant.

Upon the eruption of the Gothish and Danish Nations, they here planting
themselves in Holland and Zealand, (as Adrianus Junius conceives) in reference
to Zealand and Orland, two Islands in the Baltic Sea, out of which they came;
these two Provinces were called Holland and Zealand. And with him agrees
William Heda, Petrus Hannius, Scriverius, and others.

But Hugo Grotius will have it called Holland from Holtland, which is as much
as to say, a Country of Wood, Holt signifies a Wood. And the Annals tell us,
that heretofore Holland was full of Woods and Bushes.

This Country lies so low, that Ramparts only keep it from inundations, and
restrain the Rivers within their bounds. In many places one may see the Sea far
above the Land, and yet repulsed with those Banks.

The compass of Holland is about 180 Miles, every part of it within three hours
Journey of the Sea. The breadth is not above 24 Miles, and contains 28 walled
Towns or Cities, and 400 Villages; some situate in North, and others in
South-Holland.

North-Holland lies 'twixt the middle channel of the Rhene, and the Zuyder-Sea.

The Towns or Cities of most importance are Alcmaer, encompassed with deep Fens
and Marshes, diverse great Lakes, which are made by the Brooks which fall from
the Downs; so it has its name from these Lakes, the which in the Cymbrian
Tongue they call Meeren, as if they would say Almeer. It has the first Place
and the first Voice in the Estates of the said Provinces. It Is Eminent for the
Defeat the Inhabitants gave the Duke of Alva, merely because he had left them
no way to escape. It Is a Town well fortified with goodly Ditches and mighty
Walls, Flanck'd with nine great Bulwarks, which were made after the Spaniards
had besieged it. It Is three Leagues distant from Horn. Near unto it is the
strong Castle of Astenburg. Anno 1328 it was burnt. The Frieslanders have often
besieged it: and in the year 1517, it was taken and plundered for eight days by
those of Guelders.

Earl Florence the Fifth made a Ditch to the very extremities of the Country,
to hinder the Frieslanders incursions.

It Is not only one of the chiefest Towns of Holland, but of all the Low
Countries, for the beauty of its Buildings, and the neatness of its Streets.
Near this Town is Seayne, a great Village. The Lords hereof are descended from
the House of Bavaria.

Amsterdam.
Is situated on the Gulf called the Fie, and the Ditch or Channel called
Amstel; whence it has the name of Amsteldam, in Latin Amstelodamum; built
upon Piles like Venice.

It consisted at the first of a few Fishermens houses, and was under the
Jurisdiction of the Lords of Amstel. About 300 years since, Gilbert Amstel
fortified this City with Bulwarks and Towers; which being burnt by ill
Neighbors, 'twas walled about Anno 1482.

And afterward 'twas enlarged, and it is now become one of the greatest
Mart-towns in Europe.

Here a 1000 Ships of all sorts have been seen to go out and in.

They of Amsterdam made a great present of Money to the Emperor Maximilian the
First of that name; for the which, and other their good Services, he granted
them leave to bear an Imperial Crown upon the Arms of the City: a Dignity never
granted to any Town before.

There is yet to be seen in a Glass-window of the old Church, certain Purses
painted with their Mouths down, scattering Gold and Silver, to signify their
liberality.

It Is strong by reason of the Situation, but stronger by Art. It Is flanck'd
about with great Bulwarks, which answering one another, make it impregnable.
What with the Walls about it, and the industry of man, it is warranted toward
the Sea, with a long double Pallisadoe from the east to to the West; in which
above 1000 Ships, and innumerable lesser Vessels, may safely lie out of danger.

By reason of Trade, it is grown exceeding rich, by diverting it from Antwerp
hither.

It Is inhabited by People of all Nations, and of all Religions, and those nor
tolerated or connived at in private, but openly and freely exercised without
any disl ke.

It Is seven Leagues from Leyden.

The Townhouse is the prodigy of the world, and a miracle beyond the Seven
that Antiquity brags so much of; the Foundation of which cost many hundred
thousand pounds.

The Revenue of this City comes to above 4000 l. a day.

Near St. Katharin's Church, are laid the Foundations of a Tower, which is to
be exceeding high: 6300 great Trees have been driven into a piece of ground of
about 100 Foot square, to be Piles for the foundation of the said Tower.

They have here a House of Correction, called the Tutchthuyse, for vain, idle,
and extravagant persons, and also for those children which will not be obedient
to their Parents: at the coming in, there are two Lions upon the doors bridled,
as an emblem of the wild youth of the Town. They make them here work according
to their offenses. If they refuse to work, they are put into a low Cellar, and
water is let in upon them: if they will stand still, they may; if they will
pump, and deliver themselves, then they are helped out again. They come out of
this House, when they give Testimony of their repentance.

Anno 1595 was here set up the like house for young Maids which lived a
licentious and idle life.

In Amsterdam, notwithstanding their precise observance of the Sabbath, yet
every Sunday Morning they have a public Mart for Dogs and Rags.

Harlem
On the Lake called Harlemmeer. It Is a Noble Town, both for the largeness of
the City, the fairness of the Houses, and pleasantness of the Situation, being
seated amongst many goodly Meadows: famous for the invention of Printing,
invented here by Laurence Jans. The first Book that ever was Printed being
Tullies Offices.

Anno 1245, Pope Innocent at the Council of Lions made St. Lewis King of
France, and William Earl of Holland, undertake the relief of the Holy Land: the
Army being come before Pelusium (now called Damietta,) a great Chain did hinder
the approach of the Navy; this the Harlem-men undertook to break, and did
execute their Design, giving entry to the whole Fleet. In memory of which, the
Emperor gave the Town for Arms (which before was a dry tree) a Sword compassed
with six stars; to the which the Patriarch of Jerusalem added upon the point a
Cross Pattee. They have many silver Bells, which they brought from thence, hang
up in their Steeple.

It has the fairest Church in all Holland, being supported with great Columns
or Pillars.

The River Sparr passes through this Town.

Anno 1572, 'twas greatly afflicted by the Spaniards lying before it eight
months, to their great loss, and discharged 10256 Cannon shot against the
Town; yet in the end, by reason of Famine, it was constrained to yield to the
mercy of Duke d'Alva, who put them to the Sword: the Papists crying they were
Catholics, expecting to receive mercy at his hands; but they were answered,
that it was good for their Souls, but their Bodies must die for the King.

This Town and Castle was built by the Harmelois, who issued from the blood of
the Kings of Friesland, and from thence it took its name, as the learned
Adrianus Junius conceives. It Is the second Town in Holland for Rank and
Dignity.

The Castle hereof was seated upon the Chanel that runs toward Egmont, not far
from Heemskirk* and built of Brick; but at this day there is nothing to be seen
but the ruins of it.

The Lord of this place by his cruelty having made himself odious to his
people, he and his wife fled into this Castle, and being besieged, and reduced
to want for Provision, (having no means to escape) was compelled to enter into
a Treaty for the rendition of the Town: his wife amongst other Articles
capitulated that she might have so much of her most precious Goods as she could
carry at one time: which was granted. She (with the help of her Maid) carried
out her Husband locked in a Chest out of the Castle, leaving all her Rings and
Jewels behind her. A rare Example of conjugal Love! It Is desired that the
Ladies of these times would make it their President.

The Lordships and Villages under it, are 1 Bredenrood. 2 Assenburg. 3 Heems
kerck. 4 Meresteen. 5 Forest. 6 Keewrick. 7 Velsen. 8 Polenburgh. 9 Hemsteed.
10 Beurwick.


Between Harlem and Leyden there are many fair Villages: Heligon, Lys, and
Tassam: they are not above a League distant one from another. Not far from them
is the House of Feiling, now belonging to his Highness the Prince of Orange.

Naerden
On the Zuyder-Sea, Fortified with a strong Castle, held of the Earls of
Holland by the Dukes of Brunswick, to whom it anciently belonged.

Anno 1580, having submitted to the Duke of Alva, he, contrary to his Faith and
Promise to them, fired it, and put all the poor Inhabitants to the Sword. It Is
the chief Town of the Bayliwick of Goeland.

Anno 1355 it was built by William of Bavaria, and by him enriched with many
Privileges.

Anno 1481 they of Vtrecht having given the Hollanders a great overthrow,
surprised the Town of Naerden by an ingenious Stratagem: For they dressed a
good company of young Soldiers like Country-women going to Market; who being
let in, seized a Gate of the Town, and gave entrance to the Enemy: the Citizens
redeemed themselves from Fire and Sword with a great sum of Money.

Enchuysen,
So called from Euckle-Huysen, little or simple Houses, as they were at first;
but now it is become a great Town situate on the very point of the Gulf of
Zuyder-see opposite to Friesland, from which it is not distant above two Leagues.

'Twas very serviceable to the Prince of Orange in the first Revolt of these
Countries from the King of Spain, for siding with him: they cut off all
Supplies and Provisions from Amsterdam, and compelled it in a short time to
yield to the Prince. It Is a place of great Trade and Navigation; their Ships
passing to all Seas of the world. There are two Passages out to the Sea, and
three Havens: at the entrance of one of them, there is a great Tower.

It Is reported that Anno 1394 Albert Earl of Holland set sail from thence with
a Fleet of 300 Boats, to transport his Army into Friesland: an Argument that it
was then a Famous Port.

Here are built great Ships for the Indies; and great Fleets do sail from hence
to the Baltic Seas.

This Town is environed on three parts by the Sea.

Under the Jurisdiction of this Town are these Villages 1 Grootenbroeck. 2
Luttlebroeck. 3 Boumers-kerspel. 4 Hogekerspel. 5 Hem. 6 Veenhuysen. 7
Broeckhaven.


This Town, Horn, and Medenblyck, have equally, but successively, the
privilege of Coining of Money; each for the space of Seven years, and then
they begin again.

Horn
Is on the same Gulf also; a rich Town, with a very good Haven; and of so great
strength by reason of the multitude of Ditches and Channels which are round
about it, that it seems impregnable.

Anno 1427 this Town began to be encompassed with goodly Walls, deep and large
Ditches. Half of it all along the Sea is defended with Pallisadoes, and Banks.

It has its name from the Haven of the Town, that turns in Form of a Horn.

It has these Villages under its Jurisdiction: 1 Avenhoorne. 2 Berth. 2
Oudendick. 4 Woggenom. 5 Hubixwou. 6 Hauvoant. 7 Berchont. 8 Swaech. 9
Banejert. 10 Betlem. 11 Ostblocker, and several other Towns.


Edam
Upon the same Gulf of Zuyder-see, remarkable for the great number of Ships
which are yearly built here; It Is a Town well walled in, and ditch'd. It has a
long Haven, to the which there does belong many fair Ships, being as stately,
and of as great Burden as any in Holland or Zealand, either for War or
Merchandise.

It was anciently called Yedam, of a current of Water called Ye or Vde, by a
Sluice (which they call dam) so it is the Sluice of Yde.

This Town is two Leagues distant from Horn.

Anno 1404, some women of this Town going in Barks to feed their Cattle in the
Pastures of Gurmer-meer, discovered a Seawoman (which came out of the Sea into
the waters there, and could not find the way out.) They took her by Force,
they drew her into a Boat, and carried her into Edam, where she was washed and
clothed; in time she grew Familiar, using her self to feed on ordinary Meats,
and did learn to spin. They of Harlem desired to have her; to whom she was
sent, and lived 15 years: she never spoke (which was a rare thing in a woman!)
seeking often to get away into the water. You may read this in the History of
the Netherlands: for the truth hereof, it is desired that the Virtuosi of the
Royal-Society would take it into their grave consideration.

Medenblick
Is fortified with a strong Castle, seated on the Sea. It Is two Leagues and a
half from Enchuysen, and within 6 Miles of Horn.

It has a Port made by Art. It Is a safe retreat for Ships in foul weather.
It Is so fortified with Walls and Bulwarks, as it is held impregnable. It Is an
ancient Town, and formerly the Metropolis before Horn and Enchuysen were built.
Here live most of your Wood-Merchants which drive a Trade to Norway, and into
the North. Some derive its name from the River Medenlack.

Monickendam
On the South Side looks toward the Isle of Mark, which is opposite to it.
The Sea therein reasonably still; for that it lies under the Lee of the said
Island. Toward the Land it is walled and ditch'd: Great Ships may harbor here
safely.

It Is a League from Edam. It Is seated upon the River Monic, which signifies a
Monck; and it has for its Arms a Monck.

Purmerent
Is a Town which stands in the midst of Moors, lying at the end of the
Purmer-Sea, where is a sluice by the which they of the Town sail toward Edam,
Monickkendam, and other places which border upon the Sea. On the other side
there is nothing but Lakes, which coast the Towns of Ryp, Graft, Wormer, even to
Alkmer.

Anno 1573, it was walled in. There is a Castle which did belong to the House
of Count Egmond; but Anno 1590 it was bought by the States.

Muden
Is seated on the River Vecte, a strong Town Fortified with Ramparts, and a
strong Castle upon the Gulf where the Vecte runs into the Zuyder-see. It held
correspondence with Alkmer, Horn, Enchuysen, Medenblick, Edam, Monickendam, and
other Towns in West-Friesland; against whom the Spaniards could not prevail,
but lost many men in this waterish Country; the which is rightly called
Waterland, by reason of the many Lakes that it abounds with: some of them have
been drained, as Beemster, Zijp, and Schermer, which are now rich Grounds. In
this Castle Count Florent of Holland was kept Prisoner.

South-Holland lies next to the middle Channel of the Rhene, (passing from
Vtricht to Leyden and Zealand) eminent for these Cities.

Dort or Dordrecht
Is a City of Holland; the Figure of it is long like a Galley. It Is very rich
and plentiful, and a Granary or Storehouse of Corn, and all other Provisions:
anciently 'twas the Staple for Rhenish Wines; formerly joined to the Firm Land,
but in the year 1421 rent from't by the violentness of the Sea, and made an
Island. By this Breach there were 72 Villages drowned, and above 100000 Persons
perished, with all their Goods.

It Is seated upon the Merew, but so as this River is composed of the Rhene, the
Wahall, the M^^^^ and Ling^^ which all being joined in one, pass before the
Town, so as we may say it is seated upon four Rivers: the Merew, Wahall, Meuze
and Ling. It Is distant 10 Leagues from Leyden: It has a convenient Port.

Dordrecht or Dort has its name from the River Dort, and Drecht, which is a
passage over Dort; and therefore it is to be observed, that all the Towns in the
Netherlands ending in Tricht, Dricht, or Drecht (as that excellent Janus
Rutgertsius notes,) betoken a fare, or passage over; as appears by
Maestricht, Vtrecht, Swynedrecht, and other Towns.

Dort is one of the ancientest and chiefest Cities in Holland, having that
power and privilege (as Reginus Pruniensis relates) to stop and take of Toll
Wares which come down the streams, till they be sold; having been once the
Staple for Wools and Clothes, of Timber for Building houses. This is called the
Maiden-Town, because it was never taken, though often besieged.

It Is of great note in these latter times for an Assembly of Divines out of
diverse Countries following Calvin's Doctrine, for condemnation of the Lutheran
or Arminian Tenants concerning Universal Grace, Anno 1618.

This Town has power to Coin both Silver and Gold.

Gorchum
Situate on the Wael, where it meets with the Lingen; a Town of great Trade
and riches: It has a fair Church, from the Steeple whereof one may behold 22
walled towns, besides an infinite number of Villages. It Is a strong Town,
fortified with 12 Bulwarks, besides Half-Moons and Counter-scarps, and together
with that abundance of Water, as one would say it is impregnable. The River of
Lingen runs through the midst of it, being always full of Ships. It falls into
the Merew, and mingles it self with the Rivers of Wahall and Mouze; all which
together pass before Dordrecht, Rotterdam, Delf-Haven, Scheidam, and Briel,
where it falls into the British Seas.

Rotterdam
Is situate near unto the Meuze upon the mouth of the Channel, which they call
Rotter, whereunto adding Dam, which is a Sluice, it makes Rotterdam, the Sluice
of Rotter: so they are much deceived who fetch this name from Rotarius King of
France.

Without doubt the place where it now stands, was heretofore an Arm of the Sea
without the River of Meuze, which the remainder of the Banks do yet witness;
the which extended from the Castle of Honingen unto Croeswick, which was a
Castle upon the Rotter, and so went unto the Village Ouderschy, and ended at
the Ditches of Schiedam.

It Is a strong, fair, and well-traded Port; the Haven is long built, all of
blew stones, which does resist the violence of the Water. In which Haven a
great company of Ships may safely lie.

Every year there are goodly great Ships built in this Town for War and Trade;
and likewise Galleys when there is any need of them for War upon the Coast of
Holland and Zealand.

Anno 1467, the great Erasmus was here born: there is his Statue in Copper upon
the Bridge, with his Book in his Hand.

They say when he hears the Clock strike he turns a Leaf.

Anno 1270 it was first walled.

Schoon-hoven
Situate on the Leck. It Is a fair Town, having a commodious Haven: it takes
its name of the pleasant Gardens, which are both within and about it; for
Schoon signifies fair, and Hoffe Garden. There passes a Channel through this
Town which comes out of the River Yssel, very convenient to pass from one River
to another. On the other side of this Town is the great and mighty Castle of
Lysfesdman unto the Banks of the River of Leck formerly belonging unto the Duke
of Brunswick.

Goude
Is so named from Gou, a Town which lies near it; or from the river Gow which
runs through it.

It Is one of the six Principal Towns in Holland, rich, and well Fortified with
strong Walls, and deep Ditches; and by their Sluices the Country may be drowned
round about. It Is seated upon the River Yssel, which rising about Ysselsteyn,
falls into the Leck at a place called Ysselmond.

There runs a Chanel of fresh water through every street in this Town.

Anno 1272 it was built by Count Florent, and adorned with many Privileges.
It Is two leagues from Leyden, and nine English Miles from Rotterdam.

Oudewater
Is a reasonable good Town, upon the River Yssel, a League distant from
Woerden, and Montford; 'twixt which Towns they sow great abundance of Hemp,
wherewith they make Ropes, Cables, and Nets for fishing. From this Town you may
go to Goude, and by the Meuze to Rotterdam.

This Town Anno 1589 was besieged by Duke Alva, and stoutly defended it self,
but in the end was taken by Assault.

Ysselsteyn
Is a small Town, but very strong: It belongs to the Prince of Orange.

Leyden
Is called by Antoninus in his Itinerary Lugdunum, Caput Germanorum; for
anciently it was a Town of great Renown. The Roman Praetor which governed that
quarter, kept always his Residence and Garrison there; and therefore some derive
Leyden from Legio, there being a Roman Legion quartered there.

Ptolomy of Alexandria calls it (...), Lugdunum Batavorum. Plutarch makes
honorable mention of it.

It Is one of the six chief Towns in Holland, and the fourth in pre-eminence and
suffrage.

It Is the chief for that quarter of Rhin-lant, having under it 49 Towns and
Villages.

In this Town was born Hansvan-Leyden, a Cutler by trade; a monstrous
Anabaptist, who so besotted the people, that he made himself King of Munster in
Westphalia, and caused himself to be treated as a King, wearing a Crown of
Gold; and when he did go abroad, had always two Boys before him; one of which
carried a Sword, and the other a Bible: those which did not fall down and
worship him, were immediately condemned to die. He kept 14 wives, and caused
one to be killed, because she despised his inspirations.

After a years Siege by the Bishop, the City was taken, and this King and his
Councellor Knipperdoling were put into two Cages of Iron, and hung out of a
high Tower, where they ended their most miserable lives and reign. A just
reward for Rebels.

The town consists of 41 Islands, to which they pass partly by Boats, and
partly by Bridges, whereof there are 144, and of them an Hundred and four built
with Stone. Here Is a Castle said to have been built by Hengist the Saxon at his
return out of England. This City is situated at the middle of the mouth of the
River Rhene.

Anno 1574 it held out a gallant Siege; and at last the Enemies were enforced
by the overflowing of the waters to raise their Siege, though the Spaniard had
built 30 Forts to famish it; and there died about 7000 Persons in the town of
Famine and Pestilence; which made a great confusion in the town, insomuch as
the people came in great multitudes to Peter Adrianson the Burgermaster,
declaring their misery and want, and using many threatening words that he might
agree with the Enemy: but he answered them, and said, My beloved Fellow
Citizens, I have made an Oath, which I mean by the grace of God constantly to
keep: If my death, since I must die, may any ways profit you, it is all one to
me, whether you or the Enemy kill me: and therefore if this Carcass of mine
will do you any good, in Gods Name take it, cut it in pieces, and divide it
amongst you, as far as it may possibly stretch; for I shall be contented
therewith.

The Citizens were so amazed at his answer, as that they all went away without
any more words.

But certain the deliverance of this Town can be attributed to none but to God
Almighty; for though the Prince did use all means by breaking of Ditches,
drawing up of Sluices, and drowning all the Country almost to the Town, yet the
waters were not so deep as to carry Boats, until God sent a strong
South-west-winde, which drove the Sea into the Rivers and Land, that great
Boats passed afloat and victuall'd the Town: and two days after it was
victuall'd, came so strong a North-west-winde, that beat back the Sea again
from whence it came; as does appear in the History of the Netherlands.

Balder General for the King of Spain, when he raised the Siege, left in his
Lodgings the Town of Leyden pictured with her Royal Ways, Paths, and Channels of
Water, and in such manner as they were guarded and defended with Forts: and
under the Picture was written: Vale Civitas, valete Castella parva, quia
Relict a est is propter aquam, and non per vim inimicarum.


They of Leyden had a perfect hatred against the Spaniards; and therefore a
Zealander being in the Town, and having shot a Spaniard, he ripped him open,
plucked his heart out of his body, as he was half dead; and when he had knawn
it with his teeth, he cast it away from him: this knawn heart was afterward
seen in Delph by many credible people, and the very print of his teeth in it,
as it is delivered to us by good Authority.

The Fort Waddinghe, which the Spaniards had made against the town, did much
annoy the townsmen; whereupon they issued out, and took the Fort, and roasted
the Spaniards in it alive, though they cried out very lamentably, Misericordia,
misericordia.

They here printed Paper-coyn; on the one side, Haec libertatis ergo; on
the other side, Godt behoed Leyden.

Some of them wore about them in a silver Crescent these words: Rather the Turk
then a Spaniard; because the Turk paying his Tribute gives Liberty of
Conscience, but the Spaniard none.

I cannot forget one memorable Passage at this Siege. An English Gentleman here
had in a Salley his right Arm shot off with a Cannon-Bullet; he took it up, and
carried it along with him unto his Chyrurgeon at his lodging, where without
being sick or distempered, he held it in his left hand, saying; This is the Arm
which to day at Dinner served the whole Body.

There is a memorable Story, if true, which we have read in several eminent
Authors; which is thus: Anno 1316 there hap'ning a great Famine, a poor Woman
went to her own Sister that was very rich, to borrow a Loaf of Bread to save
her and her Children from starving: her Sister denied that she had any in the
house: she insisted that she had: whereupon her rich Sister fell a cursing and
swearing, praying God that if she had any, it might be turned into a Stone:
which God miraculously suffered to be done, as it is said, to the confusion of
this pitiless and wretched Woman. In St. Peter's Church in the same City, there
is one of these Loaves safely kept to this day in a place iron'd about, for a
perpetual remembrance of the strangeness of this accident.

But Anno 1575 this Town being delivered of its long and calamitous Siege, an
University was here Founded, in recompense of their great sufferings.

The chief Towns within the Territories of Leyden, are, 1 Rinsburgh, anciently
a well-Fortifi'd town within a League of it. 2 Nortvies within a Mile of the
Sea, and two Leagues of Leyden. 3 Valkenbourgh, where every September is kept a
Horse-fair. Here were the Romans Magazins and Storehouses against the English.
4 The two Catwicks. 5 Wassenere, a fair Village two Leagues from Leyden. 6
Oestgrest. 7 Warmont, a League and a half from Leyden on Harlem-side. 8
Soutervoude, a League distant from it: near it is Lam, and the Castle of
Gronestren. 9 Leyderdrope, a Village which has many Magnificent and Noble
Seats in it. 10 In Woorschoten, a fair Village not far off from Leyden, stood
that Famous Nunnery of Ramsburgh, so plentifully endowed, that 2000 Persons did
there daily receive Relief.

Here is a Hospital for poor Passengers and decayed old People, and also for
Orphans, a Noble Building: In it are ordinarily 500 Children, who are taught to
read and write, and bound Apprentices as they grow up.

Their Charity here is very great; if any be overburden'd with Children, or
undone by accident, they go to the Masters of the Poor, and receive Relief
according to their necessities. The number within this City which receive
Charity, amounts ordinarily to 20000.

Viane
Is a square town seated upon the left bank of the River Leck, a free Barony
belonging to the House of Brederode: it has a strong Castle in it.

Heusden
Is a fair Town and well built, beautified with a strong Castle, and goodly
Territories. It Is situated on Brabant-side upon the River Wahal.

There is a Fort in this Island of Hemert which defends Heusden. Near it is
Voroum, a small Town with four Bastions between Lenistein and Gorchum.

Leerdam
Is a walled Town upon the River Lyngen, which together with Ysselsteyn fell
unto Philip Prince of Orange, from the Earls of Buren. It has a strong Castle
belonging unto it.

Delfe.
So called from a Ditch, which the Batavians call Delph, which is brought from
the Meuze even to this City.

It was built by Godfrey the crooked Duke of Lorain, who had conquered Holland
by the assistance of the Bishop of Vtrecht. It has two Channels which pass
through the Town.

Anno 1536 the beauty of it was much eclipsed by Fire, but built up again
fairer then formerly it was.

In this Fire there happened so memorable an accident, that (happily) the like
has not been recorded in any Story. In this town the Storks Nest almost in
every house to breed; the Fire being the third of May, at which time the young
Storks are grown pretty big: the old ones perceiving the Fire to approach their
Nests, attempted to carry them away, but could not, they were so weighty; which
they perceiving, never ceased with their wings spread, covering them until they
all perished in the Flames. Jasper Veldius, an Author of great estimation,
reports the same in's Book of Storks.

This Town holds the third rank and suffrage for the Country of Holland. It Is
four Leagues from Leyden. Near this Town is Loresendam, a great and fair
Village: not far off it is Losdan, and Voorburg; the last a good Town.

In this Town was the Body of the Famous Hugo Grotius interred.

Anno 1584, William Prince of Orange was here shot with a Bullet by Balthazar
Gerard a Burgundian. It Is a Town of great Trade for Clothing.

It Is the Birthplace of that Monstrous Heretic, David George, who called
himself King and Christ immortal.

Gertruden-burgh
Is a strong Town, both by Nature and Art, situated on the left Bank of the
River Merew; it has a good Garrison in it: so named, as Hondius supposes, from
Geertruyd, the Daughter of Pipinus de Landen, who was a Religious Woman, and
lived here; and Anno 664 here died.

Scheidam
Has a good Haven upon the Mewze: it is situated upon a current of Water which
comes out of the Country called Schie; and from thence it takes its name.

In this place there is an Hospital called the New-dam, which has these
Privileges; that a Burger dying within or without the Town, or in the
liberties thereof, the best garment he leaves does belong unto the Hospital.

The chief Trade of this Town is Fishing, which they send into all parts.

Vlarding is hard by, a small Village, but formerly a strong Town.

Mausouluis is a fair Borough two Leagues lower.

Woerden
Is seated on a Moor, and has a strong Castle to it, and cannot be approached,
because it may be overflown round about it.

Anno 1374, this Town was built by the Bishop of Vtrecht to awe his Subjects.
In this Castle the Admiral of Aragon was kept Prisoner a great while after the
Battle of Flanders.

Worcom,
It Is beyond the River of Wahal on Brabant-side, right against the strong
Castle of Loveisteine: a little lower on the other Bank stands Gorchom: It Is
well fortified with good Ramparts, Bulwarks and Ditches. It did belong to the
Earls of Horn. Near this Town is the Castle and Territory of Altena; being in
ancient time drowned, but now it is a Country full of good Pastures, and is the
Rampart of the whole Province.

Gorcum is one of the strongest Towns in the Netherlands. It Is one of the Keys
of Holland. Famous for being a Prison to Hugo Grotius, and of the Arminian
Ministers.

The chief of the Holland-Villages is the

Hague, or Graven-Hague, in Latin Haga Comitis, because formerly the residence
of the Earls of Holland: So called, as Junius supposed, from Hagh, which
signifies a Hedge, from the many Hawthorn-Hedges that grow thereabouts.

It Is rich in Wealth, pleasant in Gardens, and stately in Buildings, having
2500 Houses; amongst which, the most magnificent is the Court built here Anno
1249 by William Earl of Holland, now the Residence of the Prince of Orange.
It Is a Castle with Ditches and Gates. It Is always guarded.

There are the Courts of Justice, the States Chamber for the Province, and for
the Union, whither all Causes are brought by Appeal, and finally determined.

Here resides the Count Fischal of Brabant, the States General, the States of
Holland and West-Friesland, the Council of State, the Masters of the Chamber of
Accounts of Holland, the Council of War: every of these have their several
Chambers. Hard by there is a Park 1501 Paces long* Princes, Earls, Lords, all
sorts of people walk here, and take the pleasure and profit of the place.

Not far from it you come to shady Walks, which have at once the reverence and
content of Heaven. If you please to walk a little further, you will see all
Europe floating on the one hand by water, and carried on the other by Land, to
this great Mart of Christendom for Trade and Intelligence.

It Is no walled Town, neither do the Inhabitants desire it; for they had rather
have it accounted the chief Village in Europe, then the second City.

Not far from it is Hontstardick, where the last Prince of Orange built a most
stately House, beautified with Walks and Galleries.

Riisuick is another fair Village: there the same Prince has another House in
a very pleasant situation amongst Meadows; and it is a noble Prospect to those
which come from Delft.

Anno 1574, at Scheveling near the Hague the Sea brake in, and carried away 121
Houses, as it is to be seen recorded upon a Picture in the Church.

The other Villages of Note are, 2 Egmond. 3 Brederode. 4 Wassenare, which is a
fair and beautiful Town, two Leagues from Leyden: from hence the noble Family
of the Wassemers fetched their Original. They pretend to be descended from that
Noble and Famous Captain Claudius Civilis, of whom Tacitus makes honorable
mention. From them are descended the Duvenvords, the Warmonds, the Bouchorts,
the Polanes, the Malenesses; all the flower of the Dutch Nobility.

The three forementioned Towns anciently gave names to three ancient Families;
of which none so illustrious and renowned as that of Egmond, descended lineally
from Radbolt, Son of Agillis the King of the Frisons.

They were made Earls of Egmond by Maximilian the Emperor, Anno 1592.

Thierry of Aquitaine, the first Earl of Holland, built an Abbey for Monks near
unto Egmond, enriched with great Revenues.

In the year 1565, the Prince of Orange, the Earl of Horn, and the Baron of
Brederode went with the Earl of Egmond to Dine in this Abbey: when they were to
wash, my Lord Abbot, (who was but a Monk) took the three Noblemen by the hands
to wash; the Earl of Egmond coming to present himself, the Abbot said unto him;
No; for you are my Vassal, it becomes you not to wash with your betters; yea,
he offered to put the Towel upon his shoulder, to give it to the other Noblemen
when they had washed: whereat the Earl was much discontented, and went away.

Brederode is descended from Ziphard the second son of Arnulph the third Earl
of Holland and Zealand, who to avoid his Fathers displeasure, retired into
Friesland, and married the Potestates Daughter of the Country, by whom he had
two Sons; but being afterward reconveyed to his Father, he had certain Lands
allotted him for his Portion, which were measured by the great Rod, the which
in the Country-Language is Brederode, from whence they take their name.

Besides those Towns on the firm Land or Continent, there are some Islands
which appertain to the States of Holland, called by the General name of Voorn,
signifying as much as before, or in old English bevorne, but known now directly
by their proper Names: 1 Somerdike. 2 Gaurede. 3 Pierschille, so called of
their principal Towns. 4 Voorn specially so named, and chief of them all.

The principal Towns hereof, are, 1 Briel, which we call the Brill; a strong
Town, and the first that revolted from the Spaniards, Anno 1572. A Cautionary
Town to the English, with the Town of Flushing; chosen by them in regard of the
great Command it has upon the passage to Gertrudenburg, and the rest of
Brabant; and also to Delf, Dort, and Rotterdam, the greatest Town of Trade in
the South of Holland.

Breheel, or Brehil, is as much as to say Brede-Heel; that is, a Broad River;
for Heile signifies a River: on the right side of it, the Maes receives the
Rhene into it, and falls into the main Ocean.

Geruliet
Is a small Town, but has Jurisdiction over many Villages.

There are also on the Northside of Holland the Isles Vierengen and Texel; of
which little is memorable, but that the last is furnished with a large and
capacious Bay for receipt of Shipping.

Goeree
Is situated in a little Island, and has as good and deep a Road as any in
Holland, where great Ships which go long Voyages cast Anchor, attending their
last Provision and a good Wind.

The Garrisons of Wonde and Hulst, and also Hellevoetsluys opposite unto it,
which is the Sluice of the Island of Voorn on that side toward the Sea; whereas
Brill lies on the other side, upon the Gulf of the River which is called the
Mewze.

Beverwyck,
A Burg two Leagues from Harlem, upon the River Ty, not above two Miles distant
from the Sea: this and Reensburg were in former times reckoned amongst the
strongest and fairest Towns in all this Province.

Scage,
A good Burg, and well built, in which there is a strong Castle.

Of ZEALAND.
ZEaland consists of seven Islands, the remainder of ^8: the rest whereof the
Sea has swallowed, and in them 300 inhabited Towns.

It Is severed from Flanders with the West-Branch or Arm of the Scheldt, which
the Battavians call Honte: and on the East from Brabant with the right Branch
of the said River, which still keeps its name; on the North from Holland with
the Gulf called the Vlack; and on the West with the main Ocean from the Kingdom
of England.

Zealand is so called, as Levinus Lemnius thinks, from Sea and Land, which
invironeth it round about: and with him agree Guicciardine, and Jo.
Keygersberg. But as Adrianus Junius rather thinks, from Zeeland an Island in
Denmark, as before we observed.

The whole contains eight Towns and 100 Villages. The Islands which remain, are
commonly divided into the Eastern and Western, according as they lie to the
River Scheldt.

These Islands are encompassed with strong high Banks, made with such infinite
charge, that Emanuel de Meeter says they cost above 140000 l. sterling; so the
expense to maintain them must be very great.

The Western Islands are four in Number.

Walcheren lies to the North of the Sluice in Flanders, the richest and most
populous of all this Province. It Is in compass 10 Dutch Miles, or 40 Italian.
The principal Towns whereof are

Middleburgh,
Seated on a creek off on the Sea, well walled and fortified; the Streets
spacious, the Houses and Churches well built; inhabited by wealthy Merchants
and industrious Tradesmen: so called, because built in the midst of the Island.
It Is a quarter of a League from Arnemuyden.

Flushing,
Of great Note for its good Port and invincible strength, one of the first
Towns which the Low Countrymen took from the Spaniards, by the diligence of
Voorst a Sea man, and Monsieur de Berland then Bailiff thereof; and not long
after put into the hands of the English as a Town of Caution: A poor Town then
it was, now the Key of the Netherlands; without whose license no Ship can pass
either to or from the City of Antwerp: insomuch as if the Duke of Alva, in the
beginning of his Government, had bestowed that pains in the fortifying of this
and the other Martime Towns, as he did in the strengthening Antwerp, and some
midland Cities, he had in all probability hindered the Revolt of those
flourishing Countries.

It Is situate right against Flanders, and a Mile from Middleburgh. There are
three goodly Bulwarks toward the Land, and one to the Sea, which defend the
Haven on that side, flanking it at the Port.

They have made a new Haven there, and built a Church for the English.

It Is also a Marquisate belonging to the Prince of Orange, as La Vere.

Ramne, or Arnemuyden,
A walled Town, beautified with one of the goodliest, and most frequented
Havens in Europe; out of which one may sometimes see 500 sail of Ships of great
burden set forward on their Voyage to several parts.

Anno 1574 'twas yielded to the Prince of Orange.

Veer, or Camp-veere,
A very Famous Sea-Town, and exceeding strong, having many Staples for Herrings
and other Commodities here: it belonged to the Prince of Orange. From hence
came that illustrious and most noble Family of the Veeres, now Earls of Oxford.

By Maximilian Duke of Burgundy and Lord of it, was made a Marquisate. It has
ample Jurisdiction, and nine Villages depend upon it.

Rammeken or Zeeburgh,
Built upon the Dike between Middleburgh and Flushing, serving for a Bulwark
for all Ships, which for want of good wind are forced to come and Anchor in
this Road.

This Castle is always well Manned and Garrisoned, with all things necessary
for a place of such Importance.

This was one of the Cautionary Towns delivered to Queen ELIZABETH.

There are in this Island many good Towns.
East and West-Suyburgh,
A quarter of a League one from the other betwixt Flushing and Middleburgh: at
West-Suyburgh there is a good Castle.

South-Beverland,
Situate betwixt Walcheren and Brabant, the greatest of the Isles of Zealand;
heretofore 20 Dutch Miles in compass, but now much diminished by the rage and
fury of the Sea; by which the Town and Seignory of Borhule, with all the
Country round about it, was swallowed up, Anno 1532.

The chief Towns here are Romerswal, seated on the East toward
Bergen-Op-Zoome, severed at the same time from the rest of the Island, and made
an Island of it self defended with continual charge from following the sad Fate
of the Town of Bursule, distant about a League from Bergen-Op-Zoome.

Goes, or Tergoes,
On the Northern Coast, a strong Town, and well Priviledg'd, and the only
walled in all the Island. It has a good Haven, at the mouth whereof there are
two Forts, one of either side, so as nothing can pass without Discovery.

Not far off are Cloelingen, Cruyningen, Zeateskerke, Capelle, Catton-dike, and
other Villages.

North-Beverland
Lying betwixt South-Beverland and the Isle of Schowen, in former times
esteemed the Paradise of Zealand, but so destroyed by Sea-breach, that there is
now nothing remaining but a few poor Villages. It Is the Patrimony of the Prince
of Orange.

Anno 1532 by Inundation there perished the Towns of Cortgreen, Catts, Campen,
Well, Emitesse, and others; but since recovered.

Wolferdike
Lying between the two Beverlands, the smallest of the Western Islands, as
having in it no more then three Villages, Wolferdike, Sabinglye, Habersdike;
but replenished with good store of Pasture.

The Eastern Islands are three in Number.
Schowen,
Lying on the South-West of Holland, so near unto North-Beverland in former
times, that the Inhabitants could talk together from one Shore to the other;
but now the Sea has set them at a greater distance. It contains about eight
Leagues in Circuit.

The chief Towns herein are,

Zirick zee,
The ancientest Town in all Zealand, and the greatest except Middleburgh; once
beautified with a fair and commodious Haven, now choked up with Beech; yet
still reputed for the second of all the Province.

It was built Anno 845 by one Zerick, from whence it was so named.

Brouwers-Haven,
A very strong Haven, inhabited only by Fishermen. It Is two Leagues distant
from Zirick-zee.

Here was born William Burckeld, who first invented the way of pickling
Herrings, and he died at Bieverlet, Anno 1347.

Charles the Fifth, Emperor, went one day to see his Tomb, in acknowledgment
of the service he had done his Country.

Duveland,
So named from the multitude of Doves and Pigeons, situate between Schoven and
Tolen. It Is in compass about four Dutch Miles. It has no good Town in it, but
only Country-Villages. Anno 1530 surrounded by the Sea, but by the industry and
charge of the people recovered.

Tolen, so called from the chief Town of the Island, where the Earls Toll was
wont to be paid; whence it had the name. It Is situate over against the
North-west of Brabant, from thence disjoined by a narrow Creek, or arm of the
Sea. It Is wholly environed with good Trenches, and some Forts, fearing the
irruption of the Spaniards, who twice or thrice have attempted to get Footing.
There is but one Chanel to pass upon Brabant-side.

St. Martins Dike, the second Town of Note, but not otherwise considerable, is
the Inheritance of the Prince of Orange: joining unto it is a little Island
called Philips-Land.

WEST-FRIESLAND
Has on the East Groeningland, and a part of Westphalen in High Germany; on
the South Overyssel and the Zuyder-See; on the North and West the main Ocean.
It has its name from Friso the first Prince of it, and the Inhabitants
Frisons, as Ptolomy and Tacitus term them; saying they are Germans, and People
from beyond the Rhene, whom Pliny calls Cauches, which are the Aborigines of
that place.

The Number of the walled Towns, are 11. Villages 345.

The Country is divided into three Parts.

The first Part called Westergoe, lying toward Holland.

The Principal Towns are

Harlingen,
A Haven-Town upon the Ocean, defended with a very strong Castle. It Is the best
Haven in all Friesland, and it is a League from Franiker. It has two Channels
coming from the Sea, which pass through the Town.

Hindelopen on the same Coast also,
It was first a place for Hunting when Friesland was half Forest. It comes
from Hinden, and Loopen, which is to run. It Is a course and recourse for Staggs
and Hindes. It Is a considerable place for Navigation.

Staveren,
A Hanse-Town: It Is fortified with a strong Castle, which secures the Haven. It
stands upon the Sea on the South Side, on the entry of the Gulf of Zuyder-see,
at the point which looks toward Holland, almost opposite to the passage of
Enchuysen, half a League from Hinderlopen upon the same Shore. No doubt but
heretofore it has been a very rich and mighty Town; but by the inundation of
the Sea it is much lessened. It Is a long and narrow Town, and fortified with
Ramparts and Bulwarks. Here lived the people which Pliny called Sturii, from
whence all Friesland was sometimes called Regnum Stauriae; from hence this Town
had its name.

Franiker,
An University, or a Schola Illustris, as they call it: It Is two Leagues
distant from Leuwarden, and one from Harlingen. It Is one of the most ancient
and renowned Towns in Friesland. It draws many Scholars thither from all parts,
even out of Poland and France.

Snelk,
A Town for largeness and beauty the best in this Province, and the second in
esteem of all the Country. It Is three Leagues from Leuwarden, and one from Ilst.

Sloten,
A Town near unto the Gulf of the Zuyder see, lying on the South-part upon the
Sea, a league and half from Staveren.

Ilst
Stands upon the West half a League from Snelk; upon the North-West a League
from Bolswaert; on the South as far from Sloten. It Is environed with a large
Ditch, which may defend it from the invasion of Enemies.

Bolswaerdt,
It Is a free Hanse-Town, a League distant from Snelk, Ilst and Worcom; a League
and a half distant from Hindelopen, and two Leagues from Staveren.

It Is a Town well fortified with Ports, Ramparts, Bulwarks, and otherwise. It
has a passage to the Sea by the Sluice of Mackum a League from thence, where
the Ships of the said Town lie as safely as in a good Haven.

Anno 1713, this Town was built by the Lady Bolswyne, Daughter to Radbod King
of Friesland.

Ostergoe
On the East part, lying toward Groningland: the Towns of most Note are

Leuwarden,
Situate on the hinder Leewart, the prime Town of all West-Friesland, and
honored with the supreme Court and Chancery hereof, from which there lies no
Appeal. A rich Town, well built, and strongly fortified. It Is two Leagues from
Franiker: this Town has under its Jurisdiction 17 good Villages.

Here is also the Mint for Money for the whole Country, both for Gold and
Silver, according to the order which the Deputies of the Estates shall set
down; the which notwithstanding is subject to the Generals of the Mints of all
the United Provinces when need requires. A League from this Town is the Village
Zuychen.

Dockum,
Bordering upon Groening. It Is five Leagues distant from it, and eight from
Franiker, and six Miles from Leuwarden, having a Chanel which goes into the
Sea, and another which leads unto Groaning. They may go easily from this town by
Boat to all the towns in Friesland, and by Sea to all parts of the world. It
suffered much in the late Wars. It Is the second town in all the Quarter of
Ostergoe.

Seven-Wolden, or the Country of the Seven Forests,

So called from so many small Forests joining near together, not well Inhabited
until of late.

To this Province belongs the Isles of Amelandt Schellink; the Shores whereof
are plentifully stored with Dog-fish, took by the Inhabitants in this manner:

The men of the Island attire themselves with Beasts skins, and then fall to
dancing; with which sport the Fish being much delighted, make out of the waters
toward them: Nets being pitched presently 'twixt them and the water; which
done, the men put off their Disguises, and the frighted Fish hastening toward
the Sea are caught in Toyl^*

There is a good P^^^on of Ground which is called the Bildt. It Is well defended
with Ditches from the Sea, and the fertilest quarter in all Friesland.

VTRECHT.
UTrecht has on the East Gelderland; on the West, North, South, environed with
Holland.

It Is named from the Roman Armies which lay by the Rhene, as Munster
conceives: for in that place where the City of Vtrecht now stands, the 35th
Legion was quartered, which was thus written by abbreviation: V. Trig. Leg.
stat. that is, the Station or Quarter of the 35th Legion. But the three Letters
LEG* were by Antiquity worn out. Those that were ignorant of the Latin Tongue,
reading these words together which should have been divided, did pronounce it
Vtrigstat: afterward this word Vtrigstat was changed into Vtrecht.

It contains 70 Villages, and five walled Towns; that is to say

Wickter-Duyrsted,
Situate on the middle Chanel of the Rhene, where it diverts into the Leck;
well built, and fortified with a good Castle. It formerly had 32 Parish
Churches in it. The Princes and Bishops did here keep their Courts. Tacitus
makes honorable mention of this Town, calling it Batavodurum.

Rhenen
Upon the same Branch or Chanel, whence it has its name: it is five Leagues
from Vtrecht, and as many from Arnhem and Gelders. It Is a great passage toward
Deventer, Zutphen, Doesburgh, and other places as well in Gelders as Cleve, or
to Colen, or to any place where they shall please in Germany.

Amersfort
On the River Ems, a fair Town and well peopled; there is a little Town all
walled about in the midst of it. It Is very strong with Ramparts, and Bulwarks
flanking one another, and large Ditches. It Is three Leagues from Vtrecht,
standing upon a little River which they call Do.

Montfort
Upon the Yssel, pleasantly seated, and of great strength, as being anciently a
Frontier-Town against the Hollanders. It Is a league in equal distance from the
towns Woorden, Oudewater, and Ysselsteyn.

Vtrecht
Is situate on the middle Chanel of the Rhene; first called Antonina, from one
of the Anthonies at Rome: But Dagobert King of France gave it the name of
Trajectum, or Vltrajectum, because there was at that time the common Ferry over
the River.

This City is large, beautiful, and sumptuously built, having in it many goodly
Churches; of which, Five were Anciently Collegiate; namely, our Saviors
Church, St. Martins, St. Peter's, St. John's and St. Mary's: but the most
magnificent is that of St. Martins; it was built by the Emperor Frederick.
'Twas strange that at the Foundation of this Church there was a Quick-sand
found, on which they could not build, but that it would still sink: At length,
they cast Oxe-hides into it, which made the ground solid and firm, so that they
built the Church on it. In remembrance whereof, these Verses were made, and now
extant in the Church.

Accipe Posteritas quod post tua saecula narres,
Taurinis cutibus fundo solidata columna est.
It has a fair strong Castle built by the Emperor Charles the fifth, and
called in their speech, Vredenburgh. The private Houses are well contrived;
most of them having goodly Cellars, vaulted with wonderful art and skill; to
which the People did resort in all times of danger. Sometimes the Seat-Royal of
Radbolt the King of the Frisons, then of the Bishops.

A City so eminently seated amongst walled Towns, that a man may go from hence
in one day to any one of 50 walled Towns or Cities thence equally distant, or
to any one of twenty six towns to Dinner, and come home to Bed.

Betwixt Vtrecht and Leyden is that famous and most noble Castle of Abcoude.

Here was born Pope Adrian the sixth; he was Doctor of both Laws, and
Schoolmaster to Charles the fifth.

Anno 1522 he was chosen Pope, and being in Spain, he receiving the news
thereof, he made no show of joy; being anointed, he would not change his name.
He lived but 20 months and some days after, in continual trouble and grief of
mind.

His Epitaph was: Hadrianus Sextus hic situs est, qui nihil sibi infelicius in
vita duxit, quam quod imperaret.

The Estate of Vtrecht was so great anciently, that the Bishop or Prince
thereof could come into the Field with 40000 armed Men of his own Subjects, and
maintain them.

But the Bishop being envied for his great Revenues, and for that the Duke of
Gelders made continual War upon him, He Anno 1522 resigned the Temporalities
thereof to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, as Duke of Brabant, and Earl of
Holland, that he might have the protection of so great a Monarch to defend him
and his Subjects from their Enemies, and to the end he might quietly enjoy his
Ecclesiastical Estate. Which Donation was afterward confirmed by the Pope, and
his Subjects did then Homage to him as Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Holland:
and the Bishop did finely discharge them of their Oath which they had made to
him. Of which Estate of Vtrecht the Emperor made two Provinces; that is to
say, of Overyssel and Vtrecht; which make the number of 17 Provinces in the
Netherlands.

OVERYSSEL,
SO named from its situation beyond the Yssel. It Is bounded on the East with
Westphalen; on the West with the Zuyder-see; on the North with West-Friesland;
on the South with Gelderland.

It Is divided into three parts; that is to say, Twent, confining with
Westphalen; Ysselland, on the River Yssel; and Drent, beyond the River Vecht:
in all which are contained 11 Towns, and 100 Villages.

The Principal of which, are Deventer.
It Is an Imperial Hanse-Town, situated on the River Yssel, three Leagues from
Zutphen, and four from Swoll; the chief Town of all this Province, first taken
for the States by the Earl of Leicester, then Governor of those Countries for
Queen ELIZABETH, Anno 1586.

Their Trade here is great, as well by Land to Westphalia, and other places of
Germany, as by the River Yssel; which on one side mounts up the Rhene unto
Colen, and descends down before Campen to the Zuyder-see, unto Amsterdam, Horn,
Enchuysen, and other Towns of Holland and Friesland.

It Is wonderfully Fortified with Ramparts and Bulwarks; besides that it always
had a double Wall of Brick round about it.

In former times, when matters succeeded not well in the Diocese of Vtrecht,
the Bishops retired themselves thither; as we read of the Bishop named
Baldrick, who to fly the fury of the Normans and Danes which ruined the Town of
Vtrecht, retired with all his Clergy to this town.

Swoll
Is an Imperial Hanse-town, standing on a River which runs into the Vidre,
Fortified with double Walls, double Ditches, and very strong Ramparts and
Bulwarks; a Place of great Traffic It has two Channels which pass through it.
It Is the third Town of this Province. It Is three Miles from Campen.

Campen
Situate on the West-shore and Fall of the Yssel into the Zuyder-see A fair,
large and Imperial Hanse-town, well Fortified, and of very great strength, by
reason of those inaccessible Marshes amongst which it is situated. It has a
goodly Bridge upon the River; at the end whereof there is a goodly Fort to
defend it; by which Bridge they may go both on Horseback, Wagon, or Foot, to
all the Towns of Overyssel, Friesland, and Groaning; or else if they please, by
the Channels which run through the Country. Merchants and Workmen with a good
wind may go in one night to Amsterdam; and going from thence at night after
dispatch of business, may be again the next day at their own Houses; which is a
great commodity. It Is the second Town in this Province: the Burgers can put it
under water when they please; which is a great security to it.

These three Towns are in that part hereof which is called Ysselland. In that
part which is called Twent, we have the Town of

Enschede,
A Town of good Traffic, a League from Oldenzel, and two from Otmarsum. Anno
1597, 'twas reduced to the obedience of the States by Prince Maurice, and 'twas
much ruined.

Of which little memorable.
Delden Almeto
Stenwick,
It Is situated on a Brook called Blocker-zyel. It suffered two great Sieges in
the late Belgic Wars, and did undergo a sad Fate; but since is much recovered,
and is a Town of good Trade, and of considerable strength: it is three Miles
from Meppel.

Hassel
Is seated upon the River Vidre, which runs into the Zuyder-see at Gheelmuyden,
being mingled with the two Rivers of Regg and Vect. It Is well Fortified.

Otmarsum,
A Town which did three times taste the fruits of the Wars, as well by Siege as
otherwise. It Is a place of no great strength, lying in an open Country: but
Anno 1592 taken by Prince Maurice.

In Latin this Town is called veteros Marsii, which are the old Marsians whom
Pliny and Livie do often mention, being seated in the Country of the
Tubantines, which is now Tuent.

Oldenzeel
Is a Town of good Trade, and reasonable great. It suffered much by a long
Siege Anno 1605, being beleaguered by Marquess Spinola, to whom 'twas yielded
for Archduke Albert: But Anno 1567 'twas retaken by Prince Maurice. It Is three
Miles from Otmarsum.

Coewarden
Is a place of good strength. Anno 1593 'twas strongly defended against Count
Harman van Borgh and Veedugo, who beleaguered it. From hence you may go by Land
into Friesland, the Counties of Groaning, Westphalia, Breme, and other places.
It Is about three Miles from Hardenburgh, 15 from Linge, 15 from Swoll.

There are many other Towns here; but whosoever is Master of the Field, is
Master of them.

And in that of Drent, the Town and Castle of Valenhoven, standing upon the
Zuyder-see, and two Leagues from Stenwick. It suffered much in the Wars, but
since is repaired and well fortified.

Gheelmuyden
Stands upon the gulf of Vidre toward the Zuyder-see. It Is a league distance
from Valenhoven, and as much from Hassel: it has toward the Land, the
pleasant Pastures of Mastubroouck, a league distant from Campen. It has a
strong Castle in it.

Hardenbergh,
A good Town upon the River Beecht: the Bishops of Vtrecht took great delight
in it, by reason of the pleasantness of the Seat. It has a very strong Castle.
It Is the midway between Coewarden, and Ommen.

The Sovereignty of this Province before the War in the Netherlands, did belong
unto Philip the second King of Spain, who succeeded the Emperor Charles the
fifth his Father; who had the interest confirmed by the Pope, from Henry of
Bavaria Bishop of Vtrecht.

GELDERLAND,
SO called from the Castle of Gelder, as Munster conceives, which Wichard of
Ponthe, together with his Brother, are reported to have built; though many do
suppose that it was so called from the Town Geldens, which Tacitus mentions.

It Is bounded on the East with Cleveland, and the Earldom of Zutphen; on the
West with Holland and Vtrecht; on the North with Overyssel and the Zuyder-see;
on the South with Brabant and the Land of Gulick.

The whole Country is divided into two parts.

1. Veluwe, contained within the Zuyder-see and the Yssel.

2. Betewe, intercepted 'twixt the middle Chanel of the Rhene and the Wael.

In both Divisions are contained 22 walled Towns or Cities, and 300 Villages.
The chief whereof are

Nimmegen,
A Town high mounted on the top of a Hill; the Wael, which is there large and
deep running at the Foot of the Hill: rich, great, and populous, having beside
the modern Fortifications, an Ancient Castle, with so goodly a Prospect, that
from thence one may behold the best part of the Country; built, as some say,
by Julius Caesar, to command those parts. The Castle was re-edified by B^tto,
and by him was the Town likewise encompassed with Walls: he being dead, his Son
Hesus augmented it, by adding thereto that quarter which is called Heselbergh,
or the hele of Hesus: which Town the Kings that succeeded him caused to be the
Metropolis of Battavia or Holland, as we read in Gerrard of Nimmegen. This Town
was Founded by Magus King of the Gauls, who called it after his own name Magus;
but being deceased, it was rebuilt by ^^^to: s^nc^ which time it has been
called Nimmegen, that is, New-megen, (...) Nemmeghen.

Anno 1592 it came under the obedience of the States, being taken by Prince
Maurice.

The States have built a mighty Fort, called Knotsenburgh on the other Bank of
the River of Wael, opposite to the Town, which is a great security to it.

Tiel
Is chief of Tyelweerd: it was formerly a Peninsula, but since the last Wars a
Chanel has been cut through the Country to sail from the River of Mewze into
the Wahal, upon the right Bank whereof the said Town is built: by which means
the said Tyelweerd is now made an Island; for there is no entrance into it but
by water, or through the Town. It Is very strong by Nature and Art.

Anno 1528 it was besieged by the Emperor; but was so stoutly defended, that
they were enforced to raise their Siege. It has many rich towns under its
Jurisdiction. It Is a strong Place, and well fortified.

Bomel
Is a fair strong Place, the chief Town of all the Territory of Bomel-weerd,
which the Rhene and Mewze do encompass and make it an Island. It Is a
Frontier-town upon the confines of Gelderland toward the South, and stands
upon the River Wael on the North-side of Bomel. It Is exceeding strong by
Nature. It was first walled by Otho.

The River Wael does not only make Bomel commodious for Traffic, but
impregnable on the North-side, and free from all Invasion.

The Country about it is very low, and not only unfit for Mines, but for
continuance of any long Siege; for in Winter, by reason of great Waters, and
overflowing of Rivers, it enforces the Enemy to leave the Field. Besides its
natural strength, it has been ever well fortified with Bulwarks and Towers,
and is environed with a double Rampire and Ditch. It has many rich Towns under
its Jurisdiction.

Anno 1599 'twas beleaguered by D. Francisco de Mendoza High Admiral of
Arragon, but was enforced to raise his Siege with much loss and dishonor,
after he had begirt it 20 days.

The taking of this Town opens a Passage into Holland, Vtrecht, and the heart
of Gelderland. The Fort of Voorn and Crevecoeur makes the Town impregnable,
with Hewsden a strong town, and seated within an hours journey of Bomel, and
within two Leagues of Boisleduke.

Ghent
Situate on the Wael, not far off. At the first meeting of the Wael and the
Maes, stands the strong Fort of St. Andrews, raised by the Archduke Albert, to
command the passage of those Rivers. But in the year 1600 taken in by Maurice
Count of Nassau (after Prince of Orange) and ever since Garrisoned by the
States to secure that Passage. It Is the most Noble and strongest Fort in all
the Netherlands. It Is comprehended in five Bulwarks, whereof three are upon the
Banks of the Mewze and Wahal, and the two other toward Haerwarden; either of
them having a platform to defend it, with broad and deep Ditches, without the
which is a Counter-scarp, the which has also a Ditch round about it, and small
Forts to warrant it.

Ruermond,
Situate on the mouth of Ruer. Mondt in Dutch signifies a mouth or entrance;
and so of that word and Ruer is derived Ruermondt, as many others are in that
Country: As Dendermond in Flanders, Isselmond in Holland, etc.

It Is five Leagues from Maestricht, three from Venlo. It Is a rich and populous
Town, both by Nature and Art, full of Fortifications, Ramparts and Bulwarks.
Under the Jurisdiction of Ruermond are comprehended Venlo, Gelder, Straten,
Wachtendonck, and Erckelam; all walled and strong Towns, with those Boroughs of
Montfort, Vucht, Nieustadt, Kessel, Middeter, and Greytenberck.

Kessel stands a League from Ruermond: a goodly Village, with a strong Castle
built upon a Mountain. It Is called by Ptolomy, Castelleum; and he makes it the
Metropolis of the Menapians.

Venloe,
A strong Town on the Maes: the people are Martial, and have in former times
resisted an Imperial Army. It Is half a League from Shalen, and three Leagues
from Ruermond.

In this Town the Duke of Cleve, having lost all his Duchy of Cleve, and a
great part of Juliers, yielded himself to Charles the fifth, Anno 1543.

Gelder,
Heretofore of such Reputation, that it gave Name to all the Country. It Is
within two leagues of Shalen. It has a good Castle, and strong Fortifications.

Strael, or Stralen,
A strong and well Fortified Town. It Is a League and a half from Wachtendonck.

Arnhem,
Called by Tacitus and other Authors Arenacum: It Is a large and well built
Town. It Is seated upon the right Bank of the River Rhene, half a League from
Issel-Dort.

It was the ordinary Residence heretofore of the Dukes of Gelders, who had here
their Chancery, and other Supreme Courts of Justice, established here, Anno
1543 by Charles the fifth.

This is the third Capital City of Gelderland; and had under it is Jurisdiction,
besides diverse Villages,

Wageninghen:
It Is a strong Town seated on the Rhene. It Is on all sides compassed with
Moors and Boggs, which makes it inaccessible. It Is equally distant from Arnhem
and Nimmegen, and four Leagues from Culemburg.

Harderwick,
On the Zuyder-see, burnt to the Ground Anno 1503, but since reedified, and now
more strong and beautiful then ever formerly. The Haven is bad, so as the Ships
are forced to lie in the Road.

Hattum,
Upon the Yssel, a good Town, and has a strong Castle, the Walls whereof are
24 Foot thick.

Within the Limits of this Dukedom, stands the Town and Country of Culemburg:
It Is seated upon the bank of the River Leck, a League from Buren, and two from
Vianen, on the same side of the River. It has a goodly Castle in it. It was
erected into a Dukedom by King Philip the Second, by reason of the fair
Territory which belonged unto it.

Montford
Is a Castle of importance; a small Town. It lies a League from Ruermond.

Wachtendonck,
A small Town with a Castle in it. Anno 1588 taken by the Duke of Parma: but
Anno 1600 Count Lodowick surprised it for the States. It Is very considerable by
reason of its situation.

Battenbourg
Is a Town of great Antiquity, with a noble Castle. It being the first Castle
which King Battus did build upon the Mewze in the County of the Sicambrians,
which now is Gelders.

The Baron of this place did make a great Revenue of the Toll and Custom which
is paid by all Ships that pass that way. From Batto, Batavia took its name. He
was descended of the Catts, people of Germany, of whom Tacitus makes
honorable mention; For Batavia signifies the Inheritance of Batto, as one
should say Battos-haur; for Haur in the Dutch-language signifies Heritage.
Pliny calls this Isle, The most Noble Isle of Batto.

Tacitus, who was Commissary for Gaul Belgique, makes mention of Claudius
Civilis descended from Batto, issued from a Royal Branch of the Catts: from
whom the ancient Town of Catwick had its Name; for wic signifies either a Town,
or a Castle; the Town or Castle of Catts. And it is observed, that those Towns
which end in Wic, are the most Ancient and most Honorable. This Batto was a
great Patron of the Country, a Person of much Honor and Gallantry. The Romans
laying great Impositions upon the Batavians, he advised them to take up Arms
against them; which, he being their Generalissimo, they did; and did much
disable the Roman Forces: insomuch, as Tiberius Caesar coming to a Treaty with
him, and demanding of him why he had stirred the People to so long and bloody a
War; he answered, That the Romans themselves were the cause, in that they had
sent them Wolves for their Guardians, not Dogs and Shepherds. This and much
more is reported by Dion, a Roman Historiographer, in his 55 and 56 Book.

ZVTPHEN,
It Is bounded on the East with Westphalen; on the West with that part of
Gelderland which is called the Veleuwe; on the North with Overyssel; on the
South with Cleveland.

It contains eight walled Towns, besides many Villages: that is to say,

Dortecum
On the Overyssel, rising out of Westphalen. It Is a League from Doesburgh; a
good Town, with a double Wall about it.

Doesburgh,
Seated on the Yssel.

Bronckhorst,
A County of it self. It Is within a League of Zutphen, seated upon the right
side of the River Yssel. A strong Castle in it, and a Garrison.

Lochem,
Upon the River Berckel; it is two Leagues from Zutphen, well Fortified and
strong.

Heremburgh,
A good Town with a strong Castle. It Is a League and a half from Dortecum.

Groll,
Taken by the Prince of Orange for the States Confederates, Anno 1627. It is a
strong Town walled in with Ramparts and Bulwarks, having broad and deep
Ditches, Fortified with Casemates and Counterscarps. It Is two Leagues from
Bredefort.

Bredefort,
A small Town with a Castle: it is situate in a Moor, which there is but one
passage to come unto. It Is upon a Causey, so as it is of hard Access. Anno 1597
it was taken by Prince Maurice.

ZVTPHEN, or ZVYDFEN,
SO called, of the South situation of it among the Fens, on the right shore of
Yssel, where it receives to it the River Borthel which runs through the Town.
It has been twice or thrice taken and re-taken by the Spaniards and States,
but has contined in the possession of the States since the year 1591 it was
taken by the Earl of Leicester for the States. Here fell that Gallant Gentleman
Sir PHILIP SIDNEY.

Keppel
Is a small Town of no importance, half a League from Doesburgh.

Burg
Not much better then Keppel: it is a League from Doesburgh.

GRONINGEN-LAND
Has on the East, East-Friesland; on the West, West-Friesland; and on the
North, the Main Sea; on the South, Overyssel. It contains under it, the Country
called the Ommelands, corruptly for Emmelands, as I conjecture; because lying
along the River Ems; and therein 145 Villages. The chief whereof are

Dam,
Near the Ems bordering on the East-Friesland. It Is two Leagues from Groaning.

Keykirk Old-Haven,
Standing on the Sea.

For the Town of Groaning it self, it is rich, great, and very well built,
situate amongst diverse small streams, which run through it; and having diverse
Channels for conveyance of waters which adds much to its safety and strength.
This Town has two small Rivers, Huneso, and Aha, coming out of the Country of
Drenthe, through the Ommelands; the which compassing about the Town, meet in
the Suburbs, which is called Schayten-dyep; from whence passing by the town of
Dam with other small Brooks which join there, they fall by the Sluices of
Delf-ziel into the Dullart, which is of the River Ems, by the which all Ships
both great and small take their course to join with the greater, which Anchor
upon the Dullart, and so to go from thence to the Sea.

This City is strongly fortified with Ditches and Trenches. A Town of great
Jurisdiction both within and without, judging without Appeal in Cases Civil and
Criminal.

Anno 1594 it was taken by the Prince of Orange.

Some hold that the name of this Town was given by Grunnius, issued from the
Blood of the Kings of Friesland, which was the Founder of it: but being seated
in a pleasant Soil and goodly Pastures, it is so called from the greenness
thereof; this word Groen signifying green, ingen being an Adjective which makes
up the word; as Fine-lingen and others.

This City is ennobled with many Privileges, as, that no King, Prince, or
Commonwealth, can call any Burger or Citizen out of this City, into justice,
nor cause him to be cited or adjourned before any Court, but only before the
Senate or his Ordinary Judge.

No man can appeal from any Sentence that is given here, either in Civil or
Criminal Causes.

They may make Laws, and abrogate them at pleasure, without the authority of
any Person.

The Ommelands are divided into three Quarters: 1. The Feuelingo. 2. Himsing.
3. The West quarter.

They have many Privileges here in their places of Judgment, which they call
their Gretonies or Bailiwicks.

Delfzyel
Is a great and mighty strong Fort, in Form of a Town.

We have given you a short view of the Towns and Forts which the States General
hold in these Provinces.

We shall now observe what other Towns they hold in other Provinces under the
King of Spain, especially in the Duchy of Brabant, and County of Flanders,
which they have gained by their Arms.

In the Duchy of BRABANT, Bergen Op-Zoome.
It Is called Bergen by the Normans which invaded Brabant, who so called it from
a Town in Norway; and Bergen-Op-Zoome, from the River Zoome upon which it is
situated; about half a League from Scheld, and not far from the Sea: it has a
good Haven belonging unto it.

Anno 1533 'twas made a Marquisate. It Is within six hours journey of Antwerp.
It Is opposite to Rommerswael and Tholen, Towns of Zealand. It has a very high
Earthen Rampire, and Ditches round about it. It Is in some places Fortified with
Palisadoes, in other parts with Walls on the top of the Rampires: there are
many Bulwarks about it, for defense of the Town.

It came under the power of the States, Anno 1577. If Bergen be subdued, the
Islands of Zealand would easily be reduced one after another, especially the
Isle of Terthole.

Anno 1588, it gave a Famous repulse unto the Duke of Parma, who Beleaguered it
with 30000 Men; and after a long Siege, with much loss and dishonor, was
forced to retire with the loss of 12000 Soldiers, as it is credibly reported.

Anno 1605, Marquess Spinola made two furious Assaults upon this Town; but by
the valor of the Burgers and Soldiers, was repulsed with great loss It Is held
impregnable, and one of the best Fortified Towns in the Low Countries.

Anno 1605, Prince Maurice took Woud-Castle within a Mile of Bergen-Op-Zoome.
It Is strongly fortified with Bulwark^, and seated in a Fenny pla^^; and
therefore naturally st^^ng. It Is one of the chiefest Castles belonging to the
Marquess of Bergen.

Breda
Is a very fair Town; it is seated in the Land of Kempen, situate on the River
Merck, eight Miles from Antwerp, six Miles from Boisleduc or s'Hertoghen bosch,
six Miles from Bergen-Op-Zoome, and two from Gertrudenburg.

It Is the residence, Barony, and chief Town of the Prince of Orange. Count
Henry of Nassaw caused the Town to be Fortified with Rampires.

Anno 1534, both in the Castle and round about the Town, he caused five great
Bulwarks to be made, which defended one another, together with very deep
Ditches.

He built here a most Princely Palace, moated round about, and with that a very
magnificent Edifice, with a most noble Gallery supported with Pillars of
Blewstone, with a gilded Frontispiece: within the Palace there is a most noble
Hall built on Pillars; in the Hall there is a Chapel: there is also a goodly
Armory stored with all sorts of Warlike Provision, and much Cannon.

It has under it the Town and Territory of Steenberg, the Franchise of
Rosindale, and the Seignory of Osterhout.

Anno 1567 'twas taken by the Duke of Alva, the Prince retiring into Germany
for's own security; and so continued as a Garrison for the Spaniard till 1577,
and then it returned again unto the Prince; In whose possession it was for four
years.

Anno 1581 'was taken by the Prince of Parma, and he kept it till the year
1590. It now does continue in that illustrious Family. It Is invested with many
Privileges and Jurisdictions: it has an Exchequer or Court-trial whereunto
the Town of Steenberghen and the 16 Villages of the Country of Breda, with
those of Eycheren, Mewxem, Schotem, Loetrout, and Oestmael make their Appeals.
And besides the said Court there is a Seat of Justice belonging to a Sheriff,
before whom upon the first Summons the Burgers must appear, together with them
of Tettering, Motengracht, Sandberg, Vijsluyce, and the Haeghstrate. None may
Appeal from the Sentence given in either of the said Courts, or any other Court
of Justice.

Dirst
On the River Dennere, a strong Town, and invested with a noble Territory
belonging to the Prince of Orange: in right hereof he is Burgrave of the City
of Antwerp.

Gertruydenburgh
Stands on the Douge, not far from the influx of it into the Maes, the furthest
Town in the North of Brabant, where it joins to Holland. A Town of great Trade
for Fishing, plenty of Salmons and Sturgeons being taken here: but of Stades or
Trouts especially, whereof 18000 are sometimes caught in a day, salted and sent
into Foreign parts.

This Town is of the Inheritance of the Prince of Orange.

Anno 1593 'twas recovered by the Prince of Orange in the view of the Earl of
Mansfield, who then had the Command of an Army of 30000 for the King of Spain.

It Is a Town of great strength, and well Fortified.

Grave
The chief City of the Land of Cuyck, seated in Brabant upon the Maes. It Is
strong by Nature: it is now so Fortified with Bulwarks, Ravelins, and
Counterscarps, that it is one of the strongest Towns in the Netherlands. It Is
six Miles from Ravesteyn, and 15 from the Bosch. It Is the Inheritance of the
House of Nassau. Anno 1586 'twas besieged by the Prince of Parma, and to him
delivered, and so it continued till 1602, when it was re-taken by Prince
Maurice after a stout Resistance.

Maestricht, in Latin Trajectum ad Mosam,
So called of a Ferry over the Maes in former times. It Is a very strong Town,
subject in part to the Bishop of Liege, and partly to the Duke of Brabant. Anno
1632 'twas besieged and taken by the Confederate States.

Hertogen-Bosch, Boisleduc, or the Bosch,
So called from a pleasant Wood belonging to the Dukes of Brabant, where the
Town now stands, situate on a little River called Deese, some two Leagues from
the Maes, near the Borders of Gelderland; a large and well built Town, very
strongly Fortified, and of great Trade for Clothing.

It Is one of the principal Towns in Brabant (properly so called) comprehending
under it four Countries of Compenland, Maesland, Peeland, and Osterwick; and
was taken by the Confederate States from the King of Spain, Anno 1628. It Is
environed with seven or eight Bastions, and some Half-Moons, and Horn-works:
this with the breadth of the River secures it against all Danger, and Holland
from all Fear. It has seven Ports or Gates, 51 Stone-Bridges, 58 Wooden. The
Jurisdiction of the City of Bosch, and the Majorality thereof extends over 109
Villages.

The Town and Seignory of Ravesteine,
Situate on the Banks of the Maes, between Grave and Meghen, six Miles distant
the one from the other. It belongs to the Duke of Cleve and his Successors.

Sevenburgh,
It Is seated upon the River of Merew, three Leagues beneath Gertrudenburgh, and
as much from Breda: there was a most strong and mighty Fort during all the time
of the late Wars.

Crevecoeur,
A most strong Fortress, lies about four English Miles from the Bosch, and
has held out many Sieges.

Steenberghen
Is a little Town betwixt Bergen-Op-Zoome and Breda along the Seacoast.

Anno 15^0 yielded to the States General.

Willem-Stadt
Built by William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, who gave it that name; it is
situated in the Island of Rogheville, a good and strong Town. It serves as a
Rendezvouze to the States Army when they have any Enterprise or Incursion to
make. It has seven Bastions, a double Ditch, and a fair Haven. It has Brabant
on the South, and Zealand on the North.

Cluyndert,
Here the States have built an exceeding strong Fort, where for the importance
thereof they entertain a Garrison: it has eight Bastions and some Ravelins.

Lillo
Is a strong Fort upon the River Escault, within three Leagues of Antwerp, not
far from the Gulf of the said River. It Is a place of great Importance to stop
the Navigation to Antwerp. It Is opposite to another Fort which the States now
hold in Flanders, called Liefskenhoek.

Fer Heyden.
Is a very strong Fort, at the mouth of the River; the which coming from Breda
falls there into the Sea.

For all which Towns and Places, together with their Jurisdictions, there is a
Council of Brabant held at the Hague; before which there is Appeal from
inferior Judges.

Towns and Forts which the States hold in FLANDERS.
Sluice
IS a strong Fortified City, being entrenched with Walls, and double Ditches.
During the Prosperity and Traffic of the town of Bruges, 'twas the Storehouse
for their Wines which came from Spain, the Canaries, and France.

It Is three Leagues distant from Flushing, five Miles from Middleburgh, and
three from Bruges.

It Is in the Isle of Cadsant, which the States do enjoy, with all the other
Forts opposite to the Haven of that Town.

In the Isle of Cadsant there are two Fortresses, the one called Hoolstede,
both won by Prince Maurice 1604, with the Sluice, in which there were 70 Cannon
of Brass and Iron, besides those in the Forts. The Haven is very large, where
200 Sail of Ships of great Burden may safely ride. There are two Block-houses
in the Haven; the one in the very mouth of the Haven, called Haseschant zee;
the other not far from the Town, called Beck-of.

Ardenburgh,
A strong Town near the Isle of Cadsant; 'twas heretofore called Rodenburgh,
and was the Metropolis of all Flanders; containing Touront, Ostburg, Bruges,
and all the Seacoast even to Bononia. It has a Church consecrated to the
Virgin MARY, which is the fairest and most magnificent in all Flanders: this
Town is a Mile distant from Sluice.

Ysendick
Is a mighty Fort right against Flushing, standing toward the Sas of Gant and
Bocholdt. It has a very convenient Haven, able to contain many Ships of 4 or
500 Tun, very well situated upon the Sea.

Lyefkenhoech,
A strong Fort, built at the same time with that of Lillo, and opposite unto
it, upon the River Escault; so as all Ships as come from the Sea to go to
Antwerp, must pass 'twixt these two Forts.

Ferneuse
Is a strong Village, and well-Garrisoned. It Is situate in the midst of
drowned Land; and therefore not easy to approach nor Camp before it.

Axelle
Is a strong Town in the Island of Waes, one of the best Quarters of Flanders.
Anno 1587 Colonel John Peron surprised, and delivered it to the States; which
they have powerfully Fortified, by drowning a great part of the Country, which
makes it inaccessible.

The States have in this Quarter many Sconces, as the Tetter-Sconce by
Ysendicke; St. Philips, St. Catharines, Newet-Sconce: Henries-Sconce,
Slyckenbergh, and Hansfriezes, all Forts between Sluice, and Ysendicke, the
Hoffle, Oistictirt, the Old and New Pass-Sconces by Sluice: the Crabb, the Oly,
the Alder, and Spitsbroeck-Sconces, lying about Ardenburgh: they have besides
about Sluice, St. Fredericks, Donaes, the Star, St. Jobs and Blemkenleige
sconces; Plassendate-sconce, the Fort called ^riest, with many others.

Bieruliec,
A strong Town, and lies in an Island called Bieruliec, mentioned by some
Greek Authors, as Niceta, Chomala, for the Warlike Actions under the Earl of
Flanders, the Emperor Baldwin, who was the first that scaled and entered the
Walls of Constantinople, and took in the Town which stood by the Haven side; in
remembrance whereof, the Burgers of Bieruliec gave for the Towns Arms, and upon
their Seats, four Greek B, in or within a right Cross; likewise or in a Field
Vermilian. These four B signifying, (...), (i. e.) King of Kings Ruling over
Kings.

Forts beyond the River of Rhene.
Borentungh
Is a goodly Fort, upon the Frontiers of the County of Lingen, which is the
Highway to go out of Friesland, and Groaning, into the Country of Westphalia,
and by Choppeburg to Delmenhorst, and Breme, and so to Hamburgh, Lubeck, and
other Towns of the East-Country along the Baltique-Seas.

Bellinger-Wolder-Zyel
Is a strong Town at the end of the Dullard. The States have made a strong Fort
here to defend the County of Lingen.

In the Bishopric of COLEN. Rhineberg commonly called Berck,
The most Northern Town of all the Bishopric of Colen, situated on the Rhine
(as the name imports.)

There the Lands of this Bishop, and also of the Dukes of Cleve, and the Earls
of Muers meet upon a point.

A Town which for these 70 years has been of little use or profit to the right
owner; possessed sometimes by the Spaniards, sometimes by the Confederate
States; for each commodiously seated, as opening a Passage upon the River
Rhene, and receiving great Customs on all kinds of Merchandise passing to and
fro: but it has been possessed by the Spaniards, from the year 1606 unto the
year 1633; for then it was regained for the States by Prince Maurice; there
being found in the Town 40 Brass-Cannons, great store of Powder, and all sorts
of Provision in great quantity. 'Twas a very strong Town both by Nature and
Art; yet within 10 days Leaguer, and having received 2870 Cannon-shot, it
yielded to the Prince.

There is an Island before the Town, in which there is built an exceeding
strong Fort.

In the Dukedom of CLEVE.
Wesel,
A fair and rich Town seated on the confluence of the Rhene with the River
Lyppe, which rising in Westphalia does here lose it self: a Town not subject to
the Duke, though in the Dukedom, being reckoned an Imperial City, and one of
the Hanse-towns; now neither so Imperial or fair as formerly. Possessed first
for the Spaniards with a Garrison of 3000 (at the beginning of the War of
Cleve) by Don Lewis Velasco, and from them taken by the States General of the
United Provinces, Anno 1628.

Emmerick
On the Rhene, a well-frequented Town, remarkable for a very fair School.

Rees, Burick.
On the French-side of the Rhene over against Wesel, amongst goodly Cornfieldsd
and pleasant Pastures:

And a great part of the County of Marck.

The States came to the Possession of these Places upon this occasion: John
William Duke of Cleve, Anno 1610 dying without Issue, there were several
Pretenders for the Succession, viz. Leopold Archduke of Austria George William
Duke of Prussia and Elector of Brandenburgh, Wolfangus Gulielmus Palatine of
Newburg: Leopold being up in Arms, and having taken Possession of Juliers and
most part of that Country, the Duke of Brandenburgh and Newburg agreed, by the
assistance of the Protestant Princes their Confederates, recovered the greatest
part thereof from Leopold: but the Duke of Newburg not content with his
Partage, and turning Papist, called in the Spanish Army under the conduct of
Marquess Spinola to abet his Quarrel: the Duke of Brandenburgh called in the
Forces of the States under Prince Maurice. The issue of this War was; Spinola
possessed himself of most places in Gulick and Berg, and the States got into
their hands many Towns in Gulick and Cleve; and though they delivered up some
to the right owners, yet those of most strength and importance the States have
kept ever since, pretending they keep them for the owners: but in regard that
the King of Spain is so potent a Prince, that the Dukes are not able to defend
themselves against him; and in case he should take them, he would much endanger
their Dominions: therefore for the good of the Dukes and themselves, they do
not think it covenient to part with them.

FINIS.
The Table of the several places described in this Book.
A
ALkmaer 8 Assenburg 18 Amsterdam 10 Avenhoome 22 Arnemuyden 61 Amelandt 74
Amersfort 77 Altena 66 Abcoude 90 Almeto 86 Arnhem 98 Aha 106 Ardenburg 121
Axelle 123 Aldersconce Ibid. Artois 4
B
BRedenrood 18, 52 Boumers-kerspel 21 Broeckhaven Ibid. Berth 22 Berchont 22
Banejert 22 Betlem 22 Bemster 26 Brill 55 Beverwick 18, 57 Bursute 63 Beverland
63 Browers-haven 66 Bildt 75 Bolswaerdt 71 Brederode Blockerziel Berch 72
Betewe 90 Bomel 93 Buren 29 Battenburg 100 Bronckhorst 103 Bredefort 104
Berchel 89 Burgh 105 Bergen-Op-Zoome 109 Breda 111 Bosch 116 Boisleduke 116
Beck-of 123 Bruges 121 Becholdt Bieruliet 124 Borontungh 125
Bellinger-Wolderzyel 125 Burick 128 Brabant 4
C
CRoeswich Catwick 42 Cronestein Camp Veere 62 Cortgreen Catts Campen 84
Catten-dyke 64 Cloetingen Ibid. Cruyningen Ib. Capelle Ib. Coewarden 87
Cleuland Creveceur 91, 118 Creytenberck 96 Culemburgh 98 Cluyndert 119 Cadsant
121 Crab-sconce 123 Compenland 117
D
DOrt or Dordrecht 27 Delf-haven 30 Delfe 45 Douland 67 St. Martins Dike 67
Deventer 82 Dendermond Dockum 73 Doesburgh Delden 86 Drent 82 Dortecum 103
Doesburg 103 Dam 106 Delfziel 109 Dirst 114 Dennere 28 Douge 50 Donas-sconce
124
E
EMs 3 Enchuysen 19 Edam 22 Egmond 52 Emclisse Enschede 85 Erckelam 96 Eycheren
113 Escault Emmerick 128
F
FOrest 18 Flushing 60 Franiker 70 West-Friesland 68 Frederick sconce 124
Flanders 4 Fevelingo 108 Ferneuse 122
G
GOeland Grotenbroeck 21 Graft 26 Gorcham 29 Goude 32 Gaw 2 Gertruden-burgh 47,
114 Geruliet 56 Goeree 58 Goes 64 Groningen 106 Gaurede 55 Geoninge 106
Gheeismuyden 88 Gelderland 89 Ghent 95 Gelders 97 Groll 104 Grave 115 Gulick
H
HOlland 6 Harlem 14 Heimskeirk 18 Heemsteed 18 Heligen Hogcherspel 21 Hem 21
Horn 21 Hubixwon 22 Hauvoant 22 Honingen Heusden 44 Hemert Hontslardick 51
Hulst 57 Hoggersdike Harlingen 69 Hindelopen 69 Hassel 86 Hardenburgh 89
Heselburgh 86 Haerwarden 95 Hardenwick 99 Hattum 98 Heremburgh 103 Huneso 106
Haeghstrate 114 Hertogen-Bosch 116 Heyden 120 Haseschant-see Hottle Hinisnig
108 Hainalt 4 Heligon Hague 49 Hoolstead 121 Haseschant-zee 121
I
ILst 71 Iselsteyn 34 Isselmond 82 St. Jobs sconce 124
K
KEeweick 18 Knotsenburg Kessel 96 Keppel 105 Key kirk 106 Kempen 117
Kempenland 117
L
LEck 2 Lis or Ley 4, 18 Lattlebrock 21 Leyden 34 Lam Leyderdrope 42 Leinsteine
29 Leerdam 44 Losdum 46 Lordsendam 46 Lewarden 72 Lingen 30 Laochem 103
Loetrout 113 Lillo 119 Liefskenhook 119, 122 Lyppe 127 Limburg 4 Luxemburg 4
Lysfesdman 32
M
MAes 3 Meresteen 18 Medenblick 24 Monickendam 25 Maden 26 Merew 27 Mewze 28
Maestricht 116 Montfort 77 St. Martins Dike 67 Macum 72 Meppel 98 Middeter 97
Montford 100 Merck Meuxem 113 Motengracht 114 Maesland 117 Meghen Ibid.
Mausauluis 48 Middleburgh 59 Mastubrouck 88 Me^^ck 111
N
NAerden 18 Nortuic 42 Nimmegen 91 Nyeustadt 96 Namur 4
O
OVdendick 75 Ostblocker 22 Ouderschye 58 Oude-water 33 Oestgeest 42 Ostergoe
72 Overyssel 82 Oldenze 86 Otmarsum 86 Ommen 105 Ommelands 105 Old-haven 106
Osterhout 123 Oestmael 113 Osterwick 117 Osburg 121 Oeslutirt 123 Oly-sconce
123
P
POlenburgh 18 Purmermeer 23 Purmerent 25 Purmersea Ibid. St. Philips Dike 124
Pierschille 55 Peeland 117 Plassendatesconce 124
R
RHene 2 Rypp 26 Rotterdam 30 Rinsburg 42 Ramsburg 48 Rijsuick 52 Ramne 61
Rammeken 62 Romerswal 63, 10 Rhenen 76 Regg Ruermond 96 Rosindale Ravestein 117
Rogheville Rhinbergh 125 Rees 128
S
SCelt 3 Scayn 9 Swaech 22 Schermer 26 Swyndrecht Scheidam 47 Schoon-hoven 33
Soutervode 42 Schir Scheveling Scage 57 Salinglye Staveren 70 Sloten 71 Snelk
71 Seven-Wolden 74 Schellink 74 Somerdike 55 Scowen 65 Swoll 84 Stenwick 86
Straten Straet 97 Shalen Schaytendype 106 s' Hertoghenbosch 116 Steenburgh 118
Steenbergen 118 Schotem 113 Sandberg 114 Sevenburgh 118 Sluice 124 Sas 95
Spitsbroeck-sconce 123 Stat-sconce 123 Sparr 15
T
TAssam 19 Tergoes 64 Tolen 67, 110 Twent 82 Tiel 92 Trelweerd 51 Terthole 83
Tettering 114 Ter-Heyden 52 Touront 121 Torneuse 122 Triest-fort 124 Texel 56
Tetter-sconce 123
V
VElsen 18 Venhuysen 21 Vecte Valkenburg 42 Viane 44 Voorburg 46 Vlarding 48
Vlack Veere 62 Vtrecht 75 Vierengen 56 Vidre Valenhoven 88 Veluwe 90 Voorn 55
Venlo 96 Vucht 96 Vijfluyce 114
W
WAel Woggenom Wormer 26 Woerden 48 Wassenare 42 Warmont 42 Woorschoten 43
Worcom 48 Wonde 57 Well 48 Wolferdike 123, 65 Wyck-ter Duyrsted 76
West-Friesland 68 Westergoe 69 Wachtendonck 96, 100 Wageninghen 98 Willem-Stadt
118 Waes 10
Y
YEdam 22 Ysselstein 34 Ysselmond Yssel-land 82 Ysendyck 122 Yssel 3
Z
ZVyder-see Zijp 26 Zealand 57 Zeeburg 62 Zyrick-zee 66 Zuychen Zutphen 102
Zuidfen 101 Zeatskerke 64
A Catalogue of what things are made and sold by William Berry, living at the
Sign of the Globe in the Strand between York House and the New-Exchange.
GLobes Celestial and Terrestrial of all Sizes. Spears according to Ptolomean,
Tychonean, Copernican Systeme. Concave-Hemisphears, wherein are depicted all
the Stars and Constellations of Heaven; and serve for a Case for a Terrestrial
Globe, wherein is descibed all the Countries of the Earth, fit for the
Pocket-Globe-Dials. A Map of England four Foot long three Foot deep, newly
Corrected by W. Berry. A Sheet-Map of the 17 Provinces, where the Territories
of each several Prince or State concerned are so distinguished with Colors,
that the late Conquests and present Possessions of each are Legible without any
Labor. A Sheet-Map of the seven United Provinces. Also all manner of Large
Maps or Sheet-Maps whatsoever, and all Mathematical Instruments are sold by the
aforesaid William Berry.
A Map of ye Seven UNITED PROVINCES
map of the Netherlands


