SIC VOS NON VOBIS MASSACHUSETTS HISTORICAL SOCIETY
FOUNDED AD 1791

Given by (...)

bookplate of the Massachusetts Historical Society

New Plymouth, October 26. 1669.
THis Court taking into their consideration the usefulness and seasonableness
of this Sermon, do commend the same to all the Churches and People of God in
this Jurisdiction, for their serious perusal and improvement in the Lord; And
do therefore Order the publishing thereof.

Nathaniel Morton Secretary.

THis Sermon and pious Labor of the Reverend Servant of the Lord, Mr. Thomas
Walley, being perused, is allowed, as consenting to the healing Word of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness, and worthy
to be improved by all sorts in New England, as a sovereign Remedy of diverse
Maladies; Whereupon is justly added Imprimatur,

Charles Chauncy. Thomas Shepard.


Balm in Gilead TO HEAL SIONS WOUNDS: OR, A Treatise wherein there is a clear
Discovery of the most Prevailing Sicknesses of New England, both in the Civil
and Ecclesiastical State; As also suitable Remedies for the Cure of them:
Collected out of that Spiritual Directory, The Word of God.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached before the General Court of the Colony of
NEW-PLIMOVTH on the first day of June 1669. being the DAY of ELECTION THERE.

By Thomas Walley, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Barnstable in New England.

Jer. 14. 18. Have thou utterly rejected Judah? has thy soul loathed Zion? Why
have thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we looked for peace, and
there is no good; and for the time of healing, and b^hold trouble.

Hosea 14 1. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have fallen by
thine iniquity.

Jer. 6. 8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee,
lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

Jer. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings:
Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and M. J. 1670.

To the Honored, THOMAS PRINCE Esquire Governor of New Plymouth Colony in
New England; AND The Worshipful his Assistants.
Honored Patriots,
When you were pleased to Call me to Preach this public Sermon, I must
confess by reason of my insufficiency for such a work, and a crowd of business
that then I was in, I could not rejoice in it; but I looked upon the Call as a
Call from God, and therefore submitted to it, knowing that God does often use
weak and worthless Instruments, that the glory might be his, and not ours: and
was the further encouraged, because I have found you like Hezekiah, speaking
comfortably to those that teach the good knowledge of the Lord. The Printing of
this Sermon was far from my thoughts, both in Studying and Preaching of it. I
dare not say the matter is useless, but must confess the dress to be too
uncomely, and will never be liked, if it come to the eyes of those that are
either curious or captious. I conceive the reason why you ordered the Printing
of it, was, Because you judged it a seasonable Word, and therefore thought it
would be profitable; and indeed the timing of things to their proper season, is
one of the highest acts of practical Wisdom. I did the more readily consent
to the Printing of it, that I might not have the least Censure from those that,
from my self, and all Gods people, deserve so much honor. Though in this
Sermon my weakness is exposed to public view, yet if God may have honor, and
any Soul profit, and I may be accounted obedient to you that are our Rulers, I
am satisfied. I do account it a great mercy that we have such Rulers, that we
may more safely publish Truth, then conceal it: if we conceal it, we fall into
the hands of God, but if we publish it, we are not in danger of falling into
the hands of men. The design of this Sermon is the Uniting of the People of
God, for the Wounds of some Churches bleed, if not fester. Worthy Senators, I
may boldly publish for the honor of God and your honor, That such has been
your labor of love in the Churches, that you seem to take more delight in the
Unity of the Churches, then in being Magistrates. This Sermon was once in your
Ears, it is now in your Eyes, I desire the Lord may keep it in your Hearts; it
may be it is providentially Printed for that end. As for my self, I know all
are not Bezaleels or Aholiabs, and that he that is but a poor Labourer, and
brings Stone and Mortar to the Building, is accepted of God. My hearty desire
is, That you, our Honored Governor and Magistrates, may be called The
Repairers of breaches, The Restorers of paths to dwell in, The Joy of many
Generations; which is the earnest Prayer of him that is your daily Remembrancer
at the Throne of Grace, and who is

Your most humble Servant, and less then the least of all Saints, Thomas Walley.

Balm in Gilead to heal Sions Wounds.
JEREM. 8. 22. Is there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? Why
then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?
IN this Chapter you may see what an evil and bitter thing Sin is, it will not
be that at last which it is at first, though it be Honey at first, it will be
Gall at last, it will be bitterness in the latter end: It makes persons unhappy
both alive and dead; when living, it turns them out of their Houses; and when
dead, out of their Graves, as in ver. 1. of this Chapter.

What woeful work has Sin made in the world? what incurable wounds has it
given to Kingdoms, Countries, Churches and Families? the most destroying
Judgments, Fancine, Pestilence, War, Captivity, are the bitter fruits of Sin:
it lays a People under Spiritual Judgments, provokes God to depart, and opens
a door to all woe and misery.

In this Chapter you find God threatening, the Prophet lamenting the dreadful
evils that were coming upon Judah and Jerusalem, and when he would comfort
himself, his heart fainted; When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my
heart is faint in me, ver. 18. the reason was, he saw that the people were
resolved to go on in their sin, that God was resolved to go on in the way of
his Judgments, ver. 6. compared with ver. 13.

The Prophet wonders, is even astonished, that a people that have so great
Mercies, should be in danger of so great Miseries: They had a good God, and a
good King; ver. 19. Is not the Lord in Zion? is not her King in her? God was
not as yet departed. It Is probable Josiah at present was their King, not as yet
removed by death: it may be supposed that this part of the Prophecy relates to
the time of his Reign, for he prophesied from the thirteenth year of his Reign,
to the time of the Captivity, Jer. 1. 2, 3. This people will not part with
their graven Images and strange vanities, therefore God will depart from them,
and be a stranger to them.

In ver. 20. the Prophet shows them what will be the fruit of their folly in
trusting to false Prophets, and relying upon their Predictions, at last they
shall despair of help, and cry out, The harvest is past, the Summer is ended,
and we are not saved; the time set by these false Prophets for deliverance was
past, but they were not delivered.

In the Text the Prophet being in great amazement of spirit, passionately puts
forth three Questions:

1. Is there no Balm in Gilead? 2. Is there no Physician there? 3. Why then is
not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?
The two first of these Questions do not come from any doubt, but do strongly
affirm that there was Balm in Gilead, and that there were Physicians there: The
third Question is, Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered? What is the reason that such admirable Helps should be no more
helpful? that Gileads Balm and Gileads Physicians should be so unsuccessful?
This was wonderful, that while Sion had such proper and precious Means for her
Recovery, her Wound should gangrene and become incurable.

By Gilead, is meant either a City so called, Hosea 6 8. Gilead is a City of
them that work iniquity; it was a City of the Levites, the most famous in all
the Land of Gilead, the whole Country took its Name from it: Or else by Gilead,
is meant the whole Land and Country of Gilead, which was on the other side
Jordan, and did belong to the Reubenites and Manassites, 2 Kings 10. 33. This
Country of Gilead abounded with Balm; the Ishmaelites that bought Joseph were
carrying Balm from Gilead to Egypt, Genesis 37. 25. and the daughter of Egypt is
bid to fetch Balm from Gilead, Ezekiel. 27. 17. which notes, That the most
precious and sovereign Balm was there: as it grew in the Land of Gilead, so it
was chiefly sold in the City of Gilead.

In former times there was no Balm in all the world of such account as this
Balm. Pliny says, Balsamum uni terrarum Judeae concessum, as though it were a
blessing vouchsafed to Judea only: They traded with it to Tire, that
Merchandising City, that then had the Trade of the World, and sent it far and
near. One says of this Balm, it was Medicina difficillimorum Morborum, A
Medicine to heal the most difficult Diseases. All Nations must be beholding to
Israel for Balm; noting, That all the World should be beholding to the Church
for Health.

And as there were the best Balm in Gilead, so there were the best Physicians
there: usually those Countries that abound with the best Medicines, have the
most and best Physicians.

That which the Spirit of God tells us here, is, 1. That Sion was sick. 2. That
Sion had the best and most proper Means for her Recovery; the best Balm, the
best Physicians. 3. That though Sion had all these Means, yet she was not
recovered.

Hence the Doctrine is,

That sometimes a People may be sick, and though they have the most proper and
suitable Means of Health, yet no Means may be effectual for their Recovery.

Thus it may be with Nations, Countries, Churches, they may have sickness in
them, and though all Means be present for their Recovery, yet they may remain
not healed of their sickness.

Let us consider what Means this People of Israel had from time to time to
recover them from their Sicknesses.

1. They had the Prophets of God with them early and late, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
At this time they had the Prophet Jeremiah, the Prophet Ezekiel, who faithfully
discovered to them their Sicknesses, their Danger, and the Remedy, yet they
were not healed: These Prophets were continued to them till the destruction of
the City and Temple.

2. They had the Ordinances of God, his healing Ordinances, and scarcely at any
time in more purity then in the days of Josiah; yet their hearts went after
the sins of Manasseh, the Abominations that were set up in his Reign.

3. They had a good King; Josiah was their King: you have an account of his
goodness, 2 Chronicles. 34, 35 Chap. when he was but in the eighth year of his
reign, he began to seek after the God of his father David, Chap. 34. 3. and in
the twelfth year of his reign he put forth his utmost endeavors for a
thorough-Reformation, cast out false Worship, set up the true Worship of God,
labored to settle every thing in the House of God according to the mind of
God, and yet this people were not healed. It is observeable, That in the
twelfth year of Josiah the public Reformation began, and in the thirteenth
year this Prophet is sent from the Lord to call upon them to put away their
abominations, that they may not be removed out of his sight; but all Means
proves ineffectual, their hearts go after their Idols, they are not healed.

4. They had a good God; God was not as yet departed from them, he was in Sion,
and would have healed them, Ezekiel. 24. 13. bestowed purging Means upon her. but
she would not be Healed.

So when Israel went out of Egypt, they fell into many Sicknesses in the
Wilderness; they had the proper Means for their Recovery, they had Moses for
their King and Prophet, they had Aaron the Lords High Priest, they had the Ark
of God, the Ordinances of God, yet they provoked the Lord, contemned the Means
of their healing, murmured at their Physicians; they were not healed, and
therefore they consumed their days in vanity, and their years in trouble,
Psalm. 78. 33. Their carcases fell in the wilderness, Numb. 14. 32.

When they came into the Land of Canaan, and were filled with the blessings of
God, there they surfetted, and fell into diverse Diseases, they waxed fat, and
began to kick, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. When they were poor, then they were hungry, and
murmured at God; when they were rich, then they grew proud, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of their Salvation; The Lord trusted them with healing Means,
followed them with merciful Providence, yet they were not healed; or if they
had any present healing, they quickly relapsed again: Amos 4. 6, 7. to the end
of the Chap. the Lord deals with Israel by Judgments one after another, yet
they are not healed.

When Christ came into the world, he found Church and State sick, both quite
out of order; he was a skilful, yea the best Physician, and would have healed
them, they had the best Means that ever people had, and yet they were not
healed.

And the Apostles of Christ, though they were eminent Instruments in the hands
of God, and did much in other Countries, yet could do little in their own
Country for the healing of the daughter of Sion.

I shall now give you the Reasons, Why a people that are sick, and have the
best Means for Recovery, yet are not recovered.

Reas. 1. Because oft-times the Diseases of Kingdoms, Countries and Churches
are so occult and hid, that the wisest of Physicians cannot find them out:
Hence it comes to pass, that a people perish, or continue sick, because they do
not find out the reason of their sickness; for the sin of Achan things went
ill with the Army of Israel, Josh. 7. and it was hid from Joshua and the
people, till God revealed it. In David's time, the Famine continued long, and
the reason was not known, till God discovered it to be for the sin of Saul in
slaying the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21. As secret sin in the heart causes decays of
grace, so here. Many times God in afflicting has an aim at a particular sin,
and it is hard to find out what the sin is.

Reas. 2. Because sometimes the Disease is old, and deeply rooted, grown
Malignant and Pestilential: when a people are hardened and rooted in their
evils, they grow incureable; Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin,
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil. Custom in sin hinders the cure of it, it makes sin seem less then
formerly it did, it sears the Conscience, makes persons secure.

Reas. 3. Because of the opinion of the Patient: Sometimes a sick people think
they are well, and have no need of any Physicians; they are not sensible of
their sickness: hence Physicians are of no value with them; and it is not Gods
way to bless the best Means to those that flight them: If a people con^emn
Magistracy and Ministry, though they are Gods Ordinances, yet God is provoked
to withhold his blessings from them, so that they cannot prevent the ruin and
destruction of a proud, wilful and stubborn people, that endeavor to exalt
themselves above the Lord and his Appointments.

Reas. 4. Because when Means are used to cure the Disease that is most visible,
some other Disease appears that is more dangerous, and proves an Impediment to
the Cure, so that the sickness increases and becomes mortal. When God would
have healed Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim appeared, Hos. 7. 1. Some think it
refers to the time of Jehu's Reign, who was anointed in Gilead the City of
Chirurgions, and was the Surgeon of those Times; but when he was busy in
the work of the Lord, destroying Baal and his Worships, then the iniquity of
the ten Tribes appeared, which are called Ephraim, and the wickedness of
Samaria, which was the Head of Ephraim. But what wickedness, and what iniquity
did they discover? Surely it was their love to the sin of Jeroboam, their love
to the Calves; so that the work of Reformation was at a stand, and Israel was
not healed. Many persons never discover the wickedness of their hearts, till
God gives them the Means of healing: When God brings Means home to them, their
wounds and sores begin to smart, and they are enraged more then ever; and it
may be such sins break forth, as they themselves never thought were in their
hearts.

Reas. 5. Because those that are sick hearken to Mountebanks, rather then to
experienced and tried Physicians. The Jews in their sick estate had the false
Prophets in high esteem, but persecuted the true; and this became the ruin of
their Church and State: they looked upon the Lords Prophets as the cause of all
their troubles, and hearkened to those that poisoned them in stead of healing
them; this was the temper of the people in Jeremiahs time.

Reas. 6. Because sometimes God is so provoked, that he will bless no Means to
a people: because of a peoples contempt of those Means God has afforded them,
therefore all Means are without effect for their good; that Word that was wont
to be mighty and powe^ful, becomes a dead word, does not quicken, it becomes
the savor of death to death, 2 Cor. 2. 15.

Reas. 7. Sometimes those that are sick are not healed, Because the Physicians
themselves cannot agree about the Means for Cure, one says, This is the
Disease, another That; and one faith, This must be the Cure, another That: Some
think the D^sease not dangerous; some think the way to cure it is to let the
sick Patient do what he will, and have what he will: this is either gross
ignorance, or designed wickedness; others think, that the Disease can be cured
by no other Means but violent Means, for some are cruel Physicians.
Disagreement amongst those that should be Healers, is a great hindrance of the
health of the daughter of Sion.

USE 1. This Doctrine discovers to us, That we have cause to fear that our
condition is but sad this day, for our case looks like the case of this people
that the Prophet speaks of: We have Gileads Balm, and Gileads Physicians, and
yet we are a sick people; we have the Means of healing amongst us, that Means
that is proper and suitable, and yet we continue a wounded and weak people. What
Means can a people have more for Cure, then we have? God is yet in our Sion, we
have healing Ordinances, the Preaching of the Gospel, the Seals of the Covenant
of Grace, Magistrates that would heal the Sicknesses of Sion, and Ministers
that mourn for the hurt of the daughter of Sion.

Surely this day New England is sick, the Country is a sickly Country; the
Country is full of healthful Bodies, but sick Souls.

I shall name two or three of the Diseases that reign amongst us, and do most
mischief.

1. The Lethargy, a cold sleepy Disease; there seems to be an insensibleness of
sin and danger: Faith is dead, and Love is cold, and Zeal is gone; the wise and
the foolish Virgins seem to be all asleep, in a deep sleep of Security: The
power of godliness decays, the Trumpet sounds, the Alarm is given, yet the
most sleep on.

O ye Christians that are not quite asleep! do not you perceive that the love
of the most of the Professors of Religion is grown cold to Christ, to Truth, to
Ordinances, to one another? and that which renders our case the more sad, is,
that neither the Word of God, nor the Rod of God awakens us; though we see that
Satan is busy, yet we are idle: indeed when Saints do least good, the Devil
does most hurt; while they sleep, he is awake. It is to be feared, that we
shall be awakened in some dreadful way, by some sudden and expected Tempest of
divine Wrath. A Laodicean frame of spirit is hateful to God, Rev. 3. 15, 16.

2. There is a Burning Fever amongst us, a Fire of Contention in Towns, in
Churches; Fuel is laid upon this Fire daily: What Town, or what Church is
there that is free from this Disease? the work of Contention is followed, as
though it were the work of our day, as though we had nothing else to do. Many
through the pride of their hearts are very unquiet, and cannot be content in
the places God has set them in, but strive for Mastery, Dominion and Rule,
forgetting that counsel of the Apostle, My brethren, be not many Masters, Jam.
3. 1. This comes from Pride and Self-love: Proud Nature is discontented with
the condition that God has put man in. The great reason why many are Unquiet,
is, because they do not think they are high enough either in the Church or in
the Commonwealth. The Contentions and Divisions that are amongst us, are a
sign that lust reigns, and that Gods destroying Judgments are not far off.
This Fire of Contention will consume all, except God prevent.

3. Many are possessed with an Evil spirit. It Is observed, that when Christ
came into the world there were more possessed with Evil Spirits, then had been
in any Age: and it is to be wondered at, that in this time, in which the Gospel
is so clearly Preached, and Religion so much professed, that so many should be
possessed with Evil Spirits.

Some, with a Spirit of Oppression, Cruelty and Covetousness; some, with a
Spirit of Error and Delusion; some, with a Spirit of Envy and Jealonsie;
others are filled with Pride in heart and manners: Was it ever worse among the
Jews, then it is with us? That which is threatened as before Judgment to the
Jews, is in a great measure fulfilled among us this day, Isa. 3. 5. The people
shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbor; the
child shall behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the base against
the Honorable. Many of the Children of this generation, if they consider their
carriage to their Parents, will have little cause to expect much obedience from
their Children, and are like in their latter years to reap the fruit of their
present disobedience to their Parents. Oh how sad is it, that there should be
such a Spirit of Profaneness, Looseness and Wilfulness against Counsel in our
days! Truly, if the Means we have do not cure us, what is like to cure us? God
will either make us better, or leave us; God would heal us, and we will not be
healed.

Object. If God be willing to heal a people, how is it then that they are not
healed? how can the Creature withstand him?

Answ. God in willing, does not always will according to his Omnipotent Power.
God is said to be willing to heal a people, in that he affords to them all
healing Means; and though man's will cannot overcome Gods power, yet it can
resist Gods Means; neither is it a Metaphysical Inability in man, but a Formal
Wilfulness that hinders healing.

When a people through their Wilfulness grow worse and worse under the Means of
Healing, they resist the means of their healing, and their condition become
desperate.

Having discovered to you some of the Diseases that are amongst us, it being so
evident that we are a sick people, that we may be sensible of the sadness of
our condition, let us consider what the Evils of Sickness are.

1. Sickness takes away the Comfort of Society, so that the company of dearest
Relations becomes burdensome. This is the Evil of some of our Sicknesses; those
that were wont to take sweet counsel together, to go to the House of God
together, now are weary of each others company; those that formerly could walk
together with one heart, in one way, that could Pray together, Sing together,
Humble themselves together, now they are estranged one from another; either
they have no Communion, or no comfort in Communion.

2. Sickness makes the best and most pleasant food burdensome: As the full
stomach, so the sick stomach loathes the honeycomb. The sick man, Psalm. 107.
18. his soul is said to abhor all meats; this is another evil Effect of the
Diseases that are amongst us: by reason of Sickness, the Ordinances of God that
were formerly sweet and pleasant, are now become burdensome. Have not many
cause to be convinced that they are sick, seeing they find that those
Ordinances and Duties that were in times past their meat and drink, and of a
refreshing nature, are now sl^ghted and disesteemed, of no account with them?
nay, some (so sad is their case) abhor the spiritual food that once they found
sweetness in, which is a sign of dreadful Apostasy.

3. Sickness brings a Consumption of Flesh and Spirit; this is another sad
Effect of our Sicknesses. How many be there this day that have leanness in
their souls? their graces languish; Grace it self seems to be ready to die.

4. Sickness takes away Beauty: Psalm. 39. 11. His beauty consumes away like a
Moth: The Nazarites were blacker then a coal, not known in the streets, Lam. 4.
8. Spiritual sicknesses have stained the Beauty of the whole Country. When Sion
was a Praise in the Earth, and her Renown was great, Holiness and
Righteousness, Peace and Unity were her Beauty; but these are in a great
measure lost, and her Beauty is gone.

The Beauty of many of the Professors of Religion is so much marred, that they
are scarcely known by their Duties, Dealings, Love, Humbleness, Meekness, as
they were in times past. By Pride, Covetousness, Wantonness, Frowardness, God
is dishonored, and their glory is gone. O the wonderful Change that Spiritual
sickness has made!

5. Sickness is a forerunner of Death; when there is a sick Bed, there is an
expectation of a Grave. Heman speaks personally of himself, Psalm. 88. 3. My
life draws nigh unto the grave: Our Sicknesses give us cause to fear we are not
far off the grave. When the best and most proper Physic will not work, it is
a sign that Death approaches. Are we not this day making graves for all our
Blessings and Comforts? Have we not reason to expect that ere long our Mourners
will go up and down, and say, How is New England fallen! That Land that was a
Land of Holiness, has lost her Holiness! that was a Land of Righteousness,
has lost her Righteousness! that was a Land of Peace, has lost her Peace!
that was a Land of Liberty, is now in sore bondage! Sin brings Death near, and
sets God afar off; and hence we must be miserable. All that come to visit us,
had need to mind us of our latter end, the death of our Mercies. If God deal
with us, as he has been wont to deal with others, he will make us a better
people, or leave us. When a people have the Means of healing, and are not
healed, there is cause to fear that God loathes and rejects them. See how the
Prophet expostulates the case with God, Jerem. 14. 10. Have thou utterly
rejected Judah? has thy soul loathed Sion? Why have thou smitten us, and there
is no healing for us? We looked for peace, and there is no good; and for the
time of healing, and behold trouble.

There are three things speak sadly to us, and tell us we have little cause to
be secure.

1. That there are so sew born to Jesus Christ: Indeed Children are multiplied,
but there is not much cause of joy therewith, but rather of fear that they are
born for the Sword, and Famine, and other Judgments: When a Land bears not to
Christ, it is a sign the Children therein are born to Judgment: How much has
God estranged himself from his Ordinances? how little Converting-work is there
among us? we see that a great part of the young generation are profane, and
spend the best of their time in Satan's service, and know not the God of their
fathers.

2. Another thing that speaks sadly to us, is, That under all the means of
grace, there is so little Spiritual growth amongst those that are born to Jesus
Christ. Barrenness makes way for cursing and rejection.

3. The Noise that is in the House of God, a confused Noise: This is that which
God could never endure in his House, it exceedingly stirs up his wrath: When
the Temple was to be built, there was not to be the noise of a Hammer, 1 Kings
6. 7. It is a dangerous thing to cause God to live unquietly in his own House,
to make him weary of his own dewlling place. God was never weary of the noise
of his peoples Prayers in his House, but of the noise of their Contentions; the
noise of their Prayers is pleasant, but the noise of these Contentions his soul
abhors.

USE 2. Let this be matter of Admiration, as well as of Humiliation to us, that
a sick people that have all Means to heal them, are not healed; that those who
have Gileads Balm, and Gileads Physicians, are yet sick; and if we do not
wonder at it, strangers will hereafter, That a people that have such proper
suitable Means, are still unrecovered, and dying under them. I speak not to
flatter; We have a godly Magistracy, that have made it manifest that they are
willing, yea earnestly desirous of healing the Sicknesses of Church and State;
We have godly Ministers, that I am confident would spend and be spent for the
Recovery of the health of the daughter of Sion: We have holy Ordinances, and we
have some Mourning and Praying Saints, that lament the Evils that are among us;
and Gods Providence call upon us daily to get our sicknesses healed: and is it
not a wonder, that a people that have such Means and Mercies should still
languish of their Diseases? Oh! that that which is said of Nineveh, might never
be said of us, There is no healing of thy bruises, thy wound is grievous! Nahum
3. 19. It would be sad, if God should threaten us as he does Egypt, Jer. 46.
11. In vain shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall not be cured. Or if
God should say as once concerning Babylon, Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed
Babylon, but she is not healed; forsake her, and let us go every one into his
own Country. It was no wonder that these Heathen Nations could not be healed,
but it is matter of astonishment that Sion is not, that New England should have
so much Means of Healing, and yet continue sick; that a people that are lifted
up to Heaven with Mercies, should be so likely to be thrown down to Hell.

USE 3. Let it serve to persuade Gileads Physicians to put forth their utmost
endeavors for the healing of the wounds and sicknesses of the daughter of Sion.

I would direct this Use to our Honored Magistrates, to my Reverend Brethren
in the Ministry, and to all Mourning and Praying Saints.

First, To you who are our Honored Magistrates, who are by the Providence of
God Patres Patriae, The Fathers of our Country: I hope it will not be called
Presumption, if I should give my humble Advice for the healing of Sions
Sickness, and leave it at your feet. God has called you to be Healers to a
poor sick Country: That word in Scripture that is rendered to govern, is diverse
times rendered to heal; so Isa. 30. 26. and in Isa. 3. 6, 7. the Rulers are
called Healers: the Prophet tells us, that when the people by their sin have
brought all things into Confusion, and their ruin almost present, then they
shall be desirous of healing Rulers, A man shall take hold of his brother, and
shall say, Be thou our Ruler, and let this Ruin be under thy hand: but ver. 7.
In that day shall he swear, saying, I will not be an Healer; the meaning is, a
Ruler: A Disease sometimes is so desperate, no Physician will undertake its
cure; the Patient so froward and unruly, that none will meddle with him: this
may at last be the condition of a froward people. The Lord keep us from that
woeful day.

That I would humbly offer, is this:

1. That you do your utmost for the Extirpation of Profaneness, it is a growing
Evil in the Country: This is one of the great Works God has called you that
are Magistrates and Deputies unto; I know your hearts are upon this Work: if
there be not enough done already to prevent Profaneness, I beseech you do more,
and see that your Laws be put in Execution; and especially let it be your care,
That the Lords Sabbaths may be sanctified: Give your Civil Sanction to that
holy Command of God. Those that would dispute away the Sanctification of the
Christian Sabbath, do but dispute away the Power of Godliness: it is Christ's
Institution, the Observation of it has the influence of a peculiar Blessing.
In the Primitive Times the Observation of it was a Badge of Christianity. This
was a common Question propounded to those that would join with the Assemblies
of the Saints, Servasti Dominicum? The Answer was, Christianus sum,
intermittere non possum. If this Day be slighted, Practical Religion will
quickly be lost, and a door will be opened for Gods severest Judgments,
Slighting of the Lords Sabbaths, and a decay of the power of Godliness, usually
go together. The Profane in Practice, and the Erroneous in Judgment, are the
great Enemies of Sanctifying Sabbaths. Let us remember, The Observation of it
has the Promise of God: The Fire of Gods Wrath is not like to come where his
Sabbaths are observed.

2. Let it be your Endeavor to settle the Preaching of the Gospel in all
places within your Jurisdiction, by those that are in some measure sitted: you
will find such places where the Preaching of the Gospel is long wanting, will
prove the Nurseries of Profaneness; such places will breed up Enemies to God
and Jesus Christ. I doubt not but some think it their Privilege and Liberty to
live without a Gospel Ministry; such persons are either grossly Ignorant, or
grossly Erroneous. Your Endeavors to set up Lights in such dark places, will be
pleasing to God: it will be an honor to God, and an honor to you, if you see
that Christ be Preached in every corner of the Colony. It is by Christ that
Kings reign, and that Rulers rule, Prove. 8. 15, 16. You are Christ's Officers,
though not in the Church, and are to labor his Exaltation, and your work is,
to labor that all may be brought in subjection to him.

3. Let all Incendiaries be branded, all such as are stirrers up of Strife and
Division, that are Salamanders, that love to live in the Fire, that are
Firebrarnds in Church and Commonwealth, that are Instruments of Contention in
Court and Country; let such be marked in the Churches, and let them be abhorred
by all that love God, Romans 16. 17. they are Instruments of great evil: Let
their Corruptions be kept under by good Laws, and their Manners healed. It Is a
bitter Imprecation the Apostle has, Gal. 5. 12. I would they were cut off that
trouble you.

There is a Story, that the Swevians had a Law, That in a fray where Swords
were drawn, if a Woman or a Child did but cry Peace, though they were a great
way off, they must end the quarrel, or else he died that struck the next Blow
after Peace was named. But alas, where Contentions are, the noise is so great
that those that cry Peace are not heard; nay, those that speak of Peace are
accounted Enemies. Some are of such unquiet spirits, they make the places where
they live uncomfortable.

4. Let it be your great care, That the great Truths of God, the Faith once
committed to the Saints, may be preserved: Buy the Truth, and sell it not,
Prove. 23. 23. Truth is the most precious Jewel that God has trusted his people
with. Satan has been laboring to rob us of this our greatest Jewel; through
the Apostasy of some, Error has been spread, and Truth is clouded in the eyes
of too many. The preservation of Truth requires much Wisdom, Zeal, Tenderness
and Moderation.

There is a necessity of Wisdom in the management of this great work; for you
will find, that persons that are in Error are of diverse sorts:

1. Some have weak understandings, and yet have sincere hearts, tender
Consciences, and unwillingly differ from the generality of the godly. Pity and
for bearance is due to such.

2. There are others that show much wilfulness, pride and frowardness, nothing
of Conscience; have a Frenzy, a Madness. These ought to be kept from hurting
others.

3. There is a difference to be put between lesser and greater Errors, for
there are Fundamentalia in Fide, which are called Magnalia Dei, and there are
Minutila: Zeal must be wisely ordered, according to the nature of Truths. It
would argue Hypocrisy to be substantial in Circumstantial Truths, and
circumstantial in the Substantials of Faith and Repentance. Paul's counsel to
Titus was, in matters of Consequence to affirm constantly, Tit. 3. 8. but to
avoid needless questions, ver. 9. Those Truths that more especially concern
Gods glory and man's salvation, should be especially prized and preserved.
Labor to keep the great truths of God in credit.

It would not consist with love to God and Jesus Christ, to tolerate that which
would blaspheme the Name of God, or damn the Souls of men:

Neither would it consist with our profession of love to Christ or Saints, to
trouble those that peaceably differ from the generality of Gods people in
lesser things. Those that are like to live in Heaven with us at last, we should
endeavor they might live peaceably with us here. Those that differ in lesser
things, and (...) ^^^ringe the just Liberties of others, why should they not
have (...) A well-bounded Toleration were very desirable in all Christian
Commonwealths, that there may be no just occasion for any to compl^in of
Cruelty or Persecution; but it must be such a Toleration, that God may not be
publicly blasphemed, nor Idolatry practiced.

Neither ought any Error to be tolerated, that has a tendency in its own
nature to Profaneness, or the disturbing of Peace and Order in Church or State.
You are to labor to do all things so, that you may keep God and Christ with
you.

Though it be the duty of Magistrates to see that the great Truths of God be
not vilified, nor trampled in the dirt; yet this I judge I may confidently
affi^m, That Truth never g^t ground by a violent opposition of smaller Errors:
Yet it is the duty of the people of God to contend for the least of Truths, and
it should be their endeavor in the Spirit of love and meekness, to convince
persons of their lesser Errors, and those that do differ ought to be of a
teachable spirit, and to keep a holy fear of departing from the common faith,
though in the least things; for, when persons easily let go lesser Truths, they
quickly fall into great Errors.

Secondly, I have a word to my Reverend Brethren in the Ministry; and this I
would press upon my self and you.

1. Let us all be quickly and deeply sensible of the wounds of Sion, of
breaches in the Walls of Jerusalem, else we cannot pray aright for its healing
and repairing; let not us be secure, while Sion is s^ck: Let it be our care to
kill the Cockatrice in the Egg, to make an end of Differences as soon as they
begin: if breaches be not repaired, they g^ow great quickly, if a house be on
fire, if the fire be not quenched quickly, afterward it will be too late to
attempt it. Let not the beginnings of Divisions be contemptible; a weak Enemy,
being slighted, becomes potent: A wound when it is green may be quickly healed,
but if it be let fester and gangrene, at last it is past cure. The spirits of
persons are not much imbittered at first, whereas afterward they become
irreconcilable. As you are Watchmen, so watch the times and seasons to
perserve and recover Peace in the places God has set you in.

2. Labor to see Eye to Eye; be of one mind and heart: this will help to make
up the glory of the best times. Isa. 52. 8. Thy watchmen shall lift up the
voice, with the voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye:
they shall be of the same judgment, and speak the same thing. We that are
Leaders of the people, must take heed we do not cause them to err: Let it be
our care to subject our judgments to the Word of God, and take heed that we
our selves never become Sect-masters; and therefore we had need beware lest
Pride lead us into Error and Singularity. It should be the great work of
Ministers, to keep themselves humble, to tread in the steps of our dear Lord,
who is our Pattern.

3. Labor to reconcile Differences by strong Arguments, with meekness of
Spirit; put an end to Divisions, if Self-denial will do it; become all thing to
all men. Let it be your great aim to unite men to Christ, and one unto another.
And for that end, Deny your selves for Christ's sake; bear as far as you can
without sin, with the weakness and frowardness of those that are sick.

4. Let not the Kids of the Flock be forgotten, they are Members with us of the
same Body, let them have your love and care; pray much for them, labor to
teach them the good ways of the Lord, the Trade-way to Heaven: and the more
hopeless you are of those that are grown to years, by reason of their
Stubbornness, the greater let your care be of those that are but in their
tender years: Catechizing would be of great use in every Congregation; and
where there is but one Officer in a Church, and no more can be had, it will be
necessary to get the help of some able Christian in the work of Teaching the
Children of the Congregation.

Thirdly, A further word of Counsel, is to all you Saints of the Most High,
that love Sion, and are sensible of the sicknesses of it.

1. Labor to get all your Parts and Gifts sanctified, that they may not puff
you up, and ensnare you. Some of you through the goodness of God, and his rich
grace, have greater Seize in the knowledge of the Mysteries of the Gospel
then others, be you more exemplary for Humbleness and Meekness then others. One
great reason why there are so many Sicknesses in the daughter of Sion, is,
because the Gifts of Christians are no more sanctified: when Gifts are not
sanctified, they occasion Pride the Mother of Contention; so that those that
should lead the people into Peace and Love, lead them into Divisions, and are
Firebrands in the Houses of God.

2. Endeavor to mortify those Lusts that incline you to Contention; for
Contentions do not come so much from outward provocations, as from inward
corruptions: Jam. 4. 1. All wars come from lusts; if Pride, Passion, and
Self-love were mortified, there would be more peace and agreement: but men's
lusts are so dear to them, they will rather adventure their own peace and the
Churches, then part with them.

3. Labor for that Wisdom that is from above, which is pure, gentle,
peaceable, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, Jam. 3. 17. If
you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, ver. 14. but be
ashamed whatever your parts and gifts are. Take our Saviors counsel, Mark 9.
50. Have salt in your selves, and peace one with another: the salt of Wisdom
tends to Peace and Unity.

4. Be sure you love the public good of Sion; if the love of Sion does reign
in your hearts, you will seek the welfare of it: It was the true Mother that
would not suffer the Child to be divided. Thou should so love the peace of
the Church, that when a storm begins thou should say, If I am the man that
cause this, cast me out, let the Church have her peace. The Romans had a Temple
dedicated Jovi depositorio, the Senators went thither and laid down their
mutual Contentions, before they went to the Senate house: and diverse of the
Heathen would lay aside their private Quarrels for the Common Good, which does
shame some Christians in our days.

5. Let those that agree in Fundamentals, and have Union with the same Head,
walk together in love and peace: this we are pressed to Phil. 3. 16. Why should
there not be a hearty love between those that are of the same Faith? Remember
that the Peacemakers are blessed: Peace and Union are humane Saviors to
Countries and Churches; Dulce nomen pacis, Psalm. 133. But you must also
remember this, That your labor for Unity will be in vain, if you are enemies
to Order: Keeping the Order God has appointed, is the way to Peace and Unity.
The Church is that one Body of Christ, yet this Body is made up of distinct
Members, and every Member has its own operation; when every Member does its
own office, the Body is most lovely; yet where the foundation is gold, silver,
and precious stones, though there be some hay and stubble in the
Superstructure, there ought to be a Christian for bearance.

6. Pray for the Health of Sion, for the Peace of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 6. If
the Spirit of Prayer for Unity were poured out upon the people of God, we
should not be long without the blessing of Peace in the Churches.

Pray then that Means may be effectual for the recovery of the daughter of Sion
from her Sicknesses; that Gileads Balm and Gileads Physicians may do good.

Pray down Divisions.

Pray down Error and Profaneness.

Pray that the daughter of Sion may not want Nursing-fathers, that the Land of
Liberty may not become the House of Bondage; and this will be the way to have
the God of Peace dwell among us. As we carry it toward God, so will God
manifest himself unto us: Let as cry as the Prophet, Jerem. 17. 14. Heal us, O
Lord, and we shall be h^aled. A like Prayer we read in Psalm. 60. 2. God has
promised, that if we pray and humble our selves, he will hear from heaven, and
heal the Land, 2. Chron. 7. 14. and sometimes he does heal a froward people,
when they are like to perish of their wounds; Isa. 57. 17, 18. I have seen his
ways, and I will heal him: when we go about to heal by our own skill without
God, we heal but slightly, Jer. 8. 11.

I shall only add some Motives to press every one in his place and calling,
to labor to recover the health of the daughter of Sion.

Motive 1. If there be Sickness in the Church, there will be little health in
the Commonwealth: In the Land of Judah, when the building of the Temple was
neglected, the Worship of God defiled, a decay in Religion, it never went well
with the Commonwealth. Let us believe it, that things amiss in the houses of
God, are the chief cause that it goes ill with the Country.

2. Sicknesses in Churches endanger the damnation of the Souls of many; they
hinder Conversion, harden many hearts, bring the Ways and Worships of God into
contempt; and these Evils are the fruit especially of Division among those that
profess Godliness: If Contentions reign in Churches. either the world will
never think well of Christ, or never believe such Members of Churches are
Christ's Disciples, John 13. 35.

What account can be given at last for this, that Christ and the true Religion
are contemned by the world for the sake of the Professors of it? It Is sad, that
in our days many Professors live as though there were no Canaanites nor
Perizzites in the Land. If ever you would have Christ and his Ways well
thought of, labor after Unity; If you would have any more Converted by the
Preaching of the Gospel, labor after Unity; If you would enjoy your
Church Priviledges, and your Civil Peace, labor for Unity; If you would have
God remove his frowns, his afflicting hand from us, labor after Unity; If ever
you would be serviceable to Christ, and one to another, labor after Unity.

The members of the Body do not give mutual nourishment, except they be joined
each to other. It is not enough that you keep up the Ordinances of God for his
honor, for the good of your Souls, and for the good of the Souls of others,
except you remove the stumblingblocks that that lie in the way of others, your
Contentions, and Covetous Practices, etc.

O you that are the Professors of Religion! it seems to be in your hand to save
or damn Souls, your gracious Conversation might be a means to convert others,
and the contrary may be a means of damning others.

3. Endeavoring to recover the health of the daughter of Sion, will be as
cross a work to the Devil as any you can do; it will be a crossing of Satan in
one of the greatest designs he has on foot in the world: he is always either
acting the part of a Lion, or the part of a Serpent, either persecuting by open
Enemies, or dividing dearest friends. Those that have reconciling Spirits, that
are Peace makers, counter-work Satan, they oppose him in his great design.

4. For your Encouragement, know, that the Lord does in a special manner care
for Sion; He loves the Gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob,
Psalm. 87. 2. The Church is more dear to him then the Commonwealth: As God, he
cares for the Commonwealth; as a Father he cares for the Church: yet
Magistracy is Gods Ordinance, for the help and preservation of the Churches.
And God in giving his Laws, does first command things concerning himself and
his Worship.

The Church is supposed to be a poor Orphan, and Kings and Queens and to be
their Nursing fathers and Nursing-mothers, Isa. 49. 23.

5. It will be an Honor to you, to be Instruments to heal the daughter of
Sion; God will take it kindly at your hands, and honor you that thus honor
him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Those that build the old wasle places, that raise up the
foundations of many generations, such shall be called, The repairers of the
breaches. Isa. 58. 12.

6. Consider this, the time may come that Churches, Ordinances, Communion with
Saints, may be more precious then the Gold of Ophir.

I shall close with this one Word, which is to Exhort and Persuade you all, to
encourage and strengthen the Hearts and Hands of those that God has in a
special manner made Physicians; do as the people did, Nehem. 10. 29. They clave
to their Brethren the Nobles, etc. Take heed of discouraging them, but say to
those that are your Rulers. This matter of Healing the daughter of Sion belongs
to you, but we will be with you, Ezra 10. 4. then it is well, when all work
together for God. It is said, 2 Chronicles. 30. 26. Hezekiah humbled himself, and
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and wrath came not in his days. If the
Lord give us hearts to take these Counsels which he has offered to us this
day, we shall be the more likely to go to our fathers in peace, and leave a
blessing behind us for posterity.

FINIS.
THere is now going to the Press sundry excellent and divine Poems, entitled,
Meat out of the Eater; or, Meditations concerning the Necessity, End, and
Usefulness of Afflictions unto Gods Children; All tending to prepare them for,
and comfort them under the Cross. By Michael Wigglesworth.


