A particular and full ACCOUNT Of several Great Matters relating to IRELAND OF
THE Burning and Destroying several Places by the Popish Army; As it was
delivered from Colonel Walker, Governor of Londonderry, and others his Friends
which came with him from Ireland, to their Friends at Chester, August 24. 1689.
With an Account of Col. Walkers Reception and Entertainment.
Licensed,

August 27. J.F.

SIR, IT was my good fortune on Wednesday last to meet with Mr. Geo. Walker the
Famous and Fortunate Governor of Londonderry, and others of his company in
their way from Edenbourgh to Chester; from whence the said Governor goes in the
Stage Coach for London, where probably you will meet him soon after the arrival
of this Letter: He has been highly Complemented and Caressed by all sorts of
People on the Road, and his company is very Acceptable to all who are well
wishers to the Protestant interest, and I having had the Honor of a former
Acquaintance with him, took the Liberty to Enquire perticularly of him and his
Company concerning the present Posture of Affairs in Ireland, especially
Londonderry. I understand from them, that although the Siege was carried on
with all possibe Vigor, and that the continual throwing in of Bombs into the
City, which were reckoned to be about Six hundred, and thereby some houses
Demolished, and most of them Defaced; yet the Walls have received no great
Damage, their great Guns having made no considerable Impression. And that tho
the Besieged were Reduced to the greatest Extremity; Yet their diet was not so
extremely Bad (as has been reported) and for an Instance take this account:
That when Coll. Stewart came from the Island of Inch to visit them, he was
treated at Dinner with a fat Turkey, a dish of Chickens and a dish of green
Peace, and that he in requital for their civility sent them from the Island a
Present of 30 milch Cows, and it is worth the observation that Coll. Michelburn
could find a way to preserve two Excellent Horses in a Seller under Ground,
which he presented to Major General Kirk: Upon my farther enquity, I find, that
several of the most ancient Persons in Londonderry have survived the miseries
of War and Famine, as Mr. John Mogridge, Alderman Jervice Esquire Mr. Robert
Shennan and others; when on the other side some of the younger and more likely
Persons are Dead, as Mr. Whittle Minister of Ballyhazzy, Mr. Wadmorth Minister
of Erigil, Dr. Allexander Lindsey, Mr. William Church and his Son, and many
others too tedious to be Recited in this Letter; I understand likewise that all
the Iron Mills in that Country are Destroyed: That all the Towns and Gentlemen's
Houses in the Counties of Londonderry, Donnegal and Tyrone are burnt to the
Ground except the City of Londonderry, The Towns of Strabone, Colrain,
Dungannan and Magharfels, which last was preserved by the kindness of some
Irish man whose name I do not yet know, he having no mind to be discovered; I
understand that Capt. Richard Crofton, Mr. Hugh Hammell, Mr. Monroe, Left.
Michelburn and Capt. Robert White (a Gentlman who in mere Gallentry left his
Estate in England, and put himself into Londonderry) are all made Colloners of
Foot, Mr. Allexander Stewart is a Major, James Manglin of Mayla. Pridge, and
John Wright, of Mory More, are Captains; Robert Gregory and his Brother,
Richard Hammon and his two Brothers are Officers, and all Established under the
Kings pay by Major General Kirk, who as we are informed by some Persons on
board the victualing Ships returned from Londonderry was then in Colrain, which
the Rebels Deserted upon the news of his Approach, and so also did the Rebels
at Sligo upon the approach of the Iniskilling Forces, leaving Fourteen pieces
of Canon behind them; It is likewise confirmed beyond all doubt and question,
That at the engagment of the Iniskilling men with the Irish Forces, there were
about three Thousand of the Enemy Killed and Drowned, that Major General
Macarty being shot through the Arm and the Thigh, was taken Prisoner at
Wattlibridge, and Sixty Officers with him: They tell me, That the Country about
Derry, though much Wasted and Uninhabited, is yet Clear and Freed from the
Irish; That the Market in London Derry, being to be Supplied with good Store of
fresh Provisions; That there is an Appearance of a very plentiful Harvest; but
much of it will be Lost and Spoiled, for want of Laborers to Reap and Save it.
Major General Kirk has sent Three Ships into Scotland, to bring home the
Scattered and Distressed People who fled thither for Refuge: I wish the like
Course were taken hereabout, that so Multitudes of poor People might be
Conveyed back, who are not able to pay for their Fraught. I spoke with the
Master of a Ship lately come from Londonderry, who tells me That as he Sailed
hither being near the Coast of Ireland, he saw Five or Six of the English
Frigates Playing upon Carrickfergus, and they off the Castle at them; part of
the Fleet which attended Duke Schomberg into Ireland, returned hither on Monday
last, who reports, That they left him with his Army in Bellfast, in which Place
a certain Priest with two others of his Crew were so Hardy as to Lurk privately
to Spy and take a View of our Forces; who being Discovered and brought
Prisoners before the Duke, he Generously set them at Liberty, desiring them
with all Expedition to hasten to their King, and give him an Account, That he
was come so far to make him a Visit, and that if it were too much Trouble to
him to Travel so far, he would be at the Pains to wait upon him at Dublin. We
expect with much Impatience to hear the Issue of this Expedition into Ireland;
(whether more Horse and Foot are daily Shipping off from these Parts) the
Success whereof, will very much Influence the Restitution of the Protestant
Interest there; and will particularly Redound to the Advantage of you, and of

Your humble Servant T.W.
Liverpool Aug. 24. 1689.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE Art of curing Diseases by Expectation; with Remarks on a supposed Great
Case of Appoplectick Fits: Also most usesul Observations on Coughs,
Consumptions, Stone, Dropsies, Fevers, and Small Pox; with a Confutation of
Dispensatories, and other Various Discourses in Physic. By Gideon Harvey, M.
D. 12 s. Sold by James Partridge at Charing Cross, and Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall.

THE Conclave of Physicians, in Two Parts, Complete; detecting their Intrigues,
Frauds, and Plots against their Patients, and their destroying of the Faculty
of Physic: Also a Peculiar Discourse of the Jesuits Bark, the History thereof,
with its true Use and Abuse. Moreover a Narrative of some Eminent Cases and New
Principles in Physic, of greater Use than any yet known: By Gideon Harvey, M.
D. their Majesty's Physician of the Tower, and Fellow of the College of
Physicians of the Hague: In 12 s. Both Printed for, and sold by James Partridge
at the Post House at Charing Cross.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge at the Post House at Charing Cross.
MDCLXXXIX.


