AN ANSWER TO A Scandalous and Deceitful Pamphlet: ENTITLED, Considerable
Queries humbly tendered touching Reducement of the Excise to the Customs;
Published by Necessity.
BY a lover of truth, and discoverer of fawning cringing companions, who having
little wit and much confidence; a large proportion of ignorance in affairs
they entermedle with; blinded with desire of Gain, and large Salaries, pretend
the Commonwealths good, while they only aim to enrich themselves, and by base
flatteries, love lobby attendances, and other sneaking applications; think by
fair words to deceive men into a good opinion of themselves, and would make men
believe they are necessitated to confirm them in their employments, or
transfer them to better places, where money is stirring and gain coming in, and
then their work is done: whether the work of the Commonwealth be done or
undone, sink or swim. Which presumptuous boldness, and immodest carriage,
proceeds from a hope they have upon Unkles, or Cozens in the Parliament, as
Necessity who had a Kinsman by his endeavors so powerful as to make a thin
Lawyer, and slender Soldiers, instantly became a sound, substantial
experienced Excise man, and a Cozen Commissioner, although he scarce knew Straw
from Hoppes, or Satin from Buckram, as if there was a communicative power by
the laying on of his Kinsmans hands, to ordain him and infuse new principles of
understanding; and in an instant to make him know the mysteries of all Trade,
and Commerce, the kinds, values, and denominations of all Goods and
Merchandise, and to indue him with qualifications that might fit him to purse
up money sufficient for himself and Ordinary, and yet all this to be accounted
no fimony.

It is almost to be wondered, that the influence of a malevolent Planet whose
motion is so near the earth, by his favorable aspect should have such operation
on so dull a body: That he who had not the audacity to come within a mile of a
Corporation where Bailiffs held jurisdiction, should now be so presumptuously
bold to take upon him to Excise and Judge the people, conceiting that the world
is not governed by so much wisdom, as many Sage men have thought; and being
thus steeld, dare openly appear at the Parliament door, setting forth self in
Print, yea printing himself a considerable fellow; yea more, that the Brats of
his own brains lately wet and squeesed, are so consderable as to be fit for
the guidance of the Parliament. By this it is apparent how little brains and
great Salaries work together; but such persons I hope will be soon espied and
rejected; especially such, as being entrusted and impolyed by the Parliament,
and think it no crime to be ignorant and neglectfull of their own duty, and
upbraid and scandalize those that are knowing and diligent in their trust,
shall not only be judged unfit for any other employment, but as unprofitable
and unfaithful servants be thrust out, and wiser and honester men employed in
their rooms. Such men make a dust, lest their want of ability should be
discerned; and puddle the waters, that you may not see the shallowness of
their understanding, and how inconsiderately they manage the trust reposed in
them; like Lapwings to draw you from their nest, make most noise where there is
least cause.

Page 1. He says the receipt of the Excise is 300000 l. per an.
notwithstanding the great obstructions, and is daily increasing.

Answ. There will, and needs must be great obstructions, whilst men of no
better abilities and insight into Trade, have the management thereof; for what
can be expected from men that know nothing of regulating matters of Commerce
and Trade? Merchants and Traders that understand all the ways, and by-ways of
Trade, will easily out-wit ignoramusses, and inferior officers can easily see
their Mr. Commissioners ignorance, and although in words they applaud him, yet
may play their games with the Merchants, and other Traders to their advantage,
whilst such a Commissioner is blinded with a notion of his deserving into that
he never knew nor understood.

And for the daily increase of that revenue; I cannot but wonder at the
ignorance of the Author, for many years past, when wars were in the Land, and
the Parliament had not the whole Nation under their power, yet the Excise was
then about 400000. l. and now it is about 300000. l. per an. this is the
growing receipt like a Cowes tail downwards.

It Is true for two years last past, some seeming small improvement has been in
the receipt of the Excise, but if the same be examined it will appear to be
only by farming it out, whereby the people have been most miserably exacted
upon and oppressed, not only by a due taking the utmost for Excise of
Commodities, but also forcing Innkeepers and others to pay an Annual sum for
above what their Annual Excise would come to, or else by the frowns and favors
of them or their unreasonable farmers, to put them into a worse condition by
fines and seizures of their goods; procuring Licenses for Alehouses to be taken
on their own terms, or if the parties consent not they are suppressed, and a
number such shirking tricks, grievous to the people. All which I hope the
Parliament will not only reform, but also punish the Authors of such
exorbitances.

It is true as Necessity says, the Receipt of the Customs is a vast receipt,
and he might have said a growing receipt, for it has advanced under the
Management of the present Commissioners. That in every one of these four last
years they have accounted for between three and four hundred thousand pound
per an. although in every one of these years, such hindrances have happened,
that have much prejudiced that Receipt, as in former years have not been known.
As first, the prohibition of French Wine, which if imported as formerly would
have added 40000. l. per an. to the receipt. The Portugal Trade about 30000. l.
per an. The Levant and Turkey Trade, about 40000. l. per an. The Barbados and
other American Trade about 30000. l. per an. all of which have been wanting to
the receipt of Customs, in some of those years, and some of the most
considerable of them wanting still. And although the trade of Portugal be come
into the receipt of late, yet not in that proportion as was heretofore. The
trade of Barbados and other Islands are now added to the receipt; yet there
wants the trades of Muscovia, Holland, and the east Country, whereby it is much
less then otherwise it would be; as also, the French, Levant and Turkey trade,
are lost to that receipt.

Undoubtedly if such a free trade were now in England, as was in Anno 1648. or
any year before, the receipt of the Customs would rise to 500000. l. per an.
if managed with the same or the like judgment, care, skill, and industry, they
now are by the present Commissioners and officers.

In the same Page Necessity further says, the Excise is a full check to the
Custom, and the Customs a full check to the Excise; if ignorance were not the
mother of this, he would never have published; there sits an honorable
Gentleman in Parliament, who is one of the checks to the Customs, and can
inform how true this assertion is.

But if the Customs be a full check to the Excise, why is not that receipt
bettered by that check of the Customs? For it is evident that of those
Commodities imported, which are most unlikely to be conveyed away without
payment of Custom and Excise, the Commissioners of the Customs do Annually
receive above double as much money as the Commissioners of Excise for the same
Commodities, due regard in this calculation being had as well to the values
set, or taken for the said goods on the duties payable to the respective
receipts, as also deduction for any of them exported.

And since Necessity asserts from his own mouth, that the Excise is a full
check to the Customs, and the Customs to the Excise; why then should not the
Parliament (I hope they will on Englands behalf) command both the
Commissioners of the Customs, and Commissioners of Excise, to give in their
several accounts perfect, for what has been collected for every distinct
kind and sort of goods imported, and if either of them have been deficient,
that they will see the Commonwealth righted, out of the estates of such as are
culpable?

And this seems but just in respect each set of Commissioners have considerable
Salaries, viz. the Commissioners of Customs 4 d. in the pound for their
Salarie, and for securing to the Commonwealth the whole receipt of the
Customs every 24 day of June, how much soever stands out unreceived, or is
lost by the insolvency or nonperformance of any Collector, as also to forbear
all manner of trade as Merchants, and to pay out of the said 4 d. per l. some
additionall Clerks, and to satisfy the incident charges expended for the
better management of that affair, as appears by the Contract betwixt the late
Parliament, and the present Commissioners of Customs, extant in the Records of
Parliament.

And the Commissioners of Excise have 3 d. in the pound for their Salarie,
without any engagement for debts, or incident charges.

The least of which Salaries is a sufficient reward and consideration either to
the aforesaid account or satisfaction.

There is an old proverb, whem Gamesters fall out true men come by their goods;
and Necessity has put me upon the discovery of such ajust experiment, as may
deter weak unskilful men from their bold attempts, for the same or like places
of profit. And as it is fit to recompense men of parts and abilities, that serve
the Commonwealth well, and profitably, so it is just to punish such as dare
take upon them public trust, without skill, or ability, to manage the same
sutably to the duty incumbent on them.

It Is man-like to beat a quarreller with his own weapon, the say Necessity will
make a man fight, and it will not be amiss to turn the mischief he intends to
others upon his own pate, that so he may do no more hurt with his pen, then
he could formerly do with his Pike.

Some men are opinionated they are fit for every employment, able to undertake
any business, and would have others believe them to be the only useful men in
peace and war.

And when men of parts after long experience, great travel, and diligent
study, with much hesitation, are hardly persuaded to take a command, or any
other employment of charge, doubting their sufficiency, you shall have a
confident pettifogger turn his buckram bag into a snapsack, and instantly
become a Colonel, and Commander of a garrison, where he may have little to do,
and lie far enough from his enemy, and never attempt any thing worthy the name
of a Soldier; yet there is necessity he be paid as well as he has hazards his
life daily. And when the wars are done, at first dash can have wit enough, with
help of friends, to be a Commissioner of Excise, although a place that would
require more solidity, and better experience then he could find either in his
snapsack, or buckram bag; yet is so bold to put himself in print, and thinks
all men's understandings are shallow as his own, and hopes to raise so much mud
at the Custom House, that you shall never see what water runs besides the mill
at the Excise: page 1. he asserts the Receipt of the Excise annually to be
300000 l. and page 3. he says the annual Receipt of native Commodities to be
150000 l. then it must follow that the Receipt of imported goods, is the other
moity and but 150000 l. And I do not believe upon examination it will appear to
be so much, and that the Receipt of the Customs for the same is double as
much. And yet the charge of collecting the Excise, is much more as he
confesses, page 1. to be about 2 s in the pound, which he calculateth upon the
whole Receipt of Excise; as well for goods imported as for native commodities:
the last of which were for the most part farmed, and so bring no charge, except
3 d. per l. to the Commissioners. And if Necessity understood the business of
the excise, he might have told you, that the sums of money raised by farming
the Excise without charge by the pound, other then is aforesaid, being deducted
from the sum collected for goods imported, and other native goods not farmed,
and the whole charge of officers, and other incident charges being
proportioned, as in right it ought to be at the latter end of the charge of
collecting the Excise, does amount unto about 3 s. 8 d. or 4 s in the pound,
for goods imported, but when gain is the end, mists and dark clouds are the way.

I observed before that Necessity concludes the Excise, a full check to the
Customs, as they now stand, and yet within four or five lines, he says it was
once a perfect Check: I would gladly know by what Logic, he can distinguish
between full and perfect, in that sense wherein they are applied.

In the end of the 1. page he says the Officers of Excise formerly put aboard
ships, and at water side, were taken off by the Committee of Regulation of
Excise: which, he says, was done to save charges, and the issue of it is, that
few rich goods are entered either in Excise or Customs, and both duties lost.

Ans. The Officers of Excise on shipboard and at water side were a great
Charge to the State, and those aboard were a great grievance to the owners of
shipping lying there at their charge for meat and drink, and no benefit at all,
for they only joined with the Officers of the Customs on board to take the
numbers and marks and outward forms of goods and come along with the Lighters
to the Keys: but whether they were silk or thrums, full or empty, they knew
not; and such officers were very like to make Necessities full Check to become
a perfect Check; whereas nothing could come as perfect from the Tidesmen, but
must be expected from the Land-waiter, the main and chief end of Tidesmen being
aboard is to prevent any goods fromm being delivered without due entry.

But it is apparently known, that what through the meannesse of the salary
those tidesmen had, and what through want of care and conscience, not only in
the chief Officers in choosing them, and the behavior of these tidesmen, they
trusting to the Officers of the Customs, and the Officers of Customs trusting
to them: it did plainly appear they were more burdensome then profitable, for
Mr. Samuel Moyer and others sitting in Mincing Lane London, authorized for
regulating the Officers, and management of the Customs, gave it as their
opinion, that thenceforth all the Officers of Excise employed on shipboard, and
at the water side, should be dismissed; and that the sole management for
importation, exportation, and transportation, should be in the Commissioners of
Customs and their Officers. And it was ordered accordingly: by which
dismission the Commonwealth saved a large sum of money Annually.

Since which time the Customs have been advanced to (near or altogether)
double what they then were. And yet there is no entry for landing goods passed
by the Commissioners of Customs, until the Deputy of the Commissioners of
Excise do certify that they are satisfied for the Excise due thereupon; and
yet Necessity says the Custom is lost and Excise too. That the custom is not
lost appears by the advance thereof: but that the Excise is lost appears is
manifest by the declension of that Receipt, whilst the Deputy for Excise
certifies he is satisfied, and Necessity says it is not paid.

It Is manifest then how he manages the Excise; heretofore one of the ablest of
the old Commissioners, did sit in the Excise Office at the water side, but of
late no such thing. And indeed it matters not, if there be no wiser among them
then Necessity, who could not tell what to do, if he were there. And therefore
page 2. he says, Attendance at the Custom house is the least work of the
Excise Office. And so the work too mean for a man of his worth: whereas it is
known to all experienced men, that it is the very key of the work, and the
foundation for a true Receipt, for Goods inported, and as this is well or ill
done, so it saves or loses the duty; for by this they can oly call men to
account, and compel payment for goods imported when they are sold.

It Is manifest that the decay of Excise is the deceiving the Commonwealth; for
if the Custom be paid and due entry made, and the entry certified by the
Excise Officers, that they are satisfied for Excise, it will be no hard matter
to find where the fault is. And I dare affirm, if the Parliament will please
to command an account of the Commissioners both of Customs and Excise as
aforesaid, it will appear that Necessity does not well (or knows not how to)
manage such a Receipt: and therefore he is troubled, that any wiser then
himself are employed in public Receipts, as appears in the bottom of his
first page where speaking of the Committee for Regulating the Excise, he writes
(not prints) Colonel Harvey one of the Commissioners for the Customs was a
powerful Member. For my part I conceive it was well for the Commonwealth he
was a Member of that Committee, and a Commissioner of the Customs; for all
that know him do know him to be experienced in all manner of Traffic, and
Commerce, of a quick understanding, industrious, and excellent in dispatch of
business, and I hope truly honest; one made up with qualifications fit for a
public Receipt. I might say more, and God knows I flatter not, but speak what
I know, and Necessity constrained me to say something, because he is named so
emphatically with Necessities own handwriting (if I mistake not) but whether
to commend or defame him I know not, he comes off so sneakingly.

The rest of his Pamphlet is stuffed with such reason as he can devise to show
his fear, lest the Excise be brought to the Customs, and managed by one and
the same number of persons, and this alteration he knows may undo him, and
therefore is in a bodily fear, not having a friend in Parliament to cover his
black head with a white lock, and is like to want that fine dress of
commendations whereby he was so well set out by his Uncle, that he became one
of the Parliaments darlings, and an Officer in so great a trust. And therefore
now lays about him, throws dirt in some men's faces, frowns on others, grows
saucy with his Masters, swells high in his own imagination, offers the example
of Holland and Leghorne, to abate the ancient and solid revenue of the
Customs, and to inhaunce the new (and it is hoped not intended to be long
continued) Receipt of the Excise, as p. 4. which last was set on foot only in
times of extremity and expected to cease when the pressing occasions of the
Nation will permit. I cannot easily pass by his argument, to expel pride,
luxury, and drunkenness, by making proud, luxurious, drunken persons pay more
for their sins.

If the man did but know what necessity he has to study his own business, for
which he is so well (if not too well) paid, he might be able out of his own
experience to tell others, that Wines and silk were never known so dear as of
late times, and is there any less will or desire to the excessive use of
either? And does not daily experience manifest, that drunkards will have drink,
set what rate you will upon it: and are there not many that can hardly get 7 s.
a week by hard labor, that will spend 4, or 5 s. in a day though wife and
children starve at home? Solomon says, a rod for he fools back, it is not
pecuniary mulcts, but corporal punishment that must deter men from such sins.

I do not a little wonder that any dares in a Christian Commonwealth propound
such a motion, as if we should imitate the whorish Court of Rome, who allows
common Stews because they fill the Popes coffers and so increase their
treasure with the hire of a Whore, or as the Russian, when reproved for
drunkenness, replies, Oh its good for my master the Emperor, he being the
great Merchant of Strong Water, and cares not to punish that sin because it
brings in profit. But I hope there will be no Necessity to plead against such
abominable gain, for you shall find him in the lower end of that page, talk a
little goodish, he speaks of reformation, but it is not a throughout reforming
he aims at, (the Excise are perfect already) but it is to pass upon the
Custom Officers before such reducement.

If it were good for the Commonwealth to make any such reducement, (as in my
opinion it is not, but more for the public advantage to keep the Receipts
apart) good reason might be for some variation of Salaries: but I know that is
not his drift to observe, nor mine to reply; yet let me tell him, that the
salaries that now are, were settled to the Officers of the Customs upon very
great judgment, and prepared, and proposed by persons of unquestionable
abilities, skill and experience, honesty and good affection, viz. The Committee
of Merchants then sitting in Mincing Lane, authorized thereunto by Act of
Parliament, Anno 1648, ad 49. of which Mr. Samuel Moyer, and Mr. Richard
Hutchinson were two, with many other choice and select persons, who first
presented them unto the Committee of the Navy and Customs, who reported the
matter to the Parliament then sitting, and was by them confirmed: and dares he
blunder out questions whether it be fit or unfit? And then from quarrelling at
their salaries, he falls upon their persons, and in general terms, charges
many with trading as Merchants and Factors, and indefinitly accuses all with
obstructing the Excise, violation of trust, concealing and defrauding the State
their dues.

Doubtless it was a more then ordinary passion that urged Necessity thus to
lay about him and spare none: Why man, is there never an honest man at Custom
house, not Alderman Titchbourne, nor Mr. Samuel Moyer? you made a critical
distinction betwixt full and perfect: why are you now so indefinite, sure you
never observed that rule in Logic, that every indefinite proposition must be
construed universally; and if so, thou have then comprehended them with the
rest. But I dare undertake you did it unwittingly, or without wit, otherwise
you would never have adventured to run the hazard of their displeasure, and go
against a known rule to speak evil of dignities, but you may hope they have
greater business then to trouble themselves with a -- whose tongue is no
slander, and so forgive, though I know not how they can forget because you have
given them a remembrance in print.

Had it not been better policy to have hid your self behind your large salary
and vast ignorance, and have blessed your self; you were so inconsiderable as
not to be thought on, these being not times for men of poor parts and rich
places to be rampant, when they have to do with an Eagle-eyed State.

You say many of the Custom Officers trade as Factors, it is strange you can
name none but one long since thrown out of his employment; it is not saying but
proving they trade, that makes them punishable. And amongst the many crimes you
lay to their charge in defrauding the Excise, you instance only a case near two
years since of one Opye of Plymouth, who was detected and cast out of his
Collectors place, although he had many friends in the Parliament, and diverse
eminent Officers of the Army, applied in his behalf to the Commissioners of
Customs, yet so just and unbyassed were they to their trust, that no courtship
could prevail with them.

I could tell you of many more in the port of London, and elsewhere, whom they
have cast out for the like offenses, and it might have had some seeming show of
honesty if you had named any at present in employment that had been guilty,
which the Commissioners have winked at: nay I am confident that upon the
exactest inquiry it will not be found that they ever indulged any proved guilty
of this or the like misdemeanors, either in his place or conversation. And
truly I conceive if you knew any such thing by any Officer, there lay a
Necessity upon you to have discovered it to the Commissioners of Custom,
wherein you could not have failed of a fair acceptance, and a due proceeding
against the offender according to justice.

Although Necessity have no law, yet he might have had some modest shame, every
ingenuous man will say these are unhandsome, illegal, uncharistian like
proceedings; and that you rather intend to calumniate then reform: I wish the
Parliament would enforce you to make good your charge, and if you do not, I
shall be enforced to say Necessity has no honesty. And in this Necessity has
showed himself a very busibody, quick ^ighted abroad but dull at home; he can
spy a moat at Custom house, and sees not a beam at the Excise, you might have
reckoned diverse amongst your Commissioners and Officers that keep their trades,
and deal in many Exciseable commodities, did Mr. Morice Thomson, M. Boner, Mr.
Thomas Lentall, with others, as also diverse inferior Officers give over their
trades?

And is there not the like order of Parliament against Excise officers trading
in Commodities Exciseable? is not this thy complaining upon others and
neglecting reformation at home, base hypocrisy? does not this render thee one
that keeps not company with a good conscience and understanding? and does not
thy affirming many to be guilty, and particularly naming but one (and he long
since thrown out of his employment) throw dirt in the face of all, even
Commissioners, Clerks, and al other Officers? And yet I am of opinion, that in
your own conscience you acquit every one in the port of London, and know not
any thing of guiltiness elsewhere: yet with an impudent face you charge the
Officers with concealing goods Exciseable, and defrauding the Excise, due upon
conviction of offenders for non entry of goods.

It is true, the Excise may not be paid, but it is through your own negligence,
or ignorance, or unfaithfulness, and it seems you bring not such sums to
account; but I shall tell you, and make it good, that the Commissioners of
Customs cause all goods seized, to be brought into the Commonwealths
warehouse, and the Excise officers are acquainted with them; whence they are
not delivered before composition, or condemnation, or order of Parliament, nor
before due entry be made of the same, and Custom paid and certified to be
satisfied for Excise by your hand and eyes, indeed your skill, wisdom and
experience, viz. Mr. Tho. Lenthall and Mr. Jo. Crew. And of these as also for
all other goods have the Commissioners of Customs such Certificates and fair
account kept thereof, that when this shall be inquired into, as I hope it will,
and am assured you know will be proved; I wish you be able to answer the
Commonwealth for the sums that they will prove you have certified to have
received: and yet you now assert you have not, but that they are lost to the
Receipt. Believe me, they that have found them, or kept them back, or concealed
them from the Commonwealth, it is just they should be compelled to vomit them
up again.

Well Necessity, I perceive you can play the Orator (or he that comprised the
Book, did it for you) to end highest at last: page 5. and 6. You fall upon the
Commissioners themselves, yet have learned so much wit in your anger as to
charge but some of them [and then it follows in written hand] Commissioners
for Customs, viz. Col. Harvy, Mr. Hildersly, and Mr. Tailor have themselves
strongly obstructed the receipt of the Excise, etc.

Pray, what Necessity was there to charge three Commissioners and not the
other, viz. Alderman Tichborne? I dare assure you no Act was ever done in order
to the management of the Customs, but by and with consent and concurrence of
the whole or major part, although it may be signed or pronounced by one for
orders sake; they Register all their proceedings, and can give an account out
of their diaries of all they ever did as Commissioners: I wish you did observe
the like order, for your own and the Commonwealths sake. The reason then is
plain, that the whole drift of your Pamphlet reports it fawning and scraping to
be continued in your office, and are afraid to name Alderman Titchborne being
a member of Parliament.

But you can mildly take your fellow servants by the throat of their
reputation, and falsely accuse them unto their masters; having herein neither as
a wise man or a Christian well informed your self, nor considered with them for
satisfaction, information, or reformation as it ought to be done. But as the
love of money is the root of all evil, so it is the root of that evil; will
you show against your brethren, the fear of loss of your gainful trade makes
you imitate Demetrius and his Coppersmiths, they cry up the greatness of their
Goddess, and make a tumult and would seem devout observers of that deity, and
inrages the people against the Apostles; But that which troubled them, was,
lest he should lose his gainful occupation: so your jealousy lest your craft
should fail, and your gain lessen, has put you upon this unchristian,
uncharitable behavior, so dishonestly to bespatter these wourthy, religious
and Godly persons.

Could you not consider they were too well known for you to get any Credence by
a bare general accusation.

All men of any eminent trade and business knows, Coll. Harvy, who never
obscurely lived being borne and bred in the City, had a considerable estate
left him, and when he traded as a Silk-man or Merchant, had one of the greatest
trades in London, had the repute of a fair dealer, and was a man of great
business in honorable employment in the service of his Country, and quit
himself like a man of worth and valor, as a Captain, a Major, a Collonell and
Major General, after served in Parliament, and a Commissioner of Customs with
so much industry and fidelity, as a man unwearied with business, that to speak
ingenuously, I know but few men that can and will take the pains which I daily
see him undergo, being naturally inclined to go through with what he
undertakes, and this with his impartial dealing has sufficiently irritated
many men that would be ready to work him a displeasure: but God who gave him a
heart to act by a principle of grace and true love to piety, has carried him
on in his work, that malice it self has not had any just charge against him.

And as for the other Commissioners, if wisdom her self had been set a work
curiously to search, she could not have found men more single hearted, upright,
fearing God and eschewing evil, men that desire in all good conscience to
discharge their duty to the trust reposed in them. And I dare say, it is
believed by all that know them, they are such, and I can with truth and
boldness affirm it, and add this to them all in general, that discreeter,
juster, abler, and men according in one mind and judgment, with love and
respect to one another and all with whom as to their employment they have to do
as Commissioners, never yet such were known to me, and I am persuaded it will
be hard to find such an agreement for so long a time by any four men in the
world, in so eminent an employment.

Yet Necessity stigmatizeth them with the blackest marks of infamy as grand
obstructers of the public revenewes, violation of trust, defrauders of the
Commonwealth, concealers of the duty of Excise.

And yet again, another charge for obstructing the receipt, page 6. They
constantly grant Sufferances.

It Is not true that they constantly grant them, but in one of these cases
following.

1. By way of exportation, and only on such goods where the half subsidy is to
be drawn back and the whole Excise, only for accommodation of trade that they
may be shipped and not pass Graves-end until a Cocket be passed, and the
Excise officers have certified they are satisfied.

2. When Custom is paid and Excise certified to be satisfied for small
parcels, sufferances are granted to bring up the said goods in. Wherries, which
otherwise traders are obliged to do in Lighters.

3. For the landing Graff and bulky goods, as Deals. Masts, Spars, Pitch, Tar,
Hemp, etc. which ever were granted, and without which Merchants could not trade
in those commodities, the lawful Keys, if four times as many, being too few to
take up and store the same.

4. Sufferances are granted to land such goods as no Merchant comes to claim,
and to put them inthe Commonwealths warehouse till the Merchant comes to
demand them, which goods are not delivered without a warrant passed by the
Commissioners of the Customs, which they never pass till the Customs be
first paid, and never suffer the same to be executed until they have
certificate from the Excise officer that Excise is satisfied.

5. And lastly, Sufferances are granted for landing goods transported from
other ports of this Nation to the Port of London, and they are either goods
Exciseable, or free from Excise, as Sea-coles, Corn, Butter, Chief, Wool, etc.

For such goods as are Exciseable there is never any Sufferances granted,
until first the Excise officers hand be subscribed; and these are the
Sufferances this empty headed man makes such ado about, accusing the
Commissioners of Customs for granting sufferances without any Excise officers
hand subscribed; when as they never grant any of the aforesaid sufferances
except that for exportation and goods not Exciseable, but when they have first
granted a warrant, and they never grant a warrant but they first have the
Excise officers hand to certify he has received satisfaction, and that this
is the constant practice at the Customehouse as is daily manifested; and all
this they are authorized to do by the Parliament, for avoiding unreasonable
inconveniences to the Merchants.

And for the goods not liable to Excise, as Sea-coals, etc. You cannot forget,
if you have not quite lost your memory, that about two years since, the
Commisioners of Excise desired a conference with the Commissioners of Customs
concerning sufferances by them granted, where you would needs show how ignorant
you were in the business you would pretend so much knowledge in, and did there
sputter out a deal of nonsense, insomuch as your brethren were ashamed of you,
and like discreet men did inform you in good words, you understood not the
thing you spoke of: were not many officers of Customs and Excise witnesses of
your pertinacious carriage in managing that debate, and were much grieved that a
Commonwealth abounding with many excellent men of parts and integrity, should
be served in so high an employment by a supercilious conceited pragmatick
busibody, that pretends to find holes in other men's coats, when he might have
work enough to employ more wit then the shallow pan of his brains can hold, in
searching out the leaks whereby so much treasure slips beside the receipt of
the Excise, and so begin reformation at home. But to proceed, after your wiser
brethren had persuaded your imperiousness to admit of a debate between them
and the Commissioners for Customs, it was concluded for goods Exciseable from
the Coast, that the ancient and uninterrupted way of sufferances granted
jointly by the Commissioners of the Customs and Excise should be continued,
but as for this new device of your brain for such an injunction for goods that
owed no Excise, they all except your self (wiser in your own conceit then seven
men that can render a reason) could see no cause for, yet you could not rest
with this, but about a month after your survayour or deputy came to the
Commissioners of Customs to let them know, it was expected that sufferances
for goods that owed no Excise, should be signed by the survayour or deputy for
Excise, as well as by the Commissioners of Customs; whereupon the
Commissioners of Customs readily complied (although they knew it useless to
the State) and gave order to their Clerks to prepare and order accordingly.

But the Masters trading to Newcastle, and other parts, refused to go to the
Excise officers for any such sufferances, saying, they were English men and by
law not enjoined thereunto; and that those things required were inovatious and
troublesome, and they could not write the bills well enough to please the
Excise officers; and therefore were necessitated to get the Deputy or some
other Clerks of Excise to write, and so on every entry to pay for two lines
writing 6. d. or 4. d. which upon so many thousand entries would amount unto a
vast sum of money, merely cheated out of their purses, and thereupon the
Ship-masters resolved to land their goods upon tender of their Cockets unto the
Commissioners of Customs, as by law they were enjoined; which the
Commissioners well weighing, and knowing by law no more was enjoined, did
desire the Survayor of Excise to acquaint the Commissioners of Excise
therewith, that except they did show reason to the contrary, the Commissioners
of Customs ought and would proceed to grant sufferances by themselves for all
goods not Exciseable.

But the Survayor of Excise answered, that the Commissioners of Excise did
adhere to their former resolution, whereupon the Commissioners of Customs did
again confer with the Commissioners of Excise, and found but one of them
engaged with the Deputy, and the rest declared they were put upon it by the
Deputy. And I am persuaded it was only Necessity put him upon it, and had it
been carried on their parts, it would have made a good revenue for themselves by
a multitude of six-pennies or groats, which it seems they had projected to have
received: a mere oppression and exaction as ever was thrust upon a people.

Which caused the Commissioners of Customs to send for the Surveyor or Deputy
of Excise T. L. and plainly tell him, that they now discerned the reason of his
strong endeavors for this innovation being of no use but to vex the
ship-masters, and traders, and bring money to his office, and supply Necessity.
And therefore this goes so near the heart of this Miser, that he complains
page the 6. lin. 10. And one of them did sharply rebuke the Surveyor of Excise
for discovering their misdemeanors to the Commissioners of Excise.

But consider this juggling Necessity had urged the Surveyor or Deputy T. L.
upon a foul misdemeanour, for which he was worthily reprehended by the
Commissioners of Customs. And now this shitlecock cries whore first, and lays
misdemeanors upon the Commissioners of Customs; who, as I have said, are men
of unquastionable integrity and ability to manage their trust; yet he has the
impudence to do what he can to blush their reputation: But they are above the
air of his stinking breath, nor can his black mouth bespot their innocence,
and those sharp arrows his bitter words, will retort upon his own soul either
to humble or terrify him.

And yet he has one envenomed dart which he would stick in their very hearts,
and charges the Commissioners of Customs that they have unduely maintained
persons detected of defrauding the Excise; the Devil himself would have been
ashamed to have printed such a lie, it is true he is the Father of lies, and
skillful in making lies, but he was so careful in delivering his oracles that
they should have some color of truth in them, and would so contrive his
answers that whatsoever the event was, yet he would show so much wit as not to
be found in a lie; but though you cannot outwit him, you will out-lie him, take
heed he be not too wise for you at last; how can you think ever to be believed
by honest men? they say, what is bred in the bone, will never out of the flesh,
your first trade in drawing Chancery bills wherein men take liberty to lie at
large, has begotten in you such a custom that you cannot leave it.

You might have done well to have named some of those detected persons, that so
there might have been some color of truth, and that Knaves might be known from
honest men; but you throw your dirt at random, and care not who you daube, and
deprave a great many better men then your self, and till you make good your
charge, they cannot but think as bad of you as you write of them.

But what persons did your wisdom ever detect? I can instance many discoveries
that have been made by the wisdom and insight of the Commissioners of
Customs, of several frauds whereby the Commonwealth was basely cheated, as
that of counterfeit warrants, which all your skill could not find out although
it was chiefly in defrauding the Excise, whereby the Commonwealth was wronged
of many thousand pounds, and was but newly begun to be practiced in the
Customs, but the Commissioners there discovered and found out those unworthy
officers of your putting in, or continuance.

Witness also that notable combination of your dearly beloved Pratt with
Ludlow and Welden Custom officers, what deceitful practices were by them
discovered: I might instance in many more, wherein by the prudence and vigilant
inspection of the Commissioners of Customs, such persons have been detected,
and imprisoned, and cast out, and made incapable of any preferment where they
have to do, and yet this pertinacious piece of confidence says, they maintain
persons detected, etc.

They say that the receiver is as bad as the thief, if you knew this why did
you not reveal it? if you were privy to such unjust practices, you did not well
to conceal them; how have you discharged your trust for these many years? why
did you not complain before? the law upon conviction would punish such with
imprisonment, and forfeiture of double value of the goods that the Excise
amounted unto, and could your fellows be all this while silent in a matter of
so great concernment? and now as if on a sudda'n your conscience were awakened,
you show your self to do something to be talked of, as if you were the only man
that did all business, and they all stand for ciphers; But they know, and I
know, and all the world (that have to do with you) knows you to be a
shatterbraind, ratle-headed man, altogether unfit and unworthy the place you
hold, and those that act with you, know my words to be true, and would be able
to give a better account of their business, if you were out. I have heard and
believe it, that when you crept into this employment, you were presently so
elevated, that having the luck (as you know who has the best) to be named
first in the Act of Parliament, you began to look big, and would take the first
place, and thought your self the best man; and it seems you persist in this
conceit: your brethren like wise men follow their own business endeavoring to
discharge their trust, whilst you neglect to sweep your own door; are raking
in other men's sinkes, and hope to domineer every where as you do in your
office, to put in kindred into employments, and will suffer naught to be done
without applications in private be made to your worship, and be it right or
wrong, nothing must be done but according to your own sense.

But the last, though not the least thing that troubles Necessity, is a
Reducement; and this his fear has occasioned all that he has written before:
for here he shows page 6. what is his main drift, In case Reducement of Excise
to the Custom be adjudged advantageous to the Commonwealth, may not not both
receipts so reduced be managed by persons versed in both employments, that have
suffered in their estates for the Commonwealth, and are of approved integrity,
at the salary of three half pence poundage?

Poor man, thy qualfications have undone thee, it will be to great a work for
your brains, nor are you capable by your own words: you say well that there
should be respect had to men that have suffered for the Comm-wealth; but all
that know you can tell you have been a gainer not a loser by the Commonwealth,
having had diverse good warm places, wherein you have not been wanting to make
the uttermost; and having learned to make advantages of places, you are now
loath to be left out, and then you would imagine your self into the opinion of
good men, that you are one that seeks the welfare of the Nation. And (good
soul) art grieved to see the public treasure so miscarry, and like Absalom, O
that I were Judge in Israel! So, if I had the management of both receipts of
Custom and Excise! and so by glavering words and scraping officious
attendances, you trust to get into an Office which will require a more able,
solider, and better qualified man, then one so low puzed as you set your self
out to be; you see Absalom he had a design or end he aimed at in his
flattering the people, and so have you, and for ought I know it might be better
for the Commonwealth you had Absoloms end, then your own; but you hope to
speed by offering your service cheaper then others will do it for; but I hope
all wise men know, better give 2 s. * a day to a workman, then 12 d. a day to a
bungler: can it be imagined that it is good to trust two such receipts in the
hands of those who is like to bring a Noble to 9 d.

I have many more things to write, but I shall reserve them till I come to
rejoyne with you.

Jeremiah Wattes.

FINIS.

