THE REMONSTRANCE From the Reverend Father in God, FRANCIS LORD BISHOP Of ELY,
And several others, The most Eminent DIVINES Of the CHURCH Of ENGLAND, Against
The Proceedings of the P: O. And The Lords Spiritual and Temporal* That Invited
Him. Being an ADRESS, from the PVLPIT to the KING, in fifteen Sermons;
Denouncing Damnation, etc. To the Abdicators of God's Anointed, and the
Abettors of this Rebellion.

Concilia callida et Inhonesta, pri(...) Front loeta, Tractatudura, Eventu
tristia, Tacitus. Dublin, Printed for Alderman James Malone Bookseller in
Skinner-Row. 1689.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF God's Anointed AND Vicegerent to the Almighty;
JAMES The Second by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, KING.

In Vindication of the Principles of Obedience and Loyalty, always Taught by
the Church of ENGLAND.

This Remonstrance is most humbly Dedicated.

By your Majesty's ever Loyal and Dutiful Subject. JOHN YALDEN.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader!
PArdon me, if I presume to use the King words, at his Majesty's first
Accession to t^^ Crown (viz.) I know the Principles of t^^ Church of England,
are for Loyalty; And I m^^ tell I he too, that Loyalty will be always
constant, where it is accompanied with True Re^^gion. If thou do enquire of
me, whether the Preachers of the Gospel, have fully practice those
indispensible principles, of primitive a^^ pure Christianity, herein taught and
avowed (...) them, to the whole world? I can only tell Th^^ (with the Heathen
Orator) Omnis laus virtut^s, action consistit; If any of them have acted
contra^^ to what they delivered to the People from t^^ Pulpit (where none but
Sacred Oracles should dispensed) it is they only are too blame, And t^ I am
afraid, Even my Bishop here cannot thoroughly excuse himself, yet such as are
innocent cannot, ought not, in Justice to share in those Bit^ Reproaches, which
are most justly due to t^^ Guilty. Tho the late Defection in England, was ve^^
general, and spread it self over his Majesty's ^^minions like the poisonous
infection of an Epi^^mical Contagion, yet I know there are many l^^ and those
Protestants too, that have not bo^^ their knees to Baal, nor worshipped the G^^
Calf, that others have set up, such as will most assuredly, join with the
King, upon afair opportunity, and do now really believe it to be a kind of
Idolatry, to obey the Usurper.

This Remonstrance has followed his Majesty, through all the Meanders, of his
most Barbarous Exile, and is designed chiefly to reclaim such of his Subjects,
to their duty as have been mislead; and bring them to a due consideration of
that natural and sworn Allegiance! which for the most part, both ways, They owe
the King: And to assure the Obstinat persisting Rebel, that his Portion shall
be, amidst all the dire effects of Eternal vengeance, accompanied with the
Cursed Crew of Appostat Angels, still Cursing God, as they Curse the King,
because They can expect no Mercy, by being Sunk below the Depth of all
Repentance.

The first 14 of these Sermons were preached on the 9th of September 1683,
being a day set apart for the most Solemn worship of God Almighty, a day of
Thanksgiving, for the great deliverance of his Majesty and his Royal Brother,
from the Rye house Regicides, etc. And the last for the Defeat of Monmo^th's
Rebellion. So that Sermons Preached upon such Occasions, may be truly taken, as
from persons filled with Extraordinary Devotion, and inspired with a true zeal
for the Honor of Christianity.

To have printed the whole of each Sermon, would have been too voluminous
as-well too chargable to thee. But in this Abstact, is contained the matter,
and design of the several Discourses the Force and Strength of all their
Arguments where any thing is added, it is only to make a Connection, and comes
generally betwixt these two marks [ ] And as the Divinity of these Preachers
does extend itself to an universal Obedience So I hope the Reader will pardon
me, where I apply such Doctrines, to the case of this Rebellion; In fine, I
challenge any man to show me, that I have wrested any thing contrary to the
true sense of my Authors (Though perhaps Some Men's own words, at this time a day,
will be unsavory even to themselves, but such deserve the Character of Atheists
much better than that of Honest Christians) And to that purpose I have directed
the most Malicious Critic where to find the Sermons, by telling him for whom
they were Printed.

A SERMON ENTITLED The Duties of Fearing God and The King, Preached on the 9th
of September, 1683. by John Fitz William D. D.
Prove. 24. verse. 21, 22. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly,
and who knows the ruin of them both?
FEaring God and the King are Duties inseparable. Indeed all the Commands are
so chained together, that he who loosens but a single link, dissolves the whole
chain; who transgresses one, is guilty of all. For tho they were wrote in two
distinct Tables, and distributed under ten heads, or words, (as the Jewish
Docters speak) by God himself; yet his Authority, being the soul which quickened
them, (like the soul animating the several members of the body; gave them all
but one common life and being: So that a particular violation of one, becomes
of accessity an universal destruction to all. And as the Commands, so our
obligations to observe them are connext; if not after that manner as Zeno
affirmed all virtues were, (who promiscuously confounded them together:) yet
so, as Ch^ysippus has explained that Stoical Doctrine, That a man could not be
truly Brave without the conduct of Prudence; nor Prudent, without attending to
Justice; nor Just, without the regulation of Temperance: So in like manner, a
man cannot be piously affected toward God, without being honestly affected
toward Men; cannot express his Love toward the one (in the instances
belonging to him,) without showing it toward the other, in all points which
concern them; and he who pretends to the former: And neglects the latter,
proclaims himself a liar.

The reason of this is plain and obvious, because if I perform the first from a
right principle, out of conscience of my duty toward God requiring it; the
same principle will engage me to do the second, because he demands that
likewise. And on the other side, if the motive of my love to my fellow Creature
man, be his bearing the image of God, I cannot but love and reverence that God,
who fashioned him after his own likeness.

And as there is no dividing, so there is no commuting of duties; our zeal in
one kind, will not make atonement for our remisness in another; our Piety for
Injustice.

But tho'all the commands are inseparably conjoined, yet there is a closer and
more indissoluble union between these two particular ones of ^earing God and
the King, by how much Kings are more lively expressions of God's Majesty and
Power, than ordinary images (other men) are. The wise Man has here mentioned
them as one command; and St. Peter too, even while he uses two words for them,
Fear and Honor, Fear God, Honor the King, for this honoring the King ^ Pet.
2. 17.
is the same act, as fearing of him, or expressive of it. And Kings for their
nearer and exacter resemblance of him, are adorned with his title, wear his
name, and have Psalm. 82. 6. Joh. 10. 34. Exodus 22. 28.
his style given them by Himself; I have said Ye are Gods: and again, Thou
shall not ourse the Gods..

From this strict alliance and union of these two commands, arising out of the
near resemblance between the persons, God and the King, and the Majesty of the
one, and Sovereignty of the other; it is made as impossible to adore God, and
not revere the King, who represents him; as it is to honor the King, and cast
all the contumely we can upon his Lieutenants, or Viceroys, commissioned by
him.

And of necessity it follows, that Subjects withdrawing their Obedience from
their Such was and is James the Second.
Lawful Prince, is a denying the Authority of God, a shaking off His Government
from his Shoulders, a laying Him aside, that he should not reign over The
people of England.
Them. They have not rejected Thee, but Me, that I should not reign over them,
1 Samuel 9. 7.

Treason against the King, is a kind of Sacrilege; a Revolt from Him, an
Apostasy from God; a Resisting Him, an Opposing God; Rebelling against Him,
Fighting with God; the Is not this the case in England.
Setting up a counterfeit Prince against the True One, an introducing a
plurality of Godheads; the Obeying of an Usurper, Idolatry; the slandering His
Anointed and his Footsteps, a Blaspheming God; the blaming His Conduct, a
Quarrelling with Providence.

And as we cannot Fear God, the Supreme Potentate, without Honoring the
Subordinate, who bears His Image and Superscription; so we cannot Honor this
last as we should, without Fearing the former as we ought: We cannot revere the
Copy of Divinity transcribed in the King, without revering the Original, the
Deity, front whom His power came, any more than we can have a veneration for
the picture of a man, and none for his person. We cannot be for maintaining the
Prerogative, while we are clipping the wings of his Power, etc.

There is no bearing true Faith and Allegiance to our King, when we do it not
to our God; no being loyal Subjects to the One, while we are downright Traitors
to the Other. The reason of this is clear, because the honoring and obeying
our Prince should proceed from a Religion toward God; a conscientious regard
to his Authority, exacting the payment of both these; which if they do not,
they are false and spurious, wanting the true and genuine Parent (a right
principle I mean) for their production, and must needs be English Loyalty.
sickle and inconstant, for not being grounded upon a sure and standing bottom:
So that when an Inviting Occasion offers, of promoting our interest to greater
advantage, of serving our ambition with better success, than by Honoring or
Obeying our King; or of Gratifying Malcontents or disgusted Lords?
our Revenge, of Wreaking our Malice, then these are forgot and withdrawn. Or
last of all, when by a declination in the state of affairs He is grown too
weak, to compel Us to render these, Baxter's Holy Common Wealth, These. 137.
then we not only deny the payment of them, but justify it too. Then maxims of
humane Wisdom, the most contrary to these precepts of the Divine, are broached
by Us. That the King is not God's Minister, but the Peoples Servant; and as
theirs, stands accountable to them for his misdemeanors; That his Power being a
Trust only from, and for them, is revokable at their pleasure and discretion,
and they may justly reseize it into their own hands, and for their own behoof,
when they see it is not administered for their good; That wicked, and
irreligious Princes (and all are such whom They please to brand with those
marks) have actually forfeited their Crown and Dignity to them: And then Too
lately in England.
Practices squared, or rather deformed by these enormous rules, are set on foot
too; seditious Clubs and Cabals are erected; Illegal Associations formed, and
entered into; Secret Conspiracies hatched; next Open Insurrections raised
against them; and last of all, Uillanous Assassinations, etc.

A disdainful pride swelled Dathan, Abiram and On, Sons of Reuben (and so of
the eldest House) to see that power Numb. 16, 8, 13, 14.
lodged in Moses and Aaron's hands, which by right of Primogeniture, they
imagined belonged to them; Ambition seduced Absalom, the Peoples Guil. And
Revenge for being 2. Sam. 15.
removed from his great Charge, and drove into Exile by Solomon, inflamed
Jereboam into Rebellion under the 1 Kings 11. 28. 40.
Reign of his Son. And every one of these either forsook God before they did
such is the King.
Their Lawful G^vernours, or Else Renounced them and disclaimed him together:
The Seditious Reubenites were engaged in a Schism against God, at the same time
as they were up in Mutiny against their Rulers; joined themselves to Corah, a
Levite, who had Usurped the Priest's Office, in Burning Incense before the
Lord, which appertained not to him. Absalom had his hands imbrewed in 2 Samuel
13. 28.
his Brother Amon's blood before he lifted them up against his Prince and
Father, and Jereb^am, to 1 Kings 12. 27. 28.
strengthen himself in his unjust acquisitions, made a Change in the Worship;
to continue the rend in State, by winding it; He made a Rupture in Religion. To
defend his Rebellion, he set up Idolatry, two Calves at Dan and Bethel.

And to manifest that we fear God and honor the King, We ought not to meddle
with those that are given to Change: And this The Bishops.
We may do, either by approving the Projects of Lords Temporal*
Men Designing a Change, or by actually endeavoring One our selves; and the
concerning our selves either way is unlawful: And first, the approving a
Change Renders Us as equally Guilty, as if we had brought it about; for it is
consenting to a Crime, which derives all the malignity of it upon who has been
to blame.
Us; the External Commission of it being only the owning of that to the World,
which we had before perpetrated within our selves: Cataline was not less a
Conspirator, and an Enemy to Rome, when he sat in Consultation within its
Walls, by what methods and parties its frame and constitution were to be
subverted, than when he took the Field, and Usurping the Ensigns and Badges of
Consulship he joined with C. Mallius: And a man may be as complete a Rebel as
he was, without taking up Arms against the Government, merely by justifying the
Lawfullness of so doing, a Traitor Why did not the Lords Spiritual abhor, or
disown the P. of O. Declaration as the King required them.
by Giving a Favorable Ear to Dvertures tending that way; deep died in the
Blood of his Prince, by being conscious to a design of Sheding it; or all over
Coal-black with foul Poison, which he has neither prepared nor mingled, by
being Privy only to an intention of Administering it.

And as we are Guilty in the Courts of Heaven, and our own Consciences, of a
Treason or Conspiracy, which has once gained out likeing, tho We proceed not
to Execution; Let every Xian Man in England consider this.
so we may by the Law of State be justly Punished for the same, if that could
be proved: For although it might be hard, it was not unjust, when a Nobleman
of Normandi was Arrested and Condemned of Treason by the Judges of the
Parliament of Paris, For an Intention to kill Francis the first, which he
himself disclosed as a Crime he repented of, and for which he craved the
Comfort of Absolution.

And secondly the endeavoring a Change plungeth the person (tho he be drawn in
by the Artifice of others) over head and ears in guilt, immerseth him as deep
in it as the first Contriv^^^ and hottest promoters of it: For it matters not
to the aba^ement of that, what time he engaged in it, or whether after
engagement he was active or supine in prosecuting it; nor is it any what means
he chooses to effect it, whether fair or ^ou^ (as we usually distinguish)
whether he be for Picking his way, or Resolved to venture through Thick and
Thin: And in a Crime of this Nature, there are no accessaries, but all are
Principals

And further, to endeavor a Change, is contrary to the Duties, so often and so
earnestly pressed upon Us in Scripture, of not Touching God's Anointed; of
being Subject Psalm. 105. 15. Romans 13. a 1 ad 6. 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
to the Higher Powers; of Submitting to every ordinance (of every one
Constituted in Authority) whether to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors,
as those that are sent [i. e.] Commissioned by him, For is not the
Assassination of God's Anointed, contrary to the Command of not Touching him?
Is not the Plucking down Kings or Rulers contrary to the Precept of our
Subjection and Submission to Them? Is not the endeavoring to Embroyl the
Affairs of his or their Government opposite to the Doctrine of living Peaceably
under it? And are not these the Methods We pursue in Order to bring about a
Change? And if they are, they cannot (with all the Allowance of Favor) be so
Construed, as they may be reconciled with our Honoring Him or Them; for it may
be as easily made out, that you may Smite Them with the Fist of Violence, and
not Touch them; Raise Combustions, and not meddle in their Affairs; as Salve
the doing these with Honoring Them.

And if there have been Men among us; who have taken these Courses, and yet
have confidently, or rather Impudently styled themselves his Majesty's most
Loyal Subjects, They ought to prove the before mentioned Texts are to be
expounded backward, and show us they have found out the Misterious Art of
Salving Contradictions; of making Light and Darkness, Order and Confusion dwell
together; Peace and War salute and kiss each other, or Else leave us at Liberty
to dis-believe Their Professions, when we see Their Practices.

Again, the Endeavoring a Change is contrary to the duty of Praying for the
safety of our Governors, Jer. 29, 7. Baruch 1, 11. 1 Timothy: 2. 1, 2.
and the Prosperity of their Government a point which the Jews were commanded to
do, for the Peace of Babylon, and the Lives of Nebuchadnezzar and Baltazar his
Son, while they were Captives in that Place. And Christians are Commanded to do
the like for Kings and all that are in Authority under Them, that they may lead
a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty, (with this
Recommendation) because its good and acceptable in the sight of God their
Savior: And which in the First and purest Ages of Christianity they formed for
their Emperors and Kings, respectively to their Religion, Their Opinions in
it, their Natural disposition, or their Carriage toward them, for their
Heathen Persecutors, as Tertullian is a Competent Witness, Nos enim pro Salute
Imperatorum Deum in^^^amus aternum, etc. Dein oramus pro Ominius Imperatoribus,
vitam illis Prolixam, Imperium Securum, Domum tutam, Exercitus fortes, Senatum
Fidelem, Poputum Probum, Orbem quieium, and quacunqn^ ho^inis and Caesaris vota
sunt; And so many Dioni^uis, bulgentius Theodoret, etc.
others Testify.

To endeavor a Change, is most opposite to the tenor of the Gospel, and the
frame of Christianity: The virtues That it inculcates, and This makes
profession of, are, Contentedness in all Estates; Humility in the highest,
Patience in suffering, Meekness in bearing, and Charity in forgiving injuries:
Whereas Discontent, Pride, Ambition, Impatience, Anger, Revenge, are the
Passions and Vices which instigate men to endeavor revolutions in Government.

They affect Novelty, and therefore sit uneasy under the present Government,
which will be always deemed heavy, by men of such volatile and unquiet spirits.
Militis aut pl^bis ingenium observat. Nec impositos unquam cervice volen^i
f^rre duces.

They love not a Constitution wherein Divine Providence has an hand, and are
for One of their Own setting up. This made the Israelites request to have a
King, like the rest of the Nations round about, when they were under a
Thescracy, God reserving the Sovereignty in his own hands, but exercising the
act of it by Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 5.

Or They are dissatisfied with their station and place in the Government, as
too low and mean for men of their abilities and merits; and suspecting they are
not like to rise higher, or make themselves greater, in the present posture of
affairs, are for disturbing them, as the probablest way to gain their point; or
out of mere indignation to see themselves neglected (as they esteem) are for
subverting it, tho they themselves be oppressed with its fall.

Or if They stand high, they are displeased to see any above them, (for its the
nature of Ambition not to look down, but up; not on those behind, but those
before) and therefore they will unhinge the whole Frame, in hopes to get in
their places; or tumble all down, so they may advance themselves.

Or They are Poor and Needy, and so would fain enrich themselves, though it be
with the spoil of their Country, which they can never come to Ransack but in
public Commotions: Want engaged Cateline and his Associates. And those in a
Commonwealth who want Power or Riches will envy them who have; and out of mere
anger or madness with their private Fortune, will desire and Labor to have the
Public State turned Topsie turvy. Or They like not the or Religion
Disposition of their Governors; They are too Mild or too Severe, etc. Excesses
of Princes are to be Born with, as we bear overmuch Drought, or Immoderate
Rain; nor are vicious Princes always Succeeded by such, but the good Interpose
and compensate for the bad; yet They will not expect time to assist them with
this Remedy, but are for immediate discarding them, and going in guest of
another of a more Suitable Temper, let the hazard of the Wild Goose chase be
what it will; Cerialis Tacit. lie. l: 4. cap: 73: 74.
ita loquitur, Quommodo Sterilitatem, aut nimios Imbres, and catera naturae
mala, ita Luxum vel Avaritiam dominaantium tolerate, vitia erunt, donel
homines, sed neque hac continua and meliorum interventu pensantur.

Or They have been digusted by them, because in the disposal of Honors they
have passed them over, or have not had that High Esteem for Them in words or
actions: And to be Revenged for these neglects and affronts, they will Combine
to Depase or Murder Them; And care not whether they confound Heaven and Earth
in one common Chaos again, so be it They have their Revenge. Pausanius killed
Phillip of Macedon, for advancing Attalas to the Government of a Province,
instead of punishing him upon his Complaint for abusing his body; And Aruns
brought the Goths into Italy, for having not Justice done him against Lucamon,
who had defiled his Wife; Lucan Conspired with Piso and others against Nero's
life for suppressing his Poem; Quinctianus, for Defaming him in Song; Maximus
against Valentinian the third. Julian (a nobleman of Spain) calls in the Moors
thither to be even with Roderic for corrupting his Wife or Daughter; and even
he was, for their Success put an end to his life, and the Gothique Race of
Kings in that Country; Robert of Artois called the English into France, because
a Suit of Law went against him; and Charles of Bourbon Raised up Charles the
fifth against Francis the first, for the same reason; and Bodilus killed
Chilpherick for ordering him to be Whipped as a punishment.

Or last of all their Villainies, have Rendered them Obnoxious to the Justice of
the Government from which they have no way left of Saveing themselves, unless
by committing the greatest, that of undermining and overthrowing it. The
Philosopher wisely observed. Those who have don wrong usually fly to Sedition
to protect them against punishment (...), Arist Pol. l. 5. c. 3 And the
Historian says, that Men fling themselves into actual dangers, to secure
themselves against those they only fear, Imminentium periculum remedium ipsa
pericula Arbitrati.

Thirdly, the methods which men usually take to bring about a change are
extremely Ill. The first of which is the devising and venting Lies against
their Governors; And this of slandering Princes and their Conduct, is generally
the first step Seditious Incendiaries make in their progress to Rebellion.
Absalom began his Rebellion so, telling the People their matters were good and
Right, but no man deputed of the King to hear them 2 Samuel: 15. 34. In short
Wicked men Malliciously spy out Faults where there are none, Aggravate those
that are, and with alike greediness and pleasure divulge them both, to weaken
his Credit and Estimation with his people, They make invidious Constructions of
his Designs; Odious Reflections on his Actions, and spread them abroad; which
when they are grown the subject of common report, fill the Peoples minds with
Fears and Jealousies, and so dispose them, as combustible matter soon takes
fire, for Tumults and Insurrections. The spreading of false Rumors is to the
multitude as Winds to the Sea, makes them Rage and Swell, lift up their voice
and Rore, in the Elegant Expression of the Psalmist. Psalm. 46. 3. who
otherwise; like that, smooth when not blown upon, would have lain still and
calm: And by insensible degrees it tends to work this Effect, though the false
news within few hours, days at farthest, can be disproved, for either the
Refutation shall never reach so far as the lie went, or if it does, that has
made too deep an Impression in Some to be erased; the Poison of it has wrought
it self so far in, and lodged it self so thoroughly, that Truth is too weak an
Antidote to Expel it.

The second method is near of kin to this; viz. False and Hypocritical
pretenses. They who Level at the Government, always disguise those Aims with
the fair and specious Colors of maintaining. Endangered Religion, Liberty and
Property; while They have no sense of the first, intend to oppress the second
and seize on the third; These are all such pleasing names in the Peoples Ears,
that albeit no attempt toward a change can be made, without first violating
Religion and its Commands of Subjection and Obedience; And it is always seen if
that succeeds, that Liberty is afterward crushed, and property usurped: Yet as
conspiring Knaves never fail to make use of them; so nor Easy Fools to be
charmed and caught by them, and to contribute their assistance toward the
destruction of them all in a change, for when that is Actualy come, then these
cunning Contrivers of it are sure to bind the silly, giddy helpers of it
forwards with Chains for Cords; and instead of an easy yoke to put an heavy
burdensome Clogg about their Necks; for Enjoyed or Promised Freedom, to entayl
Slabery on them and their Posrerity: And And ^ave the Impudenceat the same time
to call this State of Oppression and Tyrany, an asserting the Privilidges of
the Nation, and Restoring the People to their Birthright as The Romans when
they had Seized on Kingdoms without Right, and wasted them with Fire and Sword,
called that desolation Peace, Aufer^e, trucidare, rapere falsis nominibus
Imperium atque ubi solitudinem fecerint pacem appellan^ Miseriam servitutem
falso pacem voca^ent. This is the Recompense, and a deserved one they meet with
for their easiness in believing the pretenses, and forwardness in Aiding them
in their wicked Enterprises Absalom us d both these Colors; He complai^'d that
the due course of Law was stopped, and seemed grieved that Justice did not
freely flow in it is Channels, and promised withal to open them a passage, if
he were made a Judge; That thery Man then who had a Suit, and would come unto
him, should have right done him, 2. Sam. 15. And yet He Uiolated the Law of
Nature in thus affecting the Soveranity, which was not to be had without
killing, Dethroning or Commanding His Father And did not Jeroboam cover his
Ambition at first with a Zeal for the purity of Religion? And when he had
Usurped the Throne did he not infringe the Peoples liberties, and lay Heavier
Taxes on the Revolted Tribes, than ever Solomon did? toward the Payment of the
Soldiers and Garrisons it was necessary he should maintain for the holding of
his Ill got Power; and those no doubt harder to be paid, in his Divided and
unquiet Usurpation, than the same would have been under Solomon while the
Kingdom stood En^^^, and his Reign flowed with Peace and Wealth

The third method is Steaking through all Oaths they stand bound by, of bearing
True faith and Allegiance to their Gove^nours; of discovering all Treasonable
Designs and Practices against their Persons or Authority: Oaths in which They
deposited with them the Richest pawn it was possible for them to stake down,
and gave them the Strongest Security the others could Require of Their Fidelity
and obedience, viz. Their Salvation; Oaths in which They called God's
Omniscence to witness their Engagements, and his Justice and Power to Revenge
The breath of them. And yet, as if They were no more to be held by them than
Samson was with green wyths or new Ropes; Or as if Their Conscieuces were no
more to be wounded by Perjury than the German Hard-men are by Sword and Sho^,
or last of all, as if They had a secret Receipe of being acquainted with
Conspiracies, and not being infected with the Treason of them.

But if there were no breaking through Oaths, (and yet I believe there is
scarce any form of Regiment in the world which takes not this kind os
cautionary Bond from their Subjects) they must make Their way through all
Natural Obligations to come at their end: for every man who is not born to
Empire, antecedent to all Oaths and abstracting from the Force of all Humane
Laws, is born with a Tie of duty and Obedience to the Government under which he
was born; And he can no more Disolve change or Transfer this Obligation by a
subsequent Protectation of his Obedience to a Prince or State, other than His
Natural, than he could before he came into the World choose of what Parents he
would descend the Country where, and the dominion under which he would make his
Entrance into it.

And now suppose The Treason meet with all the Success the Conspirators could
wish, yet these Persons are often, at the long Run, overtaken by vengeance, and
exemplary punished in this World. Innumerable Footsteps of this Justice are
left Us, standing both on Sacred and Civil Records: The Earth opened her Mouth
wide and swallowed up Corah Dathan and Abiram, with their Rebellious Crew in
the very Act and Height of Their wickedness: Abimilech, Judges 9. 53.
who died his Princely Scarlet in the Blood of Seventy Brethren he slew that he
might Rule without Control, had his Skull at the storming of Thebez broke by a
stone thrown by a Woman's hand, on which the Historian, who Relates it, makes
this Remark. Athaliah who Murdered all the Royal 2. Kings: 11. 16.
Line of Judah (except an Infant He^r preserved by his Aunt for a more
fabourable Iuncture) that she might Reign, and Reign without a Rival, fell from
her greatness by the same Bloody steps she mounted to it; was slain by her
Guard within the Verge of her Palace: Jeroboam the grand Usurper of the 1.
Kings: 15. 19.
the Isralitish Crown, tho'he escaped in his person yet was punished in the
utter Extirpation of his Posterity; Nadab his Son killed and all his Family by
the Sword of Baasha, not one left alive who breathed. This Murtherer's 1.
Kings: 10. 12.
Son Elah, together with all the Male Line were destroyed by Zimri; not one
left who pissed against the 1. Kings: 16: 15. 18.
Wall, Zimri after seven days Reign, laid hands on himself to avoid falling
into Om^^'s who besieged him, Burning his Palace over his own head Shallum who
took away Z^^hariah's life and Kingdom, was 1. Kings. 15. 30.
deprived of both within a Month by Menahem, whose Son Pekajah had the like
turn done him by Pekah the Captain of his Guard, and he by Ho^hea, who in the
9th year of 2 Kings: 18. 9.
his Usurpation was stripped of his Regallity, and carried Captive by Salmanezer
into Assiria and Media, and with him expired that M^narchy.

And should I Travel out of sacred Story into Profane for instances, Time
would fail me in recounting the Tragical Ends of Usurpers or Regicides of
Cyrns who Seized on his Grandfathers Kingdoms; of Bessus whose Murder of
Da^ius Ochus caused the Translation of the Empire from the Persian to the
Greeks; of ^hillip the Usurper of the Macedonian Crown, slain between his Son
Alexander the great and his Son in Law Alexander of Epicus, at the Espousal of
his Daughter, of Pisistratus who Invaded the A^henian; Julius Caesar who
Invaded the Roman Government: The Murderers of Gordian the Emperor, who fell
all by Their own hands, using those very Swords against their own lives, which
They had before Employed to take away others. And Infinite Numbers more
mentioned by the Roman Byzantine and other Writers; only I cannot omit two
Memorable Examples, the one of Maximus, who procured the Murder of Valanttnian
the third, Torn afterward in Pieces by the People of Rome; the other of
Phocas, who through the Barbarous murder of his master Mauritius, Ascended the
Throne of Constantinople, he taken by Pho^inus received a suitable Reward, and
had his Head, Hands and Feet with his Privities cut off:

In these (Generally speaking) is that saying of our Savior verified, They who
take the Sword, (take it against Lawful Authority) shall Perish with the
Sword, (the Sword of Justice) And of St. John, he that kills with the Sword,
must be killed with the Sword; so David Killed the Amalekite who slew Saul at
his own ^^treaty, etc. And can it be thought, that he who Will not hold him
Guiltless that takes his name in vain, should connive at the violation of all
Obligations of Duty and Fidelity contracted in that name; and let such escape
Scot-free that rise up against them who wear his name, and are clad in the
Rays of his Majesty; That if men shall be in danger of Hell fire for calling
their Brother Fool, shall They be in none for Railing against their Superiors
invested with Authority from above, and 1. Pet. 1. 2. comp. with the 10. Iud.
8. comp. with the 13.
Acting by a Commission from heaven? St. Peter and St. Jude, have taught Us
otherwise, viz. That God Reserveth Such who speak evil of Dignities unto the
day of Judgment, to be punished; for the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

If Liars, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Murderers and Idolaters, shall receive
their part in the Lake which Rev. 21. 8.
Burns with Fire and Brimstone, as we are informed they shall; surely such
Liars, who Maliciously Slander Their prince first to weaken his Credit, then
his Hands; such Sorcerers, who with the Witchcraft of Cunning and Fair
Speaking, alienate the Peoples Affections from him; such Whoremongers who are
Guilty of, and stand answerable to Justice for all the Rapes and Destorations
Soldiers raised by Them to begin an Insurrection, and make a Revolt, in the
heat of War and Lust commit, surely then those Murderers of their honest
fellow Subjects, who will not side with them in taking up Arms; Then Those
Idolaters; who Crowned with Success erect a False Power in opposition to the
Legal One and would Compel all to acknowledge and pay Homage to it, like
Nibuchadnezzar, to fall down and worship the Image, They have made and Set up,
shall be cast there.

Some there are who have (too lately) made use of Their pretended Fear of God,
to Justle out the King's Honor; their serving God, to excuse these
disobedience to the King; their fits of Devotion and Extatical Raptures, their
Acts of Disloyalty, Their Asserting the True Religion, Justifying their Rising
up against his Majesty.

And now let every Englishman begin to examine himself, whether he has not
meddled with them who were given to change? Have not You showed your selves
such, by siding and going along with that Faction which wrought the last dismal
change, or by following men who Traced their steps, and Practiced the same
methods of Sedition, which ushered in that Rebellion? did you not greedily
Swallow down the Calumnies and and Slanders They F^d you with against the
Government? Have you their persons in the greatest Admiration, who made the
Biggest Noise for Religion and Liberty, while Their Lives manifested they had
extinguished the one, all but the Name, and Their Arbitrary proceedings that
they were Resolved to Prostitute the other to their own Lusts? such who had
Scrupled at Order and Decency in the Church, but had made none of involving
three Kingdoms in Misery and Confusion; strein'd at Conformity, but Swallowed
down Rebellion; slumbl'd at a Ceremony, but leaped over the Murder (or
Dethroning) of Their King.

And after all this, did you not look upon your selves as absolved from the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and on them as antiquated Bonds? Or were you
not for expounding Them so as they might be best accommodated to Rebellion, or
willing Disciples of such Masters who did? That they were stipulations of a
Conditional Obedience, Provided the King maintained your Rights, and that
limited and Restrained to some Case only; so that the King not performing the
former, you were not bound to the latter; or Commanding something without the
Verge of his Authority, might be opposed by Arms, and Forced within compass; Or
that those Sacred Ties might be violated without Sin, for promoting such great
Goods as the Power of Godliness and the Freedom of the Gospel! did not the
Casuistical Divinity of such Rabbis please you, who directed You, in Order to
shake the Crown from off the Monarch's head, to break any Oath with the deepest
sense of Religion, which you before had Sworn with a Sound Conscience, etc. And
besides the Wickedness of Breaking Through These Sacred Obligations have you
not bound your selves by illegal Associations or Covenants (directly opposite
to these solemn engagements) to labor a change? So Cataline initiated his
Accomplices to the privacy of his conspiracy, by a Sacrament solemn as a
Sacrifice to the Gods, He drank to Them in a mingled bowl of man's blood and
wine, and made them pledge him and one another in that, and so doing their
mutual Faith, devoting themselves with horrid execrations to suffer all Ills,
in case they infringed it, before he ventured to acquaint them with the villainy
they were to be actors in. And if you have in any of the forementioned respects
been guilty (as it is more than to be suspected you have.) Let me exhort you,
to wash away the contracted guilt with the tears of repentance, etc.

LONDON, Printed for William Not, at the Queen's Arms in the Pall Mall. 1683.

A Sermon Entitled, Some seasonable Reflections on the Discovery of the la^e
Plot, By William Sherlock D. D.
Psalm. 18. Verse 50. Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows mercy
to his Anointed, to David, and to his seed for evermore.
MEn of turbulent and restless spirits will be sure to find, or make some
pretenses or occasions of quarrel under the most just and equal Government.
Sometimes They dispute the right of Succession; but this they could not do in
David's case, unless they would dispute God's right to place and displace
Princes: For he was immediately chosen by God, and anointed by his Prophet,
and yet this could not secure him from Conspiracies and Rebellions.

Others pretend great Oppression and maladministration of Government, though
Their licentious noises and clamours sufficiently confute it; for men who are
most oppressed dare say the least of it. And Others make Religion a pretense for
Their Rebellion; Religion! the greatest and the dearest interest of all: But
methinks it is a dangerous way for Men to rebel to save Their Souls, when God
has Romans 13. 2.
threatened damnation against Those who rebel: But this is a vain pretense, for
no man can fight for Religion, who has any Religion. Religion is a quiet,
peaceable, governable thing; it teaches Men to suffer patiently, but never to
rebel. And were there any true concernment for Religion in this pretense, can
We imagine, that the most professed Atheists; the most lewd prostigate Wretches,
the greatest Prodigies and Monsters of wickedness, should be so zealous for
Religion? But it is evident, it is not Religion such men are zealous for, but a
liberty in Religion; that is, that every one may have his liberty to be of any
Religion, or of none; which serves the Atheists turn, as well as the Sectaries;
but is nor much for the honor or interest of true Religion.

I suppose no man doubts how many dangers a Prince is exposed to who flies
before an enraged and victorious enemy: A Prince whose Father was murdered,
and himself forced into banishment by his own Subjects! Who knows not whither
to go, where to hide himself, whom to trust: Many persons who were in greatest
power, being concerned (for their own preservation) to keep Him out; while
those who wished Hi^ Return, durst not whisper any thing tending to call the
King back again. This was the condition of our dread Sovereign, who was hunted
as: Partridge in the mountains, pursued by his own rebellious Subjects, who had
usurped his Throne, and thirsted after his Blood. But then God found an hiding
place for Him, and delivered Him from the desire and expectation of his
Enemies: And, as the Psalmist says, This is the Lords doing; and it is
mavelous in our eyes; now know We, that the Lord saves his Anointed, He
will hear Him from his holy Heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand,
Psalm. 65. 7.

God may sometimes suffer Treason and Rebellion to be prosperous, but it can
never prosper but when God pleases; and it is impossible Rebels should ever
know that. There is nothing more expressly contrary to the revealed will of God,
than Treasonable Plots and Conspiracies against Sovereign Princes: And tho God
does many times permit those things to be done, which he has forbid to be done,
or else no man could ever be guilty of any sin; yet his forbidding of it is a
plain argument that he does not approve it, that he will not countenance it.
God never indeed interposes by an irresistible power to hinder men from
choosing that which is wicked, for he offers no force or violence to men's
wills: but when this wickedness is injurious to others, who are the objects of
his care and providence, he many times interposes to prevent the mischief. Who
ever suspected, that the Fire at New Market, was sent by God for the
preservation of our King and His Royal Brother?

Christian Religion is the greatest security of Government both i^ its precepts
and examples: It commands Every Soul to be subject to the higher Powers, and
threatens eternal damnation against Rebels; it strictly enjoins the practice of
all sociable virtues, and charms those boisterous passions which disturb humane
conversation; it requires Us to obey our Superiors in all lawful things, and
quietly to submit and suffor, when we (...) obey: And the blessed Jesus, who
was the Author of our Religion, (...) our great Pattern and Example, did
himself practice these laws, which he gave to US. He lived in obedience to the
Civil Power, and though the Jewish Nation, which was a free People, the Lot and
Inheritance of God himself, were then in subjection to the Romans, yet He would
not give Them the least encouragement to shake off the yoke, but commands them
to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are God's. He died himself upon the Cross, and made this the condition of our
discipleship, To take up our Cross and follow Him; and thus the Apostles and
Primitive Christians did, they cheerfully followed their Master to the Cross,
and conquered by suffering. Christianity was planted in the world by no other
arts but the foolishness Preaching, and it defended it self Only, by a resolute
and patient suffering for the name of Christ. This is the true temper and
spirit of Christianity. Under the most barbarous and persecuting Emperors, no
Christian ever suffered as a Rebel, They gave no other disturbance to the
Government, than by confessing themselves to be Christians, and suffering for
it. Their numbers indeed were very formidable, but nothing else; for in
imitation of their great Master, They went as lambs to the slaughter, and as
sheep before their shearers are dumb, so they opened not their mou^hs.

But notwithstanding this, our daily experience tells US, that when Religion is
divided into Factions and Parties, or rather Men are divided into Factions and
Parties upon account of Religion, there is nothing more imbitters men's spirits
against each other, nor gives greater disturbance to public Government. All
the Troubles and Miseries which for these late years have overwhelmed this
unfortunate Island have been doing to this cause; Religion has been made
either the reason or the pretense of all.

To deny that Prosest Protestants have ever rebelled against their Prince, is
to deny, that there ever was a Civil War in England. And I would to God, We had
but one instance of this; it might have left some hope still, that This was not
the temper nor the Principles of the Men, but some unlucky ^^^cture of ^ffairs,
which transported Them beyond the bounds of their Duty, and their own ^^ow'd
Principles.

When Religion turns into a ^^a^e (...) to curb and restrain, and quell such
pretenses, is not to invade the (...) Conscience, o^ the ^^ber^^^ of Religion,
but to secure the public (...) to prevent the occasions of new Rebellions. And
no sob^^ man can (...) his Prince for this, tho he may Those, (and ought to
express a just indignation against Them) who forfeit this liberty, by abusing
it for a cloak of maliciousness.

A great and passionate Zeal, like a distempered Love, blinds men's eyes, and
makes them mistake both their Enemies and Friends. It fills their heads with
endless jealousies and fears, and makes them start and run away from their own
shadow. Such a boisterous Zeal is the frenzy and Calenture of Religion, which
makes men incapable of any sober counsel, and all prudent Resolves, and
precipitates them into the most wild, extravagant, and irreligious attempts.
There is nothing more pernicious than Zeal, when it gets ahead, and bears down
all the considerations of Reason and Religion before it. When men are conscious
to themselves, that they are engaged in a good cause, and have honest designs,
it makes them more bold and venturous: For tho few men da^ own it, yet the
actions of too many sufficiently proclaim, that Th^^ think they may strain a
Point, and dispense with strict Duty, when it is to serve a good cause, when
the Honor of God, and the Interest of Religion is concerned: Such a Zeal does
violently push Men forward, but ^^ does not steer well, nor observe its
compass; and thus it is too often see^ that Men who begin with a zeal for
Religion, insensibly slip into Stat^ Factions, and are engaged vastly beyond
what They first designed. L^^ Us then above all things have a care of our Zeal,
that we may not mista^en earthly Fire, which burns and consumes, for that
divine and harmle^ Flame, which is kindled at God's altar. A true zeal for
Religion, is nothing more nor less: than such an hearty love for it as makes us
very diligent in the practice of it out selves, and contented, if God sees it
fit, (...) lay down our lives for it, and very industrious to promote the
knowledge and practice of Religion in the World, by all lawful and prude^^
means. A true Christian Zeal will not suffer US to transgress the stri^^ bounds
of our duty to God, or of our duty to Men, especially to King and Princes,
whatever Flattering Prospect of advantage it may give. To lie, to forswear our
selves, to hate and revile each other; To reproach and libel Governors in
Church or State; to stir up, or countenance, with the least Thought, any Plots,
Seditions or Rebellions against the King, is not a Zeal for God nor for
Religion: for this wisdom^ not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and
devilish: for where strife and contention is, there is every evil work.

Let Our past Experience therefore teach Us, to watch over the lea^^ stirrings,
and first appearances of a seditious and factious spirit, either in our selves
or others, however it may be disguised with a pretense of Religion. Faction,
like other vices, has but very small beginnings; but when those beginnings are
indulged, it soon improves, and gets strength. Omne in praecipiti vitium
stetit: When men once espouse a Party, like those who are running down hill;
they cannot stop when they please. Discontents and jealousies are easily
fomented, when We have once given admission to them; and the busy Factors and
Agents for Sedition, when They find US never so little disposed to receive the
Impression, use their utmost art and skill, all the methods of insinuation and
address, to make us Proselytes. I doubt not but many Men have died Rebels, and
suffered as Traitors, who at first did as much abhor the though^s of Treason
and Rebellion, as any of us can; Thus I doubt not but it was in our late
Troubles; And thus I believe it is at this Day.

Let such Examples as these make Us wary, how We begin to entertain, or to
whisper our discontents and fears; how we begin to listen to be suspicious of
our Prince, or of his Government; and to hear with pleasure, any scandalous
stories or reflections on either. Those who can with content and pleasure hear
their Prince and his Government reviled, will soon think him not fit to be
Their King.

And the great danger of such beginnings is, that We are not apt to observe
them in our selves or others, when Religion is concerned in the quarrel. We
think it all Zeal, pure Zeal! and cannot suspect our selves or others, to be in
any danger of turning Rebels. But whatever is in its own nature a degree or
tendency toward Rebellion, is so wherever, and in whomsoever it is found;
and there is always more danger, that the beginnings of vice should corrupt the
best temper of mind, than any hope that a sound and religious disposition
should correct the malign influences of such a vice. Some men's Religion does as
much incline them to Faction, as secular interest does other men; and there is
no such dangerous Faction, as that which is bred and nourished by the
corruptions of Religion. The Jewish Zealots, and the Christian Enthusiasts of
all sorts, are too plain an Example of it. And therefore when men, who make
great pretenses to Religion, begin to talk or act factiously, a fair
opportunity is as like to make them Rebels, as any other men. Thus We often see
it is, and this is a sufficient reason to suspect all such beginnings, either
in our selVes or others, whatever glorious pretenses we may have.

London, Printed for Tho. Basset at the George in Fleetstreet.

The Power of Kings from GOD. A SERMON Preached, at Sarum, By Paul Lathom,
Prebendary there.
Prove. 8. 15. By Me Kings Reign.
KIngs have their Authority derived immediately from God, which Authority is
not conferred on Them, as a Trust by the People. Let us consider first what
Titles the Scriptures give to King They are called the Ministers of God,
therefore not of men, Romans 1, 4. 6. The Powers that be, are said to be Ordained
of God, therefore not of Men. v. i for the question concerning St. John's
Baptism, wa^ it from Heaven? or of Men? seems to put this upon an Issue;
Besides they are called Elohim, Earthly Gods, Psalm: 82, 6. And what People can
make there own Gods, without Palpable Idolatry.

When God first Subjected his own People, Israel to the Government of Kings,
the People had nothing to do in conferring the Power Mos^^ was made their Ruler
immediately by God so Ioshuah and the Iudge^ for so long the Theocracy did
continue visable among them. When the People desired a King with formality, God
is not angry with them simp^^ for desiring a King; for he foretold their having
a King, and gave hi^ directions for his Government, Deuteronomy. 17 but for some
irregularities their manner of desiring him, But how was he chosen? not by the
People, but by Lot. 1, Sam: 10, 20, 21. the determination whereof from the
Lord, Prove: 16. 33. no hand of the People in choosing him David was made King
by God's immediate (...) Sam: 16. 1. H^ the Theocracy seems to end. Afterward
the Government did descend by Succession And Those that pretend directions from
the Scripture in every thing, will be at a loss where to find directions there
for the People to take away or Confer Power upon their Prince.

We Challenge any man from Profane Histories, to show Us any Footsteps of such
beginings of Monarchy, when the People did entrust this Power to their King? If
they acknowledge that their History fails them, let not also reason fail them;
Let not Loyalty fail Them; let not Conscience fail them let them have somhing
more than bold Surmises, or else not attempt to build a Supposition of such
dangerous consequence, upon the mere strength of imagination.

If therefore they Persist and Urge Us to show, how Monarchy first came to
Subject men to Obedience, I think the History of the Bible will give US light
enough. That Patriarchal Government, or the Ruling of the Father or eldest of
the Family over the Rest, was the first form of Government in the World, I
think is generaly owned; Now when the Families increased, the Subjects
multiplied, and by insensible degrees the Patriarchal Government seems to have
settled into that Government of the Reguli, or small Kings, which was upon the
matter the same; when Ioshuah Conquered the land of Canaan, which is less in
extent than the Kingdom of England alone, he found and Subdued 31 Kings, Josh:
12, 24. And it seems this was the least Jurisdiction of their Reguli. For after
him Judge: 1. 7. Ad^^ibezek when he was Conquered, does own that he kept 70
Reguli in Barbarous Servitude under him. And some Hundreds of years after the
King of Syria (no great Prince) had 32 Kings at once in his Army, 1 Reg. 20. 1.
so that it seems their Territories and power were then surely but an
inconsiderable alteration of External Government, and that which by degrees
introduced greater Monarchy's.

If We further proceed to take a view of all the ways, whereby Princes ascend
to the Throne, it will appear they are but few; and that in none of those the
People confer the power on the King; first by D^scent or Succession, as in
England: Now who can say that the People hereconfe^ the Power? If they ple^d
that at the Kings Coronation the consent of the People is demanded; it is
evident that the King is King to all intents and purposes before his
Coronation, Besides neither are all the People Sommon'd, nor any considerable
part of them appear at a Coronation: And if then thereshould be any su^ly
Sheba, that should reject his Prince, that would not hinder the Coronation, so
that this is but barely a thing of course and does not deside the King's Power
from the People at all. Secondly those that attain a Crown by conquest, no man
can say They expect or receive the explicit consent of the People, though a tacit
consequential consent may be argued in their yiedling him a forced obedience,
Thirdly Those that Surprise a Throne by Fraud, though they may impose upon the
People so as to gain a formal consent. Yet is there no real consent in those
that are thus bewitched or cajoled, Fourthly, there are some that come to a
Crown by Elcteion: And here our Malcontents think they are secure, that They
derive their Power from the People. But we must consider the great difference
that is betwixt Designing the person, and conferring the Power; The former is
from those that choose Him, the latter by no means, the Dean and Chapter of a
Cathedral, by the Kings leave) choose a Bishop (Sede vacant) this choice
designs the person, but does not confer the Power, which is afterward given
him in his consecration The Aldermen and Commons of a City, do yearly choose
their Mayor; this choice does indeed design the person, but not confer the
power, which descends by virtue of the Kings Charter, So when the seven
Electors choose an Emperor of Germany, or those that usually choose a King in
Poland, they only design the person; his Power is not from them, but immediately
from God. And now, whether the Power of Kings be so immediately subordinate to
God and depending upon Him, that no Earthly: ower whatsoever can call them to
account for the Administration of their Government, and discharge of their
Trust?

The Accountableness of Princes to the People in their Representatives has
passed (too lately) for current Doctrine in the days of imprisoning King
Charles the first, etc. That Reason and Conscience may be satisfied of the
falsness and dangerousness of such Assertions, I shall offer what follows, to
prove that God Almighty is the only Ruler of Princes, and that to him only they
owe their accounts, first in reason it is a contradiction, after We have owned
the King to be Supreme in all Causes, and over all Persons both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, to affirm afterward, that there is any other Power that has Right
to call him to an account, and consequently is in that respect his superior.
That We have owned the King as Supreme, I suppose all men will confess, and the
Apostle St. Peter calls him so, 1 Pet: 2, 13. And that his accountableness to
any other on Earth, would render these persons that may demand his account (to
nomine) Superior to Him, is grounded upon that known maxim, Par in parem nou
habet potestatem. If therefore the King be Supreme, and yet has others on
Earth that are Superior to him, then is he Supreme, and not Supreme, a
palpable contradiction, both branches of which cannot be true. Now the Kings
Supremacy, both the Law has Settled, and every Good Subject has owned, and
therefore must disown the Supremacy of the People, either Collectively, or in
their Representative as a Spurious Offspring descended from Salus Populi, and
Vniversis minor. Secondly, If We consult the Scriptures, when David had
committed those two great sins of Adultery and Murder, either of which singly
was capital by the Jewish laws, yet do we not find him called to account for
them, but only by the great King of Kings, who takes the matter into his own
hands, sends his Prophet to him, Summons him before himself, as his Judge,
brings him to Repentance, accepts his Confession, and Remits his Trespass, as
to the Eternal punishment. And David appears very sensible of his being
accountable to God only; when in his most penitent Confession he cries out
against Thee, Thee! only have I Sinned, Psalm. 51, 3. If therefore We own the
Scriptures for our guide in all doubtful and important points, here is an
instance to guide Us in a matter of this great and weighty Moment.

Thirdly to hold a Power in the People to call the Prince to account for the
Administration of his Government is most highly inconsistent with the law of
nature, and all the Reason and Conscience immaginable: For it makes the People
at once the complainants, the witnesses, the Jury and the Judge, For when we
speak of the King, and the People, they are but two parties. If therefore the
King must be impleaded, who must be the Complanants and Prosecutors? the
People! who Witnesses? the People! who must be the Jury to enquire of matter of
Fact? the People! who must be the Judge, to determine he has broken a Law, and
be obnoxious to punishment^ the People! at last when Sentence is passed upon
him, who must Execute it? still the People! a thing never heard of in any
Judicial proceedings, even in the most Barbarous Nations: and that which must
needs preclude the doing of Justice, when passion or interest in the Mobile,
would carry all things according to their own Lusts and Humors.

The Judgments of God, have dogged at the Heels, in all Ages, Those Subjects
that have Risen up in Rebellion against their Lawful King, and ^^ther
Secretly, or openly, taken away their Lives Had Zimri peace who ^^w his master?
etc. And how has the Justice of God, become the avenger of Blood, and pursued
Those, who had killed and taken possession, and boasted of their Wickedness,
for several years together; and some of them desired it might be written on
their Tombs, here li^sens of the late Kings Judges. This I hope will not be
forgotten in This Generation, etc. That all men may hear and fear, and do no
more so Presumptiously.

If Kings then have their Power from God, and are not accountable to any person
or persons on Earth, then is it a great Sin, to Arraign the wisdom or Justice
of his Majesty's proceedings, in the Convention of men of unsanctified Hearts,
unhallowed lives and profane Mouths. Too many now adays make it either a sign
of Grace, or a token of Wisdom, or at least an argument of good affections to
the public, to Slander the Footsteps of God's Anointed; And as if they would
investigate their Pedegrees, from Cora^ and his Accomplices, do proceed by Rising
up against Moses and Aaron, reproaching both Prince and Priest, as if They took
too much upon them. If he that stepped out of his rank, without allowance of his
Officer, to fight an Enemy, though he killed him, was condemned for deserting
his place, what censure can be great enough for Those that desert their Ranks
and Stations, not to fight an Enemy (a Foreign Invader,) but to encounter
their lawful Sovereign? If God Almighty be the only Ruler of Princes, and
neither the People collectively nor Representatively; have power to censure the
actions of a King, then certainly the Individuals, or little knots of the
Popul^cy, have much less power to censure his proceedings.

When Men presume to think that the King is the peoples creature, deriving his
Power as a Trust from them; and when the fondness and novelty of the notion by
degrees has flattered them into a fixed opinion of it, They will quickly
implead his Authority, as a conditional and preca^ious thing, and upon the
least distaste, will be tempted to meditate a revocation of their trust; So
that what does not jump with one man's interest, tho it may advance another,
the King must answer for; And what does not indulge the lusts of the foolish,
though it is highly acceptable to the Wise, the King must account for; so apt
are Resty Men to clamor against the Settlements of their own security and
happiness, and promote the steps of their own ruin and confusion. But when Men
shall seriously consider that the Sword is put into His hand by God himself,
and that he bears it not in vain, that he is a Revenger to execute wrath upon
Him that does evil Romans 13. 1. This will oblige them to obedience and loyalty
to their earthly Sovereign, out of a principle of conscience toward the King
of Heaven; This will speak them at once both True Christians and Good Subjects.
For pretended Sain^sh^p is con^^stent with Rebellion, but True Christianity
will be always attended with Loyalty. This will clear the Profession of
Religion from the a^persion of ungovernableness; and set Us forward to that
Kingdom, where He by whom Kings Reign, shall rule over all, and be all in all.

LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brown at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's.

A Sermon Preached by Benjamin Calamy D. D. on the 9th September. 1683.
Ecclesiastes 10. Verse 20. Curse not the King; no, not in thy thought, etc.
OF all Rebels they are certainly the worst, that are such out of conscience;
and no such desperate Villains as those, who think to please God by Murders and
Massacres. Other wicked men may be often checked, are sometimes restrained by
their consciences, and dread of a future Judgment; but what evils shall they
ever boggle at, who commit such gross wickedness out of compliance with their
conscience? out of obedience to God? and expect to be rewarded for it in
another world! And is it possible (by any thing We can do) to bring greater
dishonor to our Religion, or more effectually to prejudice Rulers and
Governors against it, than by making it to patronize and countenance Faction
and Rebellion? If this were the true genious of Religion, To make men
Unpeaceable, Turbulent, Mutinous, Seditious, etc. It would then become the
great interest of Princes to guard themselves against It, as the very Pest of
Humane Society, and dangerous to the Civil Government. But thanks be to God,
This is not the temper of Our Christianity: Our Savior's Religion begets in
men the most gentle and meek, patient and Governable Spirits, and is so far
from being inconsistent with Loyalty to our Prince, that it is the greatest ^ye
and Obligation to it in the World, And there is no one can through off his
Allegiance to his Earthly Sovereign, but at the same time He Renounces all duty
and Conscience toward God.

The Doctrine and discipline of the Church of England We all know what it is;
It is stated and defined, and we are sure that it condemns all disloyal
Seditious practices, on any pretense whatever. We must not compass, imagine
desire or contrive (Or invite) any thing that tends to the damage and prejudice
either of our Sovereign Lord the King* or of any that are Commissioned or
Authorized by him, Sovereign Kings and Princes are God's Deputies and
Vicegerents, set up by himself, and They derive their Power and Authority from
him alone. God Almighty the maker of us all is the only absolute Lord and
uncontrollable Sovereign of Men and Angels, part of his own Power and
Authority, which he has over his Creatures, he has Delegated and Committed to
Kings, who are the most Principal instruments and Ministers of his providence
in the World: Hence are they called Gods, and Children of the most High: Psalm:
82 6. God has invested them with some part of his own Majesty, stamped his own
Character upon them, and appointed Them in His place to perform and administer
even some part of his Divine Office (if I may so speak) amongst men; Thus
constituting Them Earhly Gods, as to their persons, sacred; and as to their
Actions, Accountable to None, but that Supereminent Divine Authority that gave
them Commission. This is not any new coined Divinity, invented in favor of
Arbitra^y Power, but is expressly delivered in holy Scriptures, was professed
owned and taught by the primitive Christians and has been the constant
Doctrine of the Reformed Church of England, Nay it is agreeable to the general
sense of mankind, and might be made out by Rational Evidence, if we had no
other confirmation of it.

That Supreme Governors have their Power and Authority from God alone, is
expressly delivered in Scripture; and that not only of the Kings of Israel (who
were evidently established by God's appointment) but in general we are told
Prove: 8. 15. 16. By me Kings reign and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes
Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges o^ the Earth. Thus Cyrus an Heathen
Emperor is called God's Anointed Isa. 45. 1. Thus says the Lord to his
Anointed to Cyrus; and in the last verse of the preceding Chapter, he is
called God's Shepherd (Prin*ces being often, by reason of the Resemblance
betwixt the Pastoral Offic^ and Government, called Shepheard^) I have made the
Earth says God by the Prophet Jeremiah 27, 5, 6. and given it to whom it
seemed meet unto me, And now have I given all* these lands into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my servant: Thus Daniel declares that the
Most High Rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.
And he tells Nebuchadnezzar Chap. 2, 37. that it was the God of Heaven, that
had given him a Kingdom, Power and Strength and Glory. In the new Testament
nothing can be plainer, than the beginning of the 13, Rom: where St. Paul tells
us that there is no Power but of God, that the Powers that be are ordained of
God; whence in the next verse he styleth Magistracy or Government, the
Ordinance of God; and in the 4th verse the Ruler is Called the Minister of God,
To execute his vengeance upon Them that do Evil. It is plain that this was
always the Doctrine of the Church of England, as appears from the Book of
Homilies, wherein we are taught* That the High Powers are set in Authority by
God; that they are God's Lieutenants; God's Presidents; God's Officers; God*s
Commissioners; God's Judges Ordained of God himself, Nay, it has been directly
asserted in our Church, that the most High and Sacred Order of Kings, is of
Divine right, being the Ordinance of God himself, founded in the prime law of
nature, and clearly established by express Texts both of the Old and New
Testament.

Nor indeed can it be well Conceived or Reasonably imagined from whence Kings
and Sovereign Princes should have right to Govern and Command, but from God
alone, since He is the undoubted Lord of the whole Earth, and alone has full
Power and Right to Govern it: I cannot see, but that whoever shall go about to
Confer any Power of Government, or take upon himself, any such Authority, over
others, were it not ^y God's Appointment and insti^ution, he would thereby put
himself, upon disposing of Gods Right, without his leave, or ordering: so that
Government or Supriority of o^e, or more, over others, is all Tyrany and
Usurpation upon God's Right, or else it must be granted, to be Ordained by God
himself. And whatever the form of Government may be, or whatever hand the
People may have in Choosing or Designing the person, or persons, that shall be
invested with this Supreme Authority, yet the Power and Authority it self, is
derived only from God, and is neither Received of the People in Trust, nor is
the* Sovereign Power, answerable to them* for the Administration of it: which
is sometimes illustrated thus, Though the Wife may choose what person she
pleases, to make her Husband, Yet his Authority over the Wife; is not owing to
her, nor does she confer it upon him, but it is of Divine Appointment.

Whosoever R^sisteth the Power, Resists the Ordinance of God says St. Paul:
To oppose and shake off his Majesty's Government, To Plot and Con^pi^^ against
him is to Rebel against God; And when We wou^d not suffer our Lawful
Sovereign, whom the Divine Majesty had appointed to Rule over Us, we did, by
just consequence, and fair interpretation, endeavor what we could to Dethrone
God himself and proved Traitors ^ot only against our Natural Lord and King, but
against the Heavenly Monarch himself, by whose Commission he Reigns.

That Wicked King Z^d^kiah, of whom it is expressly said, 2 Kings, 24. 19. that
he did that which was Evil in the sight of the Lord; yet he is stile^ by the
Prophet Jeremy, Sam. 4, 20. The Breath of our Nostrils The fates of whole
Kingdoms depend upon them. All that live under their Government are interested
in them, and partake with them: And a Uillanous Invitation or Treache^ous
Attempt Succeeding against our Sovereign, may (I am afraid most justly, will)
stab a whole Nation to the Heart, and fill all Places with Blood and Confusion.

Is it not God's wonderful Providence, that has hitherto preserved His most
Sacred Majesty. And did not the same Providence preserve his Royal Brother, and
himself, from the Fury and Rage of those, who Embrued their Salvage hands, in
the Sacred Blood of their Majesty's Royal Father? Has not the same good
Providence continually encompassed Them as with a shield, when their own
Subjects, then, and now again, in Arms* sought both their Deaths and
destructions? was it not the same Providence, that for a long time hid and
Concealed Them, from the most diligent Search of Blood-thirsty Rebels, and at
last after a Miraculous manner provided an escape for them, and through
Innumerable dangers, conveyed them safe to a strange Land? was it not the same
God who deferded and supported them then and still continues so to do, in the
unparalled case of his present Majesty, against the most unnatural and
blackest Treacherys, and Treasons, that ever yet saw light, till at length by
His own Right hand and Ou^stretched Arm. He brought them safe again to England,
and Gloriously Restored the King, to his three Kingdoms.

Though it were realy so that We were oppressed, or treated harshly, by
Governors, yet We are not to give vent to our passion, in undecent Railing, or
Inveighing, against them, called in Scripture, Blaspheming, or speaking Evil of
Dignities. Is it fit says Elihu to Job, to say to a King, thou art wicked; and
to Princes; ye are ungodly.

It cannot but be observed, almost by every man, that many of the Heads of this
late Conspiracy, were persons Infamous throughout the whole Nation, for their
Immortallities and Debaucheries; Notorious Whoremasters! Adulterers! Drunkards!
Murderers! Swearers! and what not? Now what a Fulsome thing is it, and to be
abhorred of all Honest men, to hear such persons as these set up for the great
Patriots of their Country, and the assertors of the Peoples Rights, and
Conservators of their Liberties and Religion? Are men of such Atheistical
Principles, and prostitute Consciences, fit to be trusted, either with Religion
or our Liberties? or can we desire any gr^ater Argument, that they are moved by
some other design; which they make under such plausable pretenses.

Let Us all be warned, to have a care of Reading Factious Books, and of
imbibing antimonarchical principles, but more especially that cursed
Antichristian Principle, which has done an infinite deal of mischief amongst
Us, and perhaps has brought more into This Plot than any one thing else, I
mean, That it is Lawful in some Cases by Force and Violence, to Resist the
Supreme Authority Especially in defense of the True Religion; Particularly, if
the King or those commissioned by him, use Illegal Force to bring in another
Religion, or to persecute the Professor of the true Keligion. Let us have a
care of the Books, wherein such Poisonous Doctrines are taught, or of the
Company of those who profess to believe them, least before we are aware, they
insinuate themselves into us, and so betray us to infinite mischiefs

Men do not become Traitors, and Reb^lls, in an instant, But first They begin
with Murmuring and Complaining, then unmannerly talking of their Superiors, at
length plain accusing their proceedings, till by such undutifull practices,
they become conscious to themselves, that They have offended the Government, at
so great a rate, as that they cannot be safe under it, and then in their own
defense, they think of destroying it.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kittilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's Church
yard.

Core Redivivus. A SERMON Preached by William Bolton, one of the Scholmasters
of the Charter House.
Numb. 16. 26. And he spoke unto the Congregation, saying, Depart I pray you
from the Tents of These wicked Men, and touch nothing of Theirs, least you be
consumed in all Their Sins.
TO oppose Our lawful Magistrate, is against the sense and practice of Christ's
Church in all ages, even under the severest persecutions, I say in all ages,
even under the severest Persecutiors of Heathen Emperors, nay, under Julian the
Apostate. And if We shall reflect upon the Judicial proceedings of God Almighty
in this kind, we shall find him so jealous of his own, as not to suffer in his
Deputys Honor, and therefore by some secret and irresistible power, He has
still countermanded the deepest projects of Traitors. He has split their
Councels, and struck their most refined Policies, with frustration, Or a Curse.
You have heard how Corah, Dathan and Abiram (who had supplanted, from their
loyalty, no less than 250 Princes, men of renown, upon whom the Holy Ghost in
the Text, fastens no other character, than that of Wicked) suffered, both in
themselves, and accomplices, for their mutiny against Moses. And let Absalom
steal the hearts of Israel from David, both his King and Father, Let ten of the
twelve Tribes proclaim him King in Hebron; Let the Distressed David fly from
his Royal Seat, and let his ungrateful and rebellious Son, possess Jerusalem
[London.] Let A^hi^ophel advise Absolo^ ^o pursue David, his counsel shall be
turned into folly, insomuch that he sh^^^ lay violent hands upon himself; and
though the too indulgent Father gives command to spare his life, yet rather
than Absalom shall prosper in his Treason, his own beloved hair shall serve for
an halter to execute him, 2 Samuel from chap. 15. to the 19th. Let Sheba the Son
of Bichri make a Party in Israel, against David, let him secure himself, in the
strong City, a Woman shall persuade his own Followers to cut off his head, and
present it unto David's General; chap. 20 If you look into 2 Kings 11. you will
find the reward of Athaliah's Treason; She seizes upon the Crown of Judah, and
to s^cure herself in it, she (as she imagined) slew all the Seed Royal: After
six years enjoyment of the Throne (without doubt she supposed herself safe
enough) when behold the King's Son (hid in the house of the Lord for six years
space) is brought forth by the loyal Jehojada, the High Priest, and proclaimed
King, and the Traytoress Athaliah is justly slain.

And in our English Annals we may find Examples enough of this kind: Let John
usurp the Throne due to Arthur, his elder Brother's Son, he taught but his
Subjects to rebel against him; and after he had numbered as many troubles, as
days of his Reign, he is thought to end his life by poison. Edward the Third,
tho otherwise a brave Prince, yet because he Dispossessed his Father of the
Crown, shall rue it in his Grandson, his immediate Successor, whom H. 4
(another Usurper) bereaves first of his Throne, and a little after of his life
too; But Divine v^ngeance meets with him likewise, in his Posterity; for H. 6.
his Grandson (tho as innocent and harmless a Prince as ever before him that
enjoyed the Imperial Crown of England) has his own Son stabbed before his
face, and himself some time after butchered by the same hand^ Let Rich. 3.
murder his innocent Nephews in the Tower, let him poison his own Wife, that so
he might marry his Niece; the only Heiress to the Throne; yet God blasts his
designs, and blesses this Nation both with his death* and the happy Union of
the York and Lancaster Families, in the persons of Eliz and Henry the Seventh,
Which Contest had cost more Blood than twice Conquered France; Which, One would
think, should make all true Englishmen pray for the Succession of the Crown, in
a true lineal descent.

From these, let us come some what nearer, and behold Edward the 6th upon his
death bed, whom Northumberland works, and imposes to declare the Lady Jane
Gray his Successor: The secu^ity of the Protestant Religion was then, as now
pretended, To which They knew Mary was averse, And so soon as the King was
Dead, the Lady Gray (against her own will is proclaimed Queen, in London; and
her Ambitious Father in Law, Northumberland thinks all safe, as having nothing
to oppose him but a Naked and defenseless (Tho a true) Title; when no sooner
Mary (though a Papist) asserts her Right to the Crown, but her Subjects (though
they were Protestants) as one man rise up in Arms to Defend [not to oppose or
invade] the Succession: They knew how many thousand lives the dispute about the
Crown had cost but a little before; Neither could they find any motive then,
no more than We can now in the Church of England, That gave any Encouragement
against the Lawful Heir. P^^secution they might dread, but they would commit
that Cause to God; and they had rather undergo the flames of Martyrdom, than be
stigmatized with the brand of Rebellion. Upon this the Conspirators were
defeated (and that without a Battle) taken and Executed. I might tell you of
Wyat's Conspiracy in the same Queens time, and of many others in Her Sisters
Reign.

And as we often see Treason Severely punished in this World, so it is much
more dangerous to the Actors thereof in the World to come; I am sure St. Paul
tells Us so, Rom: 13. 2. They that Resist, shall Receive to Themselves
Damnation, a very small Encouragement (God knows) for Conspirator and Usurpers,
to rise up against and Dethrone a Lawful King; Fortho' we should grant (which
seldom happens) that many Traitors might so far prosper here, as to secure
themselves from the hands of Justice; yet there is a King of Kings, from whom
no power can shelter Conspirators or such (whether they be Lords Spiritual or
Temporal) that shall any ways Invite, or encourage an Invader, against their
Lawful Sovereign; And this Damnation, in the close of all, will prove a sad
Prize of the most Fortunate, or Succesfull Treason whatsoever.

And in the 49 verse of this Chapter, we may find no less than 14700 destroyed,
because they maliciously cried our against Moses and Aaron that they had killed
the People of the Lord; And what People were they? why even the Blessed
Conspirators! Corah and his Accomplices! Good God! that any should be so bold,
or Foolish to call those, whom the Holy Ghost in my Text, brands with the
character of wicked Men The People of the Lord; No! No! They never were nor can
be the People of the Lord, who Resist Lawful Authority.

London, Printed for James Norris at the Kings-Arms without Temple Bar

A SERMON Preached at Petworth in Sussex by John Price, D. D.
1 Corinthians: 10, 10. Neither Murmer Ye, as some of them also Murmured, and were
destroyed of the Destroyer.
NEither the sense of a natural allegiance, nor the Sacred Ties of Oaths, nor
Preferments, nor Honors, nor Riches could keep Some men, in the dutiful
station of Subjects; St. Paul would have the Corinthians take warning from the
Israelites, whose Murmurings, and discontents, are recorded in Scripture, and
recorded there not only To ubraid their ingratitude, but as the Appostle speaks
verse 11. These things happened to them, for Examples, and they are written for
Our admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come.

Solomon gives a Caveat, Say not thou what is the cause that the former days
were better than These? For thou do not enquire wisely, concerning this
matter; The Murmuring Questionists of his Age, had the like before them, and
they have been since; and ever will be! so long as time is, men will complain
of the times, and the little portion of Happiness that God gives Us in this
life, is di^^urbed by our own Restless and Repining nature, any little petry
accident, at present, does more disturb Us than a load that is past, and gone
off our shoulders, Israel was under the Miraculous protection, and deliverance
of Heaven, but wants some little convenience; and presently, we read of a loud
and clamarous Murmuring; would to God We had dyed in Egypt! The hard Bondage
they had felt, was gone off now; and the want but of a meals meat, in the
Wilderne^s, put them to Murmur against God and their Gover^ors.

As if it were not enough that man was born to labor, as the sparks fly
upward, but we ad, sparks to the fire, when we are Children and under the
discipline of the Rod, we complain that we were not born sooner, and past the
Correction of our Master; and when we are Old, we think we ware never so happy
as when we were Children; indeed we are (...) Those phansies that pleased Us,
we are soon weary of, and seek for new; something it is that would please Us
better, but what it is we know not; Nev^bus atque Quadrigis petimus been
Vivere. etc.

To Represent unto you the (...) or Murmurer; first he is an Heretic; St. Inde
speaking of false Teachers, says that they are Murmurers, Complainers etc.
Iquietoe Hereticorum Curiositates says Tertulian: They are always Restless, and
always Prying; Creep into Houses, and then into affections, till their
Murmuring discontents at last, break out into open Factions.

Secondly, The Murmurer is certainly the State sinner, The little grudgings
that begin in Princes Courts, are ^oon spread into the Country; and they are
like the Poets F^^^ Malum, the further the same goes the greater it grows, The
Murmuring discontents in the state, at last break out into open Rebellion (as
We now sadly see The Israelites said as for this Moses, We wot not what is
become of him, The next thing we hear of them is, They make a Motion Calf, that
is set up a Religion and Government of their own, The Tongue is a little Member
says St. James, but it is a great evil: and the Murmuring Tongue sets the state
still on fire; and Hell Fire shall be the Portion of such Tongues.

Thirdly the Murmurer is ever an envious person, and so an evil member of a
Socie^y; Murmuring is a distemper called (...), a complaining without cause,
and the envious man always does this, It Is a nature that mak^s a near appreach
to the Devils, The prosperity of Job is an Eyesore.

Fourthly he is the Malicious man; delights to do Mischief where he lives; is a
trouble to himself, and will be so to his Neighbor; and therefore no wonder if
punishment does attend him, for he is ranked by Solo^on among the seven
abominable things, that God hates, Him that sows discord among Brethren. In
short a Murmurer is he that is every thing, that is Mischievous, Blaspheams-
God, the King the Church his Neibour; and he is a burden to the Earth, and to
himself, neither good nor bad wheather pleases him, Complains in War, and yet
is discontented in Peace; pines away in Scarcity, and yet repines at plenty;
when ^^s Summer, he longs for Winter, and when it is Winter wishes again for
Summer, neither Times nor Manners please him, and could he call for them at his
pleasure, yet he would Murmur still, of which we have a full iustance in the
Text.

Ill Men, who have private designs of their own to carry on will be always
complaining of Public affairs; and their Complaints may sometimes seem so
plausible, that they may gain Proselytes to their Faction, I doubt not but
there were many such in England.
Some of whom may not Mean so ill, as they do.

Froward Men disturb God's method of Mercy, and make it ever Miscarry in the
Womb. God intended quietly and safely to lead Israel out of Egypt into Canaan;
and the March of so many years might have been accomplished in so many days;
but They stood in their own light and stopped the way against themselves: They
tempted God very often, and so often, that a patient and long suffering God, at
last, swear in his wrath that They should not enter into his Rest. This Sin of
Murmuring is (...) an ill habit of the stomach, that corrupts the best meat; We
Murmur at Mercys, as Israel did at Manna.

Some Casuists tells us, that Habitual Sins have a guilt distinct from those
Sins of which they are Habits, and that they are more dangerous, because the
Sinner is farther off from Repentance: The guilt that is contracted from those
Habits does make a Callus, and fear the Conscience, that the sinner little
thinks on it, That he is going down into the Chambers of death, and he is
ensnared into damnation, drowned in perdition before he says Domine miserere,
or asks what he has done? The Habit of Murmuring is so universal. Hand joined
to Hand, Tongue to Tongue, that the sense of the Guilt is lost; and because
it is so it is a distinct guilt: for the greatest Sinners have repented, as
Murderers, Adulterers, yea and Idolaters too, who are in a peculiar manner
Guilty Loesoe Majestatis Divinae, and Traitors to the God of Heaven. The
repentance of all habitual sinners is difficult, but the repentance of an
Habitual Murmurer, is bes^t with more than ordinary difficulties; for the
Arguments that should reach the guilt, are not well reducible to any single
Commandment and does scarce affect the letter of any; And yet it is a sin of a
complicated guilt, affects both Tables, and most of the Commandments of Both.
Besides the Murmurer is not so soon as other Sinners convinced of his Guilt,
because he has framed a rule of rectitude to himself, and his Conscience o^ens
and shuts by that Rule, and so he strains at gnats and swollows Camels: Nothing
so much troubled the Conscience of a Neopolitan Sh^pherd, when he came to
Confession at Ea^ter, as that he had tasted a little Cream the Lent before; but
he had often Robbed and Murdered Passengers on the Mountains, and that troubled
not his Conscience, because his Father and Grandfather had ^on so before: I
believe all o^ Us are ready to pass a true and just sentence here, but Reflect,
here are some, who cannot digest as^^t Form of Prayers; are offended at a
Surplice, startle at the Cross in Baptism, etc. And yet can whisper against the
King, and whisper to be heard too! talk loudly against Bishops and P^iests,
censure all men; complain of every thing and be satisfied with nothing.

Remember that God passed by some of the discontents of Isr^el, but when They
grew Clamorous and more Combined, his wrath fell in amonst them. And Remember
that God has other Eyes to see Sin, with than We have, and has other Scales
to weigh it in, than We have We our selves do not take ill Language kindly from
our Neighbor, and can we think that God will from Us, when by our discontents
We daily Revile his Providence?

When froward men do take a Liberty to speak, write and Print what they please,
and all with designs against the Government they live under, it is plain, They
would be Governors themselves, And when They have whet their Tongues, and
sharpn'd their Pens, They are not far off from drawing their Swords. And
surely, without offense, I may now ask if this be not the present case of
England against their natural Liege Lord and King?

LONDON, Printed for John Fish near the Fountain Taver^, in the Strand.

A SERMON Preached before the King at Winchester, by Fra. Turner D. D. then
Dean of Windsor, but since Bishop of Ely.
Psalm. 144. 9. 10. I will sing a new Song unto thee, O God, etc. Thou have
given Victory unto Kings; and have delivered David thy Servant from the peril
of the Sword.
THere is no question but David in my Text had an eye to all the terrible
hazards he had run before he was Crowned, when Saul and his bloody house were
hunting him like a Partridge upon the mountains: So that not his Own Not our
King's Palace.
House which should be a man's Castle, and his Sanctuary, not his Own His
Majesty didisturb'd at midnight.
Bed, which was made to be quiet in; not those very places whither He fl^d for
Refuge, were free from the peril of the Sword.

^o keep far enough off, not only from cold and frivolous parallels, but also
from odious comparisons. I will only say, Do We not see a King preserved from
the same implacable enemy that has pursued him above these forty years; but a
much more formi^able enemy since he concealed his enmi^y* than when he declared
himself openly, even by setting a price upon the Most Sacred Head.

And David in his refl^ctions upon the dangers or deliverances of his life,
looks up to Heaven, he acknowledges, That the Race is not to the swift, nor the
Battle to the strong; and tho it be added by Solomon, that Time and chance
happen to all things; his meaning was, that many things ^ook indeed like
Chance, tho guided by a hand of Providence, to most unseen, which yet was most
visible to King David; in the whole course of his Fortunes; therefore he gives
the Honor to God alone: He thanks him not only for his own prosperous
success^s, but in behalf of All the Crowned Heads in the world, It is he that
gives victory unto Kings: To the same great* God of Heaven he ascribes their
Preservation from so many Horrid Cons^iraties, as while there is a Devil in
Hell, and so many of his Agents upon Earth [in England] will never cease to be
carried on; and when they are defeated or prevented, it is ^e the King of Kings
that delivers his Servant David, or by parity of reason, any other Sovereign
Prince, from the hurtful Sword.

Now when David says, It is God that gives victory unto Kings, it is to be
understood virtually, and implicitly univer^al; he does not say that God always
gives them victory: We know it has been given against the Best of Kings to the
Worst and most Ungrateful of all his Subjects: But the meaning is, that when
ever th^se sacred Princes are so delivered, as to be preserved from the Sword,
it is by an extraordinary vigilance of the Divine Providence over them, it is God
is their Guardian, and not Man. And as [too late experience teaches,] no King
is to put his trust in the number or the fortitude of his People, so neither is
any People to confide in the wisdom of their Heads, or in the vastness of their
Body, to Oppose their Lawful Prince: For God in his Good Time, will make it
appear that He governs the World, and He will make Them feel his hand that
[Have Wrested] or think to wrest the Scepter from Himor Them that hold it for
Him. Whoever They are that use indirect and unlawful means to raise or
establish, or but to S^cure Themselves, They set up as it were for themselves,
without God in the World; They take the certain course either to miscarry with
their design; Or, if they do gain Their Point, yet their success it self is a
J^dgment upon Them; Proportionable to the greatness of their Sin, will be Their
punishment; which, if It comes in this World, is commonly fetched out of the
very bowels of the Sin that deserved it, and so as the hand of God is
illustriously visible in it. Such as will not trust in God as a Deliverer from
any Dangers They fear, but will take the Sword against Their Lawful Prince,
upon any pretense whatsoever; Their Sen^ence is read in the words of our
Blessed Savior; They that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword.

As an humble Confidence of God's Protection over us (if We resolve to live in
his most holy fear) is the most infallible course We can take to continue in
safety; so, on the other side, all Policy that swerves from the strict rule of
Conscience, does rather procure than pr^^ent extreme danger.

The men of Israel said unto Gideon (that was in the time of the Judges) Rule
Thou over us, both Thou and thy Son, and thy Son's Son also: By which they bind
themselves and their posterity to be subject to him and his: But how did they
keep their Faith with him? Much at the same rate as the unconstant multitude
are wont to keep it. As soon as G^deon is dead, Abimelech his Son by a
Co^^bine, insinuates himself into them; They fur^ish him with Money under hand,
wherewith he hires vain and light persons to follow him; Multi quibus utile
Bellum: And with These he assassinates all the seventy legitimate Sons of his
Father upon one stone; yet the People have still that wicked partiality for
him, as to make him their King; but how did this And so is every Traitor; for
the blood of all that is spilt in the Rebellion, shall lie upon their heads.
Murdrous Traitor and his A betters prosper? Jotham the youngest Son of Gideon,
and the only Son that survived the Massacre, cries as a Prophet from God
against the Usurper; and denounces that Fire shall come out of ^e Bramble, (so
in his parable he calls that Ba^e Son) and that this Fire shall devour their
Cedars of Libanon* Their Noblemen that raised [or invi^ed] him. And we are told
afterward, that the men of Sichem dealt treacherously with Abimelech, as Those
that have been once F^llow Tray^ors to their lawful King, do s^l^om long
continue faithful to one another. What ^umul^s t^ere followed? What
Insurrections? How the Fields were died with Gore, and how much Blood ran down
the Streets of their City, you may read in that noble Story. And all the evil
of the men of Sichem did God render upon Their own heads, and upon Them came
the Curse of Jotham.

But because this ^istrusting of God, and (in stead of doing that which David
presses so passionately, O tarty Thou the Lord's leisure) being ready to say
with that impious Nobleman, Why ^arry We for the Lord any longer? Because this
fatal Impatience seems to be now one of our national Sins, I shall urge against
the sad effects of it some such examples as shall be national, and virtually a
multitude of examples; Zedekiah the King of Judah having absolutely submitted
to the great King of Babylon, '^is said he rebelled against King
Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: Therefore by the way* The
^^st^^ing a lawful Prince to whom an Oath of Obedience ha^h once been taken,
tho he be an Heathen Prince, as Nebuchad ezxar was, is (...) better than a
downright P^^^ury, A wicked Rebellion: So Jeremiah the poor despised Prophet
of God implies it to be throughout his Prophecy. But what if these were
Perjured Rebels? yet this was always their note concerning themselves. The
Temple of the Lord! The Temple of the Lord are these* i. e. They were the
Godly, they were the Saints; just as the True Protestant! The true Protestant!
is now the common Cry of Those, who think that Title, a good Apology, and a
sufficient Plea to legitimate Perjury and Rebellion; nay more, he is sure to be
called a Factor for Babylon (as Jeremiah was) that dares but call it Perjury
and Rebellion. But to return to my Story, what became of that Rebellion I was
relating? That misguided easy Prince was utterly lost, his very eyes were not
left him, but only so long as to see his Sons put to the Sword, and the People
were carried Captives into that same Babylon, that heathenish Country, which
they so justly abhorred

Again, the same tu^bulent and restless People, being after many ages in some
degree re-established by the valor of the Maccabees, had made an entire and
necessary surrender of themselves to the Romans, as to their Lords and Masters.
For fear of giving umbrage to the Romans of any other pretender to the Crown
but Caesar, their cursed Politician Caiaphas was for putting our Blessed Lord to
death: These two words Venient Romani! the Romans will come, and take away both
our place and Nation, were effectual Incentives to stir up the People to cry,
Crucify him, Crucify him: As now to cry loud enough, Popery will come in and
swallow Us up, serves all the turns of any great Incendiaries, to b^e^k through
all Humane and Divine Laws. What else could they intend (speaking of the
Phanatick Plot in King Charles the Second's time) but a Massacre? What other
thing could they wish? What other cause of acting so detestable a Treason? For
to take off a most merciful King, and his next Successor; Who next to him has
showed himself of a most reconcilable Temper.

Complying men, such as can sit still and be quiet under any Usurpations, care
not What In^erest prevails, and laugh at the notion of being State Martyrs: But
I wish this sort of men (who please themselves w^^h being so Passive in so
Active times as these) would consider what kind of censure, or sentence rather,
an Heathenish Legislator has passed upon them; Amongst the Laws of Solon (says
Plutarch, Writer of his Life) that is very peculiar and surprising, which makes
all Those infamous, who stand Neuters in a Sedition: for it seems he would not
have any One insensible and regardless of the Public, and securing his Private
affairs, glory that he had not any feeling of the Distempers of his Country,
but Presently join with Those that have the Right upon their side, assist and
venture with Them rather than shift out of Harmsway. These are the words of the
wise man, stating and declaring the concern that every private man ought to
show, when his Prince (in respect to Rebellion) or his Country (by Invasion) is
in danger. And David being yet a Subject, tells the people plainly, as the Lord
lives (says he) Ye are worthy to dye, Because Ye have not kept your Master the
Lord's Anointed. Awake then You that together with the Land which the Lord
gave, to your Forefathers, inherit their virtue too the old English Loyalty and
Courage, Lay out your thoughts upon some thing more worthy of your selves, than
are thoughts only of your own security: Let every one in his station do his
duty fearlesly: And they that do so, prove for the most part the wisest
as well as the most Conscientious, the safest as well as the noblest and best
Patriots: Let Us set it down to our selves that Honesty is the true Policy, and
let none make that cursed conversion of the proposition, as if Policy were the
true Honesty; unless they mean to Revive that old abominable Gnostick principle
of Compliance with any Usurpations, or Impositions, for fear of sufferings, for
fear of that; which a Christian would rather wish for his own sake, could it be
without other men's guilt, i. e. the Crown of Martyrdom. The Church (the Field
of God) has been manured and enriched with the noblest compost in the world,
the blood of Martyrs; The times and Seasons of the year are bounded out and
Signalized by the dying days of Martyrs, The Christian Temples are dedicated to
the Memorials of the Martyrs; And Miracles were undeniably wrought at the
Monuments of the blessed Martyrs. After all this, men of soft and
smooth-Insinuations would introduce a Principle of self-preservation (as they
call it) as if it were unworthy, as if it were unlawful to suffer any thing
like Martyrdom, Nay as if it were more Christian like, to be Rebels and
Regicides, than to be so much as Confessors in the cause of Christ.

I hope now many of the Kings Enemies will change their note, and sing Our new
Song, But then let it come from the ground of the heart, And upon these terms
They are welcome not only to Our Communion (to our Church, She never takes the
Sword against her lawful Sovereign) but to that of the Angels in Heaven; for
there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one Sinner that
repents, then much more joy over many repenting Sinners. What a noble change,
or rather what a Glorious transfiguration would be wrought upon These men, that
were lately Instruments of miscief; would They now turn Saviors in their kind,
such as the Prophet gives God thanks for, Thou gave them Saviors who saved
them out of the hands of their Enemies, Nehem: 9. 27. I will not say the third
part of the Stars are smitten down (as they were in St. John's vision) yet now
so many who shined heretofore in their proper Orbs are fallen. And yet the
greatest Courage in the World may find Room enough to exercise and show it
self in a Thorough Penitent; as it is excellently argued by St. Chrysostom, That
David showed a more undaunted greatness of mind in daring to think of
Surmounting the Sin, and the Shame, and to set up again for a Saint, after his
Foul, Treacherous and Bloody offense in the matter of Vriah, than he had shown
in his Single Combat with Goliath of Gath.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Religious Rebel. A SERMON Preached at South-Marston, in Wiltshire by
Charles Powel, M. A.
Psalm. 10, 10. He falls down and humbles himself, that the Congregation of
the Poor may fall into the hands of his Captains.
REbellion (says Samuel) is as the sin of Witchcraft: Satan first Rebelled
against the great Monarch of the World, and tho his Ambition tumbled him down
from the bright Regions of Bliss into eternal Chains of Darkness, yet his
instruments carry on the same Rebellion still; though the scene be changed, and
the Plot carried on at a distance, the design is still the same, only that Our
earthly Rebels are in this the worse Devils, that They dare Rebel against God
and the King too.

This Psalm in general is a pathetical complaint of David to Almighty God of
the Pride, Treachery, Malice and Cruelty of wicked men, who (as Solomon says)
seek only Rebellion; and These wicked men (expositors tell us) are Those whom
he had maintained and preferred in his own Court, and were therefore the more
wicked and the more dangerous; of which very persons he says; It is not an open
Enemy that has don me this dishonor, etc.

Divisions are of late so dangerous, that I shall not dare so much as to
divide my Text, but will only raise from it this proposition; That it is no^
new thing for the worst of men to make use of the sacred name of Religion, to
palliate the most abominable undertakings. Bloodshed, the Murderer of the*
Fathers and Defenders of Religion (Pious Kings and Princes) destruction and
Massac^e of their Fellow Subjects, pulling down and overturning of all polity
in the World, must be all ushered in (as We see it this day) with the Lamb-like
harmless voice of Religion: And though in these Glorious times of the Ghospel
they cannot possibly think so, yet They will pretend, that in all this They do
God good Service; so true is that of our Savior; They come to Us in Sheeps
Clothing, but inwardly They are Ravening Wolves.

My proposition has been so often and so sadly proved, even Among Our selves,
that to go about to confirm it by Arguments or precedents were to light you
with a Lantern, in the Sunshine, or to persuade you that you are wounded,
when you are (now) Roaring under the smart and anguish of the Blow. An evil man
(says Solomon) seeks only Rebellion. therefore a cruel Messenger shall be sent
against him. Prove: 17, 11.

We must have a care how we hearken to Those men, that make the greatest noise
about Religion, which is not a thing of Talk and Noise and Tumult, but a Quiet,
Calm, Peaceable thing: The Author of it was the Lamb of God, who neither
stirred up the Jews to Rebel against the Roman Heatken C^sar, nor did he ever
make use of any Sinister, or Violent means to escape the hands of his bloody
Persecutors and Crucifiers, who envied him for nothing more than his Religion,
which he came on purpose to plant among them, and which was to be watered with
his own Blood, and brought to perfection by his own Death. In all his Actions,
in the whole course of his Life, he was a Pattern to them of Meekness,
Gentleness, Peaceableness, and Sub^ection. And truly I am afraid Those men,
who make such an Hurry and Clutter about Religion, are not his Disciples, nor
did They ever learn it from the Prince of Peace, especial when They make
Relligion the Argument of Public Commotions and Disturbances.

Let me now give you this Seasonable Caution. Does any one come to you in
Samuel's Mantle, in the Garb and Posture of a Prophet, and in that Sacred
Disguise falsy whisper to you what that Aparition said truly to Saul; That God
is departed from the King, and become his Enemy (for such Sprights also there
are now abroad in the World, and Those in Black too) Have a care now? and stand
upon your Guard! Look Diligently about you! are you not got into Endore e're
you are aware? Is not the Witch and the Devil at work now, instead of Samuel,
tempting You to ill thoughts of him, whom that more sure word if Prophecy (the
word of God) tells you, ye shall not dare so much as to think Irreverently of?
Remember that Apparition was an Extraordinary thing, never permitted but once,
a thing that Frighted the Witch herself, and not like to be repeated again, for
every Fantastic man's ^ake, that would pretend to Inspiration. It Is true
indeed; there are ^^ch Spirits in the World, but they are (...), Cademons or
Wicked Spirits, Spirits of Rebellion and Mischief and Murder, as St. Paul
Prophecies of, 2 Timothy: 3, 4. Traiterous, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of pleasure
more than Lovers of God, such as St. Jude describes, who Despise Dominion,
speak evil of Dignities; And these St. Paul tells ^s, have a form of Godliness;
They appear like Lucifer himself, when ^e is Transformed into an Angel of
Light, all Clad with the bright and Glorious Rays of pretended Sanctity, as if
they were Sons of the Morn^ng, some of the Corpse du Guard to the great King of
Heaven: But then ^ave a care, Mulier formosa superne, De^init in Piscem. Beware
of the Clo^en Foot under the Robes of light; for though they have the form of
God^iness, yet you may be sure they deny the Power of it, who endeavor to
^essen and vilify those persons in your opinion, who bear the Image and ^amp of
Him, from whom they derive their Authority; By Me Kings Reign; And while they
Command nothing* but what is in their Com^^^ssion, are no less to be obeyed
than he that sent Them, and set them over us, however They are not In any Case
to be Resisted; for Who^^ever Resist shall Receive to Themselves Damnation.
Rom: ^3, 2.

And when his Majesty was Restored in mere Mercy to Us; for I can ^^arce call
it any to him, who seemed to be brought back only to new afflictions, by the
Ingratitude and Repeated Rebellions and Conspira^^es of a Stiff-necked and
Hypocritical Generation, who have Repayd ^ll those Blessings, that by Him were
conveyed to Us, not only by Re^roachfull and Contumelious language, which Moses
calls Reviling of ^^e Gods, Exodus: 22, 28. But by atheistically, Sacrilegiously
and Re^^lliously Plotting and Contriving his death, to whose Mercy [now] and to
his Brothers God-like Act of Oblivion, so many among Us owe those lives, which
We are now Sacrificing to the God of Rebellion against him. A King so dear to
Heaven, that it has shown as many Mi^acles in his preservation, as Hell has
produced Plots even to a Miracle, for his destruction. I need not refresh your
Memories which the wonderful Acts of Heaven in his whole life, which has had
its black lines of affliction, more perhaps than any other King we read of, in
the Murder of that glorious Saint; his Royal Father, the several Exiles of
himself, and the Royal Family, and the present Calamnities, which now attend
him, in all which he has suffered and does still continue to suffer more than
I can relate, or he could bear, were he not sustained by the right hand of the
most High while he not only was, but now is again what St. Paul says of
himself, ^n Iournying often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of Robbers, in
Perils by his own Countrymen, in Perils among False Brethren [Treacherous
Favourites] in Weariness, in Painfulness etc. And now let Us pray to God that
he would move Us all to walk more uprightly, and more sincerely before him, And
that the same God would make Us for the future more Loyal to our King; that We
may not any longer deal Hypocritically with the one, or Rebelliously with the
other, That God may once more speak Peace to his People.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard:

A Sermon Preached in the Cathedral Church of Norwich, By William Smith,
Prebend there.
Psalm. 107. 8. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: And
declare the wonders he does for the children of men.
Has the Nation scarcely wiped Their Eyes dry for the Blood of the
Incomparable Father, but must it be drowned again in Tears, for the murder of
his succeeding Sons? And that in a scene of cruelty more inhumane, and with a
malice more infatiable than the former. [And may I now say (as this juncture
stands) being from Men that were once the least to be suspected.] The rage of
the Factions had then but the Blood of one King for its present gratification;
but Our Zealo^s for the Cause could not glut their thirst for Royal Blood, but
by murdering (as it were) Two at one blow; the life of the Dearest Brother too
must be sacrificed to their fury and design. So that (methinks) I hear the
Saints of that complexion say of him, Here is the Heir, come, let Us kill him
also, and seize on the Inheritance. [But let Us declare the wonders of God, for
that the King has escaped the killing, tho the Rebels have assisted an Usurper
to seize on his Majesty's Inheritance.] A Prince who all along manageth the
conduct of his own Kingdoms and Government, with such a sweetness and ingenuity
of temper, that he never did, or can, choose to see his meanest subjects so
much as ^neasy, if Ob^^inacy precludes not his Royal Kindness to relieve Them:
In a word, a Prince that is every thing, that a character of any the most
gracious King can represent him.

And is it This? Such a King! that was designed to be barbarously murdered by
his own Subjects! [and now as basely betrayed by the most villainous
treacheries!] O! are you not all struck with such an horror at the thoughts of
it, as even to forget You have a being at all? Don't all the Blood of Your
Ueins chill to a stone, at the very notice of it? And are not your whole Souls,
and all their faculties, swallowed up with surprise and amazement? Why don't
You cry to the Heavens and the Earth to be astonished, that it should ever
enter into the hearts of any of the Christian name, to attempt such acts, that
would not only have justified the salvageries of the most brutish Barbarians,
but even made Hell it self comparatively innocent in its worst consults. Such
acts! that do invert the order of the mischievous Regions, and has placed the
Bottomless Pit (as it were) above ground, and has so outdone Devils at their
own art, that they shall for ever after be tormented with envy, as with a new
kind of Hell; that there should be among mankind (in a certain Island) greater
Devils than Themselves. Marvel not that I discourse in this rapturous manner,
the Case requires it, and it is a defect not so to express it. The Devil as
General, with his Lieutenants in sheeps clothing, under the Flag of a Thorough
Reformation, had once again rallied the Whole Protestancy, that is, all the
Heresies that ever infested the Catholic Church in all ages, especially the
Reformados of the Knipperdollian and Knoxian Regiments, to bear down before
them all that is regular and loyal, learned and pious.

And let us now behold further the sad consequences that have already, and are
still like to attend Us. Did you not see the enraged Vulgar turn their
Plow-shares into Swords, and their Pruning Hooks into Spears, to execute what
their bloody Leaders long fermented malice had before contrived? Every Village
is now likely to become a seat of War, all united Neighbourhoods are now in
danger of being turned into distinct Hostilities, and every single person is
like to be lysted into one side or other to carry on the fatal, the sad and
dismal work of a Thorough Destruction. How happy were We, when the armed Troops
in our streets marched only as our Defense and Guard; When our Trumpets sounded
nothing but the welcome Joys of our common Safety; and our Drums beat Us every
night to bed* for an unsuspected quiet. [But alas, We must now awake amidst all
the dismal Alarms of horror and confusion, and our beloved Country is like to
be the Seat of that War, which is most just against Us: How could We
dethron(...)ted!]

This Treason! this late Conspiracy! was not only (...) ^betted, but really
managed and acted, by a considerable ^art of (...)^ility, [Lords Spiritual and
Temporal] who having aff(...) by Petitioning, Protesting and Ca^alling, gave
the seditious (...) f^ll assurance, that They owned and headed their Cause.
Bu^, (...) unfortunate Gentlemen, (or Wretches rather) that ^ou should co(...)
be Tools, and to creep in the dust, to humor a Pievish and unworthy ^action:
That They should go about to blend and extinguish that Light [the King] from
whence They borrowed their own Luster; and choose to fall from their own Starry
Orbs, to turn Blinking Meteors in the ^usty Regions, to shine only by the
Favor of an unjudicious and uncon(...)nt multitude under the Reign of an
Vsur^er.

This Conspiracy has been greatly supported under the pretense, and by the
obliging name of Religion. Now as Religion bears generally the most powerful
Charm in the minds of men, and influenceth them to the highest resolutions of
acting, be the attempts never so difficult or hazardous: So must the danger of
any evil procedure be increased, that ^ath gained such a prevailing abatement.
And such was our Case. All the Factions (tho in other things they may
irreconcilably disagree, yet) ^^^curr in this one common principle, That they
man's Religion is ^^s own Private Conscience, which he is to believe is the
immediate dic^ate of God, and which he is bound indisputably to follow. Now
when this notion of Religion is entertained, it sets up in every factious mind
an uncontrollable Tribunal, which governs with a power superior to all ^^mane
reason, laws and authority; and gains such an ascendant over ^^ch men's thoughts
and actions, that like the Commanders power in the Gospel, I say to one Man,
come, and he comes; and to another, Go, and (...) goes. Go; says Conscience,
fetch me a Chain, to bind this King, (...) Those iron Fetters, to tie down
those Nobles; It Is dispatched without dispute: And if then it says, Go and
pluck down those Idolatrus Stru^^ures, and let those superstitious Ministers be
cast out of them; if such a con^^^ence be but tinctured from Scripture, that
those are Groves and High ^^aces, and these are Baalitish Priests and Dumb
Dogs, the work is ^one in an instant. When this Sovereign Conscience enjoins
this Oath ^o be taken; another, to be superseded, or broken; such a Jury to be
^ack'd, and such a Verdict to be given, let an innocent man's life, or even
(...) safety of an whole Nation lie at stake, He can no more suspend his Duty,
than violate his Credit of being of the Godly Party. Nay if Blood lies in the
way of Reformation, it is but Whispering into Conscience a Text or two, and it
bids the man ((...)it be against whom it will) Go, and utterly destroy those
Sinners the Amalakites, and Fight against them till they be consumed, as he
finds it, 1 Sa^: 15. 18. Or if he Reads, Cursed be he that does the work of the
Lord negligently, and that keeps his Sword from Blood, as he is told Jer: 48.
10. Or if he but hears a Curse ye Meroz, unless you raise a Regiment to fight
the Lords Battles; The man of Conscience can no more resist such a call, than
if a Revelation from Heaven had set him at work. And what mischief these and
such like destructive principles have done We all know, and are now like sadly
to smart under the miserable consequence of them. But when shall the Prophecy
of the Royal Martyr be accomplished among Us, who told his Son (our Sovereign
Lord) That when the mask of Religion should be Pulled off the Face of
Rebellion; -- He might then see happy Days. But instead of that, Do We not now
see three Kingdoms imbroyl'd in the most unnatural War, or which is worse made
Slaves to the most unnatural Tyrants! Though we have not yet heard the sad
Tidings of Cities lay, in Ashes, or of, Fields covered with the Slain, yet We
have just; alas too just! reason to fear that destruction attends Us at our
very doors; And We have seen that the Innocent and Loyal have been every where
made a Prey, to Satiate the Malice of a Revengful Faction! And for their sakes
the Nation is Now again become the Reproach of Christianity, and Scorn of
Mankind.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby.

A SERMON Preached before the University of Cambridge by Miles Barnes, D. D.
St. Luke 19. V. 14. But his Citizens hated Him, and sent a Message afoer Him;
saying, We will not have this Man to Reign over Us.
THe Jews were always a Moody Headstrong People, Impatient of any kind of
Government, Theocracy it self could not please them, They Murmured against
Moses and Aaron, etc. And when the Messiah appears as Moses had don before in
this great Juncture of hardship, They adhere to their Oppressors, and
shamefully reject the^r Savior; by Libelling his Government in general, by
throwing contempt upon his person in particular, Is not this the Carpenters
Son? by traducing his life and conversation, making him a Winebibber, a Friend
of Publicans and Sinners; by making base Reflections on his Disciples and chief
Ministers; by undervaluing his Doctrine, as inconsistent which the Pomp and
Grandeur of the Roman Empire, by making him an Innovator, a disturber of the
Established Religion; and lastly (as the Height of their Malice) by Proclaiming
him a Traitor and Enemy to Caesar, as having Si^ister ends to set up a Fi^th
Monarchy, in opposition to the Fourth. And when all their pretenses were
Ba^^^ed, and they Reduced to the last effort of Obstinate Rebels, to own
Rebellion for Rebellions sake, then They Magisteriously resolve themselves into
the Sovereignty of their own Wills, and conclude against all Government in a
direct Nolumus Hun^, We will not have this man to Reign over Us, But can they
think he will not Reign over them? Yes he does and will too at his last
terrible Advent, when he shall come with all the Solemnities of Majesty to
Judge the World, Pronounce Sentence upon These Wicked Citti^ens, and make Them
the Vassals of Eternal vengeance, The certain Doom of all unrepenting Rebels!

I am sorry to tell you, that the frequent Tumults and Insurrections which have
infested the Reigns of our British Kings, gave occasion to that Sarcastical
saying; Rex Angliae, Rex Diabolorum; but you may tell your selves, that These
Devils never Acted more like Devils* than since They were possessed and guided
by the Turbulent Spirit of our Modern Pharisees the Presbyterians; who are the
very Citizens, that from their first Institution have shown their hatred
against Monarchs and Monarchy. John Calvin founded his Presbytery in Treason
and Rebellion, the Citizens having prepared his way by expelling from Geneva
their Lawful Prince and Governor, Which violent Act was Encouraged, approved
and confirmed by Calvin; and it has ever since been carried on by Schism and
Sedition. Never was it Received into any Church, but it presently dissolved the
Catholic unity of Faith, and broke the Bond of Peace; never into any State,
which it did not embroil and throw into very dangerous Convulsions; never into
any Family, which it did not divide, and set at variance; never did it get
possession of any single man, whom it did not strangely transform with Pride
and Morosness, made him unfit for Civil Society and Common Conversation.

Have the Presbyteria^s in any of their Synods censured or condemned the
pernicious Tenets of Calvin or Beza? has Any of them had the grace to disown or
write against their Dethroning Doctrines? if they have their Books have proved
very ineffectual, for if We pass from their Principles to Their Practices, We
shall find that They have always been of a Turbulent, Imperious and Bloody
Spirit. And there have not been wanting Some Church Trimmers, still retaining a
Fellow-feeling for the Cause, who from the Pulpit have endeavored to clear
them, and ^ay the guilt of their Horrid Murders chiefly upon the Popish
Priests; though they cannot find the name of one Papist in the whole List of
True Protestant Regicides.

The Principle of De^^roning or Deposing Kings (charged upon the Jesui^s) has
been publicly censured and condemned as impious and erroneous in several
Foreign Unsversities, written against by men of the Romish Communion, and is
most solidly and unanswerably confuted by Barclay in his excellent Book De
potestate Pap^, etc. which book is dedicated to Clement the Eighth.

The Prerogative never suffered, no great Statesman has ever been disgraced,
nor the Church of England it self (nay the Libertys of the People) ever
Wounded, But a dreadful Outcry of Popery has (...)ceded, No man could show his
Fidelity to the Monarchy, but he was presently blasted with the odious Title of
a Court or a Church Papist.

Speaking against the Bill designed to exclude his Royal Highness the Duke of
York (now King) says this Reverend Divine. To say nothing to the Rude form
observed in the penning of this Bill, that 'twas drawn up by a person since
accused of High Treason; And to pass by the Ingratitude of the Contrivers,
against a Prince of such Eminent virtues; who has ventured his Royal Blood as
frankly for the good of his Country, as the meanest Subject in it, and who was
even then actually manifesting his unalterable Loyalty and affection to his
Sovereign in Reducing Scotland to their Obedience; and We have at this hour
great reason to be thankful to him for his Wise and Prosperous Conduct in that
affair.

And I do here publicly declare; what was always my judgment, that I do
believe no human Acts or Power in the World can de jure hinder the descent of
the Crown upon the next Heir, which is his unalterable Right by Religion, Law,
History and Reason.

And now if We consider the quality of This Hellish Conspiracy, It is
compounded of so many malignant Ingredients, that it looks more like a
confederacy against Religion, Morality and the Common Sentiments of Humanity,
than a Conspiracy against the Frame, Constitution and Administration of the
Government, Ambition, avarice and Revenge have often lead men and bewitch^d
them into Treasonable Associations But This seems to be the sole result of
abstracted malice, of men abandoned to the curse of a Reprobate mind; who
after having Traveled through all the slow methods of Sedition, have now at
last taken Arms and begun a most Bloody Rebellion against the Lord's Anointed.

And now what storms are coming upon Us! what Devastations and Spoils (by Fire
and Sword) may we justly dread. And the whole Nation alas! may now become a
Theater of War and Field of Blood; And the streets filled with the Cries of
Widows, and the Fatherless, with Murders, Rapins, Incest, Adulterys,
Sacriledges, Massacres. and Conflagrations. And what satisfaction now can any
Loyal Subject have to think of Surviving the Ruins of the Government? or to
live in a Land Polluted and Stained with Blood? to see daily before his Eyes
the dismal spectacle of his enslaved undone Country? or to live in pepetual
Fears of being made a Sacrifice himself? But it has hitherto pleased that God,
who allotteth to Atheists and Rebels a portion with the Hypocrite, to rescue
and preserve his Majesty from the Paws of these Bloody Miscreants, Hence it
appears, That good Kings are the immediate care of God; and that They should be
so, seems agreeable to the Economy of his Providence, and is confirmed by
Examples in all Ages. For They are his Anointed, His Vicegerents, set over Us
by his appointment, and are therefore entitled to a special Right in the
Divine Providence. Of this Truth his present Majesty, with the late King his
Royal Brother have been very Eminent Examples through the whole course of their
Respective Lives.

And that which seems Truly deplorable in this Execrable Treason, is the
Hardiness and Impenitence that accompanies This Rebellion, and pursues the
Rebels to the very moments of their Deaths. But woe! be to Those wretched
Guids, who lead Them into both; Those Betrayers of Souls! who instead of
disposing men to Christian Obedience, have caused Them first to Rebel, and
then instead of disposing Them to Repentance have encouraged them in the
Rebellion; And then at their very Deaths have forced them (as it were) to
Publish such Iustifications as seem written with design to incite their
accomplices to carry on the work here, whilst they are answering for it in the
other world. and this consideration is enough to make the hearts of all good
Christians Ache. And We must now pray, that as God has hitherto preserved the
King, so that Justice may overtake those Rebels and Traitors whom Mercy cannot
Reclaim.

In a word then, as We are thankful to God for the preservation of his Majesty
hitherto, so let Us implore Protection over him for the time to come, That he
may daily Receive fresh Accessions of Strength and Splendour, and be Recompensed
for the times, wherein He has suffered Adversity.

O Lord save the King,
And bless thine Anointed;
Send Him help from thy holy Hill,
And evermore mightily defend Him.
Let the Enemy have no advantage over Him;
Nor the Wicked approach to hurt Him.
Amen.
Lonndon, Printed for R: Royston his Majesty's Bookseller.

A Se^mon Preached before the Lord Mayor etc. of London, By Henry Hesketh,
Minister of St. Hellens.
1 Pet. 2, 15. For so is the will of God, that with Well-doing you may put to
Silence the Ignorance of Foolish-men.
WE then most truly honor God, when we express a great sense of his Power and
Sovereignty over us, in our Lives: And we then only glorify and acceptably
praise Him, when we live according to his Commandments acknowledge the
reasonableness and goodness of his Laws, and cheerfully do those things, that
are pleasing unto Him. Among these, there cannot well be an higher instance,
than to live up to the Principles of that Excellent Religion, that he has
appointed To be the Measure of all our Actions.

To enquire now what was The Cavil and objection which these Foolish men made
against Christian Religion, which the Apostle in the Text has respect unto,
and would have Silenced? And this may easily be resolved, by considering the
two verses immediately preceding the Text; In which the Apostle does press the
duty of Obedience and Subjection to Our Lawful Governors, both Supreme and
Subordinate; Submit Your selves to every Ordinance of Man, whether it to be the
King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as those that are sent by Him. And this he
presses by an Argument that can never fail of effect upon a good man, (...)
for the Lord, and out of Conscience to him, whose Institution Government is,
and who has commanded Subj^ction to it* Upon which These words immediately
follow; by which We plainly understand, that the Objection which he enjoins
this Subjection in Confutation of, was that old and early Clamor, that
Christian Religion was an Enemy to Government, and the professors of it
Factious and Seditious persons, The great Clamor against the Christians, upon
which that great uproar against them at Thessalonica was stirred, Acts 17. 6,
7. was this, ^hese that have Turned the World up-side down, are come hither
also; and These all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying there is
another (one Jesus) King. This you will also find the chief thing in the
accusation against St. Paul, Acts 24, 5. For we have found this Man a Pestelent
fellow, and a Mover of Sedition, etc.

And I do most readily confess, that were this accusation true, were Christian
Religion inconsistent with Government, an Enemy to it, or a Disturber of it,
there could not be an objection that would be more fatal to it; all the
Reproach and Dishonor that men could load it with, were just, there were no
apology to be made for it, nor any thing to be expected, but that all the world
should combine together against it. All men that have any becoming thoughts of
the Providence and Goodness of God, how tender he is of the good of Mankind,
and how largly he has provided for it, how wisely he conducts the course of
humane affairs, and steers them by Rules, which would make them, and all things
else that is happy, can never believe That to be a Divine Religion, or be
persuaded to accept it as coming from God, which perplexeth the course of
things, and defeats these good purposes of God in the World. God is the God of
Order and not of Confusion, the Author as well as Lover of Concord and Peace,
and not of Ruin and Dissension among Men; And therefore can never be the
Author of any Religion that is destructive of the One, and naturally effective
of the other, among them. And it therefore greatly concerns all Those that have
any Respect for the Christian Religion, to be sure to keep it clear from any
Objections of this kind.

The Ancient Apologists have taken care ^in their Noble defenses of Christian
Religion, to clear it from this Scandalous Reflection, By appealing to the
known Doctrines and Principles of it; They challenge the World to instance in
any one saying in the new Testament, whether there ^e the least hint or
encouragement given to Rebellion, or any thing that can warrant the least
undutifull Carriage toward our Governors? Or rather, whether there be not
enough asserted there, to assure Government, and to engage all persons to
Subjection, upon better arguments, and stronger Reasons, than a^y yet were ever
made use of before, For here the Reason of Subjection is laid deep, and charged
immediately upon the Consciences of men, Resistance is (...) si^^ing the
Ordinance of God, and Damnation is expressly threat(...) against it. And yet I
must needs say to the dishonor of Some men, That They have Robbed Christian
Religion of this way of Defending itself, and defeated the effect of this
appology for it.

Obedience is not only recommended, upon the great advantages of quietness and
Peace, of happiness and Order, that result to the World from it, nor backed
with the Sanctions of Temporal Punishment to Those that Rebel; but it is
pressed upon Reasons of Conscience and Duty to God, and the danger of incurring
that Eternal Damnation that is prepared in Hell, for the Lawless and
Disobedient.

Kings will be better pleased, and satisfied with the quiet and peaceable Lives
of their Subjects; their cheerful obedience to their Laws, and Their ready
compliance with their pleasure, than with all the formal Caresses, and
Protestations of Loyalty and Love. And I wish Some men of late had not given
Them too great cause to conclude, that Men's Practices and Prof^ssions do not
always go together.

The good Christians of Old were in all cases peaceable and submissive, They
readily obeyed, and heartily prayed for their Governors, Even when mos^
Barbarously and unjustly provoked to the contrary; so that not one Christian
dyed as a Rebel or a Traitor, in all the Early Persecutions of Christianity,
nor for several Centuries; And you may challenge any of our modern Factors for
Treason to instance in One. Nay, it is well known that even Julian the Apostate
acquits Them from this aspe^sion, and upbraids his Heathen Subjects, with the
Obedience and Loyalty of the Galileans (as he scornfully calls them) which is
the more remarkable testimony, for coming from the mouth of the Bitterest Enemy
that Christiani^y ever had.

And now alas! amongst all the sad Circumstances of Our late Treasons and
Rebellion, there are none ^e ought more to be concerned for, than the Impiety
and Guilt of the Conspirators, and the advantage that some men will take hence,
to Reproach the Protestant Religion. Oh! Cursed Impi^ty and Hypocricy! are
these things becoming True ^rotestants? Is this the effect of all your Starched
and formal Godliness* Do all your Oaths and Vows of Loyalty, and service to
Your King? Do all Your appeals to God, for the sincerity of your Intentions? Do
all your Solmn Protestations of care and concern for his safty, come at last to
this? good God! that Plots and Conspiracys against the King, Nay ^^^n Rebellion
it self, should shelter themselves under the Gospel! And Religion ^e (...) to
Color that, which almost above all things it abhors. What shall we say of such
men? who can help U^ to Names and Characters bad enough for Them? who have put
off not only Religion, but Humanity, and are Actualy commenced Devils.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonnick at the Lion near St. Paul's

A SERMON Preached by John Harrison D. D.
2 Samuel: 18. 28. And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the King, all is well. And he
fell down to the Earth upon his Face before the King, and said blessed be the
Lord thy God, which has Delivered up the Men that lift up their hand against
my Lord the King.
THe Rebellion that was to begin at Heb^on, did happen under the pretense of
paying a vow unto the Lord, that is, under the Veil or Disguise of Religion,
Absalom said to the King, Let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the
Lord in Hebron, 2 Samuel: 15. 7. Nothing more usual than to give out, For the
cause of Christ! whilst under that vizor, They Act parts quite contrary to his
Holy Doctrine and Blessed Example. And this is ever observable, in a well
formed Conspiracy (if a Conspiracy can in any sense be so expressed) First, To
settle it self Under some Chief Leader, that by Popular Arts has insinuated
Himself into the Multitude, Giving Himself out to be some mighty one, And what
he wants of a just Title (as that ought ever to be maintained in an Hereditary
Kingdom) He will make good in his defense of the Peoples Religion, Estates,
Lives and Fortunes.

The late Lord Russel, encouraged by this Scotch Doctrine. That it is Lawful to
defend a man's Conscience by open Force against any Authority whatsoever, did
dare adventure his Body (Yea I ^remble) his very Soul on this false bottom, so
his Execreable paper seems to import, But instead of a Faithful (I fear) he met
with a Faithless Confessor: B^rne^.
For who (that is not resolved to quit humanity) will believe that to be
Religion, which is Maintained with Treasons and Murders of the most Purple Dye?
And here we may observe, of what Mischievous Consequence any Combination is,
whether influenced by self-Interest, Pride, Ambition, Spite or Malice. When We
are once lead out of the Kings Highway of Honnour and Honesty, into any
Bypath of our own, We soon fall into the Broad road of Rebellion.

Having taken a Survey of This Hellish Conspiracy, a sudden Horror here
Seifeth my trembling heart, at the sad apprehensions of what has already, or
may still, most justly befall Us, The dismal consequences of a Bloody War! etc.
The face and voice of an Angel (which hitherto has been for Religion, Estates,
Lives and Liberties) is now like to be changed into the hands of a Devil, who
may rend those dearest Interests into a thousand pieces; And the bleeding marks
of the Last Rebellions, being Scarce out of our sides, We are now again like to
be turned into avery Shambles.

But surely We that have been so many years, a Lasting mark of Infamy (over the
habitable Earth) for Murdering King Charles the First, of Blessed Memory, and
Betraying his present Majesty, as Judas did his Savior, can no longer delight,
in a continuance of such disgrace, as wants a Parallel. Have We forgot our
Oaths of Allegiance? Have We cast behind Us all past favors from the Crown? to
Betray our Trust, to lift up our hands against God's Anointed! sure there are
Some, the better they be dealt with, the worse still ye shall find them, And of
These constan^ly David was most in danger.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

A Sermon Preached on the Thanksgiving day etc. by Edward Pelling Chaplin to
the Duke of Somersett.
Psalm. 34, 19. Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous; But the Lord
delivers Him out of them all.
THe special Providence of God is seen in nothing more, than in watching over
Princes, in preserving Them, and their Kingdoms, and in supporting their
Government For the hearts of Men are naturally so impatient of Subjection, and
so greedy of Power; their particular interests are so divided; their designs
are so various; their Passions are so violent; their Principles are so
different; their minds are so set upon Villainy and Mischief, (and what through
Ambition or Covetuousness, or Discontent) their Spirits are so restless, that
it is by a daily Miracle that Princes live, and 'twould be impossible for them
to be safe one Moment, did not the immediate had of God (of whom alone They
hold their Crowns) Shelter and Protect Their Persons, and overule the Madness
of Turbulent and Blood-thirsty People.

Perhaps noe Prince living ever had such ample experience of this, as King
David had; unless W^ will except our own dread Sovereign, whose case comes
nearest to a Parallel: Davia's Title to the Crown was Unquestionable: His
Government was equal and easy; His heart was of a Tender and Compassionat
Temper; He was ready to forget the greatest wrongs, and not only to Forgive,
but also to express Kindness to the greatest Criminals; insomuch that Job had
the Confidence, in the heat of his Passion, to tell Him, That He Loved his
Enemies more than his Friends, and, by so doing, Shamed the Faces of all his
Servants, 2 Samuel: 19.

All this notwithstanding, though David was a Man according to God's own heart a
Character which God himself gave him) yet the poor Prince found Troubles on
every side, First he was prese^u^ed by Saul. and anon forced to a Controversy
with Readiness ^ouse One while he was in danger from Enemies abroad, and another
while from disaffected Men at home. Now he was Conspired against by Absalom,
which afflicted hi^ the more Because the Rebel was his Son. Then he was railed
at by S^ime^, that Dog (as Abishai rightly called him) the Sier of all that
^yt^^r, which are continually Yelping at the Lords Anointed. Nor was this all,
For Sheba and his Fellow Traitors raised a formidable In^urrection against him,
being frustrated of their expectations at the Kings Return: For David had been
in Exile, being Forced to Fly [or withdraw] from his Rebellious Subjects, and
upon his happy Restoration Some Israelites were enraged, that They had not
that Interest at Court which They hoped for; and hereupon They were vexed that
the King was come home, and so an Alarm was sounded, Every Man to his Tents, O
Israel, 2 Samuel: 20.

Had not the Divine Providence been David's Shield and Salvation, that
Excellent Prince had been utterly Ruined by This Army of Troubles, which
continually followed him at the Heels. But God was his support and stay; and
though there was Plot upon Plot, and Rebellion after Rebellion, Yet He trusted
still to the Righteousness of His Cause.

David Commemorates with thankfullness throughout this his Book of Psalms God's
unwearied goodness and singular Mercy toward him, From whence he draws this
Conclusion, for the comfort of all Righteo^s Princes, which should come after;
that though God may, and many times does, For great Ends and Reasons, suffer Them
to be Evil Entreated for a Time; yet he will not only be with them in their
Troubles, but also will (sooner or later) give Them a fair Exit, out of all
their distress Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous, etc.

There are Some, who have gained such a perfect Mastery over their Consciences,
that they can believe even a Cheat that serves their turn, and disblieve even
a Miracle that wounds their Interests* discerning Men have seen for several
years last past, that our King and Government were both in eminent danger
because those very ^r^ifices being Employed again, which served effectually to
destroy the Father, We had all the reason to believe they were intended to
Dethron the Son too; it being impossible, but the same means used in the same
manner, must tend to the accomplishment of the same Ends.

Some Men by their tacit Confessio^s and Artificial shifts; by extenuating and
mincing matters [by their d^ny^ng publicly to excuse themselves (at the Kings
request) from the foulest charge that was ever drawn against Prelates] did
force all men to conclude, that there was some great thing in hand, which
needed the utmost of their Art and Skill [which they have since most lewdly
brought to its accu^sed Perfection] And I am apt to think that These men who
can call Resistance, only Innocence, will so lessen the matter, that Cutting of
Throats will be termed only a new way of Triming, and the Destruction [or
Dethroning] of Princes, to be no more but a Perfecting the History of the
Reformation.

Who could imagine, that after so many Protestations and Professions of sorrow
for former miscarriages! after so many vows of Loyalty and hearty Obedience!
after so many Oaths of All^giance and Supremacy, repeated over the whole
Nation! after such Acts of Indemnity granted even to Monsters of Rebels! after
such prof^snes^ of Royal Bounty, whereby Villains were enriched and grew fat!
after so many expressions of Goodness, Tenderness and Clemency, enough to
s^ften any Devils but Fanatics! after so many specious Adresses, said to be
presented by his Majesty's Most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects! I say, who could
imagine, that after all This, any Such men should be found among Us, that would
not only Conspire against the King [but have now Hellishly engaged Themselves
in an open Rebellion against Him.] But methinks if Men would but seriously
consider, how the Providence of God has been particularly concerned for our
King all along, from his Birth even to this day [in delivering him from dangers
and freeing him from the Mischievous Imaginations of Wicked Men, etc.] it
should be enough to turn the hearts of all his Enemies, and prevail with Them
to love his Government and Him, who has continually been, And Still is,
wonderfully preserved by the immediate Care of Heaven. I have heard of a Jew
that was Converted to the Christian Faith, by considering these Wonders of
Christ for the King.

Though the generality of Men have been strangely Blinded and mislead, by the
Artifices of Those, who made use of Men's Fears of Popery, to promote their own
Fanatic and Republican Interests; Yet there were [and still are] Many that
will not be wrought upon To bow down their knees to Baal; [or Worship the
Golden Calf which Same Men have set up] We have all pretended great Honor and
Affections for his Majesty, and a most tender care for his safety and
preservation. But We can never be Loyal or good Subjects, till We appl^ our
selves heartily to the necessa^^ business of Repen^ance, and Turn from the Evil
of our ways; We ought to make it the business of our whole life* Truly to Fear
and Obey God, And then we ^eed not fear the most Malicious and Wicked Parties
of Those who have basely gone off from the King's Side (if ever they were really
on it) And gone off too, with all sorts of Debauchery and Immorality along with
Them.

It Is necessary too that Men repent of their Follies, Has the P: O: kept to his
Declaration?
that they have been so credulous and easy, In taking the words, and trusting
to the Principles, and ab^tting (though Inadvertently) the Practices of these
Conspirators; And to beware of the like Follies for the future. Those
Principles which have been sent so thick abroad of late, That the King holds
not his Crown Jure divino, but is the Common Wealths Trustee and Delegate; That
he is accountable to his People; That all his Rights are founded upon Human
Laws, That He is a Co-Ordinat State; And that the Supreme or Sovereign Power is
Lodged in the People: Whither did These Doctrines tend, but to the Deposition
and Destruction [or B^nishment] of his Majesty? you may observe they were the
Principles which Bradshaw went upon at the Kings T^yal.

The manifest obstructing the Course of Justice, notwithstanding full and
pregnant Evidence; The protecting of the B^sest F^l^ows, and the greatest
Cri^i^als, who had nothing to recommend them but this, that They were Factious
and Dishonest; The taking of Oaths, not in the sense of the Law, but according
to every Man's priva^e construction; The justifying of the most infamous
villains; and the zealous endeavors which have been used, both to rescue
Traitors from the Law, and to cl^anse their Reputation, after they were
condemned for the foulest Malefactors Whither did all thi's tend, but to
embolden Conspirators, and to encourage them with securities from all manner of
Penalty, if they had but the Character of true Protestants? A character of the
Popish ^lot.
The Suborning of Wretches, to say and unsay, to speak by Roat, and to tell
every thing but truth; The Supporting of Perjury as a Trade, far more
profitable than any old English Manufacture; and the Stitching up of every
hole, which any Common Idiot could see in an improbable Story, What did this
tend to, but to keep a great stock of Oaths in Bank, to swear the King himself
out of his Honor and his Life? The Charge and Sweat which Thousands have
wasted, to put the most Disaffected persons into Places and Offices of great
Trust, and Power! What did this tend to, but to make Resistance and Rebellion
look fair with the Face of Authority? the aspersing of the Government; the
Calumniating of his Majesty, and all Subordinate Magistrates, and Loyal
Ministers of State; The Frightning of Men with such a noise of Popery, when so
many had exchanged all Religion for Atheism; The Outcry against Tyrany, when
the Licenciousness of those very men argued that Common Justice could not be
done, no, not for the King himself; What did all this tend to but to Subvert
the Fundamental Constitution both in Church and State? The dispersing of
Libells; The Countenancing of the most Seditious Pamphlets, that came from the
Rudest and Fllthiest hands; The Scareing of Men (if it had been possible) from
speaking Reason, Justice or Truth; And the practicing of every thing that
served for the diminution of all that is Good, Great, and Noble; What did all
this tend to, but to help Evil-minded Men by degrees and Inches to get to the
king's Throne, that they might Assaffinate his Person with a full Thrust, and
then leave it to the prejudiced and ill affected world to make their Appology.

One would have thought it impossible, that discerning Men should not be able
to look to the end of these things, nor so much as to guess at the Conclusion
by the premises: But so it was that great multitudes of Men (Some of whom I am
peswaded were not guilty of Black Intentions) were led away with the Common
Error, and upon false presumptions; That nothing was at the Bottom, but a tru^
Design for the Interest and Stability of Religion; The Stale pretense that
turned the Nation into Aceldema once before! It Is High time therefore for such
to be sorry to see how greatly They were befooled, and to consider with
themselves how far they may have contributed (though unwittingly) to the carrying
on a Design So Horrid and Barbarous without a Parallel; and by their just
Indignation for what is past, and Highest zeal for the future, to endeavor (if
it be possible) to make his Majesty Reparation for those intolerable
mischiefs, which Blood-thirsty Traitors would (perhaps) never have attempted
upon the Confidence of their own Interest.

I have no more to add' but that We give all diligence Religiously and
Honestly to perform Our Duty to God, and to his Anointed; and in so doing to
look up to the Hills from whence all our help comes, and to trust in God for
Our deliverance from These Dangers which Stand now dreadfully before Us,
trusting in Him, who has heretofore delivered Us, that He will deliver Us yet
Still; Tho the troubles of the Righteous be many, Yet the Lord delivers him
out of all.

London, Printed for William Abington next the Wonder in Lu^g^e-street.

Samaritanisme Revived, A Sermon Preached at Great Yarmouth, by Luke Milbourne
Ezra, 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Though wicked men of all kinds are at never so great a distance among
themselves, yet Truth being equally an Enemy to them all, it moves their hatred
so much against it self, that other disgusts and Broyls are soon forgotten. So
the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Herodians labored at all times to undermine each
other, but readily combined together to destroy our Savior. The more vigorous
and bright Truths luster is, the more violent the assaults of its opposers, be:
So it proved in the Primitive Church, many and absurd Heresies sprung up in it,
The breaches between the different Heretics were irreparable, And yet They
Lived almost in a constant Conspiracy against the True Catholic Church of
Christ: And he that examins Church History will find, that when peace gave the
greatest Ornaments to Christianity the Mushroon Heresies and Schisms grew up
the fastest; as on the contrary, when Religion grew indifferent and the
Professors of it Lukewarm, Heretics and Schismatics seemed to lay down their
Weapons, as if Hell had no more employment for them.

The Devil is never so truly dreadful, as when he puts on the shape of an Angel
of Light, otherwise every one stands upon his guard, but then the Subtle
Serpent insinuats himself into the bossoms of those, who least suspect his
poisonous nature. And Wicked Men can never possibly do such mischief, as when
They put on the visor of Piety; The servants of God avoid Them, when they
appear like Themselves, But when the sheeps Clothing has invested the Wolf,
even he may pass for a very Innocent Creature.

It is not to be questioned, but that the acknowledgment of the True God, and
the offering due sacrifices to him as God, is the main Foundation of True
Religion: But a bare Foundation without a Superstructure is of on worth, for
upon these Principles plainly and evidently depend a great number of other
things, which, if not observed, prove that the Foundation was never truly
owned; For if a man believe indeed that there is a God, and by offering
Sacrifices, acknowledges there is a duty owing to that God, nothing can be
commanded by that God, nothing forbidden, but the man (if he hopes for
Salvation) must sincerely, and to the utmost of his power obey it. All the
Commands of God must be punctually obeyed; Men may not cull out this, or
another, according to their own Fancies, since the Rule is infallibly
Authentic, Iam. 2, 10. That whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend
in one point, he is guilty of all; The reason is because he breaks that very
Foundation he builds upon viz.) The confession of a God, and our duty to Him:
The Apostle makes the inference, verse the 11: For He that said do not commit
Ad^l^ery, said also, do not Kill; now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou
Kill Thou art become a ^ransgressor of the Law: so then if any man pretend, out
of a sense of his duty to God, to do one or more things, and yet minds not
some other things, which God has commanded as well as those, His whole Obedience
is nothing, and his whole pretense a Lie, he really (with the Fool) says in his
heart, there is no God.

But if at last we look into the word of God, we shall find that as he has
commanded us to abstain from all Immoralities, even from whatsoever has the
least appearance of Evil; so he has by the Apostle enjoined Us to mark, to set
a brand of infamy on Those, which cause Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the
Doctrine We have learned, and to avoid them, 1 These: 5, 22. For They that are
such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own Belly, and by good words and
fair speeches Deceive the Hearts of the People, Rom: 16 17, 18. It is not the
openess of a Sin that makes it comparitively the greater; Malice is as bad as
Theft, yet it lys close concealed within the dark Recesses of the heart;
Witchcraft is an obscure Sin, few know what it is, yet every one believes it
worse than Drunkeness, Adultery, Covetuousness, etc. And Treason though it hates
the light, is as had as Profaness. To Curse the King in Our hearts (though never
so secretly) is a Damnable Sin, And it is the same To contrive Tumults and
Rebellions in the State, against Our Lawful Sovereign. But these last admit of
one particular aggrava^ion beyond all bare Immoralities whatsoever; and it is
this, every one who pretends to Conscience acknowledges it to be his duty, to
abjure all Immoralities, while many pretend to be active in the other only for
Conscience sake, And when Sin is once abetted by that which men call
Conscience, the mischievous effects of it know no bounds.

Presently after the King's Restoration, before things wre fully settled Tongue,
Phillips, Stubbs, Hind, Sallers, Gibbs, (all of 'Em men pretending to tender
Consciences) were executed at Tyburn 22 December. 1662. for no meaner a design
than Cutting off Root and Branch, Kings! Queens! Dukes! Bishop! all were to go
one way! That there should be no Running beyond Seas, or parlyes there, but a
Total destruction of the King, Lords, Bishops and Gentry; The Plot when
effected to be Charged upon the Papists, and the People to be excited to Rise
in Arms under pretense of a Popish Massacre; And the Godly party in the year
following were Plotting again (in the Northern parts) to carry on the same work
their Brethren had failed in before; Of which Treasonable Plot; His Majesty
told the two Houses, That it was of a large extent, and very near execution,
had not he by God's goodness come to the knowledge of the Principal contrivers,
and so secured them from doing their intended mischief. But still the Evil
Spirit was not quite laid, In the year 1666 the several Parties ventured once
more upon a Plot, To Murder His Majesty, Overthrow the Government, Surprise the
Tower, Kill the Lord General and to Fire the City of London, which Plot was to
have been executed September the third of that year: Money was distributed to
the Conspirators, and a Council of the Heads settled at London for the
Management of affairs: For which Hellish Plot Rathbone, Saunders, Tuck^r,
Flint, Evans, Miles, Westcot, and Cole, were executed. And though so many
suffered, yet one part of the Plot was unhappily effected in that dreadful
Conflagration wherein the great Metropolis of the Kingdom was laid in Ashes.
This being disappointed the Devil of Sedition flew into Sc^tland, when in the
same year the Old Covenanters broke out into Rebellion, at Pentland hills, soon
after James, Mitchel (a Covenanting Minister) attempted the Assassination of
Dr. Sharp, the most Reverend Archbishop of St. Andrews, and in the attempt
mortally wounded the Bishop of O^k^^y: But the poor Archbishop escaped not so;
Implacable Fanatis^n pursued, 'till he was effectually Murdered by some of the
Crew (with the most inexpressible barbarity) 3d May 1679, The same month a new
Rebellion (under the Banner of the Covenant) broke out at Bothwell Bridge,
where Their Powers were crushed once again; From which blow God grant They
never more return. But all these ill Successes, have not yet (It seems) so
tamed our numerous Sectaries, and their Favorers, but that Religious Treason
has once more made its Entry among Us; The King himself, the Duke, the great
Officers of State, the Loyal Magistrates of the City of London, all doomed to
Slaughter, etc. No ^op^p^! No Slave^y! has been the Common Cry, They acting
therein like those Sabtle villains, who when they have Killed a man themselves,
are the most busy to find out the Murderers. Same tell us, that he Members of
the last Parliament at Westminster were All Church Men; But what ^hey were,
their horrid actions declared, Such Church Men the true Church of England will
always disown, as only fit Associats for Conspirators and Rebels.

Is This the True Protestancy some have boasted so much of? Or are all P^pishly
aff^ted who declar can Hearty The Rebellion now on Foc^.
abhorrence of all such D^^ilish Principles and P^atices? May We all bear that
reproac^ful Character, rather than for a Popular Ti^le, run headlong to the
Devil. And let all Persons, who profess Loyalty to their Sovereign be truly
Loyal to that God, who is the great preserver of Princes; Let the world be
convinced, that even s^eming virtues, which render Schismatics plausible, are
solid and real in all Thos^, who maintain God's ancient, solemn and r^g^lar
worship; Let Us Fear God and Honor and Trust our Sovereign; Let no Subtle
Emissarles of Faction, make Us suspicious of our Superiors, or of one another,
That so We preserving the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace and
Righteousness of Life, the wo^k of God may prosper in Our hands; That Plots
Treasons and Rebellions against Our Lawful Prince, may for ever be execra^ed
and accursed, And all England may hear and fear, And no such W^ckedness may be
hea^d of among Us any more. London Printed for Walter Kettilby.

A Sermon Preached at Westminster Abbey on the 29th of July 1685, being the
Thanksgiving day for Quelling Monmouth's Rebellion, by Edward Pelling, Chaplain
to the Duke of Somersett.
Psalm: 124. 6. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a Prey to Their
Teeth.
THe good Providence of God over the Sacred Persons and Government of Princes
in p^eserving both from the most Malicious designs of so many Restless and
Sanguinary Spirits, is one of the most stupendous works of God's Omnipotence,
that ever He has showed since the last day of the Creation, a Miracle which
was the Common Subject of King David's thankful M^^itations (up and down
throughout his whole Book of Psalms) and pa^^icularly in this Psalm, where
after a most humble manner he does adore the infinite Mercy and Power of God,
For Delivering Him and his Subjects, from the ^^reatning dangers of a fresh
Insurrection: And that too, when the Rebellion was so formidable, When the
Malice of Wicked Men was so outrageous; when their app^tites were not to be
satisfi^d but with streams of Blood, when Ruin was breaking in upon the whole
land like a mighty Torrent, when without the immediate help of God, nothing
could be expected but utter desolation; when the danger was so emminent, and
seemingly so inevitable, that Those Men of Uiolence thought themselves as sure,
as if the Prey they sought after, were already in the Gin; Then was the time
for God to lay to his hand, to make bare his Arm, and to gain himself For our
so was the King Delivered from Rochester.
by reseu^ng Innocence from the Pit, as it lay at the Brink, ready to drop
into the depth of Destruction. And this ^a^ger did proceed from S^eba and his
Associates; a desperate Leader of a Uery Terrible Defection; nothing being more
dangerous to any Prince, than the United Malice of Rebellions Spirits, that
submit, not for Conscience sake, but either upon Constraint, or for Their
Interest only.

I doubt not but David in the Penning of this Psalm particularly thought of the
Conspyracy of his Bloody Son Absalom, that formerly had been guilty of shameful
Murder; his Ambitious Son Absalom, whom nothing would satisfy but the Crown;
his ungratful Son Absalom, that so basely rewarded him for his Longings after
him, when he fled from his pres^nce to Geshur, and for his pardon, for his
Kisses upon his return; His Persidious Son Absalom, that no sooner went out of
his Fathers Court, but ran to the Gates, to steal away the hearts of his
Fathers Subjects, saying O that I were made Judge (meaning King) in the Land;
His Hypocritycal Son Absalom that pretending a desire to perform his vow [To
preserve the Protestant Religion etc.] would have Usurped the Throne and did
under color of Religion raise an open and barefaced R^bellion. This was such
a dreadful Conspiracy, as made David himself [the King] though a man of such
Prowess and Conduct, presently To fly for his Life. Such a Uiolent agitation
were People in the^^ that they were ready to flow to him from all Quarters,
like the meeting and inundation of many Rivers to make a Deluge.

And that which made this Conspiracy the more Terrible was that Achitophel was
in the head of many others. Achitophel that hardened Traitor, and cursed
Reprobate, that when his Council and Bloody endeavors would not take, fled for
it presently, and through Anguish and Vexation Hanged himself: A sad end
indeed, for any Rebel to be his own Executioner, though in Some Cases it is
pity that an Achitophel, an Inveterate and Advising Rebel should ever dye in
his Bed.

When the Highest Treason was formed by such working Heads, when 'twas
Conducted by such Politic Councils; when 'twas Executed by such desperate
Instruments; when it prosper'd On a sudden by such The vilest Treacherys of
some of the Nobility, in the West.
Successful Stratagems, nothing could be expected, but the King's inevitable
Ruin, had not the hand of God been more concerned in the cause, than the hand
of David's Faithful General, Joab; visible in the surprising death of Absalom,
Who was caught in a wood, and hung by his Locks upon a Tree; To show the World
what a Reward all They deserve that take up Ar^s and Rebel against Their Is not
James the 2d Son of Charles the first and only brother of Charles the 2d who
dyed without Issue.
Lawful Prin^r.

It Is true (a most sad and shameful Truth God knows) such was the monstrous
Impiety of the last Age, that it afforded one unpresidented, unparalled
instance of God's wrath, when that incomparable Monarch, the Glory of our
Reformation, and Honor of the world, was forced to bow his head down, and to
fall a Sacrifice, to the Lusts of the most barbarous Villains, Something like
the case of his present Majesty's; But God be praised it is not go^ so far!
as if God had forsaken him! however that some Compensation might be made for
that superlative (and otherwise i^ reparable) loss, by the due Succession, and
after greatness of his Posterity, God has multiplied those Temporal Glories
upon the Sons, which he took from the Father, and gave him a blessed Eternity
in Exchange for. And to let the world se^, that Resistance is criminal even
when it is prosperous, and to punish Rebellion, in a Second Age, though it escaped
in the First, God has delivered the Two Royal Brothers, from six Troub^es and
s^aven, too' Sh^ba and Absalom, with their Wicked Confederats [or Inviters]
joined hand to hand to execute a Conspiracy, which had been long a forming by
the For the People are alwais deceived by the beauty of the Pretense, Religion
etc. as the Serpent deceived Eve, with the fairness of the fruit. And repent as
she did when it is too late.
Se^pentine Subtilty of a twining and party-colored Achitophel.

This Deliverance was manifestly the work of God. Our dangers were so immense,
and and yet so close and privy, that it b^^h passed the Sagacity, and exceeded
the reach of humane Force to prevent them, and nothing can deliver Us from them
but the Power and wisdom of Almighty God, What were the Conspirators, but the
most daring and desperate Villains? And what was the Conspiracy itself, but
along studied, and now ripe Design, to draw in upon Us an whole Deluge of Blood
to over-whelm Prince and People with final Slaughter, To destroy the very name,
as well as to stiflle all further efforts of Loyalty, and to bury Ou^ Monarch
[or Dethrone him] beyond all hopes of a Resurrection? and what is like to be at
the end of all this, but Irreligion and A^^eism, accompanied with the most
dismal Confusions, and a Perpetual War, till by weak'ning and killing one
another, We may in time, when it is to late grow weary of Our Follies.

Good God! That ever Atheism should prevail in such a Land as this, where not
only all Demonstrative Arguments have been used to prove a being infinitely
wise, Just, and Good, to preside over the world, but moreover where the
presence of God has been so often, so long, and in all the vicissitudes and
changes of this Sublunary World, so constantly seen and manifested, as if he
had taken up his abode with Us, as if he had said of tkis Kingdom, as he did of
Zion, Psalm. 132. 14. This is my Rest for ever; Here will I dwell, for I have a
delight therein; And yet I may truly say, but to our great shame, that since
the Creation of the Universe there never was such an Athestical Generation, no,
not in the most dark; in the most distant; in the most infidel parts of the
World, as this Nation has groaned under these late years.

And yet it is observable (though it be very strange) that None among Us have
pretended greater concernment for the Reformation, than Those who have bid open
defiance to all Religion whatsoever Men of the most profligate Reputation: Open
Drunkards, professed Adul^^re^s, Notorious Cheats, Forsworn Rebels, Impudent
Liars, Persidious Hypocrites, and but the other day Scoff^rs at God, and at the
very show of Piety. It Is enough to move the Meekest, the most Patient Man on
Earth to consider what Foreheads of Steel and Adamant those Impious Wretches,
have that could take the ^^nsidence Th^s to Gull and Impose upon the People, by
a seeming Zeal for Religion: Especially when They are now up in Arms, fighting
for it; in open Rebellion against the Example of our Savior, and the Precepts
of the Gospel.

As far as I have observed, the whole History of England does not afford Us an
Instance of God's Providence, that can come any thing near that account which
Rel^tes to our present Sovereign, and his Royal Brother Deceased; unless it be
that single Story of King Alfred the great: A Prince of that Learning Wisdom,
Clemency, Sweetness of nature, and other such excellent Virtues, as really made
him an honor and ornament to the Throne. And yet that excellent Prince was
once Reduced to those miserable straights partly by the Invasion of Enemies
from abroad, and partly through the Treachery of Rebels and Deserters at Home,
that he was Forced to put himself into the disguise once of a Common Soldier,
another time of an Herds-man, and at last to abscond for a considerable time in
the West, in a poor Cottage, among Woods and Moors (a sad and woeful place for
a Crowned Head to Rest in!) And yet such was his Religious dependence upon God,
that though He was Forsaken by his Friends, invioron'd with his Enemies, and
brought to those extremes and shameful necessities, that his mother and himself
were hardly able to subsist, yet He doubted not but Providence would one Day
Restore Him to his just Grandieur. And so it was, that in that very mean
Condition, in that most obscure place he began the Recovery of his Fortunes:
There he began the Foundation of his Kingdom, Raising it on still by degrees,
till in a little time he became the sole and absolute Monarch of this Nation,
and made it a most Flourishing Kingdom, and gave many the most excellent Laws
that We enjoy at this Hour, or rather may so do, when God shall Restore the
King, and we return to to Our Allegiance and Duties.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Keble at the Turks Head in Fleet Street.

Error Page: 2, line last Read their Shoulders.

POSTSCRIPT.
NOw Reader! (after Thou have duly considered these Firm Doctrines, of the
Protestant Religion) Tell me truly, If thou can expect ever to see One Rebel
in Heaven, or to meet even any of Those, that do but wish prosperity to
Rebellion, in the Regions of Bliss? Tell me, if thou have any dread of a Future
Judgment! If thou have any value for thy Soul! what Rewards will follow Thee!
what vengeance rather will pursue Thee! if thou set up a God of thy own Fancy,
and hearken to the Oracles of Rebellion, instead of Governing all thy Thoughts
words and Actions, by the precepts of the Gospel, and after the meek example of
the Blessed Jes^s? Do thou think one Murder enough to Damn an unrepenting
Soul, and Can thou wish Success to those that take Arms against the King,
without Plunging thy self into the Guilt of every Man's Blood that is, or shall
be Spilt, in such a Damnable Quarrel? Can thou Offer in Sacrifice, thy will
and affections (as the Indians do their darling Children to the Devil) to the
Monstrous Idol of Rebellion, and not be tainted with that Idolatry, which will
inevitably Damn thy Soul, without a most speedy, and the deepest Repentance?
Nay tell me if thou can Repent, If the Nature of thy Crime, will admit of
Repentance in thee, when Lucifer was Damned, because the Sin of his Rebellion
was utterly incapable of that Grace, which gives a true Repentance.

Farewell.
These Sermons may be Printed, Dublin Castle the 28th of July 1689. Patrick
Clogher.

Thanksgiving Sermons Preached on the 9th of September. 1683.
Francis Lord Bishop of Ely, page 37 John Fitz-william, D. D. page 01 William
Sherlock, D. D. page 15 Paul Lathom, Prebend of Sarum, page 20 Benjamin Calamy,
D. D. page 25 William Bolton Scholmaster of the Charter House. page 30 John
Price, D. D. page 33 Charles Powel, M. A. page 43 William Smith Prebend of
Norwich, page 47 Miles Barnes, D. D. page 51 Henry Hesketh, Minister of St.
Hellens page 55 John Harrison, D. D. page 58 Edward Pelling, D. D. page 60 Luke
Milbourne page 65 A Thanksgiving Sermon against Monmouth's Rebellion 29th July.
1685. Edward Pelling, D. D. page 68

