ANTI-GOLIAH: OR An Epistle to Mr. BREVINT, CONTAINING Some REFLECTIONS upon
His SAUL, and SAMUEL, At ENDOR.

WRITTEN By E. W.

Volunt videri aliquid dicere, dum tacere erubescunt, and inania dicere non
erubescunt.

August. They would seem to say something, being ashamed to be silent, and not
ashamed to speak Idly.

Aug. With leave of Superiors, 1678.

House of Hanover bookplate MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIUS D. G. MAG. BR. FR. ET HIB. REX F. D.

J. P^^^ Sculp


TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN READER:
YOu are invited to be not only Spectator; but Judge of a co^bat, betwixt a
Giant, and a Pigmy, a Philistin, and an Israelit, Goliath, and one of the army
of the Living God. Our forces are unequal; he a man of war, from his youth,
trained up to such battles; I but a youth, a raw soldier in them: he an
ancient Doctor of Divinity; and I a y oung Divine, scarce worthy of that name.
Another advantage he has, by living amongst us, as he says in his preface,
17. years, By which means, if there be any unfortifyed weak part in our
Camp, any fault in our Armor whither defensive, or offensive, it cannot have
escaped his observing eye. where as I have scarce any other prospect of their
Camp, or Armor, then what he, and his Brethren, his fellow soldiers in this
warfare, are pleased to give of them: Lastly he has often been in such
engagements; and this is the first time that ever I entered the lists in this
nature. Yet I hope in God the Protector of the Innocent: who is pleased to make
use of weak things to confound the things, which are mighty, and the foolish
things to confound the wise: that no flesh should glory in his Presence. 1.
Cor. 1. The goodness of my Cause is likewise a great encouragement, seeing I
am to fight for Truth, nay Revealed, and Divine Truth: which will at last
prevail One only favor I desire of you, Christian Reader, that if in any place
you find me foiled, (of which I am not conscious) what you find amiss, you
charge on my weakness: when you see I foil my adversary, you attribute the
victory to that Truth, which I fight for which gives me strength and courage:
and that you Acknowledge, and Profess i^

ANTI-GOLIAH: OR An Epistle to Mr. BREVINT, CONTAINING Some REFLECTIONS upon
His SAUL, and SAMUEL At ENDOR.
CHAP. 1. My intent and reason of the Title.
SIR,
THe Cause for which I plead, is the Innocence of the Roman Catholic Church,
wrongfully accused of heinous Crimes: The concern I have in this Cause, is my
Duty to a Pious Indulgent Mother, odiously traduced with virulent Calumnies: My
End, is to wipe off her Face the Dirt you cast on it: The means I use to attain
this End, is sincerity in explicating what She believes, and rejecting what is
untruly, and by consequence, unjustly charged on Her: You, Sir, are the
Plaintiff, I the Defendant, and the Reader, our Judge. My Hope is not in
strength of Wit or Learning, in which I will not contend with you; but in the
justice of my Cause, the equity of my Judge, and above all, in the help of God,
the Protector of the Innocent: who as he promised to assist his Church to the
end of the world, will not be wanting to those, who defend her. Your quality of
Plaintiff obliges you to prove, what you charge on us; and unless your proofs
be convincing, they are insignificant, our bare denial acquits us: For In
doubtful Cases, the Defendant ought to be favored rather than the Plaintiff.
And, Each one is to be thought good, till he be proved naught. Which are two
Rules of Canon Law, so conformable to Natural Reason, that they need no proof
to confirm them.

Your Title is, Saul and Samuel, at Endor. Very mysterious! But what you mean,
who can tell? The History you allude to, is known to every body; Saul, a
lawful, but unfortunate King, engaged in a dangerous war, strongly attacked by
his enemies, weakly assisted by his subjects, and (which is worst of all)
abandoned of God; had recourse to Samuel, in the best, and it may be, the only
manner, he thought on, to know his Fate from that Oracle, which had given him
the first Tidings of his Kingdom. With this intent he goes to Endor. This is
the History. But what is this to our present Times or Controversies? Who is the
Saul you mean? Who is Samuel? Where is Endor? What War? If we consider the date
of your Book, we may guess, that is was composed aboud the time of the Holland
War 1672. or 1673. I dare not say you mean that, for the Honor due to Persons
concerned. But tell what you mean, and apply your persons to our purpose, or
acknowledge your Title to be nothing to the purpose. Until you explicate your
meaning, we will admit, what you give us: We will not refuse Saul and Samuel:
Whereof the one was a true Priest and Prophet, and both died in Communion of
the True Church: both were sound in Faith; although one of them for disobeying
God's Commands, and not hoping in God, deservedly lost his Kingdom, and
probably his Soul too. So he may be a Type of such Catholics, who entirely
believe all which God revealed, but live not according to their Belief: and
Samuel is a Type of those whose Faith is animated with Charity, and both are
Friutful of good Works. But seeing you personate us under those names; be
pleased to give us leave to represent you by the Name of Goliath: for Goliath was
in a party contrary to that Church they were of, so are you in one contrary to
ours: He was a professed Enemy to Saul and Samuel, so are you to us: He
challenged all the Isralites, so do you all us: He reproached them, for not
accepting that Challenge, so do you us, with not incountring your Books: your
insulting Language shows you to be animated with a Spirit of Vanity, of
Self-conceits, of too great esteem of your own Abilities, and Contempt of
others, not unlike that which appeared in Goliath. Infine, To accomplish the
Parallel, we shall find you alleging reasons, which destroy your own Cause; as
Goliath brought a sword to cut off his own Head.

For these reasons I call this Pamphlet Anti-Goliah. I do not presume to take
to my self the Name of David, who was the Champion of God: There were others
who bore Arms in that War against Goliath and the Philistines; and their quality
satisfies me,

You add in Title, The new ways of Salvation, and Service, which usually tempt
men to Rome. Those you mention are indeed New ways to incite Men to Rome, and
so New, that I am persuaded no catholic ever heard of them, but from your
Book. I know no other exterior ways to convert Men to Rome, but the Motives of
Credibility, which are briefly related by St. Austin. l. Cont. Epist. Fundam.
c. 4. and more largely by Bellar. Lessius, and Divines, Tract. de Fide, viz.
the Unity, Sanctity, Excellency of Faith, its Propagation in so short a time,
and the manner of it, its effects which followed it. The perpetual succession
of lawful Pastors from the Apostles, till our days. The Testimony of Martyrs by
their Blood, and of God by his Works, which are Miracles: The consent of
Nations, the Fulfilling of the Prophesies, etc. Infine, the very name of
Catholic, which maugre all pretenses of Heretics and Schismatics, This
Church only retains, as St. Austin writes it did in his time, and we see it
does in ours. These are the Motives alleged to invite Men to enter into the
Communion of that Church, in which they are found, and of which they are
verified. But I never heard any discourse thus: Be of the Communion of the
Roman Church, because it adores two Christ's (as you say c. 1.) gives the
scapular of S. Simon Stock (as c. 13.) says the beads of S. Dominick (c. 14.)
uses consecrated Images (c. 16.) If you know any who use such inducements, name
them: If you can name none, acknowledge that your Book in its forehead bears a
great Calumny, an unexcusable untruth: This is an Omen, of what sincerity we
are to expect in your whole Treatise.

In your Preface, Not to be my own witness, say you; I make the case of Papists
such as I find it in their own Authors. It is hard measure when every slip of
a private pen, is charged on the whole Church, which often dislikes, and
sometimes condemns it; yet had you kept to this Rule, you had been less blame
worthy. I shall have occasion, more than once, to mind you of it.

CHAP. II. Your General Account of New Ways.
PAge 1. What the Church of Christ has single, that of Rome has double, the
eternal God, and a mortal woman, two sorts of Christ's, two sacrifices, two
Mediators, two different ways to obtain pardon of sins, two Ladders to get up
to Heaven, two sorts of spiritual kindred, two Heads of the Church, and two
different and sometimes contrary words of God. When you writ this, sure you had
been in good company, and thence, geminis surgebat mensa lucernis: All things
seemed double. It was well for us, that at that time, Hell, Heaven, Purgatory,
Pope, the soul of Man, the Person of Christ, and the Nature of God, did not
occur to you, otherwise you would have enlarged our Accusation, and said we
believe two Popes, two souls of men, two Hells, two Heavens, two Purgatories,
two Persons of Christ, two Divine Natures.

Here is an accusation of as heinous a nature as any can be: On What is it
grounded? Whose Testimony is produced to prove it? See the Text, see the
Margin, not one single man named. Have you so soon forgotten your promise, Not
to be your own witness; but to cite our Authors? We will use the right of
Defendants, and to a groundless false accusation, return a flat denial often its
Truth. And, when you please, we will show you, That we believe only One God,
one Christ, one way to obtain Pardon of Sins, the Mercy of God, one Way to
Heaven, the Cross of Christ, etc.

CHAP. III. How the Church can be Roman and Catholic?
PAge 8. Papists, say you, are well pleased with calling themselves Catholics.
We are so; and so were Catholics in S. Austin's time, as we see l. cont.
Epist. Fund. c. 4. That being one of the greatest Motives of retaining him, S.
Austin, in the Church. Heretics both then, and now, would arrogate to their
Congregations that Title; yet could never compass it. No great wonder we should
glory in that Name, seeing, as you say, Catholic Doctrine and Service, is the
most essential Jewel, and the Soul of True Churches. You cannot give so great
Praises to Catholic Doctrine (which is Faith) taken of it self, but it will
deserve greater. Yet if compared with Charity, it must yield place; as you see
1. Cor. 13. But because the matter is of consequence, and not rigthly
understood by you, I will enlarge a little upon it.

It is an error as great as it is common, to think, that Faith in Christ (which
is Christian Doctrine) began with the preaching of the Apostles, or of Christ
himself: that Faith being as ancient almost as the world. For no sooner had
Adam, by breaking the Commandment, contracted the guilt of temporal and eternal
Death to himself and all his posterity, but God the Father decreed to send his
only begotten Son, to blot out the handwriting of the Decree which was against
us; Col. 2.14. and to reconcile us again by that blood, which was to be shed
for us. And revealing that Decree to man, raised him to hope for pardon by the
merits of the Messiah, a Mediator, who was then promised, in whom he was
commanded to believe, and from whom he was to expect his Redemption. From that
moment we may date the beginning of Faith in Christ: although the Name he was
to bear, was not then known, nor the time when he should come, nor the place
where, nor the Family of which he was to be born. And all those persons who
lived well, and were saved, either during the Law of Nature, or under the
written Law, Abraham, Job, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, Hieremy, etc. as well
as we, received of his fullness, and were cleansed in the blood of the Lamb; who
for that reason, Apoc. 15.8. is said to be slain from the beginning of the
world,

S. Austin ep. 157. Eadem Fides est, and nostra, and illorum......... Our
Faith, is the same with that of the Saints before Christ; for they believed
that to come, which we believe past. And he proves it out of S. Paul, 2. Cor.
4.13. where having spoken of the faith of the Israelitical Ministers, he adds,
We having the same spirit of faith; that is believing the same things. And
Tract. 45. in Joan. Temporavariata sunt; non sides........ Times are altered,
not Faith; the sound of words is changed, He is to come, and He is come; but
the same faith united both those who believed him to come, and those who
believe that he is come. Epiph. l. 1. contra Haereses, The same faith which now
is preserved in the Holy Catholic Church, was before Christ in vigor. Hence
Justinius M. Apol 2. Eusebius l. 1. Hist. c. 4. and l. 1. de Demons. Evang. c.
5. and 6. say, there were Christians long before Christ. Thus all faithful
believers both before and after Christ, make up one Mystical Body, whereof
Christ is the Head.

Two difficulties against this Doctrine occur, whose Explication will clear the
mist, which Mr. B. casts before his Readers Eyes. The first, Ephesians. 3.5. S.
Paul says, The mystery of Christ was not made known in other ages to the sons
of men, as it is now revealed unto his Holy Apostles. The second, We have
another Priesthood, another Altar another Sacrifice, other Rites, etc. Ergo
another Religion.

I answer to the first, The different manner of announcing Christ, makes no
change in Christ himself: as the different manner of explicating a Mathematical
Demonstration, alters not the Demonstration, or thing demonstrated. The
Scripture is the same when clearly and when obscurely understood; and Faith is
the same when it is more and more explicated, provided it change not its
object, It may be said to alter its state, when its object is altered in
quality; but it remains the same in substance, as long as its material and
formal object subsists. Thus the same person, when Minor, is undera Tutor; from
whose power he is exempted, when Major. Now the Law was our Tutor, Gal. 3.
under which we were kept till by the coming of Christ, Faith was revealed, id
est, explicated more clearly.

To the second difficulty, S. Austin answers ep. 49. Dispertita divinis
eloquiis sacrificia,..... By the Divine Spirit sacrifices were appointed,
proportionable to the times, that some should be offered before the New
Testament was revealed... and same other now since its revelation...... For as
one and the same man, offering to God one thing in the morning, and another in
the evening, cannot for that be said to change God or his Religion, so in
several Ages, although some things were offered anciently, others at present,
yet we have neither changed God, nor our Religion. Thus S. Austin. Which
Doctrine well applied, will clear all you say in this Chapter.

Page 8. You say, The first Title the faithful had after the Ascension, was to
be called Christians. The thing was long before, even from the beginning. I
wish you had proved that name to be the first Title after the Ascension; for I
think it certain, they had another name before that. The name Christian was
first known at Antioch, Act. 11.26. which was many years after the Ascension,
as is gathered out of the first Chapter to the Galatians, for it was after the
Conversion of S. Paul, his retreat into Arabia, his return to Damascus, his
Journey to Jerusalem three years after that; and then at his excursion into
Syria, and preaching at Antioch, that name was taken up Is it credible, that a
Congregation of men should be so long together, and have no name to be known
by? This might suffice, though no name had been left on record, as there is
one, Act. 6.1.2.7. where the faithful are three several times called Disciples.

Page 9 No Philosophers were ever able with all their wit, to extend their
opinions beyond their Schools nor the greatest Kings settle their Laws, beyond
their Dominions; say you very falsely: for Aristotle and Cartesius divide all
the Philosophers of our Nation, in which neither ever had a School. And
Iustinian's Laws are settled in Spain, in America, and for some Cases in
England, where his name was scarce know during his life. See, Sir, how
dangerous it is to follow your fancy! But let us admit what you say, and we
shall find you Goliah-like armed with a sword to cut off your own head; not to
hurt your enemy. What say you, Heretics cannot spread their errors much beyond
their own abode: God alone, can create a new light, which shall spread a bright
day over the world. Where you condemn your own Reformation, which is scarce
known out of the British Isles; and make a Panegyric of Rome and Popery, which
is spread over the world, and fills the East and West Indies with the light of
the Gospel; which, as you say, God alone can do. Truth extorts this testimony
from your pen. God grant you grace to profess with sincerity of heart, what you
unwittingly said with your mouth.

Page 11. Many wise men take Roman Catholic for a Bull. The Planets have their
Ecclipses, the Sun it self his spots, and the wisest men their follies. Such is
childish quibbling upon words in serious grave matters. But why is it a Bull?
Because, forsooth, Catholic signifies Universal, and Roman imports something
particular. Do those wise men, think it a Bull, to call the Catholic Church,
Apostolic, from the Apostles, who were singular men, or Christian, from
Christ, who was but one man? And if we may call the Catholic Church Christian,
and Apostolic; without being censured for incongruity of speech (though those
names be taken from single persons) why not Roman Catholic, although that name
be taken from one place? Such a Church has more of universality than any
single person.

God forbid I should make comparisons betwixt Christ and the Roman Church,
which adores him as her God. I intend no more here, than to show by this
undeniable instance, that a denomination taken from a particular body, thing,
or person, may be given to a universal Congregation. So those wise men are much
out in this censure.

But why is the Church denominated from Rome, rather than from any other place?
Answ. Because as the Poliglott acknowledges, Prolog. 10. It was always held to
be the Principal Church, and most constantly adhered to ancient Traditions.
Because it presides over the rest, as the Head over the Body, says the second
General Council to Damasus. Because in it S. Peter presided, who received the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, was the Rock on which the Church is built, is
the foundation of Jurisdiction, and the Center of Ecclesiastical Unity.

Page 22. If the Pope be the Roman Church's Head, Mass is its Body. Very
witty! Here is a new way to unchurch all Papists, who can be no part of the
Roman Church, which contains the Pope, as Head, and Mass, as Body: and we are
neither Pope, nor Mass. I am persuaded wise men will pity your labors, so ill
spent in studies, seeing after all you cannot distinguish betwixt a Church, and
her Religious Service, or Lyturgy.

Ibidem, Enquire of all the Fathers, when and where they, the Apostles sung
Mass publicly. A search worhy of your self, to seek whether they sung Mass in
Marketplaces, when their Meetings were Antelucanis horis, says Pliny. When the
Christians, to save their Lives, were forced to wander in deserts, and
mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth, Heb. 11.38.

Page 24. Purgatory, that Subterranean Rome: Rome sends down Masses to that;
that helps Rome with wealth, honors, and riches. The Primitive Christians had
Mass for the Dead, as well as Rome, as you may see in S. Austin l. de cura pro
mortuis c. 1. and Enchir. c. 110. in this later place, he says. Neque negandum
est. It ought not to be denied, that the deceased souls are eased by the piety
of their surviving friends, when the sacrifice of the Mediator is offered for
them, or Alms given in the Church. That these things ease those souls, who
during the course of this life, lived so as to merit it. For there is a manner
of life, neither so good, as not to need those helps, nor so bad, as to
receive no benefit by them. And there is another so good, as not to need them;
and a third so bad, as to be incapable of ease even by them. Thus S. Austin.

You see in these words, 1. Mass, Sacrificium Mediatoris: The sacrifice of our
Mediator. You see 2. Mass for the Dead; Pro illis offertur: It is offered up
for them. You see 3. Alms given in the Church for them. Pro illis Eleemosynae
in Ecclesia fiunt.

You see 4. Purgatory, Hell, and Heaven, three distinct states of faithful
souls departed. Those so good, as not to need help, are in Heaven: those so
bad as not to be capable of ease by suffrages, are in Hell: Those so bad as to
need them, and so good, as to receive ease by them, are in Purgatory.

Take notice, That the Saint here does not speak as of a doubtful matter, or on
his private opinion, of what may be done; but as of an undeniable truth and a
common practice of the Church. So what you reproach to Rome, was the practice
of the purest times.

And as for the substance of Mass, you find it also in S. Austin ep. 49. q. 3.
where he speaks of a sacrifice in Christian Religion, which succeeded those of
the Synagogue. This sacrifice was instituted and commanded by our B. Savior in
his last Supper, and no doubt but the Apostles obeyed that command. Therefore
they said Mass.

If these clear convincing Proofs of those prime and capital Mysteries of our
Religion, do not prove that Popery was from the beginning, tell us when it
began?

Page 333. You say, The ninth Century, the worst, the saddest, and the
ignorantest Age of the Church, drowned the Gospel with Popery, and began in
good earnest to set up the Abominable desolation in the Roman Church. So that
there you assure us, that, till then there was no Popery, seeing that then it
began to be set up. Yet see how incoherent your assertions are. P. 105. and
340. you make S. John Damasc. a Papist, who lived in the Eighth Age. P. 46. you
make S. Gregory the Great and S. Gregory of Tours Papists, who lived in the
beginning of the Seventh Age and later end of the Sixth. P. 95 you make S.
Chrysostom declaim against papists; there were then Papists in the Fifth Age.
P. 149. the building of S. Mary Majors in Rome, in Liberius his time (who lived
in the Fourth Age) is charged on Papists. P. 328. Papists are charged for using
Oil to cure Diseases, which was used for that intent in the first Century by
the Apostles themselves; Mar. 6.13. They anointed with oil many that were sick,
and healed them. So the Apostles were Papists, and Popery was extant even in
the First Age; and this by your Confession. Consider hereafter a little better
what you write, if not for Truth's sake (which you seem to regard very little)
at least for your own reputation, which cannot but sink very low, when such
palpable Co^tradictions are discovered in your Writings.

CHAP. IV. Of Miracles and Visions.
MIracles always are effects, which surpass the force of Nature, whether it be
for the substance of the work, as the raising of Lazarus, John. 11. who had
been four daves buried; or for the manner of it, as health restored to S.
Peteer's Mother-in-Law; on a sudden, without Physic, to such strength, as to
be able immediately to serve them; Mar. 1.31. This was a Miracle, because
although it may be, she might have naturally recovered, yet that she should
recover in an instant, is impossible to Nature or secundary Causes.

The Magicians had therefore reason to say, Digitus Dei est hic. This is God's
Finger; Exodus 8.19. Whether they found that the force of Nature could not reach
the production of those flies or that Nature's Activity (when applied by the
Magicians) was suspended by God: which are two manners of Working Miracles. For
it is as miraculous to suspend the Action of Nature, when Agents are applied to
Subjects duly disposed; as to raise it to produce, what of it self it cannot.
Miraculous was the preservation of Three Children in the Furnace, Dan. 3. as
well as the opening of a Rock with the stroke of a Rod, to give Waters, Number.
20. yet in a diffe-manner, one by breaking the Action of Fire, the other by
giving grearer strength to that stroke, than that of Cannon-Bullets.

The end of Miracles, is not only to declare God's infinite Power and Dominion
over all Creatures, which by Natural Reason, without Miracles is sufficiently
known: nor always the sole easing of a person in distress; although this is
sometimes the Motive, as when Oil was multiplied, to relieve the poor Widow:
and very frequently in the Desert. They are moreover Declarations of Gods mind
unto us, and a kind of Language of God, so peculiar to himself, that although
every body understands it, yet no Man, no Angel can speak it for want of its
only Tongue, God's Omnipotency. Men speak by words, says S. Austin ep. 49. q.
6. God by Actions. Divina potentia etiam factis loquitur. And before him Origin
l. 2. cont. Celsum, Christ our Lord not only tanght with his words, but also
with his works By these God confirmed the Word, or Preaching, of the Apostles,
Mar. ult. and Heb. 2.4. He is said to have born witness, with signs and
wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. Hence it is, that
Miracles ary by some Fathers called the Seal God, which comparison you use p.
41.

Page 34. All Christian Miracles are...... for confirming, and authorizing true
Christian and Catholic Truth amongst Infidels. That many have been made for
that end; I grant; but that none are made but for that end, you say it, but can
never prove it, because it is not true. For the budding of Aaron's Rod, Number.
17. was to confirm to him and his posterity, the Priests Office. The Dew on
Gedeon's Furre, Iud. 6.6. was to encourage him against the Madianites Sampson's
Force was to humble the Philistines, and protect the Israelites. That Salt
thrown into a Fountain, should change the nature of its Waters, 4. Reg. 2. was
for the comfort of the Neighbors. The virtue of the Waters causing a Curse,
Number 5. was to ease the Husband of his Jealousy; which virtue was doubtless
miraculous seeing all the Priest did to them, could not so much alter their
nature, as to give them a putrefying quality. Or if it could, yet such an
inanimate Creature could never distinguish betwixt the Guilty and the Innocent,
so as to do no hurt to the guiltless, and rot the guilty. Several others occur
in Scripture and elsewhere, made for other private ends, commonly in
confirmation of some Virtue, sometimes for even Temporal ends. The Vestal
carrying water in a Sive, or leading a Ship with her Girdle against the stream,
was in confirmation of her Innocence. That Virtue in our Kings to cure a
Disease, either in testimony of the Virtue of S. Edward, from whose time they
enjoy it, or to show that Regal Power is from God; or for other ends unknown to
us. Out of these Examples it appears, that your assertion, that, All Miracles
are wrought for confirmation of Faith amongst Infidels, is untrue, and
undefensible. One great fault is observable in your whole writing, some
particular instances occurring to you, you presently frame out of them general
Axioms; which precipitated Judgments are often very erroneous. We have seen one
Example of it; here follow others.

P. 38.39.40. God, say you, proceeds in the New Law, as he did in the Old: In
the beginning of both he does undeniable wonders, and restrains the Devil and
his Ministers from doing any. After a time, when each Law was established, God
ceases from working Miracles, and the Devil is let loose to act as he pleases.
Thus you. That God acted in both Laws in some manner alike, confirming both
with Miracles, is very true: But that the Devil was restrained and tied up from
acting, at the beginning of either; or that God ceased from them in both, after
some time, is most false.

It is false, that the Devil was restrained from acting things, which to men
seemed miraculous; for in the beginning of the Old Law, the Magicians for some
time contended with Moses, and did things like his Miracles; Exodus 7. And
immediately after the coming of Christ, Apollonius Tyanaeus is an instance,
that the Devil had then as much liberty as ever, for there scarce ever was any
Magician, who equalled him in seeming wonders.

But, say you, Oracles were suppressed, Elimas struck blind, Demoniacks silenced,
Simon Magus beat down by S. Peter. What then? Ergo, the Devil was tied from all
false Miracles Page 39. Thus you draw a general conclusion out of some
particular instances, although there are others as evident for the contrary, as
those of Vespasian and Adrian, of whom you your self speak; Page 36. prove
there were seeming wonders wrought at that time, and we find in S. Chrysostom
and Theodoret l. 3. Hist. cap. 16. a prattling Oracle of Apollo near Antioch,
whose mouth was stopped by S. Babilas his bones.

It is also false, That Miracles ceased, when the Old Law was established; for
the virtue of the Cursed Waters, Number. 5. continued to the end; that of the
Sheep Pond, John. 5. also; which two are recorded in Holy Scripture: As also
those of Elias and Elizeus in the 3. and 4. of Kings. The Old Law was
established when Hieroboam set ut his Calfes, yet 3. Kings 13. three Miracles
were wrought to confound that beginning Idolatry, and crush the Infant Schism
in its Cradle. I say nothing of several other Miracles, not recorded in
Scripture, which yet are mentioned in other Fathers, to have continued to
Christ his time; viz. that no fly should be found in the Temple, nor any
noisome smells, notwithstanding so many Burnt Offerings: that the Wind should
not blow away the Ashes of the Altar, which stood in an Open Court; that no
Enemy should infest their Country, whilst they went thrice a year to
Jerusalem, etc. which were continued till Christ's death, and that of the
Synagogue. When you have considered these things, you will say that your
assertion of Miracles ceasing, when the Law was settled, was very rash.

Seeing then, that God (as you say) proceeds in both Laws alike, Miracles
having not ceased in the Old Law till the Death of Christ, and the end of the
Law, they are not to cease in the New. But, say you, God ceased from Miracles,
when there were Christian Princes, to whose care he committed the Church, as
willing to ease himself of the trouble; being tired with the labor. But your
sword will here do us service again: for p. 44. you acknowledge the Miracles by
the Relics of S. Stephen in Africa, and S. Gervasius, and Protasius at Milan,
which being done in S. Austin's time, you acknowledge Miracles long after
Christian Princes were Nurses of the Church. Such a perpetual combat there is
in your Writings, and will be, while fancy fights against Truth, in one of a
weak memory.

Another Contradiction I find p. 37. where to show your admirable Erudition,
you say, that the Primitive Ermits retired to Deserts to convert the Barbarous
Inhabitants. Very rare! the world has been hitherto in a great error, all
universally believing, that Ermits went to the Deserts, not to seek, but to
fly all men; and it is evident, that S. Paul and several others, past a long
age of most men, without seeing any man at all; which is so evident, that you
could not but say and own it in this very place. Deserts, say you, the refuge
of Primitive Christians from the face of their enemies: They went then to the
Deserts, to fly from their enemies; not to seek them there. So incoherent are
your fancies, you say and unsay the same thing within six lines; let me advise
you not to rely on every fancy, which presents it self; otherwise, it may be
the ignorant may admire you, but certainly the learned will laugh at you. We
have examined your Assertions, we will now hear your Proofs.

Page 37. The World being sufficiently called to the Christian Faith, say you,
the Holy Fathers tell us that Miracles ceased, that they were unnecessary, that
to expect other then the old ones, was to tempt God. And you cite S. Chrysostom
and A. Operis Imperf. and qq. ex Nov. Test. You might as well have cited S.
Austin l. 1. de Vera Relig. c. 25. Cum enim Ecclesia Catholica, The Catholic
Church being spread all over the world, and founded, it was not permitted that
those Miracles should last till our days. These words are as full as any you
can produce, yet they do not oblige us to say, there were no Miracles wrought
in that great Saints time. Let him explicate his own meaning, l. 1. Retract. c.
14, Verum est quidem, That which said is true; for in our days the imposition
of hands upon persons baptized, dos not give with the Holy Ghost the knowledge
of Languages, neither do Preachers cure the Sick with their shadow. But my
words ought not so to be understood, as if no Miracles at all were done: For I
my self knew of a blind man cured at Milan; and such like things are frequent,
etiam istis temporibus, even in these days, that I can neither know them all,
nor relate all that I know. Thus S. Austin. You see, Sir, an Eyewitness above
all exception, of not a few, but many Miracles wrought in those days, when you
pretend Miracles to have ceased. If we come nearer our Times, we shall find
very many recorded in the two S. Gregory's the Great, and of Tours. And so on
till this Age, God's hand being not now shortened, or disabled to do them, and
man's wants requiring them, chiefly to nourish in him that lively Faith in God,
and hope of his help in our wants, and to encourage us to have recourse with
confidence to the Throne of Grace. I could bring a Cloud of Witnesses, but that
in reality you acknowledge what I intend (which is another of your
contradictions.)

For you say, p. 35. That God is pleased to show his Power, Justice, Mercy, or
Divine Being, in all Ages, by some supernatural Effects. That there is no
Nation, whose Chronicles do not testify this; nay scarce any private man, but
may observe some of these in himself. Magna Veritas and praevalet. Truth forces
this testimony from you, even when you impugn her, to show how, Goliath like
your sword is still at hand, to dispatch you. For you pretend there are no
miracles in these later ages in the whole Church: yet you admit them, even in
favor of private persons. O, but, say you, these are not miracles, because not
done in Confirmation of Faith. Very good! at if the same work, when done in
Confirmation of Faith, were a miracle: if on any other Score, were none. At if
you should say: the same seal, is tbe King's broad seal, when applied to
Green wax; but is not such, when it is put to Red, or yallow wax. These are
distinctions worthy of D. Brevint!

Page 51. Those of Christ, and his Apostles were 1. works convenient to
promote the glory of God, and the good of men. 2. to confirm men in Faith. 3.
Freed from all mixture with Lying wonders. Be it so. Such are the miracles
wrought in the Catholic Church, viz: that of Fair weather in the year 1675.
obtained in Paris, through the intercession of S. Genovef, Patroness of that
great town, which was obtained as soon as her Shrine was uncovered, and the
Prayers begun: and no rain fell till the Prayers were ended. This I mention,
because it is known to many of our nation, of both Professions, and even
Protestants owned the work to be very extraordinary. Many likewise remember,
that long since, when the King's most excellent Majesty was at Paris in alike
public necessity, they had recourse to the same Saint for rain, in an
exceeding great Drouth; and that Rain fell on the very day of the Procession.
Which of your three Conditions are wanting in these works?

Page 52. Modern Roman miracles are prancks becoming Hobgoblins, and fayryes.
And then you fall on the visions of our B. Lady? Which I am persuaded no body
before you ever called miracles. So your discourse is the same, as if a man
should say: Nireus was nohandsome man, because Thersites was deformed. I know
not whither to admire more, your Divinity, or your Logic: the first furnishes
you with the oddest notions, which ever entered into any sober man's head: the
second draws them into as odd forms. Both together make you a worthy
champion, of the cause you plead.

That some Spirits have appeared, is a thing so clear in both old, and new
Testament, that none, who are not strangers to both can deny it. What is more
clear, then the apparitions of Angels to the Patriarck, to the Israelits Iud.
2.1.
, to Gedeon Iud. 6.12.
, to Manue and his wise Iud. 13.
, to David, 2. Reg. 24.17.
to Daniel Dan. 10.
, and to Zacharias Zachar. 2.1.
. And in the new Testament, to another Zachary Luc. 1.11.
, to our B. Lady Luc. 1.28.
, to Philip the Deacon Act. 8.26.
, to S. Paul Act. 27.23.
, and to S. John in the Apocalypse several times. Now if Angels appear, why
not Blessed Souls, Who are like Angels in Heaven Mar. 12.25.
? S. Austin Lib. de Cura pro mort. c. 10.
says it may seem Impudence to deny that souls appear. And Ibid. c. 16.
assures that he had learnt not by uncertain rumors; but by certain witnesses,
that whilst Nola was besiedged, S. Felix appeared to many both citizens, and
strangers. Now if Saints appear, why not our B. Lady?

Page 54. She appeared to S. Alain, who had been a filthy companion before.
What then? Christ appeared to S. Paul, who had been a Persecutor before. The
change of Saul into, Paul a Persecutor into a Preacker, was a convincing
argument, that it was truly Christ which appeared to him. And the change of
that S. Alanus proves it was a good spirit, which appeared to him. Now a good
spirit could not tell a Lie, and say he was the mother of God, without being
so Can sweat grapes be gathered of thorns? Or figs of thistles? Mat. 7.16.
Spirits may be known by their fruits, as well as men.

Page 60. Roman miracles look another way, then those of Christ: They are
brought to prove other doctrines, then his. This is easily said, and as easily
denied. Your Sincerity has not appeared so great hitherto, as that now we
should take your word, and grant that we have changed the Apostolical Faith
for a compliment, in civility, not to gain say you. Prove: or be silent.

Page 66. How is this change imaginable, that she who did not appear in the
primitive times should do it of late? S. Austin as well deserved her
Protection, when he was besieged by Barbarians, as S. Dominick. Thus you very
Judiciously! As if God were always bound to give equal temporal blessings
toall, who deserve alike! Our B. Savior deserved as well fire from Heaven
upon those, who came to apprehend him, as Elias, 4. Reg. 1.10. and an Army of
horses, and fiery charrets, to defend him, as Elizeus, 4. Reg. 6.17. yet had
them not. You have seen out of S. Austin, that S. Felix appeared at the siege
of Nola: if the like did not happen ot Hippo regio, what then? Our Redeemer
during his life cured many sick; not all, (Io. 5. we find many sick Lying
about the sheep pond, and but one cured) he raised some to life; not all. Why
not S. John Baptist, as well as Lazarus, seeing he deserved it as well? This is
a presumptuous question: it ought to satisfy us, that the thing being due to
nether, might be granted to either, or refused without any wrong. And the will
of God ought to put some bounds to the curiosity of man. But our B. Lady did
not appear heretofore. How know you, she did not? Are all things written,
which happened? or have you read, all that was written? or, when you writ this,
did you remember all that you had read? Refresh your Memory, and you will find
that you have read of an ancient Apparition of our B. Lady: you your self are,
my witness, for p. 149. you say she appeared to Liberius the Pope, and John a
rich man of Rome, to order the building of S. Mary Major.

It is a great misfortune, for a man to have an Itch to write, and that in
odious matters, who has a strong fancy, a weak Memory, little understanding,
and no Judgment. Examine your conscience upon these points, and see how much of
them belongs to you.

I cannot omit an impious, (I might say Blasphemous) hint, you make, that it is
some bad Spirit, which appears with the tittle of our B. Lady, or our B.
Savior. Because, say you, they appear only since the Divil is let Loose; not
whilst he was bound up in the primitive times. Your old erroneous fancy works
still. To correct it, know, Sir, that in the Apostles times, (when you fancy
the Divil to have been bound up) Satan transformed himself into an Angel of
Light. (2 Cor. 11.14.) Be ashamed of your ignorance, if you did not know this:
and of a worse fault, if you did know it, and yet assert the contrary. And that
it is no bad Spirit, which in later times appears, is Evident by the fruits
it produces, Humility, Meekness, Patience, Peace of Conscience, a contempt of
temporal, and an esteem of spiritual things, in a word, charity to their
neighbor, and a Love of God above all things, even themselves. These virtues
are planted, watered, and increased, by these Apparitions in those souls, to
whom they are granted. Are these the fruits of a bad Spirit? Do such grapes
grow on thorns? Such figs on thistles?

But she (the ever B. Virgin) admits of Honor, say you, p. 68. She does so;
and Honor is due to her, first, because she is full of Grace, (Luc. 1.28.)
Secondly because she is the mother of God, (Conc. Ephesians.) the highest dignity
any pure creature is capable of. Thirdly for the benefits we receive by her
intercession.

CHAP. V. Of the Protection of Saints.
IN your 4. Chapter having for 8. whole pages declamed against our Prayers to
Saints, from p. 71. to. 79. you draw at length your discourse to this
conclusion: The true reason why praying to Saints is called Idolatry, is not
because they cannot hear, for this would make praying to them no more, then an
Idle, and useless act: but mainly-because Prayer, vows, and giving of Thanks,
is a main part of God's service Scripture, and the Ancient Fathers, still
reckon Prayer, and Thanksgiving amongst the truest sacrifices, and which can
belong to none, but God. So calling on them, who are not Gods, is downeryght
Idolatry. Thus you. And having breathed a while you say: The truth is, you may
call upon a Saint, without any danger of Idolatry, if he be in such a
distance, whence intelligent creatures may without Miracle Hear one another.
Which words destroy your former assertion, being contradictory to it. The truth
is, (if I may conjecture) when you advanced the first Proposition, your
Imaginative faculty had been over heated with your forgoing discourse: and so
represented things amiss. But before you writ the following part, it had time
to cool, and return to a rational temper, and then the Truth as it is
appeared, and that Action, which before seemed Idolatry, was known to be
Innocent. Thus you condemn, and absolve us, according as you are disposed. We
are sure God has more constant measures, to Judge by; which is our Comfort.

I will leave you to reconcile your disagreeing thoughts, and take what you
grant: viz. that it is not Idolatry, to pray to Saints, provided they be not
out of hearing. Moreover you say p. 80. It is not Idolatry to pray to your
friends by letters at what distance soever. So it is no Idolatry by setter to
pray to one in the other hemisphere. Nay you grant the same to a Saint in
Heaven, if we have Expresses, to carry our letters. Which are your own words.
So that S. Paul, in desiring the Romans to pray for him, had been guilty of
Idolatry, had he not found an Express, Phebe, to carry his letter: and the
Prayers of Papists to Saints are Idolatry, because they have no Expresses for
Heaven. Rare discourse!

But seeing the distance of the Saint from us, is the thing which makes Prayer
to him Idolatry, show your skill in Metaphysick, and teach us what that
distance is: In which Scripture, and fathers, as well as Divines, are silent.
Is it a Bow's-shoote? a league? ten leagues? A Diameter of the Earth? the
latitude of the whole world? The reason of my doubt, is because Bodies have
certainly a more narrow Sphere of Activity, then Spirits: yet it is not easy to
determine the Sphere of Activity of one of our senses, Seeing, which discovers
stars in the firmament at an unconceavable distance. And were there other
luminous bodies ten times more remote, with a bigness proportionably greater,
and a more vivid light, our Eyes would discern them. So it is not the
distance alone, which hinders our discovering some objects; but it is either
their obscurity, or their position out of a straight Line, or their framing too
little an Angle in the Retina, or the bad disposition of the eye it self. You
see, Sir, it is no easy matter to determine the Sphere of Activity of one of
our corporal senses: and who will then presume to determine that of a
Spiritual creature, which is much more unlimited, as drawing nearer to the
Divine Being, which is unlimited in all kinds? now unless you can resolve this
doubt, and moreover show us at what distance the Saints are from us, your
charge of Idolatry will fall to the ground, because you cannot convince, that
the Saints, we pray to, be out of hearing.

Whilst you study an answer to this unanswerable doubt, I will teach you, what
I learn out of Scripture, that the Saints do know in Heaven what passes on
Earth. For luke 15.7. our Savior says, Joy shall be in Heaven, over one
sinner, that repents. That Repentance is then known in Heaven, for there can
be no Joy, for things unknown. And if this, why not other things? Are there
settled some Expresses, to carry tidings, of the Repentance of a sinner; and not
of the Prayers of the virtuous? Again Abraham knew what had past in the times
of the rich man, and Lazarus: that one had received good things, the other
evil things: Luke 16.25. The rich man saw Lazarus, Lazarus saw him: and they
saw their different conditions of bliss, and misery: and they could speak to
one another. So souls in Limbo Patrum, as we say, (or as you say, Saints in
Heaven) and Damned souls in Hell see, know, and converse with one another. The
rich man knew he had in the world five brethren whose wicked life would bring
them to the Torments, he endured, if they did not amend it. Abraham knew the
same, and that they had Moses, and the Prophets. How can all this stand, with
that dark Ignorance of things of this world in which you fancy the deceased
souls to live, even in Heaven? Produce your doughty arguments against Christ
himself; say it is impossible the glutton should see Lazarus, or speak to
Abraham, or Abraham reply. Allege Distance; the danger of Idolatry, and what
else you please: For all these things either prove nothing against us, or
convince our Savior's words to be improper; or worse: Unless unto your other
inventions, you add that of Expresses settled betwixt Hell, and Abraham's
bosom.

As for the means, by which the souls know what passes here, it is not
material: whither it be by the mediation of Angels, or Revelation, or seeing
things in the Divine Essence, as in a voluntary looking glass, or by the force
of their understanding, which having no dependence onsenses, can reach to all
places, or by several, or all these together, or by any other way unknown to
us. Each has several good Authors, none is impossible, or improbable. But the
thing is not worth the while, to examine: it belonging to Metaphysick; not to
Divinity, much less to Faith. Yet it is considerable, that Divines find
greater difficulty, to show how the secrets of hearts are concealed from Angels,
then how the rest are made known to them. See S. Tho. 1. q. 55.

Page 81. This is to fancy in Saints an Omniscience, if they know what passes
in several parts of the world. My answer is obvious: there being several
privileges of the Divine understanding, not communicable to creatures. 1. that
God understands all things possible, and existent: Saints only the later. 2.
God understands all to come; they only what is present. 3. he understands by
his own essence; they by species. 4. his knowledge embraces all absolutely;
theirs reaches not to secrets of Hearts. 5. His is unlimitable; from theirs
several things may be restrained when God pleases. 6. His is independent;
theirs depends on God, without whose concourse they can do nothing. See, Sir,
whither you have Metaphysick enough, to prove that knowledge to be the
Omniscience of God, which is clogged: with so many Imperfections? I would know
of your Doctors, why it should not be blasphemy to attribute to God such
imperfect knowledges?

Page 94. You acknowledge Miracles of the^ saints, in the frist three hundred
years. Which, say you, tempted Christians no further, them to go, and pray to
God in those places where they were wrought and where Payers had sometimes very
extraordinary returns: there they wished to God, that he would hear in their
behalf, the general Prayers, which these souls offer to God. Where you
express the full sense of the Prayers to Saints, in our Missall, and Breviary.
But the faith full being persuaded, that God through the Prayers of those
Saints granted their requests, and releived their wants, and knowing that the
Saints know what Prayers were offered up to them, why might they not say, as we
do in the Lytanyes: Saint Peter pray for me? Is it not lawful to say so, to a
Saint alive in this world? and why not to one living in Heaven? the reason is,
say you, because Prayer, and praise is a sacrifice, which no body offers to
Peter, Paul, or Cyprian says S. Austin. Do you think what you say? Prayers
and Praise a sacrifice? Can we not then without Idolatry Praise S Paul, or S.
Peter? I cannot accuse you of that fault: though I amperswaded you never
reprehended as Idolaters, those who praised you, and offered up that Sacrifice
on your Altar. Prayer is like wise Idolatry! Was it Idolatry in S. Paul to Pray
Saints on Earth to pray for him? why then should it be such to pray Saints in
Heaven to pray for us? Are they less Saints? This is a mystery, which we long
have desired to see revealed, and long may, for you nether will, nor can
explicate it.

Page 95. Observe the wiles of Satan, Christ employes both at once his
Apostles, and his miracles, to destroy all Idolatry from among men: and Pagans
and Papists make use of both, to bring it in. Unless the Reader be attentive,
he will think you speak sense; which is not true. For tell me, I pray you, what
use did Pagans make of the Apostles, whom they slaught erd like sheep in the
shambles? How could they use the Apostles name, which they knew not, but to
hate it? Where are those Pagans? what miracles do Pagans pretend to, to bring
in Idolatry? what Idolatry do Papists bring in? How do they use the Apostles
to compass that? your Period seemed to you full, it sounded well in your ear:
you thought it pretty, to mingle Papists and Pagans, and oppose the wisdom of
Christ, to the wiles of Satan: so you writ it down, without regarding or
examining how all could hang together, or be verifyed. The bast excuse I can
find, is to lay the fault on a defect of nature. It is unreasonable to exact a
rational discourse, from one who seems to want common sense. He may be
advised to silence: which is the best counsel I can give you.

But, say you, these are the words of an ancient father, and cite S. Chrisos.
hom. 1. ad Pop. Ant. In whom there is not one word of Papists, the only
material point to our purpose. Whose wiles are these, to falsify Fathers, cite
them for what they thought not of, and corrupt their texts, to prove what you
please? In mala causa non possunt aliter, S. Austin. Your bad Cause is capable
of no better defense. I will give you your choice, whither S. Chris did, or did
not mention Papists here? that you may the better see how wrechedly you
entangle your self in the nets, you cast for others, and fall into the pit,
you dig. Did that Saint not mention Papists? You wrong him very much in saying
he did. Did he speak of them? they were then in the world early after Christ,
much sooner, then you, and your brechren will admit. Still what you say is
against yourselfe, you carry about you your sword.

CHAP. VI. Of worship given to our B. Lady.
IN your 5.6.7. and 8. Chapters you very odiously represent, what has been
said, or done, to honor the ever B. Virgin, cutting the words which seem
harsh from others, which correct them, and adding malicious glosses, and
interpretations, to make them sound yet more harshly. It would be tedious to
reply to each particular. So I will deliver, what the Church professes and the
ground of her practice, and then take notice of some remarkable faults in your
discourse.

Esteem, Honor, Praise, and Glory, consider, at their proper object, some
person endowed with some good qualitys, not in a mean; but in an excellent
degree. Esteem is the in ward value, or respect we bear it. Honor is an
outward expression of our Esteem. By Praise we endeavor to communicate both
to others: and Glory is the union of many persons in the same sentiments of
Esteem, Honor, and Praise. It resides not in the person honored; but in the
Honourer, Honor est in honorante; yet it takes its species from its object,
which gives it its being, as all other moral habits, and Acts do.

There are two sorts of Honor, answering to two sorts of Excellency, the one
natural, the other supernatural. By natural Excellency I understand all
Gifts of this life, whither personal, as science, Art, valor, etc. or Real,
as to be borne in a good country, of a noble family, heir to a great estate,
etc. which are called goods of fortune; but are Blessings of God, not depending
on any industry, and therefore are distinguished from personal endowments. By
supernatural I understand all gifts exceeding the force of nature, which lead
men to their first principle, and last end, God: viz, Grace, and Glory: all
supernurall virtues Theological, or moral. Item, those instruments, which God
uses for our sanctification: as the Bible, Sacraments, Churchs, sacred
vessels, and vestments, Persons Consecrated to God: item Saints Bodies, as
having been Temples of the Holy Ghost, and living members of Christ. There is
athird kind of Excellency which partakes of both these, it being a mean
betwixt them: viz that of Kings, which is called Sacred, as coming from God (
Prove. 8.15. Romans 13.1. and 1. Pet. 2.13.) Yet it partakes something of the
other Excellency, because God used the wills of men to establish it. This
worship stops not in the person of the Monarck; but spreades from him to all
employed by him, ( 1. Pet. 2.13.) even to the meanest, proportionably to the
authority communicated to them. This worship we call Civil: that of
supernatural things, is called Religious: that of natural may be called
Merall.

God, containing within himself all Perfecfections, which can move esteem in
amost Eminent degree, being the fountain of all natural Goodness, and all
supernatural gifts, the supreme Lord of all Creatures, and King even of
Kings, is the Prime object of worship, of Adoration, of Praise of all Creatures
in all kinds. The splendour of the Sun is darkness, the riches of the Earth,
Poverty, the wisdom of the wisest, folly, the power of the Mighty,
weakness, the Majesty of Kings, contemptible, the Justice of the Ryghteous,
as filthy rags ( quasi pannus menstruatae, Isa. 64.6.) if compared with the
Light, Riches, wisdom, Power, Majesty, and Justice of God. The Islands
compared to his greatness, are like dust: and the whole world a drop of a
Bucket, gutta situlae, Isa. 40.15. All creatures are as if they had no being,
when set before that Essential Being Esse per Essentiam. Hence no Praise, no
Honor can equal him. Quantum potes, tantum aude, quia major omni laud,
neclaudare sufficis.

This is an undeniable truth, which yet is abused, to establish two pernicious
Errors. For hence Protestans deny, that any Religious cult is due Saints: and
our later sectaryes, their brethren, refuse all Civil worship to Magistrates.
Both allege that saying. Soli Deo: to God alone Honor and Glory, not
minding, that the same Apostle Rome 13.7. commands us to render to all their
due, Honor, to whom honor, and S. Peter teaches us first to fear God, next
to Honor the King. 1. Pet. 2.17. which places may stop the mouths of sectarys,
showing an honor due to Kings: it may likewise open the eyes of Protestants,
showing an esteem due to supernatural gifts. Nay their own practice
convinces their error: seeing they show some more respect to the Bible, then to
a Romance; to a Church then to an Alehouse; to a Saint, then to a theife; to S.
Paul, then to Judas. And call this respect as you please, we call it Religious,
and the dispute about that name, will be (...): In which we have the advantage
because our worship of Saints ends not in them; but in God, who is admirable in
them: as all Civil worship ends not in the subordinate officers of state; but
in Kings, for whose sake alone others are respected, and obeyed.

Supposing then some Honor due to Saints, as they partake of God's goodness
we shall find ground enough for the like, and greater in the Mother of God. The
Angel called her full of Grace (Luke 1.21.) she was said to blessed amongst all
women (ibid. v. 42.) and she by divine inspiration foresaw she should be called
Blessed by all Generations, by reason of the manifold gifts of the H. Ghest. No
doubt but that Grace, with which the Angel found her, was much increased by a
perpetual practice of virtue. Her Humility in stiling her self the hand may de
of God, when she was called to be his mother was of so great merit, that its
quantity without temerity cannot be determined.

It is her singular prerogative, to be the mother of God. Her fulness of
Grace raised her above all men: this rayses her above all Saints and Angels,
none being so related to God. Wherefore a greater honor is due to her, then
to them.

Wherefore there is an honor due to Saints, to the mother of God, and to God:
which being different, are expressed by different words, that of Saints we call
Douleia, that of ouw B. Lady. Hyperdouleia: and that of God Latreia. The
modern reformers dislike these words, for their Etymologye: but their doubt is
not worth the answering, seeing use and custom gives, or changes, the
signification of words.

But say you page 101. She is called a Goddess. Ans. it may be, as God is said
( psalm. 82.1.) to Judge the Gods. And again: I have said: you are Gods. Now if
he called them Gods to whom the word of God Came (John 10.35.) why not our B.
Lady, in alike sense, to whom the true eternal word came, and dwelt in her?
This you will say is only a metaphorical Divinity; and I say so too; and I
anathematize any, who shall say, she is a Goddess properly. But the ground of
this calumny is very childish, because, forsooth, she is called Diva: which
title every Grammarian knows, to be given to all Saints, and used promiscuously
with Beata, or Sancta. In the Civil Law you may find it given promiscuously to
all Emperors, even Pagans: whom no Christian ever thought to be Gods.

Page 142. We keep, say you, holy days to her Honor: a thing due only to God.
Ans. we do So. And you keep Holy Days to the honor of the Apostles: and why
this, if Holy Days be due only to God? your sword is never moved, but to your
prejudice, it never strikes at us, but through your own sides.

CHAP. VII. Satisfactions, and Indulgences.
IN your 9. Chapter you declame against the treasure of the Roman Church: and
in your 10. against Indulgences. Which having great affinity, I will treat
them together. I will begin with an explication of the doctrine, which the
Church oblidges her children to believe, and as for other points, as she does,
so will I leave their discussion to Divines, whose opinions they are, rather
then Doctrine of Faith. And that my Explication of Faith in these points may be
more authentical, I will deliver it in the words of a worthy Prelate the
Bishop of Condom, Preceptor to the Dolphin, published lately in our language.

It is not only Just; but beneficial unto us, says he, that God forgiving us
the sin, and remitting us the eternal punishment, we have incurred, should
impose some temporal penalty, to retain us within our duties, least being
delivered too soon from the bonds of his Justice, we should aba^donour selves
unto a temerarious Considence, abusing the facility of his Indulgence.

It is therefore in order to our discharging that obligation, that we are
subjected to some works of Penance which we are bound to perform in the
Spirit of Humility, and Repentance: and the necessity of these satisfactory
works was the motive, that induced the Primitive Church, to impose upon
Penitents those Pennances called Canonical.

See that when the Church inflicts upon sinners Painful, and laborious
injunctions, and they undertake them with Humility, that act we call
satisfaction: and when either in regard of the Zeal, and fervor of the
Penitent, or other good work performed, which the Church has prescribed, she
releaseth some part of the Penance, which was Owing, this remission is called
Indulgence.

The Council of Trent proposes no more to our Faith in the point of
Indulgences, then this, that the power of granting them has been given the
Church by Christ Jesus: and that the use of them is beneficial. Where unto the
Council adds: that the grant of them ought to be dispensed with caution,
least the Ecclesiastical discipline should be weakened, and enervated by an
excessive facility, which advice declares that the manner of disposing of
Indulgences appartaineth to church discipline. Thus far out of this great
person. What have you to say against this Catholic doctrine?

You employ one and fifty pages declaming against this Treasure, and these
Indulgences: viz from the 189. till the 240. yet in the midst of all this
transport, we find a lucid intervall, where Truth (against which in the rest
you discourse) forces you to depose in her favor. For page 216. I find these
words: It was the practice of the Holy Church to expel from their society
scandalous, and known sinners. They were enjoined to pray, to fast, to curb,
and to mortify their flesh, to afflict their souls for their sins, and to apply
themselves to all such works, as might both improve, and declare their in ward
sincere Repentance. These long, and holy exercises did pass among all
Christians, for SATISFACTIONS to the Church, and in some manner to God too.
Before the Church most properly, because that was all which Church discipline
required: and before God in a lower, yet a very true, and proper sense: because
it is the main condition, which God requires of Offenders which he is in his
mercy both satisfied, and pleased with, when they Sincerely perform it. They
were to do it alo^g while, some a whole year, some two, some ten, some
according to the enormity of the sin, all their life long. Thus you, of
satisfaction by Penitential works.

Page 218. You continu your explication of this matter. There now and then
happened, say you such causes, as moved them (the Bishops) to be more free, by
shortning the time of sinners Penance: As when the sinner gave signal
proofs, of an extraordinary sorrow: when he stoutly owned, and defended the
Christian Faith, when in times of Persecution, they were to be strengthened to
Martyr dome: when valiant Confessors did interceede for some of their friends:
on these, and other like rational, and pious Inducements, the holy Fathers
thought they might either ease such Penitents of the length, or some times quite
discharge them of the whole burden. then. And this Relaxation of
Ecclesiastical Severity, some Latin Fathers (Tertullian, and S. Cyprian) call
in their writings by the name of Indulgence.

Here you so exactly agree with what I have written out of our Bishop de
Condom, that you may seem to have copyed him, or both to have taken your
sentiments out of some third.

At least this is evident, that you own as much as that Author teaches to be
the Faith of the Roman Catholic Church, and consequently your Censure on our
Faith in these points of satisfaction even to God, and Indulgences, is a
condemnation of your self. Magna veritas, and praevalet.

CHAP. VIII. Confraternityes.
CHapter 11. you traduce our Confraternityes, c. 12. you play with the girdle
of S. Francis. c. 13. you deride the Scapulary of S. Simon Stock etc. 14. make
your self merry with the Rosary. All which being no points of our Faith, I do
not think my self oblidged to assert them in this pamphlet. Yet I will tell
you, what you know already, though you Slily insinuate the contrary page 300.
that we preach Faith, Repentance, Perseverance in well doing etc. more then
Protestants: seeing we hold them absolutely necessary to salvation, Faith
without works being dead, as we teach with S. James; and you teach Faith alone
to Justify: we exhort People to them with hopes of a reward, they being
meritorious; and you deny all merits.

We use, indead, those things you speak of, as helps of our Faith, exercises
of our devotion, and means to strengthen our frailty to Persever in
well-doing. It is a Calumny, to say, we think Faith, Hope, and Charity
unnecessary, or, that we teach, any can be saved without them, even when we
invite men to these Gilds, or Confraternitys, into which men enter only with
intention to increase those virtues in their souls. We feel, we know, we own
our inclination to Evil from our Infancy, we are convinced, that our Will, of
it self is insensible, nay stupid, as to all Good: that words have little force
upon it, but that examples are much more powerful. Hence appears the first
advantage of those, who are incorporated into those Congregations, which
consist of men, who forgetting those things. which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things. which are before, press toward the mark. Philip. 3.
such men, who consider one another, to provoke to love, and good works, Heb.
10.24. This appeared in the Confraternity of Charity, begun by P. Vincent de
Paul: which with the Alms it gathered, releived all the poor of Loraine,
Champagne, and Picardie, many Ladys of the best quality after entering into that
Congregation, turned to the releife of the poor, what before they spent on
vanity, or lost by gaming: and changed their chambers, and Closets, into well
stored wardrobes filled with suits of Clothes of all bignesses, for both sexes,
which they bestowed upon the naked Poor, in whose persons they they were
taught to consider Christ himself.

Another advantage is, that our Prayers are more efficacious when offered in
company, then when single. All the virtue of our Prayers is derived from that of
our B. Savior now he assures us, that where two, are assembled in his name, he
is there in the midst of them. ( Mat 18.20.) And he assists there, not as an
Idle spectator, (as many Protestants go to Church, to see, and be seen;) but
to enlyghten the mind of the persons assembled with divine inspirations, to
inflame their Will, with the love of God, and their neighbor: To incite them
to Pray; to represent their Prayers to his Heavenly Father, and second them
with his own: to power into their hearts the Blessings he obtaines, through the
merit of those Wounds, he once endured for our Redemption, and ever since
retains, to show them to God the Father, in whose presence be appears for us.
These are the designs of Confraternitys.

We know, Sir, that the Honor of God, and true Religion consists in Faith, Hope
and Charity. These are nourisht by the Concourse of many Persons to increase
these interior virtues, by exterior exercises of Piety, and Mortification. To
call these together the Rosary, Scapular, and Girdle are used, with
Indulgences, to make the call more efficacious. Now whither is more to blame,
we, for using these helps, or you for rejecting them?

CHAP. IX. Images.
YOur 16. Chapter is spent in declaming against our Images: which some other
learned persons having in hand, I will leave to them, least I might seem to
thrust my sickle into others harvest. Probably I may shortly have occasion to
treat of it at large, on my own Score: and there I hope to convince the
unjustice of the charge of Idolatry put up against our Church. For the present
I will only take notice of some great untruths, peculiar to your self.

Page 332. This Experience is most certain, that, the People of God excepted,
all the world besides has bindrawne to their respective Religions by the help
of these gross Images. Answer: this is a most certain untruth, as appears by
the Turks, who have none: and if we believe Varro, the Romans were a long time
with out any.

Page 337. The main motive, which drives Pilgrims to those Churches, where
Images are, is to find, not the Resemblance, but the very presence of the
Saint. This is untru: we nether believe, nor teach any such thing, nay we teach
the quite contrary, as you may see in all our Catechismes.

Page 402. I do not love, say you, to aggravate burdens, which of themselves
are too heavy: but without aggravation, it is most certain, that the Roman
Church serves more Images, then all the Heathens did together. You could not
have found a fitter conclusion of your book, then this. At least you have
observed that Rule of the Poet: -- Servetur ad imum
Qualis ab inceptoprocesserit, and sibi constet.
For the same Spirit of falsehood runs through all. You began with an untruh, as
I have showed: I have likewise taken notice of many untruths all along, and
without aggravation, what you say here, is as great, and as evident an
untruth, as ever was spoken in matter of Humane hystory. It is impossible to
reckon up all the Gods, which the Pagans adored, when (besides dead men)
beasts, fishes, foul, and Elements, were adored: when every Plant, and Tree
was thought ammated with a Divinity. What say I, one? Each Plant had many. For
Corn alone S. Aug. (l. 4. de Civ. Dei cap. 8.) reckons up twelve, (and yet he
professes he reckons not all) viz, Seia, Segetia, Tutilina, Proserpina,
Nodotus, Volutina, Patelena, Hostilina, Flora, Lacturcia, Matuta, and Rumina.
In the same place, he says, that one Porter, (one man) is sufficient to keep
one door; and the Pagans put three Gods to each door, viz, Forculus, Cardea,
and Limentinus. And as if these were not sufficient: on some occasions three
more are added to them, (when a woman was delivered) to wit, Intercidona,
Pilumnus, and Deverra, to keep out Silvanus, a dangerous God. This as also
four Gods for every marriage, Iugatinus, Domiducus, Domitius, and Manturna.
Item six, others, who Preside in the nuptial bed, with their names, and
offices, you may see in S. Aug. l. 6. de Civ. Dei c. 9. And should I reckon up
all the Gods who succeed one another in the care of every man from Iugatinus,
till he be brought before, Minos, Aeacus and Rhadamanthus, and to the Elysian
feilds, I should spend more paper, then in all this pamphlet, now if the
Romans, and Grecians had such a numberless number of Gods, who can give
account of all the Gods, of other Pagans, all over the world?

If notwithstanding all this, you still think your assertion true, and that
without aggravation, Papists, adore more Images, then Pagans had Gods, I shall
think your Arithmetic equal to your Logic, and Divinity: and that you need
more, to be Prayed for, then Disputed against.

CONCLUSION.
THe desire of appearing in the world with the title of an Author, to be
spoken of, with applause, and Praise, to be pointed at in the streets, to
hear, as you walk that whisper: this is that Demostenes, that is M.r B. This
desire I say, is very violent, because it symbolizes with that vanity, whereof
the seeds were cast into our souls by the sin of our first Parents. A scholar
thinks his best years ill spent in studyes, unless the world be partaker of
his knowledge. A knowing silence, is no more esteemed, or regarded, then an
Ignorant silence. In many the Pleasure of knowing does not consist in
Conceiving, so much as in Producing: and they loose all the satisfaction they
took in it, if the world does not know, that they are learned.

This Passion is strengthened by another, of censuring what is above us, even
the most sublime in the world. Our Pride is pleased with an Imaginary Elevation
above those, whom we presume to Judge, and with taking a sovereign authority
over those, whom we submit to the Rules of our Critic. Hence no boby troubles
a Cobbler, or Tinker, with censures of their work; and there is none who does
not presume to censure both Prelate, and Prince.

I think no body will Judge me rash, if I say some of these shings concurred,
to move you to appear in Print. No body attacked you, you might have enjoyed
your Benefice, and other contentments of this life in Peace. But you desired to
show the world, by some work of your own, that you had spent your time well.
And to do this with more noise, you chose for the subject of your writings
Mass, and the Roman Church: whereof the later is (even by Confession of
Protestants) the most Illustrious part of the Church of Christ; and as we say,
and prove, is the true Catholic, and Apostolical Church. The other is the
prime part of her Divine worship, to which all her other Religious Actions are
directed.

This is a great Ambirion, to submit Infallibility to your Censure, to raise a
throne above the Highest on Earth, and to Judge the first seat, which
according to ancient Canons, is Judged by none: Prima seeds a nemine judicatur.

This vain presumption, and ambition is unexcusable. Yet it may seem modest,
if compared with your vanity, in thinking, that all the world, convinced with
your Reasons, submittes to your Censures, and subscribes to your verdict, only
because they do not reply: Although silence is as well, and as often an effect
of neglect, of contempt, or disdain, as of consent, and approbation. But your
head is so full, humble man! of an esteem of your own perfections, that you
cannot surmise any one can have any other sentiments, but of Honor for your
adored self, Hence very confidently in the Preface to this book, you say,
That you had laid mass in the Dirt. And as if this were not low enough: page
407. you say, you have confounded mass even to Hell. Go further with the
Alcoran, or Talmud, who can. This is a non plus ultra of Insolency, and all
moderate Persons will take it for a convincing proose of your vanity, Ignorance
and weakness.

I confess, that if only throwing dirt, with or without cause, could do the
deed, you have laid both Popery and mass in the dirt, for you have thrown it
liberally. But Accusations of this Nature, unless their Truth be manifest,
reflect on the Accuser, in this Civilized, and learned age: and I am persuaded,
that the greatest part of the world think the dirt, you with so much labor
gathered together, to throw at mass, lies close about you, and sticks still
to your own hands, from which it cannot be washed, but by Retracting your
calumnyes.

I have said enough to your Saul and Samuel at Endor, to show, that though your
Assertions are strong yet your Reasons are weak, and your Discourse
incoherent: And that you imitate Goliath, you your self do furnish arms
enough to confute you, by your own Contradictions, the fowlest fault any
scholar can be guilty of. By this claw, I guess what a Lion you are, and can
frame an Idea of what you say against mass, although I never read your book
concerning it. It may be hereafter you may hear more from me about it, if an
occasion present it self, and the thing deserve it.

In the interim learn to have some respect for your Readers; presume not so
much upon your empty title of D. D. as to think to stun us with loud clamours,
and that your words (though void of sense) should be taken as Oracles. If you
continu your resolution to write against us, weygh well what you say, say
nothing without a good Proose, and express all with the Modesty, and Gravity,
beseeming the subject you treat, and the character you bear: And your work
shall not be neglected by

YOURS E. W.

ERRATA.
Page 8. l. 18. in the title. page 15. l. 25. know. Read known. Page 25. l.
7. ut. R. up. Page 28. l. 26. at if. R. as if. Ibid. l. 28. at. R. as. Page 30.
l. 10. Patriark. R. Patriarks. Page 31. l. 1. Priacker. R. Preacher. Page 32.
l. 30. tittle. R. title. Page 39. l. 6. frist. R. first. Page 41. l. 5.
brechren. R. brethren. Page 42. l. 5. at. R. as. Ibid. l. ult. supernurall. R.
supernatural. Page 45. l. 16. Ghest. R. Ghost. Page 46. l. 1. ouw. R. our.
Page 47. l. 14. ately. R. lately.

At the end of the lines very many syllables through the whole work are
divided: which altring not the sense, I leave uncorrected.


