1. Sir Robert Willughby, Knight of the Garter, summoned to Parliament by the
Title of Lord Broke, 7 H. 7. dyed 18 H. 7.= Blanch, Daughter and Coheir of John
Champernon, Esquire; Sir Robert Willughby, Knight, the Second Lord Broke, Son and
Heir, dyed anno 13. Hen. 8.= Elizabeth, Daughter and Coheir of Sir Richard
Beauchamp, Knight, Lord Beauchamp of Powick. Edward Willughby, Esquire, eldest
Son, dyed in the Lifetime of his Father.= Elizabeth, Daughter of Richard
Nevill, Lord Latimer. 2. 1 Elizabeth, sole surviving Heir to her Grandfather,
Married to Sir Foulk Grevile, Knight; she dyed anno 6 Eliz. 3. Sir Foulk
Grevile, Knight, Son and Heir of Elizabeth, dyed anno 4 Jac. 1.= Anne, Daughter
of Ralph Nevill Earl of Westmerland. 4. Sir Foulk Grevile, Knight, Son and
Heir, created Lord Brook of Beauchamps-Court, by Patent, 18 Jac. 1. with
Remainder to Robert Grevile, his Cousin, and to his Heirs Male. The said Sir
Foulk dyed unmarried, 4 Car. 1. Margaret, only Sister and Heir, married to Sir
Rich. Verney, Knight. she dyed 6 Car. 1. 5. Sir Grevile Verney, Knight, Son and
Heir of Margaret, dyed anno 1642.= Cath. Daughter of Sir Robert Southwell, Knight.
6. 1 Grevile Verney, Esquire, Son and Heir, dyed anno 1648.= Elizabeth,
Daughter of Thomas Vicount Wenman. Sir Grevile Verney, Knight. of the Bath, only
Child, died anno 1668.=Lady Diana, eldest Daughter of Will. Earl of Bedford.
William Verney, Esquire, only Child, dyed unmarried, Aug. 23. 1683.

2 Sir Richard Verney, Knight, second Son, now living, anno 1694.



2 Anne dyed an Infant, and without Issue. 3 Blanch, Wife of Sir Francis
Dawtrey, Knight; she dyed without Issue.





Observations on the foregoing Pedigree.
1. THE Barony of Broke is a Barony in Fee, taking its original by Writ of
Summons, anno 7 H. 7. The first Person summoned being Sir Robert Willughby,
Knight of the Garter; to whom succeeded Sir Robert Willughby, Knight, his Son
and Heir, the second Lord Broke, who was summoned to Parliament by the same
Title, tempore, H. 8. and sat accordingly: By reason whereof the said Honor
or Barony of Broke is descendable to the Heirs General, and consequently to Sir
Richard Verney, Knight, now living.

2. Elizabeth Lady Grevile, Wife of Sir Foulk Grevile, Knight, was (after the
death of her Sisters Anne and Blanch without Issue) the sole surviving Heir to
her Grandfather, Sir Robert Willughby, Knight, the second Lord Broke, viz.
eldest Daughter and Coheir to Edward Willughby, Esquire, her Father, who being
Son and Heir apparent to the said Sir Robert Willughby, Knight, the second Lord
Broke, dyed in his Father's Lifetime without Issue-Male.

3. Sir Foulk Grevile, Knight, Son and Heir of the said Elizabeth Lady Grevile,
was, after the Death of his Mother, the Right Lineal Heir to the said Barony of
Broke.

4. Sir Foulk Grevile, Knight, Son and Heir of the said Sir Foulk (and Grandson
and Heir to the first-mentioned Sir Foulk Grevile and Elizabeth his Wife) was,
after the death of his Father, the right lineal Heir to the said Barony, but
dyed unmarried, anno 4 Car. 1.

5. Sir Grevile Vern^y, Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Richard Verney, Knight, and
Dame Margaret his Wife, sole Sister and Heir to the last-mentioned Sir Foulk
Grevile, Knight, was (after the Death of his Mother) the right Lineal Heir to
the said Barony.

6. The Issue of Grevile Verney, Esquire, Son and Heir of the said Sir Grevile,
being extinct, Sir Richard Verney, Knight, now living, second Son of the said
Sir Grevile, is thereby become the Right Lineal Heir to the said Barony of
Broke.

But whereas Sir Foulk Grevile, Knight, who dyed unmarried, anno 4 Car. 1. was
created Lord BROOK, Baron of Beauchamps-Court, to him and the Heirs-Male of his
Body, with Remainder to his Cousin Robert Grevile, Esquire; and the Heirs-Male of
his Body, by Patent, 18 Jac. 1. in Favor to the Surname and Family of Grevile,
yet was he truly and rightfully also entitled to the foresaid Barony of BROKE,
in Fee; By reason whereof, as the said Title and Dignity of Lord Brook, Baron
of Beauchamps-Court came to the said Robert Grevile, Esquire, and as a distinct
Title now rests in the present Lord Brook, Son of the said Robert Grevile, by
virtue of the said Remainder. So the foresaid Barony of BROKE, in Fee,
descended to the forementioned Margaret Lady Verney, Sister and sole Heir to
the said Foulk Lord Brook, and now rests in Sir Richard Verney, Knight, her
Grandson, as being the True Lineal and only Rightful Heir to the
first-mentioned Sir Robert Willughby, Knight, Lord BROKE.


