THE EXAMINATIONS OF Faithful Commin DOMINICAN FRIAR, AS Sir James Ware had
them from the late Lord PRIMATE USHER, Being One of the MEMORIALS of the LORD
CECIL.

Published by ROB. WARE, Esquire

Printed in the Year, M.DC.LXXIX.

To the Reader.
THe Impostors that daily appear in the Mode of precise or Nonconformist
Preachers, The Demonstrance of a Nonconformist.
will not seem strange to those that shall consider the Story here presented,
(collected by my Dear Father out of Primate Ushers Manuscripts;) and how the
grand Enemies of the Reformed Religion (comprised under the Name of
Protestancy) do not care in what way they attack it, so that they can but
destroy or disgrace it.

Therefore all good Protestants have need to take warning, that they admit of
no Novel Teachers, A Caution to the Church of England. The Advantages that Rome
gets by Protestants not being united and conformable.
or such as pretend to New Lights amongst them.

It is a double Advantage that the Pope and the Devil gets by such Instruments,
that under the Name of any Sect of Religion, that are contrary to the Church of
Rome, can not only debauch the People they communicate with, into the most
horrid acts of Impiety, but cover their own Guilt, and cast the shame of them
upon others, as was too palpable in that unparallelled Villainy in Destroying
His late Majesty by Popish Emissaries, in Presbyterian and Independent Guises,
and then leaving the Obloquy upon both.

The Antiquity of this Example, Romes Malice to the Church of England even from
its first Rise --
set forth in this Faithful Commin, may inform all good people, that the
Malice and Designs of Rome against Truth, that began to shine in the days of
that Defender of the Faith, Queen Elizabeth, are near as old as the Reformation
it self. And yet the Growth and Progress it has made since, shows it will
never dye, whilst that Apostate Church has Wealth or Power to support it.
Which God of his mercy put a speedy end to, that we may once again enjoy our
Liberties, without fear, to the Rejoicing of all well meaning people.

Your Humble Servant R. WARE.

The EXAMINATION OF FAITHFVLL COMMIN the Dominican Friar, who pretended to be a
Godly Preacher Anno. 1567.
Faithful Commin, of the Order of Saint Dominick Anno, 1567. to all Peoples
Imaginations supposed to be a Strict Protestant against the Church of Rome, was
brought before Her GRACE our Dread Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, of England France
and Ireland Queen, and Her Majesty's most Honorable Council on Monday the
fifth of April, being accused for sowing of Sedition amongst Her Majesty's
Faithful Subjects, by the Testimony of John Clerkson Chapline to his Grace
Matthew Parker Archbishop of Ganterbury; as also by the Testimonies of Nicholas
Draper and Mary Dean, all being Sworn upon the Holy Evangelists, That the said
Faithful was an Impostor, Notwithstanding he Preached against Pope Pius
Quintus, the Pope of Rome.

The Archbishops Questions.
Faithful Commin, what Profession art thou off?


Answer. Of Christ's Order.


Q. What Order is that?


A. A Preacher of the Holy Gospel.


Q. What Gospel is that you call the Holy Gospel?


A. The Gospel of Jesus Christ.


Q. Under whose power do you Own to hold that Holy Gospel?


A. Under Christ and his Saints.


Q. Do you acknowledge any other power save Christ, to be on Earth?


A. Yes I do.


Q What power is that?


A. The Holy Catholic Church.


Q. Do you not acknowledge a Defender of the Holy Catholic Faith?


A. God is the only Defender thereof.


The A^ch-bishop to Her Majesty. Your Gracious Majesty may perceive, that
this Man either has been Instructed what to say, or otherwise he must be by
his answers a man of Craft.


The Queen. I suppose so my Lord.


Then Faithful Commin, being commanded to withdraw, Her Grace and the whole
Council Consulted what to do, and how to proceed further in this matter,
caused the said John Clerkson to come in before the Board.

The Queen. What is your name.?


Jo. Clerkson May it please Your Grace, my name is John Clerkson.


The Queen. Were you acquainted with Faithful Commin?


Jo. Clerkson. I was.


The Queen. How long?


Jo. Clerkson. Within this year and more.


The Queen. What have you say against Faithful Commin, that he is suspected to
be an Impostor.


Jo. Clerkson. Three things.


The Queen. What be they?


Jo, Clerk. Thr^^ things, First let him prove his Ordination since he fell from
the Dominican Order.

Secondly, why he never comes to the Prayers of the now Est^blished Church of
England; but ^^arteth up and Preaches to the people not coming into the
Church, till the Prayers be finished. Thirdly, let him prove that he ever
Received the Sacrament, according to the Church of England, from any of our
Orthodox Clergymen.


Her Grace and the Council considering of these three things, sent out for the
said Faithful Commin to come in.

The Archbishop.
Quest Were you ever Ordained?


An. Yes I was Ordained.


Quest. By whom?


An. By the Cardinal (meaning Poole.)


Qu. Had you not other Certificate since under any of the Bishops hands, since
the Reformation?


An. Not any.


Qu. Wherefore would you dare to Preach, having not got a License or Permission
under some of Our Bishops hands; How shall We be Certified that you are not of
the Romish Church?


An. There are several have heard my Prayers, and my Sermons, and can testify
that I have spoken against Rome and her Pope, as much as any of the Clergy have
done since they have fallen from her; I wonder therefore why I should be
suspected.


An. B. By your answer I perceive Mr. Commin, you would have any one Preach, so
that he sprake but against the Pope in his Sermons.


An. Not every one, save he whose Function it is, and he who has the spirit.


Quest. What spirit is this you mean?


An. The spirit of Grace and Truth.


Quest. But is this spirit that is in you, either the spirit of Grace or Truth,
that does not comply with the Orders of the Church, lately purged and Cleansed
from S^ism and Idolatry?


Ans. Therefore I en^eavour to make it purer, as far as God permits me.


Quest. How do you endeavor to make the Church purer, when you neither Commune
with Her Sacrament, or in Prayer.


Ans. Yes I endeavor it when I pray to God, That He would open the Eyes of Men
to see their Errors and feveral have joined with me when I have prayed amongst
them, and I have both given, and taken the Body of Christ to those of tender
consciences, who have assemblae with me together in the fear of the Lord.


Q. By your words, you have then a Congregation that follows you?


A. I have.


Q. Of what Parish, and in what Dioscess?


A. Neither of any certain Pa^ish, or in any certain Dioscess.


Q. Where then, I pray?


A. Even in the wide World amongst the Flock of Christ, scattered over the
whole Earth.


Q. Your Dioscess is very large, Mr. Commin.


Faithful Commin being commanded to withdraw, the other two Witnesses were
called into the Council Chamger.

The Queen. Mr. Draper, what have you to say to this Faithful Commin?


T. Draper, He came to my house at the Maidenhead in Maidstown, with several of
his Followers, where they bespoke a Joint of Mutton, and two Hens for a Dinner,
hearing that my Profession was a Cook. I showing him a Room, for him and the
Company that came with him, perceived several to come and enquire for this Mr.
Commin; but by chance going up the stairs, I heard one groan and weep, which
caused me to lift up the Latch, at the first I was startled, and stood in a
maze; but enquiring of one of his Followers what ayled the Man, he replied, Do
you not see that we be all at Prayers? The Maid wondering where I was, came to
seek me, and found me amongst them, and can testify the very same.


The Queen, Are you Mr. Drapers Maid?


A. Yes, may it please your Grace.


Q. What is your Name?


A. My Name is Mary Deane.


Q. Did you see this Faithful Commin, that was here before Us now, praying to
the people.


A. I saw him, and I thought he was distracted, when I heard him pray; but the
people said he was a heavenly man, and that it was Gods Spirit made him weep
for the Sins of the World.


Q. How long continued they at Prayers, do you know Mr. Draper?


A. May it please your Grace about two hours, or near that time.


Q. What did they after that they had prayed?


A. Some went from the House, and about ten, or thereabouts, stayed to eat what
they had bespoken, and paid me to the utmost penny.


The Queen, Call in this Faithful Commin.

Mr Commin, if you will receive Orders, and become of the Church of England,
you may; otherwise you must not be permitted to pray or preach amongst my
Subjects, and though you have, as appears by several other Witnesses, preached
against the Pope; yet have you usurped over the Power both of State and Church,
in doing contrary to the Orders that We, Our Council and Parliament have
unanimously agreed on by and with the whole Consent of the Clergy of my Realm.


F. C. A. Give me time to consider, and to prepare my self, and I shall give
your Grace a further Answer in a short space.


Q I there any will be bound for your Appearance, otherwise you must be kept
close prisoner; for we have other Examinations to take, and questions to demand.


F. C. I have three who will answer for my Appearance.


Then came Richard Bland Brother to the said Faithful by the Mothers side, and
two others, which gave Bond for his Appearance.

April 12. Mr. Commin appearing before Her Majesty and the Council, it was put
off till the next day, by reason of the Spanish Ambassadors Appearance before
Her Grace, who had that day Audience. But it sell out, that the said Faithful
having appeared, according to the Bonds of those who were bound for the said
Faithfulls Appearance, that this said Faithful gave them all the slip, and
never appeared afterward; so that the Farties being summoned to appear, for to
answer the Penalties of the Bond, made this Answer to the whole Council, that
the said Faithful appeared, but they were not bound for his second Appearance,
by reason they never demanded them to be bound, or gave them any further Charge
of him; so these Bonds-men came off and paid nothing.

This Faithful Commin coming before his Followers the same day, told them,
that Her Majesty and the Council had quitted him, And that he was warned by God
to go beyond Seas, there to instruct the Protestants, and that he would return
to his Flock e're long with better success. Saying to the people, that
Spiritual Prayers was the chief Testimony of a true Protestant, and that the
set Form of Prayer in England was but Mass translated. So after he had prayed
an extemporary prayer, he feigned a Crocadile-like weeping before all of his
Flock, and took leave of them; saying, that he had not a farthing to support
him in his Journey; yet, it being Gods Cause, he intended to undertake it out
of Charity; he was certain that the Almighty would raise him up Friends where
ever he traveled. Upon this Speech of his, the poor simple people fell most of
them a weeping, especially the Women, who moving their Husbands to contribute
to this Impostor, who was amongst them esteemed as a Demi God: so that it
appeared upon further enquiry, after he had escaped out of England, that at
that present the poor people collected for him, 130 l. over and above what the
silly women gave him unknown to their Husbands.

April 13. The next day the Council waiting on Her Grace at the Board, and
several numbers attending to hear this Impostor examined, staid a long time;
Her Grace and the Council wondering at this delay, sent unto his Brother
Richard Bland, and the other two, who were Bail for this Impostors Appearance.
They coming before Her Grace and the rest of the Council, made this Answer, We
have performed as much as we undertook to perform; but had we received any
further Directions from Your Grace, and this Honorable Board, for to have
brought him this day, we should have obeyed Your Commands; but You spoke unto
the party accused to come this day, and not to us; so that we suppose our
selves to be released of what we had undertaken, having presented him before
your Grace and this Honorable Board.

It being a public Hearing, and the Auditors that were present, in expectation
to have heard Commin speak, and not those who were bound for him, caused the
Councils he to rage more than ordinary; hereupon the Council caused searches
immediately to be made over all London and Kent, especially where ever they
suspected him to be, but could not find him; for he was fled that very evening:
yet by this Inquiry, they found out several of Creatures whom he had deluded,
and the true Relation of what Sums of Money, the poor people had gathered, and
bestowed on him. Most of thest who were supposed to be of this Impostors Freek,
were examined before Her Graces Privy Council, who said, that to their opinions
and thoughts they had never beheld so Zealous and so Heavenly a man as he
seemed to be.

Septem. 14th. By a Vessel arriving at Portsmouth, called the Swan of London,
John Baker, being the Master of the same, among other Discourses declared how
he had seen Faithful Commin in the Low Countries, and some of the Council
hearing of this Man's arrival, acquainted the Queen with what they had heard,
concerning this Villain: Upon which information Her Majesty, and the Rest of
the Privy Council sent a Pursevant for the said John Baker, who comeing to the
man on the 20th of this said instant, and found him abed, the man was startled,
and demanded of the Pursevant what was his Crime, the Pursevant made answer, he
knew not what it was he was sent for, only it was Her Graces Will and the
Councils to speak with him: Yet the poor man, whether through sear, or to
Comage his spirits, called for a Cup of Sack, and Drank Her Graces Health to
the Pursevant, saying (here is a health to my Royal Queen;) if She intends to
Try my Fidelity, and Employ me in her Navy, I will venture all the Blood in my
Body to Defend Her Graces Right. But when he appeared before the Board, they
Demanded of him, if he had seen Faithful Commin, he made answer, he had seen
him in the Low Countries, and enquiring further he related this Relation as
follows.

Coming with other Vessels to Land some Goods at Amsterdam, Martin Van Davall a
Merchant of that City hearing me Talk of this man, told me, that this Commin,
had been lately at Rome, and that Pope Pius the 5th. caused him to be Clapped up
in Prison, and that Commin had wrote to his Holiness the next day, saying, that
he had something to say unto his Holiness, upon which the Pope sent for him,
and as soon as he had seen Mr. Commin, he spoke to him, saying, Sir I have
heard how you have set me, and my Predecessors forth amongst your Heretics of
England, by Railing against my Person and my Church. And that Commin made
answer, I confess my Lips have opened that which my Heart thought otherways.
But your Holiness little thinks that I have done you a kindness,
notwithstanding I have spoken so much against your Holiness. And that the Pope
should Return Commin this answer (How in the Name of Jesus Mary, and of all
His Saints have thou done so?) and that Commin should make this answer saying,
I Preached against set Forms of Prayer, and I called the English Prayers (
English Mass,) and have persuaded several to pray Spritually and Extempore,
which has taken so much with the People that the Church of England is become
as Odious to that Sort whom I instructed, as Mass is to them, which will never
be but a Stumbling Block to that Church, while it is a Church, and that upon
this Relation the Pope Cherished him, and gave him 2000 Ducats for his Labor.

Her Grace, and the Whole Council, thanking Mr. John Baker for his Relation,
bad him withdraw, and upon this Information wrote over to Her Correspondents
beyond Seas, if possible he might be sent ever hither in to England, but it
being talked all over England, how that the Pope had Rewarded this Impostor,
some knowing where he was, gave him notice, and thereby he Escaped out of those
Territories and fled into the Romish holdings.

The Council Consulting with Her Grace, to prevent not only Popery, but all
other Sectaries, caused an Act to be Framed and to be Enacted, that the
several Ministers of several Parishes, should take the Names of all the
Families li^^^ing within the several Parishes, both Male and Female from Ten
years of Age, and that every Parish should have a certain Clerk for that
purpose, and that every house within the said Parish should have a particular
seat for them and their Families; Each Man or Woman missing prayers every
Sunday, to forfeit a shilling, Excepting those who had Certificates under a
Protestant Physicians hand to be sick, The Clerk to have one third part, the
poor the second third part, and the third toward the Church for Broomes, Sweet
strowing Herbs, Flowers, and Bushes, etc.

This Act at First, was Irksom to many; but at long running, rather then a
Master would pay for his Family, or for his Servants they began to come to
Prayers and Sermons. Then the Clerks spying but little to be got, when the
People began to come to Church, neglected their Office, and several agreeing
with the Ministers of Each Parish, to give them a yearly Stipend, the Act
ceased, and Popery and Sectaries increased

This being a Copy of the Lord Cecills Memorandums of Faithful Commin, with
many other Memorandums in the same Book worth the Printing; which Book was
amongst Archbishop Vshers Manuscripts before his Death.

FINIS.

