A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE the Kings Majesty, at Hampton Court, Concerning the
Right and Power of calling Assemblies, On Sunday the 28. of September, ANNO
1606.

By the Bishop of Chichester.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1606.

NVM. 10. verse 1, 2. 1. Then God spoke to Moses, saying, 2. Make thee two
Trumpets of silver, of one whole piece shall thou make them. And thou shall
have them (or they shall be for thee) to assemble (or, (...)
(...)
to call together) the Congregation, and to remove the Camp.

AMong diverse and sundry Commissions granted in the Law, A Grant.
for the benefit and better order of Gods people; this (which I have read) is
one. Given (as we see) per Ipsum Deum, From God.
by God himself: and that viuae vocis Oraculo, by express warrant from his
own mouth, Then God spoke to Moses, saying.

And it is a grant of the Right and Power of the trumpets, and with them, Of
the power of calling Assemblies.
of assembling the people of God. The Grant of this Power a matter of
importance.
A Right and Power not to be lightly accounted of, or to be heard of with
slight attention: It is a matter of great weight and consequence, The calling
of Assemblies. There is yearly a solemn Feast holden in memory of it, and that
by Gods own appointment, Cap. 29.5.
no less then of the Passover, or of the Law it self, Even the Feast of the
Trumpets, much about this time of the year, the latter Aequinoctiall. And God
appoynteth no Feast but in remembrance of some special benefit. It is
therefore one of his special benefits, and high favors vouchsafed them, and
to be regarded accordingly.

This Power hitherto, In whose hands this Power was before.
ever since they came out of Egypt, and that God adopted them for his people,
unto this very day and place had God kept in his own hands, as to him alone of
right properly belonging. For unto this very day, and place, the people of God,
as they had assembled many times and often: Cap. 9. v. 18, 20, 23.
so it was ever (they be the very last words of the last Chapter, which serve
for an introduction to these of ours) ever, all their meetings and remouings
were, by immediate warrant from God himself. But here now, God no longer
intending, thus to warn them still by special direction from his own self,
but to set over this power, once for all: Here he does it. This is the
primary passing it from GOD, and deriuing it to Moses, who was the first that
ever held it by force of the Law written. For, Exodus 19.13.
to this place they came by the sound of Gods; and from this place they
dislodged, by the sound of Moses Trumpet.

And it is a point very considerable what day and place this was; for it
appears, The time and place of the Granting.
they were yet at Sinni, by the 12. verse: yet, at the very Mount of GOD, by
the 33. of this Chapter, even then, when this Commission came forth; So that
this power is as ancient as the Law. At no other place, nor no other time
deli^ered, then even the Law it self: when the two Tables were given, the two
Trumpets were given: and Moses that was made keeper of both the Tables, made
likewise keeper of both the Trumpets; both at Sinai: both at one time: As if
there were some near alliance between the Law and Assemblies. And so there
is: Assemblies being ever a special means to revive the Law, (as occasions
serve) and to keep it in life; As, if the Law it self therefore lacked yet
something, and were not perfect and full without them: So, till this Grant was
passed, they stayed still at Sinai, and so soon as ever this was passed, they
presently removed.

To entreat then of this power. The story of the Bible would serve our turn to
show us, who have had the exercise of it in their hands, from time to time, if
that were enough. But that is not enough; For the errors first and last, about
this point, from hence they seem to grow, that men look not back enough;
have not an eye to this, how it was in the beginning, Matthew. 19.4.
by the very Law of GOD. Being therefore to search for the Original warrant; by
which the Assemblies of Gods people are called, This the Original Grant, of it.
and kept: this place of Numbers is generally agreed to be it: That here, it is
first found, and here it is first founded; even in the Law, the best ground
for a Power that may be.

In Lege quid scriptu^est? Luc. 10.26.
quomodo legis? (says our Savior) What is written in the Law? how read you
there? as if he should say: If it be to be read there, it is well: then must it
needs be yielded to: there is no excepting to it then, unless you will except
to Law, and Lawgiuer, to God and all. Let us then come to this Commission.

The points of it be three: First, The parts of the Grant.
two trumpets of silver, to be made out of one whole peiece, both: Secondly,
with these trumpets, the Congregation to be called, and the Camp removed:
Thirdly, Moses to make these Trumpets, and, being made, to use them to these
ends. These three: The Instrument: The end for which: The party to whom. Now,
(to marshal these in their right order,) 1. The end is to be first Sapiens
semper incipit a fine (says the Philosopher.) A wise man begins ever at the
end: for that indeed, is Causa causarum (as Logique teaches us:) The cause of
all the causes; the cause that sets them all on working. 2. Then next, the
Instrument, which applies this power to this end. 3. And so last, the Agent,
who is to guide the Instrument, and to whom both Instrument and Power is
committed.

1. The end for which this Power is conveyed, is double; as the subject is
double, whereon it has his operation: The Camp, and the Congregation. On
either of these, a special act exercised: To remove the Camp: To call
together the Congregation: One for War, the other for Peace.

That of the Camp, has no longer use, then while it is war. God forbid that
should be long: nay, God forbid it should be at all. The best removing of the
Camp, is the removing of it quite and clean away. But if it be not possible,
Romans 1^.18.
if it lie not in us to have peace with all men, if war must be, here is
order for it. But the calling of the Congregation, that is it: that is to
continue, and therefore, that, which we to deal with.

The calling of the Congregation, (as in the two next verses) either in whole,
or in part; either of all the Tribes, or but of the chief and principal men
in them. A power for both these: And (in a word) a power general, for calling
Assemblies: Assemblies in war: Assemblies in peace: Assemblies of the whole:
Assemblies of each, or any part.

2. This Power, to be executed by instruments; The Instruments to be
Trumpets: Two in number: Those to be of silver, and both of one entire piece of
silver.

3. This power, and the executing of it by these Instruments, committed to
Moses: First, he to have the making of these Trumpets: Factibi: Then, he to
have the right to them being made: Et eru^t tibi: Then, he to use them to call
the Congregation, and, if need be, to remove the Camp. None to make any
Trumpet but he. None to have any Trumpet but he. None to meddle with the
calling of the Congregation, or remoouing the Camp with them but he, or by his
leave and appointment.

Wherein as we find the Grant full; so are we further to search and see, Whether
this Grant took place or no? Whether as these Trumpets were made and given to
call the Congregation, so the Congregation from time to time, have bin called
by these trumpets.

So have we two subjects: The Camp, and the Congregation. Two acts: to
Assemble, and to Remove. Two Instruments: the two silver Trumpets. Two Powers,
to make them: To owe them being made, for the two acts or ends before
specified: First, for calling the Assembly, and then for dislodging the Camp.
And all these committed to Moses. The sum of all is: the establishing in
Moses, the Prerogative and Power, of calling and dissoluing Assemblies about
public affairs.

Then God spoke to Moses, etc.
IF we be to begin with the end: Assembling, a motion extraordinary.
the end is Assembling. Assembling, is reduced to Motion. Not to every motion:
but to the very chiefest of all: as that which draws together all; and so at
once moves all. For, as in the Soul, when the mind summoneth all the powers
and faculties together: Or in the body, when all the sinews join their forces
together, it is vultimum potentiae: So, in the body politic, when all the
Estates are drawn together into one; it is nixus rather then motus, a maine
sway, rather then a motion: Or, if a motion, it is motus Magnus, no common and
ordinary, but an extraordinary great motion. Such a motion is Assembling, and
such is the nature of it.

Yet, Yet necessary.
even this, (great and extraordinary as it is) such, and so urgent occasions
may, and do daily arise; as, very requisite it is, such meetings there should
be: very requisite (I say) both in War and in Peace, both for the Camp and
for the Congregation. The ground whereof seems to be; That, Power dispersed
may do many things: but to do some, it must be united. United in
consultation: For, that which one eye cannot discern, many may. United in
action: For, many hands may discharge that by parts, which in whole, were too
troublesome for any. But, Action is more proper to war: For the Camp.
That is the Assembly of fortitude: And, Consultation rather for Peace: For the
Congregation.
That is the Assembly of Prudence. And in Peace, chiefly, for making of Laws:
For that, every man is more willing to submit himself to that, whereof all do
agree. The whole Camp, Then, when it is assembled, will be the more surely
fortified: And, the whole Congregation, when it is Assembled, will be the more
soundly advised. And, hereby it comes to pass, that there ever has, and
ever will be, great use of calling Assemblies.

Let me add yet one thing further, to bring it home to our selves. Especially
for this land of Britain.
There is no people under heaven, may better speak for the use of Assemblies,
then we: There was nothing that did our Ancestors the Britains more hurt,
Nec aliud aduersus validissimas gentes, pro nobis vtilius, quam quod in commune
non consulunt Rarusad propulsandum commune periculum conuentus. Ita dum singuli
p^gnant, v^^uersi vin^utur. In vita Agric.
(says Tacitus of them) nothing that turned them to greater prejudice, then
this one, That they met not, they consulted not in common: but every man ran a
course by himself of his own head: And, this was the greatest advantage the
Roman had of them; they were not so wise, as to know what good there was in
public conuentions. Therefore, great use of Assemblies; may we say of all
others.

Now, Necessary for the Church.
if they be needful for the Camp, and for the Congregation, as it is a
Civil body; I doubt not, but I may add also, every way as needful for the
Congregation properly so called (that is) the Church. The Church has her wars
to fight: The Church has her Laws to make.

Wars with heresies: wherein experience teaches us, it is matter of less
difficulty to raze a good Fort then to cast down a strong imagination; and
more easy to drive out of the field a good army of men, then to chase out of
men's minds a heap of fond opinions, having once taken head. Now, heresies have
ever bin best put to flight by the Churchs Assemblies, (that is) Councels, as
it were by the Armies of Gods Angels (as Eusebius calls them) yea, it is well
known, De vita Constantim, lib. 3. cap. 6.
some heresies could never be thoroughly mastred, or conquered but so.

Then for the Churches Laws (which we call Canons and Rules) made to restaine
or redress abuses, they have always likewise been made at her Assemblies in
Councels, and not elsewhere. So that, as requisite are Assemblies for the
Congregation, in this sense as in any other. By this then that has been said,
it appears that Gods Fac tibi here, is no more then needs; but that meet it
is, the Trumpets be put to making. And so I pass over to the Instruments,
which is the second part.

Organice (that is) by Instrument: Instruments.
So an Instrument we must have, wherewithal to stir up, or to begin this
Motion.

1. That Instrument to be the Trumpet. Trumpets.
1. Cor. 15.52.
In tuba nouissima, by the sound of the last Trumpe. And he holds on, or
continues one and the same Instrument, to show, it is one and the same Power,
that continues still: that whether an Angel blow it, as at Sinai; or whether
Moses, as ever after, it is one sound, even Gods sound, Gods voice, we hear in
both.

2. Two.
They are to be twain, for the two Assemblies, that follow in the two next
verses; either of the whole tribes, Coagmentatiue: or of the chief and choice
persons of them only, Repraesentatiue. And for the two Tables, also. For even
this very month, the first day, they are used to a Civil end: the tenth day to
a Holy, for the day of Expiation: of which this later belongs to the first;
that former, to the second Table.

3. They are to be of silver: Of silver.
(not to seek after speculations) only, for the Metals sake, which has the
shrillest and cleerest sound of all others.

4. Of one entire piece.
They are to be of one whole piece both of them, not of two diverse: And that
must needs have a meaning: it cannot be for nothing: For unless it were for
some meaning, what skilled it else, though they had bin made of two several
plates? but only to show, that both assemblies are vnius iuris, both of one and
the same right: as the trumpets are wrought, and beaten out, both of one entire
piece of Bullion.

3. But it will be to small purpose, to stand much upon the Instrument: I make
way therefore to the third point: how they shall be bestowed, who shall have
the dealing with them: For on them depends, and with them goes the Power of
calling Assemblies.

To whom committed.
to whom this Power was granted, to call the Congregation: And then,

1. Where first, Not to all.
it will be soon agreed (I trust) that every body must not be allowed to be a
maker of Trumpets: nor, when they be made, that they hang, where who that list
may blow them: (that is,) that every man, hand over head, is not to be in case,
to draw multitudes together: There will be (says S. Luke) Turbatio non
minima, Act. 19.23.
no small ado, if that may be suffered. If Demetrius getting together his
fellow craftesmen, they may of their own heads, rush into the common Hal, and
there keep a showting and crying two hours together; not knowing most of
them, why they came thither, and yet thither they came. There is not so much
good, in public meetings, but there is thrice as much hurt, in such as this:
No Commonwealth, no not popular Estates could ever endure them: Nay, (...),
(say both Scripture and Nature) Let all be done in order: Act. 19.39.
let us have (...), Lawful orderly Assemblies, or else none at all. Away then
with this confusion (to begin with) away with Demetrius Assemblies.

To avoid then this confusion, But some.
some must have this Power, for, and in the name of the rest. Shall it be one,
or more? (for that is next.) Nay, but one, (says God) in saying, Tibi. Where I
wish you mark this; Some, not many, but one.
That as at the first he took this Power into his own hands, and called them
still together himself: So here he deriueth this Power immediately from
himself, unto one: without first settling it, in any body collectiue at all.

It is from our purpose to enter the question, Whether the Power were in the
whole body originally, seeing though it were, it is now by the positive
ordinance of God otherwise disposed: The reason may seem to be; Partly,
necessity of expedition: The trumpets may need to be blown sometimes,
suddenly, sooner, then diverse can well meet, and agree upon it too: Partly,
avoiding of distraction: The two Trumpets may be blown, two diverse ways, if
they be in two hands; and so shall the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, 1.
Corin. 14.8. and how shall the Congregation know, whither to assemble? Nay (a
worse matter yet then all that:) so may we have Assembly against Assembly: and
rather then so, better no assembly at all.

Therefore, as God would have them, both made of one piece: so will he have them
both made over to one Person, for Tibi implies one. Who is that one? That one,
Moses.
It is to Moses God speaks, to him is this Tibi directed: Him does God
nominate, and of his Person make choice, first, to make these trumpets. No man
to make, Moses to be maker of them.
No man to have the hammering of any trumpet but he.

And, there is no question, but for Aaron, and his sons the Priests: they are
to call the Levites, to call the people together to their Assemblies; How shall
they warn them together, unless they may make a Trumpet too? But, if there be
any question about this; Gods proceeding here, will put all out of question:
For, to whom gives he this charge? Not to Aaron, is this spoken; but to
Moses: Aaron receives no charge to make any Trumpet: Never a fac tibi, to him;
neither in this, nor in any other place. To Moses is this charge given. And to
Moses: Not, Make thee one, (one for secular affairs; that, they would allow
him, but fac tibi duas: Make thee two, Make both.

2. Well, the making is not it. One may make, and another may have: Sic vos non
vobis: You know the old Verse; When they be made, and done; then who shall owe
them? It is expressed that, (...)
too; Et erunt tibi: They shall be for thee. And owner of them.
They shall be, not one for thee, and another for Aaron: but Erunt tibi, They
shall be both for thee: They shall be both thine. A third, if they can find,
they may lay claim to that; But both these are for Moses.

We have then the delivery of them to Moses to make, which is a kind of
seizin, or a Ceremony inuesting him with the right of them. We have beside,
plain words, to lead their possession; and those words operative, Erunt
tibi: That as none to make them; so none to own them being made, but Moses.
And what would we have more to show us, Cuius sunt Tubae, whose the Trumpets
be; or, whose is the right of calling Assemblies? It is Moses certainly, and he
by virtue of these, stands seized of it.

To go yet further: But, That power to continue after Moses.
was not all this to Moses for his time only; and as it begun in him, so to
take end with him? Was it not one of these same Priuilegia personalia, quae non
trahuntur in exemplum, A privilege peculiar to him, and so no precedent to be
made of it? No: for if you look but a little forward to the 8. verse
following, there you shall see, That this power which God here conueyeth; this
Law of the silver Trumpets, is a Law to last for ever, even throughout all
their generations, not that generation only. And there is great reason it
should be so, That seeing the use should never cease, the Power likewise should
never determine.

Being then not to determine, Moses received it as chief Magistrate.
but to continue, it must descend to those that hold Moses place. I demand
then, what place did Moses hold? Sure it is, that Aaron was now the high
Priest, anointed and fully invested in all the rights of it, ever since the 8.
Chapter of the last Book. Moses had in him now, no other Right, but that of
the chief Magistrate. Therefore, as in that Right, and no other, he received
and held them: So he was made Custos vtriusque Tabulae: So, he is made Custos
vtriusque Tubae. But who can tell us better then he himself, in what right he
held them? He does it in the 5. verse of Deuteronomy. 33. (read it which way you
will:) Erat in Iishrune Rex, or, in rectissimo Rex, or, in rectitudine Rex, or,
in Recto Regis, dum congregaret Principes populi, and Tribus Israel: al come to
this; that, though in strict propriety of Speech, Moses were no King; yet, in
this, he was in rectitudine Rex, or, in Recto Regis, (that is,) in this, had
(as we say) Ius Regale, that he might and did assemble the Tribes, and chief
men of the Tribes, at his pleasure. Herein he was, Rex in Rectitudine. For
this was Rectitudo Regis, A Power Regal. And so it was holden in Egypt before
Moses, even in the Law of Nature: that without Pharao, Genesis 41.44.
no man might lift up hand or foot in all the land of Egypt: (suppose, to no
public or principal motion,) and so has it bin holden in all Nations, as a
special Power belonging to Dominion. Which makes it seem strange, that those
men, which in no cause are so fervent as when they plead, that Churchmen
should not (...), that is, have Dominion; do yet hold this Power, which has
ever been reputed most proper to Dominion, should belong to none, but to them
only. Our Savior Christ's, vos autem non sic; Mat. 20.26.
may (I am sure) be said to the^ here in a truer sense, then as they commonly
use to apply it.

To conclude then this point, The chief Magistrate to succeed in it.
If Moses as in the Right of chief Magistrate held this Power, it was from him
to descend to the chief Magistrates after him over the people of God, and they
to succeed him, as in his place; so in this right, it being by God himself
settled in Moses and annexed to his place, lege perpetua, by an estate
indefeizible, by a perpetual Law, throughout all their generations. Therefore,
ever after by Gods express order, from year to year, every year on the
first day of the seventh month, were they blown by Moses first, and after by
them that held his place, and the feast of the trumpets solemnly holden, as to
put them in mind of the benefit thereby coming to them, so withal to keep
alive and fresh still in the knowledge of all, That this Power belonged to
their place, that so none might ever be ignorant to whom it did of right
appertain, to call Assemblies.

And how then shall Aarons Assemblies be called? Aarons Assemblies, how called.
with what Trumpet, they? God himself has provided for that in the tenth
verse following, that with no other then these. (There is in all the Law no
order for calling an Assembly, to what end, or for what cause soever, but this,
and only this: No order for making any third Trumpet: under these two therefore
all are comprised:) Verse 10.
This order there God takes, that Moses shall permit Aarons sons to have the
use of these trumpets. But the use, not the property, They must take them from
Moses, Number. 31.6.
as in the 31. Chap. of this book Phinees does, But Erunt tibi; (Gods own
words, Erunt tibi) must still be remembered: His they be, for all that: Moses
the owner still, the right remaynes in him: Their sounding of them depriues not
him of his interest, alters not the property: Erunt tibi, must still be true:
that right must still be preserved. It may be, if we communicate with flesh
and blood, we may think it more convenient (as some do) that God had
delivered Moses and Aaron either of them one. But when we see Gods will by
Gods word what it is, that Moses is to have them both; we will let that pass
as a Revelation of flesh and blood, and think that which God thinks, to be
most convenient.

Now then if the Trumpets belong to Moses; and that to this end, (...)
that with them he may call the congregation, The two duties.
These two things do follow: Trumpets, and both these have Gods people ever
duly performed.

And yet not so, but that this Right has bin called in question, yea, even in
Moses own time, (that we marvel not, if it be so now) and both these duties
denied him, even by those who were alive and present then, when God gave him
the Trumpets. But mark by whom, and what became of them.

The first duty is, To come when they be called.
To come when they be called: and this was denied (in the 16. Chap. following
12 verse) by Core, Dathan and their crewe. Moses sounded his trumpet, sent to
call them: they answer flatly, and that not once, but once and again, Non
veniemus, They would not come, not once stir for him or his Trumpet, they. A
plain contradiction indeed: neither is there in all that Chapter any
contradiction verinominis, true and properly so to be called, but only that.
You know what became of them; they went quick to hell for it: and woe be to
them, even under the Gospel (says S. Jude) that perish in the same
co^tradiction, Jude 11.
the contradiction of Core.

The second duty is, 2. To be called yer they come.
To be called yer they come: this likewise denied, even Moses himself (that
they in his place may not think strange of it) In the 20. Chapter of this very
book: Water waxing skant, a company of them grew mutinous, and in tumultuous
manner, without any sound of the trumpet, assembled of them selves. But these
are branded too: The water they got, is called the water of Meriba: And what
followed you know; Cap. 20.13.
None of them that drunk of it, came into the land of Promise. God swore they
should not enter into his rest.

Now, as both these are bad: so of the twain, this later is the worse:
Called, and came not.
The former (that come not, being called) do but sit still, as if they were
somewhat thick of hearing: But these later that come, being not called; Came
uncalled.
either, they make themselves a trumpet, without ever a fac tibi: or else they
offer to wring Moses Trumpet out of his hands, and take it into their own.
Take heed of this later: it is said there to be aduersus Mosen, even against
Moses himself. It is the very next forerunner to it: it pricks fast upon it.
For they that meet against Moses will, when they have once thoroughly learned
that lesson, will quickly perhaps grow capable of another; even to meet against
Moses himself, as these did. Periclitamur argui seditionis (says the
Town-clearke,) Acts 19.40.
We have done more then we can well answer: We may be indicted of Treason for
this days work, for coming together without a Trumpet: and yet it was for
Diana, that is, for a matter of Religion.

You see then whose the Right is, and what the duties be to it, and in whose
steps they tread, that deny them. Sure they have been baptized or made to
drink of the same water (the water of Meriba) that ever shall offer, to do
the like, to draw together without Moses Call.

And now to our Savior Christ's question: In the Law how is it written? How
read you? Our answer is: There it is thus written: and thus we read: That
Moses has the Right of the Trumpets: That they to go ever with him and his
successors: and that to them belongs the power of calling the public
Assemblies.

This is the Law of God; Agreeable to the Law of Nature.
and that no judicial Law, peculiar to that people alone, but agreeable to the
Law of Nature and Nations; (two laws of force through the whole world) For even
in the little Empire of the body natural, Principium motus, the beginning of
all motion, is in, and from the head. There, all the knots, or (as they call
them) all the coningations of sinews have their head, by which all the body is
moved.

And as the Law of Nature, To the Law of Nations.
by secret instinct by the light of the Creation, annexeth the organe to the
chiefest part: even so does the law of Nations, by the light of reason, to the
chiefest person: and both fall just with the Law here written; Where, (by Erunt
tibi) the same organ and power is committed to Moses the principal person, in
that common wealth. The Law of Nations in this point, (both before the Law
written, and since, where the Law written was not known,) might easily
appear, if time would suffer, both in their general order for conuentions so
to be called; and in their general opposing to all conuenticles called
otherwise.

Verily the Heathen Laws made all such Assemblies unlawful, which the highest
Authority did not cause to meet, yea, though they were (...). say Solons
Laws: yea, though sub praetextu Religionis, say the Roman Laws. Neither did
the Christian Emperors think good to abate any thing of that Right. Nay, they
took more straight order: for besides the exiling of the person, which was the
Law before, they proscribed the place, where, under pretense of Religion any
such meetings should be. But I let them pass, and stand only on the written
Law, the Law of God.

WE have Law then for us, That Moses is ever to call the Congregation. But
though we have Law, Mos vincit Legem; Custom ouer-ruleth Law. And the Custom
or practice may go another way; and it is practice that ever best bewrays a
Power. How then has the practice gone? It is a necessary question this, and
pertinent to the Text it self. For, here is a Power granted: and in vain is
that Power that never comes into act. Came then this Power into act? It is a
Power to call the Congregation together; Were the Congregations called together
by it? A grant there is, That Erunt tibi; So it should be: Did it take place?
was it so? Erantne illi? Had he it? Did he enjoy it? Let us look into that
another while, what became of this Grant; what place it took.

And we shall not offend Moses in so doing. It is his advise, and desire both;
The Practice or use of this Power among the Jews. Deuteronomy. 4.32.
that we should enquire into the days past, that were before us, and ask,
even from one end of Heaven to the other; to see how matters have been carried.
So that, as our Savior Christ sends us to the Law by this, In Lege quid
scriptum est? so does Moses direct us to the use and practice by his Interroga
de diebus antiquis. I do ask then, These Trumpets here given, this power to
call together the Congregation, how has it been used? Has the Congregation
been called accordingly in this, and no other manner? by this, and no other
Power? It has (as shall appear:) and I will deal with no Assemblies, but
only for matters of Religion.

Of Moses, first there is no question: By Moses.
It is yielded that he called them, and dismissed them: and even so did Iosue
after him, Joshua. Josh. 1.17,
no less then he; and they obeyed him in that Power, no less then Moses: And
as for that which is objected concerning Moses, that he for a time dealt in
matters of the Priests office, it has no color in Iosue, and those that
succeeded him.

The Covenant, and the renewing of the Covenant, are matters merely
spiritual: yet, in that case did Joshua (Joshua, not Eleazar) assemble all the
Tribes, Leui and all, to Sichem, Ios. Josh. 24.28.
24. called the Assembly at the first verse: dissolved it at the 28. For, if
Joshua may call, he may dissolve too: Law, Reason, Sense, teach, That, ( uius
est nolle, eius est and velle. That calling, and discharging, belong both to
one power Nay, Demetrius assembly, though they had come together disorderly;
yet when the Towne-clearke (that should have called them together) did
discharge them; they added not one fault to another, but went their ways,
every man quietly, Demetrius himself and all: that, they are worse then
Demetrius, that deny this.

But, I pass to the Kings, (that Estate fitteth us better) There, David.
does David call together the Priests and other persons Ecclesiastical, and
that, even with these Trumpets. And for what matters? 1. Chro. 15.4.
Secular? Nay: but first, when the Arc was to be removed: And again, 1.
Chron. 23.2.3, 6.
when the Offices of the Temple were to be set in order: things merely
pertaining to Religion; And as he calls them, 1. Chro. 15.4. So he dismisseth
them, 1. Chron. 16.43.

The like did Solomon, Solomon.
when the Temple was to be dedicated; called the Assembly, 2. Chron. 5.2.
dissolved the Assembly in the 10. verse of the 7. Chap. following. 2. Chro.
15.14. Asa.
The like did Asa: when Religion was to be restored, and a solemn oath of
Association to be taken for the maintaining of it: with the sound of these
Trumpets did he it.

Iehoshaphat used them when a public Fast to be proclaimed. Iehu used them,
Iehosaphat. 2. Chron. 20.3. Iehu. 2. Reg. 10.20. Ioas. 2. Chron. 24.5.
when a solemn Sacrifice to be performed. Ioas in a case of Dilapidations of
the Temple, a matter merely Ecclesiastical. Josias, Josias. 2. Chron. 34.29,
30.
when the Temple to be purified, and a mass of superstitions to be removed.

In all these cases did all these Kings call all these Conuentions, of Priests
and Levites, for matters of Religion. Ezekias. 2. Chro. 29.15.
I insist only on the fact of Ezekias. He was a King; he gave forth his
precept for the Priests and all their brethren to assemble: wherefore? Adres
Iehouae, for the affairs of the service of God, yea, God himself. There are
14. chief men of the Priests set down there by name, that by virtue of that
precept of the Kings, came together themselves, they and their brethren, all,
ex praecepto Regis, ad res Iehouae, by the Kings authority, for matters
merely of the Church. I know not what can be more plain: The matters
spiritual: the persons assembled, spiritual: and yet called by the Kings
Trumpet.

Thus, till the Captivity. In the Captivity, there have we Mardochee (when he
came in place of authority) appoynting the days of Purim, Mardocheus. Hester.
9.17.
and calling all the Jews in the province together, to the celebrating of
them.

After the Captivity, Nehemias. Nehe. 7.64.
Nehemias kept the Trumpet still: and by it, first called the Priests to show
their right to their places, by their genealogies, Nehem. 13.11.
and after reduced them also to their places again, when they were all shrunk
away in time of his absence.

These lead the practice til you come to the Maccabees: The Maccabees.
and there it is but too evident: they profess there expressly to Simeon, made
then their Ruler, That it should not be lawful for any (...): 1. Mac. 14.44.
to call any assembly in the land, (...) without him. A plain evidence, that
so had ever gone the course of their government: Else, how should it come to
pass, that the altering of Religion is still termed the deed of the King? that
his disposition, godly, or otherwise, did always accordingly change the
public face of Religion? which thing the Priests by themselves never did,
neither could at any time hinder from being done. Had the Priests, without
him, been possessed of this power of Assembling, how had any Act concerning
Religion passed without them? In them it had been to stop it at any time, if
they had (of themselves) had this power of Assembling themselves, to set order
in matters of Religion.

Thus, from Moses to the Maccabees, we see in whose hands this power was.
And what should I say more? There was in all Gods people no one religious King,
but this Power he practiced: And there was of all Gods Prophets no one, that
ever interposed any prohibition against it.

Would Esaias (shall we once imagine) have endured Ezekias, him to call, or the
Priests to come together, only by his precept, ad res Iehouae; Esa. 58.1.
and not lift up his voice like a trumpet against it, if it had not bin (in his
knowledge) the Kings right, to command, and their duty to obey? Never
certainly.

What shall we say then? were all these wrong? shall we condemn them all?
Take heed. In all that government, God has no other children, Psalm. 73.15.
but these: if we condemn these, we condemn the whole generation of his
children. Yet, to this we are come now; that either we must condemn them all,
one after another; the Kings as usurpers, for taking on them, to use more
Power, then ever orderly they received; and the Prophets, for soothers of them,
in that their unjust claim: or else confess they did no more, then they might;
and exceeded not therein, the bounds of their calling. And indeed, that we
must confess; for that is the truth.

This then may serve, for the custom of Gods own elect people. But they
were Jews, and we would be loath, to Iudaize: and it may be, this was one
of the clauses of the Law of commandments, Ephesians. 2.15.
consisting of Ordinances which Christ came to abrogate.

I demand therefore, The practice or use of this Power among Christians.
When Christ came, how was it then? will the like appear in the assemblies
since Christ? The very like, every way, as consonant to that of the old
Testament, as may be. For Christ Matthew. 18. gives a promise of his assistance
to such meetings: but sets no new order for calling of them, other then had
been taken in the old. Therefore the same order to be kept still.

A time there was (you know) after Christ, when they were Infidels; Kings and
Kingdoms both. A time there follovved; when Kings received Religion; and no
sooner received they it, but they received this Power of the Trumpets with it.
This, to be made manifest, 1. By General Councels. 2. By National and
Prouincial Councels; that have been assembled 3. under Emperors, 4. and under
Kings, by the space of many hundred years.

1. And for General Councels, this first: In general Councels.
(to begin with;) that if those Assemblies be not rightly called, that by
this Power are called; we have lost all our General Councels at one blow. The
Church of Christ has to this day, never a General Council: Vna Litura, with
one wipe, we dash them out all: we leave never a one, no not one. For all
that ever have been, have been thus called and kept. Yea, those four first,
which all Christians have ever had in so great reverence, and high estimation;
not one of them a lawful Council, if this new assertion take place. This is a
perilous inconvenience: yet this we must yield to, and more then this; if we
seek to disable Assemblies, so holden. For sure it is, all the General
Councels were thus Assembled; all; all seven (for more are not to be
reckoned:) the eight was only for a private business. The rest were only of the
West Church alone, and so not general: The East and West together, make a
general: The East and Westtogether never met, but in one of those seven, for
public affairs: unless it were once after, in that of Ferrara. And it is
well known, that was in hope of help, on the East Churches part, which they
never had; and so the Council never kept, but broken, even as soon as it was
broken up.

Briefly then to survey those seven. And I will not therein allege the reports
of Stories, (they write things they savv not, many times, and so frame matters
to their own conceits: and many times are taynted with a partial humor) but
only out of authentical Records in them, and out of the very acts of the
Councels themselves, best able to testify and tell, by whose authority they
came together. And it is happy for the Church of Christ, there are so many of
them extant as there are, to guide us to the truth in this point, that so the
right may appear.

First then, for the great Nicene Council, (...).
(the holy Emperor Constantine gathering them together out of diverse Cities
and Provinces.) The whole Letter is extant upon record in Socr. 1.9. and
Theodoret. 1.9. Give me leave to make here a little stand: For here, at this
Council, was the pale first broken, and the right (if any such were) here, it
went first away. At Nice there were then together, 318. Bishops, totius orbis
lumina (as Victorinus well terms them) the lights of the whole world; the
chiefest and choysest men for holiness, learning, virtue, and valor, that the
Christian Religion ever had before or since; men that had laid down their
lives for the testimony of the truth. Did any of them refuse to come, being
called by him, as not called aright? Or, coming, was there any one of them
that did protest against it? or pleaded the Churches interest, to meet of
themselves? Not one.

What was it then? want of skill, in so many famous men, that knew not their
own rights? Or want of valor, that knowing it for such, would not so much as
speak a word for it, but sit still, and say nothing all the while? There were
then and there present, Spyridion, Paphnutius, Potamon, and diverse besides,
(but these I name) that had not long before, for their constancy, had their
right eyes bored out, their right ham-strings, and the strings of their
right-armpits cut in sunder. Did these want courage, think we? Were they
become so faint hearted, that they durst not open their mouth, for their own
due?

Verily, that Council of Nice, (which is, and ever has been so much admired
by all Christians,) cannot be excused before God or men; if they thus conspired
all, to betray the Churches right, and suffered it, contrary to all equity, to
be carried away; leaving a dangerous precedent therein, for all Councels ever
after, to the worlds end. But, no such right there was: If there had been, they
neither wanted wit to discern it, nor courage to claim it. But, they knew
whose the Trumpets were: To whom (Erunt tibi) was spoken: and therefore never
offered to lay hold on either of them, and say; This is ours.

And yet (to say the truth,) There is no man of reason, but will think it
reasonable, if this were the Churches own peculiar, if appropriat unto it,
(and so known to them to be) there ought to have been plain dealing, now at
the very first Council of all; that if Constantine would embrace Religion, he
must needs resign up one of his Trumpets, and forbear from thence to meddle
with their Assemblies. Was there so? No such thing. Why was there not? Belike,
because none were there, that had ever been present at any Assembly, holden
under persecution, to know the Churches order, and manner of meeting then. Yes,
there was Hosius Bishop of Cordoua, who had held the Council of Eluira in
Spain, Council. Eliberit. Tom. 1.600.
even in the time of persecution. Hosius for the West. And for the East, there
was Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, had held the like at Ancyra then too: Council.
Ancyra. Tom. 1.446.
(both the Councels yet extant to be seen) and these two, Presidents of them.
Yet were these twain, two that came first, and sat foremost at the Council of
Nice; and neither of them pleaded or knew of any such right: but that their
Power then ceased; and that Constantines Trumpet now took place. Sure, if but
this first Council be well considered, it is able to move much. And the
example of this first was of great consequence; for, all the rest followed it;
and as this went, so went they. And this for the first.

2. The second General Council at Constantinople; Who called that
Congregation? (...).
Their own letter to the Emperor is to be seen, professing they were thither
assembled by his Writ.

3. For the third at Ephesus; let the Acts of the Council (now set out in
Greek) be looked on; Four several times they acknowledge, they were thither
summoned by the Emperors (...).
Oracle, (...).
Beck, (...).
Charge, and (...). Tom. 2.129. Con^e^ent^ Concilio secund. sacram
praeceptionem.
Commandment.

4. For the fourth at Chalcedon, look but upon the very front of the Council;
it proclaims it self, to be there assembled, Facta est Synodus, ex decreto
Pijssimorum, and fidelissimorum Imperatorum, Valentiniani, and Martiani. And it
is well known, it was first called at Nice; and then recalled from thence, and
removed to Chalcedon, all wholly by the disposing of the Emperor.

5. So says the fifth at Constantinople, Tom. 2.579.2.666. Imperator Iustian.
quintam aecumenicam Synodum Episcopis Ecclesiarum euocatis, coegit. Tom.
3.237.244. Secundu^ pijssimam iussionem mansuetudinis vestrae. Iis quae per
mansuetissimae fortitudinis vestrae Sacram dudum praecepta sunt efficaciter
promptam obedientiam exlubere.
Iuxta pium iussum a Christo amati, and a Deo custoditi Iustiniani Imperatoris.
They be their own words.

6. And so the sixth at Constantinople, Secundum Imperialem sanctionem
congregata est; And, pro obedientia quam debuimus. They be the express words
of Agatho Bishop of Rome in the same Council.

7. Tom. 3.453.
And even so the seventh at Nice, Quae per pium Imperatorum decretum,
congregata est, (meaning Constantine and Irene.)

And these be all the General. In all which the force of the truth presents
it self so clearly, that De Council. lib. 1. cap 13.
Bellarmine is even dazelled with it: For, as one dazeled, he sets down diverse
reasons, why the Emperors were to call them, in that very place, where he
takes upon him to prove the Emperors were not to call them.

2. But it may be, General Councels have a fashion by themselves: Those
Congregations may be called, In National and Provincial from Constantine to
Instinian.
thus: But National, or Prouincial, (such as ours,) How? Even so too, and no
otherwise. Constantine began with them first, Eusebius. 10.5.
before he proceeded to the General at Nice. His Tractoria, or Writ, is extant
to be seen. Eusebius. 10.5. whereby he called the first Prouincial Council in
France. For sure, by no Canon could the Bishop of Syracuse in Sicile, or
Restitutus Bishop of London in Britayne, be lawfully summoned, to a Synod in
France, (which they were,) but (as it was in deed) by the Emperors Writ only.
But this he did at the beginning of his reign, perhaps, while he was yet an
imperfect Christian. Nay, even first and last, he did the same; as at the
beginning he called this; so, in the end of his Reign, the thirtieth year, the
year before his death, called he the Council at Tire, and from thence, removed
it to Jerusalem, and from thence, called them to appear before himself in
Constantinople. The letters are to be seen, Socrat. 1.34.
by which they were called, Socr. 1.34. The like after him, did Theodor. 2.8.
Constans at Sardice, Sozom. 6 7.
Valentinian at Lampsacus, Tom. 1.718.
Theodosius at Aquileia, (...). 453.
Gratian at Thessalonica.

It is too tedious to go through them all: Only for that of Aquileia, thus
much. Saint Ambrose, a man of as much spirit, and as high a courage, as ever
the Church had, and one that stood as much as ever did any, for the Churches
right; he was there present, and President both. Thus writes he from the
Council to the Emperor in his own name, and in the name of all the rest: Qui
ad remoue^das altercationes co^gregare studuistis Sacerdotale Concilium. Tom.
^.718.
Iuxta mansuetudinis vestrae statuta conuenimus: Hither we are assembled, by
the appointment of your Clemency; and there is no one Council more plain, then
that of S. Ambrose for this purpose. Yea, I add this, (which is a point to be
considered,) that even then, when the Emperors were professed Arrians; even
then did the Bishops acknowledge their Power, to call Councels: came to them
being called: sued to the^, that they might be called. Came to them, as Hosius,
to that of Tom. 1.680.
Arimin; Liberius, to that of Socrat. 2.24.
Sirmium, and that of Seleucia; Sued for them, as Lucifer. oper.
Liberius to Constantius: as Leo. Epist. 9.
Leo to Theodosius, for the second Ephesin Council; Innocentius to Arcadius:
And sometimes they sped, as Leo: and sometimes not, as Liberius, and
Innocentius: and yet when they sped not, they held themselves quiet, and never
presumed to draw together of their own heads.

But it may be, Under Kings from Iust^n^an to Charles the Great.
and that Emperors had in this point more jurisdiction then Kings. Nor that
neither: For about 500. years after Christ, when the Empire fell in pieces,
and these Western parts came into the hands of Kings, Synodus ex pr^cepto
gloriosissimi Regis Theodorici congregata.
those Kings had, held, inioyed, and practiced the same power. In Italy,
Theodoric at Tom. 2.470.
Rome: Alaric at Tom. 2.504.
Agatha: In France, Clowys (the first Christian King there) Childebert,
Theodebert, and Cherebert: At Tom. 2 511.
Orleance the first, Tom. 2.558.
Auuerne, Tom. 2.5^1.
Orleance the second, Tom 2.817.
Tours. And after that again by Gunthramn, Clowys, Carloman, and Pepin: At
Tom. 2.840.
Mascon first and Tom. 2 857.
second, Tom. 3.208.
Chalons: That which is called Tom. 3.437.
Francica, and that which is in Tom. 3 439.
Vernis. Twenty of them at the least in France.

In Spain by ten several Kings: in two Councels at Tom 2.825.829.
Braccara, and in Tom. 2.547.859. T^m. 3.67.79.87.181.184.204 216 374.
ten at Toledo, by the space of three hundredth years together. And how? under
what terms? Peruse the Councels themselves: their very Acts speak, ex Tom.
2.270. Tom. 2 551.
Praecepto, Tom. 3 67.
Imperio, Tom. 3.184.
Iussu, Tom. 3.237.
Sanctione, Tom. 3.391.
Nutu, Tom. 3.391.
Decreto, ex Tom. 2.840.
Euocatione, Tom. 2 857.
Dispositione, Tom. 3.208.
Ordinatione Regis. One says, Tom. 2.504.
Potestas permissa est nobis: Another, Tom. 3.216.
Facultas data est nobis: A third, m Tom. 3.682
Iniunctum est nobis a Rege. See their several styles: nothing can be more
pregnant. And now we are gone, 800. years after Christ.

4. From Charles the Great to Arnulphus.
Then arose there a kind of Empire here in the West, under Charles the Great:
and did not he then take the Trumpets as his own, and use them six several
times in calling six several Councels, at Tom. 3.640.
Franckford, Tom. 3 679.
Arles, Tom. 3.682.
Toures, Tom. 3.686.
Chalons, Tom. 3.693.
Mentz, and Tom. 3.700.
Rhemes? And what says he in them? Rhemes I named last, take that: In
conuentu more priscorum Imperatorum congregato a pijssimo Domino nostro Carolo.
That he called that Conuention by no other right, then as the manner of the
ancient Emperors had been to do. Expressing under one, both what his was:
and what the usage had ever been before him.

The like after him did Ludouicus Pius, Lotharius, Ludouicus Balbus, Carolus
Caluns, Carolus Crassus, and Arnulphus, at the several Councels holden at Tom.
3.703.
Aken, Tom. 3.832.
Mentz, Tom. 3.866.
Melden, Tom. 3.977.
Worms, Tom. 4.17.
Colein, and Tom. 4.28.
Tribur; and so held it till 900. years: For about that year (a year or two
under or over) was holden the Council of Tribur in Germany, Cum Concilium
sacrum continuari decreuisset: and Tom. 4.41.
Praesidente pio Principe Arnulpho, By the Emperor Arnulphus Decree, himself
then President of it.

And if it be excepted; There are of the Councels which carry in their acts no
mention how they were called: For them, we are to understand, that after the
decrees of the first Nicen. Can. 5.
Nicene Council were by Constantines Edict confirmed, wherein, (as likewise in
the Council of Chalced. Can. 18
Chalcedon,) it was ordered, each Province should yearly hold their Synods
twice: but specially, after Authent. 131
Justinian had made the decrees of the four first general Councels to have
the nature and force of Imperial Laws: (a Law being thus passed for them,) we
are to conceive, the Emperors authority was in all afterward, habitually at
the least: that is, if not (as in the other) by express and formal consent:
yet by way of implied allowance, as passed by a former Grant.

Well, thus far the Trumpet gives a certain sound. Now after this, there is
a great silence in the Volumes of the Councils, in a manner for the space of
200. years, until the year 1180. or thereabout, when the Tom. 4.101.
Council of Lateran was: and then indeed the case was altered. By that time
had the Bishop of Rome by his skill and practice, One of the Trumpets gotten
away.
got one of the Trumpets away, and carried it with him to Rome: so, leaving
Princes but one: But so long they held it.

Truly, three times so much time as we are allowed, would not serve for this
one point of the Councels; but even barely to recite them, and to cite them,
they are so many. You remember how Abraham dealt with God for the saving of the
five Cities, how he went down from fifty to ten: I might well take a course
the other way, and rise from ten to fifty, nay sixty, nay seventy, nay eighty,
not so few, of Councels General, National, Provincial, called by Emperors,
by Kings. Emperors of the East, of the West: Kings of Italy, France, Spain,
Germany, (as before from Moses to the Maccabees: So here from Constantine to
Arnulphus) for so many hundred years together, extant all, to be showed and
seen, all clear and evident, all full and forcible for this Power: as indeed
it is a cause that laboreth rather of plenty, then penury of proof. And this
was the course that of old was well thought of in the Christian world. Thus was
the Congregation so long called; neither is there yet brought any thing to
force us to swerve from the way, wherein so many and so holy ages have gone
before us.

Yes, something: For what say you to the 300. How in the time of persecution
for 3^0. years before Constantine.
years before Constantine? How went Assemblies then? who called them, all that
while? For diverse were holden that while: In Palestine, about Easter: At
Carthage, about Heretics baptism; at Rome, about Nouatus; at Antioch, about
Paulus Samosatenus. How assembled these?

Truly, As in Egypt.
did before in Egypt, under the tyranny of Pharao: they were then a Church
under persecution, until Moses was raised up by God, a lawful Magistrate
over them. The cases are like for all the world. No Magistrate did assemble
them in Egypt. And good reason: they had then none to do it. Pharao (we may be
sure) would not offer to do it: Not for any conscience (I trust) or fear, to
encroch upon the Churches right: but, because he hated both Assembly and
Congregation, and sought by all means to extinguish both. But this was no
bar; but that when Moses arose, authorized by God, and had the Trumpets here,
by God delivered him; he might take them, keep them, and use them, to that
end, for which God gave them; to call the Congregation. And none then but he
could do it, because to none, but him then, was this Power conueighed. They
could not say to him now, Exodus 2.14.
as before one of them did in Egypt, Who made you a Co^mander over us, to call
us together? nor plead in bar of the Trumpets, and say; Nay, but we will
meet still, of our selves, even as we did before in Egypt; we will still
keep our old manner of conuentions. No: for God had now taken another order:
God I say, had now done it: And God shall (I trust) be allowed, to translate
this Power to the principal member of the body, and to dispose of it, as it
best pleases him.

The very same case fell out again after, As under the captivity.
in the captivity of Babylon; and again after that, Antiochus. As under
Antiochus.
And these three, are all the paternes we have in the old Testament. As before
in Egypt; so then they had meetings: but they were all by stealth: yet
meetings, then they had. For Moses ceasing, and his right with him, the Power
deuolued to the body, to gather it self (as is usual in such cases.) But
then, when Nehemias after the Captivity, and Simeon Maccabeus after the fury
of Antiochus, were raised them by God; when God had set them in Moses place,
they might lawfully do, as Moses before had done; and take the silver Trumpets
into their hands again: So soon as they had a lawful Governor, the right
returned to him straight: And the Congregation, none of them might then plead,
Nay: but as we did in Babylon, or as we did under Antiochus; So, and no
otherwise, will we Assemble still. No, we see the contrary rather: Even of
themselves, 1. Macc. 14.44.
they profess to Simeon plainly: now, they have a lawful Governor, no
meeting should be from thenceforth in the land, without him, his priuitie and
permission.

And even as these two, So before Constantine.
Nehemias and Simeon: even by the same right, Constantine: by Moses right, all,
all by the Commission here penned. By it did Constantine resume the Trumpet,
and enjoy and exercise the Power of calling the Congregation: (For even Moses
pattern and practice five sundry times at least does Eusebius allege, in the
life of Constantine, to justify his proceedings still by Moses example.) True
it is therefore, that before Constantines time, they met together as they
durst, and took such order as they could: They must venture then: there was no
Moses: they had no Trumpet: and if they had, they durst not have blown it. But
when Constantine came in place, in Moses place, it was lawful for him to do
as Moses did: And so he did: and they never said to him, Nay, spare your
Trumpet: look how we have done hitherto, we will do so even still: meet no
otherwise now, then in former times we have; by our own agreement. As before
it was said, this had been plain dealing: Thus (if rightly they might) they
should have done: Did they so? No: But to him they went, as to Moses for their
meetings; at his hands they sought them; without his leave or liking they would
not attempt them: yea (I dare say) they blessed God from their hearts, that
they had lived to see the day, they might now assemble by the sound of the
Trumpet.

To conclude this point then. These two times or estates of the Church are not
to be confounded: There is a plain difference between them, and a diverse
respect to be had of each. If the succession of Magistrates be interrupted, in
such case of necessity, the Church of her self makes supply, because then
Gods Order cease. But, God granting a Constantine to them again, Gods
former positive order returns, and the course is to proceed and go on, as
before. When the Magistrate and his authority was at any time wanting to the
Church, forced she was to deal with her own affairs, within herself: for
then was the Church wholly divided from Princes, and they from it. But when
this wall of partition is pulled down, shall Moses have no more to do then
Pharaoh, or Constantine then Nero? Congregations were so called under them:
must they be so still under these too? No: no more then their manner of meeting
in Egypt, (for all the world like this of the Primitive Church persecuted) was
to be a rule, and to ouerrule these Trumpets here (in the text) either God
for giving them, or Moses for taking them at his hands. This rather: If ever
the Church fall into such bloody times, they must meet as they may, and come
together as they can: They have no Moses, no Trumpet to call them. The times of
Pharaoh and Nero are then their pattern. But, if it be so happy as to find the
days of peace, Moses and Constantine are paternes for the days of peace: they
have a Moses then: from that time forward they must give ear to the Trumpet.
In a word, none can seek to have the Congregation so called (as before
Constantine) but they must secretly, and by implication confess, They are a
persecuted Church, as that then was, without a Moses, without a Constantine.

The times then before Constantine are no bar, no kind of impeachment to
Constantines, no more then the times in Egypt were to Moses Right. And indeed
no more they were: for Constantine and his Successors had them, and held them
till a thousand years after Christ, and then one of them (by what means we
all know) was let go by them, or gotten away from them: It was then gotten
away and carried to Rome. But that getting has hitherto been holden a plain
usurping; and an usurping (not upon the Congregation, but) upon Princes and
their Right; and that they in their own wrong, suffered it to be wrung from
them. And why? Because not to Aaron, but to Moses it was said, Et erunt tibi.

1 To draw to an end, The recovery of the Trumpets.
It was then gotten away, and with some ado it was recovered not long since:
and what? shall we now let it go, and destroy so soon that which so lately
we built again? You may please to remember, there was not long since a Clergy
in place, that was wholly ad oppositum, and would never have yielded to reform
ought: Nothing they would do, and (in eye of law) without them, nothing could
then be done: they had incroched the power of Assembling into their own
hands. How then? how shall we do for an Assembly? Then Erunt tibi, was a good
text: it must needs be meant of the Prince: He had this Power, and to him of
right it belonged. This was then good Divinity (and what writer is there extant
of those times, but it may be turned to, in him?) Now sought to be gotten away.
And was it good Divinity then, and is it now no longer so? By the Pr^sbyterie.
Was the King but licensed for a while, to hold this power, till another
Clergy were in; and must he then be deprived or it again? Was it then
usurped from Princes; and are now Princes usurpers of it themselves? And is
this all the difference in the matter of Assemblies, and calling of them; that
there must be only a change, and that in stead of a foreign, they shall have
a domestical, and in stead of one, many: and no remedy now, but one of these
two they must needs admit of? Is this now become good Divinity? Nay (I trust)
if Erunt tibi were once true, it is so still: and if (Tibi) were then Moses, it
is so still: That we will be better advised, and not thus go against our
selves, and let truth be no longer truth, then it will serve our turns.

2 And this calls to my mind the like dealing of a sort of men, By the
people themselves, Penry, Barrow, etc.
not long since here among us. A while they plied Prince and Parliament, with
Admonitions, Supplications, Motions, and Petitions. And in them it was: their
duty, their right, to frame all things to Their new invented plot: And this,
so long as any hope blew out of that coast. But when, that way they saw it
would not be, Then took they up a new Tenet, straight: They needed neither
Magistrate, nor Trumpet, they: The godly among the people, might do it of
themselves. For, confusion to the wise and mighty; the poor and simple must
take this work in hand, and so by this means the Trumpet prove their right,
in the end: and so come by deuolution to Demetrius and the craftsmen. Now, if
not for love of the truth; yet, for very shame of these shifting absurdities;
let these fantasies be abandoned: and (that which Gods own mouth has here
spoken,) let it be for once, and for ever true: That which once we truly held
and maintained for truth, let us do so still: that we be not like evil
servants, Luc 19.22.
judged (Ex ore proprio) out of our own mouths.

Let me not over weary you; let this rather suffice. The Conclusion.
1. We have done as our Savior Christ willed us, resorted to the Law, and
found what there is written: (The Grant of this Power to Moses, to call the
Congregation:) 2. We have followed Moses advise; inquired of the days before
us, even from one end of heaven to the other; and found the practice of this
Grant in Moses successors; and the Congregation so by them called: It
remains, that as God by his Law has taken this order, and his people in
former ages have kept this order; that we do so too: that we say as God says,
Erunt tibi, this Power pertains to Moses: And that neither with Core we say,
Non veniemus: Nor with Demetrius run together of our selves, and think to
carry it away with crying, Great is Diana. But, as we see the Power is of God;
so truly to acknowledge it, and duetifully to yield it: that so they whose it
is, may quietly hold it, and laudably use it, to his glory that gave it, and
their good for whom it was given: Which God Almighty grant, etc.

The Edition of the Councels here alleged, is that of Venice, by D^min^^us
Nicolinus in five Tomes.


