TWO Sermons preached before the Kings Majesty at Whitehall. Of the Birth of
CHRIST.

The one on Christmas day ANNO 1609.

The other on Christmas day last ANNO 1610.

By the Bishop of Elie his Majesty's Almoner.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1610.

A SERMON PREACHED BEfore the Kings Majesty at White Hall, On Monday the 25.
of December, Being Christmas day, ANNO 1609.

By the Bishop of Elie His Majesty's Almoner.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. Anno 1610.

A SERMON PREACHED BEfore the Kings Majesty at Whitehall, on Christmas day.
ANNO 1609.
GALAT. 4. verse. 4, 5. When the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son,
made of a woman, made under the Law.

That, He might redeem, them that were under the Law, that we might receive
the Adoption of sons.


IF, when the fullness of time comes, God sent his Son: then, When God sent
his Son, is the fullness of time come. And as this day, God sent his Son.
This day therefore, (so often as by the revolution of the year it comes about)
is to us a yearly representation of the fullness of time. So it is: and a
special honor it is to the Feast, that so it is. And we our selves seem so
to esteem of it. For we allow for every month a day, (Look how many months so
many days) to this Feast; as if it were, and we so thought it to be, the full
recapitulation of the whole year.

This honor it has, from Christ, who is the substance of this, and all other
Solemnities. Peculiarly, a Christi missa, from Christ's sending. (For, they that
read the ancient writers of the Latin Church, Tertullian and Cyprian, know that
Missa, and Missio, and Remissa, and Remissio, with them are taken for one. So
that Christi missa is the sending of Christ.) And when then has this Text
place so fit, as Now? Or what time so seasonable to entreat of it, as This? Of
the sending of his Son; as, when God sent his Son: Of the fullness of time;
as, on the yearly return and memorial of it.

To entreat of it then. The Heads are two. 1. Of the fullness of time. 2. And
of that, wherewith it is filled. 1. Times fullness, in these, when the fullness
of time came. 2. Times filling in the rest, God sent his Son, made of a
woman, made under the Law, etc.

In the former, (Quando venit plenitudo temporis,) there be four points. 1.
Plenitudo temporis, That, time has a fullness; or, that there is a fullness of
time. 2. Venit plenitudo. That, that fullness comes, by steps and degrees,
not all at once. 3. Quando venit. That, it has a Quando, (That is,) There is a
time, when time thus comes to this fullness. 4. And, when that When is? And
that is, When God sent his Son. And so pass we over to the other part, in
the same Verse, Misit Deus; God sent his Son.

For the other part, the filling of time.) There be Texts, the right way to
consider of them, is to take them in pieces. And this is of that kind. And if
we take it in sunder, we shall see, as it is of fullness, so a kind of
fullness there is in it: every word, more full then other: every word, a step
in it, whereby it rises still higher, till by seven several degrees it
comes to the top, and so the measure is full. 1. God sent, the first. 2. Sent
his Son, the second. 3. His Son made, the third. 4. And that twice made,
made of a woman the fourth. 5. Made under the Law, the fi^t, every one fuller
then other, still.

And all this, persons, and some purpose. The persons, Vt nos, that we. The
purpose, reciperemus, that we might receive. Nay, (if you mark it) there be
two Vt's, vt ille, vt nos, that He might, and, that we might. He might
redeem: and we might receive, that is, He pay for it, and, we reap the
benefit. 6. A double benefit, of Redemption first from the state of persons
cast and condemned, under the Law, which is the sixth. 7. And then, of
translation into the state of adopted children of God, which is the seventh;
and the very filling up of the measure.

All which, we may reduce to a double fullness. Gods, as much as He can send.
Ours, as much as we can desire. Gods, in the five first. 1. God sent. 2. Sent
his Son. 3. His Son made. 4. Made of a Woman. 5. Made under the Law. And
Ours in the two latter, 6. We are redeemed, the sixth. 7. We receive adoption,
the seventh.

In that of Gods, every point is full; The thing sent full. The sending, and
the manner of sending, full. The making, and the two manners of making, Of a
woman, and, under the Law, both full. And our fullness in the two latter, the
effects of these two Acts, or makings of a woman under the Law, Redemption,
and Adoption, which make up all. That, when we were strangers from the
Adoption; and not that only, but lay under the Law, as men whom sentence had
passed on: From this latter, we are redeemed, (He under the Law, that we from
under the Law) That, (being so redeemed) we might further receive the adoption
of children, (and as He the Son of man: So we might be made the sons of
God.) Which two are as much as we can wish. And this is Our fullness.

And to these, fullness of Ours, rising out of these, and to make a motion, for
it. That, as it is the time, when we from God, receive the fullness of his
bounty: so it might be the time also, when He from us, may likewise receive the
fullness of our duty. The time, of His Bounty-fulnesse, and the time, of our
Thankfulness: That it may be Plenitudo temporis, qua ad illum, qua ad nos;
downward, and upward; from Him to us, and from us to Him again: and so be
both ways, The fullness of time.

Quando venit plenitudo temporis.
FIRST, fullness in Time. The term, Plenitudo temporis.
Fullness, carries our conceit to measure straight, from whence it is borrowed:
which, is then said to be full, when it has as much, as it can hold. Sap.
11.17.
Now, God has made all things in measure: and if all things, then Time. Yea,
Time it self is by the Apostle called, Ephesians. 4.13.
Mensura temporis, The measure of time. As then, all other measures have
theirs; so the measure of Time also has his fullness, when it receives so
much, as the capacity will contain no more. So, Time is a measure: it has a
capacity: that has a fullness. That, there is such a thing, as the fullness
of time.

But, nothing is full at first: Time by and by. Venit plenitudo, Venit
plenitudo.
it comes, not at once, or straightwayes, but by steps and paces, nearer and
nearer: Fill's, first a quarter, and then half, till at last it come to the
brim. And degrees there be, by which it comes. Alcuin.
Ecce palmares posuisti dies meos, Psalm. 39.6. From which word palmares, it is
an observation of one of the Fathers, a man may read his time in his own
hand: there is a likeness between a man's hand, and his time. As in the hand,
visibly there is an ascent, the fingers rise still, till they come to the top
of the middle finger; and when they be come thither, down again by like
descent, till they come to the little, which is the lowest of all: So is it in
our time; It rises still by degrees, till we come to the full pitch of our
Age, and then declineth again, till we grow to the lower end of our days.
But, howsoever it may be (as it often falls out) the descent is sudden, we go
down headlong without degrees, go away in a moment; yet, ever this holds,
to our fullness we come not, but by degrees.

Now thirdly, coming has a Quando venit, Quando venit.
a time, when it comes thither. As a time there is a great while, when we
may say, Ioh. 7.6.
Nondum venit hora, the time is not yet come, while the measure is yet but in
filling: Ioh. 12.23.
So at the last, a time too, that we may say, Venit hora, the time is now come,
when the measure is full: That is, A time there is, when time comes to the
full: As in the day, when the Sun comes to the Meridian Line: in the
month, when it comes to the point of opposition with the Moon: in the
Year, when to the Solstice: In man, when he comes to his full years: for
that is the fullness of time the Apostle alleges, in the three verses before.

And, When, that time thus comes to his fullness? Quando.
Quando misit Deus, when God sends it: for, Time receives his filling from God.
Of it self, time is but an empty measure, has nothing in it: Many days and
months run over our heads, Dies inanes, says the Psalmist. Menses vacui,
says Job: Empty days, Psalm. 78.33. Void months, without any thing to fill
them, Job 7.3.

That which fills time, is some memorable thing of Gods pouring into it, or
(as it is in the Text) of his sending, to fill it withal. Misit Deus is it:
and so comes Time to be more or less full; thereafter as that is, which God
sends to fill it.

Now, many memorable mission's did God make, before this here; whereby in some
measure, he filled up certain times of the year under Moses, and the
Prophets: all which, may well be termed, The implements of Time.

But, for all them, the measure was not yet full: filled perhaps to a certain
degree, but not full to the brimme: full it was not (seeing it might be still
fuller) till God sent That, then which, a more full could not be sent.

And, That He sent, when He sent his Son, a fuller then whom, He could not
send, nor Time could not receive. Therefore, with the sending Him, when that
was, Time was at the top, that was the Quando venit, then it was plenitudo
temporis, indeed.

And, Time, be called the fullness of Time. For, when He was sent into the
world, Col. 2.9. Ioh. 3.34. Ioh. 1.14. Ioh. 1.16.
in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily. In whom the Spirit was not by
measure. In whom was the fullness of grace and truth. Of whose fullness we all
receive, when He was sent, that was thus full, then was Time at the full.

And well also might it be called, the fullness of Time, in another regard.
For, till then all was but in promise, in shadows, and figures, and prophecies
only, which fill not, God knows. But when the performance of those promises,
the body of those shadows, the substance of those figures, the fulfilling or
filling full of all those Prophecies came, then came the fullness of Time,
truly so called. Till then, it came not: then, it came.

And well might it be called the fullness of time, third respect. For, then,
the Heir, (that is the world) was come to his full age: and so, that the
fittest time, for Him to be sent. For to that, compares the Apostle their
estate then; that, the former times under Moses and the Prophets were as the
Noneage of the world; sub Paedagogo, in the 3. Chapter, ver. 24. (...), at
their A. B. C. or rudiments, (as in the very last words before these) Their
estate then, as of Children in their minority, little differing from servants.
For, all this while, nondum venit, the fulness of time was not yet come. But a
time there was, as for man; so for mankind to come to his full years: That
time, came with Christ's coming, and Christ's coming with it, and never till
then, was the fullness of time; but then, it was.

And let this be enough, for this point; more there is not in the Text. But if
any shall further ask, why then, at that age of the world, the world was at
his full age, just then, and neither sooner nor later? I know, many heads have
been full of devices, to satisfy men's curiosity in that point. But, I hold it
safest, to rest with the Apostle (in the second verse) on Gods (...). Let that
content us. Then was the time, for that was Tempus praefinitum a Patre, the
time appointed of the Father. For, even among men, (though the Father being
dead) the Law sets a time, for the Son to come to his heritage: yet the
Father living, no time can be prefixed, but only when it likes Him to
appoint; and the Father here, lives; and therefore let his (...)stay us. Acts
1.7.
The times and seasons, He has put in his own power, it is not for us to know
them. This is for us to know, that, with his appointment, we must come to a
full point. So does the Apostle: and so let us, and not busy our selves much
with it. Time is but the measure or caske; that wherewith it is filled, does
more concern us. To that therefore let us come.

degrees are seven (as I said.) To take them, God sent.
as they rise. Misit Deus. God sent. That stands first; first degree. For,
even this, that God sent at all, Ipsum mittere Dei, this very sending it self,
is a degree. It is so; and so we would reckon of it, if we knew the Sender, and
who He is; the Maieiestie of his presence how great it is, and how glorious,
how far surpassing all we can see on earth.

For Him, for such an one as He, to condescend, but to send; is sure a degree.
For, enough it had been, and more then enough, for Him, to be sent to; and not
to send, Himself. To have sit still, and been content, that we might send to
Him, and have our message and petition admitted; and not, He send to us. That
had been as much as we could look for, and well, if we might have been
vouchsafed but that. But it was He, that sent: not we to Him first, nay, not we
to Him at all, but, He to us.

He to us? And what were we, that He to us? Us, Ephesians. 2.12.
(as elsewhere he terms us) mere Aliens from Him, and His Household; Not that
only, but Us, in case of men, whom the Law had passed upon. (So is our estate
described in the end of the Text:) for Him, to send to Us, so great as He, to
such as we; to think us, tanti, so much worth, as to make any mission, or
motion, or to disease any about us; This, may well be the first. Be it then so;
that to us, or for us, or concerning us, God would trouble Himself, to make
any sending. A fullness, there is in this. Full He was; a fullness there was
in Him, (even the fullness of compassion in His bowels over our estate,) else
such a Sender, would never once have sent.

God sent; His Sonnc.
Sent, and sent his Son. second. Others He might have sent; and whosoever it
had been He had sent, it might well have served our turns. If, sent by the
hand of any his Servants, any Patriarch, Prophet, any ordinary messenger, it
had been enough. So hitherto had been his Sending. So, and no otherwise, ever
till now.

Then, if to send by any may seem sufficient; to send His Son, must needs
seem full. For, ever the more excellent the Person sent, the more honorable
the sending: the greater He; the fuller it. Now, greater there is not, Colos.
2.9.
then His son, His first, His only begotten Son, in whom the fulness of the
God head dwelt; In sending Him, He sent the greatest, the best, the fullest
thing He had.

To heap the measure up yet more, with the cause of his sending, in the word
(...); It was voluntary. He sent him not for need: but for mere love to us,
and nothing else. There was no absolute necessity, that He should have sent
Him. He might have done what He intended by the means and ministry of some
besides. God could have enabled a Creature; a Creature enabled by God, and the
power of his might, could soon have troad down Satan under our feet. But,
if it had been any other He had sent; his love and regard to us, had not showed
so full. It had bin ostendit Deus charitatem, but not, Ecce quantam charitatem
ostendit Deus. 1. John. 3.1.
Whomsoever He had sent besides, his love had not been full, at least not so
full, as it should have been, if He had sent his Son. That therefore it
might be full, and so appear to us for full; Misit Deus filium suum. Enough it
was, in compassion of our estate, to have relieved us, by any: Men that are in
need to be relieved, care not, who they be that do it. Enough then for
compassion: but not enough, to manifest the fullness of his love, unless to
relieve us, He sent his own Son.

This is full, Made.
one would think: Yet, the Manner of his sending him, fuller still. Misit
filium; Filium factum. Sent his Son; His Son made. Sent Him, and sent Him
made. This is a third. For, if He would have sent Him, He should not have sent
Him, made: but as He was, neither made, nor created, but like himself, in his
own estate, as was meet for the Son of God, to be sent. To make Him any
thing, is to mar Him, be it what it will be. To send Him made, is to send Him
marred, and no better. Therefore, I make no doubt, Christ's sending is one
degree, His making is another: So to send, as withal to make, are two
distinct measures, of this filling. As He is, He is a Maker, a Creator: If God
make Him any thing, He must be a thing made, a Creature; and that, is a great
disparagement. So that, howsoever the Time is the fuller, for this; He is the
emptier: (...). The fullness of Time, is his emptiness; The exalting of that,
Phil. 2.7.
his abasing. And, this very Exinaniuit seipsum, emptying Himself, for our
sake, is a pressing down the measure: and so, even by that, still the measure
is more full.

Yea, the very manner of this making, has his increase too, adds to it still.
In the word (...): which is not every making, but making it his nature. To have
made Him a body, and taken it upon him for a time, till He had performed his
Embassage, and then laid it off again, that, had been much: But so to be made,
as once made and ever made: so to take it, as never lay it of more, but,
continue so still, (...) it to become his very nature; so to be made, is to be
made indeed, so to to be made is to make the union full. And to make the union
with us full, He was content, not to be sent alone, but to be made, and that
(...), to be made so, as never unmade more. Our manhood becoming his nature,
no less then the Godhead it self: This is Filium factum indeed.

Made, and twice made, (for so it is in the verse) factum ex, and factum sub,
made of, and made under. Of a woman; under, the Law. So, two makings there be,
either of them of it self, a filling to the measure, but, both of them, makes
it perfectly full.

Made, Made of a woman.
first of a woman: that, I take clearly to be one. He, if the Son of God
must be made a Creature; it were meet, He should be made, the best creature of
all. And if made of any thing, (if any one thing, better then another) of that:
made some glorious Spirit, Some of the orders of the Angels. John 1.14. Heb.
2.16.
Nay, made, but made no Spirit, Verbum caro factum est, The word became flesh:
made, but made no Angel: Nusquam Angelos: He in no wise took the Angels nature
upon Him.

But made man, First I will ask with David, Psalm. 144.3.
Domine, quid est homo? Lord, what is man? And then, tell you his answer: Homo
quasi res nihili. Man is like a thing of naught. And this he was made, this he
became, made man, made of a woman; did not abhor the Virgins womb, (as we
sing daily, to the high praise of the fullness of his humility, to which his
Love brought Him for our sakes.) For, whatsoever else He had been made, it
would have done us no good. In this then, was the fullness of his Love, as
before of his Fathers, that He would be made, and was made, not what was
fittest for Him, but what was best, for us: not, what was most for his glory,
but what was most, for our benefit and behoof.

Made of a woman. For man He might have bin made, and yet have had a body
framed for Him in heaven, and not made of a woman. But when he says, Factu^ ex
muliere, it is evident, He passed not through Her as water through a Conduite
Pipe, (as, fondly dreameth the Anabaptist.) Made of, Factum ex: Ex, dicit
materiam. Made of Her; She ministered the matter, Flesh of her flesh. Semen
mulieris. Genesis 3.15.
The seed, and Semen intimum substantiae, that is, the principal and very
inward chief part of the substance. Made of that, made of her very substance.

And so have we here now in one, both twain his Natures. God sent his Son,
There his Divine: made of a woman, Here his humane Nature, That, from the
bosom of his Father, before all worlds: this, from the womb of his mother, in
the world. So that, as from eternity, God his Father might say, that verse of
the Psalm. Psalm. 2.7.
Filius meus es tu, hodie genuite: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. So, in the fullness of time, might the Virgin his mother, no less truly
say, Filius meus es tu, hodie peperi te: Thou art my Son, this day have I
brought thee into the world.

And here now, at this word, made of a woman, He begins to concern us
somewhat. There grows an alliance between us: For we also are made of a
woman. And our hope is, as, He will not be confounded, to be counted inter
natos mulierum: No more will He be, Heb. 2.11. Romans 8.29.
(says the Apostle) to say in medio fratrum; to acknowledge us, his Brethren.
And so by this Time He grows, somewhat near us.

This now, Made under the Law.
is full for the union with our nature, to be made of a woman. But so to be
made of a woman, without He be also made under the Law, Law, that the Law
cannot take hold of Him, factum ex muliere will do us small pleasure. And He
was so borne, so made of a woman: As, the verity, of His conception, is in
this factum ex muliere: So, the purity, is in this, that it is but ex muliere,
and no more; Of the virgin alone, by the power of the Holy Ghost, without
mixture of fleshly generation. By virtue whereof, no original soil was in
Him; lust borne He was, 1. Tim. 1.9.
and Iusto non est lex posita, No law for the lust, no law could touch him. And
so we, never the better, for factum ex muliere.

For, if one be in debt and danger of the Law, to have a Brother, of the same
blood, made of the same woman, both (as we say) lying in one belly; will little
avail him, except He will also, come under the Law, that is, become his
Surety, and undertake for him. And such was our estate. As Debtors we were, by
virtue of Chirographum contra nos, Col. 2.14.
The hand writing that was against us. Which was our Bond, and we had forfeited
it. And so, factus ex muliere, to us, without factus sublege, would have been to
smalpurpose.

No remedy therefore, He must be new made, made again once more. And so He
was, cast in a new mould, and at his second making, made under the Law, under
which if He had not been made, we had been marred: even quite undone for
ever, if this had not been done for us too. Therefore, He became bound for us
also, entered Bond anew, took on Him, not only our nature, but our Debt; our
Nature, and Condition both. Nature, as men: Condition, as sinful men;
expressed in the words following; [Them, that were under the lawe] for that was
our Condition. There had indeed been no capacity in him, to do this, if the
former had not gone before, factum ex muliere; if He had not been, as we, made
of a woman; but the former was for this; Made of a woman He was, that He might
be made under the law: Being ex muliere, He might then become sub lege, which
before He could not, but then He might and did: And so, this still is the
fuller.

And when did He this? when was He made under the law? Even then, when he was
circumcised. Gal. 5.3.
For this does S. Paul testify, in the third of the next Chapter; Behold, I
Paul testify unto you, whosoever is circumcised, factus est debtor vniuersae
legis. He becomes a debtor to the whole law. At His Circumcision then, He
entered Bond anewe with us, and in sign that so He did, He shed then a few
drops of his blood, whereby He signed the Bond (as it were) and gave those few
drops then, tanquam arrham vniuersi sanguinis effundendi; as a pledge or
earnest, that when the fullness of time came, He would be ready to shed all
the rest; as He did. For, I would not have you mistake, though we speak of
this, sub lege, being under the law, in the terms of a Debt sometimes: yet,
the truth is, this debt of ours was no money debt, we were not sub lege
pecuniaria, but Capitali: and the debt of a Capital law, is death: and under
that, under Death He went, and that the worst death law had to inflict, even
the Death of the Cross, the most bitter, reprochful, cursed death of the
Cross. So that upon the matter, factus sub lege, and factus in Cruce, come
both to one; one amounts to as much, as the other. Well, this He did undertake
for us, at His Circumcision: and therefore then, and not till then, He had his
name given him, the name of Jesus, Luke 2.21
a Savior. For then, took He on him the Obligation to save us. And look,
what then at his Circumcision He undertook, at his Passion he paid, Col. 2.14.
even to the full, and having paid it, deleuit Chirographum, cancelled the
sentence of the law, that till then, was of record, and stood in full force
against us.

Howbeit all this, was but one part of the law, But He was made sub lege
vniuersa, under the whole law, and that, not by his death only, but by his
life too. The one half of the law, (that is, the Directive part) He was made
under that, and satisfied it, by the Innocence of his life, without breaking
so much, as one jot or tittle of the law: and so, answered that part (as it
might be, the Principal.) The other half of the law, which is the Penalty,
He was under that part also, and satisfied it, by suffering a wrongful death,
no way deserved, or due by him, and so answered that (as it might be the
forfeiture.) So, He was made under both, under the whole law. Satisfying the
Principal, there was no reason, He should be liable to the forfeiture, and
penalty: yet, under that He was also. And all, that the whole law might be
satisfied fully, by His being under both parts, and so, no part of it light
upon us.

These two then, 1. Made of a woman. 2. Made under the law, ye see, are two
several makings, and both very requisite. Therefore, Either has a several
Feast, they divide this Solemnity between them. Six days a piece, to
Either; as the several moities of this fullness of time. This day, Verbumcaro
factum, The Word made flesh: Ioh. 1.14.
That day, Him that knew no Sin, 2. Cor. 5.21.
He made Sin; (that is) made him undertake to be handled as a Sinner, to be
under the law, and to endure what the law could lay upon Him. And so now, the
thing sent is full: and fully sent, because made: and fully made, because, made
once and twice over: fully made ours, because fully united to us: Made of a
woman as well as we. Made under the Law as deep as we, Both ex muliere, and
sub lege. So of our nature (of a woman,) that of our condition also (under the
law:) So, fully united to us in nature, and condition both.

3. And so we are come, to the full measure of His sending. And, that we are
come to the full, ye shall plainly see, by the ouerflowing, Verse 5.
by that which we receive from this fullness, which is the latter part of the
verse, and is our fullness, even the fullness, of all that we can desire. For,
if we come now to ask, For whom, is all this ado? This Sending, This making,
over and over again? It is for us. So is the conclusion, vt nos, that we
might from this fullness, receive the full of our wish. For in these two
behind, Redemption, and Adoption; to be redeemed, and to be adopted, are the
full of all, we can wish our selves.

The transcendent Division, of Good and Evil, is it, that comprehends all.
And here it is. Our desire can extend it self no further, then to be rid of
all evil, and to attain all, that good is. By these two, (being redeemed, and
being adopted) we are made partakers of them both. To be redeemed from under
the law, is to be quit of all evil. To receive the Adoption of children, is to
be stated in all that is Good. For, all Evil is in being under the law, from
whence we are redeemed; and, all Good, in being invested, in the heavenly
Inheritance, whereunto we are adopted. Thus stood the case with us: Ephe. 3.12.
Aliens we were from God His Covenant, and his kingdom: More then that,
Prisoners we were, fast laid up under the Law. From this latter we are freed:
of the former, we are Scised: And what would we more?

Only, this you shall observe, that in the Idiom of the Scriptures, it is
usual; two points being set down, when they are resumed again, to begin
with the latter, and so end with the former. So is it here, At the first, made
of a woman, made under the Law. At the resuming, He begins with the latter,
made under the Law, That He might redeem them, that were under the Law. And
then comes to the former, made of a woman, made the Son of man, That we by
adoption might be made the Sons of God. But this we are to mark, it is He
that is at all the cost and pain: and we, that have the benefit by it. At the
redeeming it is, vt ille: At the receiving it is, vt nos.

Briefly of either: That he might redeem them that were under the Law.
And first, of our Redeeming. Redeeming (as the word gives it) is a second
buying, or buying back of a thing, before aliened or sold. Ever, a former sale
is presupposed before it. alienation, had formerly been, whereby we had made
away our selves, (for a sale I cannot call it, it was for such a trifle) our
nature aliened in Adam, for the forbidden fruit; a matter of no moment. Our
Persons likewise, daily we our selves alien them, for some trifling pleasure,
or profit, matters not much more worth. And, when we have thus passed our
selves away, by this Selling our selves under sin, Romans 7.14.
the Law seizes on us, and under it we are (...) Cap. 3.23. even locked up, as
it were in a Dungeon, tied fast with the cords of our sins, Prou. 5.22: the
sentence passed on us, and we waiting but for execution. What evil is there
not, in this estate, and on every soul that is in it? Well then, the first vt,
the first end is, To get us rid, from under this estate.

He did it: not by way of entreaty, step in and beg our pardon: That would not
serve; Sold we were, and bought we must be. A price must be laid down for
us: To get us from under the Law, it was not a matter of Intercession, to sue
for it, and have it. No, He must purchase it, and pay for it. It was a matter
of Redemption.

And, in Redemption or a Purchase, we look to the Price. For, if it be at
any easy rate, it is so much the better. But with an high price, He Purchased
us; it cost Him dear to bring it about. Non auro, nec argento. 1. Pet. 1.18 19.
Neither of them would serve, at an higher rate it was, even pretioso sanguine.
His precious blood, was the price, we stood him in. Which He paid, Mat. 20.28.
when He gave his life a ransom for many.

It stood thus, between Him and us, in this point of Redemption. Here are
certain malefactors, under the Law, to suffer, to be executed. What say you
to them? Why, I will become under the Law, suffer that they should, take upon
me their execution, upon condition, they may be quit: In effect so much, at his
Passion He said, Si ergo me queritis Io. 18.6. If you lay hold on me, if I must
discharge all, Sinite hos abire, Let these go their way, Let the price I pay
be their Redemption: and so it was. And, so we come, to be redeemed from under
the Law.

And this is to be marked, that Them that were under the Law, and, We that are
to receive, are but one, one and the same persons both: But being so redeemed,
then we are our selves. Till then, the Apostle speaks of us, in the third
person, Them, that were under the Law, as of some strangers, as of men of
another world, none of our own: But now being redeemed, the style changes.
He speaks of us, in the first person vt nos, that we: for till now we were
not our own, we were not our selves, but now we are: till this, it was the old
year still with us, but with the new year, comes our new estate.

Being thus redeemed, That we might receive the Adoption of Children
we are got from under the Law: and that is much. Till a party come to be
once under it, and feel the weight of it, this aright; but then he shall. And
if any have been under it, he knows what it is, and how great a benefit to
be got thence. But is this all? No, He leaves us not here; but to make the
measure complete, yea, even to flow over, He gives us not over, when he had
rid us out of this wretched estate, till He have brought us to an estate, as
good, as He himself is in. After our Redemption, we stood, but as Prisoners
enlarged; that was all: But, still we were as strangers, no part, nor portion
in God, or his kingdom: nor, no reason, we should hope for any. He now goes
one step further, which is the highest and furthest step of all. For further
then it, He cannot go.

That we might receive the Adoption, (that is) from the estate of Prisoners
condemned, be translated into the estate of Children Adopted. Of Adopted: for,
of natural, we could not: That is His peculiar alone, and He therein only
above us, but else, fully to the joint fruition, of all that He has, which is
fully as much, as we could desire. And this is our Fieri out of His Factu^ ex
muliere. We made the Sons of God, as He the Son of man; We made partakers
of his Divine, 2. Pet. 1.4.
as He of our humane nature. To purchase our pardon, to free us from death, and
the laws sentence, this seemed a small thing to Him: 2. Sam. 7.19
yet this is Lex hominis. Man's goodness goes no farther; and gracious is the
Prince, that does but so much. For who ever heard of a condemned man, Adopted
afterward; or that thought it not enough and enough, if He did but escape, with
his life? So far then to exalt his bounty, to that fullness; as pardon, and
Adopt both, Non est lex hominis haec. No such measure among men, Zelus Domini
Exercituum, The zeal of the Lord of Hosts, Es. 9.7.
was to perform this: The fullness of the Godhead, dwelt in Him, that brought
this to pass.

For (to speak of adopting:) We see it daily; No father adopt's, unless He be
orb, have no child; or if He have one, for some deep dislike, have cast him
of. But God had a Son, Heb. 1.3.
The brightness of his Glory; The true character of his Substance: and no
displeasure there was; Mat. 17.5.
No, In quo complacitum est, In whom He was absolutely well pleased: yet, would
He by adoption, for all that, Heb. 2.10.
bring many Sons to Glory. Is not this full on his part?

We see again, no Heir will endure to hear of Adoption, nay, nor divide his
Inheritance, no not with his natural Brethren. Then, that the Heir of all
things, Heb. 1.3.
should admit joint Heirs to the Kingdom he was borne to; and that admit
them, Romans 8.17.
not out of such, as were near him, but from such as were strangers, yea such
as had been condemned men under the Law, Is not this full, on his part? To
purchase us, and to purchase for us, both at once? And not to do this for us
alone, but to assure it to us: For, as his Father, in this verse, sends Him:
So, in the next verse, He sends the Spirit of his Son, to give us seisin of
this our Adoption: whereby we now call him, the Jews Abba, the Gentiles
Pater, as Children all, and He our Father, which, is the privilege of the
Adoption, we here receive.

And now, are we come to the fulness indeed. For this Adoption, is the fulness
of our option, We cannot extend; we, our wish: or He, his love and goodness any
further. For, what can we ask, or He give more, seeing in giving this, He
gives all He is worth? By this time, it is full Sea. All the Banckes ar
filled. It is now, as Ezekiels waters, that he saw flow, Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5,
from under the threshold of the Temple: that took him to the ancles first,
then to the knees, after to the loins, at last, so high risen, there was no
more passage.

1. From the fulness of his Compassion, he sent to release us: 2. from the
fulness of his love, He sent his Son: 3. In the fulness of Humility, He sent
Him made: 4. Made of a Woman, to make a full union with our nature. 5. Made
under the Law, to make the union yet more perfectly full with our sinful
condition: 6. That we might obtain a full, deliverance, from all Evil, by
being redeemed: 7. and a full estate, of all the joy and Glory of his heavenly
inheritance, by being adopted. So, there is fulness, of all hands. And so much,
for the fulness of the Benefit, we receive.

Now, for the fulness of the duty, we are to perform this day. For, in the
fulness of time, all things are to be full. Plenitudo temporis, tempus
plenitudinis. And, seeing God has suffered us to live, to see the year run
about, to this plenitudo temporis: if it be so, on Gods part; meet also, it be
so on Our's: and that we, be not empty, in this fulness of time. It is not fit,
if He be at the brincke, that we be at the bottom. But, as we be willing, to
receive of his: So we be like willing, to yield Him of ours again; of our
duty (I mean:) that it, to him, in a measure, and proportion be like full; as
his Bounty, has been full above measure, toward us. That so from us, and on
our parts, it may be plenitudo temporis, or tempus plenitudinis, the fulness of
time, or time of fulness, choose you whether.

1. And, a time of fulness it will be, (I know) in a sense: of fulness of Bread,
of fulness of bravery, of fulness of sport, and pastime: and this it may be. And
it has been ever, a joyful time in appearance, for it should be so: with the
joy (says Esaias a verse or two before, Puer natus est nobis, Esa. 9.3.
unto us a Child is borne) that men rejoice with, in harvest. Not to go from
our Text here, with the joy of men that are come out of prison, have escaped the
Law; with the joy of men, that have got the reuersion, of a goodly heritage.
Only, that we forget not the principal, that this outward joy, eat not up,
euacuate not our spiritual joy, proper to the Feast: that we have in mind, in
the midst of our mirth, the cause of it, Christ's sending, and the benefits
that come thereby. And, it shall be a good sign unto us, if we can thus
rejoice, if this our joy can be full, if we can make a spiritual blessing,
Psalm. 89.15
the object of our mirth. Beatus populus, qui scit iubilationem. Blessed is the
people, that can rejoice on this manner.

And, our ioy-fulnesse, or fulness of joy, our fulness of thanks, or
thank-fulnes, is to ensue: for, with that fullness, we are to celebrate it
likewise. Our minds first and then our mouths, to be filled with blessing, and
praise, and thanks to Him that has made our times, not to fall into those
empty ages of the world; but to fall within this fulness of time, Luke 10.24
which so many Kings and Prophets desired to have lived in, but fell short of;
And lived then, when the times were full of shadows, and promises, and
nothing else. How instantly they longed, to have held such a Feast, to have
kept a Christmasse, Psalm. 144.5. Es. 64.1.
it is evident, by David's Inclina caelos; by Esaies Vtinam disrumpas caelos,
Bow the Heavens, and Break the Heavens: How much (I say) they longed for it:
and therefore, that we make not light account of it.

To render our thanks then, and to remember to do it fully, To forget none:
To Him that was sent, and to Him, that Sent; Sent his Son, in this; the
Spirit of his Son, the next verse. Psalm. 2.12
To begin with Osculamini filium, it is the first duty enjoined us this
day, to kiss the Babe newborn, that when his Father-would send Him, said,
Psalm. 40.7.
Ecce venio, so readily: and when he would make Him, was content with Corpus
aptasti mihi, to have a body made him, meet for him to suffer in: who
willingly yielded to be our Shilo; to this (...) here; Genesis 49.10
yea to be not only Christ, but an Apostle for us, Heb. 3.1. even the Apostle
of our profession.

And not to Him that was sent and made alone: but to the Father that sent Him,
and to the Holy Ghost that made Him, (as by whom He was conceived.) To the
Father, for his mission; The Son, for his Redemption; the Holy Ghost, for his
Adoption; For by him it is wrought. He that made Him the Son of man, does
likewise regenerate us, to the state of the Sons of God. And this for our
thankfulness.

3 And, to these two, (to make the measure full) to join, the fullness of
duty, even whatsoever duetifull minded persons, may yield to a bountiful
minded, and a bountiful handed Benefactor. And with this to begin, to
consecrate this first day of this fullness of time: even with our service to
Him at the full; which, is then at the full, when no part is missing: when all
our duties, of preaching, and praying, of Hymns, of offering, of Sacrament,
and all, meet together. No fulness there is of our Liturgy, or public solemn
service, without the Sacrament. Some part; yea, the chief part is wanting, if
that be wanting. But our thanks are surely not full, without the Holy
Eucharist, which is by interpretation, Thanksgiving it self. Psalm. 116.12.13.
Fully we cannot say, Quid retribuam Domino? but we must answer, Calicem
salutaris accipiam, we will take the cup of salvation, and with it in our hands
give thanks to Him; render Him our true Eucharist, or real Thanksgiving indeed.
In which cup is the blood, not only of our redemption of the Covenant, that
freeth us from the Law, and makes the Destroyer pass over us: Mat. 26.28.
but of our Adoption of the new Testament also, which intitles us, and conueyes
unto us ( Testament-wise, or by way of Legacy) the estate we have in the joy
and bliss of his heavenly kingdom, whereto we are adopted. We are then made
partakers of Him, and with Him of both these His benefits. We there are made to
drink of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13. Ephe. 4.30.
by which we are sealed, to the day of our redemption, and adoption both. So
that, our freeing from under the law, our inuestiture into our new adopted
state, are not fully consummate without it.

And what? Shall this be all? No, when this is done, there is allowance of 12.
days more, for this fullness of time: that, we shrink not up our duty then
into this day alone, but in the rest also remember, to redeem some part of the
day, to adopt some hour at the least, to be think our selves of the duty,
the time calls to us for: that so, we have not Jobs dies vacuos, no day
quite empty in this fullness of time. Hereof assuring our selves, that what we
do in this fullness of time, will have full acceptance at His hands. It is the
time of his birth, 2. Cor. 6.2.
which is ever a time as accepted, so of accepting, wherein, what is done, will
be acceptably taken to the full: fully accepted, Ioh. 1.16.
and fully rewarded by Him, of whose fullness we all receive: with this
condition, of grace for grace, ever one grace for an other.

And so, growing from grace to grace, finally from this fulness, we shall come to
be partakers of another yet behind, to which we aspire. For all this, is but
the fullness of time: but that, the fullness of eternity, when time shall be
run out, and his glass empty, Et tempus non erit amplius; Apo. 10.6.
which is, at His next sending. For yet once more shall God send him, and He
come again. At which coming, we shall then indeed receive the fullness of our
redemption, not from the Law (that we have already) but from Corruption, to
which our bodies are yet subject; and receive the full fruition of the
Inheritance, whereto we are here but adopted. And then it will be perfect,
complete, absolute fullness indeed, Ephe. 1.23.
when we shall all be filled with the fullness of him, that fills all in all.
For, so shall all be, 1. Cor. 15.28.
when nothing shall be wanting in any: for God shall be all, in all. Not, as
here He is, something, and but something in every one; but then omnia in
omnibus. And then the measure shall be so full, as it cannot enter into us, we
cannot hold it: Mat. 25.21.
we must enter into it; Intra in gaudium Domini tui.

To this we aspire, and to this in the fullness appointed of every one of our
times, Almighty God bring us, by Him, and for His sake, that in this fullness
of time, was sent to work it for us, in his person: and work it in us, by the
operation of his blessed Spirit. To whom, etc.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE His Majesty at White Hall, on Tuesday the 25. of
December last, being Christmas day,

By the Bishop of Elie, His Majesty's Almoner.

ANNO 1610.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

A SERMON PREACHED before His Majesty at Whitehall, on Christmas day last, etc.
LVKE 2. verse. 10.11. The Angel said unto them: Be not afraid, for behold, I
bring you good tidings, of great joy, which shall be, to all people,

That, there is borne, unto you, this day, a Savior, which is Christ, the
Lord, in the City of David.


THere is a Word in this Text, and it is Hodie, by virtue whereof, this day may
seem to challenge a special property in this Text, and this Text in this day.
Christ was borne, is true any day: but, this day Christ was borne, never, but
to day only. For, of no day in the year can it be said, Hodie natus, but of
this. By which word, the Holy Ghost may seem to have marked it out, and made
it the peculiar Text, of the day.

Then, Heb. 3.13.
it will not be amiss, Donec cognominatur hodie, (as the Apostle speaks)
while it is called, to Day, to hear it. To morrow the word Hodie will be lost:
This day, and not any day else, it is in season. Let us then hear it this Day,
which, we can hear no day besides.

IT is then The first report, the very first news, that came (as this day) of
that, which makes this day, so high a Feast; The Birth of CHRIST.

It came by an Angel, Dixit Angelus.
then: No man was meet to be the messenger of it. And look how it came then,
so it should come still; and none but an Angel bring it: as, more fit for the
tongues of Angels, then of men. Yet since, God has allowed sinful men, to be
the Reporters of it at the second hand; and the news, never the worse for
that: Good news is good news and welcome, by any, 2. Reg. 7.9.
though the person be but even a foul Leper that brings it. Yet, that the
meannesse of the messenger offend us not, ever we are to remember this; Be the
party who he will, that brings it, the news of Christ's Birth, is a message
for an Angel.

This had been news for the best Prince in the Earth. That these Illis here,
Dixit illis.
these parties, were Shepherds, that this Message came to them, needs not
seem strange: It found none else (at the time) to come to: The Angel was glad
to find any to tell it to; even to tell it the first he could meet withal:
None were then awake, none in case to receive it, but a sort of poor
shepherds; and to them he told it.

Yet, it fell not out amiss, that shepherds they were; the news fitted them
well: It well agreed, to tell Shepherds of the yeaning of a strange Lamb;
such a Lamb, as should take away the sins of the world; Ioh. 1.29.
such a Lamb, as they might send to the Ruler of the world for a present. Esaias
16.1.
Mitte Agnum Dominatori terrae: I says Lamb. Or (if ye will) to tell shephe
ards of the birth of a Shepherd, Ezekiels Sheheard: Eze. 34.23.
Ecce suscitabo vobis Pastorem; Behold, I will raise you a Shepherd: the 1.
Pet. 5.4.
chief Shepherd, the Heb. 13.20.
great Shepherd, and the Ioh. 10.11
good Shepherd that gave his life for his flock. And so, it was not unfit
news, for the Persons to whom it came.

For the Manner: Euangelizando, Dixit, Euangelizo.
Churchwise, (and that was a sign, this place should ever be, the Exchange
for this news:) Churchwise (I say) for he does it by a Sermon, here at this
verse: and then, by a Hymn or Antheme after, at the 14. verse. A Sermon: the
Angel himself calls it so, Euangelizo vobis, I come to Euangelize, to preach
you a Gospel: that first. And presently after he had done his Sermon, there is
the Hymn, Gloria in excelsis, taken up by the Queer of Heaven. An Angel makes
the one: A multitude of Angels sing the other. The whole Service of this day,
the Sermon, the Antheme, by Angels all.

Now the End of both Sermon and Antheme, Euangelizo gaudium magnum.
and of the Angels, in publishing it, and of the shepherds, and us, in hearing
it, is gaudium, Joy; for the Benefit, and Honor; gaudium magnum, Great joy,
for the great Benefit, and great Honor, vouchsafed our nature, and us, this
day. Joy, is in the Text, and if joy be in the Time, it is no harm; We keep
the Text, if we hold the Time with joy, For so the Angel does warrant us to
hold it.

Of this Angelical, The division.
or Evangelical message, or (as not I, but the Angel calls it) Sermon;
these two Verses I have read, are a part. Whereof, the former, is but an Ecce,
Be not afraid, for behold, I bring you good Tidings, of great Joy, which shall
be, to all people. The latter, is the very message it self, That, there is
borne, unto you, this day, a Savior, which is Christ, the Lord, in the City of
David.

In the former, are these points: 1. Fear not, (it is no ill news, I bring
you) 2. Nay, it is Good news. 3. Good, for it is news of Joy. 4. Joy, and
that no ordinary, but great Joy. 5. Not to some few, but to the whole people.
6. And not toti populo to all one people, but omni populo, to all people
whatsoever. 7. And them, not for the present, but Quod erit omni populo, that
is, and so shall be, to all, as long as there shall be any people, upon
earth. And, by virtue of this [Quod erit,] to us, here, this day. Ecce, Behold,
such is the news I bring.

In the latter, The message it self.
the message it self. The sum whereof is, the Birth of a Child, A Child is
borne. Three things are proposed of Him. Child is a Savior. 2. A Savior which
is Christ. The names.
3. Christ the Lord Christus Dominus. For every Savior is not Christ, nor every
Christ, Christus Dominus, Christ the Lord, or the Lord Christ. He, is all three.

Then have we besides, The Circumstances.
three circumstances, of the Persons, Time, and Place. 1. The Persons.
The Persons for whom all this is: twice repeated; Euangelizo vobis in the
first verse, Natus vobis in the second. But this, I make some doubt of, whether
it be a Circumstance or no; I rather hold it a principal part of the
Substance, as, the very word of conueyance, whereby it passes to us. And sure,
there is no Joy either in Euangelizo, the Message: or Natus, the Birth, without
it, without Vobis. But, if the Message, and the Birth it self both, be ours;
then it is gaudium magnum indeed. Specially, if we add 2. the Time when, not
many days hence, The Time.
but even this very day. And 3. Place where: The Place.
that it is in no remote Region far hence, but in the city of David, even
here hard by.

And then lastly in a word; Our duty reciprocal.
what our parts are to perform, to these two parts, this days Message, and
this days Birth of our Savior, Christ, the Lord.

Be not afraid.
HEre is a stop, They were afraid.
that the Message cannot proceed: For the sight of the Me^^^nger, has almost
marred the hearing of the Message. The parties, to whom it comes, be in such
fear, as they be not in case to receive it. They were afraid, and that sore
afraid (as is said in the verse before) at the sight of the Angel, that came
with the news.

And, So were others.
this was not the case of these poor men only; others, and other manner of
people were so, as well as they. This Gospel of S. Luke is scarce begun; we
are yet but a little way in the second Chapter; and we have already, three
Noli timere's in it: and all, as here, at the coming of an Angel. Fear not
Zachary, afraid. Fear not Mary, Chap. 1.30. So, she was afraid. Fear not
these here. That it seems to be general, to fear, at an Angels appearing.

What was it? Of what not.
It was not the fear of an evil Conscience: They were about no harm.
Zachary was at Church at his office: The blessed Virgin (I doubt not)
blessedly employed: These here, doing their duty; watching over their flocks
by night: Of what.
yet feared all. Wh^^ should the matter be? It is a plain sign, our nature is
fallen from her original: Heaven, and we, are not in the terms we should
be: not the best of us all.

Angels are the Messengers of Heaven: Why of the Angel.
Messengers ever come with tidings; but whether good or bad, we cannot tell.
Here comes an Angel with news from Heaven: what news he brings, we know not,
and therefore we fear, because we know not. Which shows, all is not well
between Heaven and us; that upon every coming of an Angel, we promise our
selves no better news from thence; but still are afraid of the messages and
messengers that come from that place.

That the message then may proceed, Be not afraid.
this fear must be removed. In a troubled water, no face will well be seen:
nor by a troubled mind, no message received, till it be settled. To settle them
then for it; no other way, no other word to begin with, but Nolite timere,
fear not, and that is ever the Angels beginning. Such is our infirmity; ever
he must begin with these two words, Noli timere, fear not, and so he does,
seven times in this Gospel.

But fear will not be cast out with a couple of words, For no ill tidings.
till they see some reason to quiet them. And no better reason, then to show,
they have no reason to fear: For fear is the expectation of evil, and there
is no evil toward them: and so they have no reason to fear; Psalm. 53.5.
quod trepidauerunt timore vbi non enit timor, As if he should say; Angels have
come with weeping news, as Iud. 2.5. If I were such an one, if I came with sad
tidings, ye had reason, ye might fear. But now, your terror grows out of
error. You are mistaken in me, I am no such Angel; I am Angelus Euangelizans,
an Angel with a Gospel, one that comes with no bad news. Fear not then. There
is no evil toward.

No evil: fear not. But good tidings.
But here is a further matter, not only privative, I bring no ill, but
positive, I bring you good news. And good news is Nolite timere, and somewhat
besides (that is) Fear not, but, Be of good cheer. They be two degrees
plainly, though one be inferred of the other. Fear no ill, there is none to
fear; there is no ill, nay there is good toward. For good news is good; in
that, it represents the good it self to us, before it come. It is but words:
Genesis 45.17
true. But such words made Jacob revive again, when he was more then half
dead, even the good news of Joseph's welfare. Psalm. 51.8.
If I might but hear good tidings (says David when his bones were broken) it
would make me well again: That, Solomon said well, Pro. 13.17.
A good messenger is a good medicine.

Specially this here, which is so good, as it carries away the name from the
rest, to be called the Gospel, or, the glad tidings, as if none so glad, nay
none glad at all without it: It is (says the Apostle) odor suauitatis, 2. Cor.
2.15
a comfortable sweet savor. It is (says the wise man) dulcedo animae and
sanitas ossium, Pro. 16.24.
the sweetness of the soul, the very health of the bones. Esa. 52.7.
It is such (says the Prophet) as the lips are precious, and the feet
beautiful, of them that bring it, that a Savior is borne, as by whom, things
in heaven and things in earth, Col. 1.20.
men and Angels (which were in fear one of another) are set at peace, and
love: 1 Ioh. 14.18.
and Love casts out fear, gives the true Noli timere.

of joy: For, of good news, Tidings of joy.
there are more sorts then one. Good news it had been, if it had been but,
Euangelizo vobis spem. News of good hope: that, had been enough, for nolite
timere. This is more, it is of joy. Romans 12.12 Ioh. 16.24. gal. 4.4.
I wot well, there is a Joy in hope, spe gaudentes, says the Apostle: But that
joy is not full, till the fullness of time come. Nor it is not perfect, for it
is allayed somewhat, with an unpleasing mixture, which is spes differtur, Pro.
13.12.
and that (as the wise man says) affligit animam. Hope deferred afflicts the
soul. Gaudium spei is nothing to gaudium rei: the hope de futuro, of a thing
to come hereafter, nothing to the actual fruition, of a thing present.

And indeed, till this days news, it was ever Euangelium spei: ever, in the
future tense, before. Even the very last before this, to the Blessed Virgin
Ecce concipies, Luke 1.31.
Thou shall conceive, Shall. So it was yet to come. This, the first in the
present tense, Not, is to be borne, is to be sent, is to come, but, Natus est,
Missus est, Venit, is borne, is sent, is come. Hodie, even to day, takes no
time. In the City of David, not far hence, but even hard by. This is
Euangelizo gaudium: This is joy indeed.

But even in Joy, there be diverse degrees: Of great joy.
All are not of one size: Some there are lesser; some, (as this here) gaudium
magnum. The fire is, as the fuel is; and the Joy is, as the matter is. There
is not like joy to a shepherd, when his Ewe brings him a lamb, as when his
wife brings him a son; (yet that of a lamb, is a Joy, such as it is:) But
then if that son should prove to be Princeps Pastorum, the chief Shepherd
in all the land, that were somewhat more: But then, if he should prove to be
a Cyrus or a David, a Prince, then certainly it were another manner Joy, gaudium
magnum indeed. As the matter is, so is the Joy. If great the Benefit, great
the Person, then great the Joy. And here the Benefit is great, none greater,
as much as the saving of us all, as much as all our lives and souls are
worth; therefore great. And the Person great, none so great, (it is the LORD
himself) therefore primae magnitudinis, great even as He is. Indeed so great
it is, that the Prophet bids us plainly, remember no more former things, nor
regard matters of old: Esai. 45.18.
This passes them all, the joy of it puts them all down: so that none of them
shall once be mentioned with it. Therefore well said the Angel, Euangelizo
gaudium magnum.

And great, intensiue, in the parties themselves: Joy to the people.
yet not great extensiue, nor extend it self to many, not be gaudium magnum
populo. Yes, even that way also it is great; it is public joy, it is joy to
the people. And, well fare that Joy where it is merry with all. It is added
purposely, this, that they might not mistake, when He said, Euangelizo vobis,
he brought them good news; That though he brought it them, yet not them
only, it was not appropriate to them, it was common to others: They had their
parts in it, but so should others have no less then they. And every good
Shepherd, will like it the better for that, will be pro grege, and still
prefer the joy of the whole flock.

In other joys, it falls out as Esaias tell's, Multiply the nation, Esaias 9.3.
and ye shall not increase their joy: for, That which one winnes, another
looses: But, this Joy, the Joy of Puer natus est nobis, in it, they shall all
rejoice before thee as men make merry in harvest, and be joyful as men that
divide the spoil. In Harvest, And a good Harvest all the country is the
better for. At a spoil, wherein every one has his share. That is gaudium
populi, And such is this. Well figured in the place of his Birth; an Inn,
which is domus populi, open to all passengers that will take it up; Iuris
publici, wherein every one has right. Yea, and the most common part of the
Inn. For, though they sort themselves, and have every one their several
Chambers: in the Stable all have interest, that is common. Luke 2.7.
And as the place public, so is the Benefit, and so is the Joy public of his
Birth: Christmas joy right, All fare the better for this day. Salus populi is
the best, and so is gaudium populi too, and every good mind will like it so
much the better, that All the people have their part in it.

And this were much, toti populo, Joy to all people.
to a whole people, if it were but one: But it is omni populo (say Theophylact
and Beda) that is, to All people, which is a larger extent by far. And if ye
speak of great joy, this is great indeed, for it is universal, it is as great
as the world is great: when not the Jew only but the Gentile, nor the Gentile
but the Jew, not one people but All, keep a feast. And at this word, omni
populo, nec vox hominem sonat, It is not man that speaks now, whose goodness
commonly, when it is at the greatest, extends no further, but to one Nation:
But with God, it is never great, till it come to omni populo. Esai 49.6.
It is but a small thing (says He by Esaias) to raise the tribes of Jacob, or
to restore the decays of Israel: I will give thee a Light to the Gentiles, and
a Salvation to the end of the world.

As we said of the Inn, even now, the place of his Birth: So say we here, of
the time of it: Luke 1.1.
It is well set down by S. Luke, to have been at the Description of the whole
world, for that was a meet time for the Savior of the whole world to be
borne: The dew of whose Birth is of the womb of the morning, Psalm. 110.3.
(the Psalmist in passion of joy misplacing his words,) the meaning is, His
Birth from the womb, is as the morning dew, which waters and refreshes the
face of the whole earth: Not Gedeons fleece alone, Judge. 6.37.
but the whole earth; Not one part, not the Jews only: No partition now, but
Ephesians. 2.14.
vtraque vnum one of two: nay, one of all: 1.10.
all recapitulate in himself, and from him as a Center, lines of joy drawn to
all, and every part of the Circle.

And we may not pass by Quod erit, To all people that shall be.
which shall be; which not only is, but shall be. For by this word, We hold; It is
our best tenure. Not only to All that then were, (then had we been out) but
that were, or ever should be, to the worlds end. Omni populo, all people, is
the latitude or extent: Quod erit, that shall be, is the longitude or
continuance of the joy; Quod erit, that it shall be a feast of joy, so long as
any people shall be, to hold a feast on the face of the earth. In a word, That
same Euangelium aeternum, that S. Apoc. 14.6.
John saw in the Angels hand, we now, hear from the Angels mouth, to be
preached to every nation, kindred, tongue and people, that be, or shall be, while
the world endures.

So, Quod erit, with omni populo. But some read gaudium with quod erit, Joy
that shall be.
gaudium quod erit, and make a note of that, The joy, quod erit, that is and
shall be. For commonly, all our earthly joy, is gaudium quod est, and non erit,
that is, for the present, but continues not; is, but shall not be, like the
blaze of a brush-faggot, Eccle. 7.8.
all of a flame and out again suddenly, in a moment. Gaudium quod erit, the
joy that so is, as it shall be still, is grounded upon the joy of this Day,
Christ and his Birth. Without which, our joy, is as the joy of men in prison,
merry for a while, but within a while sentence of death to pass upon them.
Prou. 14.13.
Without which, extrema gaudij luctus occupat, the end of all our mirth, will
be but mourning. All joy else is, but shall not be within a while: At
leastwise erit, quando non erit. Ioh. 16.22.
A time shall be, when it shall not be; Sed gaudium meam, nemo tollet a vobis;
But my joy, mine, grounded on me, no^^e shall ever take from you; not
sickness, not death it self. Others it shall, this it shall not; but, now ye
shall this Day, and evermore ye shall rejoice in the holy comfort of it.

And this is the magnifying of the message. 1. No evil news, Fear not, 2. Nay
good, Be of good cheer. 3. Good news of joy. 4. Of great joy, 5. Public
joy, toti populo. 6. Universal joy omni populo. 7. Joy to all, that are or
shall be; And again joy, which now is, and shall be so for ever.

Now, upon all these he sets an Ecce, and well he may; And, that is never
set by the Holy Ghost, but super res magnae entitatis, upon matters of great
moment. But upon this Hill, upon the top of it, that has so many ascent's, a
Beacon would do well. For look how many Ecce's in the Scripture, so many
Beacons; And between them, as between these, ye shall observe a good
correspondence still. This Ecce here to the last Cap. 1.31.
Ecce concipies of the Blessed Virgin, That to Esay's Esai 7.14
Ecce concipiet Virgo, That to Dauid's Psalm. 132.11.
Ecce de fructu ventris tui, That to Abraham's Gene. 22.18.
Ecce in semine tuo; and so up, till ye come to 3.15.
Semen mulieris: There they first begin, and take light one from an other, till
they come to this Ecce natus est body, the Ecce of all Ecce's the last and
highest of them all. And as a Beacon serves to call and stir up men to have
regard: so is this here to excite them (and in them, us all) with good
attention to hear, and to heed these so great good tidings. And indeed, who is
not excited with it? whose eye is not turned to behold this Ecce? whose ear
stands not attent, to hear this Euangelizo? Chap. 1.29.
whose heart does not muse, what manner of message this should be?

THis it is then, Quod natus est. The birth of a Child: That there is borne.
that there is one borne this Day, the cause of all this joy.

There is joy at every birth. Sorrow in the travail (says our Savior) but
after the delivery the anguish is no more remembered, for joy that a man is
borne into the world.

But the greater he is that is borne, and the more beneficial his birth, the
greater ado is made. And among men, because there are none greater then
Princes, and great things are looked for at their hands, Gene. 40.20. Mar.
6.21.
their birth's are ever used to be kept with great triumph. Pharaos in the
Old, Herod's in the New, both their Natus est's, days of feasting.

Now of him that is borne here, it may truly be said, Ecce mayor hic. Mat.
12.24.
Behold a greater is borne here. One whose birth is good news, even from the
poorest Shepherd, to the richest Prince upon earth.

Who is it? Three things are said of this child by the Angel. 1. He is a
Savior. 2. Which is Christ. 3. Christ the Lord. Three of his Titles; well and
orderly inferred one of another by good consequence. We cannot miss one of
them, they be necessary all. Our method on earth is to begin with great: In
heaven they begin with the good first.

First then a Savior, that is his name: Jesus, A Savior
Soter; and in that name his benefit, Salus, Saving health or Salvation. Such a
name as the great Orator himself says of it, Soter, In Verr. 4.
Hoc quantum est? Ita magnum est, vt latino vno verbo exprimi non possit. This
name Savior is so great, as no one word can express the force of it.

But we are not so much to regard the Ecce, how great it is, as Gaudium, what
joy is in it; that is the point we are to speak to. And for that; men may
talk what they will, but sure there is no joy in the world to the joy of a man
saved: no joy so great, no news so welcome, as to one ready to perish, in case
of a lost man, to hear of one, that will save him. In danger of perishing; By
sickness, to hear of one will make him well again: By sentenceof the law, of
one with a pardon to save his life: By enemies, of one that will rescue, and
set him in safety. Tell any of these, assure them but of a Savior, it is the
best news he ever heard in his life. There is joy in the name of a Savior.
And even this way, this child is a Savior too. Potest hoc facere, sed hoc non
est opus eius. This he can do, but this is not his work: a further matter
there is, a greater salvation He came for. And it may be, we need not any of
these, we are not presently sick, in no fear of the law, in no danger of
enemies. And it may be, if we were, we fancy to our selves to be relieved
some other way. But, that which he came for, that saving we need all, and none
but He can help us to it. We have therefore all cause to be glad for the birth
of this Savior.

I know not how, but when we hear of saving, or mention of a Savior,
presently our mind is carried to the saving of our skin, of our temporal state,
of our bodily life, and further saving we think not of. But, there is another
life, not to be forgotten, and greater the dangers; and the destruction there,
more to be feared then of this here, and it would be well, sometimes we were
remembered of it. Besides our skin and flesh; a soul we have, and it is our
better part by far, that also has need of a Savior, that has her
destruction, out of which: that has her destroyer, from which she would be
saved, and those would be thought on. Indeed our chief thought and care would
be for that, how to escape the wrath, how to be saved from the destruction to
come, whither our sins will certainly bring us.

Sin it is, will destroy us all. And (to speak of a Savior) there is no
person on earth has so much need of a Savior, as has a sinner: nothing so
dangerous, so deadly unto us, as is the sin in our bosom, nothing from which
we have so much need to be saved, whatsoever account we make of it. From it,
comes upon us all the evil of this life: and from it, all the evil of the
life to come; in comparison whereof, these here are not worth the speaking of.
Above all then, we need a Savior; for our souls; and from our sins, and
from the everlasting destruction, which sin will bring upon us in the other
life, not far from us, not from him of us, that thinks it farthest of.

Then, if it be good tidings to hear of a Savior, where it is but a matter
of the loss of earth, or of this life here: how then, when it comes to the
loss of Heaven; to the danger of Hell, when our soul is at the stake, and the
well doing or undoing of it for ever? He that could save our souls, from that
destroyer, were not the birth of such a one good news trow? Is not such a
Savior worth the hearkening after? Is he not? It is then because we have not
that sense of our souls, and the dangers of them that we have of our bodies:
nor that fear of our ghostly enemies, nor that lively apprehension of the
eternal torments of that place, and how near we are to it, (nothing being
betwixt us and it, but this poor puff of breath which is in our nostrils:)
Our carnal part is quick and sensible, our spiritual is dead and dull. We
have not the feeling of our sins, that we have of our sickness: if we had,
we would hear this news with greater cherefulnesse, and hold this day of the
birth of such a Savior, with joy indeed. We cannot conceive it yet, this
destruction is not near enough to affect us. Ier. 30.^.
But in nouissimo intelligetis plane, in the end when the destroyer shall
come, and we shall find the want of a Savior, we shall plainly understand
this, and value this benefit, and the joy of it as we ought, and find there
is no joy in the earth to the joy of a Savior.

There is borne a Savior, is the first. Which is Christ.
The Angel adds further, A Savior, which is Christ. For many Saviors had
been borne, many had God sent them, that at diverse times had set them free from
diverse dangers of their enemies, Moses from the Egyptians, Joshua from the
Canaanites, Gideon from the Madianites, Iepthe from the Ammonites, Samson from
the Philistims. And indeed, the whole story of the Bible is nothing else but a
Calender of Saviors that God from time to time still stirred them up.

But these all were but petty Saviors, there was one yet behind, that was
worth them all. Matthew. 1.21
One that should save his people from their sins; Save, not their bodies for
a time, but their souls for ever, which none of those Saviors could do. One
therefore much spoken of, wished for and waited for, a Savior which was
Christ: when he came they looked for great matters, as said the Woman at the
well side: Ioh. 4.25.
For he was the most famous and greatest Savior of all. And this is He, A
Savior, which is Christ. He of whom all the Promises made mention, and He the
performance of them all: of whom all the Types under the Law were shadows,
and He the substance of the^ all: Of whom all the Prophesies ran, and He the
fulfilling of them all; He, of whom all those inferior Saviors were the
figures and forerunners, and He the accomplishment of all that in them was
wanting. This is He: Jacobs Genesis 49.10.
Shilo, Esayes Esa. 7.14
Emmanuel, Ieremies Ier. 23.5.
Branch, Daniels Dan. 9.25
Messiah, Zacharies Zach. 6.12 c. 1.27.
Oriens ab alto, Aggeys Agg. 2.8.
Desideratus cunctis Gentibus. The Desire of all the nations then; and now the
joy of all nations: a Savior, which is Christ.

And what is meant by this term Christ? A Savior anointed, or (as in another
place it is said, more agreeable to our phrase of speaking) a Savior sealed,
Ioh. 6.27.
a Savior under Gods great seal, That is, not as those other were, Saviors
raised up of a sudden, upon some occasion; to serve the turn for the present,
and never heard of till they came: but a Savior in Gods forecounsaile resolved
on, and given forth, from the beginning, promised and fore told, and now signed
and sent, with absolute Commission and fullness of power, to be the perfect
and complete Savior of all.

And to be it, ex officio: His office, his very profession, to be one, that all
may have right to repair unto him, and find it at his hands. Not a Savior
incidently, as it fell out: but one ex professo, anointed to that end, and by
virtue of his anointing appointed, set forth, and sent into the world to
exercise this function of a Savior: not for a time, but for ever, not to the
Jews as did the rest, but even to all the ends of the earth. So runs his
Bill, Mat. 11.28.
Venite ad me omnes. Come all: and Ioh. 6.37.
Qui ad me venerit non eijciam for as, of them that come to me, I will cast none
out. 1. Tim. 4.11.
Seruator omnium hominum, the Savior of all men (and as the Samaritanes said
of him, Ioh. 4.42.
Seruator mundi, The Savior of the world,) of Samaritanes, Jews, Gentiles: of
Kings, of Shepherds and all.

And there is yet more particularitie in this word Christ: Three offices did
God from the beginning erect to save his people by, and that by three acts. The
very heathen took notice of them, Purgare, Illuminare, Perficere. Priests, to
purge or expiate: Prophets, to illuminate or direct them; Kings, to set all
right, and to keep all right, in that perfection, which this world admits.
And all these three had their several anointings. Aaron the Priest, Leu. 8.12.
Elisa the Prophet, 1. Reg. 19.16. Saul the King, 1. Sam. 10.1. In the Savior
which is Christ; his will was all should meet, that nothing in him might want
to the perfecting of this work. That He might be a perfect Savior of all, He
was all. A Priest after the order of Melchisedek, Psalm. 110.4. A Prophet, to be
heard when Moses should hold his peace, Deuteronomy. 18.18. A King to save his people,
whose name should be Iehoua iustitia nostra, Ie. 23.6. David's Priest, Moses
Prophet, Ieremies King.

And these formerly had met double, two of them in some other; Melchisedek,
King and Priest; Samuel, Priest and Prophet; David, Prophet and King. Never all
three, but in him alone, and so no perfect Christ but He: but He all, and so
perfect. By his Priesthood, to purge, expiate, and save us from our sins, 1.
Io. 2.2.
being a propitiation to God for them: By his prophecy, to illuminate and save
us from the by paths of error, guiding our feet in the way of peace. c. 1.79.
By his kingdom protecting and conducting us through the miseries of this life,
till He perfect us eternally by himself in the joys of his heavenly kingdom.
Rightly then, a Savior which is Christ.

Now, as in the name Savior there was, so is there likewise joy in this Name
Christ, and that many ways. First, that we shall hang no more in expectation,
We shall be no longer, Vincti Spei, Hopes prisoners. He that should come,
Zach. 9.12.
is come. The promised Savior, The Savior, which is Christ, is now borne, and
when spes becomes res, then our joy is full. 2. That now, there is a Saving
Office erected, one anointed to that end, a professed Savior, to whom all may
resort. We shall not be to seek, there is a Name given under Heaven, Act. 4.12.
whereby we may be sure of salvation, the name of Christ. 3. That to this our
saving, we have the joint consent and good will of all parties; in this Name
Christ. Christ, (that is) the Anointed, what person is He? The Son, the
second Person. Anointed, by whom? By the Father: Quem vnxisti, Acts 4.27. the
first Person. Anointed, with what? With the holy Ghost. Acts 10.38. The third
Person. So a concurrence of all Persons in this Name; all willing and well
pleased, with the work of our Salvation. 4. If we would be saved, we would be
saved unction, by oil, Cant. 1.2.
not by vinegar. Et vnguentum effusum nomen eius. And his Name is Christ, one
that saves by anointing. 5. And if by oil, (there be hot Oils) with a
gentle lenitiue Oil. And the Oil which he uses, wherewith he is anointed,
is, the Oil of gladness. Gladness therefore must needs go with this Name.
Which Oil of gladness is not for Himself, but for us: not for His use, but
for ours. So he says himself, in his first Sermon at Nazareth, upon his Text
out of Esa. 61.2. The annoynting (this Oil of gladness) was upon him to
bestow it upon us: and of us; upon them especially, that through a wounded
conscience, were troubled with the spirit of heaviness, to turn their
heaviness into joy. Glad then; that He is come: that by his office is to
save: and come with the good liking of all: to save us by Oil: and that the
Oil of gladness.

And yet to make our joy more full, A Savior, Christ the Lord.
which is Christ. Christ the Lord. For neither is this all. He is not Christ
only. We must not stay there. For the Name Christ will agree, has been and
may be imparted to others besides. Many a King in Scripture, has had the
honor to carry the Name of Christ, but with a difference. The King, Christus
Domini, the Lords Christ: He, Christus Dominus, the Lord Christ, or Christ the
Lord. Consider then how great this Child is, Heb. 7.4.
whose Anointed, Kings themselves are. For if they be Christi Domini, the Lords
Anointed, His they are, for He is the Lord. The Lord absolute, without any
addition; ye may put to it what ye will, Lord of men and Angels, Lord of
heaven and earth, and all the Hosts of them. Dominus Christorum, and Dominus
Dominorum, Lord paramount over all.

But, why the Lord? Because this name of Christ will sort with men. Nay, as He
is Christ (that is Anointed) He is man only. It is his name as man, for God
cannot be anointed. But He that should save us would be more then man, and so
more then Christ. Indeed, Christ cannot save us. He that must save us must be
the Lord. Heb. 7.28.
For such a Savior it behooves us to have, as might not begin the work of
our Salvation, and leave it in the midst, but go through with it, and make
an end too; which the former Saviors could not do. Formerly, ever their
complaint was, that their Saviors, their Christ's died still, and le^t them to
seek: their Kings, and Priests, and Prophets dropped away still; Heb. 7.23.24.
for they were not suffered to endure by reason of death. But this Savior,
this Christ, because he is the Lord, endures for ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood, kingdom, and prophecy, and so is able perfectly to save them that
come to God by him. This is one reason, why, hither we must come at the last,
to Christ the Lord, and till we be at it, we be not where we should. Else our
Saviors will die, and leave us destitute.

But the main reason is set down by Esaias, Fgosum, Egosum, Esa. 43.11.
(says God himself) and praeter me, non est seruator. It is I, I that am the
Savior, I am, and besides me, there is no Savior. None indeed, no true
Savior, but the Lord. All other are short, Vana salus hominis, says the
Psalm, man's salvation is vain, any salvation is vain, if it be not the
Lords. 1. Those Christ's, that were not the Lord, could save but the body, and
not one of them quicken his own soul: Christ that is the Lord, can save
souls and bodies, his own and others both. 2. Those Christ's that were not the
Lord, could save but from carnal enemies, with arms of flesh: He from our
ghostly enemies, even spiritual wickednesses in heavenly places, from Abaddon
the great destroyer, of the bottomless pit. 3. They, that were not the Lord,
could save but from worldly calamities, could but prune and take of the twigs
(as it were:) He from sin it self, and so plucketh it up by the roots. 4.
They, that were not the Lord, put it off but for a time, and after it came
again, Temporal only. He for ever, once for all: and is become Author of
eternal salvation, Heb 5.9.
to all that depend on him. And mark that word [eternall:] For none but the
Lord can work eternal salvation. 5. They all had need of a Savior
themselves, and, of this Savior; He needs none, receives of none, imparts to
all; as being not a Savior only, Ver. 30.
but Salus ipsa in abstracto, Salvation it self, (as Simeon calls him,) of
whose fullness we all receive. Io. 1.
To save, may agree to man. To be salvation, can agree to none but to Christ
the Lord. To begin, and to end: to save soul and body, from bodily and
ghostly enemies: from sin the root, and misery the branches: for a time,
and for ever; to be a Savior, and to be Salvation it self, Christ the Lord is
all this, and can do all this. Now then we are right, and never till now A
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

But the name Lord, goes yet further: not only to save us, and set us free
from danger, to deliver us from evil: but to state us in as good and better
condition, then we forfeited by our fall, or else though we were saved, we
should not save by the match. To make us then sauers, and not sauers alone, but
gainers, and that great gainers by our salvation, he does further impart also
the estate annexed of this last title, even whatsoever he is Lord of himself.
And he is Lord of life says S. Peter. Act. 3.15. Life then he imparts. And he
is Lord of Glory says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 2.8. Glory then he imparts. And he
is Lord of Joy. Intra in gaudium Domini. Enter into the joy of the Lord. Matthew.
25.21. Joy then He imparts. Life, and Glory, and Joy, and makes us Lords of
them, and of whatsoever is within the Name, and title of Lord. For, having
thereto a double right, by Inheritance as the Son, Heb. 1.2. And by purchase
as a Redeemer (for therefore he died, and rose again that he might be Lord of
all, Romans 14.9.) contenting himself with the former, He is well pleased to set
over the latter to us, and admit us with himself into his estate of joint
purchase of heaven, or whatsoever he is owner of, that, in right of it, we may
enter into the life, glory, and joy, of our Lord, and so be saved and be
sauers, and more then sauers, every way. This also, is in the word Lord: this
benefit further we have by it.

And now, if we will put together, Natus and Seruator, Seruator and Christus,
Christus and Dominus, Dominus and Natus: Borne and Savior, Savior and Christ,
Christ and the Lord, the Lord and Borne: take them which way ye will in
combination, any of the four, then have we his two natures in one person. In
Seruator his Godhead: None but God is a Savior. In Christus his Manhood. God
cannot be anointed, Man may. In Dominus his divine again; the Lord from
heaven. In Natus his humane nature, directly, borne of a woman. Both ever
carefully joined, and to be joined together. When S. Matthew had begun his
Gospel thus. Matthew. 1.1.
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, one nature, His
humanity: Saint Mark was careful to begin his thus; Mar. 1.1.
The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God, the other
nature, His divinity. But Saint John, he ioynes them, verbum caro factum est,
John 1.14.
the Word became flesh. Verbum the Word, there is Dominus; and Caro the Flesh,
that is, Natus.

And even this very conjunction is a new joy. For that such an one, that the
Lord would condescend to be borne, (besides the benefit,) there is also matter
of Honor. Even that He, so great a person, would become such as we are, would
so esteem our nature, as to take it upon him. This, certainly is a great
dignity and exaltation of our nature, and it is matter of new joy: that He
would so highly value it, as to assume, associate, and unite it into one
person, with the Son of God. By this, we see why a Savior: why Christ:
why the Lord. A Savior, his name or benefit, whereby he is to deliver us.
Christ, his name of Office, whereby he is bound to undertake it. The Lord, his
name of power, whereby he is able to effect it. We see also why Man, and why
God. First, So it should be, for o^ right none was to make satisfaction for
man, but man. And in very deed none was able to give satisfaction to God, but
God. So that, being to satisfy God for man, He was to be God and man.
Secondly, So we would wish it our selves: If we would be saved, we would be
saved by one of our own nature, not by any stranger. He is borne, and so one
of our own nature. Again, if we would be saved, we would be saved, by no
inferior, but by the best: He is the Lord, and so the very best of all. And
so, our desire is satisfied every way.

This blessed birth of this Savior which is Christ the Lord, thus furnished in
every point, to save us thoroughly, body and soul, from Sin the destruction,
and Satan the destroyer of both, and that, both here, and for ever; this
blessed, and thrife blessed birth, is the substance of this days solemnity,
of the Angels message, and of our joy.

And now, to the Circumstances: The Circumstance of the Persons to whom.
and first of the persons vobis, I bring you good tidings; That to you is
borne, etc.

We find not any word through all, but there is joy in it: and yet all is
suspended, till we come to this one word [Vobis,] this makes up all. This word
therefore we shall do well ever to look for, and when we find it, to make much
of it. Nothing passes without it; it is the word of application. But for it,
all the rest are loose, this girds it on, this fastens it to us, and makes it
ours. But for it, we are but in their case, Mat. 8.29.
Quid nobis and tibi? What have we to do with thee? This Savior Christ the
Lord, in this good time and fit place, Quid ad nos? What are we the better?
Omni populo, is some what too general, and the hundredth part of them, shall
not be benefited by him. We would hear it in more particularitie. Why, vobis,
for you it is, Borne for you: yea, now ye say somewhat.

And twice it is repeated for failing, Euangelizo vobis, and Natus vobis.
in either verse once. Euangelizo vobis, and natus vobis, that ye may know the
message is yours and the birth is yours: therefore, the message is sent to you,
because the birth concerns you. But yours they be, both.

May we then be bold to change the person, The use we have of it.
and utter it in the first, which he does in the second, and say nobis? We may
sure, Puer natus est nobis, Esa. 9.6.
Esaias has said it before us. And thereby, lies a mystery; The Angels they
say, Vobis, The Prophets were men, men say, Nobis. Bid the Angel say, Nobis, he
cannot, Heb. 2.16.
neither sing nor say it: Angelis he cannot, to Angels, Nusquam Angelos: but
Hominibus, verse. 14.
unto men, he can and does. And this is a special high prerogative; that which
the Angels can neither sing nor say, we can do both.

If then he be borne to us, it is to some end. Esaias tells us what it is, when he
expounds Natus, by Datus, Borne to us, by Given us. Borne, to be bestowed
upon us. And if given us, bestowed upon us, then he is ours. Ours as a
Savior, ours as Christ, Ours as the Lord. Ours His Benefit, His Office, His
Power: His Benefit to save us, His Office to undertake us, His Power to assure
us. Ours, His salvation, as Jesus, His anointing, as Christ, His Dominion, as
the Lord. And if He be ours, then all His are ours. Luke 15.31.
Omnia eius nostra sunt. His Birth ours, and if His Birth, all that follow His
Birth, ours too.

Now then, seeing He and they be ours, will it not be well done, to make our
entry, to take seisin of him and them, and dispose them to our best benefit?
And how can we do that better? Then, as God has offered Him to us, this day
that he was borne for us: so we reciprocally this day that He is borne, offer
Him again to God, as the best pleasing Oblation that we can offer him. To day,
as in the Temple alive, for our morning oblation: And when the time comes of
his death, offer Him as on the cross, slain for our evening Sacrifice. So
shall we as Bernard wishes us, vti nostro, in vtilitatem nostram, and de
Saluatore salutem operari. Employ, or ma^e use of him for our best behoof:
draw his proper extract from Him, and work Salvation out of this our Savior.

Now, a word only, what is to be done on our parts, and that respectively to
these two points, what we are to return to them, what to this Message, and
what to this Birth.

To the Message Euangelizo vobis, Our duty reciprocal.
this we are to return, this is due to a message, to hear it. To hear the
message
And, that we do, and that is all; we come to the Sermon, we hear it, and
little we do besides. But we hear it but heavily, with a faint affection (God
knows:) we hear it not as an Ecce, as matter of high admiration: we hear
it not as gaudium magnum, with that alacrity, and cheerfulnes we should. We
hear it not as nobis, as if it nearly touched us, but as a matter that little
concerned us, it skilled not much, whither we heard it or no. Many meaner
things affect us more, but this should be the ioyfullest hearing that we ever
heard.

And shall we not likewise perform some duty to Natus est? yes eue^ to that
also. To receive him.
And not hear of Him, and let Him alone: hear his tidings, and let Him self
go.

He was borne for us, and given us Natus nobis, and Donatus nobis (both go
together in the Prophet) To a gift the duty that belongs properly, is to
receive it. It He be Natus nobis, and Donatus nobis I trust we will take order
he be Acceptus a nobis. If borne us, and given us, it is our part then, we can
do no less then receive Him. We euacuate the gift, disgrace both the giver
and it, if we vouchsafe not to accept of it.

How is that? How shall we receive Him? who shall give Him us? That shall one,
that will say unto us within a while, Accipite, Take, Heb. 10.10
This is my Body by the offering whereof ye are Sanctified. Take, this is my
Blood, by the shedding whereof ye are saved. Both, in the holy Mysteries
ordained by God, as pledges to assure us, and as Conduit Pipes to conueigh into
us, this and all other the benefits, that come by this our Savior.

Verily, upon his memorable days, (of which this is the first) we are bound to
do some thing in memory, or remembrance of him. What is that? Will ye know
what it is? Hoc facite, Do this in remembrance of me.

Something would be thought on to return him for all his benefits, and this
day for this first, the fountain of all the rest; His Birth: Some thanks would
be rendered Him for it. And how can we do that better, then as we are taught by
him, that studied the point of Quid retribuam, and resolved it thus, Psa. 116-12
no way so well, as by Accipiam Calicem: I will take the cup of Salvation,
and so do it: So, with it taken into our hads, give thanks to the name of the
Lord. And when better then to day? Hodie as we are here directed. What better
day then on this day, the very day he was bestowed on us. To defer him, no
longer, then he did us. He deferred not us at all, but as soon as he was
borne, sent us word the same instant: and shall we defer Him to bear of us
an other time; and not be as ready on our part to receive him instantly, as he
was on his, to bestow himself, even presently, as soon as He was borne? Sure
somewhat would be done more then ordinary, this day of His birth, the day it
self is more then ordinary.

And let this move us. If ever there be a day of salvation, Ecce hic est dies
salutis, Behold, this is it, when a Savior is borne unto us. If ever an
accepted time, Ecce tempus acceptum. Behold, now it is, this is that time. The
birth day has ever bin a time accepted. Then, Genesis 40.21.
one king forgave the trespass of his Servant, and received him to Grace. An
other, being pleased, was ready in his bounty to have given away the one
half of his kingdom. Our Savior Christ, Our Lord, Mar. 6.23.
on his birth day will be no worse then they. His bounty then, no less then
theirs.

Let us then make this so accepted a time in it self, twice acceptable, by our
accepting: which, He will acceptably take at our hands. Let us honor this day,
with our receiving: which He has honored by his first giving: Yielding him
evermore, (but this day, the day of it, chiefly,) our unfeigned hearty
thanksgiving for this so good news; for this so great a gift; both of them
this day vouchsafed us: in Him and for Him, who was himself the gift, our
Savior, Christ, the Lord. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three
Persons, one immortal, everliving, invisible, only wise GOD; be all honor,
glory, blessing, praise, and thanksgiving, this day and for ever.


