HEre begins a little treatise the which speaks of the xv. tokens the
which shullen be showed before yt drefull day of Judgment. And who that our
lord shall ask rekenyng of every body of his wordis workis and thoughts. And
who our lord will show us other xv. tokens. of his passion to them that
been deyeth in dedely sin.

depiction of two male figures and one female figure standing apart from each
other, and two other male figures emerging from the ground

depiction of a male figure or monk seated in a scriptorium

IN this beginning so will I writ of the xv. Tokens they which shullen be
showed before the drefull day off dome of our lord Ihu^ xpe^. and there shall
we show our self Ionge and old etc.

And our lord will that there shall be showed, iiij. tokens after doctors
sayng. For our lord is so mercyful that hy will not punisshe us but hy will
show sum tokes before. And that we may besory off our sins and do
penance. And after thise forsaide iiij. tokens shullen yet be xv. other
tokens be showed. Which Iheronimus had fonden in the rinskens there Cronicle
there Jews. Of which xv. tokens forsayde shullen be declared be ordinance
here after. And yt first toke^ of ye iiij. shall be that ye might of Satan
thorugh ye passie of our lord was made lasser. and was bounden. and shall be
onbonde^. All be it yt he by ye might of ye passie be bonde^. and may not do so
much harm to ye me^shen as hy was wont to do. But ye devil is bonde^ at
certain times. and hi shall be onbonde^ yt hi may do ye more harm to ye people
with temptacien and tribulacien for to assaye them tho that be chosen.

But in the last time of the world shulle^ the good be very good and the
evil shullen be very badde. Like the holy writters shown in the last
chaptre of apocaliosis. Tempus prope est qui nocet noceat ad huc et qui in
sordibus est sordescat ad huc. et iustus iustificetur. ad huc et qui sauctus
est sanctificetur. ad huc.

THat second token of the four. shall be as love shall be lost and not more be
used. Likewise as the me^shen warend old and the nature waxed cold in hem.
which the philosophe called it the lytil world. Likewise is it of the great
world. Who she more comes to the eynde who more the love waxed cold in
herself. But ye hot of a body is gostly of living there gretter world. And
shall all hole fail for it goth sore to ye eynde of the world. As apostolus
ad hebreos. Qui antiq^tur and se nescit prope i^teritu^ est. And a man may
now know who yt god is served without deuocie. And how hy is blasphemyed. and
by hem swering and also pulle him all a sonder in pices. And ye may well know
yt ye love is al most al done and is waxen cold and dreyed away. but som^e
be naked and pray hertely but they find no help. and they yt be hongery
deye for honger and have none socour. The gate of mercy is shitte ye fonteyne
of ye co^passie has shitte her condutes. And through failed among his
friends. and she shall not be fonden before god shall give sentence upon them yt
have honred charity and patience out of this world.

That third toke^ shall be as all manner of evil and sins shall be i^ this world
and the fere of god be put done / and have none thinkyng on him. And wha^
faithful and patience shall not besette be but almaner of eueyll shall be used
and when ye me^sche^ shullen loue^ with a secretly love and care of none man but
for her own profyt And also we shall be a fore ye ey^de of ye world be proud
and hy shall make much of he^ self and shall blasphemeren ye name of our lord
and they shullen not care of there fader or mother and than they shullen love
flesly nature more than god As the apostel in the.ij. episle ad thy moteum

Therefore latte every body remember in he^ self what people now a day be
lyuinge in this world and look well if this aforesaid things not be now a
days showed and done and set be none sy^ne. For it is not well possible that
any body might writ the great syne^s the noweadayes be done pray to god that
hy will torn his people that ye may do penance before there death

That for the toke^ that shall before the eynde of the world and fore the
other. xv. tokens and a fore that great ordil a fore the day of dome and tha^
shall there be great peruerten and war and there shall be war i^ many diverse
lands of the world and also among al creatours i^ this world lyui^g For as
mathees said in. xiiij. chapitre Fyghtyng and wars shall be among us and also
one body shall arise against tho there and also one king against on other and also
troyson shall be a moge towns all have they made pays and pays shall be out the
world and laid done and also ye pri^she against his come^ and his come^ against
hem. And also there shall be none closter of monks nor of no^nes it shall be full
of peruertes or contrary one that other And than shall it be as / Iheremias
writted i^ his x. chaptre Vnusquisque se a suo proximo custodiat That is to
say Every man keep hem of his neygbour or frinde and troste not his brother for
one shall show an other a fair face but it heart of him is fulle falls and also
one brother shall mock that other and hy shall lay snares and gynes for he^ to
begyle if he may And than is it fulfylt like. Messiah the prophet said Keep
you of beware you of your own wyff the which sleped i^ your arms for she
shall begyle her own husbou^de and also ye child shall begyle the fader and
the fader the child and the daughter the mother and ye mother ye dought^ and
also one brother shall deliver that other to death and ye fader ye sone and ye
children the fader. And when al thise things and peruerte^ shall be though out
of all ye world than shall it be an token of the last termyn or eynde of this
world. Other peruerten shullen be in the firmament But commu^ly it shall be a
dyre time not allone i^ one province or kingdom but thorugh out of al ye world.
but it shall be yt ye earth shall bear none fruyce to our behouff or need to live
with all. And it shall be also great earth beui^ge be against nature that there
shulle^ fallen done castles and houses And also in the zee and Ryuers shulle^
be more peruerten than it has be a fore And the air shall be full of
corrupcyen and venym thereof shulle^ come^ great pestilencie^ as well in the
bestes as in the me^shen thereof they shullen deye. and also do^neryng lightni^g
tempests and wyndes shullen be more perylos than the wont the be. and the
people shall be sore aferde And lykewys as sanit hyeronimus has fou^den xv.
principael tokens they shulle^ be a fore ye dry full day of dome of our lord.
Ihu^ xp^i.

But we know not yff these. xv. tokens shullen be showed one after on other.
or if there any other token shall be showed between Thereof said saint hyronies
none certain nor none doctor but they put it in the will of our lord but our
lord may there with do his will but hy is almighty

Here folowen the.xv. principael tokens the which shulen be showed a fore the
great ordeel of Judgment of our lord Ihu^

Of that first toke^
depiction of a pond of lake full of fish

That first toke^ ye wiche shall goo before the comen Judgment shall be. that the sea shall arise. xi. cubits above all hills there world. and shall so stand
in a token of a miracle wthout re^nyng over or going done and no more in one
place tha^ in another and shall stand stylle in hier one place for that they
words of psalmi. should be true. like he said Mirabilis elatioe^s maris:
Merueylous is ye see of her oprysynge. and this shall god suffer. for the
punisshe ye which have be proud like the wise man said in his proverb.
xiij. chaptre. Cor superbiq^u^ mare feruens quodquescit. The heart of pride is
like the bernende zee the which none rest en has and not others desired than
discord and war. The which is comen of pride like Salomo^ said in his
proverb. Into superbos sper iurgia sunt Discord and twyst is ever among the
proud folk. and ye proud will also be in the heyest plase. and of a lityl
thing that which he has done will he be worshipped and honored. and never is
he fulle of worship and ever. would have more. And god shall this done for to
punysshe the proud the whithe them self so enhau^cen and will be beter than on
other. and hy shall take of they^ there lands and goede. And also that they
should know there sins. and torn them to penance. For our lord is so full
of mercy that hy will yt none soul should be lost. but hy gives us knowelge
and token of trybulation and other pouerte yt we should know hem and do
penance. like the apostel said. No^ dimittitur perctm^ nisi restituatur
ablatu^: that is to say. The sins en been not relest nor forgyuen. but hy
do satisfaction therefore

Of that second token:
depiction of the sea fallen below the level of the land

THat second token that which shall goo before that comen Judgment shall be.
that the sea shall good one in to the earth. like if the son it had dreyeth
away. Like as the prophet Naum said in his first chaptre. Increpans mare et
exsiccans illud. That is to say. that the maker of all the world shall the sea done gone in to the dypte of the earth. like if she had be dreyed out. in
a great token of impossibilite or of in meruelyosite. And betokeut that the
proud and lecherous folk full of flesly lust and have follows the resynne.
And have labored for to get great richesses and bildinges as houses and
other castles And have not byldeth in heaven by our lord Ihesu and have not
byldeth gostely for there soul health And like as the have put done they
pouer and have not succured them with there good as god has sent you in this
world. But in ye day as ye see shall hem hyde in to the earth. Like as it is
said before. and that shall be done for such folk as it is spoken of before. and
they shullen be ashamed of there sins and shullen be dampened for such
sins. Like saint lucas showed in his xiiij. chaptre. Quise exalt at
humiliabit^. And in his proverb xxix. Superbum sequitur humilitas.

Of that third token.
depiction of a merman and mermaid in the sea

THat third token shall be. that al beestis and fisshes shullen monstren. and in
the sea they shullen come to gyder and make a great complaynt and cryeng
merueylously yt it shall be herd in heaven and god shall this understand allone
Of this said Job in his xij. chaptre. Loquere terre et a^nunciabit tibi Et
enarrabu^t pisces mares. That is to say. Speak to the earth and she shall say
you all the ylle of the men shen. And the fysshes of the sea shullen speak to
you of the evil of the folk.

God shall suffer this to one token to the people tho that have lived in yt
water of Joy. and lustenes of the flesh. And they that haue^ be merry in
daunsyng pyping and in synging more than to ye co^maundementis of our blyssed
lord Ihesu xpe^ And their myrthe shall be changed in great heaviness. Like us
lucas declared in his vi. chaptre. Ve vobis qui nu^c ridetes quia lugetis: That
is to say. Sorrow shullen they have they yt lawhen. For ye shullen weep in
bitter teeres in that day of Judgment. And they yt haven done penance in this
world they moen well be merry. As our lord said / Beati qui nunc fletis (...)
ridebites / That is as much to say / Blyssed be all tho yt weep in this
world and sufferen / For they shulle^ be merry in everlasting glory / And ye
fisshes and beestes of the sea shulle^ speak of one manner or cryeng. and
co^playn over ye menshen for their great sins. for which sins they suffere^
great peayn in the sea.

Of that forth token
depiction of the sea on fire

That forth token shall be that ye see and all other waters and ryuers shullen
bernen of the fire that which shall Come out of heaven. and shall punysshe
them that have lived lecherously in this world. after there lustisnes of the
flesh. And have lived against the commandment of our lord Ihu^. And such
folk shall berne in the fire made of brymstone. Like ye find in Apocalipsi in
his xxi. chaptre. Erit pars eorum in igne et sulphur. And also for there
pleasure the which they have hadden in there lecherousnes. shullen have a
sonder pain in everlasting fire Like ye find in apocalipsi in his xviij.
chaptre.

Quantum in delicijs fuit tantum date tormentum et luctum. Give them pain
after that they have deserved. the which have lived lecherously and haven
kept other men's wives. and haven lived after there own pleasure and flesely
lust. Therefore shall this token be showed that the sea and all Ryuers
shullen bernen as ye here may see portred etc.

Of that fyfte token.
depiction of seven forest birds, including an owl and a peacock, surrounded by
falling blood droplets

THat fyfte token shall be. yt all herbs trees forestis and boskasyen shullen
sweet drops like blood. As Sybilla writted. And Iohel in his secunde chaptre.
Spekende in the person of god. In diebus illis dabo prodigia in celoet in terra
sanguine^ et vaporem fumi. That is to say In those days shall I give tokens in
heaven and in earth of smelling or savoring. Also in that same day shullen come
to gyder all byrthes. they shullen cryen and wypen. And they shullen not be
wyllyng to ete nor to drink in no manner wise. These forsayde savor and bloet
that the trees and herbs shullen sweet. that shall god suffer for to punysshe
the manquellers and mordenars in a peayne tho that have killed them that never
was gylty. Like as Seneu^ said in his iiij chapitre. Spekyng in the person of
god to Cayin. that blood of thy brother Abel cried to me of the earth into heaven.
And that weeping and cryeng of thise birds shullen not wylling be to ete nor
to drink. And shall be done in a peayne and in a token of they dronkarts. tho
that be evermore dronken in this world. and so live in much etyng and
drynkyng. but they shullen be punisshed in hell of the honger there deed. Like
salistinus said. Mors depassed eos. And so they shullen be punysshed with diverse
torments.

Of that vi. token
depiction of buildings falling down, including a church steeple and tower tops

THat vi token shalke. yt all towns. Castles tours. houses and other
byldynges shullen fall down. Like saint Lucas and Mathees sayde^ in xxiiij.
chaptre. No^ relinquet^ lapis super lapidem qui non destruatur. That is to
say. There shall not one stone abeyde by that other. And that shall god suffer
for they in that have labored for to make great castles and fair houses for
their pleasur Than to make one fondacien or to bylde in ye worship of our
lord. for to find a house in heaven Like saint Johan said in his xxiiij.
chaptre. In domo patris mei mansiones multe sunt That said our lord In my
faders house be many wonyng places. For they souls shulle^ have yt ye
deserved for one shall have more tha^ ye oder Therefore there be many wonyng
places thereof said Ysayas. Ve qui coniungitis domum ad domum et agrum agro
copulatis. O we ye rich ye make houses by houses with begylynge and make
great your land and fyldes. and one acker by that other the which ye have
taken of the power folk knowelyng by force or strong hand: And they that
have no might against you. O ye rich look on your worldely houses the which
ye have byldeth with great labor. And wylt not ones say to your own self. O
good lord had I made one house in heaven for my soul helt with so great
labor as I have done in earth I had done wisely for my soul etc.

Of that vij. token.
depiction of stones

That vij. took shall be yt one stone shall beat that other and shullen fight in
them self and they shullen spring asonder. and so fighting they shullen give
and maken a great noise of cryeng And that shall no man understand but god
allone. Like it was done as our lord was Crucified. As matheus said i^ his
xxvij. chaptre. Petre scisse su^t. And yt shall be done for to fere the^ tho yt
ben harder than stones. for they have no feere of our lord. and they may not
be made tender for no prechi^g of ye pain of hell. nor of his Judgment nor of
his passion. but they stones haven hadd compassion of our lord in his passion
in manner of speking But they sinner is so hard yt they will not shryue the^ nor
do no penance for their sins But late us pray to our lord Ihu^ yt hy will
make our hertes tender yt we may besory for our sins.

Of that viij token.
depiction of a female figure falling over, with cattle and a sheep nearby

THat viij token shall be. that there shall be a general earth shaking and contrary
there earth And shall be showed over all the world. so perilous that nor man nor
wife nor beeste shall mow stand upright. but shullen fallen done the gronde.
Like it speaks in apocaliprosi xvi. chatre. Et fcu^s e^terremotes magnus q^lis
no^ fuit ex quo hoi^es ee^ ceperu^t. That is to say. Before our lord shall come
to Judgment shall be also great an erthquauyng as ever has been. since our lord
ye world made. and this shall be done for to fere them tho yt ben yet in earth
And shall be a token yt the earth shall bear no more the sinners. but shall them
leave. and our lord shall do over them Iusticie, and shall them give they
maledictie in the pytts of hell with Lucifer. And ye people and sinners
shulle^ seek places and holes for them to hyde there in. And there shall be showed
the great unmerciful yt our lord has to the sy^ners For the yt would not
leave there sy^nes for all they tokens yt they might see here before.

Of that ix token.
depiction of a plain studded with the tops of mountains

THat ix token shall be yt all hills and valeyes shulle^ be plaen. and this shall
be as Ysay as in his xl chaptre showed Oi^s vallis i^plebit^. et oi^s mo^s et
collis hui^liabit^. yt is to say That all hills shulle^ be leyde done. and yt
shall god show for to feere al princes tho yt make much of the^ self and have
put done they pouer. for all kings lords and princes be^ all like the pouer.
For they be all made of one substans and have all had one fader. and god shall
such kings and lords give wages like they have deserved. Like mathees said
i^ his xvi. chaptre Filies hoi^o redda^ vnicuique scd opera sua. Without any
taken out as well the master as the servant. Like psalm. said. Cu^ accepero
te^pus ego iusticias iudicabo. yt is to say. As I shall take the day and ye
hour shall I Judge ye good and the badde works of ye people. as well the one as
ye other. of what state or co^dycien yt thy be

Of that x. token
depiction of two male figures and one female figure standing apart from each
other, and two other male figures emerging from the ground

That. x. toke^ shall be. yt al me^ and wy^me^ they yt had hid them in ye earth
shulle^ come again out of there holes like as mad folk. And shulle^ so sore
be aferde / yt one shall not mow speak to that other And this shall god show
in one token that when god shall give Judgment over the good and badde. Shall hy
no man excuse. which Judgment them is showed with many tokens if they would
not torn them fro their sins and do penance: And god shall also show
this token to the people yt shall live than in earth. That Maria the mother of our
lord Ihu^ aduocatrice to all sinners that in ye hour / of Judgment shall she
not co^ne help no ma^nor none saint of heaven but there own good deeds.

Of that xi. token.
depiction of an open tomb with skulls, bones, and two skeletons or corpses

THat xi token shall be. that all graves and thombes shullen stand open. fro the
vprysing of the son and going done again. And also all bones of the bodies
the which that be death fro the beginning of the world to that same day to.
shullen arise by and by. Like Ezechiel said in his xxxvij. chaptre. Erce ego
aperia^ tumulos vestros This same toke^ shall god show to one toke^ to all tho
that has be hid secretly Like sins that have not be confessyd nor
shryuen thereof. And they that have done sins secretly and have not shriuen
them thereof nor haue^ done no penance. and all they shullen be dampened. Like
euangelista said. Nihil opertum quod no^ reueletur nec absco^ditum quod
sciatur. That is to say. None things so secretly kept but our lord shall
have thereof knowledge in the day of Judgment. and no thing so vnbeknowen but it
shall be known in co^mun of every man in tho days. etc.

Of that xij. token.
depiction of creatures staring up at the night sky, including a boar, ox, dog,
cat, rabbit, horse, lion, and unicorn

THat xij token shall be that sterres shulle^ fallen out of heaven. for all
planetes the which yt goo about with ye course of the elementis. and also they
yt stand stylle be called in latin planete or stelle errancie. Shullen fallen
and casten out great cometes with long tails. like a burning spear. that
which shall be sore fertfull on to see. And shullen all beestes come to gyder
and maki^g a great noise without mete or drink. Like matheus writted of the
sterres in his xiiij chaptre.

Stelle cadent de celo et virtutes celorum mouebuntur. Of this may ye
understand that the people shall see no more like if they had be cast out of
heaven, Like ye may understand of saint ambrosius Iheronimus and beda. As the
son and moan and all oath bryghtenes of heaven shullen change there brightness
into derkenes not that they shullen lose there bryghtnes. To understand as our
lord shall come to Justice than shall be such a brightness that the son and moan
shullen lose their brightness. Here of said the prophet Iohel in his iij.
chaptre. Sol conuertetur in tenebras et luna insanguinem antequam veniat dies
dn^i magnus et horribilis. That is to say. Before our lord Ihu^ shall come tho
Judgment shall the son lose her bryghtnes. and the moon shall turn her in to
blood. Like in apocalipst is showed. Sol factus est niger quasi factus
cilicinus et luna fcta^ est quasi sanguinis et stelle cadent super terram. That
is to say. In tho days shall be a meruelyos token. as that the son shall be
like a sack cast with esshes. and the moon shall be red like the blodde And
this is to understand that all creatures off heaven syeng the eynde of the
world. Wherefore yt they ware made to give bryghtenes in token off soroufulnes.
Like when the master is death tha^ the servant putt on hem black clothes in
token of morning. And not that the sterres shullen fallen done to the earth. but
they shullen abeyde above in the air and making a great noise of lyghtning and
they shullen not be wasted. but shullen abeyde in that loweste part of the
air and the people shall wene that they fallen to the earth. And verily as men
said ye might of heaven is like angels goostes and the works of heaven shullen
peruerten and tremblem in the day of Judgment. Not that they have feere of
dampnacion. but the tremble for the reuerencie that they shullen done. but when
they shullen seen they great might of our lord comy^g to Judgment with all
his Empire and might and lokyng so ferthfully against they that be dampened and
than the angels shullen humbli bow them Like if they sholden suffer the
everlasting pain And ye may also understand of the peruerten of the angels
and goostes that she hem peruerten for to fulfylle the will of our lord: And
this shall god suffer that the sterres shullen fallen. for to feere them tho
that be fallen fro their belyue. and for them that have not meyntened our
belyue and tho that have kept it a back etc.

Of that xiij. token:
depiction of a pile of recently dead bodies

THat xiij. token shall be. that all men wy^ me^ and children they than be alive
op ye world shulle^ deye without any remedy. And hy shall this done for that
they shullen arise against ye day of dome with them that have been deed in the
beginning of the world to that day to aforesaid And certeynly this shall be
a pytuosly work yt all people tho that been alive. going sytting standing
liggyng etyng or drynking. shullen be hurt so shortly with the lancie of death
sudenly. O ye wretched people ye wene to live ever, but think that ye shall
deye. and you know nor day nor hour And also you think not on your sins.
O ye men and wymmen what shall ye do when ye have none time for to amend your
sins.

Of that xiiij. token.
THat xiiij token shall be. that heaven and earth and all elementen shullen bernen
and specially all things that which is operthe. And ye bodies of men and
wymmen shullen be burns in to esshes. Like Genesi said in his iij. chaptre.
Puluis es. et in puluerem reuerteris. And of ye same resolucien of heaven and
the et the said Mathees in his xiiij chaptre. Celuin et terra transibu^t And
of this same fire said Psalmista. Ignis ante ipsum precedet. That fire shall
goo before that comun Judgment Which fire shall be very great by the might of
our lord. Not allone that fire i^ hem self but all fyres in earth and shulle^
come above to gyder for to for burn all the world. And ye doctors say that
this fire shall have three manner of might. As the might of the fire of earth. for
too take and to burn all to things that ye may fyle Like trees herbs and in
general all tho things that been in earth. For that same fire shall turn in to
esshes. As all bodies of men and wy^men. And it shall have the might of the fire
of the elementis and shall purgyren the air and elements. And this same fire
shall goo about all the world and make clean all the elements of the
Infectie of the people. And this same fire shall goo also high as the Infectie
is gone of the synful people. for to purge all that same. Like our lord said
that heaven and earth shall be burned and fergo. not that the be wastable na ye
substancie. for the be Incorruptible or wastable. and that same fire shall goo
above all hills xv. cubytes. like the dyluuye did for too purge that
opperste part of the air. the which that the synful people had be smytted
with there great sins. And in this manner shall the heaven be purget. But the
things of heaven shullen not be wasted in no manner of wise. Like propheta
said. Ipi^ peribunt tu au^t permanes. That is to say. That the heaven shall
fergo after sum disposicie and change like it now is. And the shall not be
wasted to say after there corruptibilier substa^cien. And than it shall not be
nedeful etc.

Of that xv. token and of that last.
depiction of naked male and female figures emerging from the ground and the
sea

THat xv. token shall be that heaven and earth shall be changed and made new. Like
it is said asore. And all people shullen arise too the Judgment. Like saint
Thomas said. That the elements shullen be made new And the earth shall be
bright. and that water like the cristal. and the air like heaven. and that fire
like the bryghtnes of heaven. and I shall see no thing in ye air above. but
shall stand stylle and remeue not. And certeynly this forsaide fire shall burn
all bodies of the people if they be deed or alive good or bad but there shall be
difference it shall give pain to ye badde. and none to the good. But it
fyndeth noothinge there to purge. No more than it did to ye three children the
which waren put in a forncyse. As daniel said in his iij. chaptre. And
certeynly all this is not others than as god it will have. and no man knows it
but god alone of this tookens before said. and if they shullen be showed one
after an other. And if there more than one shall be up one day. but this same
is uncertain and unknown. And therefore it is possible that that fire there
purgacien shall come op that same hour as ye people shullen be slaen. and than
they shullen be burned to esshes to powder and dust.

And therefore shall men not say for certain that they forsayde tokens shullen
be upon. xv. days one after an other. Like Iheronimus has fonden in the
Hebrewshe Cronicle. For hy hemselfe is there of vncertaeyn.

But the most part of thise forsayde tokens may ye well belyue for the be
geapprobiert with the holy gospels. that the world shall burn and purge the
elementis. And also that the holy bodies shullen arise. And that same fire
shall goo about after the Judgment and shall take all corrupcien with hem and
shall goo with a great hette to hell. and there with to punysshe the badde. And
all those that of suttylnes is in this same fire and off good works shall
abeyde above in everlasting glory. And this is known that this same fire
shall goo before that dreful day of Judgment.

Here ends the xv tokens depiction of two male figures throwing a third
figure into a pit or well, while a male figure with crown and scepter points
And here follows who our lord shall (...) shall come to Judgment:

All criste^ people be of very doubt to know by the simbol of the belyue. That
is our Credo. like the simple people say. which every body ought to know. or
to have penance the everlasting dampnacion of his soul. And our lord shall
come at that same day to Judge ye that be alive and tho that be deed. and good
and badde. In which Judgment hy shall give every body after that they have
served. And this shall be done like it is said before. But as our lord shall
come with great might in time of Iusticie i^ which time shall be noon mercy. After
that vision of saint Johan in appocalipsi in his x. chaptre said. One angel
coming out of heaven. puttyng his right foot op the sea and his lyfter foot
upon the earth. and making his oath by our lord the which is alive in heaven.
That that same time should be no more Glosa. the time of mercy. But the time of
Judgment and there Iusticien. And said that there spoke to hem vij. donre claps.
and there by shulle^ we understand that there shullen fallen vij. peryllosshe
things. The which shullen fallen upon they tho that be dampened. And tho that
be sauyd shullen have vij myrthee. in that same day of Judgment. and by yt
first donre clape shall ye understand ye arysing of ye ded bodies men and
wymmen But after the purgacie of the fire in earth. shall out lord be ready to
come to Judgment. and his angels shullen blow the trompettis making a great
noise. and they shullen bring to gyder all frindes of our lord. the which
that have be turned in to esshes in all four corners of the world. Like
matheus said in his xxiiij. chaptre. Mittit angelos suos cu^ tuba. And this
same blowyng shall be herd of good and badde and shullen arise upon that same
day. As the apostle said ad Corintheos. Oe^s quidem resurgemus. And they
trompettis shullen give a meruelyous noise. Whereof saint Iheronimus said Sieve
dormio sieve vigilo etc. That is to say. Sleep I wake I ete I drink I. or what
that I do. ever my seems that I here ye last trompettis of that drefull
Judgment Sayng stand op ne deed and comes to Judgment. Like one doctor said
op that book of sapiens. The noise of these trompettis shullen give a fylynge
sown the which shall command that commandment of our lord ihu^ xpi^. by
which commandment all deed bodies shullen arise. As Chrisostomus said. That
is one meruelyous sown of the crompettis that it makith the elementis subgette
and also parted the stones. And does open ye yate of hell. and brecte the yate
of Aren and the gate of hell made of iron. and brecte the ba^des of the ded
people. And shall give every body his soul again and shullen be pulled out of
the depnes. And eueribody shall than have his soul open. And that same sown
shall not be herd allone in heaven butt also in earth. And adam shall come first
with all his progeny the which that have served our lord Abraham shall come
with all holy patriarchen Isay as with all holy prophets. David with all good
kings Saint peter with all apostles evangelists and disciples. Saint stephen
and Saint Laurens with all tho that have shed there blood for the love of
crist. Saint nicolaus and Martimis with all his confessors Saint katherin with
all holy virgins Saint elisabeth with all holy and sage wymmen weduwes Saint
Anna with all wymmen that have not broken there wedlock: And the queen of
heaven shall come with all relygious persons the which that haue^ served and
worshipped her. And like wise shall the noise be herd in hell. As Crisostimus
said. And than shullen comen Lucifer. Asmodees. Sathanas. belsebuck. astaroch.
and other capiteyns. and with all that in hell is. And this foresaid blowyng
shall be herd in all corners of the world. And than shall come Cayin the
which slew his brother. and shall goo with the foresaid deuyls. and also al
mordenars. Judas with all traitors Pylatus with al untrue jews. Herodes with
all falls kings and princes. Barrabas with all thieves. Lamech with all tho that
have not kept there wedlock. Nemroch with all vserers Yezy with all falls
marchans. Simon maguo with all nygromantiers. Athalya with all tho that have
killed there children Isabel with all harlottls and lecherous wymmen. Like
saint Johan said in his v. chaptre. Procedent qui bona feceru^t in
resurrectio^em vite qui vero male egerint in resurrecto^em iudicij And ye shall
understand by ye secunde donre clap Whereof that the euangeliste said. in
apocalipst. That all tho that shall be to gyder in the Judgment shullen be
departed in four. The first company shullen sytte by the Judgment of our
lord. As our blyssed lady the mother of our lord Ihu^. The apppostles.
discipules. marters. Confessors. patriarchs. and prophets.

And this same compasy shall stand there beside not for to give sentence. But
for to approbere the sentence of our lord Ihesu Criste. And in this forsayde
Company. All tho that have left there good here in earth for the love of our
Lord And haven given it to the pouer folk and to the Religious people. And to
tho that have kept the commandment of our lord. Like matheus said in his
xix. chaptre.

Vos qui reliquistis omnia et cetera. And also in the secunde company shullen
be in that same Judgment. all tho that have been good people. And have also
done sin and have done penance therefore gladly for there sin. and have
also done the works of mercy. And our lord shall say to them. Come ye that
have done my will and commandment in everlasting Joy and shall say. Esurrui
and dedisti mibi manducare etc. I have had honger and you have given me mete
I have be dorsty. I have been a pilgrim. I have been naked. and you have hulpen
me in all my need and have been merciful. To them shall say our lord. Comet ye
in that richdome of my fader which I have made ready for you in the beginning
of the world The third company they yt shullen come to Judgment shullen be
the badde criste^ people. tho that have not kept nor fulfilled the
commaundementis of our lord. nor the works of mercy. And our lord shall say
to them. As mathees said in his xxv chaptre. Esuriui ec no^ dedistis mihi
ma^ducare etc. I have had hongre and ye haven given me noon mete nor drink.
and I have desired the goodness of your soul. and ye have cared not thing for
me. And ye have not loget me nor herborwed. nor have me take out off prison.
nor ye have me not clothed. And tho that been dampened shullen say we have you
not seen naked. Like if they wolden say we have you not seen in earth. And
our lord shall say again.

Quod vni ex minimis fecistis etc. That ye have given the leiste or ye lowest
of pouer people in this world yt have ye given me. and that ye have given not
/ that have ye denied me. And therefore our lord shall say / Gaet ye that be
dampened in that everlasting fire of hell yt never shall have eynde When fourth
company shulle^ be Jews turks and heyden folk. the that belyue of our lord
not haven kept. And these, company shullen be given to the deuyls of hell
without of any mercy. Without any Judgment to do over them. For all such
folcke is dampened before they part out off this world. Like saint Ioha^ said
in his iij. chaptre. Qui non credit iam iudicatus est. And as matheus said in
his xiij chaptre. The angels shulle^ gader then good out of they badde, and
shullen they send in that burning furneys and fire off hell. There ever
shall be weeping and morning without eynde evermore and everlasting etc.

And ye may well understand that the badde shullen be Iuged before the good in
the day of Judgment of the rightwys Judge our lord Ihu^ xpi^ And shall receive
mercyfully the good and shall say to them. Comet ye blyssed myns faders and
received that which is made ready for you in eulastynge Joy of heaven. And as
the wise man said. so shullen the badde not see the myrthe of our lord.
Tolletur ipsius ne vide at gloriam dei. That is to say. Take aweye the badde
that they not see the glory of our lord Ihesu.

And here follows. who that our lord shall show the blyssed tokens of his
passion to them tho that be dampened to great pain / and to them that be
saved to great myrthe and glory.
depiction of a male figure or Jesus Christ above two groups of naked figures,
one surrounded by clouds, the other by flames; in the background tokens of the
Passion: crown of thorns, vinegar sponge, ladder, spitting head, and a column
with ropes and whip

ANd by the third donre clap. Like saint Johan in Apocalipsi writted. shullen
we understand they blyssed tokens there passion of our lord Ihu^. the which
hy shall bring with hem to Judgment. for hy shall show them to all read ly
creaturs. the yt be shapen of ye beginning of yt world, to yt day to of
Judgment. and the tokens of his passion shullen be brighter than the raynes of
the son or sterres. And our lord shall say to them tho that be dampened.

Look here that tresoure of my blood that which I have given for you. Where is
that service or gift the which ye haven given me. for that costely tresour of
my blood. And than shullen all nation of the earth complaen over them self.
And principaly the turks. Jews and heyden folk. They shullen them self give
discomfort. for that they have been against our lord. And the false kristen
people shullen complaeyn that they have done so much ylle. for they good
works the our lord Ihesu has done for us etc.

Who that our lord shall speak to the sinners and mysdoers of his passien.

depiction of a male figure or Jesus Christ nailed to a cross; below a birch
and whip, two hands and two feet with nail wounds, a spear or lance entering a
heart, a crown of thorns, and three nails

ANd also in that day of Judgment shall our lord say to them tho that be
dampened. Look here that body that which ye have put on the Cross. Look here
your Judge the which is god and menshe Look here the wondes the which ye have
made hem. look here the side the which ye have wonded and door passed with
aspere. look here my hands the which be thorugh nailed for your sake on the
cross. the which I have put out for to receive you. had it plesed you. And
for that case that ye have cared not for my. And I have called and cried after
you and ye have set not thing be me. Therefore goo ye in that everlasting
fire with the deuyls of hell with all their company. For one good body shall hem
haste for to do penance the while that hy is alive. for that hy may be
bocht with that tresour his blots. And so that we not be of ye iiij. company of
Judgment. tho that be dampnad.

depiction of a column with ropes

AT the first so shall our lord show the Colu^me to all them that have not
be mercyfully. there hi so pleniuosly shed his blood. whereof yt we shullen
thank our lord. Like ambrosius said. Plus enim debio tuis iniurijs O good
lord I am more bounden to the for thy bitter passion the thou suffredest for
me and all mankind. and there thorugh I am bought. than I am bound to ye might
of almighty for to be made and shapen should not have profyted. had I not be
bought. As Bernardus said There is noothinge so profytelyck for to hele the
wounds of the soul than many times to remember the passion of our lord.

depiction of a crown of thorns

At the secunde time shall our lord show his precious Crown of thorn the
hy bare upon his hedde. to them yt have be proud. And have set upon there
hedde that which they have plesed the world and have cared not thing of him
nor of the crown the which hi bare upon his hedde for our sake.

depiction of a lance or spear piercing a heart

At the third time so shall our lord show the lancie of his passie to them
that have be angry and have not loved there even christian menshe^. and have
had plesur of their mysfortune. Of this said Seneca. I would that they
hatyge menshen hadden eyes for to see in all corners of the world. For that
the lancie of hating them self should thorugh styke or wonde of all holsamhz
and of al his fortune. that they have seen that the menshen hadden For the
hatyge people has also much pain of the people that have fortu^ne. As hy
has pleasure of the mysfortunyge menshen.

depiction of two hands with nails in the palms

At forth time shall our lord show they nails of his hands. to them yt
have be covetous. tho that never be satysfyed. To them said the apostle.
Habentes alimenta etc. Have we mete and clothing. late us be conten etc.

depiction of two feat with a nail through them

At the fyfte shall our lord show the nails of his fete to them that have hadd
great pleasure in daunsyng and have had more pleasure to that than to
remember the passion of our lord. And therefore the devil shall dance with them
in hell.

depiction of an angel holding a cross

ANd at the syxte time shall hi show yt glorious Cross to them yt have not be
pacient in this world. and have would not suffer nothing fore the love of our
lord. Gregorius said to them Si illic dulcia appeties nece^ e^ vt hic amara
tollereese. Desire we ye swetenes of yt paradis Than is it of need that we
have bitterness in this world

depiction of a birch and a multi-tongued whip

At the vij. time shall our lord show the rod and the shorge. to them yt
have be Lecherous. there with hy was shorged and beten. The which Lecherous
have wasted that good of there soul. and have shorted there life without
chastysing of there bodies. And for to amend their living.

depiction of a gown or garment

And at viij time shall our lord show his gown of purperen there hem
pylatus with clothed. And that whitte gown there hem Herodes with clothed for
to mock hy^ And this shall hy show to them that have be proud in their
clothi^g in this world with costely furs and also long tails on there gown
have the wyme^ and also wydesleues have they men Also one pulled that other to
evil thoughts the which have this in sight. Like Crisostomes said. all those
that areye them. for to pulle one yt other to sin shulle^ receive that
everlasting Judgment. for they sinned gretely in our lord Ihu^.

depiction of the head of a male figure or Jesus Christ, blindfolded

That ix. token shall our lord show to all them that there good falsely
selle. as falls merchants and begyelrs they that there good so falsely selle
in this world. That cloth there his blysed visage with was bound and blind
fyldeth. And tho they beten him on his neck. and asked in mockyng who has
done that etc. And in this manner ye blynfyldeth our lord. And selle your good
with great oaths and swering falsely and hy is syeng and knowing all thing.

depiction of rope

That x. token shall hy show the cords there wyh his blyssed hands, and arms
where bosnden and tied. to all them that give them self and pulle other
people to sin to lecherousnes and flesly lust.

THat xi. token of his passion shall hy show he galle and vinegre that they
hem gave on the cross. to them that have mothe eten and dronken. and in
especially to they dronkarts. Like raint Lucas said in his vi. chaptre. Ve
vobis qui saturati estis. Whereof saint Iheronimus said. It is impossybly to
fulfylle them that never have ynowe nor there belly never full in this world.
And there soul to be merry in paradys.

And saint Bernard said also. So why in this world is fulfilled of fleshely
lust. is not shorthy to be spyst of goostely mete of heaven. And Ambrosius
said. That they dronkarts hurt there nature and lose the grace of god and the
glory of heaven. and to get the everlasting dampnacion.

depiction of the head of a male figure, spitting

THat xij. token shall our lord show that specksel that they Jews spitted in
his blissed face. And that shall hy show to them that have blanketted them.
and have them made fayrer. than god them has made. There of says saint
Ambrosies Deles picturam dei si vultu^ tuu^ naturali candore obnubilas et
exquisito rubore profundis etc.

depiction of a hand holding a lock of hair

That xiij. token shall our lord show his here and berde that which the false
Jews hem pulled out in his passion. To them that there here have colored and
made it crouse. and they wymen their hedde have discovered for there with they
men to pulle to sin etc.

depiction of three dice

That xiiij token shall our lord Ihesu show they dese to the dobbelers or
dees players. tho that have played for lucre and covetous. and not for
pleasure. For covetous is in hem self a death sin. Therefore such play ye
may not do without sin. And all such gotten good may ye not keep but
turn it again to them that it owes.

depiction of a purse of money

THat xv. token and that last shall our lord show the money there with hy
was sold and bought. And yt shall hy show to them that have be usurers and
have done none restitucie nor given it again. O good lord what shall say such
people at the dreful day of Judgment.

For Judas gave again they xxx. pens there hy our lord Ihesu for sold. thorugh
covetous. Like modyners thieves usurers and robbers. tho that have other men's
good knowing without gyui^g again. Here of may ye see in that Decret. Vsurarius
non vere penitet nisi prius vsuras restituat The usurer may do none very
penance. For that hy has given again yt which hy has gotten there with. The
cause is. For saint Augustinus said. For certain in his comun regel or orden.

Peccatum non dimittitur. etc. The sins may not ben forgyuen before that that
wronful good be given again to them that it is owyng.

Here ends this lytill treatise that which is called the xv tokens which
been late translated out of frenshe in to English. The which been very
necessary to every man and woman to know them. And to remember the dreful day
of Judgment there we all shullen comen to. And also the passion of our lord
Ihu^ xpi that the not be lost on us and may us come to stead in our most
need. And that hy may bring me and you all in everlasting and perpetual Joy
Amen.
depiction of the Madonna and Child, or Mary and Jesus Christ, with a kneeling
male figure or monk And here follows the nombre of the footsteps of our
lord the which hy went in his passion and also other deuote matters. And if
there be any person that would say it were not autentic. Let hem therefore not
be trobbled in his mind. for it has hundred times be more and gretter than
men there of can writ etc.
ANd also that we may get after this same life a mercyful Judgment. and that
we may escape that dretful wort. go ye that be cursed of the month of our
lord etc.

So is no thing better there against than too receive ye passion of our lord
Ihesu Criste. As bernardus said. O ye menshen remember the passion of our
lord in your mind. For if ye deyed in the

(...) tuosly that it was pity to see etc.

depiction of a male figure or Jesus Christ being guarded by a group, while a
seated male figure washes his hands

Item there fore steps they our lord went fro annas house to Cayphas
house. there was C. and xxx. and betwine the way so mocked they Jews our
lord. xxx. times in his blyssed face. and gauen hem. xl. great strokes in his
neck. And they falls Jews axed our lord in Cayphas house if hy were the son
of godde and hy said ye And in continent they gave Judgment over hem that hy
was worthy to deye. and do they mocked he^ at secu^de time in his visage xlij.
times. and gauen hem also xl. great strokes in his neck the secunde time. And
also there wenten they Jews in Cayphas house too gyder. they scryben and
pharyseen and accorded to gyder who that they would deye our lord ihu^ And
there was lxvi. of one counseyll of they greatest. in that same night.

Item hundred and lxxx. sores had our lord ye which hy suffcedeth
specially in the time of his passion etc.

depiction of a semi-naked male figure or Jesus Christ bound to a column while
two male figures beat him with a birch and a whip; in the background other
figures look in at the window

ANd also in ye morni^g erly broghten the Jews our lord with CCCC.
servants in pylatus house. and there footsteps was M And Pylatus send our
lord to He rodes house. and there footsteps was. C. and. l. And pylatus
would please the Jews and badde yt they should shurge hem. for to content there
falls Jews will. And our lord Ihesu received there vi. C. strokes. and also
they wounds they our lord there took they were not well nommerably.

depiction of a seated male figure or Jesus Christ, robed, with wrists bound,
wearing a crown of thorns which two male figures press into him with a pole

Item the crown ye our lord was put upon his blyssed head had lxxij. tackes
and the tackes have been forsquer. and ye tackes went i^to his Blyssed hedde.
and the Crown was put twyes upon his hedde. So our lord received many
wou^des for our sake. And there wondes they our lord there received of the
crown have been onno^merably. Alsp if there be any yt will worship these
wondes. the shall say every day xv. pater noster a year long etc.

depiction of a male figure or Jesus Christ dragging a large cross, helped by
another male figure or Simon or Cyrene; around them other figures including two
soldiers and two female figures

ALso our lord was beten xxx. times do hy bare his Cross. And our lord
fell done to ye ground v. times with his cross upon his sholder. And fro
Iherusalem to the hille of caluarye there footsteps was lxxij. Ite^ fro the
hylle benethe to above has been footsteps. M. Item the largenes above upon
the hylle thee our lord was crucified have been xl. footsteps Item do our
lord was nailed on that Cross an bode hands have been xl. strokes with the /
hamer etc. / And tho token the false Jews a rope made of here and pulled his
fete to the hole of the cross for it was made to long. for his fete might not
reche it. and tho they nailed hem his fete / and there strokes have been
lxxxliij etc.

depiction of the crucifixion; a male figure or Jesus Christ nailed to a cross;
a male figure is tied to another cross on either side; below, four soldiers
including one on horseback and one piercing his heart with a lance or spear;
nearby, four haloed figures, including a male figure or John the Baptist and a
female figure or Mary

ALso our Lord was hanging on that Cross iij. hours alive and. iij. hours
deed. and also. l. teeres wept our lord on that cross. and hundred footsteps was our lord boren fro the cross to his sepulture or grave After
that same time that our lord was arosen out of his grave. was hy in earth xl.
days. Also if there be any man or woman that will worship they bloddroppes
of our lord Ihu^ ye whi che he has spyldeth for us here in earth. with one
pater noster. for hy most say every day an hoole year long C. pater noster.
and than should be worshypped every droppel blots with one pater noster. Also
they that would do this hy shall have of our lord a special grace. And if
there were any man or woman that had begone this. and deyed in the first year
he should be waged of the hole time of xv. year etc.

Our lord Ihesus do hy was croscifyed had hy his blyssed vysage to us
westward. Therefore torn we our visage estward when we do pray to our lord
hanging on the cross.

As our lord Ihesus cristes went to heaven had hy his blyssed vysage estward.
and prayed his fader of heaven for us. and therefore pray we also in that este.
And therefore late us pray estward that hy will give us after this wretched life
everlasting lyff Amen.

Emprinted by me Johan fro doesborch dwelli^ge at Anwerpe by the Iron ballaunce
etc.

printer's device of Jan van Doesborch (?), featuring an armoured male figure
or soldier holding a sword and blowing a horn; to his left hangs an escutcheon
featuring a castle; to his right hangs a blank escutcheon; behind his feet a
blank scroll




