THE PRINCIPLE OF ALL PRINCIPLES Concerning RELIGION. OR THE SVMME OF certain
SERMONS: Prooving The Scriptures to be the very Word OF GOD.

Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures; For in them ye think to have eternal life.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne, At the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 162^

TO THE WORSHIPFVL, Mr HVMPHREY BROWN, Increase of Grace, and the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ.
AMongst other Doctrines heretofore gathered from my Text, viz Act.
24.14.15.16. We learned, that, We are to ground our Faith only upon the Word
written. Which Doctrine arose out of this Observation, That Paul does not say,
He believed all things whatsoever as directions of his worshipping the God of
his Fathers; but Believing all things written in the Law, and the Prophets, so
worship I, etc. This point is worthy due consideration, in these prevaricating
times, wherein Papists do so fearfully decline the Word written, and run
unto Traditions, which they call Unwritten Verities; though indeed
Traditionall very lies; they run (I say) unto these, as unto the rock of
their refuge. For if they could, but in show, justify their Antichristian
Idolatry, and Superstitions by the Word written, how boasting they would then
be, may appear by their catching at syllables thereof, which sound, in
fantastical ears, to some of their purposes. So that Christ his censure upon
the Scribes and Pharisees, may be justly laid upon them, viz: Ye have made the
Word Mat. 15.1.6.
written of none authority by your Traditions: But whosoever speaks not
according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them Isa. 8.20.
. For the whole Scripture that is, The Word written) is given by Inspiration of
God, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17.
.

Amongst other Uses of the said Doctrine, this was one, If we are to ground our
faith only upon the Word written, then all, who are wise unto Salvation, must
diligently read the same; or, If they cannot read, diligently hear them read
in public Congregations, and els-where, as they may. For to what end was the
Word of God committed to Writing; but that Gods people should read, or hear
it read diligently? Therefore let us religiously take to heart, and consider
the wise exhortation of our Master Christ, viz: Search the Scriptures, For in
them ye think to have eternal life Ioh. 5.39.
. Wherein observe, that He calls the word of God Scriptures, that is,
Writings, and not only so, but The Scriptures, that is, Writings incomparably
excelling all other. For (indeed) they are given by inspiration of God.
Therefore we are to search them. Which word Search, implies Diligence. As
where we are exhorted Pro. 2.3.^
to Search for the Knowleage of God as for Treasures. But how are Writings
searched otherwise, than by diligent reading? Thus did the Nobly-minded
Baereans Acts. 17.1^
Search the Scriptures daily. So that Christ his exhortation is this in effect.
If ye think (indeed) to have eternal life in the Scriptures, then show your
selves wise unto salvation by your diligence in reading, or hearing them read.
This point requires much pressing in these times, wherein too many are like
those, whom Isaiah taxes. Isa. 29.10.
Who, being covered with a spirit of slumber, dream of eating, but when they
are awake their souls are empty; Yet when a Book is offered them to be read,
they refuse, saying either The Book is Sealed, as do the Papists; or, They
cannot Read, as do thousands of irreligious people, whose carelessness to
hear the Scriptures read, (discovered by their late coming to the Church,
where the Scriptures be read, and their readiness to hear the reading of
vain Books and Ball^des) does manifest their want of religious zeal, to
supply their disability to read the Scriptures, by diligence in giving
attendance to the reading thereof. But there may come a time of trial, when
the Deaf shall hear the words of the Book, as ISAIAH Prophecieth in the same
Chapter. Verse. 17.1^
Which Prophecy implies, that he, who said, He could not read, should (yet)
have signified desire to hear the Book read. To prevent which trial (if it
may so please our most gracious God) let us imitate, yea, emulate the religious
Jews, Acts. 13.14.15. And 15.21.
who so diligently heard the old Testament read in their Synagogues every
Sabbath day, that Christ, and his Apostles saw it not necessary to quote
Chapter, and Verse, when they preached, or wrote. And why? Because, by diligent
hearing the Scriptures read, their memory was so confirmed, that they could
presently acknowledge every allegation to be contained in the Scriptures. To
which end, viz: the confirmation of memory by reading, was the Word of God
written; Yea so, That the children of Israel were commanded Deuteronomy. 11.19.18.
as well to write Gods words upon the posts of their houses, and upon their
gates, as to be speaking of them, when they sit, walk, etc. that they might
lay them up in their hearts. These things I now write, that thereby I may
stir you, and others up, by reading, to renew, and confirm your memory, that
it may, unto your farther edification, reflect upon this ground of Religion.
The Scriptures be the very Word of God. Which (indeed) is, The Principle of
all Principles concerning Religion, and therefore is (as it ought to be)
esteemed accordingly of all that do the Truth Ioh. 3.2^ Deuteronomy. 17.19
, that is, Obey God in Sincerity, so as they come to the light thereof, that
their deeds may be made manifest, that they be wrought according to God.
Therefore not only David a King, and an old man, professed ^^al.
37.25.^^9.105.9.
Gods Word to have been a Light to his paths, but the Spirit also, by way of a
Question, does, with a strong asseveration, affirm, That young men (if they
fear God) must redress their ways in taking heed to them according to Gods
Word. To which our most holy God, and to the Word of his grace, ^ct 20.32.
which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance amongst all
them which are sanctified, I heartily commend you.

THE PRINCIPLE OF ALL PRINCIPLES concerning Religion.
Act. 24.14.15.16. 14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which
they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets.

15. And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust.

16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward men.


IN these three Verses may be observed 4. grounds of Religion, whereof every
one is prooved by the other three, and is of that powerful truth, that if it
be believed indeed, it persuades the believer to make conscience of sin,
therefore all are worthy of due consideration, Viz. (1.) There is a God (by
name, The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) to be worshipped. (2.) There is a
Word of God (Viz. The Bible, that is, the Book of Books, consisting of the
old, and new Testament) to be believed. (3.) There is a Resurrection both of
just, and unjust to be expected. And (4.) There is a Conscience to be tendered.
The first ground has been laid as surely as I can. For none can be religious,
who does not believe it. The second is likewise to be surely laid. For if there
be no such Word, there can be no true religion, but superstition. The
Samaritans (...). 4.20.22.
and Athenians (...). 17.22.23.
were superstitious, because they worshipped God not according to his Word.
That therefore we may have true spiritual comfort in our Christian Religion,
in which we worship God, let us be well persuaded, that the Bible is the Word
of God. That imposter Mahomet, to make the Turks superstitiously to regard his
Alchoran, Compiled by himself, a Jew, and a Nestorian heretic, so plotted
with his Accomplices, that having told the Turks that God would send his
undoubted Word about a Camels neck out of the Wilderness, before the Sermon
was ended, a Camel came into the Church with the Alchoran about the neck.
Were not the Bible the undoubted Word of God, we Christians are the most absurd
in our Religion of all other. For we make him a God, and our only Savior,
whom we acknowledge to have been a man, and crucified. But if it be, then may
we, with comfort, avow our Religion, against Jews, Turks, and Papists.

That we may be well grounded in this point, I have determined to prove it not
only by the other three grounds, but also by imitating an order of proofs
which Christ observes, Ioh. 5.31. to 39. With which I will begin as being most
worthy in regard of the Author, and as showing, that the Bible, which is the
Word written, may be prooved to be the Word of God, by like Arguments as Christ
prooveth himself to be the Eternal Word ^ ^oh. 1.1.14.
made flesh, that is, the Messiah. Which he prooveth by 4. testimonies. 1. Of
John Baptist. 2. Of his own Works. 3. Of his Father; And 4. Of the
Scriptures. Jews did in John Baptist. For it is The Pillar of truth Tim. 3.15.
. Not because the Church supporteth the Scriptures, so as to be the Word of
God, as Papists would make us to believe. Nay, The Scriptures support the
Church, so as to be the Church of God. Indeed, if there be no other use of a
Pillar but to support, then that place of 1 Timothy 3.15. might seem to make for
the Papists: but there is another use of a Pillar, viz. To have that written,
or engraven thereupon, which is to be remembered for ever. As in Rev. 3.12.
Revel. 3.12.
Christ says, Him that overco^meth, I will make a Pillar in the Temple of my
God. How? I will write upon him the Name of my God, and my new Name. Indeed,
The true sense of that to Timothy is this; As a Pillar does preferue the
memory of those things which are written thereon; So the Church preserves
Truth commended thereunto. This sense the place it self does intimate; For
(says Paul) These things I write, that, if I tarry long, thou may know how
to behave thy self in the house of God, that it being the Church of the living
God (therefore ever-living) may, as a Pillar, preserve Truth which it learneth
of thee. Hence it is that Aust in says, ^ntra Epist. ^^md. cap. 5.
I had not believed the Scriptures to have been the Word, had I not been
moved with the Churches credit. Thus was he moved indeed, when he first
turned from his Manichisme: But when he was settled in Religion, thus he writes
to Maximinus. Contra Maxim. ^ib. 3. cap. 14.
Neither must I allege the Council of Nice in prejudice of the matter, nor
you the Council of Ariminum, Let matter strive with matter, cause with cause,
reason with reason, by authority of the Scriptures. And in another place.
Read this out of a Prophet, De Pastor. cap. 14.
out of a Psalm, out of the Law, out of the Gospel, out of an Apostle; Thence
recite I the Church dispersed over the whole world; and our Lord saying. My
sheep hear my voice. So that Austin did like the Samaritans, who, at the
first, believed Christ to be the Messiah for the saying of the Woman, but
afterward, they professed. Ioh. 4.39.42.
Now we believe, not because of thy saying; For we have heard him our selves.

2 Cor. 12.9. 1 Cor. 3.4.^.
. It being like fire, and an hammer, Ier. 23.29.22.
converteth the soul, Psalm. 19.7.
being not carnal, casts down imaginations exalted, and brings every
thought to the obedience of Christ 2 Cor. 10.4.^
. For it is the sword of the Spirit Ephesians. 6.17.
; because the Spirit of God, being author thereof Pet. 1.21.
by it works mightily upon the spirit of man. Heb. 4.12. For it accompanies
the same, Isa. 59.21. so as a man is compelled to acknowledge the power of Gods
word, when it is faithfully preached, 1 Cor. 4.^.

The other is, They prophecy many great things, which are accomplished in due
time. As the bondage of Israel in Egypt, Ezod. 12.41. Captivity in Babylon,
Ier. 29.10. The succession of four Monarchs, Dan. 2.37. to 40. Coming of the
Messiah, Dan 9.24.25.26. Calling of the Gentiles, Isa. 2.2.3. And revealing of
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.8. that is, the Pope revealed after the removal of
the Emperor from Rome. So that, as God was acknowledged so to be, because he,
by Daniel, opened secrets Dan. 2.47.
and a Prophet is to be acknowledged so to be, if his Prophecy come to pass
De^t. 18.18. etc.
, I may conclude, that, because so many, and great Prophecies in the Scriptures
are duly fulfilled, they are therefore the undoubted word of God

Father that is God, Gal. 1. I who has given testimony to the scriptures, viva
voce, and by his wonderful works. He gave testimony viva voce to the old
Testament, when he gave the Decalogue Deuteronomy. 5.2^
. Whereof the Prophets, and the rest of the Scriptures are explanations, so
that as Law, and Prophets is here (per Synchdochen) put for the whole old
Testament, so else where is Prophets only Acts. 26.27. Ephc. 2.20.
. So that, as the whole lump, and branches be holy, if the first fruits, and
root be holy Romans 11.16.
: So the testimony given viva voce to the Decalogue, is an authorizing of the
whole old Testament, God likewise viva voce gave Testimony to the new
Testament, when, by a voice out of a cloud Mat. 17.^.
, he said This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.
Wherein should we hear him? To wit, In the Gospel, which is The word of
Reconciliation 2 Cor. 5.19.
by forgiveness of our sins, and is therefore worthily called The word of
Christ Colos. 3.16.
, Which reconciliation is intimated in these words. In whom I am well pleased.
This word of Christ is contained in the new Testament; Therefore, by this
voice, testimony is thereunto given. This inference is confirmed by the
Apostle Peter 2 Pet. 1.16.17.
. Who by this voice, proves, that the Apostles followed not deceiveable
fables, but opened the power, and coming of Christ. God also gave testimony
thereunto by wonderful works. For) if Antiquity may be believed Iren. lib. 3 ^ap
25.
) He confirmed the old Testament by this miracle. Ptolomy King of Egypt,
hearing the books of the Jews highly exalted, set 70. learned Jews in so many
places, so as they could not confer, to translate those books out of Hebrew
into Greek. When they had done, the 70. translations so agreed word for word,
as if all had conferred, and agreed upon one translation. The number of the
books being thirty nine, The puacitie, and ambiguity of Hebrew words, and
experience of diversity in translating far more intelligible languages,
considered, this is a great miracle. Touching the new Testament, the Text says
plainly that Mark 16.2^
the Apostles preached every where; And the Lord confirmed the word with signs
that followed: therefore God gave testimony to the new Testament by wonderful
works. Here Papists may be answered, who require us to show by what miracles,
we confirm our new Gospel, I answer; Indeed, if the Gospel, which we
preach, were new, as they (like Jews Mark 1.27.
) do term it, then it is to be confirmed with new miracles, or not to be
received: But being the same which Christ, and his Apostles preached, it is so
sufficiently confirmed by the miracles which Christ, and his Apostles wrought,
that we, with Austin Aug de Civi^. Dei. l. 22.
call him a wonder of men who now requires miracles to that end.

God gave testimony both to the old, and new Testament by preserving them
miraculously. Touching the former it is to be considered, that Israel was for
a long season, without the true God, without Priest to teach and without Law
Chro. 15.3.
Is it not a special work of God, that the Scriptures then being were
preserved, and that in purity? And the rather, if we consider how despitefully
Iehoiakim, cut and burnt Ieremies roll, Ier. 36.23. It is yet more remarkable
that the people of God were captives. 70. years in Babylon Iere: 29.10. and
27.22.
, whether also the holy vessels were carried. How were the Scriptures preserved
all this while otherwise than by the wonderful providence of God? But it is
most admirable, that Jerusalem, and the Temple were twice destroyed, once by
Nebuchadnezzars servant 2 King 25.
, and again after Christ his ascension, Luke 19.41 to 44
and yet the holy Books kept in the Temple are preserved. Touching the latter;
It is not unknown, that in the first ages of the Church Acts and Mo^ments, p.
30.
there were grievous persecutions for three hundred years, by ten Tyrannical
Heathen Emperors of Rome, whereof (it may be) Christ prophesied, when he told
the Churches they should have tribulation Revel. 2.^
ten days, or times. How were the Scriptures preserved all this terrible time,
other-wise than by the wonderful providence of God? Again; Since those ten
persecutions, Antichrist the Pope has exercised his tyranny over the Churches
for the space of about. 900. years. Under a type of a King, Daniel Dan.
11.31.36.37.
prophecyeth of him, which is to be considered. For it is said; His heart shall
be against the holy Covenant; So the Popes heart is against the new Testament
in Christ his blood, to establish his merits by works. It is also said, On
that King's part arms shall stand, as now they do on the Popes part; and they
shall pollute the Sanctuary, and set up the abominable desolation: So does the
Pope, pollute the Churches, and sets up his abominable Mass. That King,
Did what he listed, cared not for any God, but magnified himself above all.
Does not the Pope all this? Lastly; That King, In place of the God of his
Fathers, honored the God, Mauzzim: Does not the Pope honor in the Mass a God
of bread in place of the true God? But what may induce us to suppose that King
to be a type of the Pope? Besides the many agreements noted, It is to be
observed, that howsoever all things, written of that King were true according
to the letter: yet Christ says Mat. 24.15.
When ye see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniell, stand in the
holy places etc, Whereby he applies this Prophecy to the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the Temple by the Roman Emperor, as does more plainly appear
in Luke 21.20. conferred with Dan. 9.26.27. Divines, not without Analogy, apply
this prophecy to the Mass, that abomination (indeed) of Desolation. Again,
It is to be observed, that the Roman Emperor was the first beast ^evel. 13.1.
(...) 7.11.12.
that the Pope is another beast, which does all that the first beast did; And
that the Church of Christ is the House of God, 1 Timothy 3.
as was the Temple. So then, as the Roman Emperor destroyed the Temple, so
the Pope has persecuted, and still persecuteth the true Church of Christ. How
did the new Testament, so opposite to Popery, escape so long a rage, and
reign? This is the more strange these things considered. The old Testament in
Hebrew, and the new Testament in Greek, were strangers in Israel ever since
the Pope was, before the Gospel was renewed. The Pope will not suffer the
Scriptures to be read to the people in their mother tongue, and the second
Commandment condemning the worshipping of Images is in popish Catechismes
thrust out of the Decalogue. So that I may conclude that as Nebuchadnezzar Dan.
3.^
acknowledged Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to have been the servants of
God, because they escaped the fiery furnace: so God gives a remarkable
testimony to the Scriptures, that they be his undoubted word, by his so
wonderful preservation.

Now it is time to proceed to the testimony of Scriptures. ^ohn 1.13.14.17.18.
justified the record which he bare of himself. (1) We know from whence the
Scriptures came, even from Gods spirit Pet. 1.20.21.
(2) The Father (as we have proved) is a witness, therefore the testimony of
two is true, and consequently of credit. Now Christ says ^hn 5.39.
The Scriptures, (that is the old Testament, which were before Christ) testify
of me. If of Christ, then of his Word, that is, his Gospel. For the woman of
Samaria could tell ^^hn 4.25.
that the Messiah, that is, Christ, when he came should tell us all things. It
may be she had heard, that Moses prophesied of Christ, who was to be heard in
all things Acts 7.^^
Besides, Christ is the corner stone of the foundation, (that is, doctrine) as
of the Apostles, so of the Prophets. Therefore the Prophets give testimony to
Christ, and his word. As Moses and the Prophets (that is, the old Testament)
give testimony to Christ, and his word, which is the doctrine of the new
Testament: So Christ in those words, John 5.39. does give an honorable
testimony to the old Testament, saying, In them ye think to have eternal
life. And two of the chief Apostles give likewise testimony to the old
Testament. For Peter says 2 Pet. 1.^
We have a most sure word of the Prophets. Here Prophets (as Ephesians: 2.20. is put
for the whole old Testament. And Paul says 2 Timothy 3^
The whole Scripture is given by inspiration. Whereby the old Testament,
without doubt, is signified, and the new Testament may be understood.

Having finished this course of Testimonies to the word by way of imitation as
well as I can, I am now to show how the other three grounds do prove this.
^^ason 5.
The first is, There is a God to be worshipped, therefore there is a word of
God to be believed. There be many Gods, so called Cor. 8.5.
Every one has his prescribed worship, whereby he is honored according to his
own mind, as Saturn had his Saturnalia, and drunken Bacchus his Bacchanalia.
Yea, the Scriptures intimate as much, ^cts 7.43.
Moloch had his tabernacle, and Remphan his Star. So that the true God
forbids his people ^eut. 12.30
to enquire how other Nations serve their Gods. Now can we think that our
great, and only true God is less zealous of his glory, then false Gods be of
their supposed honor? Heathen men concluded otherwise, For when they heard
that the Samaritans were devoured by Lions, they deemed the cause was, Not
worshipping the God of the Land after his own manner 2 King. 17.25.26.
. God has made all things for his own sake, yea even the wicked for the day
of evil Prove. 16.
, that he may be glorified, as by all things made, so by the lust condemnation
of the wicked. Therefore he has given a Word, that by holy Worship, according
to it, he may be glorified. For by such worship especially is He glorified
Levn. 10.2.3.
, and therefore the Glory departed from Israel, when the Arc, before which
Israel worshipped, was taken by the Philistims 1 Samuel 4.^ Exodus 33.
: So that God did justly forsake the Gentiles, because, when they knew him by
his Works of Creation Romans 1. etc.
, they did not glorify him as God, by worshipping him according to his will.
That this consequence may yet better appear to be good, it is to be duly
observed, that immediately after God, in the Decalogue Exodus 20.3^
, required Worship as due to him only, he commands that worship to be
according to his word, and not by man's inventions: And that, where God
forbids to inquire how other Nations serve their Gods, Deuteronomy. 12.30.32.
he commands to take heed to his Word. And lastly, that when God commanded
his people to sanctify him, he presently commanded to bind up the Testimony
Isa. 8.13.16.
, and to seal up the Law among his Disciples. For (indeed) no Book does so
glorify God, as does the Bible, therefore it is the true Word of God Ioh. 7.18.
. All that is said, being well considered, this consequence is good. There is a
God, to wit, Jehovah, therefore there is a Word of God, viz: The old and new
Testament.

The other ground, Cicero held the Immortality of the soul; yet the Athenian
Philosophers deemed the resurrection of the body to be an unheard of point
Act. 17.1^.32.
. For, indeed, it is an Article of Christian faith, and not a Tenet of natural
reason. So that the Sadduces (though Jews) rejected it Mat. 22.33.
. Therefore if it be an Article of Faith, then the Scriptures, being the only
book, that does clearly avouch, and prove it, must needs be the word of
Faith. Again; Why must there be a Resurrection? That the just may arise unto
life, and the unjust unto condemnation Ioh. 5.29.
. For the last day is, The day of the general declaration of the just
judgment of God Romans 2.5. Dan. 12.2^.
. Now that God may appear just when he judges, it is requisite, that he make
his Will known by his Word; For where no Law is, there is no transgression
Romans 4.15
. Therefore says Christ, If I had not come, and spoken to them, they should
not have had sin Ioh. 15.22.
: but now they have no cloak for sin. The Gentiles had not the Law Romans
2.12.14.15.
, how can they be judged? Yes, because they have the effect of the Law written
in their hearts.

The third ground, There is a Conscience to be tendered, therefore there is a
Word of God to be believed. For the Spirit of God, which speaks in the
Scriptures, so inlightneth the minds of Gods people, that the Word works
upon their Consciences. That as face answers face in Water Prove. 27.19.
. So where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is such liberty Cor. 3.17.
, that is, Freedom from the veil over our hearts, that we behold, as in a
glass, the glory of the LORD with open face, and are changed into the same
image. So that the Apostle does presently affirm, And 4.1.2.
That having this Ministry, he did not handle the Word deceitfully, but in
declaration of the truth, he approoved himself to every man's Conscience. In
another place, ^ T^es. 4.8.
he thus writes, He that despises these things, despises not man but God,
who has even given you his holy Spirit. Which is as if he should say, The
Spirit of God, in your reading, cannot but acknowledge the same Spirit in me
writing, therefore take heed how ye despise those things. It may be observed,
that the more godly any is, the more readily does his Conscience reflect upon
the Word. Which is intimated by the Apostle, saying, 1 Cor. 2.6.
I speak Wisdom among them that are perfect. Nay; the Consciences of them,
who are not perfect, are moved by the Word. The unlearned man, the secrets of
whose heart are made manifest by Prophecy 1 Cor 14.24.25.
, (that is, powerful Preaching the Word) is compelled, in Conscience, to say,
God is in the Preacher indeed: And Agrippa was by Paul's Preaching, (though he
a prisoner) compelled, in conscience, to say Acts. 16.27.28.
; Almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian. So that the conscience
gives an evident testimony to the Word of God. All then duly considered, we
may collect, and conclude, etc.

First, if the Church of God, throughout all ages, have avouched the old, and
new Testament to be the Word of God. Secondly, if, howsoever the Scriptures be
for the most part, simple, and plain, yet, Gods Spirit working by them, they
be mighty in operation. Thirdly, if the Scriptures contain many Prophecies of
great things, which accordingly came to pass in due time. Fourthly, if God
gave testimony to the old, and new Testament, by a voice from heaven. Fifthly,
if he confirmed them by miracles. Sixthly, if he have wonderfully preserved them
unto this time. Seventhly, if the old Testament give testimony to the new, and
the new to the old; as Moses to Christ, and Christ to Moses. Eighthly, if it
follow, that, If there be a God to be worshipped, viz. The God of Israel, there
must needs be a Word, viz: the Scriptures, that according to them he may be
worshipped. Ninthly, if it be a good consequence, A Resurrection of the just,
and unjust is to be expected, therefore there is a Word of God, viz. the
Scriptures, that God may appear just, when he judges in the last day; And
tenthly, if this be a sound Enthymeme, There is a Conscience, therefore the
Scriptures be the Word of God; Because the Conscience, both of perfect
Christians, and other, does give an evident testimony to them; then, There is a
Word of God, viz. the old, and new Testament, to be believed.

Here (perhaps) some would expect a resolution of the question between the
Papists, and us, touching the Apocryphal Writings, viz. Esdras, Tobit, etc.
Whether they be parts of the Canonical Scriptures, or no. I told you, when I
first entered upon this Text, that it offers just occasion of discussing many
points of Religion, fitter for the Schools, than for this Auditory: Yet
because many take occasion to deem those Writings to be Canonical, because
they are ordinarily bound in the midst of them, (notwithstanding the wall of
separation, prudently and providently set, by Authority, between the Books
of the old Testament, and them, I mean, the title [Apocrypha] with a
declaration of the meaning thereof, I will show you my judgment in a few words.
I deem them, or most of them, Writings worthy of reverend estimation for their
antiquity, and many things worthy diligent reading: But I deny them to be
Canonical, that is, the words of God, or Rules, whereby our Faith is to be
squared. For we are to be builded only upon the foundation of the Apostles,
and Prophets, Christ himself being the corner stone Ephesians. 2.20.
. For reverence to those Writings, and for my words sake, I forbear to note
obliquities in them, such as are sufficient to demonstrate that they be not
endited by the Spirit of God. I therefore desire you to consider but this one
Argument. If they be parts of Canonical Scriptures, they are parts either of
the old, or of the new Testament: But they are parts of neither; Therefore
they are no parts of the Canonical Scriptures. I never heard that any Papist
affirmed them to be parts of the new Testament. And (indeed) their antiquity,
and contents do manifest that they were written before any part of the new
Testament was written. To prove that they be not parts of the old Testament,
I will not urge a reason of Hierom In Prolog^^ Galeato.
, viz: They are not in the Register of divine Books, which the Jews
preserved: but desire this to be considered, that they be in Greek, whereas
all the Books of the old Testament be in Hebrew. So (without doubt) had these
been likewise, had they been written by inspiration of the Holy Ghost. For
the Oracles of God, the giving of the Law, the service of God, and the promises
pertained to the Israelites (...).
. If these were amongst them, should they not have been in the same Language?
Again; The Law, and the Prophets were read in the Synagogues of the Jews
(...) ^1.^7.
. If these Writings were amongst them, should not they also have been read?
But surely Popery had not then prevailed, to persuade the Scriptures to be read
in a strange language to the people assembled on the Sabbath day. Therefore I
may conclude, that the Apocryphal Writings are no parts of the Canonical
Scriptures.

Now am I to proceed on to Uses to be builded upon this ground of Religion.
There is a Word of God, viz: The Bible, consisting of the old and new
Testament, to be believed. If this be true indeed, then the holy Scriptures are
to be highly esteemed, as the undoubted Word of God. For, as when we know God,
if we do not glorify him as God Romans 1.2^
, he will not be better pleased with us, than he was with the Gentiles: so if
we acknowledge the truth of this Doctrine, and do not esteem the Word as the
Word of God, we shall be judged as despisers of it. For not to regard, as we
should, is to despise. As Timothy had been despised 1 Cor. 1^.10.11.
, if (notwithstanding his youth) the Corinthians had not convoyed him on his
Journey toward Paul, seeing he wrought the work of the Lord, as Paul did. And
Christ makes not hearing, and despising the Word Preached by the seventie Luke
10.16.11.
to be aequivalent. How indignely this despising is taken, shaking of dust, and
lessening of the judgments of Tyrus, and Sidon, in comparison do demonstrate.
Therefore let us imitate David, who esteemed the Word better than Gold, yea
than much fine Gold ^al. 19.10.
; and the Merchant, who sold all he had to buy a Pearl of price ^^at.
13.45.^6.
. And let us deserve the commendations which Paul gives to the Thessalonians
These. 2.13.
, for receiving the Word, not as the Word of men, but as the Word of God.
Suppose a true religious man had the only Bible in the world, would he part
with it, think ye, for the richest Jewel in the World? If a Book being the
Workmanship of a man be worthily so to be esteemed for the Contents sake, how
highly are we to esteem the doctrine of the Bible, being the Word of God? But
how are we to manifest our high estimation of the Word of God? Not chiefly by
binding the Bible fair, though that shows some good respect thereof: Nor by
setting it handsomely in the Window, or some eminent place, and never, or
seldom read therein: But by hearing, believing, and obeying it as the Word of
God.

In such hearing, Psalm. 110^
: and, That many people shall flow to the house of the Lord Isa. 2.2.
, inciting one another. And why? Because the Word of the Lord goes from
Jerusalem. This is to seek after the knowledge of Gods will in his Word, as
for treasure Prove. 2.
. According to those Prophecies. The Kingdom of God was Preached, and every
man pressed unto it Luke 16.
after the coming of John Baptist. The Apostles would not go from Christ Ioh.
6.67.68.
, (as some Disciples did) because He had the words of eternal life. And
Cornelius a Captain, when he heard that Peter should tell him what he ought to
do, sent immediately for him, and having called together his kinsmen, and
special friends, waited for him ^ct. 10.5.6.7 ^4.33.
, and were ready to hear whatsoever he should say from God. Hereby are
condemned such as have small zeal in repairing to the Word, but absent
themselves upon small occasions, as prooving of Oxen ^uk. 14.19.^1.
, with whom God is angry. Such as remember not the Sabbath day, so as to
dispose of their business, that they may be ready in due time to attend the
Word. They will remember, and plead, that it is a day of rest, and sleep the
longer that day: But they forget that the rest must be holy to the Lord ^od.
31.15.
. Yea such are hereby condemned, who though they seem to have some mind to
hear the Word Preached, and therefore cast to come to that betime, yet are not
diligent to come to hear the Word read. As if the Word read be not to be
regarded as the Word of God, and, As if it be not necessary that Gods people
should know, in some measure, the letter, and body of the Scriptures; Whereunto
they cannot attain by hearing only those small Texts whereupon Preachers
Discourse. Therefore Christian Churches have well imitated the ancient people
of God Act. 13.1. and 15.21^
, in appointing the Scriptures to be read in the great Congregations,
especially on the Lords day, so as the body thereof may be read over again,
and again in time. Whereunto if the people do not diligently resort,
especially such as want learning, leisure, or Bibles to read, do they esteem
the Word read as the Word of God?

Psalm. 95^
, or should do: when the word is read, or preached, God speaks to us, and
shall we not hear him with religious reverence? We hear the Judge giving a
charge in the Assizes, with uncovered heads, and all civil reverence, and
shall not our demeanure be religiously reverent, when God speaks unto us in
his word? Moses was to put off his shoes because of the presence of God
speaking out of a burning bush: ^od. 3.4.5.9.10.11.17.
And the people were to be sanctified when they were to meet with God speaking
the ten Commandments. When we hear the word preached we are in Gods
special presence, therefore we are exhorted by the Spirit ^^cles. 5.1.
to look to our feet before we enter into the house of God, and be more
ready to hear, than to offer the sacrifice of fools. And Christ stood when he
read his text ^^ke 4.16.20.
: but he sat after, when he preached. All this does show, that the word is to
be heard with religious reverence. Yea there be some learned Divines, who hold
that men ought to be uncovered, that is, put off their hatts the whole Sermon
while. But for my part, I dare not precisely bind the conscience of any man to
this, or that particular demonstration of religious reverence. Though I grant
that a Sermon is to be heard with religious reverence as well as the word read:
For Ministers of the Gospel are the messengers of God (as were the Priests of
the Law Mal. 2.7. 2 Cor. 5.^ 1 Cor. 4. (...)
) and it is to be presumed, that their lips also preserve knowledge, therefore
people must, with religious reverence, hearken to the word from their mouth.
Hereby are condemned such as come to Wisdoms feast Prou 9.3.
without a wedding garment Math. 22.
, that is, due preparation and fitness. As also such as sleep, talk, gaze
about, or otherwise have their minds drawn from hearing the word. Is this to
have either their eyes fastened Luke 4.2^
upon the Preacher, or to have hearts opened by the Lord Acts 16. (...)
to hearken to his word?

the Word to repair thereunto with diligence, and to hear it with reverence,
except we believe it as the Word of God. For if the Word be not mixed with
Faith in those that hear it Hebr. 4.2.
, it will not profit them unto either reformation, aedification, or
consolation, which are the effects of Prophecy 1 Cor. 14.3.24.25.
, that is, of powerful Preaching. Again; He, who believes the Word so as to
receive Ioh. 1.12.
, that is, to believe the testimony thereof, does seal that God is true (...)
and 3.33.34.
: But God is true (I may add, Absolutely) and to be justified in his words
Romans 3.4.
; I may add, because they be absolutely true as God is. Therefore they are to
be heard with Faith, resting upon them absolutely without all doubting of their
truth. For the Word of God is called the Faith of God Romans 3.3.
: Which intimates, that if we believe Faith to be in God, we must believe his
Word accordingly. This is a maine difference between the Word of God (which is
to be heard with Faith howsoever it cross our judgment; for Faith surmounteth
Reason) and the Word of man, which is no further to be believed, than it
agrees with the Word, which is, Truth it self Ioh. 17.1^
: For every man is by nature, a Liar Romans 3.^
, and therefore is not to be justified in all his words. So that, Gods people
may lawfully (so it be with Discretion, and Humility) examine the Doctrine, by
what Preacher soever delivered, whether it be warranted by the Scriptures, or
no, if the truth thereof be not evident to them, as did the nobly-minded
Beraeans Acts. 17.1^.11.
. But if the truth of the Word be delivered to their Consciences, then must
they believe it without any demurring. So the Apostles believed that Christ his
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed Ioh. 6.55.^^.61.66.67.6^
, and followed him without any offense, because he had the words of eternal
life, whereas other seeming Disciples were offended, and gave over following
Christ, because it seemed to their natural reason to be an hard saying. So
Abraham ^om. 4.18.19.20.21.
above hope, in regard of his old age, and his wife's barrenness, but under
hope in regard of Gods power, believed the Word of God, promising to make him a
Father of many Nations. So Hezekiah ^sa. 39.5.6.^.8.
(though a King) was not angry with the Prophet, prophesying most grievous
things to him, but believed his Prophecy (so crossing natural affections) as
the Word of God, and said, The Word of the Lord is good. Here I suppose, it
will be some comfort to know how ye may judge of your selves in the time of
hearing, whether the Word be mixed with faith; I Will show you. If your hearts
answer Gods Word, as did David's, when God said Psalm. 27.8.
, Seek ye my face, his heart answered, O Lord, I will seek thy face. For
Faith is such an assent to every Word of God, as produces affections, and
actions answerable to the Word, whereunto the heart assenteth. So that when
John Baptist Preaches Repentance Math. 11.1.16.17.18.1^.
, we grieve in the sense of sin: and when Christ Preaches the Gospel, we
are comforted in hope of forgiuenensse.

Hereby are condemned such as are like those proud men Iere. 43.2.
, who told Jeremy, that he spoke falsely when he delivered the Word of God
which crossed their purposes. Secondly, Such as be like the Prince 2 King.
7.1.2.17.
, who contraried the Word of God touching sudden cheapnesse of Corn, because
it was contrary to his sensual reason: But the Word was fulfilled, and he
perished. And thirdly, Mockers 2 Pet. 3.3.4.
, which, in these last days, will walk after their lusts, not believing the
promise of Christ his coming to judgment, because it is deferred. Yea,
fourthly, those weak ones, who are like to David Psalm. 116.11.
, who said in his fear, All men be liars, meaning especially Samuel, who
anointed him to be King Sam. 16.13
: But before he got the Crown, Saul so persecuted him, that he doubted of the
word which Samuel had spoken. Fifthly, Much more are they hereby condemned, who,
out of an humor troubled by the Word, do cavil against it, contrary to the
Apostle James his exhortation, Tam. 1.21.19
That we should receive the Word with meekness, and therefore should be swift
to hear slow to speak, and slow to wrath. For Wrath, because the Word
crosses our mind, stirs up the tongue unto gainsaying, and therefore the
Word is not believed as the Word of God. Sixthly, Hereby are condemned such as
despair in the time of affliction, and do not live by Faith Hab. 2.3.4.
, waiting for the appointed time when the vision will speak comfort. And
seaventhly, such as like the Elders of Israel Ezekiel. 14.1.3.
, set up Idols in their hearts, which are stumbling blocks of iniquity,
stopping the way between the Word, and Faith, so as they cannot be mixed in
them that hear, I mean those who hear the Word with preiudicate opinions,
Papists or other, who will stop their ears, and not hear the Word, so as to
believe it as the Word of God, charm the charmer never so wisely Psalm. 58.5.
.

casting it away 1 Samuel 15.22.23.
. Therefore we deceive our selves, though we be hearers, if we be not doers
also of the Word Iam. 1.22.
: But what is required of us that we may obey the Word as the Word of God? I
answer, many things. Among the rest especially, Absolute obedience to
whatsoever the Word commands, without making any question, or difficulty.
For God is of absolute authority, and therefore we pray, Math. 6.10.
Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven: and, His Word is perfect, and
right Psalm. 19.7.8.
, Therefore our absolute obedience is not blind, as is the obedience of
Jesuits to their superiors, whom they must obey, though they command the
killing of Princes, not inquiring after the lawfulness of such a Commandment:
But their superstitious, and blind obedience condemns us, if we yield not
absolute obedience to the Word of God, which is of absolute authority, and
altogether without error. So be not the Commandments of the Pope, or of any
humane Superior whomsoever Let us consider some few examples of obedience to
the Word, as to the Word of God. That unmatchable example of Abraham, may well
be Instar omnium, who obeying the Word of God, spared not Isaac his only son
Genesis 22.1.2.^.9.10.16.
, begotten in his old age And 21.2.
, and in both these respects dearly beloved; Yea, the Son of Promise Gal.
4.28.
; with whom, and his seed, God promised to establish an everlasting Covenant
Genesis 17.19.
: But without pleading any of these things Zach. 12.
, arose early to go to sacrifice him, with his own hands. Now whereas Abraham
is the Father of all Romans 4.1
, who walk in the steps of his Faith, I will tell you one other example of his
obedience to the Word of God, which is remarkable too, the rather because the
Spirit of God takes special notice thereof Heb. 11.
, showing us that Abraham obeyed God commanding him to go he knew not whither.
Which last words imply, that he obeyed readily without questioning whether
dangers were in the way, and what commodious dwelling was in the place
whereunto he should go; therefore it is said, that by Faith he obeyed. So also
it is written in the same Chapter, Verse 17. that Abraham offered up Isaac by
Faith. Whereby the Spirit of God intimates, that in both these obediences,
Abraham esteemed the Commandments, as the words of God. I shall express this
point yet more plainly by an example of Peter's walking upon the Sea at Christ
his bidding ^at. 14.34.^^.36.37.^8.39.
. But note, that Peter perceiving that it was Christ, and not a Spirit, as he,
and his fellows feared, who walked on the Sea in the night, said, Master, if
it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water. Which shows how highly he
esteemed of Christ his Word, persuaded that obeying it he should neither tempt
God (...) 4.5.6.7.
, nor perish by going on the water. I will add but another example, wherein
ye may see both the Wisdom of the flesh, and obedience of Faith. Naaman was
directed King. 5.10 12.13.14.
by a messenger from Elisha, to wash himself in Jordan for cure of his
leprosy; He went away murmuring; But persuaded by his servants to have due
regard of the Prophets word, he obeyed, and was cured.

Hereby are condemned (1) rebellious hearers of the word, who say, The word
which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hear Ier.
44.16.
: but we will do what we think good, and as our Princes, and Fathers before
us have done. (2) Presumptuous hearers, who bless themselves in their hearts
Deuteronomy. 29.1^.2^
, when they hear judgments out of the word against their sins, and so add
drunkenness to thirst: but God will not be merciful to such. (3)
Hypocritical hearers, who call one upon another Ezekiel. 33.30.31.
to hear the word, and sit before the Preacher, as reverently as others, but
they make a jest of it, and will not obey it. And (4) such as pretend obedience
to the word out of a sudden flash of zeal, like the young man Mark.
10.17.21.22.
who came running, and kneeling to Christ, to know what he might do for
eternal life: But when Christ bad him sell, and give all to the poor, and
follow him, he went away sorrowful; for he was rich: So, many, when the word
reprooveth them for drunkenness, are grieved for the present, confess it is
their sin, and wish they could leave it, but they do not.

I have told you of some to be condemned for not believing, and of others, for
not obeying the word as the word of God; Now I must tell you of the
Antichristian Synagogue of Rome, which shamefully offends in both those
respects, in taking the second Commandment out of the Decalogue, as has
been said, contrary to the express word of God; who gives this peremptory
charge Deuteronomy. 12.32.
, Whatsoever I command you, take heed you do it. Thou shall put nothing
thereto, nor take ought therefrom. If the Papists did believe the word, as the
word of God, durst they thus abuse ignorant people? God deliver us from
unreasonable, and evil men These. 3.2.
: for all men have not faith. Now; why do they this? Even because they are so
addicted to Idolatry, that despising the censure of Christ, Mat. 5.19. they
will neither obey this word of God themselves Mat. 5.1^
, nor suffer the people to obey it, in not worshipping Images. For they fear,
that if it were published in their Catechismes, the people would, in time,
abhor that babish, and Babylonish Idolatry, observing how precisely that
commandment forbids the worshipping of Images, and how jealous God is
thereof. And the more, when they know and consider, that the whole Decalogue
was written twice in Tables of Stone Exodus 3.18. and 3^ and 20.1^
, with the finger of God; which argues the perpetuity thereof, and that the
Commandment forbidding worshipping of Images is twice recorded by the Spirit
Deuteronomy. 5.
, as the second of the ten Commandments spoken by God himself. But I pray you
take knowledge of most damnable cousenage, viz. Because the Scriptures say
expressly, that God wrote ten Commandments in the two Tables ^eut. 10.4.
, and the people generally know that there must be ten Commandments, they
divide the tenth Commandment, and make Thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, the ninth; and Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc. the tenth.
Note further, I pray you, as cousenage, so gross absurdity; For the
Commandment consists only in these words, Thou shall not covet; So that it
is absurd to say that there be so many Commandments as there be objects of
coveting mentioned, as Ox, Ass, etc. Were it not absurd to make two
Commandments of the fifth, because therein be mentioned two objects, ( viz.
Father, and Mother) of Honor, the duty commanded. If it be said, that Honor
is but once commanded, whereas Coveting is twice forbidden, yea so, as that
Coveting a neighbors wife is first forbidden, as if there were a kind of
respect to the seventh Commandment: and Coveting a neighbors house, is
forbidden afterward, as if there were a kind of respect to the eight
Commandment: I answer. All (yet) is but Coveting; which is twice urged,
because more knowledge should be taken of the Commandment: For if Paul had not
known Lust to be a sin Romans 7.^
, had not this Commandment forbidden it, how would others have known it? But
further, I answer; That howsoever, indeed, not-coveting a wife be first set
down Deuteronomy. 5.21. yet notcoveting an house is first set down Exodus 20.17.
Which shows that not-coveting house, wife, etc. is forbidden by one, and the
same Commandment. Have not we cause to thank God, that we are delivered from
Popery, which is the Mystery of iniquity?

Here (it may be) some will grant that the Word spoken by God, or Christ, who
was God as well as man ^ath. 1.23.
, is to be believed, and obeyed absolutely without any doubting, or
questioning: But they think, that the doctrine of others is not so to be
believed, and obeyed. Let such remember that God approoved the mind of the
people, desiring that GOD would speak to them no more himself (...)
5.25.26.27.28.
, and promising to hear, and do whatsoever God shall speak unto them by his
servant. Moses, Prophets, and Apostles sent immediately from God, or Christ,
their words are to be believed, and obeyed absolutely: But so are not the
Sermons of Preachers in these times. Indeed, was immediately 1 Cor. 12.^.
ordained by Christ, whereunto they having fit gifts for the same, are called
by the voice of the Church Acts. 14.2^
, and therefore to be esteemed as Ministers of Christ 1 Cor. 16.10.11.
. For they perform the same ordinary work of the Ministry, in disposing the
Mysteries of God unto the aedification of the Church, which the Apostles did.
Therefore the Apostle exhorts Gods people Heb. 13.1^
to obey (which implies hearing, and believing) such as had the charge of
their souls. If then people are to esteem their Pastors, and Teachers, as the
Ministers of Christ, they must, as did Cornelius Acts. 10.3.33.
, presume, that they will Preach the Word of GOD, and be prepared accordingly
to hear, which implies believing and obeying. I grant, that the doctrine of
Pastors, and Teachers, be they never so learned, and faithful, is subject to
error; whereas the Prophets, and Apostles delivered an infallible truth,
therefore people may the more diligently (so it be with humility) try the
Spirits. ^ Ioh. 4.1.
But if the truth of Gods Word be declared to their Consciences, let them
remember what Christ says Luke 10.1.16.
, speaking (not of the Apostles, but) of the seaventie Disciples; He that
hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me. Lastly, let
it be considered, Whether Naaman could have excused his not-washing in Jordan 2
King. 5.10
, by saying, He was commanded so to do by a messenger, and not by the Prophet
Elisha; seeing that, which the Messenger commanded, was the Word of God as
well, as if Elisha had spoken it.

Ezechiels time Ezekiel. 33.30.
, (but with better minds) Let us go, and hear what is the Word that comes
from the Lord. When they go to hear their Pastors, and Teachers, they must
not bring with them ears, either Antichristian to hearken after Doctrines
strange, or not grounded upon the Word (For Christ his Sheep know his voice,
and follow him Ioh. 10.4.
: They know not the voice of a stranger, nor follow him) or itching 2 Timothy 4.3.
, to hearken after the enticing speech of man's wisdom 1 Cor. 2.4.5.
, as if their faith depends thereon: But let them be of David's mind, who
professed that he loved Gods Word Ps. 116.113.
, but hated vain inventions. Much less are they to be so obstinate, and
wicked, as to say, either in their hearts, or with their mouths Isa 30.10.
; Let not our Seers Prophecy right things, but errors, and flattering things.

Again, and obey as the Word of God, then the Preacher must be wise to seek
out the words of truth ^ccles. 12.9.^0.
, and faithful to Preach them as the words of God Pet. 4 11.
, that is, with all authority Tit. 2.15.
, in the plain evidence of the Spirit Cor. 2.4
. For if any man Preach not according to the Word, what reading soever he make
show of, he has no light in him Isa. 8.20.
: And howsoever his affected humane eloquence be applauded by itching ears,
yet he does but make Merchandise of the Word of God 2 Cor. 2.17.
. Let Ministers therefore speak (as God himself admonishes Ier. 23.28.
) the Word faithfully; For what is chafe to the wheat?

Lastly; viz. There is a Word of God, to wit, the Bible, to be believed. This
is soon done, both these Propositions being prooved; 1. Whosoever believes
the Word, as the Word of God, makes Conscience of sin; and 2. Whosoever
makes not Conscience of sin, believes not the Word, as the Word of God.
Touching the former. What other cause can be supposed why the Word was as a
fire in Jeremy Ier. 20.7.9.10.
, compelling him to speak in the name of God, though in a strong passion he had
said, he would not, but that he verily believed, that it was the Word of GOD
which he was commanded to speak, and which commanded him to speak? The answer
which Abraham gave to the rich man in hell torments desiring that Lazarus might
be sent unto his brethren to prevent their torments ( viz. Luke 16.2^.28.29.
They have Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them, that is, their
doctrine) shows plainly, that whosoever hears the words of God as the
Words of God, cannot but make conscience of sin: And Paul tells the Romans
Romans 6.17.
, that howsoever they had been servants of sin, yet after they were delivered
unto the form of doctrine, that is, heard the Word as the Word of God, they
obeyed that form from the heart, that is, made conscience of sin. 2. That
whosoever makes not Conscience of sin, believes not the Word to be the Word
of God, whatsoever he pretend, briefly thus appears. That wicked one who
has Gods Word in his mouth Psalm. 50.16.17.
, and yet will not be reformed, is judged by God himself to cast his words
behind him. The remnant of the people of Judah, and their Chieftaines prayed
Jeremiah Ier. 42.1.2.3 6.19.20.21.^^.43.1.2.
to enquire of God whether they might not fly into Egypt to save themselves
from the Caldeans, protesting to obey the Word of God whatsoever it should be:
Yet, when the Word crossed their purpose to fly into Egypt, they would not
believe it. And when the rich man in hell, further pressed Abraham to send
Lazarus, he had this further answer; Luke 16.3^
If they hear not (with Faith) Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rise from the dead again. Both the Propositions are
confirmed by these words of Christ Ioh. 3.20.21.
. He that does evil hates the light, that is, does not believe the Word as
the Word of God: But he that does the truth comes to the light, that his
deeds might be made manifest, that they be wrought according to God. To whom
be glory by all men in their obedience of FAITH. Amen.

FINIS.

