News from Antwerp, the.10. day of August. 1580.

Containing, A special view of the present affairs of the low Countries:

Revealed and brought to light, by sundry late intercepted Letters, of
certain vizarded and counterfeyt Countrymen of the same Countries.

Translated into English, partly out of French, and partly out of Lattin:
According to the original Copy, printed at Antwerp, by William Riuiere, a
sworn Printer, and Bookseller.

printer's device? (not found in McKerrow): thistle flower

Imprinted at London, by John Charlewood.

To the Reader.
ALl persons bearing affection to the Common wealth of these Countries, desire
to be discharged of the oppressions, which the war of necessity leads and
brings with it. But this desire is only a general discourse. For the
effects of the same are hindered still, and heretofore have been interrupted by
an irresolution, which happens not (as many have thought,) by the fault of
the chief Captains and Governors, who, have so often, both by word of
mouth, and wrytinges in print declared, what counsel was meet to be taken,
and with so great pains and dillygence sent into all the Provinces, yea, and
transported themselves thither in their proper persons.

But the fault thereof is to be imputed to the particular Commynalties, the
greatest part whereof do order their matter with extreme delays. The causes
of such delays are diverse. But the principal of the same is, that some
subtle and wily fellows amongst us, of the same humor that these were of
(whose Letters thou shall see here.) When they counterfeyted the good
Countrymen with us, do feed us with a vain hope of peace, either by the way
of Spain, or Almayne, or by some other means? Hoping, that as already under
color of peace, they have divided the provinces of Artoys, and Haynault from
us: so they will bring the like to pass amongst the other Provinces, that are
yet at unity. But if those things which we learn by the confession of our
enemies, ought to be taken for a truth: thou shall know freendly Reader, by
these Letters, that we may not any longer look for peace with the king of
Spain, except we will yet suffer our selves to be burnt. And therefore it
remains that we make good provision to defend our selves valiauntly by all
means possible, yea, to repulse the force that we see repayring for our ruin:
Specially, if the Spaniardes obtain the kingdom of Portugal. Which God
forbid.

Farewell.
Copies of Letters of the Abbot of Marolles to the Cardinal Granuellan. The
first Letter.
MY Lord, within these four last months, I have written many Letters to your
most honorable and reverend Lordshyp, the which I fear by reason of the great
dangers of the ways, are not so soon come to your hands as I would wish.
Because I have received no answer, but to those of the.xxviij. of January. I
would not let slyp the occasion thereof, for the understanding of the truth
thereof, finding so Not too sure for he was taken.
sure a man as the Lord of Grobbendonk, sends into those parties, for his
particular affairs: to write this also, and to send therewith the copy of the
last Letter written the xvij. of this month: whereby your Lordship shall see
the continuance of my writing from time to time, to this end, that in case I
may understand the none receypt of my said former Letters: I might The Abbot
thinks, that the Cardinal keeps a Register of his Letters because they are of
so great substance, learning and eloquence. But he takes not so much pains
as to read them, having dr^wen out of the Abbot, the thing he pretended.
also send after the Copies. Sithence my said last Letters we have received,
understanding with great grief and marvel, the departing of the Lord of
Aussi, from my Lord the Prince of Parma, to go and reioyne him self to the
Prince of Orange: Delyuering into his hands withal, his Castle of Liekerk
lez Aloste. Also the deteining of the Colonel De heze, and other partakers,
whom my Lords of Risbourge and Mountigny have laid hold on: laying to their
charge, that they would have wrought some treason, or slippery pranck to the
Camp, lying before Tournay, and that by the intelligence and subornation of
the said Prince of Orange, they should have spoiled the principal heads of
our said The Marquess of Risbourge and Montigny, accused him of an other
matter, to wit, that he had intellygence with the Duke of Amon.
Camp, and brought them by force to Tournay aforesaid, to the end to have
sunk our Army afterward. I am so much astonished, that I know not what to
say, seeing You shall see an other manner of one: when the Conspiracies of the
Monks with the Spaniards shall be discovered.
this wickedness and lyghtnesse, which I fear much, will greatly diminish all
our credites with his Majesty, (who I doubt not) will be highly offended
therewith, and also augment his distrust, although the Such as thou have been.
steadfast settled, and well resolved sort, ought not to suffer any thing
therefore.

I remember that I have by diverse Letters represented like inconveniences to
your most honorable Lordship, knowing the sleyghts and wyles of the said
Prince, being so Yet, thou thoughtest to be a more crafty Fox, when thou
did countermine with thy accomplices in the counsel of estate. And when under
shadow of thy Ambassadorship, thou made thy boasts with thy accomplices, to
make him fall into the trap with, all the good cou^treymen, specially, those of
the Religion. But God has preserved them.
subtle and such a Fox, and the inconstancy, and covetousness of some in the
world: Quos merito leaves iudicare poteram habentes etiam Witnesses the four
thousand Ducats of Pencion, that the Duke of Terra noua, has promised thee.
animam venalem. Whereunto great heed is to be taken. For they have, A dextris
et a sinistris, great Factors, to wit, the Wherefore then do thou spread a
rumor that he has intelligence with the Pope, and the King of Spain.
Duke of Alanson, and the said Prince, who accord together in nothing, but in
making sharp war against the king of Spain our Lord and Master, to strippe
him of that is his. Howbeit, the overthrow of the Lord de La noue, lately
happened in Flaunders, and the victory now newly won in Frizeland, upon the
said Prince of Orange, his men endeavoring to hinder the succors of Groeninghen,
will give great impediment to their desseins and purposes in this behalf.

My Lord, I will pray the Creator to give unto your most honorable and reverend
Lordship, a long and happy life, after I have saluted the good graces of the
same, with my most humble recommendations. Beseeching your Lordship, withal,
that the same would vouchsafe to present to his Majesty my Letters coming
with these. Whereby I send unto the same, the continuance of my good will, and
what has passed touching my matter, the which I desire to be construed in good
part.

From Cullen, the.xxv. of June. 1580. Under was written. Your most honorable
and reverend Lordshippes, most humble and obedient Orator. Frederick, Abbot
of Marolles.

The superscription was thus. honorable and reverend Cardinal Granuellan, etc.
my most honorable Lord.
To the Cardinal Granuellan. The second Letter.
MY Lord, although by my three former Letters last sent to your most honorable,
and reverend Lordship, the one of the first, the other of the.xij. of April,
and the last of the.x. of May, (which I think are surely conveyed by the means
of my Lord, the Duke of Terra Noua) I had sufficiently informed your honorable
Lordshyp, in what state the affairs stand in these parties, yet would I not
fail in my duty, to send unto the same again at this present, what has
passed: Albeit, that since my last Letters, there has not happened any great
change, saving the good victory that God has given to the Marquess of
Risbourg, accompanied with the Albanoys and Wallons, who have surprised,
overthrown, put to flight and dispersed the Prince of Orenges men being in
Flanders, under ye leading and government of Mounsier de La noue, a Frenchman,
who with many of his men, was taken prisoner. The which in good sothe, is a
very good gyrde given to the enemy, and will cool his courage from
enterprising hereafter according to his former custom. I understand that a
part of the glory of this victory may well be attributed to the said Albanoys,
who by report played the men most valiauntly.

Notwithstanding this, we understand from Antwerpe, that they do not They have
well showed it unto you, when they have taken two Towns by force, and cut in
pieces your old company of blood.
greatly quayle at this overthrow, but with all fury prepare them selves to
gather together their spoiled and dispersed men, and to make a new levy. Yea,
and that they labor very dilligently in their estates. De abnegando rege, et
de transferendo imperio. As touching the matter of renouncing his Majesty, and
declaring him to be fallen from his Ryghtes: I understand they have already
Thou thy self have been a hundred times of this opinion.
resolved upon it, having taken a show and color upon the person of the
Duke of Alanson whom they feign, that they will adopt, giving to understand to
the simple and unwise sort, that the assumption of the said Lord Duke, would
cause a war against the Crown of France. Presupposing that the most
Christian King his brother (giving unto him favor and support) would bend his
forces upon Italy, Bourgundy, Haynault, and Artoys. And that by means thereof,
the wars would be turned out of Flaunders, Brabant, and other Provinces that
will not be reconcyled. But knowing the subtylties and wyles of such as at this
day are in credit amongst their Estates: I have always persuaded my self,
that they will The Monk thinks yt every man so dallyeth with Princes, as he
has done, denying thryse his Way: and selling his faith and honor, for the
Abbay of S. Bartin, or a pencion in steed thereof.
set the said Duke in the feelde only for a shadow, that covering them
selves with his cloak, they may the more easily attain to their pretended,
and desired renunciation. Which obtained, My Lord the Abbot shall not be called
to this counsel.
(using an other stratageme) they will bring into consideration, and
delyberation, whether his person will be beneficial, and profitable for the
Country.

Not forgetting to set the pride and Is there any greater lyghtnes and
inconstancy, then in my Lord the Abbot, and his accomplices?
lyghtnesse of the Frenchmen as a counterweight, against the cruelty of the
Spaniardes. The small means and habillytie that he has to succor the
Countries, for as much as the Crown is not fallen unto him: and when he
comes to the same, that he will be too mighty a King, and too near a
neighbor: and that so he might easily degenerate into tyranny, (whereof they
call them selves great enemies, although by their These abominable acts be,
that they take heed that they be not betrayed and sold by these Gentlemen
Abbots, who accustoming to sell their God in the Mass, make no scruple to sell
men to establishe their kettell.
abominable acts, a man might judge them tyranny it self.) Therefore that it
is in no wise, to be counseled to accept him for their King: They may also set
in concurrence, to make a fair show of the matter, the Emperor, the Queen of
England, and certain other Princes neighbors, not forgetting (though he come
last) the Prince of Orange.

Then coming to the This Monk judges all at his pleasure, of all the Princes
of Christendom: as though he were our holy Father, and that he were their
Scholemaister.
estimation of the merits of every of them, the Emperor will be found too
weak, and too young, yea, suspected because he is a Catholic, and of the
house of Austriche. The Queen of England scant capable, for that she is a
Woman, and other Princes in no wise to be lyked of. But having regard to the
long experience of the Prince of Orange, to the great and honorable services by
him done, for the recovering of ye liberty of the Country, the restoring of
the Privileges: By reason whereof, he has been banished, deprived of his
Estates, honors, and goods. Yea, they will not forget to place amongst his
first quarters, and for the fairest part of his Arms, that he has This is as
great an honor as can be.
brought in and maynteyned, the In deed it is new to the ears of these Asses
and Coltes, that never heard the voice of the Gospel.
new Religion, whereof they are so desirous, and far in love with all. That
therefore of due desert, he ought to be chose^, elected, and accepted for King,
giving reasonable contentation to the others. The which I see very likely to
come to pass. If it be so: his Majesty shall thereby lose but the name among
them, Ad tempus: For the Prince in effect is the same already. As for me, I say
the same, that I have often repeated by my former Letters, that to have peace,
it is To deceive them.
expedient to have more: or to make better war against them, then has been
made hitherto. Otherwise, one while they will be beaten: an other while they
will beat. As we fall out by the overthrow abouesayd. And a little after by
the reconquering of Die, and Malines before. They of Cambray, Tournay, and
Bonchaim, continue their excursions upon their neighbors, destroying the
Country, so that every where is nothing to be seen but This could not be seen
without the treason of the heads and Magistrates of Artoys and Haynault, who
have persuaded the poor people, that they would grant them peace, and in the
mean while have plunged them in the whyrle pytte of all the myseries of the
war, not regarding any other thing, saving to gain credit or recompense of
the Spaniardes, and their ministers, with the whole ruin of the people.
myserie and poverty. And it should be a godly deed to take heed aforeha^d,
to other infinite evils yt threaten us. As touching the last Letters, that it
pleased your honorable Lordship to write unto me: I made my answer the x. of
May: And amongst other things, showed unto the same my complaynt and grief,
that the Letter therein mentioned, which it had pleased his Majesty to write
unto me, was not delivered to my hands: And am constrained to do the like
again, for that I cannot yet recover the same. Wherefore I am in extreme
sorrow, for that I know not the contents of it, nor can not order my self
according to the same. Notwithstanding, I have received a Letter of the.xx. of
the month past, from my Lord, the Prince of Parma. Whereby he advertised me,
that his Majesty had named me of his counsel of Estate. And that I should
return into Haynault, to be assystant in the said Counsel in proper person.
I have answered his excellency, that I will not fail to obey his
commandment, to employ my self with heart and affection, to the serving of
so principal a charge. But that by reason of the sickness of my Lady, the
Duchess of Arschot: my Lord the Duke her husband could not so soon depart.
Who has often required me not to forsake him, but to stay for his going to
reenter into the Country together. Whereunto his said excellency, for To have
two at once.
certain good respects has condiscended. And I will not fail to work all
manner of forwardness at our said return, to procure in good earnest, with
all sincerity and fidelity the restablishing of the affairs. And although I
have understood, that touching the denomination of my Lord the Prelate of
Saint Gertrude and me, there has privily been moved some diffycultie:
Specially, by certain One Traitor knows another very well.
Ecclesiastical persons, suspecting, or wrongfully quarrelling at our former
actions, yet will not we therefore leave of to mayntaine our selves in the
order and degree, wherein it has pleased his Majesty to set us for the
fervent desire we have to do service to ye same, as good and better then they,
and that we will not yield or give place to such persons, ielous of our
prosperity. Hoping yt our behauiours shall be such as God, his Majesty, the
Country, Cobrethren, and others shall receive acceptable service thereby. In
this behalf, my Lord, I will recommend my self, to your most honorable and
reverend Lordships good grace, praying yt it may please the same to make me
partaker of his majesty's good grace. Whereunto to my great grief, I cannot
write, for that hitherto I could not recover his Letters. Wherefore I desire to
be excused.

From Cullen, this.xvij. of June. 1580. Under was written. Your most honorable
and reverend Lordships, most humble Orator.
And signed. Frederick Abbot of Marolles.

A Copy of the Letters of the Abbot of Marolles, to the King. The third
Letter.
Soueraygne Lord.
WHereas I have by diverse Letters, given advertisement to your Majesty, that I
desired nothing more, then to have the mean to yield all manner of obedience,
and do most humble service to the same in whatsoever it should vouchsafe to
command me: As being of a most prompt and ready will to render my dutyfull
endeavor of fidelity and naturallitie. Besides that, I have also given a more
particular accoumpt of my good That is to say, of my treaso^s. For being
Ambassador to ye States. I would with others like unto me, have enducet them
under color of ^ peace, to have letten themselves to have been deceived.
intencions, to my Lord the Duke of Terra Noua, being in this City of
Cullen, who at his departure had assured me, that your Majesty should be
advertised thereof, to give me understanding of the noble pleasure of the same.
Yet notwithstanding I have not hitherto, to my unspeakable grief, been
honored with any The Spaniards love treason, but no traitors.
commandments by Letter, nor otherwise.

By means whereof, I am, and have been in great perplexity, having stayed in
this City You mu^^ say your Mattins, and sing Mass every day.
idle, since the departing of the said Lord, Why go you not then to rule your
Monks, who will find you enough to do? But my Lord Abbot rather medleth with
matters of Estate, and of the Court then to feed his Hogs, Secundum illud ne
Clerici se immisceant negotijs secularibus.
For that I knew not whereabout to employ my self, for want of charge or
commission. Howbeit, the twenty of the month past, I received Letters from my
Lord the Prince of Parma: whereby he advertised me, that it had pleased your
Majesty, to name me of his Counsel of It must needs be that the Estate is
well governed, for that frocked Monks govern the same according to the old
proverb. Since decrees had wings, and Sergeantes carried Mayles, and Monks
went a horseback: The world had nothing but all evil.
Estate. And that I should transport my self immediately into Haynault, to
assyste there in my proper person.

Whereat I rejoiced greatly, understanding that His Majesty is ignorant of it.
But the Prince of Parma, upon his blankes assigned, writes what he lists.
your Majesty had not forgotten his so humble a Chaplen and Orator for the
care he has of his Chapel, and to say continual prayers.
Chaplen and Orator, wholly dedicated to his service, honoring him with so
principal an Estate. For which I most humbly thank the same: assuring your
Majesty that I will not fail, according to my dutiful power, with all Such
as thou have yielded to Don John, and since to my Lord the Duke of Aniou, and
lastly to my Lord the Archduke. Whose Almonens thou have been, and forsaken
them all three.
fidelytie and integrity, to do my duty in the same charge. And will procure
the My Lord Abbot, we will take heed of you, and such as you are.
reducing of the Provinces, Cities, Commonalties, and particular persons,
with all my possibillytie, that all things may in short time be It should be
better for my Lord Abbot to reduce him self and his Monks, to some good order
and discipline.
set again in good order: for the better ordering of the affairs in the
service of God, your Majesty, and the Country.

Being most sorry that God has not endued me with Certainly you have great
cause to be sorry therefore. For you have great need of the same, least you be
beguyled by the Spaniardes, who will mock you as they have done others, as is
to be seen by the example of the prisoners even to the most simple Gentlemen
of these Cou^treyes, of the which they redeem not one. But as for the Italia^s
and Albanoys, which are better for the Spaniards, they leave them not in prison.
greater sense and experience, that I might be more able and fytte, to exercise
the same charge with greater worthiness. Nevertheless, I will spare neither
pains nor travail, to attain to the premises. And would not for all that,
wyllingly give place to any other whatsoever he were, that he could truly
vaunt, that he would more Thy actions past, give good witness of thy fidelity,
the belly of thy playnes, and the f^ocke of thy frankenes.
franckly, faithfully, and plainly, employe him self in the same then I:
Although I understand that certain persons. To wit the Abbot of Hannon with
his train, according to the nature of the Monks, which do always grunt one
against an other, as a drove of Hogs.
Ielous of my good luck, and enemies of my prosperity, would have impugned
the said denomination, and my Lord the Prelate of Saint Gertrudes, synisterly
quarrelling, and interpreting our actions passed. Wherein they show them selves
Then it is a sign that what thou have don heretofore, has been but fayning
and treason.
unadvised, and too full of passions: for as much as all that we did, was by
their express charge. It being very unseemly for them, that they would See
how these hogs can one no more then an other, cleanse them selves of their
filthynesse.
clear them selves, to cast the fault upon others: Considering that by the
rule of equity, no man is to be received to accuse an other, him self being
guilty of the same matter. And for that by the He confesses himself with the
rest, to have been faulty, and to have stood in need of grace.

Mounsier the Monk says well, yt he repents of his offenses. But he will
receive no disciplin^ and mainteyneth that there is great reward due unto him
for ye good services that he has done. So shameless and impudent he is.


clemency of your Majesty, all matters paste are forgotten, it is impertinent
to enter into contencion, vpbrayding, or any sifting with us, which were but
their associates. Otherwise, if there should question be had for the narrow
examination of their behauiours: and all be interpreted to the worst, they
would not be found clear. For if we have done amysse, they have commanded us
otherwise then they ought to have done.

It were best to set all these reproaches aside, and to study in good sadness,
how to set up that which is fallen down, and procure by good vnanimytie,
and mutual assistaunce, the redressing of matters, in acknowledging our God,
our King, and our Law. Which for mine own part I am determined to do,
maynteyning my self in that My Lord Abbot will forget neither his ambition nor
covetousness.
degree of honor, wherein it has pleased your Majesty to place me. For that
I will neither yield nor give place unto them: for they have no occasion to be
at debate with me. Saving for that I would not agree to their particular
appointment, having judged it too burdensome, and He betrayeth his companions,
accusing them to the Spaniards.
disaduantagious to your Majesty. And that the fruit by them promised, would
not come thereof. But that it were better to take pain, to come to a general
Peace. And I think that I have not thereby deserved to be This Monk will
become a soldier, or peradventure he fears to be turned out of his frocke,
as he has been put beside the myter of S. Bartin: for these be the Arms he
speaks of, and his honor is to be first set at the table and counsel, and to
have the Kitchen well furnished and the Kettell full.
disgraded of Arms and Honor.

For your Majesty may now easily see, and the euentes will more plainly
declare, what is to be hoped thereby, and what foundation may be laid with
personnages, which See here how these good servant of the King agree
together, and what the Towns of Haynault and Artoys ought to expect at the
hands of so good proctors of their own cause, seeing that without any
lymitation or restraynt, they mean to put them in subjection to the yoke of
the Spaniards, with the prize yt these Gentlemen Abbots, may save their goods
and credit with the king. Note also, how the peace of Artoys will be
interpreted by the Spanyardes, seeing their own Abbots make so goodly gloses
upon the some.
lymitte the authority of the same, after their own discretion: and will be
seeking rather to advance their particular affairs, then to maintain either
the Catholic Universal particular.
Romish Religion, or the authority of your Majesty. And that if matter fall
not out according to their pleasures: they might draw men to wickedness at
every hour (the examples are already at the gate,) in doing more disseruise
in a day: then all this appointment would bring profit to the same in a whole
year.

And because some of them know, that I will He will be still unfaithful to
his own, to get the good will of the Spanyardes.
hyde nothing, and know their desartes, and valors well enough, they love not
to have me admytted into the said Counsel: Meaning them selves, to govern
every thing after their own fashion. Your Majesty will ordain in that
behalf, as by his provident discretion, the same shall Judge most convenient,
for his better service.

Expecting the commandment of the same, I will go into Haynault, to my
Lord, the Prince of Parma, so soon as my Lord the Duke of Arschotte may
depart from Aixe, after my Lady his Wife shall recover her health, to dispose
my self, according to his commandment. And to set my self in actual
service, as well to preserve the authority of your Majesty (which otherwise,
both now and hereafter, might receive great diminution and hurt:) As to save
mine honor. For otherwise, I might be declared Thou art infamous enough,
without other declaration.
infamous, and unworthy to receive any benefit of your Majesty. To wit. In
case we have nothing to assuage his ambition and covetousness. He had rather
become a Chaplen and bondsman.

Note the great humylitie of this good Monk.


Were it not for that, I would desire nothing more then that I might retire
into my Thou should have been there, to have been lead to Boncham, with the
Lord of Selles.
little Monastery of Marolles, to my Cobrethren, to serve God in rest of body
and mind: being sequestered and delivered from all publyque affairs.

Herevppon I will pray the Creator, to grant your Majesty, in prosperity
and health, a long and happy life: Kyssing the hands of the same, in saluting
the good graces thereof, with my most humble recommendations.

From Cullen the.xxv. of June. 1580. Under was written in this manner. Your
Majesty's most humble and most obedient servant and Orator. Sygned.
Frederick Abbot of Marolles.
The superscription was thus.

To the King.



The translation of the Letters of Jasper Schets, Lord of Grobbendonk: Written
in Latin to the President Fonck. The fowrth Letter.
I Will not declare in words, (albeit I might very well) the singular joy
that I received, when I understood that your Lordship had so prosperous
sailing from France, that the same arrived within three days at the Port of
Larede in Spain, referring the judgment thereof unto you, Note the great
freendship of these good men. For according to the old proverb: Like will to
like.
according to the mutual freendship that is between us. But it lyketh me very
well, to imagine that the most honorable Cardinal your Patron, has not only
very courteously: But also with gratulation received you. Seeing that by his
last Letters to me written, he signified unto me, that with a fervent desire he
had long looked for you, in hope that you would unburden, and discharge him of
some part of his labors: admonishing me also, that the care of my business
should be committed unto you: Then the which nothing more joyful or
acceptable, could be brought unto me for news. For I have set all my hope in
your benevolence only.

It remains now, that your Lordship show your self unto me in effect the
same, that you have steadfastly promised to me. Ye have also my Supplication To
wit, to demand money.
that I delivered unto you at your departing: you have ye Articles of my
peticions. I think you yet remember some of those things which I declared
unto you by word of mouth. Therefore I thought it not convenient to be tedious
unto you, with any long repiticion of the same matters. Howbeit I thought it
not altogether superfluous, breefly to admonish you of it by the way, to the
end that you should not forgette me.

I think also that the Duke As long then as the Duke of Terra Noua, was at
Cullen, the faithful Schetz, who was Deputy to the States, solicited his own
affairs, yea, with their most great enemy, and studied to betray the States.
of Terra Noua will be present, who has very lyberally promised me his favor,
as well in his absence by Letters: as in presence by word of mouth. And
certainly he may in this behalf, by his intercession, help and advance, the
good affection that you bear unto me, and make the same more effectual and of
greater efficacy. I hold my self assured that you who are such excellent
Patrones, not only for the affection which you bear me, but also by the
aucthority that you have with the King: will help and assyst me your Client,
altogether depressed and brought low by the general injuries of the time, and
the particular malice of mine enemies: to the end, that at the least, being
discharged of my debtes, which I have run and entered into, not by reason of
my accoumpts, or particular necessities: But by doing my ready service in all
things to the At the same time that being here, he falsely feigned and
dissembled whatsoever they would wish at his hands.
King: I might hereafter provide for my children that they fall not into
extremity, and so with a settled and quiet mind, consecrate the rest of my life
unto To wit, to Vertune and Mercury, as he is accustomed. For the good man
cares not whether God be honored or not.
God: or if it shall please his Majesty to employ me in his service: that then
I might more promptly and cheerfully, (so far as my age will suffer) execute
the duty of my office.

But that can not be effected, except his Majesty give earnest and straight
commandment, that I may be paid without delay, whatsoever shall appear upon
the due rendering of my accoumpts, to be due unto me. The which how it may most
conveniently be accomplished: I think I have set down in my said
Supplication.

Others that have served the King a long time, waxing rich, accustom to be
careful, and procure that they may be honored and increased, with tytles of
honor and great benefits, Yet so it is, that being not content with thy
fortune, how prosperous so ever it were: Thou have by Usury aspyred to govern
the Kings Coffers.
serving as it were for recompenses and thanksgiving for their rewards. But as
for 6. me, I have reaped thus much of all my continual service for thyrtie
years, or thereabouts, that I find that I have not lost my goods only, but
mine honor also.

Certainly, I feel at this present more want of money, then ever before. By
reason of my hard Fortune, and my Creditors perceiving it, I find them more
rygorous and hasty with me, then they were wont to be.

For which cause, I will esteem it as a gracious good turn: if that which
upon the just casting up of my accoumpts, is manifestly found to be due unto
me, be paid to my hands, or at the very least, that the debt may be assygned
with such assurance, that with all by this sufficient caution my Creditors
being pacified, may cease from troubling me. Yet notwithstanding, I sollycite
not this with such scrupulositie that I would, make any diffycultie to receive,
or neglect any good For covetousness is insatiable.
benefice which might be offered unto me by so great and mighty a Prince. But
for that I desire principally before all other things, to be released and
freeed from this trouble and tediousness. Wherefore at the last I shall desire
your Lordshippe to procure me to be enrolled amongst them that have deserved to
taste of the kings beneficence and lyberallytie, when occasion shall serve
thereto.

But my chief desire is that the same may be bestowed upon my children, whom
I have of purpose caused to be trained up in such instructions and learning,
that they should grow to be apt and fit to serve, as well Royal and
public affairs, as also Ecclesiastical dignities. Some of them there be,
that I have destined and appointed to the To wit, to transfer to their own
uses great Revenues, pertaining to the poor. For this is the Religion of Spayn
and the duty they do to the Church.
Church, and which towardly frame them selves to adorn and advance the same,
as appertains. I have others very fit for any manner of Offices whatsoever
they be. All the which I recommend to your Lordship, as a principal friend, to
the end that they may be further recommended.

I will use no more words unto you, referring all other matters to my Letters
the last of March, the.v. of April, and the.xx. of May also: all the which I
think were in Spain before your Lordshippe, wherein I then breefly
comprehended the course of all that has passed here, since your departing.
The aid so long solicited and demanded, is sent to Groeninghen at last, and
that verily by the diligence of our He would say, Buffo, to wit, a Toade, who
under color of Ambassadorshyppe, has wickedly spread his poison against his
most innocent Country.
Bucho, rather then by the solicitation of the kings What will the Prince of
Parma say to that? Who cares not for any thing that may aid the Country, so
that he procure the kingdom of Portugal for him and his?
counsel of Estate. The said Bucho has so handled the matter, that either
without any, or at the least with a very small expense of ye kings money. He
has caused a just army to be leuyed, and brought over the Rhyne, after that
about six hundred horsemen, sent from the Prince of Parma for aid, were
joined to the footmen, which had soiourned a good while about the same River,
but only putting them in hope to receive two months pay here. And albeit they
be disappoynted Behold the fair promises, wherewith they have hitherto fed the
poor Malcontents.
thereof, yet having passed the Rhyne with the rest, they have made haste in
marching together with such dillygence, that having passed over all the rivers,
where there was any danger: It is thought yt they be already safely entered
into Frizeland. In deed there ran a rumor, that the Prince of Orange would
give them impediment: but besides rumors, nothing else is yet Count not your
Chickens before they be hatched.
heard of* Saving that certain Shyps of war, which peradventure were sent to
that effect and came too late, presented them selves before this Town. The
which after they had stayed here a certain time, having commandment to
depart: it is uncertain whether they have sailed. In the mean space we hope
yt the issue of the expedition will be prosperous, taking this for a good
presage, that the Frizelanders at the only report of their coming, began to
be more intentive and careful how to run away: then to stand to their defense.
Further, they of Groeninghen, since the death of Bartholomew Ente, slain in an
excursion, who was in a manner the principal leader of the enemies, have taken
courage. Your Lordship very well knowing ye situation and importance of that
Country, understanding as well with how great hope such as bear good affection
to his Majesty, do now rejoice. Who by reason of Die, lately occupied again
by the Statesmen; are tormented with a new doubtfulnes and fear, for yt they
perceive yt Louain thereby stands in emynent and present danger, with all the
Country of Brabant: which the Prince of Orange would have had ere this, if
Bolseduke had not given impediment thereto. The report goes, that the Abbot of
S. Gertrude, with his presence, maynteyneth and keeps the men of ye same
Town in their duties: who I think is not exempt from fear, while he
co^sidereth with himself, that all the Kings men by such news of the taking
of Towns, lose courage, and wax faint, for Behold the prodigious and
monstrous rytches, whereby they promised to defend them selves, without the
charging of the inhab^taunts of Artoys and Haynault.
great scarcity of money. For want of money, gives pretense to negligence and
wicked dealing, and turns from the ways of dutifulness, the minds of all
such as remain in so doubtful an estate: I know too well, that the war of
Portugal consumes the Treasure and Revenues, and that it is not possible for
them to furnishe all necessities. Schetz, has in all respects, a Spanishe
mind: to wit, swelling and proud For that he thinks that so flourishing a
kingdom may be so easily overcome.
But I am of this opinion, yt it were expedient to take some order in it
quickly, or that it had been better never to have been For the war ought not
to be tyrannously moved, and against the priueledges of Portugal, by the enemy
the Spanyard.
enterprysed. The event of this war is of great importance, for our affairs
in these quarters. Wherefore I beseech your Lordshyp, that the same would
vouchsafe to write unto me how the matter stands, concerning the same war.
And if after the end thereof, there should be want of courage, or mean to
atchieue our matters in good order: I fear yt I shall one day see those
things set forth too late, which in fytte and convenient time to conclude
Peace, peradventure have been too hardly denied. I will not deny, but that the
exercise of diverse Religions is very inconvenient, in a well ordered common
wealth, as the most honorable Cardinal has But if thou speak from thy
heart, thou think thy Cardinal very unwise for suggesting such foolish
counsel to his King.
wisely admonished me. But all men, specially these that are amongst these
troubles, are persuaded that ye thing ought to be To wit, till they shall find
occasion fytte to destroy us.
tolerated sometimes, which cannot For they reserve that which should be
consumed afterward, for the hot iron.
immediately be amended. And that it is requisite to avoid the greater
inconuenientes, with suffering the lesser, although that they which be far of,
and no seeers of the euylles, but hearers only: are not of the same opinion.
To whom these words of the Comycall Poet, might fitly be objected. If thou
were in my case, thou would be of an other mind*

But that I may make an end, I beseech your Lordship to procure that we fail
not in our duties, namely, to make Peace by what means so ever, or to make
war. Fearing least we do that too late, which ought to be effected in
convenient time. Of all auncientie, the house of Austriche has been blamed
with this spotte, that it has accustomed to apply remedy But now they of
Austriche, although it be very late, give no remedy.
too late to the euilles thereof. For the which cause it is expedient that your
Lordship, by your counsayles prevent that the king stumble not again at the
same Rock.

At this present there is a treaty at Antwerpe, touching the renunciation of
the King, and the accepting of Alanson: but as far as I hear, the voices
neither condiscende, nor agree together in so wicked a cause. Whether these
deuiners be true, the effect in the end shall declare.
All men for the most part presage that, by procuring the abiuration of the
King aforehand, the way is opened and prepared for the Prince of Orange.
Howsoever it be, these counsayles are dangerous, and the King ought to have
great regard to the same. We leese that is ours more lightly (although
unjustly,) then we recover the same (albeit justly.) But here I will cease,
heartily recommending my self to your Lordshippe, to the which God grant
prosperity. Dated at Cullen, the.xvi. of June. 1580.

AFter I had written this Letter, Here it may be seen how long the Abbot has
been a Traitor.
the Abbot of Marolles being by chance then present, moved through my
example, said that he would also write to your Lordship. And therwithall has
caused me to remember, to recommend unto you The Abbot has a principal care
of this: To wit, the good father is enflamed with the love of the Church.
his matter, touching the Pencion of S. Bertin. I think you have in
remembrance as being in the same company, when we were here together, that
the same was promised unto him. And that you are not ignorant how much good
faith is worth.

Therefore for as much as promise has been performed with him, touching the
kings denomination of him, to be in the counsel of Estate. It seems also to
be very expedient that the like were done concerning his Pencion. And therefore
I recommend him to your Lordshippe as much as is possible. Wishing to the same
again good health and prosperity. The year place and day abouesayde. This is
the copy of my last Letter written to your Lordshippe, which I thought good to
copy out and send, if perchance by the injury of the time, it might so fall
out, that the Letters were intercepted.

From Cullen the.xxvi. of June. 1580. Most affectionate to your Lordship,
Jasper Schetz.

To the reverend and most honorable Lord, John Fonke, Prouoste of Saint Marie
at Cullen, Counsayller to the Catholic Kings Majesty.
To the same Lord. The fifth Letter.
IT is not possible for me (most honorable Lord President (to express the
desire that I have at this present, to receive Letters from you, the which
might in a manner set before me both commodities and inconueniencies, together
with the congratulatio^ of your welcome to the Court. To this end, that I
might seem as it were to talk with my friend, as much as is possible for one
that is absent. The which in these most miserable troubles, might somewhat
comfort a man that remains in perplexity. For I have not yet left this exyle
of Cullen, because I could not hitherto set my affairs in such order as I
might make them sure, The goods of Schetz have been the only cau^^ of his
dissymulation.
from the confiscation of the adversaries, notwithstanding that I have assayed
all means possible thereunto, my enterprises being always hyndred by
delays, proceeding of the injury of the time. Where as many others thereby
seek their gain, and in like manner stir and move from day to day, one
while, one thing, and an other while an other thing. It is to be lamented, that
thou wast not fallen before upon a very hangman in deed. Who with a halter
might have stopped the way of all thy treasons.


My executioner Flemming, has showed him self openly abroad again, who
always lying in wait for my life and honor, at this present taking occasion
by the time is reported to use meruaylous practices against me, thinking that
he may with better success, use his wyles and deceypts against me that am
absent, and have evil will there: and peradventure he will obtain what he
list at the hands of the Judges that wish me all evil. What have the Judges
more to do against a Traitor that confesses his offense?
And if it fortune that he work many dommages against me, at the least: he
shall deliver me from this exyle, unloosing the fetters wherewith I am in this
place deteyned.

I expect good news from your Lordshyp, of the Kings benevolence, and answer
touching my peticions, to the end that at the very least, being discharged of
my debts: I may more patiently suffer the rest of the injuries of fortune, and
of my tormenter Flemming. I will no longer keep your Lordshyppe occupied with
my particular callamyties, I will speak of matters pertaining to the common
wealth. And this man who was sent by the States to treat the Peace: played an
honest man's part.
Touching the prosperous success in Frizeland: My Lord the Provost Aytta
writes it. To whom as I yield the office of writing, so I attrybute unto him
the glory, and dexterity of that is done. Without all doubt he has done a
great 2 piece of work: which your Lordshyppe should not forget. 2. To wit, a
notable great Treason.

It is not yet time to sing the triumph, for the matter is not yet in any wise
finished.

A great praise of Culle^ that has so many good Citizens, and lovers of
equity.




For he has not atcheeued a work of so great importance, without expenses
and peril, to the great grief of all such as favor the adversary. Of the
which there is a great number in this City, as your Lordshyppe well knows.
What profit will come thereby to the Kings men, the time will teach?

For if the Governors in Frizeland do their duties, Where are the mountains
of gold that you promised to the Melcontents?
and that we fall not wholly into contempt, through lack of money: Many
presage, that a more happy proceeding of the war will succeed this victory,
and that in the end, Miserable Prophets who might see by the former wars,
upon how frail a foundation they are stayed.
Hollande may be brought in subjection.

But this scantnesse of Where are the Millions wherewith the Malcontents should
be stored?
money, does at this present press us in such sort, that the Duke of Parma
Governor, as an idle person, sitting at the Stern, is driven to commit
the Ship to the wyndes. So slowly the war goes forewarde.

And by means thereof, the minds of such as have over showed them selves
scant of a constaunt disposition, are brought to waver. As for example, the
Lord of Aussi, is again revolted to the States, I know not well other wise
for what occasion: leaving his wife at Alost, who fayning her self angry with
her Husband, (as it is reported) went about to betray the Town also to the
States: the Lord de Heze, being of the same conspiracy of the which she is
kept prisoner at Alost.

And de Heze, when the treason that he pretended But the Marquess and
Montigny, accuse de Heze, by their Letters written to the States of Haynault
and Arroys, that he would have delivered Cassell to the Duke of Amon.
to execute against the Marquess of Richbourghe was discovered, being
apprehended by the same Marquess was sent prisoner to Mons in Haynault.

With whose captivity, many of the principal Soldiers of his Regiment,
being moved, fled to Tournay. The report goes, that these were solliceted
by the Duke of Alanson, and overcome by promises to attempt the enterprise, by
the counsel of the Prince of Orange.

And it is well known that he which kept a Garrison in Cassell a Town of
Flaunders, by the preferment of the Lord de Montigny, was of the same
conspiracy. Who therefore (as it is said) was set upon in the plain feelde,
by certain Cornets of Horses overcome, and But the same man perceiving your
disloyalty and treason, has joined him self to good men, and peradventure ye
shall feel him alive one day,
killed in fighting: and so Cassell (which the adversaries thought they had
holden already in their hands) was preserved for the king.

These news will seem very strange to your Lordshyp, as well as to me. But I
think it a matter of destiny, that Heze and Behold the rewards of those that
are revolted to the enemies, who care not for the prisoners, according to the
Spanish fashion. The which is experimented, not only by Elimes, but also by
Egmont, the which only cause sufficiently purges the said be Iussi from
crime, in that he has followed better counsel.
Elimes his Lieuetenaunt, receive the salarie of their Acts. I think also
your Lordshyp has still in remembrance, that de Aussi first brought the
Prince of Orenges soldiers into Flaunders, all the whole Counsel being
against it, and how he cleared his doing with But de Aussi says thou lie.
false Letters. Such rewards are meet for such deeds. Amongst the which Let
the Malcontents judge hereby what they are to look for.
Fresin also for his vehemency, wherewith he was at the first so hot against
the king, is peradventure taxed to have wrought some thing. And I think no
less will one day befall to his brother Mounsier de Loyns^, who depriueth the
King of Cambray. I am sorry only for this, that the nobillytie of our nation,
will be noted and accused of unfaithfulness, in Spain, and all other
Countries, by reason of these Metamorphosies. He will beware of your treasonn.


But it is expedient for your Lordshyp to do this duty to your Country, that
the dispositions of those that have been the workers of these things may be
noted and discerned, for fear least the offense of such manner of men, which
are but a few and most light, Countrymen, you see all hope of peace taken
from you, except the Friars be kindled again and the Spanish Inquisition
established.
defyle not all others with infamy. Further, seeing we must have war, for
that there remains no hope to conclude Peace, by suffering the exercise of a
strange Religion, God grant it may be ordered with less cost, and more
profit then it has been hitherto. Which in my judgment will be brought to
pass, if there be as many soldiers enrolled as the money will suffice to
pay, least for want of payment troubles arise. Secondly, that Colonels and
Captayns be taken and chosen, Ye see Countrymen, what manner of moderators of
peace ye have had: is not this as much as to commit the sheep to the woolfe?
with singular discretion, who are neither raunsackers nor cowardes. We have
here the Earl of Swartzenberg, whom your Lordshyp knows. He seems unto
me worthy to be recommended and preferred for his lyberallytie, magnanymitie,
and honorable representation of body, and household government, whereby he
keeps all his retynew in their duties. Whereunto is to be added his great
kyndred that he has in Germany, the acquaintance and freendshippe in a manner
of all the Princes, without forgetting the experience that he has gotten by
the affairs, wherein he has been a dealer. Whom lately in famylliar talk I
found very ready, and inclyned to serve the King. Wherefore, thinking that he is
able to do more then Focre, now deceased, or Fraunsberghe at this present
altogether weakened, and without force, Fraunsberghe and Pouluyller, have
gotten great glory at the hands of the Spanished sort. For that they have
quitted them selves so well in spoiling the low Countries.
or Pouluiller regarding all things less then money: I have by his own
consent declared his mind, to the most honorable Cardinal.

And I can not refrain my self from recommending the same matter unto you,
not so much in respect that the said Earl is my freende: as for that in my
judgment, it would greatly redound to the profit of his Majesty.

I beseech your Lordshippe, to obtain me answer in this behalf, to the
end I may not keep the honorable man's mind long in suspense. God grant you
the advancement of your enterprises, to your contentment.

A diew. The feast of S. John Baptist, at Cullen. 1580. The said Earl will
keep a certain matter, that he has to treat with the Emperor, in suspense.
Until he receive answer from the King. Therefore I beseech your Lordship to
urge the same.



Affectionate, and ready to do service to your Lordship. Jasper Schetz.
To the reverend and honorable Lord. John Foncke, etc.
Certain other Copyes of Letters of the Abbot of Marolles: To the President
Foncke. The sixth Letter.
MY Lord, supposing that ye are already arrived in Spain, I would not be
behind with my duty, to congratulate your prosperous arryuall, and to say the
Proficiat, of the Estate that his Majesty has vouchsaued to honor you withal
Beseeching God it may be to his honor, Et ad multos annos. The Abbot was
already a Traitor.
For performance of that I made unto you, when ye departed hence, to advertise
you from time to time of ye state of our affairs. May it please you to
understand first of all, that since that time there has not happened any great
alteration, either good or bad, saving that according to the uttermost of all
worldly affairs, But lost a great deal more then they have won: by witness
of the good Towns we have taken.
sometimes his Majesty's men have triumphed, and otherwhyles have lost: Such as
are good to maintain the Spanish tyranny.
The good persevere to procure the restablishing of the affairs.

But the necessity that they suffer through want of money, suffers not that
they can execute their good intencions. Where is the treasure of Peru, that
they promised.
The wicked wax obstinate more and more, preparing themselves with all fury,
to offensive and de: fensiue war. And though they have been well gauled in
Flanders: and their principal Captains, as the Master Monk, ye have no
cause to be so joyful. For in steed of one prisoner of ours, we have three of
yours.
Lord de La noue, and other taken prisoners. Nihil tamen sunt mutati ab illis,
sed potius facti deteriores et Better resolved then that they will sell* their
liberty and Country, for the Spanyardes rewards.
obstinatiores, tantum abest, vt cum piscatore icti sapiant, imo nunc serio
videntur egisse de abnegando rege et transferendo imperium in Note, that the
Abbot counseled this an infinite many of times, when the time served not. But
what else may be looked for at a Monks hands, that have no other God but his
belly.
Alansonium: Sed, ni fallor, quidquid dicant aut pretexant, credo sterni
Auriaco viam. Quod si fit, mutatio parua erit aut paene nulla, quia propter
ipsorum dicere aut nominare, nihill mutabitur in re.

I have written mine opinion in that matter to my Lord the Cardinal: And see
to my great grief, that their obstinacy, will cause the whole ruin and
destruction of our Country. And that this war will be of long contynuaunce,
with great charges, and small profit. For the feats The Monk speaks like a
brave warrior, to maintain his fleshpot.
of Arms must be better ordered to get the victory, or more must be granted
for the conclusion of Peace.

The men of Cambray, Tournay, and Bouchain, make war according to their
custom, destroying the Country, to the great displeasure and detryment of the
Who feel the smart of the folly of their Governors and wicked Magistrates.
poor people. The Prince of Espinoy has accepted the office of General.
Mounsier de Ainsy, and they of Cambray. Iurarunt in verba Alanson. So By your
infidelity and treason.
all goes amysse.

I beseech you my Lord to vouchsafe, by your wisdom and discretion to
inform his Majesty: in what state at this present, the affairs in these
parties remain, exhorting him to follow the healthsome ways of myldnesse and
clemency, As appears by the contynuance of the wars, he makes with all
extremity against his own subjects.
which he has heretofore taken, and inclyning him rather to Peace, then to
war. Nam adhuc grandis restat via, quia illud vere quadrat in eos quod sole
vulgo dici, vno salus victis nulla^ sperare salutem. I think you were a good
while, ere this advertised of our loss of Malines. And also that the Town of
Die was surprised in these days. Here he calls us overcome, and before h^
said, that they have not yet got the match. So he sings a triumph before
the victory.
Which will fall out very evil for the poor Town of Louain. These be Events
of the war nay, rather fruits of your folly, which causes this war, under
color of Peace.
, events of ye war: And till there be some mean found to establish an
assured Peace, each party must prepare him self to beat, and be beaten.
Touching mine own Which my Lord Abbot prefers before the common wealth.
particular affairs, I reco^mend them unto you, as to him yt knows my These
services are secret services, that by their right named are called Treason and
Felony, committed against his country, and against three Princes, whose Almo
(...) he has been one after an other.
services and good will, hoping that by your means yt which has been freely
The Abbot, then while he named him self Ambassador to the States, had created
with the enemies, being ouercom by such promises, as are aduantageable to his
fleshpotte.
promised me by the Duke of Terra Noua, shall be ratified unto me by his
Majesty.

For a beginning whereof, I have had some experience already, having received
understanding within these few days, by Letters from my Lord the Prince of
Parma, that his said Majesty had vouchsaued, to name me one of his Counsel
of Estate, (notwithstanding, that there was a diffycultie raised, by some of
mine adversaries of The Abbot of Hannon, as honest a man as he of Marolles: So
one Woolfe will cite an other.
mine own profession, whom I esteem little or nothing,) which brings me in
hope, that in short time shall be given unto me, the assygnification of the
Pencion of See that all is done for money, and according to the ordinary trade
of Monks.

Metuo danaos et dona ferentes.


three thousand Duckattes, that the said Lord the Duke promised me, for giving
over mine action, touching the Abbay of Saint Bertin. Besides the absolute
forsaking of the administration that I had by the charge and ordenaunce of the
general Estates. Whereunto I beseech you to lay to your good helping hand.

Which shall make me heeafter 20. Note, that money makes him wylling to serve
the King according to that: Curio romana non querit oues sine lana.
more wylling to procure the service of his Majesty and the Country, and
bind men to do you all the service that is possible for me. Heerewith my
Lord, I will end this present Letter, with my most humble recommendations to
your good grace. Beseeching the Creator, to grant you a prosperous and long
life.

From Cullen, the.xvij. of June. 1580. Under was written. Your Lordships
obedient Orator.
Under signed. Frederick Abbot of Marolles.

An other. The seventh Letter.
MY Lord, fearing least my Letters were intercepted by the way, I would not let
slyp by this It was not too sure for thanks be to God by this mean the Rosepot
was found out.
assured mean of my Lord of Grobbendonkes man, to send you a copy of my former
Letters: whereby your Lordshyp may see what was then passed in these quarters
worthy of advertisement: and also to give you to understand at this present,
the strange Metamorphosies happened here sithence, by the inconstancy of
Malcontents, who are become evil ma^nered. I mean the They have seen with
their eyes, in what a whyrle pyt, they were plundged by the false persuasions
of certain Monks.
Lords of Heze, de Auxi, and their associates, as my Lord of Grobbendonck, has
written at large unto your Lordshyppe. But the victory myraculously happened
within these few days to our men, against the Rebels, and Earl of Hollach
with his men, endeavoring to stop the succors of Groeninghen (that you had
so Flattery for the Malcontents of Frizeland, complain above all things that
they had no help from them of the Counsel.
carefully and dillygently procured, whylst you were in this City) causes
the loss of these personages to be forgotten. Specially, for that the said de
Heze, and certain Captains prisoners. And as ye said Lord Grobbendonk
informed me, he advertised your Lordshyp of the same: whereunto I refer my
self. Beseeching you to be a mean that his said Majesty by this occasion,
withdraw not his He should say, deceyuing.
merciful hand, nor distrust his good As is this master Monk, who in hope to
become rich, has forsaken but three or four times the Princes, to whom he
was bound by oath. And in the end betrayed the States of his Country, being
sent as their Ambassador.
steadfast, and constant vassalles: who by good reason are most sorry for this
foul and intolerable fault. Further recommending, after ye public, my
small particular affairs. With thus much, my Lord I pray God grant you a
long and happy life, with my most humble reco^mendations to your good Lordshyps
grace. I write at this present to his Majesty, what has passed touching my
denomination in the Counsel of Estate. Being sure that my Letters will come
to your hands. I pray you vouchsafe to give good interpretation to the same,
and to ad of your own thereto, what you think may serve to my intencion:
which is no other, but to further the service of his Majesty, to save his
Authority, and my honor.

From Cullen, this.xxv. of June. 1580. Your Lordshyps obedient Orator, to do
you service. Sygned, Frederick, Abbot of Marolles.

The superscription was. To my Lord, my Lord Fonck, President in Spain, of his
Majesty's Counsel, for the affairs of Flaunders, My good Lord.
A Copy of the Letter of the Lord of Grobbendonck. To Cardinal Granuellan. The
eight Letter.
MY Lord, although I have not presently any Letter of your most honorable
Lordships to make answer unto. But my self, expect answer to those letters
which I have written: Yet for all that, seeing a matter of importance offered
for the service of his Majesty, I could not stay my self from writing. And
therefore, whereas since my last Letter, I thought more narrowly upon the
contents of your Lordships last Letter, We believe now, that no Prince can
procure us peace, unless it be with the rooting out of the Religion. For the
Cardinal being chief of the Counsel, knows the Kings meaning well enough.
whereby ye same discourses unto me the exercise of two sundry Religions cannot
be tolerated, where men pretend to have unity and tranquilytie, referring
your self to the The answer should be seen proouing the contrary.
declarations made in that respect, by the States of the Duchy of Burgundy. I
was moved to say unto your Lordshyp hereby, that I perceive very well by such
speech, that his Majesty's meaning is, not to grant any more in the cause of
Religion, then has been already agreed upon. And It is very rightly concluded.
consequently seeing Peace can not be concluded, without a further grant that
his Majesty must Therefore we also must resolve the like, and seek all means
to defend our selves without spending any more time about treaties, full of
deceypt.
resolve to make war, to Note, how these good Ministers presuppose and
persuade the King that his Country is lost from him, except he can root out
all those of the Religion, and govern the Country with a club, and without
any contradiction or intercession of the States. And therevppon the King is
fully resolved to the war, without leaving us any hope of Peace.
recover his Country, which under pretense of the said Religion they would
take from him.

Now, my Lord, calling to remembrance how the said war has been ordered
hitherto, with his Majesty's great charge, and small profit, I am sorry for
it. And although it be a matter beside my profession, yet notwithstanding, for
as much as the same is of so great importance to the common good, or evil of
all in general: I could not discharge my self of the care thereof. Therefore I
thought it my duty, to advertise your most honorable Lordship, that mine
opinion is, that heretofore they have erred in two respects, to ye end that
your Lordshyp may remedy the same hereafter. Then speak better then the Duke
of Alua, who had three score, and ten thousand men, and could not overcome
Holland and Zeland.
To wit, they have levied so many men, yt they could not pay them: And that
they have taken Captains without good examination of their quallities and
sufficiency. Whereof proceeded the disorder and destruction of all Milletary
discipline: without ye which no good effect can be hoped for. Praying the same
therefore, to vouchsafe to ground him self rather upon a small Camp well
paid: then upon a great one not paid, so much ye rather. To burn us in a
small fire.
Quod bellum istud trahendu^ potius, quam subito conficiendum, fore timeatur.
And as touching the Captains, Vt bonus habeatur delectus. And in this respect
I may not hyde from your most honorable Lordshyp, that being the other day in
company with the He is one of them th^^ would judge our controversy, as the
Fere does the Chickens.
Earl of Swartzenberghe, Ambassador to his Majesty, we fell in talk of this
matter so far, that he complained upon and lamented the small service that
his Majesty had received of the men of his Nation, with so great charges, They
shall see whether he will do any better then the rest.
Taxing with all the slacknesse and covetousness of the heads and Colonelles,
showing him self very sorrowful, that the German Nation, was in a manner
defamed thereby.

Whereunto I made him answer, that he was to remedy the same as much as lay
in him. And if his Majesty fell into the necessity of this war, then to set
forward him self to the feelde, and to offer his service, so much the more,
because the justification of the cause was known to him. As with the contrary
party and enemy, and not as an equal Arbytrator: to wit, such a one as his
honor and promises commanded him to be.
As having dealt in it with the other Princes. And that for such he ought to
help to defend it, and employ him self to restore unto his Nation, the
ancient reputation, which seemed unto me the duty of a personage of his
calling.

And after this talk was a while continued, at last he grew to this
resolution, that he would be content to enter into his Majesty's service, so
that he knew whether the same would be acceptable, and that he might have a
charge granted him, meet for his calling.

Further, declaring unto me that since the death of the Emperor Maximilian, he
was not so far bound to the Emperor that now is, but that it was lawful for
him to accept this service. And that albeit, he was solicited by the Emperor,
and also by the Duke of Bauiere, as having before this served the deceased Duke
his Father, he thought to pacify them both, by means of the service of the
King: And so to treat with the Emperor, that serving the King, he should
nevertheless remain in his service, As good and faithful as he.
placing an other in his rowme, in his absence. And thereof he earnestly
desired to have your most honorable Lordshyp advertised: But upon confidence
and promise to have the matter kept secret, in case his For like an honest man
he will have two stringes to his bow, according to the Proverb: If God will
not have me, the Devil prays me.
Majesty have no need of his service.

Wherefore my Lord, for that it seems unto me, that the said Earl
proceeds with good zeal, I thought it meet to advertise your Lordshyppe
very particularly of the same, in consideration that his said Majesty may
reap good service at his hands, in case the same be constrained to make
war: For as much as he has many good quallyties, requisite in a chief
Captain of men of war. As that he is well Allied and esteemed in Germany,
and known of all the Princes, having already dealt in the affairs. Being of
good representation, And gross.
Eloquent in many languages, He means, prodigal.
and very lyberall: whereby he shall have mean, not only to levy men, but
also to provide better Officers and Captains, and a good Lieuetenaunt, which
is no small matter in the wars. Your most honorable Lordship may think on
it, and propound the same, where and in such sort as you think good. In my
simple judgment it would be very good, to employe such a one, rather then any
other, for that his quallities serve not only for the exploytes of the war,
but also for counsel: and to have in the Camp a personage, that with
aucthority and good ground, can speak touching the justification of the cause,
being a thing of great importance in the wars, which Princes are
constrained to make against their subjects. Referring the whole to your most
honorable Lordshippes wisdom, only beseeching you most humble, to vouchsafe
to pardon me, if I have gone too far in a matter that is without the compass
of my profession, and that you would at your leisure send me some answer
thereunto, that according to the same I may order my self and frame my speech
to the said Earl. Without saying any more hereby to your honorable Lordship,
for that this Letter seems unto me to be already too long. I beseech our
Lord to grant you my Lord, long and prosperous life in health.

From Cullen this xxvi. of June. 1580. My Lord Fonck will give your Lordship
part of the good news of the succors sent from this City to them of
Groeninghen, by means whereof it seems that We hope it shall not so prove.
all Friezland already lost may be recovered.


Thus under signed. Your most honorable and reverend Lordships most humble
servant. Jasper Schetz.

A Copy of a Letter of the Lord Worms, to the Lord De Gommicourt, Governor
of Mastreighte. The ninthe Letter.
MY Lord Governor I humbly recommend me to your good grace. This shall be to
advertise you, that I have been with my Lord the Earl of Mansfeld. He is in
hand to find all means to content all the Allemains which are in the Country
of Luxemburghe. For he has charge from the Princess of Parma, by all means
in the world to agree with them. My self have been with the Princess. She
told me that it is above a month since she sent, as well to the King her
Master: as to all Princes in the world that are his friends, to find Money
Then she has not yet all those Millions that the Malcontents so much bragged
of.
the which me thinks, she cannot accomplish, as she desires. Not
withstanding the words of the said Princess, and the promises of the Earl
of Mansfeeld: Our Regiment and Foncres men, will not be content without they
have eight Months pay altogether, there are but three offered unto them. I
think that the said Princess being at accord with us, will send us to the
aid of the Friselanders in default that nothing can be executed touching Note
that there be yet some of the Spanished sort in the Country that are the
cause of our err solutions, a waiting occasion to play their part.
the intelling that my Lord Governor wotteth of. I have showed your letter to
my Lady the Princess, who thinks it very strange that the noble party of
Gelderland has written nothing to us since. Howbeit touching the other
Personage. My Lady takes him for an honest man, in assurance that for money
all will go well, though it be with leapes. When I departed from my Lady, she
gave me one thing in commandment, and not to me alone, but also to you and
Captain De Carpe, commanding me also to speak thereof to This is one of the
Arbitrators of peace, Grand Criado to the Pope.
the Elector of Cullen. He has promised me to stand my friend to my Lady the
Princess in this matter, and in all that he can besides in the world. The
thing that my Lady demau^deth, is that by our means, we should find the
means to practice by force of Arms, to take, brown, or burn the Vessels
of our enemies, which are near to Bonne. The said Lady has promised that if
we can bring it to pass, she will give us three thousand Crowns of gold.
For that my men are but evil Armed. I pray my Lord Governor to ward the
accomplishment thereof, to send me six and thirty Soldiers with Muskets,
and seaue^ or eight Pikemen, Then I will see with The Counselors of the
Spaniardes.
the Elector and Mounsier Lopez whether we can find the mean to perform it.
My Lady has most expressly commanded me, that I should tell you by word of
mouth, and spare for no Money to keep touch with those Of the Country of
Gelderland.
Noble men abouesayd. And that his Grace of It is a good Neighbor, but he is a
Cardinal and beaten in a corner of Rome.
Liege for the effecting thereof will furnish you with the sum of a thousand
Florens, of five and twenty Patars a piece. For that I am not well at ease you
shall hold me excused, in that I am constrained to Surely there is ^ great
hurt in that.
write unto you, being very sorry that I could not come to you my self: Yet
notwithstanding, if you have any matter of secretnes: ye may tell it to this
present bearer my good freende. Believe me there is great poverty that my men
are so evil Armed. It is a horrible matter that there can no Armor be gotten
at Cullen nor Franckefort scate for any Money. If the affairs of England,
There be enough she let him.
and the French Kings brother go forward, as the report goes, it will go
evil for the King of Spain our Master. No more at this time, but that here I
will end, praying God, my Lord Governor to grant you a most perfect long and
happy life.

Dated at Andrenac this second of July, the year fourscore. Your humble and
obedient servant. Worms.
I know not what to think of that Priest of Gelderland, which keeps himself
with my Lord Conwer at Cullen: He is an evil man, for I can by no mean get
the Armor of him.



The superscription was. To my Lord, my Lord of Gommicourte, Governor of
Mastreight for his Majesty, at Mastreight.
FINIS.

