A CATECHISM OR BRIEF INstruction in the Principles and Grounds of the true
Christian Religion.

With a short Treatise premised concerning the profit and necessity of
Catechizing.

PSALM. 34. 11. Come children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of
the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for HENRY FETHERSTONE.

1617.

TO CHRISTIan Parents, House -holders, Schoolmasters, and such as have charge
of youth: E. B. wishes the fruition and increase of all-sauing Grace, and true
blessedness.
IT is one special duty (my good brethren) which is required of Christians,
to be performed by them: that they admonish and stir up one another, to
matters which concern Piety and godliness. Exhort one another (says the
Apostle, 1. These. 5. 11.) and edify one another, even as ye do: and Hebr.
10. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works. Let
us exhort one another, and that so much the more, because the day draws near.

Through this am^ bold to impart an admonition to you, and this concerning a
duty of most great and high importance-to wit, of Catechizing.

And I suppose there cannot be a more needful thing spoken of; and concerning
which admonition should be rather given, then this: partly by reason of the
great benefit and profit which comes by it; and partly through the great
contempt and neglect which is had of it; and partly for that a great number of
these, by whom this duty is to be performed, put it off from them as a business
impertinent, and with which they stand not chargeable. I mean this last of
House and Schoole-gouernours.

I shall therefore labor breefly to inform you of three things: the first is,
teaching the profit of it: secondly I shall endeavor to remove the contempt of
it: thirdly, I shall prove that you (my brethren above mentioned) do in some
sort (though not so fully as certain other) stand chargeable therein.

Touching the first, my reasoning shall be only by allegation of the several
benefits which flow from it: now Catechizing is of exceeding advantage, as in
respect of the preaching: it is not unknown how great the number is of these
who enjoy the preaching of the word, and are nothing, or very slenderly
bettered by it; this is most certainly one main cause thereof, the want of
Catechizing; in that persons come unskilled thereto in the principles of
religion: and therefore this is a special course to be taken of him that would
be a good proficient by preaching, that he be seen in the grounds before
mentioned.

Secondly, concerning the Sacrament of Baptism, wherein we enter into solemn
Covenant with Gods majesty, how comes it to pass that so many thousands who
have thus solemnly bound themselves, yet are so far from keeping it, that
they scarcely think of such a matter? Proceeds not this of neglect of
Catechizing? And therefore as any one tendreth to receive the comfort of his
baptism, it stands him upon to submit himself to this kind of instruction.

Thirdly, concerning the Sacrament of the holy Supper, is not this generally to
be held of all Christians, that the same appertains not to all comers, but
only to prepared guests? therefore the holy Ghost plainly affirms of the
other sort, that they eat and drink their own judgment: now can it be
denied that this is one special good help of preparation, to be well lessoned
in all the ground points of the christian doctrine?

Fourthly, what a special matter is it to be frequent in the reading of the
sacred Scriptures, concerning which, the commandment of our heavenly master,
is express for all, John 5. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to
have eternal life; and they are they which witness of me: hereby we are made
wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. now certain it is, that without Catechizing,
the Scriptures will be as a sealed book: and therefore as we have in regard
the reading of Gods book, to receive edification and comfort by it, it is
needful we be skilled in the principles before.

Fifthly, can there be a more notable preservative, to keep us safe from the
multitude of seducers and impostors in the world, as Jesuits and Seminaries?
How many are perverted by them? for they compass sea and land, to make of
their profession, that they may make them the children of hell like themselves,
I will not say twofold worse; for that I suppose cannot be: witness their
many treacheries and conspiracies, and especially that gunne-powder business,
which argue their attainment to perfection in this kind. If false Prophets may
be known by their fruits, which is the rule of our master, Matthew. 7. then it
is no hard matter for these who will apply themselves to discerning of spirits
(the which we are counseled, 1. John 4. 1.) to find out of what spirit they
are: but concerning these that have been subverted by them, has there been a
more chief cause then neglect of instruction in the grounds of the true
religion?

Sixthly, what a rich treasure is the fear of God? the want whereof Abraham
perceiving in a country where he was soiourning, doubted of villainies to be
done him and his wife: Surely (said he) the fear of God is not in this place,
and they will slay me for my wives sake, Genesis 20. This is it which keeps the
subject from disloyalty against his Prince and Sovereign, 1. Sam. 26. 9. 10.
11. which is the ground of dutifulness in children toward their parents,
Ephesians. 6. 1. Children obey your parents in the Lord. This is the chain that
tieth servants to due obedience to their masters, Ephesians. 6. 5. 6. 7. 8. This is
it that holds persons from breaking forth into lewdness of behavior: How
can I (said Joseph being tempted by his ill mistress) do this great
wickedness, and so sin against God? Genesis 39. 9.

Now is it possible that this treasure of Gods fear can be, except there be
knowledge going before? and is there again a more direct way for this, then
instruction in the principles of Christianity?

Seventhly, what is catechizing in the very nature of it, but as it were a
taking of any one by the hand, to lift him up out of the dungeon of darkness,
and to bring him into the light and sight of Christ crucified, the which alone
does yield justification, Esa. 53. 11. and life eternal, Ioh. 17. 3. So that
catechizing is a most special pole to lift up the brazen Serpent, the only
beholding of which perfectly cures that deadly wound which that fiery Serpent
of hell gave us, John 3. If therefore the knowledge of Christ crucified be in
price and account with us, (the which Paul esteemed of such excellency, that
all things of this world herewith compared, he reckoned them to be dung and
filth, Phil. 3.) then ought this exercise to be in request with us, as being
without all controversy greatly requisite to the getting and procuring of that
worthy science.

There may be added an eighth benefit: The doctrine of the Gospel is a
mystery, Ephesians. 3. 9. yea a great mystery, 1. Tim. 3. 16. and every one by
his birth is a person natural, and the natural man perceives not the things
that are of God, 1. Cor. 2. This being so, it may easily appear how necessary
catechizing is, as being a familiar and plain instruction in the grounds of
doctrine.

A ninth consideration of the benefit of this is hereby evident: Christians are
all of two sorts; either they are babes, through being lately newborn, or
they have attained to some good growth, and they have their wits exercised to
discern both good and evil. This distinction the holy Ghost sets down,
Heb. 5. 13. 14. Now how many are there of the former rank? (yea and it were
well if they were come to this) and as for these, they have need of milk, and
not strong meat, as the Apostle there speaks, v. 12. And will you know what
he means there by milk? he expresses himself a little before, calling it
the first principles of the word of God: and could he have spoken more plainly?

The last benefit, which is the perfection of the whole: Catechizing is
necessary to the establishing of persons for a fixed and settled standing in
grace. If ye continue in my word (says our heavenly Master) then are ye my
Disciples, Ioh. 8. 31. Now hereunto this kind of exercise (by the confession
of all) is singularly expedient. It is a common title given to the principles
of religion, that they are called grounds, which is a very fit appellation, as
being to notify, that all such who are not skilled in these principles, are as
a building which stands upon no firm ground. Therefore every one that minds
in good earnest the profession of Christianity, had need to look to his
ground, that it be sure enough. All that will live godly (says the Apostle, 2.
Tim. 3.) must suffer persecution: and therefore without firm settling not any
one may look to hold out against such storms and tempests.

Let this suffice to have been said concerning the benefits by catechizing,
the which as diverse coards twisted together, may make as a great cable to draw
and pull any unto it.

Now in the second place, I am to labor about remoueall of the contempt,
wherein this noble exercise is: and here, albeit the former consideration,
touching the profits arising by it, may be applied to this, yet whereas profit
is one thing, and dignity or excellency is another, I will here allege what
concerns this.

First, should catechizing seem a base and vile matter in our eyes, which God
in the depth of his wisdom has invented as an ordinance of his, to help his
elect to the faith of Christ, or to confirm them therein? This is an argument
which Paul used in his plea for preaching, which otherwise was accounted
foolishness, 1. Cor. 1. 21. Here then may I say this of catechizing: Be it in
the account of the greater number a foolish and weak thing, yet certainly it
is Gods foolishness, which is wiser then men, and Gods weakness, which is
stronger then men, 1. Cor. 1. 25.

Secondly, should that be contemptible with us, the careful and diligent
practice of which, has made certain, though otherwise much accepted, yet to
be the more honorable with God? Abraham for example: It is true that his faith
properly made his person pleasing unto God, Heb. 11. 6. and 39. yet his
diligentnesse about the instructing of his family in the way of the Lord, did
make him the more acceptable; and therefore for this very act God makes him of
his privy counsel: Shall I hide (says the Lord) from Abraham the thing that
I will do? For I know him, that he will command his sons and his household
after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, Ge. 18. 17. 19.

Thirdly, if antiquity and ancientie may procure reverence, (as it ought to
do when it is not severed from truth) certainly catechizing is not destitute
of this.

In the Ecclesiastical story there is mention made of diverse Catechists,
Pantenus, Clemens, Origin, and other which were in the Primitive Church, or
very shortly upon the same, that took great pains in this kind. More then
this, it is evident that in the Apostles times it was in practice, as is plain
both by the fifth to the Hebrews, verse. 12. 13. and especially the sixth, verse.
1. 2. young Timothy, as he was brought up by his mother Eunice, and
grandmother Loys, in the Scriptures from his childhood, 2. Tim. 3. 15. so
doubtless he was in this kind also. Further then this, in the times of the
old Testament there is mention made of Solomon, how he was taught and
instructed by his mother, Prou. the last: The words of King Lemuel, the
prophecy that his mother taught him.

Beyond all this, it is plain that in the times of the Patriarchs catechizing
was practiced. That Jacob used it, it is plain by Genesis 35. Then said Jacob to
his household, and to all that were with him, put away the strange gods that are
among you, and cleanse your selves. Now it may not otherwise be thought, but
that this holy Patriarch, as he took straight order for the removing of the
false gods, so his care was as great in the informing them in the knowledge of
the true God, and in the right worship of him. And as for Abraham, that he
used it, it is evident by Genesis 18. the place formerly alleged.

Yea it ascends to the supremest height of antiquity, which is to Adam
himself: for in that his two sons did so apply themselves to the worship
and religious service of God, it is certain (howsoever it be not literally
expressed) that this came to pass by being catechized and instructed therein,
by their Parents Adam and Eve.

Fourthly, this makes not a little for the high reputation of catechizing, in
that all the reformed Churches throughout Christendom do urge and require the
practice of it: wherein what do they otherwise then give an honorable
testimony unto it?

Lastly (which only might suffice, if there were no more spoken for it)
Catechizing is of ordinance Apostolical; and so it is not of humane invention,
but it has Iehoua himself to be the founder of it. This is plain by Heb. 6.
the Apostle having before spoken of the needfulnesse of it, whereas he says,
Ye have need again that we teach you the first principles of the word of God,
then does he afterward relate the Catechism it self in the maine 2.
principal points of it, which he terms repentance from dead works, and
faith toward God: he mentions also the two sorts of persons of whom it was
required, to wit, the Conuerts before they were baptized, which he means by
the doctrine of Baptismes, and the children of Believers so soon as they came
to discretion, which he means by the laying on of hands, because these
little ones after such exercises performed by them, had the hands, to wit, of
the Pastors, laid on them.

Thus we have seen of these two points, to wit, the great profits which come
by catechizing, and also that there is no vileness in it, so as any one may
despise it; but contrariwise to be had in great regard by any persons
whatsoever.

There remains now this third to be shown, which is that you (my brethren)
who are Parents, Masters, and Schoole-gouernours, have an interest in this
business, I mean that in some sort you stand chargeable for the practice of
this duty of catechizing.

Far be it from me to lay any yoke on your necks, or burden on your backs,
other then that which is Christ's, to which every one must submit himself,
Matthew. 11. 29. especially sithence his yoke is easy, and burden is light,
Matthew. 11. 30. He is that great, yea and only Lawgiver to the conscience, and
therefore these that desire to be in the number of his good subjects, must not
deny him obedience, as in other, so in this duty.

Now how shall this appear? Even easily if we acknowledge that all the whole
Scripture is only his word, according as is said, Col. 3. Let the word of
Christ dwell plenteously in you, meaning thereby the whole doctrine of the
Scripture. But let us go to the matter. And first I reason thus: Every
Christian is by his calling a Prophet, Act. 2. 12. and certain it is, that if
we partake with Christ in his two greater offices, to wit, Priesthood and
Kingdom, Ren 1. 6. we partake in the lesser also, which is of Prophecy. Now
then if every common Christian ought to be a Teacher, how much more you, whose
callings, though not public, yet are more special then ordinary?

Secondly, thus I argue: The husband owes this duty to teach the wife, as is
plain by 1. Cor. 14. 35. If they will learn any thing, let them ask their
husbands at home: now she is a person of superiority in a family; then much
more is this duty to be performed to those that are simply the inferiors.

Thirdly, the express commands of God are many and diverse for this duty:
Deuteronomy. 6. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart,
and thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of
them when thou tarriest in thine house. Likewise verse. 20. If thy son shall
ask thee in time to come, saying, What mean these testimonies and ordinances,
etc. then thou shall say unto thy son, etc. And Psalm. 78. God established a
testimony in Jacob, and ordained a Law in Israel, which he commanded our
Fathers, that they should teach their children, that the posterity might know
it, and the children which should be borne, should stand up and declare it to
their children.

And in the new Testament, very pregnant is that which is Ephesians. 6. Ye Fathers
provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction and
information of the Lord.

Fourthly, I thus argue: You that are Parents and Schoole-gouernours, owe love
unto your children and Pupils, for this is a common debt which we owe unto all,
Romans 13. 8. much more unto them. Now this love must be in deed, 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
and can there be a more special work of love, then to help them to that
science, which yields for its benefit life eternal, Ioh. 17. 3.

Fifthly, those that profess the Christian faith, are by their calling Abraham's
children, Gal. 3. 7. Now they that will be Abraham's children, must necessarily
(as Truth it self has affirmed) do the works of Abraham, Ioh. 8. 39. Now
this was one of his works, as may be seen Genesis 18. 19. of which also God did
take especial notice.

Sixthly, it is your desire, that at the appointed times, especially at Easter,
they should come to the Sacrament, and partake thereof: now in coming
unprepared, what other do they then eat and drink unto themselves judgment?
1. Cor. 11. and should not you take pity on them in this respect, and apply
your best endeavors, that they may not turn unto their bane, which by Gods
ordinance is appointed the food to life eternal?

Seventhly, you that are Parents and Masters, desire greatly to have your
children dutiful and obedient, also your servants faithful and diligent; and
can there be a more notable means then catechizing, for the effecting of this,
whereby their hearts may be seasoned with grace, and consequently fit fruits
will be following?

Lastly, what is a Christian family but a little Church? so is it termed in
diverse places, as Romans 16. 5. and Philem. verse 2. To the Church which is in
thy house: therefore such a special holy exercise as is Catechizing, should
not be as a stranger therein.

I omit further allegations (beloved brethren) concerning this catechizing
duty to be performed by you: it is God only that has the perswasiue power,
Genesis 9. 27.

I will only satisfy a demand or two, and so I will end. One is, wherefore I
am silent concerning the Ministers, for the executing of this catechizing
business: I answer, for that generally it is held for a duty whereto they are
bounden, whereas concerning other it is not. And hence it is strange to me,
that all those who make conscience of preaching, do not also of catechizing,
which is equally commanded, and rather more then less profitable. Secondly,
That if the Ministers do their duties, there may be no more required then
their care to present them to the Minister: I answer, that except they do
something in private, the profit by the public may be endangered: but if this
be neglected in the public, then it stands you the more upon, that your
selves be laborers in the work.

If here it be said, the matter is too difficult to be done by you, I answer,
if you only command your companies to learn these principles, and to utter the
same to you, this is a small matter; and then there are so many helps by those
who have written upon the grounds of Religion, that at the least some of those
being procured, there may be something with great facility performed.

I shall briefly specify something concerning this Treatise which here is put
forth, and so I will end. I have for the method altogether followed the
Palatine Catechism: for the matter, I have used liberty therein, as other
have done before me in the selfsame book.

The points here set down, I hope have every one of them good warrant.

There are some persons, for whom I have done it, who I know will make use of
it; and indeed for them I took this business, such as it is, in hand.

Yet I have been bold to hang out a garland, because this kind of mine,
howsoever good, is in small request, I mean of catechizing in general.

Now I desire you (good brethren) to take my former admonitions and
exhortations in good part, and to accept these my poor endeavors in the
forwarding of this so needful an exercise.

And so I commend you to Gods gracious inclining and directing you for all his
good ordinances: and I heartily beseech him to vouchsafe to all us his elect
and called ones of his purpose, through a grace that was given us through
Christ before the world was, that we may be made perfect in all good works,
to do his will, working in us that which is pleasant in his ^ight* through
Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
A CATECHISM or brief instruction by way of Question and Answer, in the
principles and grounds of the true Christian Religion.
Question. WHat is thine only comfort in life and death?

Answer. Mine only comfort in life and death is this, that both in soul and
body whether I live or die, I am not mine own, but Jesus Christ's my most
faithful Lord and Savior Romans 14. 8. 9
, who has both lived, and died, and risen again for my justification Romans 4.
25.
, and makes me partaker of his spirit Matthew. 3. 11.
, whereby I may live the life of God and godliness 2. Pet 1. 3.
, by which also he ascertaineth me of a raising up to eternal glory Ephesians 4.
30.
.

Q. How many things are necessary to be known of thee, that thou may enjoy
this comfort, and consequently may both live and die blessedly?

A. Three things: first, what is the greatness of my sin and misery Mat. 9.
12. 13
: secondly, by what means I may have deliverance from that sin and misery
John 8. 21.
: thirdly, what the thankfulness is which I owe unto God for the same Romans 12.
1.
.

The first part of the Catechism, which is of man's sin and misery.
Q. How do thou know thy misery?

A. By the Law of God (...). 3. 20.
.

Q. What does the Law of God require of us?

A. This is briefly taught by our Lord in the 22. of Matthew: Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind; and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self Matthew. 22. 37. 38. 39.
.

Q. Art thou able perfectly to keep this?

A. Nothing less: for by nature I am prone to the hatred of God and of my
neighbor Tit. 3. 3.
.

Q. What? Did God create man thus perverse and corrupt in the beginning?

A. Not so: yea contrariwise, God made man good, and after his own image, that
is, endued him with knowledge and true holiness Genesis 1. 27.
.

Q. How then came this corruption into man's nature?

A. This corruption of our nature came by the fall and disobedience of our
first Parents Adam and Eve in Paradise Genesis 3. 7.
.

Q. What? is our corruption such, that we are altogether unmeet to do what is
good, and only prone to that which is evil?

A. Yea certainly, except we be newborn by the Holy Ghost 1. Cor. 2. 14.
.

Q. Does not God then injury unto man, in requiring of him in the Law, what he
is not able to perform?

A. No truly: for God created man able to perform it; but man through abuse of
his free will, and the Devils instigation, did deprive himself and all his
progeny of these divine gifts Genesis 3. 6. 7.
.

Q. Is it so then that God will leave unpunished this disobedience and sin in
man?

A. Nothing so; but contrariwise, God is most angry, both for the sin wherein
we were conceived and borne, and also for these which we actually commit Job
15. 16.
.

Q. But is not God also merciful?

A. God indeed is merciful, yet is he also just Exodus 34 7.
: wherefore his justice requires, that as his infinite Majesty is offended by
sin, so the punishment of it be according.

The second part of the Catechism, which is of man's freedom and deliverance.
Q. Sithence then through the just judgment of God, we are liable under
temporal and eternal punishment, is there any means whereby we may be
delivered from it, and get reconcilement with God?

A. God will have his justice satisfied Genesis 2. 17.
, and therefore it must needs be, that either by our selves, or by some other,
this satisfaction be made.

Q. Are we able to satisfy Gods justice by our selves?

A. In no respect Esa. 59. 16.
: yea rather we increase the debt day by day.

Q. Can any of the creatures in heaven, or in earth, which is only a creature,
make satisfaction for us?

A. Not any at all Heb. 12. 29.
: for first, God will not punish man's offense in any other creature: secondly,
not any thing being but a creature, is able to sustain Gods wrath against
sin, and free other from the same.

Q. What kind of Mediator and Redeemer is then to be sought for us?

A. Such a one who is indeed very man Genesis 3. 15.
, but perfectly just Exodus 12. 5.
, and withal more mighty then all creatures, that is also very God Esaias 9. 7.
.

Q. Why is it necessary that this Mediator must be very man, and that also
perfectly just?

A. Because Gods justice does require, that as in man's nature the sin was
committed, so in the same the punishment should be suffered 1. Cor. 15. 21
: now he who is himself a sinner, cannot undergo the same for other.

Q. Why is it necessary that he be also very God?

A. Because he might thereby sustain in his flesh the burden of Gods wrath,
and also recover unto us the righteousness and life which we had lost 1. Pet.
3. 18.
.

Q. But who is that Mediator, who is both very God, and very man, and withal
perfectly just?

A. That only, is Jesus Christ 1. Tim. 2. 5.
, who is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption 1. Cor. 1. 30.
.

Q. How do thou know this?

A. I know this by the Gospel Col. 3. 16.
, which God did first preach in Paradise Genesis 3. 15.
, and afterward by the Patriarchs Gen 18. 18.
, and Prophets Esaias 53. John 6. 35.
, and last of all by his only begotten Son.

Q. Is it so then, that salvation by Christ is granted unto all that have
perished in Adam?

A. Not so, but unto those only, who are ingraffed into Christ by true faith,
and do believe in him. John 3. 16. and 18.


Q. What is this true faith?

A. True faith is a persuasion in my heart Job 19. 25.
, grounded on the word of God Ephesians. 2. 2.
, and wrought by the holy Ghost Gal. 5. 22.
, through the preaching of that word Romans 10. 14
, whereby I believe, that Jesus Christ is not only a Savior for other, but
even my Savior also Gal. 2. 20.
, and thereupon do put all my trust in him.

Q. What is that which every one must necessarily believe, that would be
accounted to have true faith in him?

A. True faith, although it be a firm assenting to all things revealed in Gods
word Act. 26. 27.
, yet properly it rests on the promises of the Gospel Romans 4. 16.
, the sum whereof is the Apostles Creed.

Q. What is that Creed?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the holy Ghost,
borne of the Virgin Mary, who suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead, and buried: he descended into hell: the third day he arose again from
the dead: he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the
Father Almighty: from thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead: I
believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting.

Q. Into how many parts is this Creed divided?

A. Into four: The first is, of God the Father, and our Creation: The second
is, of God the Son, and our Redemption: The third is, of God the holy Ghost,
and our Sanctification: The fourth is, of the Catholic Church, and its
benefits of eternal Salvation.

Of the Father.
Q. What beleeuest thou when thou say, I believe in God the Father Almighty,
maker of heaven and earth?

A. I believe, that God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has made of
nothing heaven and earth, with all therein Genesis 1. 1.
, who likewise vpholdeth, and by his providence governs the same, to be my
God, and my Father Ioh. 20. 17.
, and therefore I do put my whole trust and confidence in him.

Q. What is the providence of God?

A. The almighty power of God, whereby he maintains and governs all things,
so that nothing comes to pass by fortune, but only according to the counsel
of his good will Matt. 10. 29. 30.
.

Q. What does the knowledge of Gods creation and providence profit us?

A. That in adversity we be patient, and in prosperity thankful to our God,
and that in him we have most firm hope for the time to come Job 1. 21.
.

Of the Son.
Q Why is the Son of God called Jesus?

A. Because he is the only Savior, that can save us from all our sins Matt.
1. 21.
, neither can salvation in any other whatsoever be found Act. 4. 12.
.

Q. Why is he called Christ?

A. The meaning thereof is Anointed: and this is to signify, that he is
ordained by the Father, to be unto us a Prophet Matthew. 17. 5
, Priest Heb 5. 5.
, and King Psalm. 2. 6.
.

Q. What is meant by these his offices, of being Prophet, Priest, and King?

A. A Prophet he is, in that he teaches us by his word and spirit whatsoever
is needful to eternal salvation Heb. 1. 2.
.

A Priest, because he offered up that expiatorie sacrifice of himself, and
does make continual intercession for us Heb. 9. 28.
.

Q. And what is meant by his office of Kingdom?

A. A King he is, in that he gathers unto himself a Church by his word and
spirit, does also govern and defend it, that the gates of hell cannot prevail
against it Mat. 16. 18.
.

Q. How art thou called a Christian?

A. Because through faith I am a member of Christ, and partaker of the ointment
of his spirit John 1. 16:
, also of his offices, Prophecy Act 2. 18.
, Priesthood, and Kingdom Revel. 1. 6.
.

Q. How art thou a Prophet, Priest, and King?

A. A Prophet I am, that I may confess Gods name Matt. 10. 32.
.

A Priest, that I may present my self unto him a lively sacrifice and thank
offering Romans 12. 1.
.

A King, that here I may fight against sin and Satan, and afterward may
reign with Christ in eternal glory Romans 8. 17.
.

Q. Wherefore is Christ called the only begotten Son, when as we also are
the sons of God?

A. Because he is the only natural Son of the Father, begotten from all
eternity Ioh. 1. 18.
, and we are sons only by adoption and grace Gal. 4. 5.
.

Q. Why call thou him our Lord?

A. Because he has redeemed our souls and bodies from sin by his precious
blood 1. Pet. 1. 19.
, and delivering us out of the Devils power, has set us free to serve him Tit.
2. 14.
.

Q. What beleeuest thou when thou say, He was conceived by the holy Ghost,
and borne of the Virgin Mary?

A. That the Son of God, who is evermore very God 1. Tim. 3. 16
, took man's nature of the substance of the Virgin Mary Luke 1. 35.
, by the working of the holy Ghost Heb. 5 17.
, and so is become like to his brethren Heb 4 15.
in all things, sin except.

Q. What profit reapest thou by Christ's holy conception and birth?

A. That he is our Mediator 1. Tim. 2. 5.
, and does cover with his perfect holiness my sin, in which I was conceived,
that it may not come into the sight of God John 17. 19.
.

Q. What beleeuest thou when thou say he suffered?

A. That all the time of his life, but especially at the end thereof, he
sustained Esa. 53 8.
for our sins the wrath of God, both in his body and soul, that he might
deliver us from everlasting death Matt. 26. 38
, and purchase to us the favor of God, and life eternal John 3. 16.
.

Q. Why was he to suffer under Pilate as his Judge?

A. That being innocent, and yet condemned by a civil Judge, he might deliver
us from the severe judgment of God Romans 8. 1.
.

Q. But is there any more in it that he was fastened to the Cross, then if he
had suffered any other kind of death?

A. Yea: for by this I am assured that he took on himself Gal. 3. 13.
the curse which lay on me, because the death of the Cross was accursed of
God Deuteronomy. 21. 23
.

Q. Why was it necessary that Christ should humble himself unto the death?

A. Because the justice and truth of God might not otherwise have been
satisfied for our sins Heb. 5. 8. 9.
.

Q. To what end was he also buried?

A. To manifest thereby the truth of his death Matt. 27. 64. 65.
.

Q. Since Christ has died for us, why must we also die?

A. Our death is not a satisfaction for our sins, but an abolishing of sin
Rom* 6. 7.
, and passage into life eternal Ioh. 11. 25.
.

Q. What is meant by this, He descended into hell?

A. That he suffered the lowest abasement, to wit, the ignominious captivity
under death, so that he was for a time deaths prisoner in the grave Act. 2. 24.
, whereby even I might never despair, how low soever I be brought.

Q. What does the resurrection of Christ profit us?

A. First, it serves for our justification Romans 4. 25.
: secondly, as by his obedience to death, he is our Savior in merit, so by
this he is our Savior in efficacy 1. Cor. 15. 45
. Thirdly, it is a pledge of our own resurrection to glory 1. Cor. 15. 20. 21.
.

Q. How understand you this, He ascended into heaven?

A. That Christ in the sight of his Disciples was taken up into heaven Act. 1.
9.
, and yet is there for our sakes, and will be until his coming again to
judgment Act. 3. 21.
.

Q. What fruit does Christ's ascension into heaven bring us?

A. First, he does there make intercession for us Heb: 9. 24.
.

Secondly, he sends from thence the holy ghost on us Ephesians. 4 10.
.

Thirdly, his ascension is a pledge of our ascension in our very bodies Ioh:
14: 2: 3.
.

Q. What is meant by Christ's sitting at the right hand of God?

A. That he has all power given him, by the Father, and all things Phil: 2. 9.
, and does gloriously execute the office of Priest and King for us Math: 28.
10.
.

Q. What special benefits have we by this glorious estate of our Lord in
heaven, and by his office of Mediatorship there performed for us?

A. First we have hereby a bringing out of unbelief wherein by nature we were
shut Rom: 11: 32.
, unto true saving faith ^ Pet: 2. 9.
.

Secondly, a continual pardon of our sins 1 Ioh: 2: 12.
.

Thirdly, the sending down of the holy ghost on us, with all needful
graces Ephesians: 4: 8.
.

Fourthlie, defense against all our enemies whatsoever Ephesians: 1: 12. 13.
.

Q. What comfort have thou by Christ's coming again to judge, the quick and
the dead?

A. I am hereby free from all fear of condemnation, sithence he shall be my
Judge, who suffered himself to be condemned for me Rom: 8. 34.
.

Also, I am certain that his coming shall be to lift me up to the fruition
of eternal glory with him 1 These: 4. 16. 17.
.

Of the holy Ghost.
Q. What beleeuest thou concerning the holy Ghost?

A. First, that he is very God, coeternall with the Father, and the Son Act:
5. 3. 4.
.

Secondly, that he is given me to make me through faith, partaker of Christ
and all his benefits Romans 1: 9.
. Also, to comfort me, and to abide with me for ever Ioh: 14. 16.
.

Of the Holy Catholic Church.
Q. What beleeuest thou concerning the Holy Catholic Church?

A. I believe, that the Son of God, does in all ages 1 King. 19. 18.
by his Word and Spirit, gather, govern, and defend a company chosen to
eternal life 2 Timothy: 2. 19.
, and that I am a very member of the same, and so shall remain for ever.

Q. What means the communion of Saints?

A. First, that all true believers, are partakers in common of Christ, and all
his benefits Gal: 3. 27. 28.
.

Also, that every one might cheerfully bestow their gifts, to the mutual good
of each other Act: 4. 32.
.

Q. What beleeuest thou concerning forgiveness of sins?

A. That God for the satisfaction of Christ, has put out of his remembrance,
all my sins, original and actual Ephesians: 4. 32.
.

Also, that he counts me fully just in the righteousness of his Son imputed
to me Rom: 4. 5.
.

Q. What comfort have thou by the resurrection of the body?

A. That not only my soul, presently on the departure out Luk: 23: 45.
of my body, shall be taken up into Paradise, but that this my body, shall by
the power of Christ, be reunited to my soul, and made like the glorious body
of Christ 2 Cor: 15. 42. 43.
.

Q. What comfort have thou by the article of life everlasting?

A. That whereas at this present I begin the enjoying of life eternal Ioh:
6. 47.
, I shall at length have the same perfected, with all fullness of felicity 1
Cor: 2 9.
.

Q. What benefit have thou by thy belief of the Gospel?

A. I am thereby righteous before God Rom: 8: 1.
, and heir of life eternal Heb: 11. 7.
.

Q. How art thou righteous before God?

A. Only by faith in Christ Phil: 3: 9.
, whereby his perfect satisfaction, righteousness, and holiness are made
mine: as if I had performed the same in mine own person Rom: 8. 3: 4.
.

Q. How say thou that thou art righteous by faith only?

A. Not, that I please God, through the worthiness of my faith Mark: 9: 24.
, but because the only satisfaction, righteousness, and holiness of Christ,
is my righteousness before God Cant: 2: 16.
.

And for that I cannot take hold of it, and apply it to my self, any other
way then by faith alone Rom: 4: 16.
.

Q Why cannot our good works go for righteousness, or some part of it, before
God?

A. Because that righteousness, which must stand before the judgment of God,
must be perfect and in all points agreeable with the law of God Gal: 3. 15.
: now our works even the best of them, are imperfect and defiled with sin
Es: 64: 6.
.

Q. How do our works merit nothing, sithence God promises a reward for them,
both in this life, and that to come?

A. That reward is given, not out of merit, but of grace and free favor
Coloss: 3: 24.
.

Q. Does not this doctrine make men secure, and profane?

A. No: because those who are incorporate into Christ by faith, cannot but
yield forth the fruits of thankfulness 2 Cor: 5: 14.
.

Of the Sacraments.
Q. Sithence then, that Faith only makes us partakers of Christ, and his
benefits, from whence does this faith proceed?

A. From the Holy Ghost Gal: 5. 22.
, who begets it in us, by the preaching of the gospel Rom: 10. 14.
, and confirms it by the same 1 These: 3. 2.
, and by use of the Sacraments Act: 2. 42.
.

Q. What are Sacraments?

A. They are visible signs, and seals from God Rom: 4: 11.
, to declare and seal unto us, the promise of his gospel Math: 28. 19.
, that not only to believers in general, but to every such one in particular
Rom: 4. 11.
, he gives free remission of sins, and life eternal, for that only
sacrifice of Christ, which he offered on the cross Luke: 22. 19.
.

Q. Does not then both the word and the Sacraments tend to this end to lead our
faith unto the sacrifice of Christ finished on the cross, as to the only
ground of our salvation?

A. Yea: for the holy ghost teaches us by the gospel 1 Cor: 2. 1.
, and assures us by the Sacraments, that all salvation is grounded on the only
sacrifice of Christ offered for us on the cross 1 Cor: 11. 24. 25. 26.
.

Q. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in the new Testament?

A. Two: Baptism Math: 1. 18. 19.
, and the holy Supper Luk: 22. 19.
.

Of Baptism.
Q. How art thou admonished and assured by baptism, that thou art partaker of
Christ and his righteousness?

A. Because, Christ has commanded the outward washing with water Math: 28. 19.
, with this promise, that I am so certainly washed by his blood and spirit,
from all uncleanness of sin 1 Cor: 12. 13
, as I am outwardly washed with water, by which the filthiness bodily is
cleansed.

Q. What is it to be washed with the blood and spirit of Christ?

A. To be washed with Christ's blood, is to receive of God forgiveness of sins,
freely for the blood of Christ, shed for us Ephesians: 1: 7.
.

To be washed with his Spirit, is to be sanctified by the holy ghost, whereby I
am made a member of Christ, and received unto holiness.

Q. Where does Chrrist promise that he will wash us, as certainly with his
blood, and spirit, as we are washed with the water of baptism?

A. In the institution of it, Math. 28. 19. and in Mark 16. he that shall
believe and be baptized, shall be saved: also where the Scripture calls
Baptism, the washing away of sins Act: 2: 38.
, and the washing of the new birth Tit: 3: 5.
.

Q. Is then the outward Baptism of water, the very washing away of sins?

A. It is not: for the blood of Christ alone, cleanses us from all sin Ioh:
2. 7.
.

Q. Why then does the holy Ghost call Baptism, the washing away of sins, and
the washing of the new birth?

A. God speaks this not only to teach us, that as the filth bodily is
cleansed by water, so our souls are by the blood and Spirit of Christ, but
also to assure us, by this divine pledge, that we are as verily washed, from
our sins inwardly, as we are outwardly by water 1 Pet: 3: 21.
.

Q. Are infants also to be baptized?

A. Yea: for fithence they belong to the covenant of grace Genesis 17. 7.
, and church of God Phil: 2.
; and since remission of sins is promised also to them Gen: 17: 7.
, they are to have the seal thereof Rom: 4: 11.
, and to be distinguished from the children of Infidels 1 Cor: 7. 14.
, as in the old Testament was done by circumcision Col: 2: 11: 12
, to which Baptism has succeeded Col: 2. 11. 12
.

Of the holy Supper.
Q. How art thou in the holy Supper admonished and warranted, that thou art
partaker of Christ crucified with all his benefits?

A. Because Christ has commanded me to eat of this bread broken, and to
drink of this cupp Luk: 22: 19.
, with promise, that so certainly as I behold this with my eyes, so was his
body broken, and blood shed for me 1 Cor: 11. 24. 25.
.

Also, that I am freed by the same to life eternal, so surely, as I receive
into me these signs thereof 1 Cor: 12. 13.
.

Q. What is it, to eat the body of Christ crucified, and to drink his blood
that was shed?

A. It is not only to embrace with sure confidence, the whole passion of k
Gal: 3. 27.
Christ, but also by the holy ghost, who l 1 Cor: 6. 17.
dwells both in Christ and us, to be more and more united to him, that we
be quickened and guided, by one and the same Spirit.

Q. Where has Christ promised, that he will as certainly give his body and
blood to be eaten and drunk, as we eat this bread broken, and drink this
cup?

A. In the institution where it is said, Christ took bread and brake it, and
gave to them saying, this is my body which is given for you, likewise he took
the cup, saying, this cup is the new Testament in my blood which is shed
for you Math: 26. 26: 27. 28.
.

Q. Are then the bread and wine made the very body and blood of Christ?

A. No verily: but as the water of Baptism, is not turned into the blood 1
Cor: 11. 26. 27. 28.
of Christ, so the bread and wine of the holy Supper, are not the natural
substance of Christ's body and blood, but the signs and pledges only Rom: 4.
11.
.

Q. Why does Christ then call the bread his body and the cup his blood, and
Paul calls the bread and wine the Communion of the body and blood of Christ?

A. Christ speaks this to assure us, that through the holy ghost, we do as
verily partake his body and blood, as we bodiliwise receive into us, the
signs thereof 1 Cor: 10: 3. 4.
: And that his obedience and passion, are so certainly our own, as if that had
been done in our own persons Romans 5: 19.
.

Q. Who are to come to the Lords Table?

A. Those only, who do truly sorrow for their sins Math: 11. 38
, yet trust in Christ's satisfaction Ioh: 6. 35.
; who also desire increase in faith, and holiness Heb: 12: 14:
.

But the other sort eat and drink to themselves judgment 1 Cor: 11. 19
.

Q. Are they to be admitted to this Supper, who in confession, and life
declare themselves to be Infidells and ungodly?

A. No Math: 7. 6.
: for Gods covenant is thereby profaned Psalm: 50. 16.
, and his wrath kindled against the whole congregation 1 Cor. 11. 30
? wherefore the Church using the keys of the kingdom of heaven received from
Christ, ought to keep such from this Supper, till they repent Math. 18. 18.
.

Q. What are the keys of the kingdom of heaven?

A. The preaching of the gospel Math: 16. 19.
, and Ecclesiastical discipline Math: 18. 19
, by which heaven is opened to believers, and penitent ones Math: 16: 19.
, and shut to the contrary Math. 18. 18.
.

Q. How is the kingdom of heaven opened, and shall be by the preaching of the
Gospel?

A. When in Christ's name, it is publicly taught, that all their sins are
pardoned, who truly believe the gospel Ioh: 20. 23.
: and unto the unbelievers, and impenitent there is denounced condemnation; the
which testimony is ratified in heaven.

Q. How is the kingdom of heaven opened and shut by Ecclesiastical Discipline?

A. When according to the rule of Christ, they that show themselves aliens from
him in doctrine Tit: 3. 10.
, or life 1 Cor: 5. 4. 5.
, are by the Church after refusal of admonition, suspended from the Sacrament,
or barred from the holy assemblies. Also when upon due profession of amendment
they are received in again 2 Cor: 2. 7.
.

The third part of the Catechism, which is of gratitude or thankfulness.
Q Sithence we are delivered from all our sins and miseries by the only
mercy of God, for Christ's sake, why are we to do good works?

A. There is a threefold cause, why being thus delivered, we should do good
works: One is, that we may declare our thankfulness to God Matt: 3. 16.
: a second, that we may have assurance of the trunesse of our faith Gal: 5. 6.
: a third is, that by our good conversation we may win other unto Christ 1.
Pet: 3. 1. 2
.

Q Cannot they then be saved who are unthankful, and remain still in their
sins and iniquities?

A. By no means: for as the Scripture witnesses, neither fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor extortioners, nor thieves nor drunkards, shall inherit the
kingdom of God 1 Cor: 6. 9. 10.
.

Q. Wherein consists the conversion of man unto God? and whence also flows
it?

A. It does arise of a godly sorrow, through our foolishness in offending God
2 Cor: 7. 10.
, and has with it an after wisdom, in leaving our former folly, and turning
unto God Psalm: 2. 10. 11. 12.
.

Q. What are the kinds of this conversion?

A. Two: one is in seeking unto God for pardon of our sins; this may be
termed the conversion of humiliation Esaias 5. 6. 7.
: the other is upon the obtaining of that pardon; this may be termed the
conversion of thankfulness Rom: 12. 1. 2
.

Q. Sithence this latter appertains to this place, we shall more specially
consider of it: show me therefore wherein this conversion, which is of
thankfulness, does consist.

A. It consists in the mortifying of the old man, and living according to the
new Rom: 6. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
.

Q. What is the mortifying of the old man?

A. This is, when acknowledging our sins, whereby we have offended Gods
Majesty, we are heartily sorry for them, and daily more and more do hate and
eschew them 1 Pet: 3. 11.
.

Q. What is the living according to the new man?

A. This is, when upon the knowledge of Gods mercy, which is promised to all
that sorrow for their sins, and believe in Christ Ioh: 6. 47.
, we have in us an earnest desire of living after Gods will 1 Pet: 4. 1. ^
, with a serious endeavor of doing good works Tit: 2. 14.
.

Q. What are good works?

A. Only these, which through true faith Rom: 14 23
, are done according to the word and Law of God Ps: 117. 105.
, and are referred to the glory of him alone 1 Cor: 10. 31.
.

Q. What is the Law of God?

A God spoke all these words, saying: Exodus: 20.
I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

II. Thou shall make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things
that are in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are
in the waters under the earth: Thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve
them; for I am the Lord thy God, a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the children unto the third generation, and unto the fourth of
them that hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands, to them that love me,
and keep my Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy: six days shall thou labor
and do all thy work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God;
in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
man-seruant, nor thy maid-seruant, nor thy beast* nor thy stranger, that is
within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made the heaven, and the earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, therefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged upon the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his man-seruant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
neither any thing that is thy neighbors.

Q. How are the Commandments divided?

A. Into two Tables Exodus: 32. 15 16
: the former whereof delivers in four Commandments, how we ought to behave
our selves toward God: the latter in six, what duties we owe to our neighbor
Matt: 32. 37. 38. 39.
.

Q. What does God require in the first Commandment?

A. That I abandon all idolatry 1 Cor: 6. 9. 10.
, enchantments Deuteronomy: 18. 11
, sorcerie Ierem: 17. 7
, and the like: and that acknowledging the true God, as he has revealed
himself in his word, I do only trust in him, pray unto him Psalm: 50. 15.
, and worship him Matt: 4. 10.
: also that I love and fear him above all Matt: 10. 28.
, and in every thing submit my self unto him with all humility James 4. 7.
.

Q. What does the second Commandment require?

A. That we should not represent God by any image Ioh: 4. 24.
, much less that we worship any image, or God thereby Deuteronomy: 4. 15. 16. 17. 18.
19.
, but only that we hold our selves to that form of worship, which himself
has prescribed in his word Esaias 18. 20.
.

Q But may not Images be tolerated in Churches, to serve for the peoples use?

A. No: for it is not seemly that we should be wiser then God, who will have
his Church to be taught by the Act: 10. 28. Habac: 2. 18. 19.
lively preaching of his word, and not by dumb Images.

Q. What does God require in the third Commandment?

A. That not only we abondon the abusing of Gods glorious name, by cursing
Leuit: 24 11. 12. 13 ^4.
, or forswearing Leuit: 19. 12
, but also by rash swearing Ier: 4. 2.
, though the matter be true: neither should by silence, or conniuence, partake
with other therein Ephesians: 5. 12.
. Also that evermore his sacred name be used by us with all due reverence Matt:
6 9.
.

Q. Is it lawful to swear by Saints, or other creatures?

A. No Deuteronomy: 6. 13.
: for a lawful oath is an inuocating of God, as the only searcher of the heart
Ier: 17. 10.
, to witness the truth, and punish the swearer if wittingly he swear falsely:
now this honor agrees to no creature Iam: 5. 12.
.

Q. What does God require in the fourth Commandment?

A. That I carefully on the Sabbaths frequent the solemn assemblies Matt: 18
19.
, and there diligently hear his word read Act 15 21.
, and preached Rom: 10* 14 15
, use the Sacraments with due preparation 1 Cor: 11. 28
, assist to the prayers, and contribute after mine ability to the collections
1 Cor: 16. 1. 2.
: also that then especially I be diligent in private exercises tending to
edification in faith and piety Esaias 58. 15.
.

Q. What does God require in the fifth Commandment?

A. That we yield due honor to our parents Ephesians: 6. 1. 2. 3
, and to all who have authority over us Ephesians: 6. 5.
, that we duly submit our selves to them, and reverence all our superiors as
is meet 1 Pet: 5. 5.
.

Also that superiors behave themselves as worthy of the same Ephesians: 6. 5. 9.
.

Q. What does God require in the sixth Commandment?

A. Not only I am here forbidden the actual killing of my brother Gen: 9. 6.
, and the doing him any bodily harm Gen: 5. 39.
, but also all envy Gal. 5. 21.
, hatred Gal: 5 20.
, and desire of revenge Rom 12. 9.
. Further I am commanded to show him kindness, though mine enemy, and as need
requires to tender his life and safety Rom: 12. 20
.

Q. What is the meaning of the seventh Commandment?

A. That not only I fly all bodily uncleanness, but whatsoever may draw
thereto, as filthy songs 1 Cor: 15. 33.
, ribald talk Ephesians: 5. 4.
, drunkenness Gen: 19. 32.
, and the like. Also, that whether in wedlock, or single life, my behavior be
in all pureness and chastity 1 Thessalonians: 4. 3. 4. 5.
.

Q. What does God require in the eighth Commandment?

A. That not only I abandon all thefts and robberies, commonly so called, but
also all crafts and devices, whereby the goods of other are unlawfully procured
1 Thessalonians: 4. 6.
, as false weights and measures Leu: 19. 35.
, deceitful wares, usury Ezec: 18. 13
, and the like.

Also that I labor faithfully in some honest calling, to get mine own
maintenance 1 Timothy: 5.
, and to be helpful unto other Ephesians: 4. 28.
.

Q. What is required in the ninth Commandment?

A. That I bear not false witness against any, neither empaire any ones name,
by broching forth, or receiving slanders Psalm. 15 3.
.

That I abandon lying Ephesians: 4 25.
, and follow the truth in all things Ephesians: 4. 15.
, and what lies in me, defend the good name of other Matt. 7. 12.
.

Q. What does the tenth Commandment require of us?

A. That our hearts be not moved by the least thought or desire Romans 7. 7
against any Commandment of God, but that continually from our heart we detest
all sin, and delight in all righteousness Iam: 2. 10
.

Q Can they that are converted unto God, perfectly keep all these
Commandments?

A. No: but even the holiest, so long as they live, have only small beginnings
of this obedience Iam* 3. 2
; yet so that there is in them an unfeigned desire to live even according to all
the Commandments of God Ps: 119. 5 6
.

Q. Why will God have his Law to be so exactly preached, sithence no man in
this life is able to keep it?

A. First, that we acknowledging our sin, and great pronenesse thereto,
might the more earnestly hunger after Christ's righteousness Mat: ^. 3. 4. 5
.

Secondly, that our praying might be the more fervent for the holy Ghost,
whereby Gods image may be more and more renewed in us Luk: 11. 11. ^^. 13
.

Of Prayer.
Q. Why is prayer necessary for Christians?

A. Because it is a chief part of that thankfulness which is required of us
Ps: 50. 14. 15
. Also, God makes promise of his spirit and divine graces, upon condition of
earnest praying and hearty thanksgiving for the same Luke 11. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13
.

Q. What is required unto that prayer which may please God, and be heard of him?

A. That our prayers be made only to God Psalm: 50. 15
, and that for such things as his word does warrant Luk: 11. 2
: also of an inward feeling of our needs Iam: 5. 16.
, being ascertained, that though unworthy of our selves, yet for his promise
sake, and the merits of Christ Ioh: 16. 23. 24.
, we shall be heard.

Q. What are these things which God commands us to ask of him?

A. All things necessary both for Ioh: 14 13. 14.
soul and body, which are comprised in that prayer which our Lord has taught
us.

Q. What prayer is that?

A. Our Father which art in heaen, Matthew: 6. Luke 11. 2.
hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our debts, as we
forgive them that are debtors unto us; and lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil; for thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for
ever and ever. Amen.

Q. Why does Christ teach us to call God our Father?

A. That in the very entrance of our prayer he might stir up in us confidence
in God, that sithence earthly Fathers do not deny earthly things, much less
will our heavenly Father deny us what in true faith we crave of him Luke 11.
11. 12. 13.
.

Q. Why is it added, which art in heaven?

A. That we conceive not basely of Gods heavenly Majesty Ier. 23. 24.
: also that we expect from his omnipotency whatsoever is necessary for our
soul and body Psalm: 115. 3.
.

Q. What is the first petition?

A. Hallowed be thy name: that is, Grant us to know thee aright Exodus 33. 13.
18.
, and to magnify thy virtues shining in thy works 1 Pet: 2. 9.
: also so to direct our life, that thy name may receive honor and renown by
us Matt: 5. 16.
.

Q. What is the second petition?

A Let thy kingdom come: that is, rule us so by thy word and spirit Cant. 1. 3.
, that more and more we may submit our selves to thee: preserve thy Church
Psalm: 122. 6* 7
, destroy the works of the devil, and all adverse power Romans 16. 20.
, till at length thou reign fully being all in all.

Q. What is the third petition?

A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: that is, Grant that we
renouncing our own wills, may in all readiness obey thy will Psalm: 119. 5.
, and that with such cheerfulness we may perform the duties of our callings,
as the Angels do in heaven Psalm: 103. 20 21. 22.
.

Q. What is the fourth petition?

A. Give us this day our daily bread: that is, Since thou art the only
fountain of all true good Iam: 1. 17.
, grant us whatsoever is needful for this life Gen: 28. ^
; and hereunto vouchsafe thy blessing in our labors, which otherwise will prove
most vain Psalm: 1^^
.

Q. What is the fifth petition?

A. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us:
that is, Grant us for the merits of thy dear Son, a gracious pardon of all
our sins Ephesians. 1. 7.
, and give thereof such assurance in our hearts, as we are there certain, that
through thy grace even our selves do forgive all those that have offended us
Mat. 6. 14. 15
.

Q. What is the sixth petition?

A. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: that is, Because
our spiritual enemies do continually assail us 1 Pet: 5. 8.
, and we of our selves cannot hold out against them even one moment John 15. 5.
, vouchsafe to strengthen us by the power of thy spirit Esaias 11. 2.
, that we may both withstand them, and also at length get full victory
against them John 5. 4. 5.
.

Q. How concludest thou thy prayer?

A. For thine is the kingdom, the Psalm. 84. 11.
power and the glory, for ever and ever: that is, We crave all these things of
thee, because thou being our King, and Almighty, art both willing and able to
give them to us, and our end in asking them is, that not unto us, but unto thy
name all glory may redound Psalm. 115. 1.
.

Q. What means this particle, Amen?

A. That the thing is sure and out of 2 Cor: 1. 20.
doubt, for my prayer is more certainly heard of God, then I feel in my heart
an unfeigned desire of it Luk: 11. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
.

Q. Tell me now briefly, what is the sum and substance of thy knowledge in
the heavenly doctrine, whereon all thy comfort depends?

A. First I know thereby, that by nature I am most miserable, as being under
the guilt of sin Rom: 3. 9.
, and the bondage thereof: secondly, I know and believe, that God has given
me his Son, by whom I have righteousness 2 Timothy: 2. 26.
, and sanctification 1 Cor: 1. 30.
: thirdly, I know that God requires of me thankfulness Rom: 12. 1. 2. 1. Cor.
13. 9. Iam. 1. 19. 1 Cor 11. 25. 1 Thessalonians: 5. 1 Thessalonians: 4. 1.
, and therefore I must diligently obey his revealed will: and since my
imperfections are great, I ought carefully attend the holy ordinances, as the
ministry of the word and Sacraments, prayer, and the like, whereby I may grow
in godliness, which has promise of blessedness in this life, and that to
come 1 Timothy: 4. 8*
.

FINIS.

