PYROTECHNIA OR, A DISCOVRSE OF ARTIFICIAL FIREWORKS: In which the true
Grounds of that Art are plainly and perspicuously laid down: Together with
sundry such Motions, both Straight and Circular, performed by the help of
Fire, as are not to be found in any other Discourse of this kind, Extant in any
Language.

Whereunto is annexed a short TREATISE of Geometry, containing certain
Definitions and Problemes, for the Mensuration of Superficies and Sollids, with
Tables for the Square Root to 25000, and the Cubick Root to 10000 Latus,
wherein all Roots under those Numbers are extracted only by Ocular Inspection.

Written by John Babington Gunner, and Student in the MATHEMATICS.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for RALPH MAB, MDCXXXV.

A Table of the Contents.
CHAP. 1 HOw to make all sorts of moulds in a true proportion with the Rollers,
and drift. Page 1 CHAP. 2 How to make your Coffines of paper. p. 4 CHAP. 3 How
you shall choke a Rocket. idem CHAP. 4 The manner of driving a Rocket, with
the instruments belonging to the same. p. 6 CHAP. 5 The manner of heading a
Rocket, with the order of capping the same. p. 7 CHAP. 6 The manner of
finishing a Rocket. p. 8 CHAP. 7 The manner of fyring Rockets, with the
description of a staff for fyring of them. p. 10 CHAP. 8 Diverse compositions
for stars. p. 11 CHAP. 9 The manner of making the best sort of stars. p. 12
CHAP. 10 The manner of making silver and golden rain. p. 14 CHAP. 11 How to
make fisgigs which some call Serpents. idem CHAP. 12 How to make the reports or
breakers. p. 15 CHAP. 13 How to make a Runner on the Line. p. 16 CHAP. 41 The
manner of firing your Runner. p. 17 CHAP. 15 How to compose a Wheel. p. 19
CHAP. 16 How to make a ground Wheel. p. 20 CHAP. 17 Another manner of ground
Wheels. p. 21 CHAP. 18 The manner of making a fixed Wheel which shall give
diverse reports. p. 22 CHAP. 19 How to make a fixed Wheel which shall cast
forth many Rockets into the Air. idem CHAP. 20 How to make a fixed Wheel
which shall cast forth diverse fisgigs, and likewise as many reports. p. 28
CHAP. 21 The manner of making a Wheel to run two ways, which is forward and
backward. idem CHAP. 22 The manner of composing a Wheel, which having finished
his revolution, shall represent a Coat of Arms. p. 25 CHAP. 23 How to
represent a Coat of Arms in fire which having burnt a small while, the said
Coat shall appear in perfect colors, and shall continue so a long while. p. 27
CHAP. 24 How to represent an antic dance by the help of fire, which shall
moove in a circular form. p. 28 CHAP. 25 Another way for making an antic
dance which is not so violent as the former, p. 29 CHAP. 26 How to compose a
Castle of fire-worke, with the manner of placing the works in a true order,
idem CHAP. 27 How to represent diverse motions in a Castle of Fire-worke. p. 30
CHAP. 28 Another way to perform the same Motions, and will not be so violent
as the former. p. 34 CHAP. 29 How to represent the form of an Army of an
hundred men marching, which shall present and fire at on certain place
appointed. idem CHAP. 30 How to represent Music playing (by the help of
fire) with anticks dancing. p. 36 CHAP. 31 How to make a Dragon or any other
creature run on the line, by the help of fire. idem CHAP. 32 Another way for
making a fiery Dragon to pass on the line without the help of fire. p. 37
CHAP. 33 How to represent Saint George fighting with a Dragon on the line, p.
37 CHAP. 34 How to make a trunk of fire, which shall cast forth diverse
fireballs. p. 41 CHAP. 35 The manner of making a Club which shall cast forth
diverse small works or fisgigs. p. 42 CHAP. 36 Another sort of club, which
being fired, shall give many reports. p. 43 CHAP. 37 Another which I call Jack
in a box. p. 45 CHAP. 38 How to represent the sphere moving in the air,
without any other supportation. Idem CHAP. 39 How to represent the sphere, with
diverse circles, some moveable, others fixed. p. 46 CHAP. 40 How to make a half
moon of rockets appear in the air. p. 47 CHAP. 41 How to make a case of
rockets to rise at once. Idem CHAP. 42 How to make letters or any other figure
appear in the air, after the spending of a rocket. p. 49 CHAP. 43 How to
represent a figure of the Sun, casting forth his beams in fire. Idem CHAP. 44
How to make a rocket, which firing it out of your hand, shall continually be in
agitation, on the ground sometimes, and other whiles about in the air. p. 50
CHAP. 45 How to make a ball which shall be in continual agitation on the
ground, till the fire be consumed. p. 51 CHAP. 46 How to make another sort of
bals for the ground, which will continue a long while in their motion. Idem
CHAP. 47 How to make a Dragon issuing out of a Cave, which shall cast out much
fire. p. 52 CHAP. 48 How to make two Dragons to meet each other from several
Caves, which shall send forth their fire to each other with great violence. Idem
CHAP. 49 How to make a bucklar, which shall cast forth a hundred Fisgigs, every
one making his report. p. 53 CHAP. 50 How to make the Curtlax, Cimiter, or
Fauchion. p. 55 CHAP. 51 How to make a water ball which shall burn on the
water with great violence. Idem CHAP. 52 A water ball which shall shoot forth
many reports. p. 56 CHAP. 53 How to make a water ball, which after a certain
time of firing, shall cast forth diverse rockets into the air. p. 57 CHAP. 54
Another sort of water ball, which shall cast forth rockets at two sundry times,
and after it is finished, shall give a great report. p. 58 CHAP. 55 Another
sort of bal, with iron chambers, every one casting forth a small bal. p. 60
CHAP. 56 The proportions of the mortar piece. p 61 CHAP. 57 How to make a ball
for the Mortar piece, which shall cast forth a great shower of stars at the
breaking. Idem CHAP. 58 Another sort of ball for the mortar piece, which shall
cast forth diverse Rockets in the air. p. 63 CHAP. 59 How to compose a ship of
fire-worke, which being once fired, diverse motions shall present themselves. p
63 CHAP. 60 How to make the Siren or Mermaid playing on the water. Idem CHAP.
61 How to represent a Dragon issuing out of a Castle, which shall swim through
the water, and be encountered by a horseman from the shore. p. 66 CHAP. 62 An
order for a general piece of fire-worke for land, and is for the pleasure of a
Prince, or some great personage p. 67 CHAP. 63 An other order for a general
work, and is to be acted on the water. p. 68 CHAP. 64 The use of certain
engines for trying the goodness or strength of powder. p. 69 CHAP. 65 The
manner of making one of the aforesaid engines. Idem CHAP. 66 Another engine for
the same. p. 71 CHAP. 67 A third Engine for the same. Idem CHAP. 68 Another
Engine for trying the strength of powder by water. p. 27
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE EARL OF Newport, Master of his Majesty's
Ordnance, my singular good Lord.
Right Honorable:
I Am not induced to present this Treatise to your Lordship for any worth that
is either in it, or in my self, the Author of it; the thing being of small
moment, and my self of as little account: but your Lordships singular clemency
to all, and your Honorable favor vouchsafed to me in particular, has made me
thus bold, and has caused me thus far to presume. I have been for certain
years past, and so at present am, one of the inferior Gunners of his
Majesty; and ever since I held that place, I have endeavored to gain such
skill and experience, as I esteemed most requisite for that service. And to
that end I have bestowed some time and expense, as my occasions and ability
would permit, in the practice of Artillery and Fire-workes, wherein though I
have chiefly aimed at such conclusions as might be useful against an enemy in
the field, yet these halcyon days of peace and tranquillity, which through the
goodness of God we have so long enjoyed, have given me occasion to invent and
practice such also as these following; which howsoever they may seem to serve
only for delight and exercise, yet as by the handling of these there may be
gained knowledge in the natures and operations of the several ingredients and
their compositions; so the due consideration of the ordering of them may excite
and stir up in an ingenious mind, sundry inventions more serviceable in
times of war. Now because your Lordship has of late, by the gracious
providence of the Almighty, for your extraordinary wisdom and worth, been
advanced to that eminent place, upon which I have some dependence, and to which
I stand obliged by my special service (to which also all works of Pyrotechnie
may seem to have relation) I hold it my bounden duty to present these first
fruits of my labors to your Honor, as an unfayned testimony, and an undoubted
evidence of my faithful observance, and singular respect to your Lordship:
which if you shall be pleased to take into your special Patronage and
protection, I shall be in good hope to be freed both from the venomous tooth of
Momus, and from the malevolent aspect of Zoilus, and from the poisoned breath
and stinging of the rest of that viperous brood, and shall always remain

Your Honors in all dutiful observance, JOHN BABINGTON.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
HAving for mine own private recreation, spent some vacant hours in the study
and contemplation of those artificial Fireworks which are discoursed of in
the ensuing Treatise; J held it requisite for my further and better
satisfaction, as any opportunity did offer it self, to make experiment of some
of the particularities there set down; and I did accordingly now and then
bring into Act that whereof before I had but a mere Notion, and the bare and
naked Theorie: which because it could not be done so privately, but that of
necessity sometimes it would come to the view of others; by that means it is
come to pass, that more notice than J was ever willing to, has been taken,
that J have bestowed some thoughts upon that subject, and taken more than
ordinary pains in it. And not so only, but thereupon also some of my intimate
friends and acquaintance, who have a special intrest in me, have been very
instant and urgent with me that J would make my labors more public, and
communicate them to the world, by committing them to the Press: whereto though
J was a long while utterly unwilling, as being conscious to my self of mine
own inability and insufficiency to devise and contrive any thing worthy to
come to such public view, yet their importunity has at last so far
prevailed with me, that those rude and unpolished lines are now like to see the
Sun; and to come abroad to be scanned and censured by others. Jf thou shall
look upon them with a fair and favorable eye, I shall be encouraged to
bestow my pains upon some other thing, which may happily give thee more
content, and in the mean while shall rest

Thy true friend and well-willer, JOHN BABINGTON, Gunner.

In laudem Authoris IOANNIS BABINGTON Amici and in Art Mathesios celeberrima
Socii.
THe pleasant object of close ardent Bowres,
Envelloped with Florae's fragrant flowers,
The goodly Prospect of Skie-kissing Hills,
Or fertile Plains vein'd ore with purling Rils:
More ravish not my senses with delight,
Then does thy Pyrotechnie. Many write
Of Arts in themselves worthy, but their worth
Is much impairde by those that set them forth,
Wholly unskilled in Megathologie,
The very soul of each deep Mystery.
I wish such shallow men would meddle less,
And with their senseless stuff not cloy the Press.
All such his School to pass by Plato wild
In beautiful Geometry not skild.
Well have thou then my Friend expressed thy Art,
Since this rare Science has the greater part
Shared in thy Work, giving it winged fire,
To mount it up-aloft, and deck the air
With splendent stars, silver and golden showers;
These are the effects of Mathematick powers:
Which crown their Authors temples, not with bays,
But with a wreath of stars and fulgent rays.
Fairly go on, thy self such Trophies rear,
That neither Time not Envy may outweare:
Tho. Stutevill. Philomathes.

Unto his worthy Friend, and industrious Artist, Master JOHN BABINGTON.
When as I did thy Book by chance epsy,
With diverse figures graced, most curiously
Contrived, all new, and of thine own invention,
With sundry Engines made by just proportion:
I did admire thy skill, thy active brain,
Whereby those things thou did so well attain:
Justly I might, for of no Nation yet,
There Is any has this path so fully beat;
Nor laid those grounds that thou have done, whereby
We might attain to things that tend so high.
For senseless things with life thou seem to fill,
Making them wondered at by common skill.
Thou sundry doubts unfold'st, and with much ease,
Thou teach us to measure Land and Seas.
When as I thought on these, and knew how rare
Men thus addicted, and thus given were,
My mind, my hand, my hand did force my pen,
TO offer my mite of thanks amongst other men.
Accept it then, and let it no less be
Pleasing, then greater gifts are unto thee.
Thy truly affectionate, and wel-wishing Friend, John Bate.

In commendations of his worthy Friend Master John Babington Gentleman.
I f I were worthy to extol the Name
O f him that spends the 'Elixer of his spirits,
H ow rare definde, I should set forth the same,
N ere should I flinch; for why thy great demerits
B ravely should arm me boldly to oppose
A against thy Critics and backbiting foes,
B rave man of worth proceed: the rarest wits,
I f thy rare Work do come but in their view,
N ere doubt, but they as soon as God permits,
G reat love and aid will then express to you,
T hat spends your time, spirits, and great expense
O n Countries good for love, not recompense.
N ow tell me thou that have a Tallent lent,
Which was received from God Omnipotent,
And hor'dst it up, burying it with thy Name,
It there takes Period, ending with thy frame.
When this my Authors fame, I just presage,
Shall flourish still, and not wear out with age.
Thy Friend JOHN HICKS, alias Bridghampton Gunner.

A Treatise of ARTIFICIAL FIREWORKS, most of them being invented and approved
by the Author.
CHAPTER I. How to make all sorts of moulds, in a true proportion, with the
Rowlers and Drifts.
THat I may set down the true proceeding in Fireworkes, it is requisite in the
first place to lay down the true order and form of making all sorts of
moulds, as well greater as less: and to proceed, you must get of the best dry
Box you can find; if not, of some other tough wood, as Crabbetree, Holly, or
such like wood, which when you have provided according to your size you mean
to use, it behooves in the next place to be known, of what diameter you will
have the height of your bore, and from thence all the rest is derived: For
example, I desire to have one bored of an inch high, which I get bored by some
Turner; and to know of what length it must be, I take for the said length six
diameters of the bore, which makes six inches, and for the thickness it ought
to be half a diameter on each side, so that being turned true round, it
contaynes two inches in diameter. Then have you to provide a bottom, which is
to be fitted in such sort as you see described in this figure: the proportions
hereafter follow.

A is the foot of the mould, and is in height two diameters, which must be
two inches; and one diameter and in breadth, whether it be square or round. B
serves only for a stay, and must arise one inch into the mould, which is one
diameter, and so proportional in all other sorts. C is for the mouth of the
rocket, and is in diameter of the bore; so setting one foot of the compasses in
the center, describe the arch, which is the full height required. fig 1
diagram of a mold, roller, and drift used for fireworks E E serves for the
paper being rolled, and is part of the diameter on each side: F F is the
thickness of the mould, which is half the diameter of the bore, that is in
this place half an inch. F G the length of the mould, which is six diameters.
D the length and bigness of the needle, which is the length of the mould, and
bigness to be of the diameter of the bore at the bottom, and sow taper to the
top.
When you have provided your mould according to your desire, then you are to
fit your rowler, which must be two third parts of the diameter of the bore of
the said mould, and the length thereof to be six inches longer than your
mould, which is for the roling of your paper, and is described by the letter A
in this second figure, with a hole to be bored in the bottom to receive a wire,
which must be fastened in another piece of wood somewhat shorter, which is to
take out at pleasure, as you may see described by the letter D: there is
required no proportion of length for this short piece; only it suffices if it
be but so long as a man may well hold it in his hand; the use hereafter shall
be more plainly described when I come to speak of the order of making the
coffins; which shall be in the next Chapter. When you have fitted your rocket
according to this direction, proceed to the making of your rammers, (or more
properly called drifts) which must be always two at the least to, each mould,
and as your mould increases in largeness, so must you have more rammers, by
reason of the largeness of the taper needle: the manner and form you may see
described by the letters B C.

B is the hollow rammer, and has a hole in it answerable to the length and
bigness of the taper needle, as appears in that figure. It must be a small
matter less than the rowler, because that otherwise in putting it in, you will
put down the paper, which is very prejudicial to your rocket. The other rammer
is not half so long, and is sad, that when you have beaten to the top of the
needle, you make use of it: it is described by the letter C.
When you have fitted your rammers, you must provide a piece of Box made after
the form as you see described; which must serve to make your large coffins to
put the work which you intend, on the head of your rockets. It is described by
the letter F, as in the figure is manifest.

The letters E E show the diameter, which is the just bigness of your rocket,
and must be so in all sizes. G G shows the largensse of the coffin, and must
be two diameters, which in this figure is two inches. H H H H shows the
length of the coffin, which ought to be two diameters of your rocket, which in
this place is two inches; but we are not tied to that so precisely; for we are
to alter that according to the works which we put therein.
CHAP. II. How to make your coffins of paper.
NOW having explained the manner and form of the moulds, with the rest of the
dependants, I come now to show the use of them in their several orders: and
first for the use of the rowler, which is described by the letter A.

You must provide some good strong paper, as old Law books, which are both
strong and large; and cut out your sizes of paper for your work: now to know
what length your paper must be, let it be always the length of your mould:
so shall you have one diameter left above the mould, the use whereof shall be
shown in his proper place. Now having provided your paper in length ready, take
your rowler, and one length of paper, and begin to roll; when you have rolled
one sheet, you must have a board to roll it with (the board is marked in the
second figure; Figure 2. G.
) which must be done in this manner: you must hold the rowler in your left
hand, and with your right hold the board; then lay down your rowler upon some
smooth chest, or table, or such like; which when you have done, lay on your
board, and roll it very hard, only one way; which having done, roll another
length, and so proceed in rolling between every sheet, till you have rolled on
so much as will fill the mould very straight; when you have so done, draw forth
your rowler one diameter, which in this place is one inch; and then take the
other part of the rowler, which is short, and marked with D, and put it in as
you see described; and there have you a place left for the choking of your
rocket, of which we come now to speak:

CHAP. III. How you shall choke a rocket.
WHen you come to choke your rocket, you must have a ring to screw into some
post, at which you must tie your cord, which must be bigger or lesser,
according to the bigness of your rocket, by reason that a small cord will not
choke a great rocket for want of strength; and again, a great cord will not
serve for a small, in regard that it will make too great a choking; so that
you must have a bigger and less; which when you have so provided, tying one
end to the ring, you must about a yard off tie a stick, in fashion of a handle
for a swing, which must be strong, by reason that it must bear the whole
weight of the body, (the letter G in the second figure expresses the same;
Figure 2. K.
) which when you have provided, fig 2
diagram of making a coffin of paper for fireworks put the stick between your
legs, and wind the cord about the rocket case in the place appointed, which
is between the long rowler and the short, when you have so done, girt it by
degrees, ever turning your rouler, to the end it may come together more close
and neat (the manner is expressed in the third figure, by the letter K) so when
you have choked it sufficiently, draw forth your short rowler, and where your
choking is, Figure 3. K.
tie it about with strong packthred; and so drawing forth your rowler, you have
a coffin ready to be filled when occasion serves, the form whereof follows.
And because the choking of a rocket is very laborious and dangerous, in regard
of the breaking of the cord, which often happens; I have therefore invented a
certain Engine, whereby a child may choke the strongest rocket. The parts of
it are a screw moving a wheel, on the axeltree of which is fastened your cord
for choking, with the other end of the cord fastened to a staple on the same
board: Figure 3. B. C.
the form whereof you shall find described in the third figure, by the letter
B. C.

Figure 3.
A Js the coffin of a Rocket wholly finished, with his choking. B The form of
an Engine for choking a Rocket. C The mannner of using the Engine. F Is a
measure made of horn or latten. G Is a funnell with a handle to fill small
Rockets, and other small works. H Is a fine searce, with a receiver to searce
your ingredients. I Is a mortar to meal your powder, and your other
ingredients, which must be of wood, with a pestle.
Having described the order and forms of all things necessary to the making of
a rocket, it rests now that we know the manner of driving it, as also what
ingredients are most proper for every size.

CHAP. IV. The manner of driving a Rocket, with the instruments belonging to
the same.
WHen you have finished your coffin of paper, take it, and with your hollow
rammer force it down close into your mould, which when you have done, strike
two or three smart blows to settle the paper into his right form: which being
done, you must begin to fill your coffin, in doing whereof, you must have a
great care, always providing a measure, which may contain 1/20, part of your
whole Rocket; so by that means you shall not fail, but every Rocket shall
have a true proportion alike; as for Example, I have a coffin, which being
filled, will hold an ounce of mixture or therabouts. I take the twentieth part,
and when I find what quantity it is, I make a measure of horn, which shall
contain so much, and then I begin to fill my coffin with one measure at a
time, and putting in my rammer, strike four or five smart blows with a good
strong mallet, Figure 3. M.
and then I fill another measure, and strike again, so I continue till I come
to the top of the needle, then I take the sad rammer, and so continue with it,
till I come to the top of the mould: now the paper which is above the top of
the mould, must be turned down, and beaten hard down, which being done, the
Rocket is finished from the mould; which force out, with as much ease as you
can, for the less you force it (being filled, and the needle taken out) the
better it is, for knocking loosens the powder, and so causes the Rocket to
fail: now it rests to know the receipts proper for every sort of Rockets.

And first for Rockets of one ounce, The ingredients for ordinary Rockets.
you may take only powder dust being very fine searced; which rises very swift,
but carries no tail of fire with it, and often times breaks, unless they be
very thick of paper: but the best and surest way is, to allay your powder with
coal dust being well searced, which causes a more glorious show; and you may
use it at your discretion. The ordinary allay for small Rockets is, 1 l. of
powder, two. of coal dust, which serves till you come to Rockets of four
ounces, then must you take to every 1 l. of powder 2 of coledust, continuing
that quantity till you come to Rockets of ten ounces, and from ten to
sixteen ounces, which is one pound: your allay must be to one pound of powder,
three ounces of coal. Now when you have provided your powder, you must first
meal it, and then scarce it, so that it may be free from any corn though
never so small. Likewise take good dry coal, well burnt, and beat it to dust,
searcing it very fine, which when you have done, mix them according as your
occasion serves, and as your directions are.

CHAP. V. The manner of heading a Rocket, with the order of capping it.
NOw we come to show the manner of heading a Rocket, in which we are to use our
thick Roler, specified in the second figure, and marked with F. Upon which you
must role some paper or fine past-board, and past it so that it may be very
close, and then choke it at the length of the thicker part, so that it may
come close to your stick in the lesser part, which will fit to be tied to the
top of your Rocket, so shall you have a coffine to put in your works, which
must be of diverse sorts. That being done, you must provide Taper caps, which
must be adjoined to the top of the large coffin. The use of them is to keep in
your works, and to cause them to pierce the air more swiftly. The manner of
making these caps, is, to take a pair of Compasses, and describe a circle in
pastboard, then cut it forth with a pair of sheeres, and that shall make two
cappes, being cut in the middle, and turned one corner under the other, and so
pasted; and let them so pasted, be put in a napkin press till they be dry, and
when they be dry, cut out a semicircle in paper, which shall fit round about
the said cap, and shall serve to paste on the cap to the coffin: the form
whereof is expressed in the fourth figure, by the figure 14. and 15. so have
you all things ready to the finishing of your Rocket, which must be done as
follows.

CHAP. 6. The manner of finishing a Rocket.
WHen your Rocket is driven, as I have showed you, with the paper turned down,
you shall first prime it, which must be with cotton wicke made for the said
purpose, which you shall put up into the vent, leaving a piece to hang lower
than the mouth of your Rocket, by three or four inches, which being done, tie
a piece of paper over the mouth, to the end it fall not out: now having primed
your Rocket, you may proceed to the heading of it, and that is done after this
manner. Take your Rocket, and on the head (where I told you, you should turn
down the paper, you must with a bodkin, pierce two or three holes, to the
intent that the Rocket having spent himself, your works which are on his
head, may take fire; which holes, prime with a little powder dust, and then put
on his head, with the choking fitted to your Rocket, which must come over the
Rocket, in such manner, that the bottom of the greater part must come even
with the top of the Rocket; which tie fast to your rocket with thread, and then
put in your works: but before you put in your works, whether they be stars,
or any other works, you must put in a little cotton wool, being rolled in
powder dust, to the end your stars may fire, and likewise may blow out: which
having done, put in your stars, or other works, and if you make more than
one tire (as you may do of your stars) then must you put more cotton rolled
in powder dust amongst them, or between every tire, to the end they may all
take fire; then take your cap so provided as I have formerly showed, and fill
the hollow place with cotton, because it is light, and likewise will fire
quickly: which being fitted, paste it close to the top of the coffin, in such
manner, that it may stand very upright; then must you fit on your stick, for
the peasing of your Rocket, which ought to be about eight lengths of your
Rocket without the head. You must get the smoothest and lightest you can, such
as basket makers use; which when you have got, you must make very strait, and
then cutting one side of it, flat at the great end, make two notches on the
round side, provided that the one be differing from the other, so much as is
between the choking of your Rocket, and the end of the vent; because if you
should tie it upon the vent, it would loosen the powder, and so cause it to
break in the firing. Now that you tie not the wrong end of your fig 3.
diagram of how to choke a rocket Rocket uppermost, as some foolishly have
done, for want of better instructions, you must always tie the end downwards,
which is choked, and with a piece of strong thread tie it fast to the lower
notch, just about the choking, so shall you be sure your sticks shall not
fall off, neither will it endanger the hurting of your rocket. When yo^ have
tied that, then proceed to the tying of it higher, which as I say, must be
somewhat high^r than the top of the vent, and let your stick come even with
the top of your rocket; which having done, pease your rocket, which must be
after this manner. Lay it on your finger two or three inches or more from the
mouth, and if you find the stick be too heavy, cut it shorter, till you find
your Rocket to balance your stick, for the stick being too heavy, causes
your rocket to slugge, and being too light, it makes a rocket fall before he is
half up: these things being provided, you have your rocket ready to be fired,
which must be after this manner.

CHAP. VII. The manner of firing Rockets, with the description of a staff for
the firing of them.
PRovide a long staff with a pike at one end, which must be thrust hard into
the ground, and a three legged staff with a hollow hoope at the top, to let
this long staff slide up and down, to the end that having rockets, whose
sticks are longer than your said staff, yet by raising it through the said
iron hoope, you may make it four or five foot longer than it would be standing
on the ground. Now this long staff must have a sliding piece cut with several
points, which must be near the top; and at the bottom there must be a ring of
wire, to let the stick go through, which must be made likewise to slide up
and down; so thrusting the small end through the said ring, your rocket will
rest upon that part above, which must be just opposite in a straight line, so
open the mouth of your rocket, and pull out the end of your cotton wicke, and
with a piece of match, fastened in a Linstocke, give fire to the said wicke,
and by degreees, you shall see it fire your rocket; which being well ordered,
will mount very straight and high: now having showed the whole order of
composing a rocket, with the firing of the same, I will show you an order for
making of your stars, and other works which are necessary for the heads of
your rockets; and first of all I will show you the making of diverse sorts of
stars, with their compositions; and since we cannot make them without the
compositions, I will first set down the compositions, and then proceed to the
manner of making them.

CHAP. VIII. Diverse Compositions for stars.
A Composition for stars of a blew color, with red.

TAke of powder mealed, 8 Salt peter, 4 Sulphur vive, 12
Meal these very fine, and mix them together with 2. of aqua vite, and ^/2 of
oil of spicke, which let be very dry before you use it.

Another Composition which makes a white fire and beautiful.

Take powder, 4 Salt peter, 12 Sulphur vive, 6 Camphire,
Meal your ingredients, and mix them; now to powder your Camphire, you must
dip your pestle in oil of Almonds, or such like oil: you must not use your
wooded pestle for this, because that oil will soake into it, which is an enemy
to some works; therefore take a brass pestle and mortar, and dipping the
pestle in oil of Almonds, put it to your Camphire, and so stirring it by
degrees, it will powder; which when you have done, keep it very close from
air, till such time as you use it, otherwise the Camphire will lose his
spirit, and become of no use.

Another white fire which lasts long.

Take powder, 4 Salt peter, 1 l Sulphur vive, 8 Camphur, 1 Oil of peeter, 2
Meal those which are to be mealed, very fine, and mix them according to the
former directions.

CHAP. IX. The manner of making the best sort of stars.
NOw having set down the compositions for stars, it rests to know how
these stars are made, which is diverse ways, but I will set you down only
two ways both which are very good, so that you may take your choice. The first
is this, you must make little square pieces of brown paper, which fill with
your composition you intend, Figure 4. N. G.
and so double it down, rolling it till you make it somewhat round, about the
bigness of a nut or bigger, according to the size of your rocket; you may put
in a dozen on the head of a small rocket; when you have made them up in this
form, you must bind them round with small thread, which done, draw through a
cotton wicke prepared for priming, as hereafter shall be shown.

The second sort are made after another manner, which is thus; you must have a
rowler, as big as an ordinary arrow, which shall be to roll a length of paper
about it, and with a little mouth glue, or paste, paste it round; so have you a
hollow trunk of paper, which you shall order after this manner. Fill it by
little and little with your small funnell, still thrusting it very hard, till
you have filled it to the top; which done, cut it into short pieces, about
half an inch in length; then having in readiness either hot glue, or size
mingled with red lead, dip one end of your short pieces, to the end, that both
ends of your star fire not, and also that it may not blow out; which being so
finished, set to dry till you use them, and then putting the other end into
powder dust, you may put them on your rocket, in one or two tier; always
provided, as I said before, that you put in powder dust between every tier, to
the end they may all fire; thus have you the manner of making your stars, the
forms whereof you shall have described hereafter.

Priming for Rockets.
The priming before spoken of, is made after this manner; take oil of Camphire,
and soake some cotton wicke in it, then take it out being moist, and roll it
in fine powder dust, which having done, you shall hang it up till it be through
dry, so have you prepared a very good priming, which must be kept close from
air, till such time you have occasion, otherwise the spirit of the Camphir
will decay.

The description of the staff for firing of Rockets.

A The long staff to rise through the ring. B B B The three legd staff. C The
ring or hoope of iron for the long staff to slide through. D A screw to screw
fast the long staff being raised. E A piece of iron filed with notches to hang
the Rockets on. F The ring of wire to put through the stick, which may be
raised higher, or put lower, as occasion proffers. G G The description of two
stars, with the priming, K, and the binding L. H The description of the
trunk, or case, which is to be f^lled with your star mixture, and so cut into
short pieces, as you see represented by the figures 1.1. fig 4th
diagram describing how to create a report and the staff for firing a rocket
where the uper part represents the open end, and is marked with M, and the
under part which is glued, is represented by the letter N, so have you the
stars wholly described.
CHAP. X. The manner of making silver and gold rain.
NOw I will show you the order for making of golden rain, which is after this
manner; you must provide store of Goose quils, which having, you must cut off
the quill as long as you can leave it, and cut not off the other end, but leave
it close as you see presented by the letters O P. Figure 4. where O represents
one filled, and P one empty. The receipt which you make your golden rain, must
be the same which you make your rockets of one ounce, which is to 1 l. of
powder, 2. of coal dust: now having filled many of these quils, as I have
showed you, they must be put on the head of your rocket, with the open ends
downward, to the end they may take fire so soon as your rocket is spent, and
so shall you see appear a shower of gold, which by some is called golden
rain: the like way may you make silver rain, filling your quils with the
mixture prescribed for your white stars, and using them in the same manner,
you shall see them fall down like a shower of silver, which is called silver
rain; and thus much shall suffice to be known for this sort of work.

CHAP. XI. How to make Fisgigs, which some call Serpents.
NOw I will show you to make another sort of work, which we call Fisgigs, or as
the French name them, Serpents, which are made as follows. You must provide a
small mould, of of an inch diameter, which must be made without a needle,
which when you have, you must make your cases, as you make for your rockets,
choking them an inch from the end, which shall serve for occasion as it shall
be proffered; when you have made your cases, fill them three inches with
powder dust, and then choke him, and after put in a little corn powder, to
the end that your Fisgig having played a while to and fro, he may break and
give a report; the use of the making so deep a mouth at your first choking
is, that you may fill it with your star mixture; so that putting diverse of
them on the head of a large rocket, they will first appear like so many
stars, and when the stars are spent, taking hold of the powder dust, they
will run wrigling to and fro like Serpents, and after a while they will give so
many reports, which will give great content. There are many works which are
made of these fisgigs, which we will speak of in their places.

CHAP. XII. How to make the reports or breakers.
NOW I will proceed to show the manner of making reports to place on the head
of a rocket; you must make a coffin of the size of your rocket of one inch, but
you must roll your paper a great deal thicker, to the intent your report may
be the greater; also in choking, the mouth must be left very large, to the
end that on occasion you may fill it with star mixture; now when you have
made diverse coffins about three inches and better in length, you must leave a
small vent at the choking, the bigness of an ordinary wire, which you must
stop with a little paper, while you fill the coffin almost full, or within
half an inch of the top, with good corn powder, turning down four or five
folds of paper, choke it close at the top, and bind it round with thread, so
you have your reports ready, against such time you come to use them; which must
be done in this manner: first be careful to pull out your stopple, which
having done, fill the mouth with your star mixture, and so fasten him on the
top of your rocket, always putting a little paper about the top of your
rocket, and in it put a little powder dust, and so set on your report, and tie
it fast on, with the mouth toward the head of the rocket, so that the rocket
having spent himself, you shall see a large star appear, and when it is near
the ground, you shall hear the report; the order thereof you shall find
described in the fourth figure.

1 Is the report ready finished. 2 The rocket with the report on the head. 3
The report fastened on the head of the rocket. 4 The paper to fasten the report
to the rocket, which must first be tied to the rocket, and likewise to the
report. 8 Represents a fisgig finished. 9 The choking, as I have showed,
which must be silled upward with corn powder. 10 The mouth of your fisgig,
which upon occasion you may fill with your star mixture, to put on the head
of your rockets. 11 Represents a fisgig, with a bladder, which must be tied
on to the head of them, in such manner, that the neck of the bladder may go
into the fisgig, and so be fast tied, that they stir not; the use of them is,
only to fire in your hand, (for being fired with a little powder dust in the
mouth of it) and so cast away from you, it will fly to and fro without ceasing,
till it has spent it self; and by reason of the bladder which is tied to it,
it will not stick fast to the ground, as others do which have no bladders. 12
Represents a cracker fastened to the top of a rocket, so that the rocket
having spent himself, it takes fire, and makes many reports; the manner of
fastening him is thus; you must first tie on your rocket, leaving the stick so
much higher than the top, as will suffice to tie on your cracker, which must be
tied about the said stick, in such manner, that the nose of it may come into
the head of your rocket, which being primed with some powder dust, will take
fire. 5 Represents a rocketh with several works, whether stars, or
serpents, and must be with a large coffin on the top, with his cap. 6 Is the
coffin, which as J have showed you, must be somewhat bigger than your rocket.
7 Is the cap, which must be taper. 13 Shows the fastening of the stick, which
must not be higher than your rocket, beside the large coffin.
All which I have formerly described, with the form and manner of making them,
and their several uses; so that I have fully laid down the whole order of
finishing a rocket for the air. Now it rests to show what other works may
be done by the said rockets, which are many; for all sorts of Fire works for
pleasure, do wholly depend upon them, except the water bals: and to proceed, I
will first describe unto you the order of making the runners on the line, which
must be done in manner following.

CHAP. XIII. How to make a runner on the line.
YOU must provide a small rocket mould, which must be half an inch or more,
with rowlers, and rammers, according as I have described, save only that your
mould must have no needle, nor your rammers hollow; when you have provided
them, make up your cases, after the form which I have showed you, some longer,
and some shorter, which must be used as follows; your short ones must be
beaten up to the top, which must not be above four inches; your longer, which
must be 5 inches, must be likewise filled four inches high, and the rest to
be filled with corn powder within half an inch of the top, Receipt for runners.
which must be choked close, and tied up; the receipt for these sorts must be
only fine powder dust.

Now when you have driven them as is showed, you may proceed to the finishing
of them, which must be in this manner; you must roll a piece of paper about
the head of your shorter rocket, (which must be left open to give fire to the
next) which paper must be five inches broad, and being rolled on, you must
first try if the mouth of your other rocket will easily go in, which when you
have done, draw forth your other rocket which you tried, and bind your paper
fast to the top of your short one, in such manner, that four inches may
remain hollow above the top of your rocket, which is to be filled with powder
dust, about two inches high; then put in your longer rocket, (with the mouth
inward) so far as it may touch your powder dust; and tie the paper fast about
the choking, as you shall find described in the fifth figure; after you have
done this, proceed to the putting on of your cane, which must be after this
manner; you must first provide canes of such bigness as will fit your line,
and cut them three inches, long, or somewhat better, and then notch them with
three notches, which when you have so provided, first tie it to your longer
rocket which is to fire last, and then doubling them together, (in such sort
that the nose of the first come farther out than the tail of the second) tie
it to them both; the reason of this is, because otherwise, if it were tied to
them both together, and not to one severally, so soon as the first were fired,
the cane will grow slack, and often fall off, and never make his return; and
again, if you should not put the mouth of the one farther out than the tail
of other, it would fire your other rocket, and so make a confusion: therefore
that you may the better understand what I have showed you, I have set down in
this fifth figure, the whole order of finishing a runner for the line.

A Is the short rocket. B Is the longer, which must be beaten four inches with
powder dust, and one inch with corn powder. C C Your two rockets joined, the
mouth of one to the tail of the other, in such sort, that there may be two
inches between them. D The coffin of paper which joins those two together, and
must be filled with powder dust, lightly put in. E E The rockets doubled, with
the cane tied on. F The cane, which must be three inches long, or more. G The
cord that passes through the cane. H A piece of cork on the end of the line.
CHAP. XIV. The manner of firing your runner.
NOW having thus finished your runners, you must provide a line, which may be
a hundred yards, or more, as your ground will permit, so fastening your cord at
the farthest of your distance, provide a piece of board or cork, with a hole of
the bigness of your line, which must be put on the end of your line, to the
end that your rocket may not rest against any thing that may hinder it in the
retrogade motion; always provided, you soap your line very well, for fear of
firing: then put on your runner at the other end (with the mouth of the rocket
toward you, which must be primed with powder dust) and pull your line very
straight, which is a great help to the running of a rocket, so fastening your
cord, you may fire your runner, which being well ordered, will run to the
farthest of your line, making his return, with a report at last; so have you
finished the runner.

fig 5th
diagram showing runners, wheels and ground wheels

CHAP. XV. How to compose a wheel.
NOW I will show you the order of composing a wheel, which is a prime work,
being well ordered; of which some are movable, and some immovable: of the
movable, some move horizontall, and some vertical, which is toward the zenith:
and first of the movable wheel. You must provide a wheel of such diameter as
you please, which must be made into squares, according to the circumference of
your wheel, and to proportion your wheel into a just number, you may allow
five inches or better for every side, so that your wheel being 14 inches
diameter, the circumference will be as 7 to 22, which is 44 inches
circumference; so being divided by 5, there will be 8 squares, Figure 5. N 1.
or more properly, 8 sides, which will every one contain 5 inches and 3/10,
which is the cord of 45 degrees; these sides must be hollowed with a groofe
fitting your rockets, and at the ends of every side it must be filed with
notches, to fasten your binding that it slide not, when you bind fast your
rockets; the form whereof you shall find in the fifth figure N 1.

A Shows the 8 sides. B The places of fastening. C The screw which fastneth
the wheel to some post.
Note always, that as your wheel does increase in diameter, so you must
increase in the proportion, for that rocket which forces about a wheel of 14
inches, will not force a wheel of 18 inches; nor that rocket which forces one
of 18 inches, will not force one of 24 inches; but that you may come to a near
proportion, I will satisfy you so near as I can; first seek the diameter of
your wheel, which imagine to be 18 inches, I take the third thereof, which is
6, so that your rocket for 18 inches diameter, must be 6 inches long, and your
wheel of 24 inches diameter, will require rockets of 8 inches; yet as your
wheel increases, you may alter this proportion by dividing it into more sides.

Now having provided your wheel, with your rockets of a just size, you shall
proceed to the finishing of it, which must be after this manner; you must
join your rockets one to another, in such sort as I showed you for your
runners, that is, with the mouth of the one to the top of the other, and so
proceed till you have fastened so many as will serve your wheel, always
leaving so much space between each rocket, as may suffer them to come round
about your wheel, without breaking any; which when you have done, proceed to
the tying of them on to your wheel, which must be so ordered, that you tie
them where the notches are, to the end they fail not in firing, by sliding
off. In tying the^^ on you must provide that you leave a little distance
between the first and the last, which must be parted with a bolster of paper
well soaped, to the end that the first fire not the last, and so cause a great
confusion. Now for the manner of placing them, it is according to the workmans
pleasure, which must be either horizontall, or vertical; for the horizontall
wheel you must provide a post fastened in the ground, and screw your wheel to
the top of it; for the vertical, you must screw it on the side of the post, so
having fired them, you shall see one run parallel to the horizon, and the
other to the zenith, as you shall see described in the fifth figure.

N 2 Represents the horizontall wheel. N 3 Represents the vertical
wheel.
There are many other works which do wholly depend upon the wheel, of which I
will set down some few.

CHAP. XVI. How to make a ground wheel.
HEre I will declare unto you the manner of making a pair of wheels to run
upon a plain horizon; provide two wheels, (such as are spinning wheels) of one
bigness, which must be fastened to a small axeltree, in such manner, that they
may not move about the axeltree, and on the middle of the axeltree fasten a
fire wheel, which let be so much less than the other, that it touch not the
ground, so that being fast upon the same axeltree, it cannot run unless it
carry the other with it, which being set on a plain horizon, will run a great
way without ceasing: now that you may make it return, you may provide your
wheel in such manner, that it may have rockets on both sides, so that one side
being spent, it may give fire to the other, which being fastened with their
mouths the contrary way, will make a return with a swift motion.

The form of these ground wheels you may see represented in the fifth figure, N
4.

A A the two wheels fastened to the axeltree. C C the axeltree on which the
three wheels are all fastened. B the fire wheel, which is represented of a
lesser diameter than the other two.
CHAP. XVII. Another manner of ground wheels.
THere is another kind of ground wheels, and that is made so, that the
wheels may move about the axeltree; but this sort is not moved about by a
wheel, in regard the axeltree must stand still, but it is made after this
manner; you must make your axeltree somewhat broad about the midst of it, and
in that place you shall boar two holes, into which you shall put two rockets,
which must be so close one to the other, that they may almost touch, and must
be so joined together, that one having spent himself, the other may take
fire, after the manner of your line work, to the end that being fired, it may
run first one way, and then the other taking fire, may make his return by a
second motion: now the rockets which you put into this place, must always be
proportioned according to the bigness of your wheel, which if you perform
according to the direction, you shall have your desire.

The form of this wheel is expressed in the fifth figure N 4.

A A the two wheels being loose upon their axeltree. B B the axeltree in which
the rockets are put. C the place for the two rockets to be fastened, which must
be so ordered, that the mouth of one may join to the tail of the other.
It is especially to be noted, that these wheels must run upon a very plain
horizon, such as the place for the game of Pall Maile at St. Iameses, or some
other very smooth place; by reason that after the first firing of a rocket, his
violence is over, and so a small thing will stay him.

There are also sundry sorts of wheels, which do perform diverse offices; some
for displaying of a Coat of Arms, and others for setting of diverse circular
works, some of them I will speak of; and first I will show the manner of making
a horizontall wheel, which with one firing shall give diverse reports, and
shall stand fixed.

CHAP. XVIII. The manner of making a fixed wheel, which shall give diverse
reports.
YOU must first get a wheel turned by some workman, which must be two foot in
diameter, (or as you please to augment or diminish your work) which must have a
groofe turned out of the upper side, of half an inch wide, and likewise as
deep; to which groofe you must have a piece of wood so fitted, that it may just
slide in, which piece of wood must have so many small holes bored in it as you
will have reports about it, always provided, you set them not too near
together, because the firing of one may not beat down the other; when you have
thus provided your wheel, make a conveyance or hollow trunck of paper which
will just fill it, which must be filled with some of your slow mixtures for
stars, and then putting on the cap of wood so fitted with holes, and made
very fast with glue, pierce every hole into your hollow conveyance, so that
putting a quill into every one, they may take fire, and to the said quill
fasten a report, so shall you have a peale of Chambers placed in a small room,
which being once fired, Figure 6. A.
will follow in order till the whole train be spent. The form you shall see
expressed in the sixth figure marked A.

CHAP. XIX. How to make a fixed wheel which shall cast forth many rockets into
the air.
THere is likewise another sort of wheel not much unlike to the former, which
shall give fire to diverse rockets standing circular, the order differs nothing
from the former, only you must make a hole for every stick to pass through, and
therefore it must be made somewhat broader, which will effect the same as the
other does, by conveying fire from one rocket to another, till they be all
spent; the mixture for this conveyance ought to be very slow, wherefore I
advise you to take this ensuing, which is both slow and sure.

Take Roch peter, 8 Sulphur vive, 4 Camphire, Fine powder dust, 2
Meal these ingredients very fine, and incorporate them, adding of Linseed
oil, and of oil of peter; these oils must be dropped in by degrees, and so
wrought up, till you find your mixture bound like dough, which if you perform
well, will be both slow and sure. Figure 6. B.
The form of this wheel is expressed in the sixth Figure, by the letter B.

CHAP. XX. How to make a fixed wheel, which shall cast forth diverse Fisgigs,
and likewise as many reports or breakers.
CAuse a wheel to be turned, with a groofe on the top to put in your
conveiance of paper; then fit on a piece of wood, as I have formerly showed
you, with small holes to put in quils, which are for the firing of your
reports, and must be placed round about the uper part of your wheel; and on
the side thereof, shall be made diverse holes of the bigness of your Fisgigs,
(which shall be so pierced through to the paper conveiance) those fisgigs that
are placed round on the side, and the reports on the top, one train shall fire
them all, and in firing, you shall see all the Fisgigs flying round about, one
after another, as the fire passes to them; and for every Fisgig which passes
out, shall be fired a report, so that there shall be a continual motion
until the whole train be consumed: the form of this wheel is represented
in the sixth Figure, by the letter G.

G Represents the wheel finished, with Reports and Fisgigs. R R Represents the
reports, placed on the uper part of the wheel. F F Represents the Fisgigs
placed round on the side of the wheel.
CHAP. XXI. The manner of making a wheel which shall run two ways, which
is, forward and backward.
CAuse a wheel to be made, so that the rockets may be placed on each side,
with a hole through one side, which shall serve for a vent, passing from one
side to the other, then place your rockets first upon one side, provided that
the last rocket be placed over the said hole, and boring a small hole in one
side of that rocket, put in a cotton wicke for priming, and let it come through
your wheel, to the mouth of another rocket, which shall be turned the
contrary way; so that the wheel having finished his revolution one way, may
take fire fig 6th
diagram showing fixed wheels on the other side, and so make a retrograde
motion: and as you do this, so may you after the same manner, make a wheel
which shall run direct, and continue twice so long as another of the same
bigness, which is by placing the rockets the same way on both sides. The form
of this is expressed the 6 Figure, by the letters D and E.

D Represents the wheel with Rockets placed on the one side, the last rockets
having a vent, to pass through to the other side. E Represents the said wheel
finished with Rockets on both sides.
CHAP. XXII. The manner of composing a wheel, which having finished his
revolution, shall represent a Coat of Arms.
MAke a wheel of some light board, so that it may be without any spoakes, and
upon one side of it, let be drawn, that Coat of Arms you intend to represent,
then boar so many holes in the wood, as may conveniently stand on the traced
lines, then on the other side, near the top, shall a place be made, which may
contain your rockets, with a hole pierced through where the last rocket must
rest. This being done, place your rockets round about, so that the last rocket
may be placed on the vent which must be primed carefully, to pass through to
the other side; having placed on the rockets, fill those holes on the other
side with some slow mixture, such as is for your stars, or the like, then cover
it over with paper, and put in some powder dust to fire it, and to break the
paper, which being done, soap it well over for fear of some sparks lighting
on the paper before the appointed time of firing, so have you a wheel ready
which you must put on an axeltree, so that it may stand vertical, and then
firing it, you shall have your desire, for so soon as the wheel has spent
his moving work, it will give fire to the other side; and then standing still,
you shall see a perfect Coat of Arms in fire. Figure 7. A. B.

A Represents that side of the wheel which has the Rockets placed on it. B
Represents the Coat of Arms, in which the round spots signify the places to
be filled with a slow mixture, which must be moist, to the end it keep close
in.
fig 7th
diagram showing coat of arms in fire and antique figures moved by rocket

CHAP. XXIII. How to represent a Coat of Arms in fire, which having burnt a
small while, the said Coat shall appear in his perfect colors, and shall
continue so a long while.
FIrst cause a board to be made four square, of what dimension you please,
which let be an inch thick, and cause a Painter or some drafts man to trase
out what Arms or other figure you please, upon the said board; also let there
be another which shall be an inch and thick, and of the same breadth, which
fasten to the other with some small tackes, till you have boared so many holes
as you have occasion for, which shall behalf an inch asunder, and likewise
half an inch boar; then boar your holes through your inch board, and let them
enter an inch into the thicker planke, then make four square holes (one at
each corner) in the thicker planke, to receive four square pieces of wood,
which must be an inch square, which glue fast into four holes opposite to the
other in the thinner planke, to the end it may slide to and fro; then fasten an
iron rod in the midst of the thinner, so that it may come through the thicker
planke, and be fastened to a piece of wood, which may turn upon a joint; to
the end you may draw the thinner square nearer as your fire consumes, and must
draw it too foot at least; then provide a small arrow of two foot long, and
upon it roll so much paper, till it fill your small holes exactly, then fill
so many as you have holes already provided in your square, and put them through
the thinner piece, and the ends thereof into the thicker, which let be glued
fast into the bottom of that, so that they may stand very fast, and likewise
let them pass so easily through the other holes, that the board may slide
nearer or further, to or from the fire, at pleasure; then fit a piece of
past-board, so that it may come close about these rouled lances, and may fit as
exactly as the board does at the other end; and let this come within half an
inch of the firing end, then prime them all with quick powder dust, and cover
it over with paper, which having performed, you are ready against such time as
you have occasion to fire it, which must be after this manner, observing which
side the wind is; stand on that side, and fire it at the lower corner, so that
by the help of the wind, you shall have it all fire at once; which having
burnt a while, will come to the past-board and fire it, so that falling away,
there will be represented a Coat of Arms in colors, close to your fire, which
may be drawn in by one standing behind, so that it shall seem always to be
standing in one place, and the light not to grow shorter till the last. The
form of this frame is presented in the seventh figure C D.

A The frame without the scutcheon or letters. B The back side of the frame,
with an iron rod passing through it, and fastened to the other part, and the
moving part which slideth to and fro as occasion proffers. D The frame finished
ready to put in your lances. F Represents the face of the frame, or thinner
board. G The inner part of the fixed piece, with holes boared in each alike, to
put in your lances of rolled paper, filled with slow composition.
CHAP. XXIV. How to represent an antike dance, by the help of fire, which
shall move in a circular form.
CAuse a board to be made of two foot square, so that one side of it may be
hollowed, (or grooved) to lay your rockets in; then cause another board to be
made of the same largeness, so that it may sit close on the other, the rockets
lying between, and in the center of the same board, place a brass socket,
which must pass through the other for the center pin to enter into it; then
place your antike figures on the top of the said board, with wiers passing
through both; to the end they may be turned about in their motion, by certain
pinnes placed in another board, which must stand fixed; so that moving about
the said board, the pinnes take hold of the wiers which come through, and turn
them backward and forward; but in regard of the extraordinary violence of this
motion, it will tear all in pieces, unless you have a great care in making
all things to run very exactly, which must be tried before you come to use
it. The order of this is represented in the seventh Figure by the letter E.

A B C D The bottom board, which stands fixed with a socket to put on a long
pole, and has a small pin standing at each corner. E E E The under board
which moves, in which is placed the rockets. F F The uper board which is
fastened to the other, wherein the rockets are placed. G G The wiers passing
through both boards which are fastened to the foot of each anticke. H H The
other wiers which stand fast in the fixed board, and are to turn about the
antickes passing by them.
CHAP. XXV. Another way for making an anticke dance, which is not so violent as
the former.
TAke one of your large sort of wheels, and fasten it on an iron axeltree, so
that the wheel move the axeltree with his motion; then let there be a screw
filed on the said axeltree, which may be fitted to a small wheel of ten
teeth or thereabouts as you please, for the more teeth there is in the wheel,
the slower it goes, and easier, et contra: which wheel let it be so fastened
to an axeltree, (on which the board bearing the antickes must stand) that the
fire wheel turning about vertical, may move your work hirozontall, which
will move so slow, that the fire wheel will be ten times about, before your
Motion will move once about, which being done neatly, will prove a work of
great contentment. The form whereof is expressed in the seventh Figure by the
letter F.

A The fire wheel placed on an iron axelrree, and made fast to it. B The screw
made on the said axeltree, or filed out of the same stuff. C The wheel which
the aforesaid screw must be fitted to run with, which must have so meny
teeth, as you intend the fire wheel shall move about for once of your motion.
D The square board on which the antickes stand, and is fastened to the axeltree
which has the wheel. E A place for a light to burn so long as the work
indureth. F F F The detentes or pieces which come through the board from the
foot of each anticke. G G G Certain pinnes standing upright in the fixed
board, to the end that the others passing by may be turned about.
CHAP. XXVI. How to compose a Castle of fire work with the manner of placing
the works in a true order.
PRepare a Castle of wood, or plate, of what largeness you please, the which
shall be made four square, with round towers and battlements, and on the top
or inner part of that work, let there be a lesser tower of the same fashion,
with a Vane on the top, or such a like Figure, which having provided, let there
be a place made close to the battlements, or within one inch of them, to lay
your conveiances, (which let be of brass) which is for your reports, which
must be placed between each battlement, and shall have little pipes of brass
to give fire to each report, which must be screwed into the great conveiance;
which conveiance let be filled with your composition for rockets of 1 l. which
is one pound of powder to 3 of coal dust; and by this means you shall have
them all fire in order, without any confusion; which having spent it self,
shall give fire to another conveiance, which shall be placed further in, with a
strong wall between, so that the fire of one do not offend the other: the use
of this conveiance is to place diverse rockets on, so that they may fire one
after another, and shall take fire as soon as the reports are ended. Now for
the four large towers, you shall provide four pieces of wood, turned and
fitted to slide in exactly, and shall have diverse smooth holes boared round
through the out side of your tower, and the wood, till they meet with the hollow
which passes from the top to the bottom, or within an inch, which hollow
shall be one inch and a half diameter, and must be filled with a very slow
mixture, (to the end it may continue as long as the work is a burning) then
place some Fisgigs round in those little holes, so that the mouths may be
inward and primed, which will take fire one after another, and fly out on
every side of your Castle, which will give great content: for the manner of
firing this, I could wish, that it were first fired at the four uper towers,
and that through one of the corners, may be a hole, which may go to the uper
conveyance, that so those reports may fire next, and at the end of that
conveyance shall be another to pass down to the lower tier of reports, and at
each corner of that conveyance shall be a hole to pass into those lower
towers, so that by that time all the reports are fired, the towers shall be all
on fire; then at the end of that conveyance, (as I said before) let your
conveyance for your rockets be placed, which taking fire orderly, will
conclude the work. These and the like are for the pleasure of princes and
great personages, rather then for the vulgar. The form of this Castle is laid
down in the eight Figure by the letter A.

B B B Expresses the angles of the lower tower. C C C The angles of the higher
tower. D D The conveiance that fires the reports. E The conveyance passing to
the rockets. F F F The Fisgigs placed round each angle. G G Reports placed on
the battlements. H H Rockets placed farther in with a wall between.
CHAP: XXVII. How to represent diverse motions in a Castle of fire-worke.
CAuse a frame to be made, placing thereon two Castles, that they may stand
about twelve foot distant one from another; this frame must be so ordered,
that it may be hollow underneath, which being done, let the doors of those
Castles be placed the one opposite to the other, at each end of the said
frame, and just within each door, let there be a figure 8
diagram showing a castle of fireworks with moving figures rowler of wood,
four inches diameter, which shall have iron pevikts or points to run upon,
that they may run the more easy; and let those roulers be put full of small
pinnes, and a girt put round about them, to the end that the rowlers moving
circular, may draw the girt in a straight line, then placing some antike
Figures on the girt (so that they may move about with it) place your fire
wheels upon the axeltree of each rowler, providing another rowler at each end
to make it slide more easily; so firing the said wheels, you shall see the
antikes come one out of one door, and the other at the other door, meeting in
the midst; and when they come at the contrary end, they make a return with
their heads downward, and come up again at the same doors they went first
out of, which will continue running, so long as the fire wheels continue. And
when the wheels stand still, the reports shall go off on each tower one
against another, which shall be done after this manner: let one of the spoakes
of both your wheels be hollow, and also part of the axeltree, which let be
filled with powder dust, and the rocket which fires last, shall be placed over
that spoake which has the vent, with a piece of cotton wicke to fire it, so
will it run down through the axeltree, which (as I said) must be hollow, and
must have paper pasted over it, so that as soon as the fire comes there, it
breaks through the paper, and fires a train which is laid round about it,
which train passes to a standing conveyance, which goes up to the
battlements, and so gives fire to those reports; which having past each
corner, the lower tower shall fire as it passes, and from thence pass to an
inner conueiance, which shall fire so many rockets, as may be well placed about
it; this being well and orderly performed, will give great content. The form
whereof is expressed in the eight Figure, N B B.

B B Represents the two Castles ready fitted with the frame. A A The two doors
opposite. B The two figures moving forward. C C The two fire wheels which
causes this motion. C Represents the frame for this motion. D D The two fire
wheels fixed on their axeltree. E E The Roler each wheel is fixed to. F F The
other Rolers which guide the girts. G G The girts passing from one roller to
the other. H H The figures placed on the girts.
fig 9th
diagram showing a castle of fireworks with moving figures including an army

CHAP. XXVIII. Another way to perform the same motions, and will not be so
violent as the former.
PRepare your Castle with the frame fitted as the former, only upon the
axeltree of each rowler, let there be a small wheel with teeth, and likewise
must there be a screw upon the axeltree of each fire wheel; which must be so
fitted, that they may draw these wheels about, which if they be well fitted,
will move them with great facility; and whereas the other fire wheels were
placed on each side, these must be placed behind, or underneath, which you
please, or find most commodious. Now you must note that your fire wheel
moving once about, moves but one tooth of your other wheel by reason of the
screw which draws him, so that if you make ten teeth in the said wheel,
your fire wheel shall make ten revolutions for one of your rowler: by this
means it will move after a far more easy manner then the former. The manner
of this is represented in the ninth Figure, A A R.

A A Represents the two Castles ready placed. R The frame for the motion. B B
Two fire wheels which forces the rest of the work. C C The screws fastened
on the axeltree of each wheel, which forces the rowlers. D D The two wheels
which are placed on the rowlers, and fitted to the screw which force them. P P
The two girts on which the figures are placed.
CHAP. XXIX. How to represent the form of an army of an hundred men marching,
which shall present and fire at one certain place appointed.
THe ground of all these motions, are wheel works; wherefore to proceed, you
must provide a rowler of two foot long or more, which must be made and placed
as the forementioned, to be drawn by two screwes fastened to the fire wheels,
in regard of the great weight they are to draw; also they must be somewhat
large wheels, with rockets of the second size, which is five ounces in each
rocket, placing about each wheel, 20. or more, which having provided, you must
likewise get you so many figures of soldiers, which must be cut by a Carver,
and ought to have the joints loose of the right arm of each, with a wire or
detent, to come down from the arm to the thigh of each, and likewise another,
which may move that, and come to the foot; then place these on several girts,
so that they may stand ten in rank and file, and may be an inch between each,
to the end they touch not at the feet, but every file may run in a several
groofe; then placing small pieces in their hands, which must be ready loaded
and primed, set them going, and within two foot of the end of their march, let
there be a crooked piece of iron stuck up, between each file, so that they may
stand just in a straight line, to the end that when the soldiers move to that
place, the detents or wyers are forced against those pins which draw back the
arm, and so pulls the trickers of each Piece in that rank, so that the whole
rank will fire altogether, if they be well ordered; and as these have fired
and past, another rank moves forward to the same place, performing the same;
thus continuing till they have all performed the like, which being finished,
and all past, they shall make a second march, orderly without firing. This
being well and carefully ordered, shall not fail, and will be a very rare work
to behold, but will prove extraordinary costly to the owner thereof.

The form of this you shall find in the ninth figure, by the letter R?

E represents the whole frame, with all the parts thereof. F F are the two fire
wheels, being placed one at each end of the rowler. G G the screwes, being
fastened to each fire wheel, which move the two wheels placed on the rowler. H
H the two wheels being placed at each end of the rowler. I I two rowlers,
about which the girts do pass, which carry the whole body of men. K K the
girts on which the figures are placed, each girt having upon it ten, so that in
the whole there will be an hundred. L represents the figure of a man standing
in that posture as he ought to be made. M Is the detent which is fastened to
the right arm, and is to slide on a joint, being fastened to the thigh; so
that it may move the arm. N another detent which moves the former, as it
passes by the pin. O the pin which puts by the said detent as it comes to
it. q q the said pins in their right places.
CHAP. XXX. How to present music playing, (by the help of fire) with anticks
dancing.
CAuse an instrument to be made, representing the Virginals, and to it fit a
Barrel set with several tunes, (as I shall show you in another Treatise
hereafter) then let there be a wheel with teeth fastened on this barrel, and a
fire wheel, with a screw on the axeltree, as I have showed before, which screw
may be so fitted, that as it moves round the barrel one way, so it may move
another wheel, being placed on the side, which wheel shall move certain
anticks, as the music plays. This and many more may be performed by the
motion of wheel work.

The form of this is expressed in the tenth figure, by the letter A: B the fire
wheel, fixed on the axletree, which moves a screw. C the screw, moving a
wheel placed on the top of it, and another on the side. D the wheel fastened
to a barrel set with tunes. E the wheel placed on the side, which has a
pinion at the end of the axeltree, marked F; which carries about the wheel G;
on which there are placed four anticks: this wheel moves four pinions
marked H, on which is placed four other anticks. I is the barrel set with
tunes. K the pallats which causes the jacks to move. L the jacks which pass
up to the strings. M a board or frame covering the strings, on which is placed
the anticks.


Having spoken sufficiently of the order of motions performed by wheel work, I
come now to show some things that may be done on the Line.

CHAP. XXXI. How to make a Dragon, or any other creature to run on the Line, by
the help of fire:
LET your Dragon be made either of pasteboard, or else of fine rods, such as
your Basketmakers use; which must be made hollow, with a place in the belly to
put in two rockets, and shall be so ordered, that there may come a small pipe
from the tail of one, to the head of the other; then make a place in the eyes,
and mouth, to put into each hole fire, which shall be made up in rolled paper,
and thrust in; then on the top of the back let there be fastened two small
pulleys for the line to run in, which being done, your Dragon is finished, to
firing, which must be thus; first fire it at the eyes, and mouth, (always
noting, that this receipt must be some slow mixture, such as your stars) then
fire that rocket which is placed with his mouth toward the tail of the Dragon,
which will make it seem to cast fire from thence, till he come to the end of
his motion; and then on a sudden, as a creature wounded with some accident,
shall return with fire coming forth of his belly, which being well ordered,
will give great content.

The form of this you shall find in the tenth figure, by the letter B.

B represents a dragon to be forced with rockets, which are placed in the
belly. C a place made to put in a rocket, which must be put in at the tail,
with the mouth of the rocket outward. D is a conveyance from the tail of that
rocket, to the mouth of the next, which comes out at the belly. E E two small
brass pullees, fastened in a frame on the back, for the line to run in.
CHAP. XXXII. Another way for making a fiery Dragon to pass on the line
without the help of fire.
IN the former Chapter, I spoke of a Dragon of a small size, of a foot in
length, or thereabout; now I come to speak of those of a greater magnitude,
which cannot so easily be forced with fire, in a straight line, without some
artificial help; for Art must be always as a handmaid attending on Nature,
to help her in her work; therefore having prepared a large dragon, you must
make diverse hollow truncks of wood, within the body, which shall be to cast
out fire, and on a sudden diverse small bals of fire, other times a great number
of small fisgigs. Now to make this run on the line, you must have a hollow
trunck fastened on the back, between the wings of your dragon, which must be
somewhat bigger than your cord, with a small hole through each end; the use of
those small holes is, to fasten a small cord, which must be so fastened, that
one end thereof must be fastened at the head of the Dragon, and so pass over a
pulley; (which pulley shall be fastened at the end of the line) and returning
through that hollow trunck in the back, it shall be put over another pulley at
the other end of the line, and so making a return, shall be fastened to the hole
in the hinder part of the trunck. Now one of these pulleys shall have a handle
or winch to turn it about, which shall cause the dragon to move, and shall be a
help to the drawing of it backward and forward at your pleasure; after this
manner you may form many works on the line, which otherwise cannot be done. The
form of this is set down in the eleventh figure, by the letter A.

fig 10
diagram showing antique figures dancing to music using wheel work and a dragon
moving on a line

A represents the dragon ready finished, with all his works. B C the manner
of the hollow trunck which the cord must pass through. B the place for fastening
of a small cord, which must pass over the pulley, marked D. D the manner of
fastening that pulley which must be at the further end of the line. o o o o the
manner of the passing of the said line which is through the hollow trunck, and
so over the pulley marked E, and then fastened to the other end of the trunck
marked G. F a handle or winch belonging to one of the pulleys which makes the
dragon move forward and backward, as occasion profereth. H H the great line on
which the dragon passes, and is only for keeping it steaddy in the motion.
CHAP. XXXIII. How to represent S. George fighting with a Dragon in fire on
(...).
HAving prepared your figures artificially made, you must make a h^llow t^^nck
through the body of each fi^^^e, for a (...) to pass through (...) likew^se for
a smaller lin^ to draw them (...) from each other; which m^st be fastened in
^^is manner: at the breast (...) ^he dragon let one end of one cord be (...)
which shall pass through the body of the George, and returning it about ^
pulley at the other end, fasten it to the back of the George, and a^ the breast
of the Georg^ let ^n^^her cord be tied, which shall pass through the body of
the d^^gon o^ a trunck on the back, and so returning about a pulley at that
(...) sha^^ be pulled straight, and fastened to the tail of the dragon, (...)
that (...) you turn that wheel, the George and dragon will run furiously at
each other; and when you please you may cau^^ the^ to make a ret^eat and come
on again diverse times; but in all th(...) forget not to (...) your line
extraordinary well, and likewise have (...) that yo(...) not too heavy above
the line, but that they may hang equ^^r^^^ ^the^wise they will turn their
heels upward, which (...) be^ a great disgrace to the work and workman: there
might be (...) w^^tten upon this same subject, but to the ingenious, I think
it i^ ^ufficient, they may order their work^ according to their own fa(...)e is
the ground of the matter. The manner of this is repr(...) eleventh figure, by
the letter B.

C represening the George. D the dragon. E the small line fastened to the head
of the dragon, and passes through the body of the George. fig 11th
diagram showing dragon moving on a line and fighting Saint George F the pulley
which guides the said line. G the place of fastening the other end of that
line. H another line fastened to the breast of the horse, which passes through
the hollow trunck of the dragon. I the pulley about which it passes, and is
fastened to the tail of the dragon. K the place of fastening the said line to
the dragon. L L the great line which guides these two figures. M the winch or
handle fastened to one of the pulleys, and is for the moving them forward or
backward.
CHAP. XXXIV. How to make a trunck of fire, which shall cast forth diverse fire
bals.
PRovide a trunck of four inch boar, and two foot long, with a hollow place
in the bottom, of two inch boar, and as much deep, to the end it may be put on
a strong post; let there be a bottom left between the two boares, which shall
be two inches thick, so that there will be twenty inches left for your work,
which shall be filled as follows; first fill it with corn powder one inch,
then put in your ball, which shall be five inches and a half, and round about
it put powder dust, till you come to the top, then fill it two inches and a
half with slow mixture, and on that two inches of corn powder: then put in
another ball, and after it slow mixture, which shall be filled to the top, and
so reserve it for your use; note that you must turn three places for arming of
it, which must be done either with iron hoops or else with cords, to the end
the violence of your corn powder burst it not; your upper ball shall be made
after this manner: Having made ready a case of canvas, fill it with this
mixture following.

Take 1 l. of salt peter. l. of powder dust. l. of sulphur vive. 2 of camphire.
1 of oil of peter.


Mix these very well, till it become somewhat tough, and then fill your ball,
and arm it, leaving four vents, into which you shall put four small sticks,
till such time you have coated; the manner of coating is, to dip the ball in a
mixture of pich, rosin, tallow, and sulphur, but this is for bals of longer
continuance; the coating for ^his ball shall be as follows;

The receipt for coating, l. of pitch. l. of vernish. 1 of sulphur vive. 2 of
powder dust.


Melt your pitch and sulphur, and then pour in your vernish and powder dust,
and while it is hot dip in your ball, and then cast a little fine powder dust
over it, and so let it cool a little, and then dip it lightly again, and so
you have it ready; when you use it, pull out your four sticks out of the
vents, and fill them with powder dust, and so put them in. The lower ball which
is last fired, shall be full of stars, with powder dust intermixed, to break
the ball, these shall be primed with cotton wick made of purpose, to the end it
may not fire the bal til it be up a good height, and then to break into a
shower of stars.

The receipt of the composition for the trunck.

1 l. of roch peter. l. of fine powder dust. of sulphur vive. 2 of camphir. 1
of linseed oil.
The form of this trunck is represented in the twelfth figure by the letter A:
A represents a trunck ready finished, with two bals. B the ball which lies
uppermost, and is filled with slow composition. C the lower ball, which is
filled with stars, D the slow mixture at the top of the trunck. E the corn
powder to send forth the upper ball. F the second lay of composition. G the
powder for sending forth the lower ball. o o o three places left for arming the
said trunck. H the bottom of the trunck, which must be two inches thick. I a
place left to put in a post of wood for it to stand on.


CHAP. XXXV. The manner of making a Club, which being fired, shall cast forth
diverse small works, or fisgigs.
CAuse a piece of wood to be turned of four inches diameter, boar it one inch
and a half from the top toward the bottom, only leaving a bottom of an inch
thick, and likewise a place underneath to put in your club staff, the length
of this trunck may be eighteen inches; then draw a circular or spiral line,
from the top to the bottom, which let be in the manner of a screw, every thread
being an inch and a half asunder, and in that line boar small holes, (of the
bigness of one of your fisgigs) till you come within a quarter of an inch of
the bottom of each hole; and then pierce it with a small piercer, till you come
to the soul of the trunck. Having done this, make small wyers fit to each
hole, which let be fastened, so that they may stand opposite to the said holes,
within two inches off from each hole; the use of them is, to keep your fisgigs
more upright and steaddy, which otherwise would be apt to fall out, by reason
they must be put in very slack, or else they would not so easily come forth,
when they should, then load your trunck with the slow mixture appointed in the
former chapter (for a trunck) and put in your fisgigs, priming each, and
likewise each hole, and so firing it at the top, you shall find them come
forth one after another, as your trunck burns downwards, which shall scatter
abroad after a confused manner. The form of this you shall see in the twelfth
figure, by the letters E I.

E represents the form of the club without the wyers on, or any other work. I
is the said club ready finished with all his work. K the wyers placed for to
stay each fisgig in his place. L the fisgigs placed. M the place of firing. N
the club fast put into the bottom.
CHAP. XXXVI. Another sort of club, which being fired, shall give many reports.
PRovide a club like unto the former, but let not the holes be boated so big,
but only that a small quill or pipe may go in for a vent to every breaker, then
having boared your holes at proportionable distance, cut so many hollow groofes
with a googe or half round chisell, and fit them to your breakers of paper,
and place so many reports round about it; your reports or breakers for this
work shall be made as follows; upon a rowler of half an inch, roll so much
paper till you make it an inch thick, and better, choking it close at one end,
then fill it an inch and a half with good pistol powder, choking it at the
other end, so that it be very close at each end; then pierce a small hole in
the middle for a pipe to enter in, which must be filled with powder dust, and
put into the small holes of your trunck, very close, then pitch them well round
about, and pour pitch all over, that the work may not be seen; and likewise
that it may hold your reports close together; this pitch likewise when the fire
comes to it, will easily fire, and make a very furious light, which will give
great content. The form of this is represented in the twelfth figure by the
letters O and V.

O representing the club without the reports placed. A the groofes to put in
the reports, with a hole in the middle of each groofe to put in the quill. R a
report with a quill ready to be placed in the club. figure 12
diagram showing club, jack in a box, and sphere types of fireworks q the
manner of the quill which must be put into those small holes to fire the
reports. V the club finished, with the reports placed in it. B B the manner of
the reports as they are placed in the said club.
CHAP. XXXVII. Another, which I call Jack in a box.
THE order of making this is after this manner; provide a box of plate, of what
largeness you please, which let be six inches deep, with a socket at the
bottom to put in your staff, then putting in a quantity of corn powder or
powder dust, (in the bottom of the box) you shall fill it with fisgigs, or
serpents, leaving a place in the middle for a cane to go through to the bottom,
which cane must be filled with slow receipt, in which you shall put a quantity
of camphir, but no oils, in regard of the narrow passage it has to burn,
without any other vent; then put your cane down, leaving it an inch above the
box, and take a piece of thick pastebord, cutting a hole for the cane to pass
through, and glue it close to the cane, to the end the fire pass not through
before the appointed time; this pastebord must be of sufficient breadth to
cover your box quite over, then put it on a staff, and light your cane, which
will appear only like a candle, and after a pretty distance of time you shall
hear a sudden noise, and see all those fisgigs flying some one way, some
another. This toy has given great content to the spectators. The form of this
is set down in the twelfth figure by the letters B C D.

B the box without any thing in it. C the fisgigs placed in the box. D the box
finished, with a cane passing through to the bottom.
CHAP. XXXVIII. How to represent the Sphere, moving in the air, without any
other supportation.
CAuse a Sphere to be made somewhat light, and on the horizon place your
rockets, and in the zenith or upper part, let there be a pin pass through
the meridian, with a ring fastened to it, to hang it by; this must be fastened
to a large Kite, so as the Sphere may hang six foot under it, then fasten a
match of cotton to the nose of the first rocket, and light it, which having
done, raise your Kite, and by such time as it is at the highest, the rockets
shall take fire, and shall cause it to make diverse revolutions in the air; you
may place the midst of this sphere full of lights, which will seem very
strange. The manner of this is represented in the twelfth Figure, by the
letters K and S.

K Represents the Kite which is supported by the air, and to which the sphere
is fastened. S The sphere with all his circles, the rockets being placed about
the horizon. H H The horizontall circle about which the rockets are placed!
CHAP. XXXIX. How to represent the sphere, with diverse circles, some moveable,
others fixed.
CAuse a sphere to be made, either of wood or metal, the outward circles
representing the meridian circle with the horizon, the next within shall
represent the Collurs with the equinoctial, likewise the tropicks and
zodiac, whose poles shall be 23 degrees from the poles of the world; by which
means the eclipticke shall be excentricke to the equinoctial, (which shall
be expressed) so that fastening rockets about the equinoctials, and placing two
small lights in the zodiac, the one representing the Sun, the other the
Moon: you shall see them move about the earth, (which is placed in the midst
of the spheres) according to the rules of Ticho Brahe, and shall be according
to their natural manner of motion, which is continually rising and settling in
an oblique motion to the horizon and meridian, which always stand fixed, and
the rest moving on the poles of the equinoctial, although the eclipticke be
framed from its own poales. The form of this is represented in the twelfth
Figure, by the letter T.

M The fixed Meridian. A A The Horizon. E E The Equinoctial. E E The
Eclipticke with the Sun and Moon placed round. P P The poles or axeltree
about which all the inner circles move.
CHAP. XL. How to make a half moon of Rockets to appear in the air.
PRovide a piece of planke of two inch thick, and turn it to a half round,
then cut so many groves (from the center to the circumference) as you intend to
place rockets about it, and on the other side, let there be rings for every rod
to pass through, of which let one of each be close to the top, and another
near the end of each rod; and note that the planke must be so large, that the
ends of all the rods must meet in the center; then prime each rocket with a
quill filled with powder dust, and put on the top of each groofe, till you have
placed your semicircle full; then having primed these groofes, (which comes
from one center to the circumference) paste paper over them, and so let it
stand till you fire it, which is done after this manner: set this same at the
top of a poast, about four or five foot from the ground, and prime it (at the
center) with a little cotton wicke prepared for that purpose, and firing it,
you shall see them take fire all at one instant, and so will fly circular, in
the form of a half Moon. The form whereof is represented in the thirteenth
Figure, by the letters A B.

A Represents the forepart of the frame, in which one presents the groofes
which pass to each rocket. D D The quils filled with powder dust, entering into
the groofes with one end, and into the rocket with the other. B Represents the
back part of the frame. E E The rings below. F F The rings above. G G The
rockets placed on the frame.
CHAP. XLI. How to make a case of Rockets to rise at once.
CAuse a frame to be made about two foot square, with small groofes, two
inches asunder, and between each groofe, boar holes for your rocket rods to
pass through; you may make ten groofes, and in each groofe you may place ten
rockets, so you shall have a hundred rockets in one of these cases, which shall
fire all at once; there must be a cross groofe made in the midst, and in
the center of that groofe, shall you fire it, which shall suddenly fire all
over, being primed with a quick train of powder: the charge is great, and
quickly spent, but it makes a very glorious show.

The form of this is represented in the 13 Figure, by the letters G D.

fig 13th
diagram of a half moon of rockets, a case of rockets and fireworks of letters,
sunbeams, ground and aerial types

A A A A Represents the square of your case which is grooved. The white
strokes signify the groofes which are to be filled with powder dust, whereon
the mouth of your rockets must be placed. The other spaces express the holes
where your rods pass through with a hole in the midst to fire it at. B
Represents the case filled with rockets, their rods passing through, and is made
long, to the end there may be another board at the bottom for each rod to
pass through, that they may be kept more steady.
CHAP. XLII. How to make letters, or any other figure appear in the air,
after the spending of a Rocket.
HAving considered of what largeness you will have your letters or figures,
make them of pastboard, leaving a hollow to put in small quils, (which shall
be filled with a clear and strong mixture) then put in your quils, and glue
them fast in; and and so have you finished it, till you come to use it. There
is another manner, which is thus; provide a mould of plate, and cut out what
letter you please in wax, which having done, stick it full of quils in an
orderly form, and put this on the head of your rocket: note this, that these
are only to be used on very large rockets. The form of these are represented
in the thirteenth Figure E F.

The form of the letters, the white spots signifying the place for so many
quils filled full of slow mixture, to be placed in.
CHAP. XLIII. How to represent a figure of the Sun casting forth his beams,
in fire.
CAuse a box to be made of plate, too inches long, and one inch diameter,
which must be filled with your slow composition, and let the head be made with
small groofes, crossing the center, to the end you may lay in certain springs
of steel, such as they use to small Watches. These springs shall be about
six inches in length, and must be four, so that both ends of each appearing,
will make eight, which will make a circular form, the box being the center;
now to the end of every one of these springs, must be fastened one of your
small Fisgigs, and then bent up close to the box, and so put into your coffine
at the top of your rocket, with powder dust and cotton to fire and break the
coffine, which as soon as it breaks, the springs will cast forth your
Fisgigs, and make them seem like the sparkling beams of the sun, and the
mixture in the center will seem as the body of the same; this will continue a
while, and then you shall see it break with diverse reports. This I had from a
noble Captain of this City, namely Captain Forestar, who invented the same,
the form whereof is represented in the thirteenth Figure, by the letters L M.

L Being the box with the springs fastened to the top, with a Fisgig at the
end of each. M The said box finished with the springs bent ready to put on the
head of a Rocket; the mouth of each Fisgig must come down to the mouth of the
box, and so be put with their mouths all downwards.
Having spoken sufficiently of works operating in the air, I will show you
something which shall serve for ground works.

CHAP. XLIV. How to make a Rocket which firing it out of your hand, shall
continually be in agitation on the ground sometimes, and other whiles about in
the air.
HAving prepared a Rocket, with a report in the head, tie it to a bladder, so
that the end of the Rocket may come to the mouth of the bladder, and bind it
over very strongly, then firing it out of your hand, cast it away from you, it
matters not which way, for it will come to the ground, and by reason of the
bladder, it cannot stay, but presently rebounds upward, moving to and fro, till
it be all spent. There is another sort, and that is a small Rocket put into a
bladder, and so blown up round about it, and tied about the neck of the
Rocket. The form of these are represented in the 13 Figure, by the letters G H.

G The Rocket with the bladder at the tail of it. H The Rocket in the bladder.
CHAP. XLV. How to make a ball which shall be in continual agitation on the
ground, till the fire is consumed.
CAuse a ball to be made of some light wood, which must be made so, as you may
take it asunder just in the midst, then make on each side a hollow groofe to
lay in two rockets (joined together after the manner of your runners) so close
up your ball fast with glue; only in the place where the two Rockets join,
shall be a groofe, which shall be pasted over with paper, that the second
rocket firing, may have a vent, otherwise your ball will serve but once. Then
fire it, and you shall have your desire. This is represented in the 13 Figure
by the letters I K.

I Represents a part of the ball, as it is ready to place in the Rockets. K
Represents the ball, with the Rockets placed in, so that the other side being
joined, makes a perfect round. C C C The vents to each Rocket, which being
closed, must have paper glued over them, that they be not seen.
CHAP. XLVI. How to make another sort of Balls for the ground, which will be a
long time in their motion.
CAuse a ball to be made of some light wood, and let it be hollowed, to make
it the lighter; then fit in two pieces of wood, so that you may make both sides
equal, which pieces of wood shall be so groofed, that you may lay in so many
Rockets as may well be contained about it, providing that at the end of each
groofe or rocket, you may have a vent through your ball, then place in your
rockets as I have showed you for the wheel: which having done, glue them fast
in, to the end, that by the motion of the ball, they may not be disordered,
then join your ball together, and glue it fast with paper round about it, to
the end the vents may be covered, only leaving one open to fire it, so have
you this ball finished, which firing, will continue a long while in motion,
Figure 36.

A The ball turned hollow with groofes to lay in your rockets. B The other part
of the ball, with the rockets fastened in. C C C C The vents at the end of each
rocket.
CHAP. XLVII. How to make a Dragon issuing forth of a Cave, which shall cast
out much fire.
PRovide a Dragon of some light matter, as wicker rods or the like, which let
be made so, that you may put into the midst of the body, one of your greatest
rockets, and close under the belly let there be a couple of wheels, which
shall be so placed in the belly of the Dragon, that no part may be seen, but
only the bottom which comes to the ground; and let the rocket be so placed,
that it may with trains fire all parts of the body, as the eyes, mouth, and
all other parts; in which you shall place diverse small works, which firing,
shall fly out, and make a very great show, which shall burn till all be
consumed: this Dragon must be so placed, that he may come forth of a seeming
cave; which firing on a sudden, will make a great noise, by reason of the
largeness of the rocket, and the hollownesse of the cave he comes forth of.
The form whereof is represented in the fourteenth Figure by the letter G.

G The Dragon ready finished. A The wheels on which it must run, which must
be hid within the body. B The rocket placed in the body of the Dragon, which
causes the motion. G The vent which passes to this rocket for the firing.
CHAP. XLVIII. How to make two Dragons to meet each other, from several
Caves, which shall send forth their fire to each other with great violence.
HAving prepared two Dragons (both of one size and weight) after the manner as
I have showed you in the former Chapter; it is requisite that you know how
far they will run, then place the Caves at such a distance one from the
other, that they may meet each other in the mid way, and that you may do this
the more neater, you shall have your ground laid with smooth boards that they
may run more free, and from the midst of the walk, to the end of each
Dragon; let there be a groofe made in one of the boards, which shall serve to
convey a train to each, for the firing of them; then you shall be sure, that
if you fire it in the midst, they will both take fire together; always
provided you make a conveyance of paper from the board to the tail of each
Dragon, or to the mouth of each rocket, which being fired once, they shall
meet, and cast forth their fire at each other with great violence. The form
of this is represented in the fourteenth Figure, by the letters A A.

A A The two Dragons ready to run. B B The two great rockets which forces
them. C C The wheels which each Dragon runs on. D The midst of their walk,
with the groofe to each rocket.
There are diverse other works which may be performed after this manner, which
for brevity sake I will omit.

Likewise there are diverse motions to be performed by the action of man, as
single duels, to which appertain the Buckler of fire, and likewise the Curtlax
or Fauchion, the manner of which has been formerly described by diverse
Authors, almost in all languages, and therefore will seem more then requisite
to relate those things so large as they might be; for what action cannot man
perform by his industry? and therefore I leave every man to his own order,
only I will show you the making of one sort of Bucklar, which as yet has not
been performed, and likewise the Fauchion or Curtlax, and first for the
Bucklar.

CHAP. XLIX. How to make a Bucklar which shall cast forth a hundred Fisgigs,
every one making his report.
CAuse a Bucklar to be made of some light wood, which let be about two foot in
diameter or more, as you please, then cause a groofe to be cut in it, from the
center to the circumference in a spirall or serpentine form, then fill that
groofe with one of your slow compositions, such as has neither oil nor
gummes, by reason the sum thereof may not offend the Bearers; when you have
filled it, fit in pieces of wood, which may have holes to receive a quantity of
Fisgigs, let every one be two inches asunder, and let there be wire rings to
every one of your Fisgigs to hold them steady, that they fall not out, till
such time they fire, then put in your Fisgigs, into every hole one, till you
come to the center, and then shall you have a very great breaker, so that
firing it at the circumference, every Fisgig will fly out as the fire comes to
it, and will fly against his adversary combatant, till they come both to the
center, and then will they give a great report, and so end. The form of this
is represented in the 14 Figure by the letters F G.

F Represents the Buckler as it must be grooved. G Represents the same
finished, with the Fisgigs placed about it. H H Represents the manner of using
the said Buckler, with the Fauchion.
fig 14
diagram of dragon moving out of a cage, dragons confronting each other,
buckler and falchion filled with fizgigs

CHAP. L. How to make the Curtlax, Cimiter, or Fauchion.
PRepare a Curtlax either of wood, or plate, which let be hollowed from back
to edge, three inches, and let it be so thick, as it may serve for your
smallest fisgigs, then you shall have a piece of pastebord so fitted on the
back, that your work may be close covered, only holes left for the ends of your
fisgigs to come forth; then you shall lay in your lances of fire (which is
nothing else but your slow composition for stars put into hollow truncks of
paper made on an arrow) and between every lance you shall put two or three
fisgigs, which shall fly out so soon as the fire comes to them; having done
this, you have finished your Fauchion, which must be fired at the point, and
so burn downward toward the hilt. This has been formerly set forth by
Monsieur Thybaviel a French Author, and since by diverse others. The form
whereof is represented in the fourteenth figure, by the letters I K L.

I represents the Fauchion prepared, with a groofe in the back. K represents
the Fauchion, with holes to put in the works. L represents a Fauchion wholly
finished, with the fisgigs placed as they ought to stand.
Having spoken sufficiently of land works, I will come in the next place to
show the making of some works to be acted on the water; and first of all I
will show you the making of the water bals.

CHAP. LI. How to make a water ball, which shall burn on the water, with great
violence.
FIrst, having considered of what bigness you will have your ball, take the
circumference and half it, and of that half make a circle, which cutting out
in strong canvas, shall be half a case, so that sewing two of them together,
they shall make a case according to your desire; For Example; I have a ball to
make whose diameter is six inches, then the circumference (being as seven to
twenty two) must be 18 6/^, so the half will be 9 3/7, which must be the
diameter of your cloth, and must be made true round, so that sewing two
together, and making a case thereof, it shall be almost six inches, which the
arming will make good; having made your case, you shall proceed to the filling
of it, which shall be done after this manner; you shall first put in three or
four good spoonfuls of your mixture, and then with a stick (made round at one
end) force it close together, and so continue filling it, and between every
filling put in your stick, and force it together, rounding it continually in
your hand, till such time you have finished it; which having done, sew it up
close, and then arm it with small cord, which is called marling; after you have
done that, you shall coat it with a quantity of rosin, pitch, and tallow
dissolved, and so your ball dipped over in the same, providing always that you
leave two vents to fire it, which shall be pierced a third part into your ball,
and must be stopped with small sticks, till such time you come to use them,
then pulling forth the sticks, fill the two vents with fine powder dust, and
firing it, cast it into the water, and you shall have your desire; you must
always let your ball be through fired before you cast it from you.

A receipt for this ball.

Take 1 l. of powder. 8 of rochpeter. 4 of sulphur. 2 of camphir. 1 of oil of
peter. 1 of oil of linne. of oil of spike. 2 of colophonia.
The form of this ball is represented in the fifteenth figure by the letters A
B.

A A the canvas ready cut, to be sewed together. B the ball finished. C C the
two vents. D a piece of cord left to hold it by whilst you coat it, and
likewise to hang it up being finished.
CHAP. LII. A water ball which shall shoot forth many reports.
CAuse a ball to be made of wood, which shall be in two pieces, so that you
may join it close together at pleasure; this ball must have small holes boared
round about it, to put in your quils, which must fire your reports; the reports
or breakers shall be made of paper choked at both ends, and primed through the
midst; they shall be fastened round with pitch, and so covered round about,
that no water may pass in; you shall fill this bal in two halfes, to the end you
may force it very close together, and when it is filled, glue it fast, and arm
it well with nealed wire, then put in your breakers, with a quill which shall
enter into the bal, and likewise into the breaker; the form whereof you shall
see in the fifteenth figure, by the letter C. The receipt for this bal must be
somewhat slower than the last, by reason of the many vents it will have, as the
reports pass away.

The receipt for this ball.

Take 1 l. of rochpeter. 4 of powder dust. 3 of sulphur vive. 2 of camphir. 1
of linseed oil. 2 of rosen. 1 of oil benedick.
Powder that which is to be powdered, and incorporate them well together, and
by little and little sprinckle your oils, til you have wrought it like a
paste, and then make use of it; your quils which you prime with shall be filled
only with powder dust, to the end it fire suddenly before the quil come to
shrink up, which will be with a slow mixture.

A the mouth of the ball where it is to be fired. B B B the reports or
breakers, being made of paper, and filled with corn powder. C C C the quils,
which are primed with powder dust, and serve for firing the reports. D the
hollow of the ball, being filled with the slow composition.
CHAP. LIII. How to make a Water ball, which, after a certain time of firing,
shall cast forth diverse rockets into the air.
PRepare a ball of wood, of eight inches diameter, and boar a hole in the
midst (of an inch and a half) and let it come within one inch of the bottom,
and round about that great hole you shall boar eight smaller holes of an inch,
so that they may be fit for eight rockets; these holes shall be an inch from
the greater, and shall all meet in one at the bottom; wherefore you shall cut
off the bottom of the ball, and fit another to it, which may be so hollowed,
that your mixture may be conveyed to all the rockets, then fasten on the bottom
(having filled it with your mixture) and put in your rockets, with the mouth of
each rocket downward, pasting paper round about it, which shall be coated with
rosin and tallow, and over each hole where the rockets are placed, let it be
soaped over the tallow, to the end that being fired, the sparks may not easily
take fire of the paper, which otherwise would make some confusion; having done
this, fit in a piece of wood to the greater boar of your ball, leaving only a
smaller vent, of half an inch, and by this means the fire will come out with
more violence, and having spent it self, within one inch of the bottom, it
shall fire the eight rockets placed about, which by their force shall break the
paper of each, and ascend into the air, a small height, and after lie
tumbling on the water. This ball is represented in the twelfth figure by the
letter D.

A the place of firing the ball. B B the piece of wood put in to lessen the
vent. C the greater hollow to be filled with the slow composition as the
former. D D the bottom, which is loose, and to be hollowed to receive part of
the slow mixture. E E the holes boared to put in the rockets, which must be
covered with paper. F F the rockets placed in, with their mouths downward. G G
the place of fitting the rockets.
CHAP. LIVE. Another sort of water ball, which shall cast forth rockets at two
sundry times, and after it is finished, shall give a great report.
THis ball shall be made after the manner of the other, but shall be a foot in
diameter, and shall have two circles of rockets placed round about, so that the
lower circle shall be one inch from the higher, and likewise shall go down into
the ball an inch lower, and under that row of rockets there shall be placed a
breaker of iron, which shall be one inch from the lower tyer, so that the ball
being fired, shall after a certain time, cast forth a dozen of small rockets,
and then continue a while longer, and then in regard of the larger
circumference of that circle, it shall cast forth twenty, and after that is
ended, their fire coming to the chamber of iron, shall cause a very great
report, and so conclude. The form of this is laid down in the fifteenth figure
by the letter H.

H the vent for firing the ball. I I the piece of wood fitted to the greater
boar. K the hollow of the greater boar filled with a slow composition. L L
the upper tyer of rockets. M M the lower tyer of rockets. N the breaker of
iron. o o o o the places to put in the rockets, which must be covered with
paper well soaped, upon tallow.
fig 15th
diagram of water balls

CHAP. LV. Another sort of ball, with iron chambers, every one casting forth a
small ball.
CAuse a ball to be made, of twelve inches diameter, and in the midst boar a
large hole of two inches high, hollowing it within, and let it come within an
inch of the bottom; then boar small holes of an inch from the top to the
bottom, in a spiral line, to put in your small chambers, which shall be made of
iron, each chamber having a broad plate at the mouth to fasten it to the ball;
those chambers shall be laden with a quantity of corn powder, and after that a
small ball made up in canvas, and primed, as I have showed you for stars, then
having filled the large concave with slow composition, place in your chambers,
whose touch holes or vents must be just at the breech, and shall come al in
toward the center of the ball, then coat it round with rosin and tallow, and so
have you this bal finished; the form whereof is represented in the fifteenth
figure, by the letter A.

The first figure marked F, represents the inside of the bal.

F the mouth of it. B B the iron chambers, as they lie with the touch hole or
vent of each chamber, at the breech of the same. C the concave filled with slow
composition. D a large chamber placed at the bottom: note, that this ball must
be made in two pieces, to place in this chamber, and after glewed well, and
bound about with wire.
The second figure marked G, is the bal finished, except the coating.

G the vent at the mouth. B B the reports, with a plate of iron round the mouth
of each, to nail it fast.
This bal being thus provided, must be after covered with canvas, and then
dipped in a mixture of three parts rosin, two parts pitch, and one part tallow,
which must be first incorporated on the fire, and so used: this bal may serve
as well for service in war, as for pleasure or triumph, by putting into each
chamber a bullet of lead, and so shot out of a Mortar piece.

CHAP. LVI. There are diverse other sorts of bals, as well for water as for
land, and are to be shot out of the Mortar piece.
AND because the Mortar piece is often used in Fireworks, I will describe the
manner of it, with the use thereof, as much as is requisite to this place: and
first for the manner; the manner of the Mortar piece consists only in his
proportions, which are diverse, according to the pleasure of the workman; but
those of most use for fire bals, are one and a half, and two diameters, in the
length of the chase, and one diameter in the length of the chamber, with half
a diameter at the mouth of the chamber; the reason of this shortness is, that
one may come the more commodiously to the firing of the ball; the proportion of
this piece follows in the sixteenth Figure.

B is the form of a Mortar piece lying on his carriage, the quoyn being made to
draw with a screw, as I have made use of. A A the diameter or height of the
boar, which is 4 inches, or 100 parts of this scale. A B the length of the
chase, and is two diameters, or 8 inches. B B the height of the chamber, which
is half a diameter of the shot, which is here two inches. B C the length of
the chamber, which is one diameter of the shot, that is four inches. C C the
bottom of the chamber, which is one inch, or diameter. D D the diameter of the
trunions, which is half the diameter of the shot, and is two inches. D E the
length of the trunions, and is two inches.
The proportion of powder for this piece is 2 for a stone shot, and 1 for a
Fire ball.

CHAP. LVII. How to make a ball for the Mortar piece, which shall cast forth a
great shower of stars at the breaking.
THis ball must be made of canvas, and must be so proportioned, that being
armed (as I have formerly showed) it may just fit the chase of your piece,
which being ready, you shall proceed to the filling of it, which must be after
this manner; at the bottom of this ball put in an ounce of fine corn powder,
and then put in some of your round stars well primed, and so fill them up
close about with powder dust, still putting in more of those stars, and in
the midst put figure 16th
diagram of balls for use with a mortar one star which may be somewhat great,
so filling it till you come within one inch of the top, then fill it up with a
slow receipt, as I have formerly prescribed for bals; and sew it close up,
arming it with fine cord, or marline, and pierce a vent in that place where
your slow mixture lies, always provided you pierce it not too deep, that
your ball break not before his appointed time: then when you would use it,
load your mortar piece with one ounce of corn powder, putting after a wadd
and tampion, and put on your ball with the vent toward the mouth of your
piece: so elevating your piece toward the Zenith, you may proceed to the firing
of it, which must be after this manner: provide two matches ready lighted,
having one in each hand, and first fire your ball with one hand, and presently
give fire to your Piece with the other, always holding your head under the
horizontall line of your Piece, for fear the blast annoy you: this having
done, you shall see your ball mount very high, with a fair tail of fire, and
when it is at highest, shall break forth into a goodly shower of stars: one
of these bals will contain almost one hundred small stars. The form of it
is represented in the 16 Fiigure, by the letter G.

C Representing the ball cut in sunder, that you may see the order of the stars
lying. E The great star in the midst, with all the rest placed about it. Note
every one of these stars must be primed through with cotton wicke, as I have
formerly showed. D The slow mixture, which comes within one inch of the top.
CHAP. LVIII. Another sort of ball for the mortar piece, which shall cast forth
diverse Rockets in the air.
THis ball must be made of wood, according as I have formerly showed you, only
it must be made proportionable to the piece, and moreover the vent which in the
other is required to be a slow mixture, in this must be more swift, in regard
it would otherwise continue till it came to the ground, wherefore the mixtute
that this ball shall be filled with, shall be the same that your rockets of one
pound are, which is 4 of coledust to a pound of powder, and one ounce of
saltpeter. These must be well mealed, and likewise must be close driven,
otherwise it will consume too fast. This ball may be made somewhat
cillindricall, in regard of the length of the rockets to be placed in it, as
you have made this for to cast forth once, so you may make another to cast
forth twice, as I have formerly showed you for the water ball. The form is
represented in the 16 Figure, by the letter D.

fig 17th
diagram of fireworks on water in the form of a ship, a mermaid and a castle
with dragon and horseman

CHAP. LIX. How to compose a ship of fire works, which being once fired,
diverse motions shall present themselves.
CAuse a mould to be made so, as you may take off the upper deck, to place
some work; underneath, where you shall have a fire wheel placed with a screw
on the axeltree; this wheel shall be pla^ed in the stern, and shall turn a
rowler, on which shall be two girts placed, which shall pass on each side of
the maine mast, and run on to the foreship; in this wheel there shall be a
hollow spoake and axeltree, as I have formerly showed, which shall be so
ordered, that the wheel being spent, it may convey fire to a tier of gunnes
lying round about, which shall be fired with a close conveyance, and having
passed that, it shall take hold of another conveyance, which shall give fire to
certain rockets, being placed in the bodies of some figures representing
Mariners, and shall be so fitted, that they may have a cane joined to the body
to guide them, so that they may run up from the top of the deck, to the top
of each mast: this and many the like may be performed with great facility. The
form of this is represented in the 16 figure A.

A Represents the ship ready finished, with all things in motion. B The fire
wheel which moves the rowler, and carries the girt whereon the figures are
placed. C The figures placed on the girt being in motion. D D D D The tier of
guns which fire as the wheel begins to stand still. E E The figures which
stand ready to run up the cords; also you may see some in their motion half
way, and others being got up to the top of the masts.
CHAP. LX. How to make the Siren or Mermaid, playing on the water.
THis is to be formed diverse ways, according to the magnitude of the figure;
if you will make one of an ordinary length, which is five or six foot, proceed
as follows: Let the body be made of light rods, such as basket-makers use,
and in the center of the body, let there be placed an axeltree, having too
wheels coming into the water; yet so as they may not be seen; these wheels
must be made hollow, to contain a quantity of sand or water; the use of it is
to keep the Sirene upright, and also to sink it so far into the water as is
needful, and likewise to make it go more steady; note that these wheels must
be loose, and the axeltree fast; in the midst of this axeltree, place three or
four great rockets, one by another with their mouths all one way, yet so
provide, that there may be such a distance between each rocket, that there may
come a vent from the tail of the first, to the mouth of the second, and from
the second to the third, and to the end that it may continue the longer in
motion, you may place diverse lights about the body, to make it more beautiful;
every of each light extinguishing, shall give a report, and so conclude. The
form of this is represented in the 17. Figure by the letter B.

B Represents a Siren on the water. C The wheels which are loose on the
axeltree, being hollow, and filled half with sand or water. D D The rockets
placed in the axeltree which is fast.
There are many other works to be performed on the water, by manual art, or
the help of the hand: some of which I will show, the rest I shall leave to the
judgment of judicious workmen in that art; in regard there are sea fights,
which are performed by galleys placed on the water, with the help of Mariners
acted; and likewise Castles placed both on the water, and on the shore; all
which do represent some former story of the like: yet know this, there are
many motions, to be wrought by hand, after a more secret manner, which will
cause more admiration, and is done by certain lines placed under the
superficies of the water, the ground of which I will show you.

CHAP. LXI. How to represent a Dragon issuing out of a Castle, which shall
swim through the water, and be incountred by a horseman from the shore.
CAuse a Castle to be made on certain timber, so as it may flote, if it be in
a flowing and ebbing water, and let the bottom of the door of this Castle,
with the ground plat, be two foot under the horizon of the water (the reasons
follow) and at a foot high within the Castle, let there be a certain line
tied, which may pass through the body of the Dragon, and may be fastened near
the shore, where you shall have a floate likewise sunk so far under water,
that the line may not be perceived, then fasten on your Dragon, as I have
formerly showed you for the line, but so that the head of this may always be
above the line, where that was under: then when the time appointed comes, there
shall be one ready within the Castle to fire those parts of the Dragon which is
requisite, which being done by the help of those pullies, shall pass it
through the water, which so soon as it presents it self, Neptune (as being
displeased to see so monstrous a creature within his bounds) shall come and
encounter the said Dragon, page 66 and 67
foldout of a diagram combining multiple types of pyrotechnics previously
described and at last shall overthrow him: you may order your work so, that
which you please shall have the victory, for that which keeps fire longest,
is supposed to have the best, and that which is soonest spent, to have the
worst. Many rare things may be done in this for the pleasure of Princes, which
are to be acted on the water, which for brevity sake I omit: only I shall show
you the order of composing two sorts of works, the one to be acted on the
land, the other on the water. The form of this work is represented in the 17
Figure, by the letters C D.

G Representing the Castle floating on the water, out of which the Dragon
issues. E The Dragon coming forth of the Castle. D Neptune coming toward
the said Dragon to encounter him. F The pully which causes these motions by
means of drawing them to and from each other: the manner of fastening the line
for drawing them, I have showed you before in the 33 Chapter.
CHAP. LXII. An order for a general piece of fire-worke for land, and is for
the pleasure of a Prince or some great person.
CAuse a frame to be made of wood, which let be eight square, or more properly
eight sided (which is the best figure for this purpose) and let it be forty
yards from one side to the other, there place two Castles the one opposite to
the other, which Castles shall be eight foot square, these Castles shall be
fitted with motions, as I have formerly showed you, some coming out against
others, some moving on the walls; all which may be performed by the help of
large fire wheels, which must be at the least six foot diameter, with large
Rockets for the same purpose, as I have formerly showed you: then on the four
adjacent sides, you shall place four other wheels, two running horizontall,
and two vertical; and on the other two sides you shall place rockets, some
flying upright, and others circular; at each angle or corner, there shall be
placed a torch of a beautiful fire and slow; so much for the sides: now you
shall come to fill up the vacuum between the sides, always noting that from
one Castle to the other, passes a frame of wood, the use whereof I have
formerly showed, then before the midst of this frame, there is placed on the
one side, two square cases of rockets, and between these cases toward the
bottom, and somewhat before, there is placed anticke motions, and to the
angles of each Castle are placed two lines, with runners which take fire, and
pass to and fro; note the end of those lines must be perfect wire, or else the
fire would burn them, then on the same side behind the motions, shall stand
aloft a frame with the Kings name or the like; then on the other side of the
frame, within the vacuum, shall be placed three standing wheels, whereof the
one shall cast forth rockets into the air, the other two are for reports and
fisgigs; these three wheels shall stand in a triangular form, and shall have
a frame pass from the one to the other; and between the angles of these
wheels, shall be placed two mortar pieces, which shall be to cast fire bats,
with diverse works in them. The manner of this is represented in the 18 Figure.

CHAP. LXIII. Another order for a general work, and is to be acted on the
water.
HAving a place appointed for your work, (which must be in some spacious
River) you shall seek the most convenient place on the shore for placing a
Castle, which shall be made to represent some City or Fort lying on the water;
this Castle shall be furnished with all manner of works, as well fire bals, as
rockets, with diverse small Ordnance to give a more grace to the work; this
being provided, you shall also make another Castle on the water, on certain
boats chained and lying at anchor, these shall be set at a reasonable distance
from the other, about twenty score, or as your place will permit: in this
Castle likewise you shall provide works, as in the other, only this Castle
may not be so big as that on shore, then you shall provide diverse small ships,
which shall be ready to make a sea fight: these shall be so divided, that the
greater part may belong to the smaller Castle on the water, and likewise for
surprising that on the land; likewise you may have motions passing from one
Castle to another, as I have formerly showed you for the water; amongst the
rest you shall have some small fire ship, such as I have showed you, which
shall have diverse motions: now there are many actions to be performed by these
works, as casting bals from one Castle to the other, with the mortar pieces,
likewise sending back rockets to each other, with diverse onsets on each side
for surprisals, all which I leave to the discretion and appointment of the
judicious workman; and because I will not trouble you with prolixity, I will
conclude this my Pyrotechnia; only I will at last impart that which is not the
least, which is the making of certain Engines for trying of powder, of which I
shall show you four, with the use of them in the ensuing Chapters, and so
conclude.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the use of certain Engines for the trying of the goodness or
strength of powder.
BEfore I come to explain the manner of making those Engines, I will show you
the commodiousnesse of them, especially in these works; for he that will make
a good rocket, must be certain of the strength of his powder, which if it be
too strong, will break; if too weak, it will not rise to that height it
should; which, I must confess, has been a great loss of labor to me, as
well as to other men, yet if men will be so careful and take that pains for
the trying their powder, they may make rockets infallible; therefore I advise
every man that will work sure, first to take his powder, be it what it will,
and allay it according to the rules prescribed, then take a quantity of that
mixture, and put it into your Engine being exactly weighed to a grain, then
drive your rocket, and be sure to follow the former rules prescribed in driving
your rockets, which being finished, with his works upon his head, you may fire
it, which if you shall find to be too violent, you may allay by putting
thereto a proportion of coal, and so try it again, till such time you find it
to be the best, then note that proportion for all rockets of that size, and so
do for all others; and if you find your mixture yet too weak, add thereto a
small quantity of roch peter till you make it of sufficient strength; and thus
doing, you shall have a certain and infallible rule for your proportions: I
could set down the proportions according to my Engines, but that would prove an
absurdity, in regard every Engine may have a greater or lesser strength added to
his springs, or the like, as you shall perceive in the next Chapter.

CHAP. LXV. The manner of making the aforesaid Engines for trying the strength
of powder.
THE first is made in a circular form, with a neck coming from the
circumference, which serves for a lid to the powder box, which box shall be
made to hold the quantity of a dram of powder, or there about, so that being
covered with the lid, and fired, will blow, according to the strength of the
powder, and moving, will turn about a circle of brass, which is divided into
certain equal parts, and so will show the strength according to the part it
cutteth; for the greater the degree is that it is blown fig 20
diagram of engines for determing the strength of powder up to, the stronger is
the powder, and contrary. The form of this is represented in the twentieth
Figure, by the letter A.

A representing the form of the whole Engine. B the powder box, which must be
filled to the top. C the lid, which must be put on the said box, it being
filled. D the circle of brass to which the lid is fastened, which is divided
into degrees, and runs upon the pin E, passing through the center, with a
screw to set it harder or easier.
CHAP. LXVI. Another Engine for trying of powder.
THE lid of this second sort is made to rise in a straight line, and has for
his guide two square pillars of brass, divided into degrees, with springs to
keep it steaddy in this motion; this must be made on a square piece of brass,
with the small box in the midst, and two square pillars on each side, with a
piece of brass to slide up and down by those pillars, and must serve for a
cover for your powder box; this piece of brass must have small springs, which
must go to each side of the square to guide it steaddy in the motion. The form
whereof you shall find in the twentieth Figure, by the letter B.

B the whole frame, with his parts adjoined. C the square plate of brass, on
which all is fastened. D the powder box, standing in the midst of that plate. E
E the two square pillars of brass, standing on this foot, and may be made to
screw off and on at pleasure. F the lid to the fire box, which is made to slide
up the two square pillars. G G the springs, which are fastened to the lid, to
make it move more steaddy. The divisions 10, 20, etc. show of what strength the
powder is, for the higher that the lid rises, the stronger is the powder.
CHAP. LXVII. A third Engine for trying the strength of powder.
THE third sort are made somewhat after the manner of the former, which is to
rise up straight, only it has a cover hollow as big as the box, and on each
side of the cover is a small hole for a wire to pass through, and on one of the
sides are little pieces of steel or brass, so fitted, that they will rise
with a touch, and give way to the rising of the lid, and so soon as it is past,
will hold it there, and will not suffer it to pass down any further; this I
hold to be the best of the three, in regard that the springs in the former are
subject to grow foul with use, and so will be very stiff, every time more and
more; but this will not. The form of this is represented in the twentieth
Figure, by the letter C.

A the foot whereon the Engine stands. B the powder box, which has two small
wyers passing from each side to the top, to guide the lid. D the lid, which
has also two holes on each side for the wyers to pass through. E the side
which is divided, on which is placed at every degree, one of those pieces to
slide up and catch the lid. F F the form of those catches, being either of
steel or brass. G G the two wyers which guide the lid of the box, and must
be put into a little piece of brass at the top, which may be screwed higher
or lower at pleasure, for the straightning of the same. H the screw which
straightneth those wyers.
CHAP. LXVIII. Another Engine for trying the strength of powder by water.
THE fourth, and most certainest way of all, is by water, and is thus; cause a
small vessel to be made of brass, and very tight, so as it may contain a
pint of water; let this vessel be made in a cillindricall form, and from the
top of this vessel let there be made a pipe of brass, which shall turn like
the siphon, and shall have a screw at the lower end, to screw into a box of
brass; all which shall stand on a wooden frame: now when you will use this,
you shall fill this great vessel half full of water, at a pipe which shall come
from the bottom, and come up to the top winding, then shall there be likewise
another vessel underneath for a receiver, so that putting a quantity of powder
into the small box, and screwing it on, it is ready; then fire the powder, and
you shall see it send forth a quantity of water, which you shall weigh, and so
keep the weight of it, by this you shall know what quantity of powder of such a
goodness will send forth such a quantity of water; this I hold to be the
certainest way, although the most troublesome. The form of it is represented in
the twentieth Figure, by the letter D.

A representing the vessel of water, which shall be always filled one half.
B the pipe of brass which passes from the powder box to the vessel of water.
C the powder box, being screwed to one end of the said pipe. E the receiver, to
receive such water as is forced out. G the pipe which conveyeth that water into
the receiver. F the bottom being of wood, with a plate of brass let into it.
FINIS.

