THE ESSAYS OR COVNSELS, CIVIL AND MORAL, OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM, VISCOUNT
St. ALBAN.

Newly written.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for HANNA BARRET. 1625.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD Lo. THE DVKE of Buckingham his Grace, Lo.
High Admiral of England.
EXCELLENT LO.
SOLOMON says; A good Name is as a precious ointment; And I assure my self,
such will your Graces Name be, with Posterity. For your Fortune, and Merit
both, have been Eminent. And you have planted Things, that are like to last. I
do now publish my Essays; which, of all my other works, have been most
Current: For that, as it seems, they come home, to Men's Business, and
Bosoms. I have enlarged them, both in Number, and Weight; So that they are
indeed a New Work. I thought it therefore agreeable, to my Affection, and
Obligation to your Grace, to prefix your Name before them, both in English, and
in Latin. For I do conceive, that the Latin Volume of them, (being in the
Universal Language) may last, as long as Books last. My Jnstauration, I
dedicated to the King: My History of HENRY the Seventh, (which I have now also
translated into Latin) and my Portions of Natural History, to the Prince: And
these I dedicate to your Grace; Being of the best Fruits, that by the good
Increase, which God gives to my Pen and Labors, I could yield. God lead your
Grace by the Hand.

Your Graces most Obliged and faithful Servant, FR. St. ALBAN.

The Table.
1 OF Truth. Page 1 2 Of Death. 6 3 Of Unity in Religion. 10 4 Of Revenge. 19
5 Of Adversity. 22 6 Of Simulation and Dissimulation. 25 7 Of Parents and
Children. 32 8 Of Marriage and Single Life. 36 9 Of Envy. 40 10 Of Love. 50 11
Of Great Place. 54 12 Of Boldness. 62 13 Of Goodness, and Goodness of
Nature. 66 14 Of Nobility. 72 15 Of Seditions and Troubles. 76 16 Of Atheism.
90 17 Of Superstition. 96 18 Of Travail. 100 19 Of Empire. 105 20 Of Counsel.
115 21 Of Delays. 125 22 Of Cunning. 127 23 Of Wisdom for a Man's Self. 135
24 Of Innouations. 139 25 Of Dispatch. 142 26 Of Seeming Wise. 146 27 Of
Friendship. 149 28 Of Expense. 164 29 Of the true Greatness of Kingdoms and
Estates. 167 30 Of Regiment of Health. 187 31 Of Suspicion. 191 32 Of
Discourse. 194 33 Of Plantations. 198 34 Of Riches. 205 35 Of Prophecies. 212
36 Of Ambition. 218 37 Of Maskes and Triumphs. 223 38 Of Nature in Men. 227 39
Of Custom and Education. 231 40 Of Fortune. 235 41 Of Usury. 239 42 Of Youth
and Age. 247 43 Of Beauty. 251 44 Of Deformity. 254 45 Of Building. 257 46 Of
Gardens. 266 47 Of Negotiating. 280 48 Of Followers and Friends. 284 49 Of
Sutours. 288 50 Of Studies. 292 51 Of Faction. 296 52 Of Ceremonies and
Respects. 300 53 Of Praise. 304 54 Of Vainglory. 308 55 Of Honor and
Reputation. 312 56 Of Judicature. 316 57 Of Anger. 325 58 Of Vicissitude of
Things. 329
Of Truth. I.
WHAT is Truth; said jesting Pilate; And would not stay for an Answer.
Certainly there be, that delight in Giddiness; And count it a Bondage, to fix
a Belief; Affecting Free Will in Thinking, as well as in Acting. And though
the Sects of Philosophers of that Kind be gone, yet there remain certain
discoursing Wits, which are of the same veins, though there be not so much
Blood in them, as was in those of the Ancients. But it is not only the
Difficulty, and Labor, which Men take in finding out of Truth; Nor again,
that when it is found, it imposes upon men's Thoughts; that does bring Lies in
favor: But a natural, though corrupt Love, of the Lie it self. One of the
later School of the Grecians, examineth the matter, and is at a stand, to
think what should be in it, that men should love Lies; Where neither they make
for Pleasure, as with Poets; Nor for Advantage, as with the Merchant; but for
the Lies sake. But I cannot tell: This same Truth, is a Naked, and Open day
light, that does not show, the Masks, and Mummeries, and Triumphs of the
world, half so Stately, and daintily, as Candlelights. Truth may perhaps come
to the price of a Pearl, that shows best by day: But it will not rise, to
the price of a Diamond, or Carbuncle, that shows best in varied lights. A
mixture of a Lie does ever add Pleasure. Does any man doubt, that if there
were taken out of Men's Minds, Vain Opinions, Flattering Hopes, False
valuations, Imaginations as one would, and the like; but it would leave the
Minds, of a Number of Men, poor shrunken Things; full of Melancholy, and
Indisposition, and unpleasing to themselves? One of the Fathers, in great
Severity, called Poesy, Vinum Daemonum; because it fills the Imagination,
and yet it is, but with the shadow of a Lie. But it is not the Lie, that
passes through the Mind, but the Lie that sinketh in, and setleth in it, that
does the hurt, such as we spoke of before. But howsoever these things are thus,
in men's depraved Judgments, and Affections, yet Truth, which only does judge
it self, teaches, that the Inquiry of Truth, which is the Loue-making, or
Wooing of it; The knowledge of Truth, which is the Presence of it; and the
Belief of Truth, which is the Enjoying of it; is the Sovereign Good of humane
Nature. The first Creature of God, in the works of the Days, was the Light of
the Sense; The last, was the Light of Reason; And his Sabbath Work, ever
since, is the Illumination of his Spirit. First he breathed Light, upon the
Face, of the Matter or Chaos; Then he breathed Light, into the Face of Man; and
still he breaths and inspireth Light, into the Face of his Chosen. The Poet,
that beautified the Sect, that was otherwise inferior to the rest, says yet
excellently well: It is a pleasure to stand upon the shore, and to see ships
tossed upon the Sea: A pleasure to stand in the window of a Castle, and to see a
Battle, and the Adventures thereof, below: But no pleasure is comparable, to
the standing, upon the vantage ground of Truth: (A hill not to be commanded,
and where the Air is always clear and serene;) And to see the Errors, and
Wanderings, and Mists, and Tempests, in the vale below: So always, that this
prospect, be with Pity, and not with Swelling, or Pride. Certainly, it is
Heaven upon Earth, to have a Man's Mind Move in Charity, Rest in Providence,
and Turn upon the Poles of Truth.

To pass from Theological, and Philosophical Truth, to the Truth of civil
Business; It will be acknowledged, even by those, that practice it not, that
clear and Round dealing, is the Honor of Man's Nature; And that Mixture of
Falsehood, is like Allay in Coin of Gold and Silver, which may make the Metal
work the better, but it embaseth it. For these winding, and crooked courses,
are the Goings of the Serpent; which goes basely upon the belly, and not upon
the Feet. There is no Vice, that does so cover a Man with Shame, as to be found
false, and perfidious. And therefore Mountaigny says prettily, when he
enquired the reason, why the word of the Lie, should be such a Disgrace, and
such an Odious Charge? Says he, If it be well weighed, To say that a man
lies, is as much to say, as that he is brave toward God, and a Coward toward
men. For a Lie faces God, and shrinkes from Man. Surely the Wickedness of
Falsehood, and Breach of Faith, cannot possibly be so highly expressed, as in
that it shall be the last Peale, to call the Judgments of God, upon the
Generations of Men, It being foretold, that when Christ comes, He shall not
find Faith upon the Earth.

Of Death. II.
MEn fear Death, as Children fear to go in the dark: And as that Natural
Fear in Children, is increased with Tales, so is the other. Certainly, the
Contemplation of Death, as the wages of sin, and Passage to another world, is
Holy, and Religious; But the Fear of it, as a Tribute due unto Nature, is
weak. Yet in Religious Meditations, there is sometimes, Mixture of Vanity,
and of Superstition. You shall read, in some of the Friars Books of
Mortification, that a man should think with himself, what the Pain is, if he
have but his Fingers end Pressed, or Tortured; And thereby imagine, what the
Pains of Death are, when the whole Body, is corrupted and dissolved; when many
times, Death passes with less pain, then the Torture of a Limme: For the
most vital parts, are not the quickest of Sense. And by him, that spoke only
as a Philosopher, and Natural Man, it was well said, Pompa Mortis magis
terret, quam Mors ipsa Groans and Conuulsions, and a discolored Face, and
Friends weeping, and Blackes, and Obsequies, and the like, show Death Terrible.
It is worthy the observing, that there is no passion in the mind of man, so
weak, but it Mates, and Masters, the Fear of Death: And therefore Death, is
no such terrible Enemy, when a man has so many Attendants, about him, that
can win the combat of him. Revenge triumphs over Death; Love slights it;
Honor aspireth to it; Grief flies to it; Fear pre-occupateth it; Nay we
read, after Otho the Emperor had slain himself, Pity (which is the
tenderest of Affections) provoked many to die, out of mere compassion to their
Sovereign, and as the truest sort of Followers. Nay Seneca adds Niceness and
Saciety; Cogita quam diu eadem feceris; Mori velle, non tantum Fortis, aut
Miser, sed etiam Fastidiosus potest. A man would die, though he were neither
valiant, nor miserable, only upon a weariness to do the same thing, so often
over and over. It is no less worthy to observe, how little Alteration, in good
Spirits, the Approaches of Death make; For they appear, to be the same Men,
till the last Instant. Augustus Caesar died in a Complement; Liuia, Coniugij
nostri memor, viue and vale. Tiberius in dissimulation; As Tacitus says of
him; Iam Tiberium Vires, and Corpus, non Dissimulatio, deserebant. Vespasian in
a lest; Sitting upon the Stool, Vt puto Deus fio. Galba with a Sentence; Feri,
si ex re sit populi Romani; Holding forth his Neck. Septimius Seuerus in
dispatch; Adeste, si quid mihi restat agendum. And the like. Certainly, the
Stoikes bestowed too much cost upon Death, and by their great preparations,
made it appear more fearful. Better says he, Qui Finem Vitae extremum inter
Munera ponat Naturae. It is as Natural to die, as to be borne; And to a little
Infant, perhaps, the one, is as painful, as the other. He that dies in an
earnest Pursuit, is like one that is wounded in hot Blood; who, for the time,
scarce feels the Hurt; And therefore, a Mind fixed, and bent upon somewhat,
that is good, does auert the Dolors of Death: But above all, believe it, the
sweetest Canticle is, Nunc dimittis; when a Man has obtained worthy Ends, and
Expectations. Death has this also; That it opens the Gate, to good Fame, and
extinguisheth Envy.

-- Extinctus amabitur idem. Of Unity in Religion. III.
REligion being the chief Band of humane Society, it is a happy thing, when it
self, is well contained, within the true Band of Unity. The Quarrels, and
Divisions about Religion, were Evils unknown to the Heathen. The Reason was,
because the Religion of the Heathen, consisted rather in Rites and Ceremonies;
then in any constant Belief. For you may imagine, what kind of Faith theirs
was, when the chief Doctors, and Fathers of their Church, were the Poets. But
the true God has this Attribute, That he is a Jealous God; And therefore, his
worship and Religion, will endure no Mixture, nor Partner. We shall therefore
speak, a few words, concerning the Unity of the Church; What are the Fruits
thereof; what the Bounds; And what the Means?

The Fruits of Unity (next unto the well Pleasing of God, which is All in All)
are two; The One, toward those, that are without the Church; The Other,
toward those, that are within. For the Former; It is certain, that Heresies,
and Schisms, are of all others, the greatest Scandals; yea more then
Corruption of Manners. For as in the Natural Body, a Wound or Solution of
Continuity, is worse then a Corrupt Humor; So in the Spiritual. So that
nothing, does so much keep Men out of the Church, and drive Men out of the
Church, as Breach of Unity: And therefore, whenever it comes to that pass,
that one says, Ecce in Deserto; Another says, Ecce in penetralibus; That is,
when some Men seek Christ, in the Conuenticles of Heretics, and others, in an
Outward Face of a Church, that voice had need continually to sound in Men's
Ears, Nolite exire, Go not out. The Doctor of the Gentiles (the Propriety of
whose Vocation, drew him to have a special care of those without) says; If an
Heathen come in, and hear you speak with several Tongues, Will he not say
that you are mad? And certainly, it is little better, when Atheists, and
profane Persons, do hear of so many Discordant, and Contrary Opinions in
Religion; It does auert them from the Church, and makes them, To sit down in
the chair of the Scorners. It is but a light Thing, to be Vouched in so
Serious a Matter, but yet it expresses well the Deformity. There is a Master
of Scoffing; that in his Catalogue of Books, of a feigned Library, sets Down
this Title of a Book; The morris dance of Heretics. For indeed, every Sect
of them, has a Diverse Posture, or Cringe by themselves, which cannot but Move
Derision, in Worldlings, and Depraved Politickes, who are apt to contemn Holy
Things.

As for the Fruit toward those that are within; It is Peace; which contains
infinite Blessings: It establishes Faith; It kindles Charity; The outward
Peace of the Church, Distilleth into Peace of Conscience; And it turns the
Labors, of Writing, and Reading of Controversies, into Treaties of
Mortification, and Devotion.

Concerning the Bounds of Unity; The true Placing of them, imports
exceedingly. There appear to be two extremes. For to certain Zelants all
Speech of Pacification is odious. Is it peace Iehu? What have thou to do with
peace? turn thee behind me. Peace is not the Matter, but Following and Party.
Contrariwise, certain Laodiceans, and Lukewarm Persons, think they may
accommodate Points of Religion, by Middle Ways, and taking part of both; And
witty Reconcilements; As if they would make an Arbitrament, between God and
Man. Both these Extremes are to be avoided; which will be done, if the League
of Christians, penned by our Savior himself, were in the two cross Clauses
thereof, soundly and plainly expounded; He that is not with us, is against us:
And again; He that is not against us, is with us: That is, if the Points
Fundamental and of Substance in Religion, were truly discerned and
distinguished, from Points not merely of Faith, but of Opinion, Order, or good
Intention. This is a Thing, may seem to many, a Matter triuiall, and done
already: But if it were done less partially, it would be embraced more
generally.

Of this I may give only this Advice, according to my small Model. Men ought
to take heed, of rending Gods Church, by two kinds of Controversies. The one
is, when the Matter of the Point controuerted, is too small and light, not
worth the Heat, and Strife about it, kindled only by Contradiction. For, as it
is noted by one of the Fathers; Christ's Coat, indeed, had no seame: But the
Churches Vesture was of diverse colors; whereupon he says, In vest varietas
sit, Scissura non sit; They be two Things, Unity, and Uniformity. The other is,
when the Matter of the Point Controuerted is great; but it is driven to an
ouer-great Subtilty, and Obscurity; So that it becomes a Thing, rather
Ingenious, then Substantial. A man that is of Judgment and understanding,
shall sometimes hear Ignorant Men differ, and know well within himself, that
those which so differ, mean one thing, and yet they themselves would never
agree. And if it come so to pass, in that distance of Judgment, which is
between Man and Man; Shall we not think, that God above, that knows the
Heart, does not discern, that frail Men, in some of their Contradictions,
intend the same thing; and accepts of both? The Nature of such Controversies,
is excellently expressed, by St. Paul, in the Warning and Precept, that he
gives, concerning the same, Deuita profanas vocum Nouitates, and Oppositiones
falsi Nominis Scientiae. Men create Oppositions, which are not; And put them
into new terms, so fixed, as whereas the Meaning ought to govern the Term,
the Term in effect governs the Meaning. There be also two false Peaces, or
Unities; The one, when the Peace is grounded, but upon an implicit ignorance;
For all Colors will agree in the Dark: The other, when it is peeced up, upon
a direct Admission of Contraries, in Fundamental Points. For Truth and
Falsehood, in such things, are like the Iron and Clay, in the toes of
Nabucadnezars Image; They may Cleave, but they will not Incorporate.

Concerning the Means of procuring Unity; Men must beware, that in the
Procuring, or Muniting, of Religious Unity, they do not Dissolve and Deface
the Laws of Charity, and of humane Society. There be two Swords amongst
Christians; the Spiritual, and Temporal; And both have their due Office, and
place, in the maintenance of Religion. But we may not take up the Third sword,
which is Mahomets Sword, or like unto it; That is, to propagate Religion, by
Wars, or by Sanguinary Persecutions, to force Consciences; except it be in
cases of Ouert Scandal, Blasphemy, or Intermixture of Practice, against the
State; Much less to Nourish Seditions; To Authorize Conspiracies and
Rebellions; To put the Sword into the Peoples Hands; And the like; Tending to
the Subversion of all Government, which is the Ordinance of God. For this is,
but to dash the first Table, against the Second; And so to consider Men as
Christians, as we forget that they are Men. Lucretius the Poet, when he beheld
the Act of Agamemnon, that could endure the Sacrificing of his own Daughter,
exclaimed; Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum.

What would he have said, if he had known of the Massacre in France, or the
Powder Treason of England? He would have been, Seven times more Epicure and
Atheist, then he was. For as the temporal Sword, is to be drawn, with great
circumspection, in Cases of Religion; So it is a thing monstrous, to put it
into the hands of the Common People. Let that be left unto the Anabaptists,
and other Furies. It was great Blasphemy, when the Devil said; I will ascend,
and be like the Highest; But it is greater Blasphemy, to personate God, and
bring him in saying; I will descend, and be like the Prince of Darkness; And
what is it better, to make the cause of Religion, to descend, to the cruel and
execrable Actions, of Murdering Princes, Butchery of People, and Subversion of
States, and Governments? Surely, this is to bring Down the Holy Ghost, in
stead of the Liknesse of a Dove, in the Shape of a Vulture, or Raven: And to
set, out of the Bark of a Christian Church, a Flagge of a Barque of Pirates,
and Assassins. Therefore it is most necessary, that the Church by Doctrine and
Decree; Princes by their Sword; And all Learnings, both Christian and Moral,
as by their Mercury Rod; Do Damn and send to Hell, for ever, those Facts and
Opinions, tending to the Support of the same; As has been already in good
part done. Surely in Counsels, Concerning Religion, that Counsel of the Apostle
would be prefixed; Ira hominis non implet Iusticiam Dei. And it was a notable
Observation, of a wise Father, And no less ingenuously confessed; That those,
which held and persuaded, pressure of Consciences, were commonly interessed
therein, themselves, for their own ends.

Of Revenge. IIII.
Revenge is a kind of Wild Justice; which the more Man's Nature runs to, the
more ought Law to weed it out. For as for the first Wrong, it does but offend
the Law; but the Revenge of that wrong, puts the Law out of Office.
Certainly, in taking Revenge, A Man is but even with his Enemy; But in passing
it over, he is Superior: For it is a Princes part to Pardon. And Solomon, I am
sure, says, It is the glory of a Man to pass by an offense. That which is
past, is gone, and Irreuocable; And wise Men have Enough to do, with things
present, and to come: Therefore, they do but trifle with themselves, that
labor in past matters. There is no man, does a wrong, for the wrongs sake. But
thereby to purchase himself, Profit, or Pleasure, or Honor, or the like.
Therefore why should I be angry with a Man, for loving himself better then me?
And if any Man should do wrong, merely out of ill nature, why? yet it is but
like the Thorn, or Bryar, which prick, and scratch, because they can do no
other. The most Tolerable Sort of Revenge, is for those wrongs which there is
no Law to remedy: But then, let a man take heed, the Revenge be such, as there
is no law to punish: Else, a Man's Enemy, is still before hand, And it is two
for one. Some, when they take Revenge, are Desirous the party should know,
whence it comes: This is the more Generous. For the Delight seems to be,
not so much in doing the Hurt, as in Making the Party repent: But Base and
Crafty Cowards, are like the Arrow, that flies in the Dark. Cosmus Duke of
Florence, had a Desperate Saying, against Perfidious or Neglecting Friends, as
if those wrongs were unpardonable: You shall read (says he) that we are
commanded to forgive our Enemies; But you never read, that we are commanded,
to forgive our Friends. But yet the Spirit of Job, was in a better tune; Shall
we (says he) take good at Gods Hands, and not be content to take evil also?
And so of Friends in a proportion. This is certain; That a Man that studieth
Revenge, keeps his own Wounds green, which otherwise would heal, and do
well. Public Reuenges, are, for the most part, Fortunate; As that for the
Death of Caesar; For the Death of Pertinax; for the Death of Henry the Third of
France; And many more. But in private Reuenges it is not so. Nay rather,
Vindicatiue Persons live the Life of Witches; who as they are Mischievous, So
end they Unfortunate.

Of Adversity. V.
IT was an high speech of Seneca, (after the manner of the Stoickes) That the
good things, which belong to Prosperity, are to be wished; but the good things,
that belong to Adversity, are to be admired. Bona Rerum Secundarum, Optabilia;
Aduersarum, Mirabilia. Certainly if Miracles, be the Command over Nature, they
appear most in Adversity. It is yet a higher speech of his, then the other,
(much too high for a Heathen) It is true greatness, to have in one, the
Frailty of a Man, and the Security of a God. Vere magnum, habere Fragilitatem
Hominis, Securitatem Dei. This would have done better in Poesy; where
Transcendences are more allowed. And the Poets indeed, have been busy with it;
For it is, in effect, the thing, which is figured in that Strange Fiction, of
the Ancient Poets, which seems not to be without mystery; Nay, and to have
some approach, to the State of a Christian: That Hercules, when he went to
unbind Prometheus, (by whom Humane Nature is represented) sailed the length of
the great Ocean, in an Earthen Pot, or Pitcher: Lively describing Christian
Resolution; that saileth, in the frail Bark of the Flesh, through the Waves of
the World. But to speak in a Mean. The Virtue of Prosperity, is Temperance;
The Virtue of Adversity, is Fortitude: which in Morals is the more Heroical
Virtue. Prosperity is the Blessing of the Old Testament; Adversity is the
Blessing of the New; which carries the greater Benediction, and the Clearer
Revelation of Gods Favor. Yet, even in the old Testament, if you Listen to
David's Harp, you shall hear as many Herselike Airs, as Carols: And the
Pencill of the holy Ghost, has labored more, in describing, the Afflictions
of Job, then the Felicities of Solomon. Prosperity is not without many Fears
and Distastes; And Adversity is not without Comforts and Hopes. We see in
Needle-workes, and Imbroideries, It is more pleasing, to have a Lively Work,
upon a Sad and Solemn Ground; then to have a Dark and Melancholy Work, upon
a Lightsome Ground: Judge therefore, of the Pleasure of the Heart, by the
Pleasure of the Eye. Certainly, Virtue is like precious Odours, most fragrant,
when they are incensed, or crushed: For Prosperity does best discover Vice; But
Adversity does best discover Virtue.

Of Simulation And Dissimulation. VI.
DIssimulation is but a faint kind of Policy, or Wisdom; For it asks a
strong Wit, and a strong Heart, to know, when to tell Truth, and to do it.
Therefore it is the weaker Sort of Politics, that are the great Dissemblers.

Tacitus says; Liuia sorted well, with the Arts of her Husband, and
Dissimulation of her Son: Attributing Arts or Policy to Augustus, and
Dissimulation to Tiberius. And again, when Mucianus Encourages Vespasian, to
take Arms against Vitellius, he says; We rise not, against the Piercing
Judgment of Augustus, nor the Extreme Caution or Closeness of Tiberius. These
Properties of Arts or Policy, and Dissimulation or Closeness, are indeed
Habits and Faculties, several, and to be distinguished. For if a Man, have
that Penetration of Judgment, as he can discern, what Things are to be laid
open, and what to be secretted, and what to be showed at Half lights, and to
whom, and when, (which indeed are Arts of State, and Arts of Life, as Tacitus
well calls them) to him, A Habit of Dissimulation, is a Hinderance, and a
Poorness. But if a Man cannot obtain to that Judgment, then it is left to
him, generally, to be Close, and a Dissembler. For where a Man cannot choose,
or vary in Particulars, there it is good to take the safest and wariest Way in
general; Like the Going softly by one that cannot well see. Certainly the
ablest Men, that ever were, have had all an Opennesse, and Francknesse of
dealing; And a name of Certainty, and Veracity; But then they were like Horses,
well managed; For they could tell passing well, when to stop, or turn: And at
such times, when they thought the Case indeed, required Dissimulation, if then
they used it, it came to pass, that the former Opinion, spread abroad of their
good Faith, and Clearness of dealing, made them almost Invisible.

There be three degrees, of this Hiding, and Vailing of a Man's Self. The first
Closeness, Reservation, and Secrecy; when a Man leaves himself without
Observation, or without Hold to be taken, what he is. The second Dissimulation,
in the Negative; when a man lets fall Signs, and Arguments, that he is not,
that he is. And the third Simulation, in the Affirmative; when a Man
industriously, and expressly, faigns, and pretends to be, that he is not.

For the first of these, Secrecy: It is indeed, the Virtue of a Confessor; And
assuredly, the Secret Man, hears many Confessions; For who will open
himself, to a Blab or a Babbler? But if a man be thought Secret, it inuiteth
Discovery; As the more Close Air, sucketh in the more Open: And as in
Confession, the Revealing is not for worldly use, but for the Ease of a Man's
Heart, so Secret Men come to Knowledge of Many Things, in that kind; while Men
rather discharge their Minds, then impart their Minds. In few words,
Mysteries are due to Secrecy. Besides (to say Truth) Nakedness is uncomely, as
well in Mind, as Body; and it adds no small Reverence, to Men's Manners, and
Actions, if they be not altogether Open. As for Talkers and Futile Persons,
they are commonly Vain, and Credulous withal. For He that talks, what he
knows, will also talk, what he knows not. Therefore set it down; That an
Habit of Secrecy, is both Politic, and Moral. And in this Part, it is good,
that a Man's Face, give his Tongue, leave to Speak. For the Discovery, of a
Man's Self, by the Tracts of his Countenance, is a great Weakness, and
Betraying; By how much, it is many times, more marked and believed, then a Man's
words.

For the Second, which is Dissimulation. It follows many times upon Secrecy,
by a necessity: So that, he that will be Secret, must be a Dissembler, in some
degree. For Men are too cunning, to suffer a Man, to keep an indifferent
carriage, between both; and to be Secret, without Swaying the Balance, on
either side. They will so beset a man with Questions, and draw him on, and
pick it out of him, that without an absurd Silence, he must show an
Inclination, one way; Or if he do not, they will gather as much by his
Silence; as by his Speech. As for Equivocations, or Oraculous Speeches, they
cannot hold out long. So that no man can be secret, except he give himself a
little Scope of Dissimulation; which is, as it were, but the Skirts or Train
of Secrecy.

But for the third Degree, which is Simulation, and false Profession; That I
hold more culpable, and less politic; except it be in great and rare
Matters. And therefore a general Custom of Simulation (which is this last
Degree) is a Vice, rising, either of a natural Falsenesse, or Fearfulness;
Or of a Mind, that has some maine Faults; which because a man must needs
disguise, it makes him practice Simulation, in other things, lest his Hand
should be out of ure.

The great Advantages of Simulation and Dissimulation are three. First to lay
asleep Opposition, and to Surprise. For where a Man's Intentions, are
published, it is an Alarm, to call up, all that are against them. The second
is, to reserve to a Man's Self, a fair Retreat: For if a man engage himself,
by a manifest Declaration, he must go through, or take a Fall. The third is,
the better to discover the Mind of another. For to him that opens himself,
Men will hardly show themselves adverse; but will (fair) let him go on, and
turn their Freedom of Speech, to Freedom of thought. And therefore, it is a
good shrewd Proverb of the Spaniard; Tell a lie, and find a Troth. As if
there were no way of Discovery, but by Simulation. There be also three
Disaduantages, to set it even. The first, That Simulation and Dissimulation,
commonly carry with them, a Show of Fearfulness, which in any Business, does
spoil the Feathers, of round flying up to the Mark. The second, that it
pusseth and perplexeth the Conceits of many; that perhaps would otherwise
cooperate with him; and makes a Man walk, almost alone, to his own Ends. The
third, and greatest is, that it depriueth a Man, of one, of the most principal
Instruments for Action; which is Trust and Belief. The best Composition, and
Temperature is, to have Opennesse in Fame and Opinion; Secrecy in Habit;
Dissimulation in seasonable use; And a Power to faigne, if there be no Remedy.

Of Parents and Children. VII.
THe Joys of Parents are Secret; And so are their Griefs, and Fears: They
cannot utter the one; Nor they will not utter the other. Children sweeten
Labors; But they make Misfortunes more bitter: They increase the Cares of
Life; but they mitigate the Remembrance of Death. The Perpetuity by Generation
is common to Beasts; But Memory, Merit, and Noble works, are proper to Men:
And surely a Man shall see, the Noblest works, and Foundations, have proceeded
from Childlesse Men; which have sought to express the Images of their Minds;
where those of their Bodies have failed: So the care of Posterity, is most in
them, that have no Posterity. They that are the first Raisers of their Houses,
are most Indulgent toward their Children; Beholding them, as the Continuance,
not only of their kind, but of their Work; And so both Children, and
Creatures.

The difference in Affection, of Parents, toward their several Children, is
many times unequal; And sometimes unworthy; Especially in the mother; As
Solomon says; A wise son rejoices the Father; but an ungracious son
shames the Mother. A Man shall see, where there is a House full of Children,
one or two, of the Eldest, respected, and the Youngest made wantons; But in the
midst, some that are, as it were forgotten, who, man, times, nevertheless,
prove the best. The Illiberalitie of Parents, in allowance toward their
Children, is an harmefull Error; Makes them base; Acquaints them with Shifts;
Makes them fort with mean Company; And makes them surfeit more, when they come
to Plenty: And therefore, the Proof is best, when Men keep their Authority
toward their Children, but not their Purse. Men have a foolish manner (both
Parents, and Schoolmasters, and Servants) in creating and breeding an
Emulation between Brothers, during Childhood, which many times sorteth to
Discord, when they are Men; And disturbeth Families. The Italians make little
difference between Children, and Nephews, or near Kinsfolks; But so they be
of the Lump, they care not, though they pass not through their own Body.
And, to say Truth, in Nature, it is much a like matter; In so much, that we see
a Nephew, sometimes, resembles an Uncle, or a Kinsman, more then his own
Parent; As the Blood happens. Let Parents choose betimes, the Vocations, and
Courses, they mean their Children should take; For then they are most
flexible; And let them not too much apply themselves, to the Disposition of
their Children, as thinking they will take best to that, which they have most
Mind to. It is true, that if the Affection or Aptness of the Children, be
Extraordinary, then it is good, not to cross it, But generally, the Precept is
good; Optimum elige, suaue and facile illud faciet Consuetudo. Younger Brothers
are commonly Fortunate, but seldom or never, where the Elder are disinherited.

Of Marriage And Single Life. VIII.
HE that has Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune; For they are
Impediments, to great Enterprises, either of Virtue, or Mischief. Certainly,
the best works, and of greatest Merit for the Public, have proceeded from the
unmarried, or Childlesse Men; which, both in Affection, and Means, have
married and endowed the Public. Yet it were great Reason, that those that have
Children, should have greatest care of future times; unto which, they know,
they must transmit, their dearest pledges. Some there are, who though they lead
a Single Life, yet their Thoughts do end with themselves, and account future
Times, Impertinences. Nay, there are some other, that account Wife and
Children, but as Bills of charges. Nay more, there are some foolish rich
covetous Men, that take a pride in having no Children, because they may be
thought, so much the richer. For perhaps, they have heard some talk, Such an
one is a great rich Man, And another except to it; Yea, but he has a great
charge of Children: As if it were an Abatement to his Riches. But the most
ordinary cause of a Single Life, is Liberty; especially, in certain
Selfe-pleasing, and humorous Minds, which are so sensible of every restraint,
as they will go near, to think their Girdles, and Garters, to be Bonds and
Shackles. Unmarried Men are best Friends; best Masters; best Servants; but not
always best Subjects; For they are light to run away; And almost all
Fugitives are of that Condition. A Single Life does well with Church men: For
Charity will hardly water the Ground, where it must first fill a Poole. It is
indifferent for Judges and Magistrates: For if they be facile, and corrupt, you
shall have a Servant, five times worse than a Wife. For Soldiers, I find the
Generals commonly in their Hortatiues, put Men in mind of their Wives and
Children. And I think the Despising of Marriage, amongst the Turks, makes
the vulgar soldier more base. Certainly, Wife and Children, are a kind of
Discipline of Humanity: And single Men, though they be many times more
Charitable, because their Means are less exhaust; yet, on the other side,
they are more cruel, and hard hearted, (good to make severe Inquisitors)
because their Tenderness, is not so often called upon. Grave Natures, led by
Custom, and therefore constant, are commonly loving Husbands; As was said of
Ulysses; Vetulam suam praetulit Immortalitati. Chaste Women are often Proud, and
froward, as Presuming upon the merit of their Chastity. It is one of the best
Bonds, both of Chastity and Obedience, in the Wife, if She think her Husband
Wise; which She will never do, if She find him Jealous. Wives are young Men's
Mistresses; Companions for middle Age; and old Men's Nurses. So as a Man may
have a Quarrel to marry, when he will. But yet, he was reputed one of the wise
Men, that made Answer to the Question; When a Man should marry? A young Man not
yet, an Elder Man not at all. It is often seen, that bad Husbands, have very
good Wives; whether it be, that it rayseth the Price of their Husbands
Kindness, when it comes; Or that the Wives take a Pride, in their Patience.
But this never fails, if the bad Husbands were of their own choosing, against
their Friends consent; For then, they will be sure, to make good their own
Folly.

Of Envy. IX.
THere be none of the Affections, which have been noted to fascinate, or
bewitch, but Love, and Envy. They both have vehement wishes; They frame
themselves readily into Imaginations, and Suggestions, And they come easily
into the Eye; especially upon the presence of the Objects; which are the
Points, that conduce to Fascination, if any such Thing there be. We see
likewise, the Scripture calls Envy, An Evil Eye: And the Astrologers, call
the evil Influences of the Stars, Evil Aspects; So that still, there seems
to be acknowledged, in the Act of Envy, an E^aculation, or Irradiation of the
Eye. Nay some have been so curious, as to note, that the Times, when the
Stroke, or Percussion of an Envious Eye does most hurt, are, when the Party
envied is beheld in Glory, or Triumph; For that sets an Edge upon Envy; And
besides, at such times, the Spirits of the person Envied, do come forth, most
into the outward Parts, and so meet the Blow.

But leaving these Curiosities, (though not unworthy, to be thought on, in fi^
place,) we will handle, what Persons are apt to Envy others; What persons are
most Subject to be Envied themselves; And, What is the Difference between
Public, and private Envy.

A man, that has no virtue in himself, ever enuieth Virtue in others. For
Men's Minds, will either feed upon their own Good, or upon others Evil; And
who wants the one, will prey upon the other; And who so is out of Hope to
attain to another Virtue, will seek to come at even hand, by Depressing an
others Fortune.

A man that is Busy, and Inquisitiue, is commonly Envious: For to know much of
other Men's Matters, cannot be, because all that Ado may concern his own
Estate: Therefore it must needs be, that he takes a kind of plaie-pleasure, in
looking upon the Fortunes of others; Neither can he, that minds but his own
Business, find much matter for Envy. For Envy is a Gadding Passion, and
walks the Streets, and does not keep home; Non est curiosus, quin idem sit
maleuolus.

Men of Noble birth, are noted, to be envious toward New Men, when they rise.
For the distance is altered; And it is like a deceit of the Eye, that when
others come on, they think themselves go back.

Deformed Persons, and Eunuchs, and Old Men, and Bastards, are Envious: For he
that cannot possibly mend his own case, will do what he can to impair
another; Except these Defects light, upon a very brave, and Heroical Nature;
which thinks to make his Natural Wants, part of his Honor: In that it
should be said, that an Eunuch, or a Lame Man, did such great Matters;
Affecting the Honor of a Miracle; as it was in Narses the Eunuch, and
Agesilaus, and Tamberlanes, that were Lame men.

The same, is the Case of Men, that rise after Calamities, and Misfortunes; For
they are, as Men fallen out with the times; And think other Men's Harms, a
Redemption, of their own Sufferings.

They, that desire to excel in too many Matters, out of Leuity, and Vain
glory, are ever Envious; For they cannot want work; It being impossible, but
many, in some one of those Things, should surpass them. Which was the
Character of Adrian the Emperor, that mortally Envied Poets, and Painters, and
Artificers, in Works, wherein he had a vein to excel.

Lastly, near Kinsfolks, and Fellows in Office, and those that have been
bred together, are more apt to Envy their Equals, when they are raised. For it
does vpbraid unto them, their own Fortunes; And points at them, and comes
oftener into their remembrance, and incurreth likewise more into the note of
others: And Envy ever redoubleth from Speech and Fame. Cains Envy, was the more
vile, and Malignant, toward his brother Abel; Because, when his Sacrifice was
better accepted, there was no Body to look on. Thus much for those that are
apt to Envy.

Concerning those that are more or less subject to Envy: First, Persons of
eminent Virtue, when they are advanced, are less envied. For their Fortune
seems but due unto them; and no man Enuieth the Payment of a Debt, but
Rewards, and Liberality rather. Again, Envy is ever joined, with the Comparing
of a Man's Self; And where there is no Comparison, no Envy; And therefore Kings,
are not envied, but by Kings. Nevertheless, it is to be noted, that unworthy
Persons, are most envied, at their first coming in, and afterward overcome it
better; whereas contrariwise, Persons of Worth, and Merit, are most envied, when
their Fortune continues long. For by that time, though their Virtue be the
same, yet it has not the same Luster; For fresh Men grow up, that darken it.

Persons of Noble Blood, are less envied, in their Rising: For it seems, but
Right, done to their Birth. Besides, there seems not much added to their
Fortune; And Envy is as the Sun Beams, that beat hotter, upon a Bank or
steep rising Ground; then upon a Flat. And for the same reason, those that are
advanced by degrees, are less envied, then those that are advanced suddenly,
and per saltum.

Those that have joined with their Honor, great Travels, Cares, or Perils,
are less subject to Envy. For Men think, that they earne their Honors
hardly, and pity them sometimes; And Pity, ever heals Envy: Wherefore, you
shall observe that the more deep, and sober sort of Politic persons, in
their Greatness, are ever bemoaning themselves, what a Life they lead;
Chanting a Quanta patimur. Not that they feel it so, but only to abate the
Edge of Envy. But this is to be understood, of Business, that is laid upon
Men, and not such as they call unto themselves. For Nothing increases Envy
more, then an unnecessary, and Ambitious Engrossing of Business. And nothing
does extinguish Envy more, then for a great Person, to preserve all other
inferior Officers, in their full Rights, and Preheminences, of their Places.
For by that means, there be so many Skreenes between him, and Envy.

Above all, those are most subject to Envy, which carry the Greatness of their
Fortunes, in an insolent and proud Manner: Being never well, but while they are
showing, how great they are, Either by outward Pomp, or by Triumphing over all
Opposition, or Competition; whereas Wise men will rather do sacrifice to Envy;
in suffering themselves, sometimes of purpose to be crossed, and ouerborne in
things, that do not much concern them. Notwithstanding, so much is true; That
the Carriage of Greatness, in a plain and open manner (so it be without
Arrogance, and Vain glory) does draw less Envy, then if it be in a more
crafty, and cunning fashion. For in that course, a Man does but disauow
Fortune; And seems to be conscious, of his own want in worth; And does but
teach others to Envy him.

Lastly, to conclude this Part; As we faid in the beginning, that the Act of
Envy, had somewhat in it, of Witchcraft; so there is no other Cure of Envy, but
the cure of Witchcraft: And that is, to remove the Lot (as they call it) and to
lay it upon another. For which purpose, the wiser Sort of great Persons, bring
in ever upon the Stage, some Body, upon whom to derive the Envy, that would
come upon themselves; Sometimes upon Ministers, and Servants; Sometimes upon
Colleagues and Associates; and the like; And for that turn, there are never
wanting, some Persons of violent and undertaking Natures, who so they may have
Power, and Business, will take it at any Cost.

Now to speak of Public Envy. There is yet some good in Public Envy;
whereas in Private, there is none. For Public Envy is as an Ostracisme, that
eclipseth Men, when they grow too great. And therefore it is a Bridle also to
Great Ones, to keep them within Bounds.

This Envy, being in the Latin word Inuidia, goes in the Modern languages,
by the name of Coffeehouse. Of which we shall speak in handling Sedition.
It is a disease, in a State, like to Infection. For as Infection, spreads
upon that, which is sound, and tainteth it; So when Envy, is gotten once into a
State, it traduceth even the best Actions thereof, and turns them into an ill
Odor. And therefore, there is little won by intermingling of plausible
Actions. For that does argue, but a Weakness, and Fear of Envy, which hurts
so much the more, as it is likewise usual in Infections; which if you fear
them, you call them upon you.

This public Envy, seems to beat chiefly, upon principal Officers, or
Ministers, rather then upon Kings, and Estates themselves. But this is a sure
Rule, that if the Envy upon the Minister, be great, when the cause of it, in
him, is small; or if the Envy be general, in a manner, upon all the Ministers
of an Estate, then the Envy (though hidden) is truly upon the State it self.
And so much of public envy or coffeehouse, and the difference thereof from
Private Envy, which was handled in the first place.

We will add this, in general, touching the Affection of Envy; that of all
other Affections, it is the most importune, and continual. For of other
Affections, there is occasion given, but now and then: And therefore, it was
well said, Inuidia festos dies non agit. For it is ever working upon some, or
other. And it is also noted, that Love and Envy, do make a man pine, which
other Affections do not; because they are not so continual. It is also the
vilest Affection, and the most depraved; For which cause, it is the proper
Attribute, of the Devil, who is called; The Envious Man, that sows tares
amongst the wheat by night. As it always comes to pass, that Enny works
subtly, and in the dark; And to the prejudice of good things, such as is the
Wheat.

Of Love. X.
THe Stage is more beholding to Love, then the Life of Man. For as to the
Stage, Love is ever matter of Comedies, and now and then of Tragedies: But in
Life, it does much mischief: Sometimes like a Siren; Sometimes like a Fury.
You may observe, that amongst all the great and worthy Persons, (whereof the
memory remains, either Ancient or Recent) there is not One, that has been
transported, to the mad degree of Love: which shows, that great Spirits, and
great Business, do keep out this weak Passion. You must except,
nevertheless, Marcus Antonius the half Partner of the Empire of Rome; and
Appius Claudius the Decemuir, and Lawgiver: Whereof the former, was indeed a
Voluptuous Man, and Inordinate; but the latter, was an Austere, and wise man:
And therefore it seems (though rarely) that Love can find entrance, not only
into an open Heart; but also into a Heart well fortified; if watch be not well
kept. It is a poor Saying of Epicurus; Satis magnum Alter Alteri Theatrum
sumus: As if Man, made for the contemplation of Heaven, and all Noble Objects,
should do nothing, but kneel before a little Idol, and make himself
subject, though not of the Mouth (as Beasts are) yet of the Eye; which was
given him for higher Purposes. It is a strange Thing, to note the Excess of
this Passion; And how it braues, the Nature, and value of things; by this, that
the Speaking in a perpetual Hyperbole, is comely in nothing, but in Love.
Neither is it merely in the Phrase; For whereas it has been well said, that
the Arch-flatterer, with whom all the petty Flatterers have Intelligence, is a
Man's Self; Certainly, the Lover is more. For there was never Proud Man,
thought so absurdly well of himself, as the Lover does of the Person loved:
And therefore, it was well said; That it is impossible to love, and to be wise.
Neither does this weakness appear to others only, and not to the Party
Loved; But to the Loved, most of all: except the Love be reciproque. For, it is
a true Rule, that Love is ever rewarded, either with the Reciproque, or with an
inward, and secret Contempt. By how much the more, Men ought to beware of this
Passion, which loses not only other things, but it self. As for the other
losses, the Poets Relation, does well figure them; That he that preferred
Helena, quitted the Gifts of Juno, and Pallas. For whosoever esteems too much
of Amorous Affection, quitteth both Riches, and Wisdom. This Passion, has
his Floods, in the very times of Weakness; which are, great Prosperity; and
great Adversity; though this latter has been less observed. Both which
times kindle Love, and make it more fervent, and therefore show it to be the
Child of Folly. They do best, who, if they cannot but admit Love, yet make it
keep Quarter: And sever it wholly, from their serious Affairs, and Actions of
life: For if it check once with Business, it troubles Men's Fortunes, and
makes Men, that they can, no ways be true, to their own Ends. I know not
how, but Martial Men, are given to Love: I think it is, but as they are given
to Wine; For Perils, commonly ask, to be paid in Pleasures. There is in Man's
Nature, a secret Inclination, and Motion, toward love of others; which, if it
be not spent, upon some one, or a few, does naturally spread it self, toward
many; and makes men become Humane, and Charitable; As it is seen sometime in
Friars. Nuptial love makes Mankind; Friendly love perfecteth it; but Wanton
love Corrupts, and Imbaseth it.

Of Great Place. XI.
MEn in Great Place, are thrice Servants: Servants of the Sovereign or State;
Servants of Fame; and Servants of Business. So as they have no Freedom;
neither in their Persons; nor in their Actions; nor in their Times. It is a
strange desire, to seek Power, and to lose Liberty; Or to seek Power over
others, and to loose Power over a Man's Self. The Rising unto Place is
Laborious; And by Pains Men come to greater Pains; And it is sometimes base;
And by Indignities, Men come to Dignities. The standing is slippery, and the
Regresse, is either a downfall, or at least an Eclipse, which is a Melancholy
Thing. Cum non sis, qui fueris, non esse, cur velis viuere. Nay, retire Men
cannot, when they would; neither will they, when it were Reason: But are
impatient of priuatenesse, even in Age, and Sickness, which require the
Shadow: Like old Townsmen, that will be still sitting at their Street door;
though thereby they offer Age to Scorn. Certainly Great Persons, had need to
borrow other Men's Opinions; to think themselves happy; For if they judge by
their own Feeling; they cannot find it: But if they think with themselves,
what other men think of them, and that other men would feign be as they are,
then they are happy, as it were by report; When perhaps they find the Contrary
within. For they are the first, that find their own Griefs; though they be
the last, that find their own Faults. Certainly, Men in Great Fortunes, are
strangers to themselves, and while they are in the pusle of business, they
have no time to tend their Health, either of Body, or Mind. Illi Mors grauis
incubat, qui notus nimis omnibus, ignotus moritur sibi. In Place, There is
License to do Good, and Evil; whereof the latter is a Curse; For in Evil, the
best condition is, not to will; The Second, not to Can. But Power to do good,
is the true and lawful End of Aspiring. For good Thoughts (though God accept
them,) yet toward men, are little better then good Dreams; Except they be put
in Act; And that cannot be without Power, and Place; As the Vantage, and
Commanding Ground. Merit, and good Works, is the End of Man's Motion; And
Conscience of the same, is the Accomplishment of Man's Rest. For if a Man, can
be Partaker of Gods Theater, he shall likewise be Partaker of Gods Rest. Et
conuersus Deus, vt aspiceret Opera, quae fecerunt manus suae, vidit quod omnia
essent bona nimis; And then the Sabbath. In the Discharge of thy Place, set
before thee the best Examples; For Imitation, is a Globe of Precepts. And after
a time, set before thee, thine own Example; And examine thy self strictly,
whether thou did not best at first. Neglect not also the Examples of those,
that have carried themselves ill, in the same Place: Not to set off thy self,
by taxing their Memory; but to direct thy self, what to avoid. Reform
therefore, without Bravery, or Scandal, of former Times, and Persons; but yet
set it down to thy self, as well to create good Presidents, as to follow
them. Reduce things, to the first Institution, and observe, wherein, and how,
they have degenerate; but yet ask Counsel of both Times; Of the Ancient Time,
what is best; and of the Latter Time, what is fittest. Seek to make thy Course
Regular; that Men may know before hand, what they may expect: But be not too
positive, and peremptory; And express thy self well, when thou digressest
from thy Rule. Preserve the Right of thy Place; but stir not questions of
Jurisdiction: And rather assume thy Right, in Silence, and de facto, then voice
it, with Claims, and Challenges. Preserve likewise, the Rights of Inferior
Places; And think it more Honor to direct in chief, then to be busy in all.
Embrace, and inuit Helps, and Aduices, touching the Execution of thy Place;
And do not drive away such, as bring thee Information, as Medlers; but accept
of them in good part. The vices of Authority are chiefly four: Delays;
Corruption; Roughness; and Facility. For Delays; Give easy Access; Keep
times appointed; Go through with that which is in hand; And interlace not
business, but of necessity. For Corruption; Do not only bind thine own
Hands, or thy Servants hands, from taking; but bind the hands of Sutours also
from offering. For Integrity used does the one; but Integrity professed, and
with a manifest detestation of Bribery, does the other. And avoid not only the
Fault, but the Suspicion. Whosoever is found variable, and changes manifestly,
without manifest Cause, gives Suspicion of Corruption. Therefore, always,
when thou changest thine Opinion, or Course, profess it plainly, and declare
it, together with the Reasons, that move thee to change; And do not think to
steal it. A Servant, or a Favorite, if he be inward, and no other apparent
Cause of Esteem, is commonly thought but a By-way, to close Corruption. For
Roughness; It is a needless cause of Discontent: Severity breeds Fear,
but Roughness breeds Hate. Even Reproves from Authority, ought to be
Grave, and not Taunting. As for Facility; It is worse then Bribery. For Bribes
come but now and then; But if Importunity, or Idle Respects lead a Man, he
shall never be without. As Solomon says; To respect Persons, is not good; For
such a man will transgress for a piece of Bread. It is most true, that was
anciently spoken; A place shows the Man: And it shows some to the better,
and some to the worse: Omnium consensu, capax Imperij, nisi imperasset; says
Tacitus of Galba: but of Vespasian he says; Solus Imperantium Vespasianus
mutatus in melius. Though the one was meant of Sufficiency, the other of
Manners, and Affection. It is an assured Sign, of a worthy and generous
Spirit, whom Honor amends. For Honor is, or should be, the Place of Virtue:
And as in Nature, Things move violently to their Place, and calmely in their
Place: So Virtue in Ambition is violent, in Authority settled and calm. All
Rising to Great Place, is by a winding Staire: And if there be Factions, it is
good, to side a Man's self, whilst he is in the Rising; and to balance
Himself, when he is placed. Use the Memory of thy Predecessor fairly, and
tenderly; For if thou do not, it is a Debt, will sure be paid, when thou art
gone. If thou have Colleagues, respect them, and rather call them, when they
look not for it, then exclude them, when they have reason to look to be
called. Be not too sensible, or too remembering, of thy Place, in Conversation,
and private Answers to Suitors; But let it rather be said; When he sits in
Place, he is another Man.

Of Boldness. XII.
IT is a triuiall Grammar School Text, but yet worthy a wise Man's
Consideration. Question was asked of Demosthenes; What was the Chief Part of
an Orator? He answered, Action; what next? Action; what next again? Action. He
said it, that knew it best; And had by nature, himself, no Advantage, in that
he commended. A strange thing, that that Part of an Orator, which is but
superficial, and rather the virtue of a Player; should be placed so high,
above those other Noble Parts, of Invention, Elocution, and the rest: Nay
almost alone, as if it were All in All. But the Reason is plain. There is in
Humane Nature, generally, more of the Fool, then of the Wise; And therefore
those faculties, by which the Foolish part of Men's Minds is taken, are most
potent. Wonderful like is the Case of Boldness, in Civil Business; What
first? Boldness; What Second, and Third? Boldness. And yet Boldness is a
Child of Ignorance, and Baseness, far inferior to other Parts. But
nevertheless, it does fascinate, and bind hand and foot, those, that are
either shallow in Judgment; or weak in Courage, which are the greatest Part;
Yea and prevails with wise men, at weak times. Therefore, we see it has done
wonders, in Popular States; but with Senates and Princes less; And more ever
upon the first entrance of Bold Persons into Action, then soon after; For
Boldness is an ill keeper of promise. Surely, as there are Mountebanques for
the Natural Body: So are there Mountebanques for the Politic Body: Men that
undertake great Cures; And perhaps have been Lucky, in two or three
Experiments, but want the Grounds of Science; And therefore cannot hold out. Nay
you shall see a Bold Fellow, many times, do Mahomets Miracle. Mahomet made the
People believe, that he would call an Hill to him; And from the Top of it,
offer up his Prayers, for the Obseruers of his Law. The People assembled;
Mahomet called the Hill to come to him, again, and again; And when the Hill
stood still, he was never a whit abashed, but said; If the Hill will not come
to Mahomet, Mahomet will go to the hill. So these Men, when they have promised
great Matters, and failed most shamefully, (yet if they have the perfection of
Boldness) they will but slight it over, and make a turn, and no more ado.
Certainly, to Men of great Judgment, Bold Persons, are a Sport to behold; Nay
and to the Vulgar also, Boldness has somewhat of the Ridiculous. For if
Absurdity be the Subject of Laughter, doubt you not, but great Boldness is
seldom without some Absurdity. Especially, it is a Sport to see, when a Bold
Fellow is out of Countenance; For that puts his Face, into a most Shruncken,
and wooden Posture; As needs it must; For in Bashfulnesse, the Spirits do a
little go and come; but with Bold Men, upon like occasion, they stand at a
stay; Like a Stale at Chesse, where it is no Mate, but yet the Game cannot
stir. But this last, were fitter for a Satyr, then for a serious
Observation. This is well to be weighed; That Boldness is ever blind: For it
sees not dangers, and Inconveniences. Therefore, it is ill in Counsel, good in
Execution: So that the right Use of Bold persons is, that they never Command in
Chief, but be Seconds, and under the Direction of others. For in Counsel, it
is good to see dangers; And in Execution, not to see them, except they be very
great.

Of Goodness And Goodness of Nature. XIII.
I Take Goodness in this Sense, the affecting of the Weal of Men, which is
that the Grecians call Philanthropia; And the word Humanity (as it is used) is
a little too light, to express it. Goodness I call the Habit, and Goodness
of Nature the Inclination. This of all Virtues, and Dignities of the Mind, is
the greatest; being the Character of the Deity: And without it, Man is a
Busy, Mischievous, Wretched Thing; No better then a Kind of Vermin.
Goodness answers to the Theological Virtue Charity, and admits no Excess,
but Error. The desire of Power in Excess, caused the Angels to fall; The
desire of Knowledge in Excess, caused Man to fall; But in Charity, there is no
Excess; Neither can Angel, or Man, come in danger by it. The Inclination to
Goodness, is imprinted deeply in the Nature of Man: In so much, that if it
issue not toward Men, it will take unto Other Living Creatures: As it is seen
in the Turks, a Cruel People, who nevertheless, are kind to Beasts, and give
Alms to Dogs, and Birds: In so much, as Busbechius reports; A Christian Boy
in Constantinople, had like to have been stoned, for gagging, in a
waggishnesse, a long Billed Foul. Errors, indeed, in this virtue of
Goodness, or Charity, may be committed. The Italians have an ungracious
Proverb; Tanto buon che val niente: So good, that he is good for nothing. And
one of the Doctors of Italy, Nicholas Macciauel, had the confidence to put in
writing, almost in plain Terms: That the Christian Faith, had given up Good
Men, in prey, to those, that are Tyrannical, and unjust. Which he spoke,
because indeed there was never Law, or Sect, or Opinion, did so much magnify
Goodness, as the Christian Religion does. Therefore to avoid the Scandal, and
the Danger both; it is good to take knowledge, of the Errors, of an Habit, so
excellent. Seek the Good of other Men, but be not in bondage, to their Faces,
or Fancies, For that is but Facility, or Softness; which takes an honest
Mind Prisoner. Neither give thou Aesops Cock a Gemme, who would be better
pleased, and happier, if he had had a Barley Corn. The Example of God teaches
the Lesson truly: He sends his Rain, and makes his Sun to shine, upon the
Just, and Unjust; But he does not rain Wealth, nor shine Honor, and Virtues,
upon Men equally. Common Benefits, are to be communicate with all; But peculiar
Benefits, with choice. And beware, how in making the Portraiture, thou breakest
the Pattern: For Divinity makes the Love of our Selves the Pattern; The
Love of our Neighbors but the Portraiture. Sell all thou have, and give it to
the poor, and follow me: But sell not all thou have, except thou come, and
follow me; That is, except thou have a Vocation, wherein thou may do as much
good, with little means, as with great: For otherwise, in feeding the
Streams, thou driest the Fountain. Neither is there only a Habit of
Goodness, directed by right Reason; but there is, in some Men, even in Nature,
a Disposition toward it: As on the other side, there is a Natural Malignitie.
For there be, that in their Nature, do not affect the Good of Others. The
lighter Sort of Malignitie, turns but to a Crosnesse, or Frowardness, or
Aprnesse to oppose, or Difficilnesse, or the like; but the deeper Sort, to
Envy, and mere Mischief. Such Men, in other men's Calamities, are, as it were,
in season, and are ever on the loading Part; Not so good as the Dogs, that
licked Lazarus Sores; but like Flies, that are still buzzing, upon any Thing
that is raw; Misanthropi, that make it their Practice, to bring Men, to the
Bough; And yet have never a Tree, for the purpose, in their Gardens, as Timon
had. Such Dispositions, are the very Errors of Humane Nature: And yet they are
the fittest Timber, to make great Politiques of Like to knee Timber, that is
good for Ships, that are ordained, to be tossed; But not for Building houses,
that shall stand firm. The Parts and Signs of Goodness are many. If a Man be
Gracious, and Courteous to Strangers, it shows, he is a Citizen of the World;
And that his Heart, is no Island, cut off from other Lands; but a Continent,
that ioynes to them. If he be Compassionate, toward the Afflictions of others,
it shows that his Heart is like the noble Tree, that is wounded it self, when
it gives the Balm. If he easily Pardons and Remits Offenses, it shows, that
his Mind is planted above Injuries; So that he cannot be shot. If he be
Thankful for small Benefits, it shows, that he weighes Men's Minds, and not
their Trash. But above all, if he have St. Paul's Perfection, that he would wish
to be an Anathema from Christ, for the Salvation of his Brethren, it shows
much of a Divine Nature, and a kind of Conformity with Christ himself.

Of Nobility. XIIII.
WE will speak of Nobility, first as a Portion of an Estate; Then as a
Condition of Particular Persons. A Monarchy, where there is no Nobility at all,
is ever a pure, and absolute Tyranny; As that of the Turks. For Nobility
attempers Sovereignty, and draws the Eyes of the People, somewhat aside from
the Line Royal. But for Democracies, they need it not; And they are commonly,
more quiet, and less subject to Sedition, then where there are Stirps of
Nobles. For Men's Eyes are upon the Business, and not upon the Persons: Or if
upon the Persons, it is for the Business sake, as fittest, and not for Flags
and Pedigree. We see the Switzers last well, notwithstanding their Diversity
of Religion, and of Cautons. For Vtility is their Bond, and not Respects. The
united Provinces of the Low Countries, in their Government, excel: For where
there is an Equality, the Consultations are more indifferent, and the Payments
and Tributes more cheerful. A great and Potent Nobility adds Majesty to a
Monarch, but diminishes Power; And puts Life and Spirit into the People,
but presses their Fortune. It is well, when Nobles are not too great for
Sovereignty, nor for Justice; And yet maintained in that height, as the
Insolency of Inferiors, may be broken upon them, before it come on too fast
upon the Majesty of Kings. A Numerous Nobility, causes Poverty, and
Inconvenience in a State. For it is a Surcharge of Expense; And besides, it
being of Necessity, that many of the Nobility, fall in time to be weak in
Fortune, it makes a kind of Disproportion, between Honor and Means.

As for Nobility in particular Persons; It is a Reverend Thing, to see an
Ancient Castle, or Building not in decay; Or to see a fair Timber Tree, sound
and perfect: How much more, to behold an Ancient Noble Family, which has stood
against the Waves and weathers of Time. For new Nobility is but the Act of
Power; But Ancient Nobility is the Act of Time. Those that are first raised to
Nobility, are commonly more Virtuous, but less Innocent, then their
Descendants: For there is, rarely, any Rising, but by a Commixture, of good and
evil Arts. But it is Reason, the Memory of their virtues, remain to their
Posterity; And their Faults die with themselves. Nobility of Birth, commonly
abateth Industry: And he that is not industrious, enuieth him, that is.
Besides, Noble persons, cannot go much higher; And he that stands at a stay,
when others rise, can hardly avoid Motions of Envy. On the other side, Nobility
extinguisheth the passive Envy, from others toward them; Because they are in
possession of Honor. Certainly Kings, that have Able men of their Nobility,
shall find case in employing them; And a better Slide into their Business:
For People naturally bend to them, as borne in some sort to Command.

Of Seditions And Troubles. XV.
Shepherds of People, had need know the Kalenders of Tempests in State; which
are commonly greatest, when Things grow to Equality; As Natural Tempests are
greatest about the Aequinoctia. And as there are certain hollow Blasts of
Wind, and secret Swellings of Seas, before a Tempest, so are there in States:
-- Ille etiam coecos instare Tumultui
Saepe monet, Fraudesque, and operta tumescere Bella.


Libels, and licentious Discourses against the State, when they are frequent
and open; And in like sort, false News, often running up and down, to the
disadvantage of the State, and hastily embraced; are amongst the Signs of
Troubles. Virgil giving the Pedegre of Fame, says, She was sister to the
Giants Illam Terra Parens ir a irritata Deorum,
Extremam (vt perhibent) Caeo Enceladoque sororem.
Progenuit. --
As if Fames were the Relics of Seditions past; But they are no less,
indeed, the preludes of Seditions to come. Howsoever, he notes it right, that
Seditious Tumults, and Seditious Fames, differ no more, but as Brother and
Sister, Masculine and Feminine; Especially, if it come to that, that the best
Actions of a State, and the most plausible, and which ought to give greatest
Contentment, are taken in ill Sense, and traduced: For that shows the Envy
great, as Tacitus says; Conflata magna Inuidia, seu been, seumale, gesta
premunt. Neither does it follow, that because these Fames, are a sign of
Troubles, that the suppressing of them, with too much Severity, should be a
Remedy of Troubles. For the Despising of them, many times, checks them best;
and the Going about to stop them, does but make a Wonder Long-liued. Also that
kind of Obedience, which Tacitus speaks of, is to be held suspected; Erant
in officio, sed tamen quimallent mandata Imperantium interpretari, quam exequi;
Disputing, Excusing, Cauilling upon Mandates and Directions, is a kind of
shaking off the yoke, and Assay of disobedience: Especially, if in those
disputings, they, which are for the direction, speak fearfully, and tenderly;
And those that are against it, audaciously.

Also, as Macciauel notes well; when Princes, that ought to be Common Parents,
make themselves as a Party, and lean to a side, it is as a Boat that is
overthrown, by uneven weight, on the one Side; As was well seen, in the time
of Henry the third of France. For first, himself entered League for the
Extirpation of the Protestants; and presently after, the same League was turned
upon Himself. For when the Authority of Princes, is made but an Accessory to a
Cause; And that there be other Bands, that tie faster, then the Band of
Sovereignty, Kings begin to be put almost out of Possession.

Also, when Discords, and Quarrels, and Factions, are carried openly, and
audaciously; it is a Sign, the Reverence of Government is lost. For the
Motions of the greatest persons, in a Government, ought to be, as the Motions
of the Planets, under Primum Mobile, (according to the old Opinion:) which is,
That Every of them, is carried swiftly, by the Highest Motion, and softly in
their own Motion. And therefore, when great Ones, in their own particular
Motion, move violently, and, as Tacitus expresses it well, Liberius, quam vt
Imperantium meminissent; It is a Sign, the Orbs are out of Frame. For
Reverence is that, wherewith Princes are girt from God; Who threatens the
dissoluing thereof; Soluam cingula Regum.

So when any of the four Pillars of Government, are mainly shaken, or weakened
(which are Religion, Justice, Counsel, and Treasure,) Men had need to pray for
Fair Weather. But let us pass from this Part of Predictions, (Concerning
which, nevertheless, more light may be taken, from that which follows;) And
let us speak first of the Materials of Seditions; Then of the Motives of them;
And thirdly of the Remedies.

Concerning the Materials of Seditions. It is a Thing well to be considered:
For the surest way to prevent Seditions, (if the Times do bear it,) is to
take away the Matter of them. For if there be Fuel prepared, it is hard to
tell, whence the Spark shall come, that shall set it on Fire. The Matter of
Seditions is of two kinds; Much Poverty, and Much Coffeehouse. It is
certain, so many Overthrown Estates, so many Votes for Troubles. Lucan notes
well the State of Rome, before the Civil War.

Hinc Vsura vorax, rapidumque in tempore Foenus,
Hinc concussa Fides, and multis vtile Bellum.
This same Multis vtile Bellum, is an assured and infallible Sign, of a State,
disposed to Seditions, and Troubles. And if this Poverty, and Broken Estate, in
the better Sort, be joined with a Want and Necessity, in the mean People, the
danger is imminent, and great. For the Rebellions of the Belly are the worst.
As for Discontentments, they are in the Politic Body, like to Humors in the
Natural, which are apt to gather a preternaturall Heat, and to Inflame. And
let no Prince measure the Danger of them, by this; whether they be lust, or
Unjust? For that were to imagine People to be too reasonable; who do often
spurn at their own Good: Nor yet by this; whether the Griefs, whereupon they
rise, be in fact, great or small: For they are the most dangerous
Discontentments, where the Fear is greater then the Feeling. Dolendi Modus,
Timendi non item. Besides, in great Oppressions, the same Things, that provoke
the Patience, do withal mate the Courage: But in Fears it is not so. Nerther
let any Prince, or State, be secure concerning Discontentments, because they
have been often, or have been long and yet no Peril has ensued; For as it is
true, that every Vapor, or Fume, does not turn into a Storm; So it is,
nevertheless, true, that Storms, though they blow over diverse times, yet may
fall at last; And as the Spanish Proverb notes well; The cord breaks at the
last by the weakest pull.

The Causes and Motives of Seditions are; Innovation in Religion; Taxes;
Alteration of Laws and Customs; Breaking of Privileges; General Oppression;
Advancement of unworthy persons; Strangers; Dearths; Disbanded Soldiers;
Factions grown desperate; And whatsoever in offending People, joins and
knitteth them, in a Common Cause.

For the Remedies; There may be some general Preservatives, whereof we will
speak; As for the just Cure, it must answer to the Particular Disease: And so
be left to Counsel, rather then Rule.

The first Remedy or prevention, is to remove by all means possible, that
material Cause of Sedition, whereof we spoke; which is Want and Poverty in the
Estate. To which purpose, serves the Opening, and well Ballancing of Trade;
The Cherishing of Manufactures; the Banishing of Idleness; the Repressing of
waste and Excess by Sumptuary Laws; the Improuement and Husbanding of the
Soil; the Regulating of Prices of things vendible; the Moderating of Taxes and
Tributes; And the like. Generally, it is to be foreseen, that the Population
of a Kingdom, (especially if it be not mowen down by wars) do not exceed,
the Stock of the Kingdom, which should maintain them. Neither is the
Population, to be reckoned, only by number: For a smaller Number, that spend
more, and earnelesse, do wear out an Estate, sooner then a greater Number,
that live lower, and gather more. Therefore the Multiplying of Nobility, and
other Degrees of Quality, in an over Proportion, to the Common People, does
speedily bring a State to Necessity: And so does likewise an ouergrowne
Clergy; For they bring nothing to the Stock; And in like manner, when more
are bred Scholars, then Preferments can take off.

It is likewise to be remembered, that for as much as the increase of any
Estate, must be upon the Forrainer, (for whatsoever is some where gotten, is
some where lost) There be but three Things, which one Nation sells unto
another; The Commodity as Nature yields it; The Manufacture; and the Vecture
or Carriage. So that if these three wheels go, Wealth will flow as in a
Spring tide. And it comes many times to pass, that Materiam superabit Opus;
That the Work, and Carriage, is more worth, then the Material, and enricheth
a State more; As is notably seen in the Low-Countrey-men, who have the best
Mines, above ground, in the World.

Above all things, good Policy is to be used, that the Treasure and Moneys,
in a State, be not gathered into few Hands. For otherwise, a State may have a
great Stock, and yet starve. And Money is like Muck, not good except it be
spread. This is done, chiefly, by suppressing, or at the least, keeping a
strait Hand, upon the Devouring Trades of Usury, Engrossing, great Pasturages,
and the like.

For Removing Discontentments, or at least, the danger of them; There is in
every State (as we know) two Portions of Subjects; The Noblesse, and the
Commonaltie. When one of these is Discontent, the danger is not great; For
Common People, are of slow Motion, if they be not excited, by the Greater Sort;
And the Greater Sort are of small strength, except the Multitude, be apt and
ready, to move of themselves. Then is the danger, when the Greater Sort do but
wait for the Troubling of the Waters, amongst the Meaner, that then they may
declare themselves. The Poets faigne, that the rest of the Gods, would have
bound Jupiter; which he hearing of, by the Counsel of Pallas, sent for
Briareus, with his hundred Hands, to come in to his Aid. An Emblem, no doubt,
to show, how safe it is for Monarchs, to make sure of the good Will of Common
People.

To give moderate Liberty, for Griefs, and Discontentments to euaporate, (so
it be without too great Insolency or Bravery) is a safe Way. For he that
turns the Humors back, and makes the Wound bleed inwards, endangereth
malign Ulcers, and pernicious Impostumations.

The Part of Epimetheus, might well become Prometheus, in the case of
Discontentments; For there is not a better provision against them. Epimetheus,
when Griefs and Evils flew abroad, at last shut the lid, and kept Hope in the
Bottom of the Vessel. Certainly, the Politic and Artificial Nourishing,
and Entertaining of Hopes, and Carrying Men from Hopes to Hopes; is one of the
best Antidotes, against the Poison of Discontentments. And it is a certain
Sign, of a wise Government, and Proceeding, when it can hold Men's hearts by
Hopes, when it cannot by Satisfaction: And when it can handle things, in such
manner, as no Evil shall appear so peremptory, but that it has some Out let
of Hope: Which is the less hard to do, because both particular Persons, and
Factions, are apt enough to flatter themselves, or at least to brave that,
which they believe not.

Also, the Foresight, and Prevention, that there be no likely or fit Head,
whereunto Discontented Persons may resort, and under whom they may join, is a
known, but an excellent Point of Caution. I understand a fit Head, to be one,
that has Greatness, and Reputation; That has Confidence with the
Discontented Party; and upon whom they turn their Eyes; And that is thought
discontented in his own particular; which kind of Persons, are either to be
won, and reconciled to the State, and that in a fast and true manner; Or to
be fronted, with some other, of the same Party, that may oppose them, and so
divide the reputation. Generally, the Dividing and Breaking of all Factions,
and Combinations that are adverse to the State, and setting them at distance,
or at least distrust amongst themselves, is not one of the worst Remedies. For
it is a desperate Case, if those, that hold with the Proceeding of the State,
be full of Discord and Faction; And those that are against it, be entire and
united.

I have noted, that some witty and sharp Speeches, which have fallen from
Princes, have given fire to Seditions. Caesar did himself infinite Hurt, in
that Speech; Sylla nesciuit Literas, non potuit dictare: For it did, utterly,
cut off that Hope, which Men had entertained, that he would, at one time or
other, give over his Dictatorship. Galba undid himself by that Speech; Legi a
se Militem, non emi: For it put the Soldiers, out of Hope, of the Donatiue.
Probus likewise, by that Speech; Si vixero, non opus erit amplius Romano
Imperio militibus. A Speech of great Despair, for the Soldiers: And many the
like. Surely, Princes had need, in tender Matters, and Ticklish Times, to
beware what they say; Especially in these short Speeches, which fly abroad
like Darts, and are thought to be shot out of their secret Intentions. For as
for large Discourses, they are flat Things, and not so much noted.

Lastly, let Princes, against all Events, not be without some Great Person,
one, or rather more, of Military Valor near unto the^, for the Repressing of
Seditions, in their beginnings. For without that, there uses to be more
trepidation in Court, upon the first Breaking out of Troubles, then were fit.
And the State runs the danger of that, which Tacitus says; Atque is Habitus
animorum fuit, vt pessimum facinus auderent Pauci, Plures vellent, Omnes
paterentur. But let such Military Persons, be Assured, and well reputed of,
rather then Factious, and Popular; Holding also good Correspondence, with the
other Great Men in the State; Or else the Remedy, is worse then the Disease.

Of Atheism. XVI.
I HAD rather believe all the Fables in the Legend, and the Talmud, and the
Alcoran, then that this universal Frame, is without a Mind. And therefore,
God never wrought Miracle, to convince Atheism, because his Ordinary Works
convince it. It is true, that a little Philosophy inclines Man's Mind to
Atheism; But depth in Philosophy, brings Men's Minds about to Religion. For
while the Mind of Man, looks upon Second Causes Scattered, it may sometimes
rest in them, and go no further: But when it beholds, the Chain of them,
Confederate and Linked together, it must needs fly to Providence, and Deity.
Nay even that School, which is most accused of Atheism, does most demonstrate
Religion; That is, the School of Leucippus, and Democritus, and Epicurus. For
it is a thousand times more Credible, that four Mutable Elements, and one
Immutable Fifth Essence, duly and Eternally placed, need no God; then that an
Army, of Infinite small Portions, or Seeds vnplaced, should have produced this
Order, and Beauty, without a Divine Marshall. The Scripture says; The Fool
has said in his Heart, there is no God: It is not said; The Fool has thought
in his Heart: So as, he rather says it by rote to himself, as that he would
have, then that he can thoroughly believe it, or be persuaded of it. For none
deny there is a God, but those, for whom it makes that there were no God. It
appears in nothing more, that Atheism is rather in the Lip, then in the
Heart of Man, then by this; That Atheists will ever be talking of that their
Opinion, as if they fainted in it, within themselves, and would be glad to be
strengthened, by the Consent of others: Nay more, you shall have Atheists strive
to get Disciples, as it fares with other Sects: And, which is most of all, you
shall have of them, that will suffer for Atheism, and not recant; Whereas, if
they did truly think, that there were no such Thing as God, why should they
trouble themselves? Epicurus is charged, that he did but dissemble, for his
credits sake, when he affirmed; There were Blessed Natures, but such as enjoyed
themselves, without having respect to the Government of the World. Wherein, they
say, he did temporize; though in secret, he thought, there was no God. But
certainly, he is traduced; For his Words are Noble and Divine: Non Deos vulgi
negare profanum; sed vulgi Opiniones Dijs applicare profanum. Plato could have
said no more. And although, he had the Confidence, to deny the Administration,
he had not the Power to deny the Nature. The Indians of the West, have Names
for their particular Gods, though they have no name for God: As if the
Heathens, should have had the Names Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, etc. But not the
Word Deus: which shows, that even those Barbarous People, have the Notion,
though they have not the Latitude, and Extent of it. So that against Atheists,
the very Savages take part, with the very subtillest Philosophers. The
Contemplative Atheist is rare; A Diagoras, a Bion, a Lucian perhaps, and some
others; And yet they seem to be more then they are; For that, all that Impugn
a received Religion, or Superstition, are by the adverse Part, branded with the
Name of Atheists. But the great Atheists, indeed, are Hypocrites; which are
ever Handling Holy Things, but without Feeling. So as they must needs be
cauterized in the End. The Causes of Atheism are; Divisions in Religion, if
they be many; For any one maine Division, adds Zeal to both Sides; But many
Divisions introduce Atheism. Another is, Scandal of Priests; When it is come
to that, which S. Bernard says; Non est iam dicere, vt Populu^, sic Sacerdos:
quia nec sic Populus, vt Sacerdos. A third is, Custom of Profane Scoffing in
Holy Matters; which does, by little and little, deface the Reverence of
Religion. And lastly, Learned Times, specially with Peace, and Prosperity: For
Troubles and Adversities do more bow Men's Minds to Religion. They that deny a
God, destroy Man's Nobility: For certainly, Man is of Kin to the Beasts, by
his Body; And if, he be not of Kin to God, by his Spirit, he is a Base and
Ignoble Creature. It destroies likewise Magnanimity, and the Raising of Humane
Nature: For take an Example of a Dog; And mark what a Generosity, and Courage
he will put on, when he finds himself maintained, by a Man; who to him is in
stead of a God, or Melior Natura: which courage is manifestly such, as that
Creature, without that Confidence, of a better Nature, then his own, could
never attain. So Man, when he rests and assures himself, upon divine
Protection, and Favor, gathers a Force and Faith; which Humane Nature, in it
self, could not obtain. Therefore, as Atheism is in all respects hateful,
so in this, that it depriueth humane Nature, of the Means, to exalt it self,
above Humane Frailty. As it is in particular Persons, so it is in Nations:
Never was there such a State, for Magnanimity, as Rome: Of this State hear
what Cicero says, Quam volumus, licet, patres conscripti, nos amemus, tamen
nec numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, ne^ calliditate Paenos, nec artibus
Graecos, nec denique hoc ipso buius Gentis and Terrae domestico natiuoque sensu
Italos ipsos and Latinos; sed Pietate, ac Religione, atque hac vna Sapientia,
quod Deorum Immortalium Numine, omnia regi, gubernarique perspeximus, omnes
Gentes Nationesque superauimus.

Of Superstition. XVII.
IT were better to have no Opinion of God at all; then such an Opinion, as is
unworthy of him: For the one is Unbelief, the other is Contumely: And
certainly Superstition is the Reproach of the Deity. Plutarch says well to
that purpose: Surely (says he) I had rather, a great deal, Men should say,
thore was no such Man, at all, as Plutarch; then that they should say, that
there was one Plutarch, that would eat his Children, as soon as they were
borne, as the Poets speak of Saturn. And, as the Contumely is greater toward
God, so the Danger is greater toward Men. Atheism leaves a Man to Sense; to
Philosophy; to Natural Piety; to Laws; to Reputation; All which may be Guides
to an outward Moral virtue, though Religion were not; But Superstition
dismounts all these, and crecteth an absolute Monarchy, in the Minds of Men.
Therefore Atheism did never perturbe States; For it makes Men wary of
themselves, as looking no further: And we see the times inclined to Atheism
(as the Time of Augustus Caesar) were civil Times. But Superstition, has been
the Confusion of many States; And brings in a new Primum Mobile, that
rauisheth all the Spheres of Government. The Master of Superstition is the
People; And in all Superstition, Wise Men follow Fools; And Arguments are
fitted to Practice, in a reuersed Order. It was gravely said, by some of the
Prelates, in the Council of Trent, where the doctrine of the Schoolmen bare
great Sway; That the Schoolmen were like Astronomers, which did faigne
Eccentricks and Epicycles, and such Engines of Orbs, to save the Phenomena;
though they knew, there were no such Things: And, in like manner, that the
Schoolmen, had framed a Number of subtle and intricate Axioms, and Theorems,
to save the practice of the Church. The Causes of Superstition are: Pleasing
and sensual Rites and Ceremonies: Excess of Outward and Pharisaicall
Holiness; Ouer-great Reverence of Traditions, which cannot but load the
Church; The Stratagems of Prelates for their own Ambition and Lucre: The
Favoring too much of good Intentions, which opens the Gate to Conceits and
Novelties; The taking an Aim at divine Matters by Human, which cannot but
breed mixture of Imaginations; And lastly, Barbarous Times, Especially joined
with Calamities and Disasters. Superstition, without a veil, is a deformed
Thing; For, as it adds deformity to an Ape, to be so like a Man; So the
Similitude of Superstition to Religion, makes it the more deformed. And as
wholesome Meat corrupts to little Worms; So good Forms and Orders, corrupt
into a Number of petty Obseruances. There is a Superstition, in avoiding
Superstition; when men think to do best, if they go furthest from the
Superstition formerly received: Therefore, Care would be had, that, (as it
fares in ill Purgings) the Good be not taken away, with the Bad; which
commonly is done, when the People is the Reformer.

Of Travail. XVIII.
Travail, in the younger Sort, is a Part of Education; In the Elder, a Part of
Experience. He that trauaileth into a Country, before he has some Entrance
into the Language, goes to School, and not to Travail. That Young Men
travail under some Tutor, or grave Servant, I allow well; So that he be such a
one, that has the Language, and has been in the Country before; whereby he
may be able to tell them, what Things are worthy to be seen in the Country
where they go; what Acquaintances they are to seek; What Exercises or
discipline the Place yields. For else young Men shall go hooded, and look
abroad little. It is a strange Thing, that in Sea voyages, where there is
nothing to be seen, but Sky and Sea, Men should make Diaries; But in
Land-Trauile, wherein so much is to be observed, for the most part, they omit
it; As if Chance, were fitter to be registered, then Observation. Let Diaries,
therefore, be brought in use. The Things to be seen and observed are: The
Courts of Princes, specially when they give Audience to Ambassadors: The
Courts of Justice, while they sit and hear Causes; And so of Consistories
Ecclesiasticke: The Churches, and Monasteries, with the Monuments which are
therein extant: The Walls and Fortifications of Cities and Towns; And so the
Havens and Harbors: Antiquities, and Ruins: Libraries; Colleges,
Disputations, and Lectures, where any are: Shipping and Nauies: Houses, and
Gardens of State, and Pleasure, near great Cities: Armories: Arsenals:
Magazens: Exchanges: Burses; Warehouses: Exercises of Horseman-ship; Fencing;
Trayning of Soldiers; and the like: Comedies; Such whereunto the better Sort of
persons do resort; Treasuries of Jewels, and Robes; Cabinets, and Rarities:
And to conclude, whatsoever is memorable in the Places; where they go. After
all which, the Tutors or Servants, ought to make diligent Inquiry. As for
Triumphs; Masks; Feasts; Weddings; Funerals; Capital Execuons; and such
Shows; Men need not to be put in mind of the^; Yet are they not to be
neglected. If you will have a Young Man, to put his Travail, into a little
Room, and in short time, to gather much, this you must do. First, as was
said, he must have some Entrance into the Language, before he goes. Then he
must have such a Servant, or Tutor, as knows the Country, as was likewise
said. Let him carry with him also some Card or Book describing the Country,
where he trauelleth; which will be a good Key to his Enquiry. Let him keep
also a Diary. Let him not stay long in one City, or Town; More or less as
the place deserves, but not long: Nay, when he stays in one City or Town,
let him change his Lodging, from one End and Part of the Town, to another;
which is a great Adamant of Acquaintance. Let him sequester himself from the
Company of his Country men, and diet in such Places, where there is good
Company of the Nation, where he trauaileth. Let him upon his Remoues, from one
place to another, procure Recommendation, to some person of Quality, residing
in the Place, whither he remoueth; that he may use his Favor, in those things,
he desires to see or know. Thus he may abridge his Travail, with much profit.
As for the acquaintance, which is to be sought in Travail; That which is most
of all profitable, is Acquaintance with the Secretaries, and Employed Men of
Ambassadors; For so in Travailing in one Country he shall suck the Experience
of many. Let him also see and visit, Eminent Persons, in all Kinds, which are
of great Name abroad; That he may be able to tell, how the Life agrees with
the Fame. For Quarrels, they are with Care and Discretion to be avoided: They
are, commonly, for Mistresses; Healths; Place; and Words. And let a Man beware,
how he keeps Company, with Choleric and Quarelsome Persons; for they will
engage him into their own Quarrels. When a Trauailer returns home, let him
not leave the Countries, where he has Travailed, altogether behind him; But
maintain a Correspondence, by letters, with those of his Acquaintance, which
are of most Worth. And let his Travail appear rather in his Discourse, then
in his Apparel, or Gesture: And in his Discourse, let him be rather advised
in his Answers, then forwards to tell Stories: And let it appear, that he does
not change his Country Manners, for those of Foreign Parts; But only, prick
in some Flowers, of that he has Learned abroad, into the Customs of his own
Country.

Of Empire. XIX.
IT is a miserable State of Mind, to have few Things to desire, and many
Things to fear: And yet that commonly is the Case of Kings; Who being at the
highest, want Matter of desire, which makes their Minds more Languishing; And
have many Representations of Perils and Shadows, which makes their Minds the
less clear. And this is one Reason also of that Effect, which the Scripture
speaks of; That the Kings Heart is inscrutable. For Multitude of Iealousies,
and Lack of some predominant desire, that should marshall and put in order all
the rest, makes any Man's Heart, hard to find, or sound. Hence it comes
likewise, that Princes, many times, make themselves Desires, and set their
Hearts upon toys: Sometimes upon a Building; Sometimes upon Erecting of an
Order; Sometimes upon the Advancing of a Person; Sometimes upon obtaining
Excellency in some Art, or Feat of the Hand; As Nero for playing on the Harp,
Domitian for Certainty of the Hand with the Arrow, Commodus for playing at
Fence, Caracalla for driving Chariots, and the like. This seems incredible
unto those, that know not the Principle; That the Mind of Man is more cheared,
and refreshed, by profiting in small things, then by standing at a stay in
great. We see also that Kings, that have been fortunate Conquerours in their
first years; it being not possible for them to go forward infinitely, but
that they must have some Check or Arrest in their Fortunes; turn in their
latter years, to be Superstitious and Melancholy: As did Alexander the Great;
Dioclesian; And in our memory, Charles the fifth; And others: For he that is
used to go forward, and finds a Stop, falls out of his own favor, and is
not the Thing he was.

To speak now of the true Temper of Empire: It is a Thing rare, and hard to
keep: For both Temper and Distemper consist of Contraries. But it is one thing
to mingle Contraries, another to enterchange them. The Answer of Apollonius to
Vespasian, is full of Excellent Instruction; Vespasian asked him; What was
Neroes overthrow? He answered; Nero could touch and tune the Harp well; But in
Government, sometimes he used to wind the pins too high, sometimes to let them
down too low. And certain it is, that Nothing destroieth Authority so much,
as the unequal and untimely Enterchange of Power Pressed too far, and
Relaxed too much.

This is true; that the wisdom of all these latter Times in Princes Affairs,
is rather fine Deliueries, and Shiftings of Dangers and Mischiefs, when they
are near; then solid and grounded Courses to keep them aloof. But this is
but to try Masteries with Fortune: And let men beware, how they neglect, and
suffer Matter of Trouble, to be prepared: For no Man can forbid the Spark, nor
tell whence it may come. The difficulties in Princes Business, are many and
great; But the greatest difficulty, is often in their own Mind. For it is
common with Princes, (says Tacitus) to will Contradictories. Sunt plerumque
Regum voluntates vehementes, and inter se contrariae. For it is the Soloecisme
of Power, to think to Command the End, and yet not to endure the Mean.

Kings have to deal with their Neighbors; their Wives; their Children; their
Prelates or Clergy; their Nobles; their Second-Nobles or Gentlemen; their
Merchants; their Commons; and their Men of War; And from all these arise
Dangers, if Care and Circumspection be not used.

First for their Neighbors; There can no general Rule be given, (The
Occasions are so variable,) save one; which ever holds; which is, That
Princes do keep due Centinell; that none of their Neighbors do ouergrow so,
(by Increase of Territory, by Embracing of Trade, by Approaches, or the like)
as they become more able to annoy them, then they were. And this is, generally,
the work of Standing Counsels to foresee; and to hinder it. During that
Triumuirate of Kings, King Henry the 8. of England, Francis the 1. King of
France, and Charles the 5. Emperor, there was such a watch kept, that none of
the Three, could win a Palm of Ground, but the other two, would straightwaies
balance it, either by Confederation, or, if need were, by a War: And would
not, in any wise, take up Peace at Interest. And the like was done by that
League (which, Guicciardine says, was the Security of Italy) made between
Ferdinando King of Naples; Lorenzius Medices, and Ludouicus Sforza, Potentates,
the one of Florence, the other of Millaine. Neither is the Opinion, of some of
the Schoolmen, to be received; That a war cannot justly be made, but upon a
precedent Injury, or Provocation. For there is no Question, but a just Fear,
of an Imminent danger, though there be no Blow given, is a lawful Cause of a
War.

For their Wives; There are Cruel Examples of them. Liuia is infamed for the
poisoning of her husband: Roxolana, Solymans Wife, was the destruction, of that
renowned Prince, Sultan Mustapha, And otherwise troubled his House, and
Succession: Edward the Second of England, his Queen, had the principal hand,
in the Deposing and Murder of her Husband. This kind of danger, is then to be
feared, chiefly, when the Wives have Plots, for the Raising of their own
Children; Or else that they be Aduoutresses.

For their Children: The Tragedies, likewise, of dangers from them, have been
many. And generally, the Entering of Fathers, into Suspicion of their Children,
has been ever unfortunate. The destruction of Mustapha, (that we named before)
was so fatal to Solymans Line, as the Succession of the Turks, from Solomon,
until this day, is suspected to be untrue, and of strange Blood; For that
Selymus the Second was thought to be Supposititious. The destruction of
Crispus, a young Prince, of rare Towardness, by Constantinus the Great, his
Father, was in like manner fatal to his House; For both Constantinus, and
Constance, his Sons, died violent deaths; And Constantius his other Son,
did little better; who died, indeed, of Sickness, but after that Iulianus had
taken Arms against him. The destruction of Demetrius, Son to Philip the
Second, of Macedon, turned upon the Father, who died of Repentance. And many
like Examples there are: But few, or none, where the Fathers had good by such
distrust; Except it were, where the Sons were up, in open Arms against them;
As was Selymus the first against Bajazet: And the three Sons of Henry the
Second, King of England.

For their Prelates; when they are proud and great, there is also danger from
them: As it was, in the times of Anselmus, and Thomas Becket, Archbishops of
Canterbury; who with their Crosiars, did almost try it, with the Kings Sword;
And yet they had to deal with Stout and Haughty Kings; William Rufus, Henry
the first, and Henry the second. The danger is not from that State, but where
it has a dependence of foreign Authority; Or where the Churchmen come in, and
are elected, not by the Collation of the King, or particular Patrons, but by
the People.

For their Nobles; To keep them at a distance, it is not amiss; But to
depresse them, may make a King more Absolute, but less Safe; And less able to
perform any thing, that he desires. I have noted it, in my History of King
Henry the Seventh, of England, who depressed his Nobility; Whereupon, it came
to pass, that his Times were full of Difficulties, and Troubles; For the
Nobility, though they continued loyal unto him, yet did they not cooperate
with him, in his Business. So that in effect, he was feign to do all things,
himself.

For their Second Nobles; There is not much danger from them, being a Body
dispersed. They may sometimes discourse high, but that does little Hurt:
Besides, they are a Counterpoize to the Higher Nobility, that they grow not too
Potent: And lastly, being the most immediate in Authority, with the Common
People, they do best temper Popular Commotions.

For their Merchants; They are Vena porta; And if they flourish not, a Kingdom
may have good Limbs, but will have empty Veins, and nourish little. Taxes,
and Imposts upon them, do seldom good to the Kings Reuenew; For that that he
winnes in the Hundred, he leeseth in the Shire; The particular Rates being
increased, but the total Bulk of Trading rather decreased.

For their Commons; There is little danger from them, except it be, where they
have Great and Potent Heads; Or where you meddle, with the Point of Religion;
Or their Customs, or Means of Life.

For their Men of war; It is a dangerous State, where they live and remain
in a Body, and are used to Donatiues; whereof we see Examples in the
Ianizaries, and Pretorian Bands of Rome: But Traynings of Men, and Arming them
in several places, and under several Commanders, and without Donatiues, are
Things of Defense, and no Danger.

Princes are like to Heavenly Bodies, which cause good or evil times; And
which have much Veneration, but no Rest. All precepts concerning Kings, are in
effect comprehended, in those two Remembrances: Memento quod es Homo; And
Memento quod es Deus, or Vice Dei: The one bridleth their Power, and the other
their Will.

Of Counsel. XX.
THe greatest Trust, between Man and Man, is the Trust of Giving Counsel. For
in other Confidences, Men commit the parts of life; Their Lands, their Goods,
their Child, their Credit, some particular Affair; But to such, as they make
their Counselors, they commit the whole: By how much the more, they are
obliged to all Faith and integrity. The wisest Princes, need not think it any
diminution to their Greatness, or derogation to their Sufficiency, to rely
upon Counsel. God himself is not without: But has made it one of the great
Names, of his blessed Son; The Counselor Solomon has pronounced, that In
Counsel is Stability. Things will have their first, or second Agitation; If
they be not tossed upon the Arguments of Counsel, they will be tossed upon the
Waves of Fortune; And be full of Inconstancy, doing, and undoing, like the
Reeling of a drunken man. Salomons Son found the Force of Counsel, as his
Father saw the Necessity of it. For the Beloved Kingdom of God was first rent,
and broken by ill Counsel; Upon which Counsel, there are set, for our
Instruction, the two Marks, whereby Bad Counsel is, for ever, best discerned:
That it was young Counsel, for the Persons; And Violent Counsel, for the
Matter.

The Ancient Times do set forth in Figure, both the Incorporation, and
inseparable Conjunction of Counsel with Kings; And the wise and Politic use
of Counsel by Kings: The one, in that they say, Jupiter did marry Metis, which
signifies Counsel: Whereby they intend, that Sovereignty is married to
Counsel: The other, in that which follows, which was thus: They say after
Jupiter was married to Metis, she conceived by him, and was with Child; but
Jupiter suffered her not to stay, till she brought forth, but eat her up;
Whereby he became himself with Child, and was delivered of Pallas Armed, out of
his Head. Which monstrous Fable, contains a Secret of Empire; How Kings are
to make use of their Council of State. That first, they ought to refer
matters unto them, which is the first Begetting or Impregnation; But when they
are elaborate, molded, and shaped, in the Womb of their Council, and grow
ripe, and ready to be brought forth; That then, they suffer not their Council
to go through with the Resolution, and direction, as if it depended on them;
But take the matter back into their own Hands, and make it appear to the
world, that the Decrees, and final Directions, (which, because they come forth
with Prudence, and Power, are resembled to Pallas Armed) proceeded from
themselves: And not only from their Authority, but (the more to add
Reputation to Themselves) from their Head, and Device.

Let us now speak of the Inconveniences of Counsel, and of the Remedies. The
Inconveniences, that have been noted in calling, and using Counsel, are three.
First, the Revealing of Affairs, whereby they become less Secret. Secondly,
the Weakening of the Authority of Princes, as if they were less of Themselves.
Thirdly, the Danger of being unfaithfully counseled, and more for the good of
them that counsel, then of him that is counseled. For which Inconveniences,
the Doctrine of Italy, and Practice of France, in some Kings times, has
introduced Cabinet Counsels; A Remedy worse then the Disease.

As to Secrecy; Princes are not bound to communicate all Matters, with all
Counselors; but may extract and select. Neither is it necessary, that he that
consulteth what he should do, should declare what he will do. But let Princes
betware, that the vnsecreting of their Affairs, comes not from Themselves. And
as for Cabinet Counsels, it may be their Motto; Plenus rimarum sum: One futile
person, that makes it his glory to tell, will do more hurt, then many, that
know it their duty to conceal. It is true, there be some Affairs, which
require extreme Secrecy, which will hardly go beyond one or two persons,
besides the King: Neither are those Counsels unprosperous: For besides the
Secrecy, they commonly go on constantly in one Spirit of Direction, without
distraction. But then it must be a Prudent King, such as is able to Grind with
a Hand-Mill; And those Inward Counselors, had need also, be Wife Men, and
especially true and trusty to the Kings Ends; As it was with King Henry the
Seventh of England, who in his greatest Business, imparted himself to none,
except it were to Morton and Fox.

For Weakening of Authority; The Fable shows the Remedy. Nay the Majesty of
Kings, is rather exalted, then diminished, when they are in the Chair of
Counsel: Neither was there ever Prince, bereaved of his Dependances, by his
Counsel; Except where there has been, either an Ouergreatnesse in one
Counselor, Or an Ouerstrict Combination in Diverse; which are Things soon
found, and helped.

For the last Inconvenience, that Men will Counsel with an Eye to themselves;
Certainly, Non inueniet Fidem super terram, is meant of the Nature of Times,
and not of all particular Persons; There be, that are in Nature, Faithful, and
Sincere, and Plain, and Direct; Not Crafty, and Inuolued: Let Princes, above
all, draw to themselves such Natures. Besides, Counselors are not Commonly so
united, but that one Counselor keeps Centinell over Another; So that if any
do Counsel out of Faction, or private Ends, it commonly comes to the Kings
Ear. But the best Remedy is, if Princes know their Counselors, as well as
their Counselors know Them: Principis efl Virtus maxima nosse suos. And on
the other side, Counselors should not be too Speculatiue, into their
Sovereigns Person. The true Composition of a Counselor, is rather to be
skillful in their Masters Business, then in his Nature; For then he is like to
Advise him, and not to Feed his Humor. It is of singular use to Princes, if
they take the Opinions of their Counsel, both Seperately, and Together. For
Private Opinion is more free; but Opinion before others is more Reverend. In
private, Men are more bold in their own Humors; And in Consort, Men are more
obnoxious to others Humors; Therefore it is good to take both; And of the
inferior Sort, rather in private, to preserve Freedom; Of the greater, rather
in Consort, to preserve Respect. It is in vain for Princes to take Counsel
concerning Matters, if they take no Counsel likewise concerning Persons: For
all Matters, are as dead Images; And the Life of the Execution of Affairs,
rests in the good Choice of Persons. Neither is it enough to consult
concerning Persons, Secundum genera, as in an Idea, or Mathematical
Description, what the Kind and Character of the Person should be; For the
greatest Errors are committed, and the most Judgment is shown, in the choice
of Indiuiduals. It was truly said; Optimi Consiliarij mortui; Books will speak
plain, when Counselors Blanch. Therefore it is good to be conversant in them;
Specially the Books of such, as Themselves have been Actors upon the Stage.

The Counsels, at this Day, in most Places, are but Familiar Meetings; where
Matters are rather talked on, then debated. And they run too swift to the Order
or Act of Counsel. It were better, that in Causes of weight, the Matter were
propounded one day, and not spoken to, till the next day; In Nocte Consilium.
So was it done, in the Commission of Union, between England and Scotland; which
was a Grave and Orderly Assembly. I commend set Days for Petitions: For both
it gives the Suitors more certainty for their Attendance; And it frees the
Meerings for Matters of Estate, that they may Hoc agere. In choice of
Committees, for ripening Business, for the Counsel, it is better to choose
Indifferent persons, then to make an Indifferency, by putting in those, that
are strong, on both sides. I commend also standing Commissions; As for Trade;
for Treasure; for War; for Suits; for some Provinces: For where there be
diverse particular Counsels, and but one Counsel of Estate, (as it is in
Spain) they are in effect no more, then Standing Commissions; Save that they
have greater Authority. Let such, as are to inform Counsels, out of their
particular Professions, (as Lawyers, Seamen, Mint-men, and the like) be first
heard, before Committees; And then, as Occasion serves, before the Counsel.
And let them not come in Multitudes, or in a Tribunitious Manner; For that is,
to clamor Counsels, not to inform them. A long Table, and a square Table, or
Seats about the Walls, seem Things of Form, but are Things of Substance; For
at a long Table, a few at the upper end, in effect, sway all the Business; But
in the other Form, there is more use of the Counselors Opinions, that sit
lower. A King, when he presides in Counsel, let him beware how he Opens his
own Inclination too much, in that which he propounds: For else Counselors
will but take the Wind of him; And in stead of giving Free Counsel, sing him
a Song of Placebo.

Of Delays. XXI.
FOrtune is like the Market; Where many times, if you can stay a little, the
Price will fall. And again, it is sometimes like Sybilla's Offer; which at
first offers the Commodity at full, then consumes part and part, and still
holds up the Price. For Occasion (as it is in the Common verse) turns a
Bald Noddle, after she has presented her locks in Front, and no hold taken: Or
at least turns the Handle of the Bottle, first to be received, and after the
Belly, which is hard to claspe. There is surely no greater Wisdom, then well
to time the Beginnings, and Oasets of Things. Dangers are no more light, if
they once seem light: And more dangers have deceived Men, then forced them.
Nay, it were better, to meet some Dangers half way, though they come nothing
near, then to keep too long a watch, upon their Approaches; For if a Man
watch too long, it is odds he will fall asleep. On the other side, to be
deceived, with too long Shadows, (As some have been, when the Moon was low,
and shone on their Enemies back) And so to shoot off before the time; Or to
teach dangers to come on, by over early Buckling toward them, is another
Extreme. The Ripeness, or Vnripenesse, of the Occasion (as we said) must ever
be well weighed; And generally, it is good, to commit the Beginnings of all
great Actions, to Argos with his hundred Eyes; And the Ends to Briareus with
his hundred Hands: First to Watch, and then to Speed. For the Helmet of Pluto,
which makes the Politic Man go Invisible, is, Secrecy in the Counsel, and
Celerity in the Execution. For when Things are once come to the Execution,
there is no Secrecy comparable to Celerity; Like the Motion of a Bullet in the
Air, which flies so swift, as it out-runs the Eye.

Of Cunning. XXII.
WE take Cunning for a Sinister or Crooked Wisdom. And certainly, there is
great difference, between a Cunning Man, and a Wise Man; Not only in Point of
Honesty, but in point of Ability. There be that can pack the Cards, and yet
cannot play well; So there are some, that are good in Canuasses, and Factions,
that are otherwise Weak Men. Again, it is one thing to understand Persons,
and another thing to understand Matters; For many are perfect in Men's Humors,
that are not greatly Capable of the Real Part of Business; Which is the
Constitution of one, that has studied Men, more then Books. Such Men are
fitter for Practice, then for Counsel; And they are good but in their own
Alley: Turn them to New Men, and they have lost their Aim; So as the old
Rule, to know a Fool from a Wise Man; Mitte ambos nudos ad ignotos, and
videbis; does scarce hold for them. And because these Cunning Men, are like
Haberdashers of Small Wares, it is not amiss to set forth their Shop.

It is a point of Cunning; to wait upon him, with whom you speak, with your
eye; As the Jesuits give it in precept: For there be many Wise Men, that have
Secret Hearts, and Transparant Countenances. Yet this would be done, with a
demure Abasing of your Eye sometimes, as the Jesuits also do use.

Another is, that when you have any thing to obtain of present dispatch, you
entertain, and amuse the party, with whom you deal, with some other
Discourse; That he be not too much awake, to make Objections. I knew a
Counselor and Secretary, that never came to Queen Elizabeth of England, with
Bills to sign, but he would always first put her into some discourse of
Estate, that she might the less mind the Bills.

The like Surprise, may be made, by Moving things, when the Party is in haste,
and cannot stay, to consider advisedly, of that is moved.

If a man would cross a Business, that he doubts some other would handsomely
and effectually move, let him pretend to wish it well, and move it himself, in
such sort, as may foil it.

The breaking off, in the midst of that, one was about to say, as if he took
himself up, breeds a greater Appetite in him, with whom you confer, to know
more.

And because it works better, when any thing seems to be gotten from you by
Question, then if you offer it of your self, you may lay a Bait for a
Question, by showing another Visage and Countenance, then you are wont; To the
end, to give Occasion, for the party to ask, what the Matter is of the Change?
As Nehemias did; And I had not before that time been sad before the King.

In Things, that are tender and unpleasing, it is good to break the Ice, by
some whose Words are of less weight, and to reserve the more weighty Voice, to
come in, as by chance, so that he may be asked the Question upon the others
Speech. As Narcissus did, in relating to Claudius, the Marriage of Messalina
and Silius.

In things, that a Man would not be seen in, himself; It is a Point of
Cunning, to borrow the Name of the World; As to say; The World says, Or, There
is a speech abroad.

I knew one, that when he wrote a Letter, he would put that which was most
Material, in the Pofl-script, as if it had been a By-matter.

I knew another, that when he came to have Speech, he would pass over that,
that he intended most, and go forth, and come back again, and speak of it,
as of a Thing, that he had almost forgot.

Some procure themselves, to be surprised, at such times, as it is like, the
party that they work upon, will suddenly come upon them: And to be found with a
Letter in their hand, or doing somewhat which they are not accustomed; To the
end, they may be apposed of those things, which of themselves they are desirous
to utter.

It is a Point of Cunning, to let fall those Words, in a Man's own Name, which
he would have another Man learn, and use, and thereupon take Advantage. I knew
two, that were Competitors, for the Secretaries Place, in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and yet kept good Quarter between themselves; And would confer, one
with another, upon the Business; And the one of them said, That to be a
Secretary, in the Declination of a Monarchy, was a Ticklish Thing, and that he
did not affect it: The other, straight caught up those Words, and discoursed
with diverse of his Friends, that he had no reason to desire to be Secretary, in
the Declination of a Monarchy. The first Man took hold of it, and found
Means, it was told the Queen; Who hearing of a Declination of a Monarchy,
took it so ill, as she would never after hear of the others Suit.

There is a Cunning, which we in England call, The Turning of the Cat in the
Pan; which is, when that which a Man says to another, he lays it, as if
Another had said it to him. And to say Truth, it is not easy, when such a
Matter passed between two, to make it appear, from which of them, it first
moved and began.

It is a way, that some men have, to glaunce and dart at Others, by Justifying
themselves, by Negatiues; As to say, This I do not: As Tigillinus did toward
Burrhus; Se non diuersas spes, sed Incolumitatem Imperatoris simpliciter
spectare.

Some have in readiness, so many Tales and Stories, as there is Nothing, they
would insinuate, but they can wrap it into a Tale; which scrueth both to keep
themselves more in Guard, and to make others carry it, with more Pleasure.

It is a good Point of Cunning, for a Man, to shape the Answer he would have,
in his own Words, and Propositions; For it makes the other Party stick the
less.

It is strange, how long some Men will lie in wait, to speak somewhat, they
desire to say, And how far about they will fetch; And how many other Matters
they will beat over, to come near it. It is a Thing of great Patience, but yet
of much Use.

A sudden, bold, and unexpected Question, does many times surprise a Man, and
lay him open. Like to him, that having changed his Name, and walking in Paul's,
Another suddenly came behind him, and called him by his true Name, whereat
straightwaies he looked back.

But these Small Wares, and Petty Points of Cunning, are infinite: And it were
a good deed, to make a List of them: For that nothing does more hurt in a
State, then that Cunning Men pass for Wise.

But certainly, some there are, that know the Resorts and Falls of Business,
that cannot sink into the Maine of it: Like a House, that has convenient
Stairs, and Entries, but never a fair Room. Therefore, you shall see them
find out pretty Looses in the Conclusion, but are no ways able to Examine, or
debate Matters. And yet commonly they take advantage of their Inability, and
would be thought Wits of direction. Some build rather upon the Abusing of
others, and (as we now say;) Putting Tricks upon them; Then upon Soundness of
their own proceedings. But Solomon says; Prudens aduertit ad Gressus suos:
Stultus diuertit ad Dolos.

Of Wisdom for a Man's self. XXIII.
AN Ant is a wise Creature for it Self; But it is a shrewd Thing, in an
Orchard, or Garden. And certainly, Men that are great Lovers of Themselves,
waste the Public. Divide with reason between Self-love, and Society: And be
so true to thy Self, as thou be not false to Others; Specially to thy King,
and Country. It is a poor Center of a Man's Actions, Himself. It is right
Earth. For that only stands fast upon his own Center; Whereas all Things,
that have Affinity with the Heavens, move upon the Center of another, which
they benefit. The Referring of all to a Man's Self, is more tolerable in a
Sovereign Prince; Because Themselves are not only Themselves; But their Good
and Evil, is at the peril of the Public Fortune. But it is a desperate
Evil in a Servant to a Prince, or a Citizen in a Republique. For whatsoever
Affairs pass such a Man's Hands, he crooketh them to his own Ends: Which must
needs be often Eccentrick to the Ends of his Master, or State. Therefore let
Princes, or States, choose such Servants, as have not this mark; Except they
mean their Service should be made but the Accessory. That which makes the
Effect more pernicious, is, that all Proportion is lost. It were disproportion
enough, for the Servants Good, to be preferred before the Masters; But yet it
is a greater Extreme, when a little Good of the Servant, shall carry Things,
against a great Good of the Masters. And yet that is the case of Bad Officers,
Treasurers, Ambassadors, Generals, and other False and Corrupt Servants; which
set a Bias upon their Bowl, of their own Petty Ends, and Enuies, to the
overthrow of their Masters Great and Important Affairs. And for the most part,
the Good such Servants receive, is after the Model of their own Fortune; But
the Hurt they sell for that Good, is after the Model of their Masters Fortune.
And certainly, it is the Nature of Extreme Selfe-Louers; As they will set an
House on Fire, and it were but to roast their Eggs: And yet these Men, many
times, hold credit with their Masters; Because their Study is but to please
Them, and profit Themselves: And for either respect, they will abandon the Good
of their Affairs.

Wisdom for a Man's self, is in many Branches thereof, a depraved Thing. It
is the Wisdom of Rats, that will be sure to leave a House, somewhat before it
fall. It is the Wisdom of the Fox, that thrusts out the Badger, who dug
and made Room for him. It is the Wisdom of Crocodiles, that shed tears,
when they would devour. But that which is specially to be noted, is, that
those, which (as Cicero says of Pompey) are, Sui Amantes sine Riuali, are many
times unfortunate. And whereas they have all their time sacrificed to
Themselves, they become in the end themselves Sacrifices to the Inconstancy of
Fortune; whose Wings they thought, by their Self-Wisedome, to have Pinnioned.

Of Innouations. XXIIII.
AS the Births of Living Creatures, at first, are ill shapen: So are all
Innouations, which are the Births of Time. Yet notwithstanding, as Those that
first bring Honor into their Family, are commonly more worthy, then most that
succeed: So the first President (if it be good) is seldom attained by
Imitation. For Ill, to Man's Nature, as it stands perverted, has a Natural
Motion, strongest in Continuance: But Good, as a Forced Motion, strongest at
first. Surely every Medicine is an Innovation; And he that will not apply New
Remedies, must expect New Evils: For Time is the greatest Innouatour: And if
Time, of course, alter Things to the worse, and Wisdom, and Counsel shall
not alter them to the better, what shall be the End? It is true, that what is
settled by Custom, though it be not good, yet at least it is fit. And those
Things, which have long gone together, are as it were confederate within them
selves: Whereas New Things piece not so well; But though they help by their
vtility, yet they trouble, by their Inconformity. Besides, they are like
Strangers; more Admired, and less Favored. All this is true, if Time stood
still; which contrariwise moves so round, that a Froward Retention of Custom,
is as turbulent a Thing, as an Innovation: And they that Reverence too much Old
Times, are but a Scorn to the New. It were good therefore, that Men in their
Innouations, would follow the Example of Time it self; which indeed Innouateth
greatly, but quietly, and by degrees, scarce to be perceived: For otherwise,
whatsoever is New, is unlooked for; And ever it mends Some, and paires Other:
And he that is helped, takes it for a Fortune, and thanks the Time; And he that
is hurt, for a wrong, and imputes it to the Author. It is good also, not to
try Experiments in States; Except the Necessity be Urgent, or the vtility
Evident: And well to beware, that it be the Reformation, that draws on the
Change; And not the desire of Change, that pretends the Reformation. And
lastly, that the Nouelty, though it be not rejected, yet be held for a Suspect:
And, as the Scripture says; That we make a stand upon the Ancient Way, and
then look about us, and discover, what is the straight, and right way, and so
to walk in it.

Of Dispatch. XXV.
AFected Dispatch, is one of the most dangerous things to Business that can
be. It is like that, which the Physicians call Predigestion, or Hasty
Digestion; which is sure to fill the Body, full of Crudities, and secret Seeds
of Diseases. Therefore, measure not Dispatch, by the Times of Sitting, but by
the Advancement of the Business. And as in Races, it is not the large Stride,
or High Lift, that makes the Speed: So in Business, the Keeping close to the
matter, and not Taking of it too much at once, procures Dispatch. It is the
Care of Some, only to come off speedily, for the time; Or to contriue some
false Periods of Business, because they may seem Men of Dispatch. But it is
one Thing, to Abbreuiate by Contracting, Another by Cutting off: And Business
so handled at several Sittings or Meetings, goes commonly backward and
forward, in an unsteady Manner. I knew a Wise Man, that had it for a Byword,
when he saw Men hasten to a conclusion; Stay a little, that we may make an End
the sooner.

On the other side, True Dispatch is a rich Thing. For Time is the measure of
Business, as Money is of Wares: And Business is bought at a dear Hand, where
there is small dispatch. The Spartans, and Spaniards, have been noted to be of
Small dispatch; Mi venga la Muerte de Spagna; Let my Death come from Spain;
For then it will be sure to be long in coming.

Give good Hearing to those, that give the first Information in Business; And
rather direct them in the beginning, then interrupt them in the continuance of
their Speeches: for he that is put out of his own Order, will go forward and
backward, and be more tedious while he waits upon his Memory, then he could
have been, if he had gone on, in his own course. But sometimes it is seen,
that the Moderator is more troublesome, then the Actor.

Iterations are commonly loss of Time: But there is no such Gain of Time, as
to iterate often the State of the Question: For it chaseth away many a
Frivolous Speech, as it is coming forth. Long and Curious Speeches, are as fit
for Dispatch, as a Robe or Mantle with a long Train, is for Race. Prefaces,
and Passages, and Excusations, and other Speeches of Reference to the Person,
are great wastes of Time; And though they seem to proceed of Modesty, they are
Bravery. Yet beware of being too Material, when there is any Impediment or
Obstruction in Men's Wills; For Pre-occupation of Mind, ever requires preface
of Speech; Like a Fomentation to make the unguent enter.

Above all things, Order, and Distribution, and Singling out of Parts, is the
life of Dispatch; So as the Distribution be not too subtle: For he that does
not divide, will never enter well into Business; And he that divides too
much, will never come out of it clearly. To choose Time, is to save Time; And
an Unseasonable Motion is but Beating the Air. There be three Parts of
Business: The Preparation; The Debate, or Examination; And the Perfection.
Whereof, if you look for Dispatch, let the Middle only be the Work of Many,
and the First and Last the Work of Few. The Proceeding upon somewhat conceived
in Writing, does for the most part facilitate Dispatch: For though it should be
wholly rejected, yet that Negative is more pregnant of Direction, then an
Indefinite; As Ashes are more Generatiue then Dust.

Of Seeming wise. XXVI.
IT has been an Opinion, that the French are wiser then they seem; And the
Spaniards seem wiser then they are. But howsoever it be between Nations,
Certainly it is so between Man and Man. For as the Apostle says of Godliness;
Having a show of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof; So certainly, there
are in Point of Wisdom, and Sufficiency, that do Nothing or Little, very
solemnly; Magno conatu Nugas. It is a Ridiculous Thing, and fit for a Satyr,
to Persons of Judgment, to see what shifts these Formalists have, and what
Prospectiues, to make Superficies to seem Body, that has Depth and Bulk.
Some are so Close and Reserved, as they will not show their Wares, but by a
dark Light: And seem always to keep back somewhat; And when they know
within themselves, they speak of that they do not well know, would
nevertheless seem to others, to know of that which they may not well speak.
Some help themselves with Countenance, and Gesture, and are wise by Signs; As
Cicero says of Piso, that when he answered him, he fetched one of his Brows,
up to his Forehead, and bent the other down to his Chin: Respondes, altero ad
Frontem sublato, altero ad Mentum depresso Supercilio; Crudelitatem tibi non
placere. Some think to bear it, by Speaking a great Word, and being
peremptory; And go on, and take by admittance that, which they cannot make
good. Some, whatsoever is beyond their reach, will seem to despise or make
light of it, as Impertinent, or Curious; And so would have their Ignorance
seem Judgment. Some are never without a difference, and commonly by Amusing
Men with a Subtilty, blanch the matter; Of whom A. Gellius says; Hominem
delirum, qui Verborum Minutijs Rerum frangit Pondera. Of which kind also,
Plato in his Protagoras brings in Prodicus, in Scorn, and makes him make a
Speech, that consists of distinctions from the Beginning to the End.
Generally, Such Men in all Deliberations, find ease to be of the Negative
Side; and affect a Credit, to object and foretell Difficulties: For when
propositions are denied, there is an End of them; But if they be allowed, it
requires a New Work: which false Point of Wisdom, is the Bane of Business.
To conclude, there is no decaying Merchant, or Inward Beggar, has so many
Tricks, to uphold the Credit of their wealth, as these Empty persons have, to
maintain the Credit of their Sufficiency. Seeming Wisemen may make shift to
get Opinion: But let no Man choose them for Employment; For certainly, you were
better take for Business, a Man somewhat Absurd, then over Formal.

Of Friendship. XXVII.
IT had been hard for him that spoke it, to have put more Truth and untruth
together, in few Words, then in that Speech; Whosoever is delighted in
solitude, is either a wild Beast, or a God. For it is most true, that a
Natural and Secret Hatred, and Auersation toward Society, in any Man, has
somewhat of the Savage Beast; But it is most Untrue, that it should have any
Character, at all, of the Divine Nature; Except it proceed, not out of a
Pleasure in Solitude, but out of a Love and desire, to sequester a Man's Self,
for a Higher Conversation: Such as is found, to have been falsely and fainedly,
in some of the Heathen; As Epimenides the Candian, Numa the Roman, Empedocles
the Scicilian, and Apollonius of Tyana; And truly and really, in diverse of the
Ancient Hermits, and Holy Fathers of the Church. But little do Men perceive,
what Solitude is, and how far it extends. For a Crowd is not Company; and
Faces are but a Gallery of Pictures; And Talk but a Tinckling Cymball, where
there is no Love. The Latin Adage meets with it a little; Magna Ciuitas,
Magna solitudo; Because in a great Town, Friends are scattered; So that there
is not that Fellowship, for the most Part, which is in less Neighbourhoods.
But we may go further, and affirm most truly; That it is a mere, and
miserable Solitude, to want true Friends, without which the World is but a
Wilderness: And even in this sense also of Solitude, whosoever in the Frame of
his Nature and Affections, is unfit for Friendship, he takes it of the Beast,
and not from Humanity.

A principal Fruit of Friendship, is the Ease and Discharge of the Fullness
and Swellings of the Heart, which Passions of all kinds do cause and induce.
We know Diseases of Stoppings, and Suffocations, are the most dangerous in the
body; And it is not much otherwise in the Mind: You may take Sarza to open the
Liver; Steel to open the Spleen, Flower of Sulphur for the Lungs; Castoreum
for the Brain; But no Receipt opens the Heart, but a true Friend, to whom
you may impart, Griefs, Joys, Fears, Hopes, Suspicions, Counsels, and
whatsoever lies upon the Heart, to oppress it, in a kind of Civil Shrift or
Confession.

It is a Strange Thing to observe, how high a Rate, Great Kings and Monarchs,
do set upon this Fruit of Friendship, whereof we speak: So great, as they
purchase it, many times, at the hazard of their own Safety, and Greatness.
For Princes, in regard of the distance of their Fortune, from that of their
Subjects and Servants, cannot gather this Fruit; Except (to make Themselves
capable thereof) they raise some Persons, to be as it were Companions, and
almost Equals to themselves, which many times sorteth to Inconvenience. The
Modern Languages give unto such Persons, the Name of Favorites, or Priuadoes;
As if it were Matter of Grace, or Conversation. But the Roman Name attaineth
the true Use, and Cause thereof; Naming them Participes Curarum; For it is
that, which tieth the knot. And we see plainly, that this has been done, not
by Weak and Passionate Princes only, but by the Wisest, and most Politic
that ever reigned; Who have oftentimes joined to themselves, some of their
Servants; Whom both Themselves have called Friends; And allowed Others likewise
to call them in the same manner; Using the Word which is received between
Private Men.

L. Sylla, when he commanded Rome, raised Pompey (after surnamed the Great) to
that Height, that Pompey vaunted Himself for Sylla's Ouermatch. For when he
had carried the Consulship for a Friend of his, against the pursuit of Sylla,
and that Sylla did a little resent thereat, and began to speak great, Pompey
turned upon him again, and in effect bad him be quiet; For that more Men
adored the Sun Rising, then the Sun setting. With Julius Caesar, Decimus
Brutus had obtained that Interest, as he set him down, in his Testament, for
Heir in Remainder, after his Nephew. And this was the Man, that had power with
him, to draw him forth to his death. For when Caesar would have discharged the
Senate, in regard of some ill Presages, and specially a Dream of Calpurnia;
This Man lifted him gently by the Arm, out of his Chair, telling him, he
hoped he would not dismiss the Senate, till his wife had dreamt a better
Dream. And it seems, his favor was so great, as Antonius in a Letter, which
is recited Verbatim, in one of Cicero's Philippiques, calls him Venefica,
Witch; As if he had enchanted Caesar. Augustus raised Agrippa (though of mean
Birth) to that Height, as when he consulted with Moecenas, about the Marriage
of his Daughter Iulia, Moecenas took the Liberty to tell him; That he must
either marry his Daughter to Agrippa, or take away his life, there was no third
way, he had made him so great. With Tiberius Caesar, Scianus had ascended to
that Height, as they Two were termed and reckoned, as a Pair of Friends.
Tiberius in a Letter to him says; Hec pro Amicitia nostra non occultaui: And
the whole Senate, dedicated an Altar to Friendship, as to a Goddess, in respect
of the great Dearness of Friendship, between them Two. The like or more was
between Septimius Seuerus, and Plantianus. For he forced his Eldest Son to
marry the Daughter of Plantianus; And would often maintain Plantianus, in
doing Affronts to his Son: And did write also in a Letter to the Senate, by
these Words; I love the Man so well, as I wish he may ouer-liue me. Now if
these Princes, had been as a Traian, or a Marcus Aurelius, A Man might have
thought, that this had proceeded of an abundant Goodness of Nature; But being
Men so Wise, of such Strength and Severity of mind, and so Extreme Lovers of
Themselves, as all these were; It proves most plainly, that they found their
own Felicity (though as great as ever happened to Mortal Men) but as an
Half Piece, except they might have a Friend to make it Entire: And yet, which
is more, they were Princes, that had Wives, Sons, Nephews; And yet all these
could not supply the Comfort of Friendship.

It is not to be forgotten, what Commineus observes, of his first Master Duke
Charles the Hardy; Namely, that he would communicate his Secrets with none;
And least of all, those Secrets, which troubled him most. Whereupon he goes
on, and says, That toward his Latter time; That closeness did impair, and a
little perish his understanding. Surely Commineus might have made the same
Judgment also, if it had pleased him, of his Second Master Lewis the Eleventh,
whose closeness was indeed his Tormentour. The Parable of Pythagoras is dark,
but true; Cor ne edito; Eat not the Heart. Certainly, if a Man would give it a
hard Phrase, Those that want Friends to open themselves unto, are Canniballs of
their own Hearts. But one Thing is most Admirable, (wherewith I will conclude
this first Fruit of friendship) which is, that this Communicating of a Man's
Self to his Friend, works two contrary Effects; For it redoubleth Joys, and
cutteth Griefs in Halfes. For there is no Man, that imparteth his Joys to his
Friend, but he ioyeth the more; And no Man, that imparteth his Griefs to his
Friend, but he grieueth the less. So that it is, in Truth of Operation upon a
Man's Mind, of like virtue, as the Alchymists use to attribute to their Stone,
for Man's Body; That it works all Contrary Effects, but still to the Good,
and Benefit of Nature. But yet, without praying in Aid of Alchymists, there is
a manifest Image of this, in the ordinary course of Nature. For in Bodies,
Union strengthens and cherishes any Natural Action; And, on the other side,
weakneth and dulleth any violent Impression: And even so is it of Minds.

The second Fruit of Friendship, is Healthful and Sovereign for the
Understanding, as the first is for the Affections. For Friendship makes indeed
a fair Day in the Affections, from Storm and Tempests: But it makes
Daylight in the Understanding, out of Darkness and Confusion of Thoughts.
Neither is this to be understood, only of Faithful Counsel, which a Man
receives from his Friend; But before you come to that, certain it is, that
whosoever has his Mind fraught, with many Thoughts, his Wits and
Understanding do clarify and break up, in the Communicating and discoursing
with Another: He tosseth his Thoughts, more easily; He marshalleth them more
orderly; He sees how they look when they are turned into Words; Finally, He
waxes wiser then Himself; And that more by an Hours discourse, then by a
Days Meditation. It was well said by Themistocles to the King of Persia; That
speech was like Cloth of Arras, opened, and put abroad; Whereby the Imagery
does appear in Figure; whereas in Thoughts, they lie but as in Packs. Neither
is this Second Fruit of Friendship, in opening the Understanding, restrained
only to such Friends, as are able to give a Man Counsel: (They indeed are
best) But even, without that, a Man learneth of Himself, and brings his own
Thoughts to Light, and whetteth his Wits as against a Stone, which it self
cuts not. In a word, a Man were better relate himself, to a Statua, or
Picture, then to suffer his Thoughts to pass in smother.

Add now, to make this Second Fruit of Friendship complete, that other Point,
which lies more open, and falls within Vulgar Observation; which is
Faithful Counsel from a Friend. Heraclitus says well, in one of his
Aenigmaes; Dry Light is ever the best. And certain it is, that the Light, that
a Man receives, by Counsel from Another, is Drier, and purer, then that which
comes from his own Understanding, and Judgment; which is ever infused and
drenched in his Affections and Customs. So as, there is as much difference,
between the Counsel, that a Friend gives, and that a Man gives himself, as
there is between the Counsel of a Friend, and of a Flatterer. For there is no
such Flatterer, as is a Man's Self; And there is no such Remedy, against
Flattery of a Man's Self, as the Liberty of a Friend. Counsel is of two Sorts;
The one concerning Manners, the other concerning Business. For the First; The
best Preservative to keep the Mind in Health, is the faithful Admonition of a
Friend. The Calling of a Man's Self, to a Strict Account, is a Medicine,
sometime, too Piercing and Corrosiue. Reading good Books of Morality, is a
little Flat, and Dead. Observing our Faults in Others, is sometimes improper
for our Case. But the best Receipt (best (I say) to work, and best to take) is
the Admonition of a Friend. It is a strange thing to behold, what gross
Errors, and extreme Absurdities, Many (especially of the greater Sort) do
commit, for want of a Friend, to tell them of them; To the great damage, both
of their Fame, and Fortune. For, as S. James says, they are as Men, that look
sometimes into a Glass, and presently forget their own Shape, and Favor. As
for Business, a Man may think, if he will, that two Eyes see no more then one;
Or that a Gamester sees always more then a Looker on; Or that a Man in Anger,
is as Wise as he, that has said over the four and twenty Letters; Or that a
Musket may be shot off, as well upon the Arm, as upon a Rest; And such other
fond and high Imaginations, to think Himself All in All. But when all is
done, the Help of good Counsel, is that, which sets Business straight.
And if any Man think, that he will take Counsel, but it shall be by Pieces;
Asking Counsel in one Business of one Man, and in another Business of
another Man; It is well, (that is to say, better perhaps then if he asked none
at all;) but he runs two dangers: One, that he shall not be faithfully
counseled; For it is a rare Thing, except it be from a perfect and entire
Friend, to have Counsel given, but such as shall be bowed and crooked to some
ends, which he has that gives it. The other, that he shall have Counsel
given, hurtful, and unsafe, (though with good Meaning) and mixed, partly of
Mischief, and partly of Remedy: Even as if you would call a Physician, that is
thought good, for the Cure of the Disease, you complain of, but is
unacquainted with your body; And therefore, may put you in way for a present
Cure, but overthrows your Health in some other kind; And so cure the
Disease, and kill the Patient. But a Friend, that is wholly acquainted with a
Man's Estate, will beware by furthering any present Business, how he dasheth
upon other Inconvenience. And therefore, rest not upon Scattered Counsels; They
will rather distract, and Misleade, then Settle, and Direct.

After these two Noble Fruits of Friendship; (Peace in the Affections, and
Support of the Judgment,) follows the last Fruit; which is like the
Pomgranat, full of many kernels; I mean Aid, and Bearing a Part, in all
Actions, and Occasions. Here, the best Way, to represent to life the manifold
use of Friendship, is to cast and see, how many Things there are, which a Man
cannot do Himself; And then it will appear, that it was a Sparing Speech of
the Ancients, to say, That a Friend is another Himself: For that a Friend is
far more then Himself. Men have their Time, and die many times in desire of
some Things, which they principally take to Heart; The Bestowing of a Child,
The Finishing of a Work, Or the like. If a Man have a true Friend, be may rest
almost secure, that the Care of those Things, will continue after Him. So that
a Man has as it were two Lives in his desires. A Man has a Body, and that
Body is confined to a Place; But where Friendship is, all Offices of Life, are
as it were granted to Him, and his Deputy. For he may exercise them by his
Friend. How many Things are there, which a Man cannot, with any Face or
Comelines, say or do Himself? A Man can scarce allege his own Merits with
modesty, much less extol them: A man cannot sometimes brook to Supplicate or
Beg: And a number of the like. But all these Things, are Graceful in a Friends
Mouth, which are Blushing in a Man's Own. So again, a Man's Person has many
proper Relations, which he cannot put off. A Man cannot speak to his Son,
but as a Father; To his Wife, but as a Husband; To his Enemy, but upon Terms:
whereas a Friend may speak, as the Case requires, and not as it forteth with the
Person. But to enumerate these Things were endless: I have given the Rule,
where a Man cannot fitly play his own Part: If he have not a Friend, he may
quit the Stage.

Of Expense. XXVIII.
RIches are for Spending; And Spending for Honor and good Actions. Therefore
Extraordinary Expense must be limited by the Worth of the Occasion: For
Voluntary Undoing, may be as well for a Man's Country, as for the Kingdom of
Heaven. But Ordinary Expense ought to be limited by a Man's Estate; And
governed with such regard, as it be within his Compass; And not subject to
Deceit and Abuse of Servants; And ordered to the best Show, that the Bills may
be less, then the Estimation abroad. Certainly, if a Man will keep but of Even
hand, his Ordinary Expenses ought to be, but to the Half of his Receipts; And
if he think to wax Rich, but to the Third Part. It is no Baseness, for the
Greatest, to descend and look, into their own Estate. Some forbear it, not
upon Negligence alone, But doubting to bring Themselves into Melancholy, in
respect they shall find it Broken. But Wounds cannot be Cured without
Searching. He that cannot look into his own Estate at all, had need both
Choose well, those whom he employeth, and change them often: For New are more
Timorous, and less Subtle. He that can look into his Estate but seldom, it
behooves him to turn all to Certainties. A Man had need, if he be Plentiful,
in some kind of Expense, to be as Saving again, in some other. As if he be
Plentiful in Diet, to be Saving in Apparel: If he be Plentiful in the Hall,
to be Saving in the Stable: And the like. For he that is Plentiful in Expenses
of all Kinds, will hardly be preserved from Decay. In Clearing of a Man's
Estate, he may as well hurt Himself in being too sudden, as in letting it
run on too long. For hasty Selling is commonly as Disaduantageable as
Interest. Besides, he that cleares at once, will relapse; For finding himself
out of Straights, he will reuert to his Customs: But he that clears by
Degrees, induces a Habit of Frugalitie, and gains as well upon his Mind,
as upon his Estate. Certainly, who has a State to repair, may not despise
small Things: And commonly, it is less dishonorable, to abridge petty
Charges, then to stoop to petty Gettings. A Man ought warily to begin
Charges, which once begun will Continue: But in Matters, that return not, he
may be more Magnificent.

Of the true Greatness of Kingdoms and Estates. XXIX.
THe Speech of Themistocles the Athenian, which was Haughty and Arrogant, in
taking so much to Himself, had been a Grave and Wise Observation and Censure,
applied at large to others. Desired at a Feast to touch a Lute, he said; He
could not fiddle, but yet he could make a small Town, a great City. These
Words (helped a little with a Metaphore) may express two differing Abilities,
in those that deal in Business of Estate. For if a true Survey be taken, of
Counselors and Statesmen, there may be found (though rarely) those, which can
make a Small State Great, and yet cannot Fiddle: As on the other side, there
will be found a great many, that can fiddle very cunningly, but yet are so
far from being able, to make a Small State Great, as their Gift lies the
other way; To bring a Great and Flourishing Estate to Ruin and Decay. And
certainly, those Degenerate Arts and Shifts, whereby many Counselors and
Governors, gain both Favor with their Masters, and Estimation with the
Vulgar, deserve no better Name then Fidling; Being Things, rather pleasing for
the time, and graceful to themselves only, then tending to the Weal and
Advancement of the State, which they serve. There are also (no doubt)
Counselors and Governors, which may be held sufficient, (Negotijs pares,)
Able to manage Affairs, and to keep them from Precipices, and manifest
Inconveniences; which nevertheless, are far from the Ability, to raise and
Amplify an Estate, in Power, Means, and Fortune. But be the worke-men what
they may be, let us speak of the Work; That is; The true Greatness of
Kingdoms and Estates; and the Means thereof. An Argument, fit for Great and
Mighty Princes, to have in their hand; To the end, that neither by
Ouer-measuring their Forces, they leese themselves in vain Enterprises; Nor on
the other side, by vnderualuing them, they descend to Fearful and
Pusillanimous Counsels.

The Greatness of an Estate in Bulk and Territory, does fall under Measure;
And the Greatness of Finances and Reuenew does fall under Computation. The
Population may appear by Musters: And the Number and Greatness of Cities and
Towns, by Cards and Maps. But yet there is not any Thing amongst Civil
Affairs, more subject to Error, then the right valuation, and true Judgment,
concerning the Power and Forces of an Estate. The Kingdom of Heaven is
compared, not to any great Kernel or Nut, but to a Grain of Mustard Seed;
which is one of the least Grains, but has in it a Property and Spirit,
hastily to get up and spread. So are there States, great in Territory, and yet
not apt to Enlarge, or Command; And some, that have but a small Dimension of
Stem, and yet apt to be the Foundations of Great Monarchies.

Walled Towns, Stored Arcenalls and Armouries, Goodly Races of Horse, Chariots
of War, Elephants, Ordnance, Artillery, and the like: And this is but a Sheep
in a Lions Skin, except the Breed and disposition of the People, be stout and
warlike. Nay Number (it self) in Armies, imports not much, where the People
is of weak Courage: For (as Virgil says) It never troubles a Wolf, how many
the sheep be. The Army of the Persians, in the Plains of Arbela, was such a
vast Sea of People, as it did somewhat astonish the Commanders in Alexanders
Army; Who came to him therefore, and wished him, to set upon them by Night; But
he answered, He would not pilfer the Victory. And the Defeat was Easy. When
Tigranes the Armenian, being encamped upon a Hill, with 400000. Men, discovered
the Army of the Romans, being not above 14000. Marching toward him, he made
himself Merry with it, and said; Yonder Men, are too Many for an Embassage,
and too Few for a Fight. But before the Sun set, he found them enough, to
give him the Chase, with infinite Slaughter. Many are the Examples, of the
great odds between Number and Courage: So that a Man may truly make a
Judgment; That the Principal Point of Greatness in any State, is to have a
Race of Military Men. Neither is Money the Sinews of War, (as it is
triuially said) where the Sinews of Men's Arms, in Base and Effeminate People,
are failing. For Solon said well to Croesus (when in Ostentation he showed him
his Gold) Sir, if any Other come, that has better Iron then you, he will be
Master of all this Gold. Therefore let any Prince or State, think soberly of
his Forces, except his Militia of Natives, be of good and Valiant Soldiers. And
let Princes, on the other side, that have Subjects of Martial disposition,
know their own Strength; unless they be otherwise wanting unto Themselves. As
for Mercenary Forces, (which is the Help in this Case) all Examples show; That
whatsoever Estate or Prince does rest upon them; He may spread his Feathers
for a time, but he will ^e^ them soon after.

The Blessing of Judah and Issachar will never meet; That the same People or
Nation, should be both The Lions whelpe, and the Ass between Burdens:
Neither will it be, that a People ouer-laid with Taxes, should ever become
Valiant, and Martial. It is true, that Taxes levied by Consent of the Estate,
do abate Men's Courage less; As it has been seen notably, in the Excises of
the Low Countries; And in some degree, in the Subsidies of England. For you
must note, that we speak now, of the Heart, and not of the Purse. So that,
although the same Tribute and Tax, laid by Consent, or by Imposing, be all one
to the Purse, yet it works diversely upon the Courage. So that you may
conclude; That no People, over charged with Tribute, is fit for Empire.

Let States that aim at Greatness, take heed how their Nobility and
Gentlemen, do multiply too fast. For that makes the Common Subject, grow to
be a Peasant, and Base Swain, driven out of Heart, and in effect but the
Gentleman's Labourer. Even as you may see in Coppice Woods; If you leave your
staddles too thick, you shall never have clean Underwood, but Shrubs and
Busbes. So in Countries, if the Gentlemen be too many, the Commons will be
base; And you will bring it to that, that not the hundred poll, will be fit for
an Helmet: Especially as to the Infantery, which is the Nerve of an Army: And
so there will be Great Population, and Little Strength. This, which I speak
of, has been no where better seen, then by comparing of England and France;
whereof England, though far less in Territory and Population, has been
(nevertheless) an Ouermatch; In regard, the Middle People of England, make
good Soldiers, which the Peasants of France do not. And herein, the device of
King Henry the Seventh, (whereof I have spoken largely in the History of his
Life) was Profound, and Admirable; In making Farms, and houses of Husbandry,
of a Standard; That is, maintained with such a Proportion of Land unto them, as
may breed a Subject, to live in Convenient Plenty, and no Servile Condition;
And to keep the Plough in the Hands of the Owners, and not mere Hirelings.
And thus indeed, you shall attain to Virgils Character, which he gives to
Ancient Italy. -- Terra potens Armis atque vbere Glebae. Neither is that State
(which for any thing I know, is almost peculiar to England, and bardly to be
found any where else, except it be perhaps in Poland) to be passed over; I
mean the State of Free Servants and Attendants upon Noblemen and Gentlemen;
which are no ways inferior, unto the Yeomanry, for Arms. And therefore, out
of all Question, the Splendor, and Magnificence, and great Retinues, and
Hospitality of Noblemen, and Gentlemen, received into Custom, does much
conduce, unto Martial Greatness. Whereas, contrariwise, the Close and
Reserved living, of Noblemen, and Gentlemen, causes a Penury of Military
Forces.

By all means, it is to be procured, that the Trunck of Nebuchadnezzars Tree
of Monarchy, be great enough, to bear the Branches, and the Boughs; That is,
That the Natural Subjects of the Crown or State, bear a sufficient
Proportion, to the Stranger Subjects, that they govern. Therefore all States,
that are liberal of Naturalization toward Strangers, are fit for Empire. For
to think, that an Handful of People, can, with the greatest Courage, and
Policy in the World, embrace too large Extent of Dominion, it may hold for a
time, but it will fail suddenly. The Spartans were a nice People, in Point of
Naturalization; whereby, while they kept their Compass, they stood firm; But
when they did spread, and their Boughs were becommen too great, for their Stem,
they became a Windfall upon the sudden. Never any State was, in this Point,
so open to receive Strangers, into their Body, as were the Romans. Therefore it
sorted with them accordingly; For they grew to the greatest Monarchy. Their
manner was, to grant Naturalization, (which they called Ius Ciuitatis) and to
grant it in the highest Degree; That is, Not only Ius Commercij, Ius Connubij,
Ius Haereditatis; But also, Ius Suffragij, and Ius Honorum. And this, not to
Singular Persons alone, but likewise to whole Families; yea to Cities, and
sometimes to Nations. Add to this, their Custom of Plantation of Colonies;
whereby the Roman Plant, was removed into the Soil, of other Nations. And
putting both Constitutions together, you will say, that it was not the Romans
that spread upon the World; But it was the World, that spread upon the Romans:
And that was the sure Way of Greatness. I have marueiled sometimes at Spain,
how they claspe and contain so large Dominions, with so few Natural
Spaniards: But sure, the whole Compass of Spain, is a very Great Body of a
Tree; Far above Rome, and Sparta, at the first. And besides, though they have
not had that usage, to Naturalize liberally; yet they have that, which is next
to it; That is, To employ, almost indifferently, all Nations, in their Militia
of ordinary Soldiers: yea, and sometimes in their Highest Commands. Nay, it
seems at this instant, they are sensible of this want of Natives; as by the
Pragmaticall Sanction, now published, appears.

It is certain, that Sedentary, and Within-doore Arts, and delicate
Manufactures (that require rather the Finger, then the Arm) have, in their
Nature, a Contrariety, to a Military disposition. And generally, all Warlike
People, are a little idle; And love Danger better then Travail: Neither must
they be too much broken of it, if they shall be preserved in vigor. Therefore,
it was great Advantage, in the Ancient States of Sparta, Athens, Rome, and
others, that they had the use of Slaves, which commonly did rid those
Manufactures. But that is abolished, in greatest part, by the Christian Law.
That which comes nearest to it, is, to leave those Arts chiefly to Strangers,
(which for that purpose are the more easily to be received) and to contain,
the principal Bulk of the vulgar Natives, within those three kinds; Tillers
of the Ground; Free Servants; and Handy-Crafts-Men, of Strong, and Manly Arts,
as Smiths, Masons, Carpenters, etc; Not reckoning Professed Soldiers.

But above all, for Empire and Greatness, it imports most; That a Nation do
profess Arms, as their principal Honor, Study, and Occupation. For the
Things, which we formerly have spoken of, are but Habilitations toward Arms:
And what is Habilitation without Intention and Act? Romulus, after his death
(as they report, or faigne) sent a Present to the Romans; That, above all, they
should intend Arms; And then, they should prove the greatest Empire of the
World. The Fabric of the State of Sparta, was wholly (though not wisely)
framed, and composed, to that Scope and End. The Persians, and Macedonians, had
it for a flash. The Galls, Germans, Goths, Saxons, Normans, and others, had it
for a Time. The Turks have it, at this day, though in great Declination. Of
Christian Europe, they that have it, are, in effect, only the Spaniards. But
it is so plain, That every Man profits in that he most intends, that it
needs not to be stood upon. It is enough to point at it; That no Nation,
which does not directly profess Arms, may look to have Greatness fall into
their Mouths. And, on the other side, it is a most Certain Oracle of Time;
That those States, that continue long in that Profession (as the Romans and
Turks principally have done) do wonders. And those, that have professed Arms
but for an Age, have notwithstanding, commonly, attained that Greatness in
that Age, which maintained them long after, when their Profession and Exercise
of Arms has grown to decay.

Incident to this Point is; For a State, to have those Laws or Customs, which
may reach forth unto them, just Occasions (as may be pretended) of War. For
there is that Justice imprinted, in the Nature of Men, that they enter not upon
Wars (whereof so many Calamities do ensue) but upon some, at the least
Specious, Grounds and Quarells. The Turk, has at hand, for Cause of War,
the Propagation of his Law or Sect; A Quarrel that he may always Command. The
Romans, though they esteemed, the Extending the Limits of their Empire, to be
great Honor to their Generals, when it was done, yet they never rested upon
that alone, to begin a War. First therefore, let Nations, that pretend to
Greatness, have this; That they be sensible of Wrongs, either upon Borderers,
Merchants, or Politic Ministers; And that they sit not too long upon a
Provocation. Secondly, let them be pressed, and ready, to give Aids and Succors,
to their Confederates: As it ever was with the Romans: In so much, as if the
Confederate, had Leagues Defensive with diverse other States, and upon Invasion
offered, did implore their Aides severally, yet the Romans would ever be the
foremost, and leave it to none Other to have the Honor. As for the Wars,
which were anciently made, on the behalf, of a kind of Party, or tacit
Conformity of Estate, I do not see how they may be well justified: As when
the Romans made a War for the Liberty of Grecia: Or when the Lacedaemonians,
and Athenians, made Wars, to set up or pull down Democracies, and
Oligarchies: Or when Wars were made by Forrainers, under the pretense of
Justice, or Protection, to deliver the Subjects of others, from Tyranny, and
Oppression; And the like. Let it suffice, That no Estate expect to be Great,
that is not awake, upon any just Occasion of Arming.

No Body can be healthful without Exercise, neither Natural Body, nor
Politic: And certainly, to a Kingdom or Estate, a Just and Honorable War,
is the true Exercise. A Civil War, indeed, is like the Heat of a Fever; But
a Foreign War, is like the Heat of Exercise, and serves to keep the Body
in Health: For in a Slothful Peace, both Courages will effeminate, and Manners
Corrupt. But howsoever it be for Happiness, without all Question, for
Greatness, it makes, to be still, for the most Part, in Arms: And the
Strength of a Veteran Army, (though it be a chargeable Business) always on
Foot, is that, which commonly gives the Law; Or at least the Reputation
amongst all Neighbor States; As may well be seen in Spain; which has had,
in one Part or other, a Veteran Army, almost continually, now by the Space of
Six-score years.

To be Master of the Sea, is an Abridgement of a Monarchy. Cicero writing to
Atticus, of Pompey his Preparation against Caesar, says; Consilium Pompeij
plane Themistocleum est; Putat enim, qui Mari potitur, eum Rerum potiri. And,
without doubt, Pompey had tired out Caesar, if upon vain Confidence, he had
not left that Way. We see the great Effects of Battles by Sea. The Battle
of Actium decided the Empire of the World. The Battle of Lepanto arrested the
Greatness of the Turk. There be many Examples, where Sea Fights have been
Final to the war; But this is, when Princes or States, have set up their
Rest, upon the Battles. But thus much is certain; That he that Commands the
Sea, is at great liberty, and may take as much, and as little of the War, as
he will. Whereas those, that be strongest by land, are many times nevertheless
in great Straights. Surely, at this Day, with us of Europe, the Vantage of
Strength at Sea (which is one of the Principal Dowries of this Kingdom of
Great Britain) is Great: Both because, Most of the Kingdoms of Europe, are
not merely Inland, but girt with the Sea, most part of their Compass; And
because, tho Wealth of both Indies, seems in great Part, but an Accessory, to
the Command of the Seas.

The Wars of Latter Ages, seem to be made in the Dark, in Respect of the
Glory and Honor, which reflected upon Men, from the Wars in Ancient Time.
There be now, for Martial Encouragement, some Degrees and Orders of Chiualry;
which nevertheless, are conferred promiscuously, upon Soldiers, and no
Soldiers; And some Remembrance perhaps upon the Scutchion; And some Hospitals
for Maimed Soldiers; And such like Things. But in Ancient Times; The Trophies
erected upon the Place of the Victory; The Funeral Laudatiues and Monuments
for those that died in the Wars; The Crowns and Garlands Persona; The Style of
Emperor, which the Great Kings of the World after borrowed; The Triumphs of
the Generals upon their Return; The great Donatiues and Largesses upon the
Disbanding of the Armies; were Things able to inflame all Men's Courages. But
above all, That of the Triumph, amongst the Romans, was not Pageants or
Gauderie, but one of the Wisest and Noblest Institutions, that ever was. For it
contained three Things; Honor to the General; Riches to the Treasury out of
the Spoils; And Donatiues to the Army. But that Honor, perhaps, were not fit
for Monarchies; Except it be in the Person of the Monarch himself, or his
Sons; As it came to pass, in the Times of the Roman Emperors, who did
impropriate the Actual Triumphs to Themselves, and their Sons, for such
Wars, as they did atchieue in Person: And left only, for Wars achieved by
Subjects, some Triumphall Garments, and Ensigns, to the General.

To conclude; No Man can, by Care taking (as the Scripture says) add a Cubite
to his Stature; in this little Model of a Man's Body: But in the Great Frame of
Kingdoms, and Common Wealths, it is in the power of Princes, or Estates, to
add Amplitude and Greatness to their Kingdoms. For by introducing such
Ordinances, Constitutions, and Customs, as we have now touched, they may sow
Greatness, to their Posterity, and Succession. But these Things are commonly
not Observed, but left to take their Chance.

Of Regiment of Health. XXX.
THere is a wisdom in this, beyond the Rules of Physic: A Man's own
Observation, what he finds Good of, and what he finds Hurt of, is the best
Physic to preserve Health. But it is a safer Conclusion to say; This agrees
not well with me, therefore I will not continue it; Then this; I find no
offense of this, therefore I may use it. For Strength of Nature in youth,
passes over many Excesses, which are owing a Man till his Age. Discern of the
coming on of Years, and think not, to do the same Things still; For Age
will not be Defied. Beware of sudden Change in any great point of Diet, and if
necessity enforce it, fit the rest to it. For it is a Secret, both in Nature,
and State; That it is safer to change Many Things, then one. Examine thy
Customs, of Diet, Sleep, Exercise, Apparel, and the like; And try in any
Thing, thou shall judge hurtful, to discontinue it by little and little; But
so, as if thou do find any Inconvenience by the Change, thou come back to
it again: For it is hard to distinguish, that which is generally held good,
and wholesome, from that, which is good particularly, and fit for thine own
Body. To be free minded, and cheerfully disposed, at Hours of Meat, and of
Sleep, and of Exercise, is one of the best Precepts of Long lasting. As for the
Passions and Studies of the Mind; Avoid Envy; Anxious Fears; Anger fretting
inwards; Subtle and knottie Inquisitions; Jove's, and Exhilarations in Excess;
Sadness not Communicated. Entertain Hopes; Mirth rather then Joy; Variety of
Delights, rather then Surfeit of them; Wonder, and Admiration, and therefore
Novelties; Studies that fill the Mind with Splendide and Illustrious Objects,
as Histories, Fables, and Contemplations of Nature. If you fly Physic in
Health altogether, it will be too strange for your Body, when you shall need
it. If you make it too familiar, it will work no Extraordinary Effect, when
Sickness comes. I commend rather, some Diet, for certain Seasons, then
frequent Use of Physic, Except it be grown into a Custom. For those Diets
alter the Body more, and trouble it less. Despise no new Accident, in your
Body, but ask Opinion of it. In Sickness, respect Health principally; And in
Health, Action. For those that put their Bodies, to endure in Health, may in
most Sicknesses, which are not very sharp, be cured only with Diet, and
Tendering. Celsus could never have spoken it as a Physician, had he not been a
Wise Man withal; when he gives it, for one of the great precepts of Health
and Lasting, That a Man do vary, and enterchange Contraries; But with an
Inclination to the more benign Extreme: Use Fasting, and full Eating, but
rather full Eating; Watching and Sleep, but rather Sleep; Sitting, and
Exercise, but rather Exercise, and the like. So shall Nature be cherished, and
yet taught Masteries. Physicians are some of them so pleasing, and conformable
to the Humor of the Patient, as they press not the true Cure of the Disease;
And some other are so Regular, in proceeding according to Art, for the Disease,
as they respect not sufficiently the Condition of the Patient. Take one of a
Middle Temper; Or if it may not be found in one Man, combine two of either
sort: And forget not to call, as well the best acquainted with your Body, as the
best reputed of for his Faculty.

Of Suspicion. XXXI.
SVspicions amongst Thoughts, are like Bats amongst Birds, they ever fly by
Twight. Certainly, they are to be repressed, or, at the least, well guarded:
For they cloud the Mind; they leese Friends; and they check with Business,
whereby Business cannot go on, currantly, and constantly. They dispose Kings
to Tyranny, Husbands to Jealousy, Wise Men to Irresolution and Melancholy.
They are Defects, not in the Heart, but in the Brain; For they take Place in
the Stourest Natures: As in the Example of Henry the Seventh of England: There
was not a more Suspicious Man, nor a more Stout. And in such a Composition,
they do small Hurt. For commonly they are not admitted, but with Examination,
whether they be likely or no? But in fearful Natures, they gain Ground too
fast. There is Nothing makes a Man Suspect much, more then to Know little: And
therefore Men should remedy Suspicion, by procuring to know more, and not to
keep their Suspicions in Smother. What would Men have? Do they think, those
they employ and deal with, are Saints? Do they not think, they will have
their own Ends, and be truer to Themselves, then to them? Therefore, there is
no better Way to moderate Suspicions, then to account upon such Suspicions as
true, and yet to bridle them, as false. For so far, a Man ought to make use
of Suspicions; as to provide, as if that should be true, that he Suspects, yet
it may do him no Hurt. Suspicions, that the Mind, of it self, gathers, are
but Buzzes; But Suspicions, that are artificially nourished, and put into Men's
Heads, by the Tales, and Whisprings of others, have Stings. Certainly, the best
Mean, to clear the Way, in this same Wood of Suspicions, is franckly to
communicate them, with the Party, that he Suspects: For thereby, he shall be
sure, to know more of the Truth of them, then he did before; And withal, shall
make that Party, more circumspect, not to give further Cause of Suspicion. But
this would not be done to Men of base Natures: For they, if they find
themselves once suspected, will never be true. The Italian says: Sospetto
licentia feed: As if Suspicion did give a Pasport to Faith: But it ought rather
to kindle it, to discharge it self.

Of Discourse. XXXII.
SOme in their Discourse, desire rather Commendation of Wit, in being able to
hold all Arguments, then of Judgment, in discerning what is True: As if it were
a Praise, to know what might be Said, and not what should be Thought. Some have
certain Common Places, and Theames, wherein they are good, and want Variety:
Which kind of Poverty is for the most part Tedious, and when it is once
perceived Ridiculous. The Honourablest Part of Talk, is to give the Occasion;
And again to Moderate and pass to somewhat else; For then a Man leads the
Dance. It is good, in Discourse, and Speech of Conversation, to vary, and
entermingle Speech, of the present Occasion with Arguments; Tales with Reasons;
Asking of Questions, with telling of Opinions; and Jest with Earnest: For it is
a dull Thing to Tire, and, as we say now, to Jade, any Thing too far. As for
Jest, there be certain Things, which ought to be privileged from it; Namely
Religion, Matters of State, Great Persons, Any Man's present Business of
Importance, And any Case that deserves Pity. Yet there be some, that think
their Wits have been asleep; Except they dart out somewhat, that is Piquant,
and to the Quick: That is a Vain, which would be brideled; Parce Puer
stimulis, and fortius vtere Loris. And generally, Men ought to find the
difference, between Saltness and Bitterness. Certainly, he that has a
Satyricall vain, as he makes others afraid of his Wit, so he had need be
afraid of others Memory. He that questioneth much, shall learn much, and
content much; But especially, if he apply his Questions, to the Skill of the
Persons, whom he asks: For he shall give them occasion, to please themselves
in Speaking, and himself shall continually gather Knowledge. But let his
Questions, not be troublesome; For that is fit for a Poser. And let him be
sure, to leave other Men their Turns to speak. Nay, if there be any, that
would reign, and take up all the time, let him find means to take them off,
and to bring Others on; As Musicians use to do, with those, that dance too
long Galliards. If you dissemble sometimes your knowledge, of that you are
thought to know; you shall be thought another time, to know that, you know not.
Speech of a Man's Self ought to be seldom, and well chosen. I knew One, was
wont to say, in Scorn; He must needs be a Wise Man, he speaks so much of
Himself: And there is but one Case, wherein a Man may Commend Himself, with
good Grace; And that is in commending Virtue in Another; Especially, if it be
such a Virtue, whereunto Himself pretends. Speech of Touch toward Others,
should be sparingly used: For Discourse ought to be as a Field, without coming
home to any Man. I knew two Noblemen, of the West Part of England; Whereof the
one was given to Scoff, but kept ever Royal Cheer in his House: The other,
would ask of those, that had been at the Others Table, Tell truly, was there
never a Flout or dry Blow given; To which the Guest would answer; Such and
such a Thing passed: The Lord would say; I thought he would mar a good
Dinner. Discretion of Speech, is more then Eloquence; And to speak agreeably to
him, with whom we deal, is more then to speak in good Words, or in good
Order. A good continued Speech, without a good Speech of Interlocution, shows
Slownesse: And a Good Reply, or Second Speech, without a good Settled Speech,
shows Shallowness and Weakness. As we see in Beasts, that those that are
Weakest in the Course, are yet Nimblest in the Turn: As it is betwixt the
Greyhound, and the Hare. To use too many Circumstances, ere one come to the
Matter, is Wearisome; To use none at all, is Blunt.

Of Plantations. XXXIII.
PLantations are amongst Ancient, Primitive, and Heroical Works. When the
World was young, it begat more Children; But now it is old, it begets fewer:
For I may justly account new Plantations, to be the Children of former
Kingdoms. I like a Plantation in a Pure Soil; that is, where People are not
Displanted, to the end, to Plant in Others. For else, it is rather an
Extirpation, then a Plantation. Planting of Countries, is like Planting of
Woods; For you must make account, to leese almost Twenty years Profit, and
expect your Recompense, in the end. For the Principal Thing, that has been
the Destruction of most Plantations, has been the Base, and Hasty drawing of
Profit, in the first Years. It is true, Speedy Profit is not to be neglected,
as far as may stand, with the Good of the Plantation, but no further. It is a
Shameful and Unblessed Thing, to take the Scumme of People, and Wicked
Condemned Men, to be the People with whom you Plant: And not only so, but it
spoileth the Plantation, For they will ever live like Rogues, and not fall to
work, but be Lazy, and do Mischief, and spend Victuals, and be quickly
weary, and then Certify over to their Country, to the Discredit of the
Plantation. The People wherewith you Plant, ought to be Gardners, Plough-men,
Laborers, Smiths, Carpenters, Ioyners, Fishermen, Fowlers, with some few
Apothecaries, Surgeons, Cooks, and Bakers. In a Country of Plantation, first
look about, what kind of Victual, the Country yields of it self, to Hand:
As Chestnuts, Wall-nuts, Pine-Apples, Olives, Dates, Plummes, Cherries,
Wilde-Hony, and the like: and make use of them Then consider, what Victual or
Esculent Things there are, which grow speedily, and within the year; As
Parsnips, Carrets, Turnips, Onions, Radish, Artichokes of Jerusalem, Maiz, and
the like. For Wheat, Barley, and Oats, they ask too much Labor: But with
Pease, and Beans, you may begin; Both because they ask less Labor, and
because they serve for Meat, as well as for Bread. And of Rice likewise comes
a great Increase, and it is a kind of Meat. Above all, there ought to be
brought Store of Biscuit, Oat-meale, Flower, Meal, and the like, in the
beginning, till Bread may be had. For Beasts, or Birds, take chiefly such, as
are least Subject to Diseases, and Multiply fastest: As Swine, Goats, Cocks,
Hens, Turkies, Geese, House-doues, and the like. The Victual in Plantations,
ought to be expended, almost as in a Besieged Town; That is, with certain
Allowance. And let the Maine Part of the Ground employed to Gardens or Corn,
be to a Common Stock; And to be Laid in, and Stored up, and then Delivered
out in Proportion; Besides some Spots of Ground, that any Particular Person,
will Manure, for his own Private. Consider likewise, what Commodities the
Soil, where the Plantation is, does naturally yield, that they may some way
help to defray the Charge of the Plantation: So it be not, as was said, to the
untimely Prejudice, of the maine Business; As it has fared with Tobacco in
Virginia. Wood commonly abounds but too much; And therefore, Timber is fit to
be one. If there be Iron Ure, and Streams whereupon to set the Milles; Iron is
a brave Commodity, where Wood abounds. Making of Bay Salt, if the Climate be
proper for it, would be put in Experience. Growing Silk likewise, if any be,
is a likely Commodity. Pitch and Tar, where store of Firres and Pines are,
will not fail. So Drugs, and, Sweet Woods, where they are, cannot but yield
great Profit. Soape Ashes likewise, and other Things, that may be thought of.
But moile not too much under Ground: For the Hope of Mines is very Uncertain,
and uses to make the Planters Lazy, in other Things. For Government, let it
be in the Hands of one, assisted with some Counsel: And let them have
Commission, to exercise Martial Laws, with some limitation. And above all,
let Men make that Profit of being in the Wilderness, as they have God always,
and his Service, before their Eyes. Let not the Government of the Plantation,
depend upon too many Counselors, and Undertakers, in the Country that
Planteth, but upon a temperate Number: And let those be, rather Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, then Merchants: For they look ever to the present Gain Let there
be Freedoms from Custom, till the Plantation be of Strength: And not only
Freedom from Custom, but Freedom to carry their Commodities, where they may
make their Best of them, except there be some special Cause of Caution. Cramme
not in People, by sending too fast, Company, after Company; But rather hearken
how they waste, and send Supplies proportionably; But so, as the Number may
live well, in the Plantation, and not by Surcharge be in Penury. It has been
a great Endangering, to the Health of some Plantations, that they have built
along the Sea, and Rivers, in Marish and unwholesome Grounds Therefore, though
you begin there, to avoid Carriage, and other like Discommodities, yet build
still, rather upwards, from the Streams, then along. It concerns likewise,
the Health of the Plantation, that they have good Store of Salt with them, that
they may use it, in their Victuals, when it shall be necessary. If you Plant,
where Savages are, do not only entertain them with Trifles, and Gingles; But
use them justly, and graciously, with sufficient Guard neucrthelesse: And do
not win their favor, by helping them to invade their Enemies, but for their
Defense it is not amiss. And send often of them, over to the Country, that
Plants, that they may see a better Condition then their own, and commend it
when they return. When the Plantation grows to Strength, then it is time, to
Plant with Women, as well as with Men; That the Plantation may spread into
Generations, and not be ever peeced from without. It is the sinfullest Thing in
the world, to forsake or destitute a Plantation, once in Forwardness: For
besides the Dishonor, it is the Guiltiness of Blood, of many Commiserable
Persons.

Of Riches. XXXIIII.
I Cannot call Riches better, then the Baggage of Virtue. The Roman Word is
better, Impedimenta. For as the Baggage is to an Army, so is Riches to Virtue.
It cannot be spared, nor left behind, but it hinders the March; Yea, and the
care of it, sometimes, loses or disturbeth the Victory: Of great Riches, there
is no Real Use, except it be in the Distribution; The rest is but Conceit. So
says Solomon; Where much is, there are Many to consume it; And what has the
Owner, but the Sight of it, with his Eyes? The Personal Fruition in any Man,
cannot reach to feel Great Riches: There is a Custody of them; Or a Power of
Dole and Donatiue of them; Or a Fame of them; But no Solid Use to the Owner.
Do you not see, what fained Prices, are set upon little Stones, and Rarities?
And what Works of Ostentation, are undertaken, because there might seem to be,
some Use of great Riches? But then you will say, they may be of use, to buy Men
out of Dangers or Troubles. As Solomon says; Riches are as a strong Hold, in
the Imagination of the Rich Man. But this is excellently expressed, that it is
in Imagination, and not always in Fact. For certainly Great Riches, have sold
more Men, then they have bought out. Seek not Proud Riches, but such as thou
may get justly, Use soberly, Distribute cheerfully, and Leave contentedly.
Yet have no Abstract nor Friarly Contempt of them. But distinguish, as Cicero
says well of Rabirius Posthumus; In studio rei amplificand^e, apparebat, non
Auaritiae Praedam, sed Instrumentum Bonitati, quaeri. Hearken also to Solomon,
and beware of Hasty Gathering of Riches: Qui festinat ad Diuitias, non erit
insons. The Poets faigne that when Plutus, (which is Riches,) is sent from
Jupiter, he limps, and goes slowly; But when he is sent from Pluto, he runs,
and is Swift of Foot. Meaning, that Riches gotten by Good Means, and Just
Labor, pace slowly; But when they come by the death of Others, (As by the
Course of Inheritance, Testaments, and the like,) they come tumbling upon a
Man. But it might be applied likewise to Pluto, taking him for the Devil. For
when Riches come from the Devil, (as by Fraud, and Oppression, and unjust
Means,) they come upon Speed. The Ways to enrich are many, and most of them
Foul. Parsimony is one of the best, and yet is not Innocent: For it
withholds Men, from Works of Liberality, and Charity. The Improuement of
the Ground, is the most Natural Obtaining of Riches; For it is our Great
Mothers Blessing, the Earths; But it is slow. And yet, where Men of great
wealth, do stoop to husbandry, it multiplieth Riches exceedingly. I knew a
Nobleman in England, that had the greatest Audits, of any Man in my Time: A
Great Grasier, A Great Sheepe-Master, A Great Timber Man, A Great Colliar, A
Great Corne-Master, A Great Lead-Man, and so of Iron, and a Number of the like
Points of Husbandry. So as the Earth seemed a Sea to him, in respect of the
Perpetual Importation. It was truly observed by One, that Himself came very
hardly to a Little Riches, and very easily to Great Riches. For when a Man's
Stock is come to that, that he can expect the Prime of Markets, and overcome
those Bargains, which for their greatness are few Men's Money, and be Partner
in the Industries of Younger Men, he cannot but increase mainely. The Gains of
Ordinary Trades and Vocations, are honest; And furthered by two Things,
chiefly: By Diligence; And By a good Name, for good and fair dealing. But the
Gains of Bargains, are of a more doubtful Nature; When Men shall wait upon
Others Necessity, broake by Servants and Instruments to draw them on, Put off
Others cunningly that would be better Chapmen, and the like Practices, which
are Crafty and Naught. As for the Chopping of Bargains, when a Man Buies, not
to Hold, but to Sell over again, that commonly Grindeth double, both upon the
Seller, and upon the Buyer. Sharings, do greatly Enrich, if the Hands be well
chosen, that are trusted. Usury is the certainest Means of Gain, though one
of the worst; As that, whereby a Man does eat his Bread; In sudore vultus
alieni: And besides, does Plough upon Sundaies. But yet Certain though it be,
it has Flawes; For that the Scriueners and Broakers, do value unsound Men, to
serve their own Turn. The Fortune, in being the First in an Invention, or in
a Privilege, does cause sometimes a wonderful Ouergrowth in Riches; As it was
with the first Sugar Man, in the Canaries: Therefore, if a Man can play the
true Logician, to have as well Judgment, as Invention, he may do great
Matters; especially if the Times be fit. He that rests upon Gains Certain,
shall hardly grow to great Riches: And he that puts all upon Adventures, does
often times break, and come to Poverty: It is good therefore, to guard
Adventures with Certainties, that may uphold losses. Monopolies, and Coemption
of Wares for Resale, where they are not restrained, are great Means to enrich;
especially, if the Party have intelligence, what Things are like to come into
Request, and so store Himself before hand. Riches gotten by Service, though it
be of the best Rise, yet when they are gotten by Flattery, Feeding Humors, and
other Servile Conditions, they may be placed amongst the Worst. As for Fishing
for Testaments and Executorships (as Tacit says of Seneca; Testame^ta et
Orbos, ta^quam Indagine capi;) It is yet worse; By how much Men submit
themselves, to Meaner Persons, then in Service. Believe not much them, that
seem to despise Riches: For they despise them, that despair of them; And none
Worse, when they come to them. Be not Penny-wise; Riches have Wings, and
sometimes they Fly away of themselves, sometimes they must be set Flying to
bring in more. Men leave their Riches, either to their Kindred; Or to the
Public: And moderate Portions prosper best in both. A great State left to an
Heir, is as a Lure to all the Birds of Prey, round about, to seize on him, if
he be not the better stablished in Years and Judgment. Likewise Glorious
Gifts and Foundations, are like Sacrifices without Salt; And but the Painted
Sepulchers of Alms, which soon will putrify, and corrupt inwardly.
Therefore, Measure not thine Aduancements by Quantity, but Frame them by
Measure; And Defer not Charities till Death: For certainly, if a Man weigh it
rightly, he that does so, is rather Liberal of an Other Man's, then of his Own.

Of Prophecies. XXXV.
I Mean not to speak of Divine Prophecies; Nor of Heathen Oracles; Nor of
Natural Predictions; But only of Prophecies, that have been of certain
Memory, and from Hidden Causes. Says the Pythonissa to Saul; To Morrow thou
and thy son shall be with me. Homer has these Verses.

At Domus Aeneae cu^ctis dominabitur Oris,

Et Nati Natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis: A Prophecy, as it seems, of the
Roman Empire. Seneca the Tragedian has these Verses. -- Venient Annis
Seculaseris, quibus Oceanus
Vincula Rerum laxet, and ingens
Pateat Tellus, Typhisque nouos
Detegat Orbs; nec sit Terris
Vltima Thule:
A Prophecy of the Discovery of America. The Daughter of Polycrates dreamed,
that Jupiter bathed her Father, and Apollo anointed him: And it came to pass,
that he was crucified in an Open Place, where the Sun made his Body run
with Sweat, and the Rain washed it. Philip of Macedon dreamed, He sealed up
his Wives Belly: Whereby he did expound it, that his Wife should be barren: But
Aristander the Soothsayer, told him, his Wife was with Child, because Men do
not use to Seal Vessels that are empty. A Phantasme, that appeared to M.
Brutus in his Tent, said to him; Philippis iterum me videbis. Tiberius said to
Galba. Tu quoque Galba degustabis Imperium. In Vespasians Time, there went a
Prophecy in the East; That those that should come forth of Judea, should
reign over the World: which though it may be was meant of our Savior, yet
Tacitus expounds it of Vespasian. Domitian dreamed, the Night before he was
slain, that a Golden Head was growing out of the Nape of his Neck: And
indeed, the Succession that followed him, for many years, made Golden Times.
Henry the Sixth of England, said of Henry the Seventh, when he was a Lad, and
gave him Water; This is the Lad, that shall enjoy the Crown, for which we
strive. When I was in France, I heard from one Dr. Pena, that the Q. Mother,
who was given to Curious Arts, caused the King her Husbands Nativity, to be
Calculated, under a false Name; And the Astrologer gave a Judgment, that he
should be killed in a Duel; At which the Queen laughed, thinking her Husband,
to be above Challenges and Duels: but he was slain, upon a Course at Tilt, the
Splinters of the Staff of Mongomery, going in at his Beuer. The triuiall
Prophecy, which I heard, when I was a Child, and Queen Elizabeth was in the
Flower of her Years, was; When Hemp is sponne;
England's done.
Whereby, it was generally conceived, that after the Princes had Reigned, which
had the Principiall Letters, of that Word Hemp, (which were Henry, Edward,
Mary, Philip, and Elizabeth) England should come to utter Confusion. Which,
thanks be to God, is verified only, in the Change of the Name: For that the
Kings Style, is now no more of England, but of Britain. There was also another
Prophecy, before the year of 88. which I do not well understand. There shall
be seen upon a day,
Between the Baugh, and the May,
The Black Fleet of Norway.
When that that is come and gone,
England build Houses of Lime and Stone
For after Wars shall you have None.
It was generally conceived, to be meant of the Spanish Fleet, that came in 88.
For that the King of Spaines Surname, as they say, is Norway. The Prediction of
Regiomontanus; Octogessimus octauus mirabilis Annus; Was thought likewise
accomplished, in the Sending of that great Fleet, being the greatest in
Strength, though not in Number, of all that ever swamme upon the Sea. As for
Cleons Dream, I think it was a Jest. It was, that he was devoured of a long
Dragon; And it was expounded of a Maker of Sausages, that troubled him
exceedingly. There are Numbers of the like kind; Especially if you include
Dreams, and Predictions of Astrology. But I have set down these few only of
certain Credit, for Example. My Judgment is, that they ought all to be
Despised; And ought to serve, but for Winter Talk, by the Fire side. Though
when I say Despised, I mean it as for Belief: For otherwise, the Spreading or
Publishing of them, is in no sort to be Despised. For they have done much
Mischief: And I see many severe Laws made to suppress them. That, that has
given them Grace, and some Credit, consists in three Things. First, that Men
mark, when they hit, and never mark, when they miss: As they do, generally,
also of Dreams. The second is, that Probable Conjectures, or obscure
Traditions, many times, turn themselves into Prophecies: While the Nature of
Man, which coueteth Divination, thinks it no Peril to foretell that, which
indeed they do but collect. As that of Seneca's Verse. For so much was then
subject to Demonstration, that the Globe of the Earth, had great Parts beyond
the Atlanticke; which might be Probably conceived, not to be all Sea: And
adding thereto, the Tradition in Plato's Timeus, and his Atlanticus, it might
encourage One, to turn it to a Prediction. The third, and Last (which is the
Great one) is, that almost all of them, being infinite in Number, have been
Impostures, and by idle and crafty Brains, merely contrived and feigned,
after the Event Past.

Of Ambition. XXXVI.
AMbition is like Choler; Which is an Humor, that makes Men Active, Earnest,
Full of Alacrity, and Stirring, if it be not stopped. But if it be stopped,
and cannot have his Way, it becomes Adust, and thereby Malign and Venomous.
So Ambitious Men, if they find the way Open for their Rising, and still get
forward, they are rather Busy then Dangerous; But if they be checked in their
desires, they become secretly discontent, and look upon Men and matters, with
an Evil Eye; And are best pleased, when Things go backward; Which is the
worst Property, in a Servant of a Prince or State. Therefore it is good for
Princes, if they use Ambitious Men, to handle it so, as they be still
Progressiue, and not Retrograde: Which because it cannot be without
Inconvenience, it is good not to use such Natures at all. For if they rise not
with their Service, they will take Order to make their Service fall with them.
But since we have said, it were good not to use Men of Ambitious Natures,
except it be upon necessity, it is fit we speak, in what Cases, they are of
necessity. Good Commanders in the Wars, must be taken, be they never so
Ambitious: For the Use of their. Service dispenses with the rest; And to take
a Soldier without Ambition, is to pull off his Spurs. There is also great use
of Ambitious Men, in being Skreenes to Princes, in Matters of Danger and Envy:
For no Man will take that Part, except he be like a Seel'd Dove, that mounts
and mounts, because he cannot see about him. There is Use also of Ambitious
Men, in Pulling down the Greatness, of any Subject that ouer-tops: As
Tiberius used Macro in the Pulling down of Seianus. Since therefore they must
be used, in such Cases, there rests to speak, how they are to bebrideled,
that they may be less dangerous. There is less danger of them, if they be of
Mean Birth, then if they be Noble: And if they be rather Harsh of Nature, then
Gracious and Popular: And if they be rather New Raised, then grown Cunning,
and Fortified in their Greatness. It is counted by some, a weakness in
Princes, to have Favorites. But it is, of all others, the best Remedy against
Ambitious Great-Ones. For when the Way of Pleasuring and Displeasuring, lies
by the Favorite, it is Impossible, Any Other should be Ouer-great. Another
means to curb them, is to Balance them by others, as Proud as they. But
then, there must be some Middle Counselors, to keep Things steady: For
without that Ballast, the Ship will roll too much. At the least, a Prince may
animate and inure some Meaner Persons, to be, as it were, Scourges to Ambitious
Men. As for the having of them Obnoxious to Ruin, if they be of fearful
Natures, it may do well: But if they be Stout, and Daring, it may precipitate
their Designs, and prove dangerous. As for the pulling of them down, if the
Affairs require it, and that it may not be done with safety suddenly, the
only Way is, the Enterchange continually of Favors, and Disgraces; whereby
they may not know, what to expect; And be, as it were, in a Wood Of Ambitions,
it is less harmefull, the Ambition to prevail in great Things, then that
other, to appear in every thing; For that breeds Confusion, and marres
Business. But yet, it is less danger, to have an Ambitious Man, stirring in
Business, then Great in Dependances. He that seeks to be Eminent amongst
Able Men, has a great Task; but that is ever good for the Public. But he
that plots, to be the only Figure amongst Ciphars, is the decay of an whole
Age. Honor has three Things in it: The Vantage Ground to do good: The
Approach to Kings, and principal Persons: And the Raising of a Man's own
Fortunes. He that has the best of these Intentions, when he aspireth, is an
Honest Man: And that Prince, that can discern of these Intentions, in Another
that aspireth, is a wise Prince. Generally, let Princes and States, choose such
Ministers, as are more sensible of Duty, then of Rising; And such as love
Business rather upon Conscience, then upon Bravery: And let them Discern a
Busy Nature, from a Willing Mind.

Of Masks and Triumphs. XXXVII.
THese Things are but Toys, to come amongst such Serious Observations. But
yet, since Princes will have such Things, it is better, they should be Graced
with Elegancy, then Daubed with Cost Dancing to Song, is a Thing of great
State, and Pleasure. I understand it, that the Song be in Quire, placed aloft,
and accompanied with some broken Music: And the Ditty fitted to the Device.
Acting in Song, especially in Dialogues, has an extreme Good Grace: I say
Acting, not Dancing, (For that is a Mean and Vulgar Thing;) And the Voices of
the Dialogue, would be Strong and Manly, (A Base, and a Tenor; No Trebble;)
And the Ditty High and Tragical; Not nice or Dainty. Sever all Quires, placed
one over against another, and taking the Voice by Catches, Antheme wise, give
great Pleasure. Turning Dances into Figure, is a childish Curiosity. And
generally, let it be noted, that those Things, which I here set down, are
such, as do naturally take the Sense, and not respect Petty Wonderments. It is
true, the Alterations of Scenes, so it be quietly, and without Noise, are
Things of great Beauty, and Pleasure: For they feed and relieve the Eye, before
it be full of the same Object. Let the Scenes abound with Light, specially
Colored and Varied: And let the Masquers, or any other, that are to come down
from the Scene, have some Motions, upon the Scene it self, before their
Coming down: For it draws the Eye strangely, and makes it with great
pleasure, to desire to see that, it cannot perfectly discern. Let the Songs be
Loud, and Cheerful, and not Chirpings, or Pulings. Let the Music likewise,
be Sharp, and Loud, and Well Placed. The Colors, that show best by
Candlelight, are; White, Carnation, and a Kind of Sea-Water-Greene; And Oes,
or Spangs, as they are of no great Cost, so they are of most Glory. As for Rich
Embroidery, it is lost, and not Discerned. Let the Suits of the Masquers, be
Graceful, and such as become the Person, when the Vizars are off: Not after
Examples of Known Attires; Turks, Soldiers, Mariners, and the like. Let
Antimasques not be long; They have been commonly of Fools, Satyrs, Baboones,
Wilde-Men, Antiques, Beasts, Sprites, Witches, Ethiopes, Pigmies, Turquets,
Nimphs, Rusticks, Cupids, Statua's Moving, and the like. As for Angels, it is
not Comicall enough, to put them in Anti-Masques; And any Thing that is
hideous, as Devils, Giants, is on the other side as unfit. But chiefly, let the
Music of them, be Recreatiue, and with some strange Changes. Some Sweet
Odours, suddenly coming forth, without any drops falling, are, in such a
Company, as there is Steame and Heat, Things of great Pleasure; and
Refreshment. Double Masks, one of Men, another of Ladies, adds State, and
Variety. But All is Nothing, except the Room be kept Clear, and Neat.

For Iusts, and Tourneys, and Barriers; The Glories of them, are chiefly in the
Chariots, wherein the Challengers make their Entry; Especially if they be
drawn with Strange Beasts; As Lions, Bears, Cammels, and the like: Or in the
Devices of their Entrance; Or in the Bravery of their Liueries; Or in the
Goodly Furniture of their Horses, and Armor. But enough of these Toys.

Of Nature in Men. XXXVIII.
NAture is Often Hidden; Sometimes Overcome; Seldom Extinguished. Force makes
Nature more violent in the Return: Doctrine and Discourse makes Nature less
Importune: But Custom only does alter and subdue Nature. He that seeks
Victory over his Nature, let him not set Himself too great, nor too small
Tasks: For the first, will make him dejected by often Faylings; And the Second
will make him a small Proceeder, though by often Preuailings. And at the first,
let him practice with Helps, as Swimmers do with Bladders, or Rushes: But
after a Time, let him practice with disaduantages, as Dancers do with thick
Shoes. For it breeds great Perfection, if the Practice be harder then the use.
Where Nature is Mighty, and therefore the Victory hard, the Degrees had need
be; First to Stay and Arrest Nature in Time; Like to Him, that would say over
the Four and Twenty Letters, when he was Angry: Then to Go less in Quantity;
As if one should, in forbearing Wine, come from Drinking Healths, to a Draught
at a Meal: And lastly, to Discontinue altogether. But if a Man have the
Fortitude, and Resolution, to enfranchise Himself at once, that is the best;
Optimus ille Animi Vindex, ledetia pectus
Vincula qui rupit, dedoluitque semel.
Neither is the Ancient Rule amiss, to bend Nature as a Wand, to a Contrary
Extreme, whereby to set it right: Understanding it, where the Contrary Extreme
is no Vice. Let not a man force a Habit upon himself, with a Perpetual
Continuance, but with some Intermission. For both the Pause, reinforceth the
new Onset; And if a Man, that is not perfect, be ever in Practice, he shall as
well practice his Errors, as his Abilities; And induce one Habit of both: And
there is no Means to help this, but by Seasonable Intermissions. But let not
a Man trust his Victory over his Nature too far; For Nature will lay buried
a great Time, and yet revive, upon the Occasion or Temptation. Like as it was
with Aesopes Damsel, turned from a Catt to a Woman, who sat very demurely,
at the Boards End, till a Mouse ran before her. Therefore let a Man, either
avoid the Occasion altogether; Or put Himself often to it, that he may be
little moved with it. A Man's Nature is best perceived in Priuatenesse, for
there is no Affectation; In Passion, for that puts a Man out of his
Precepts; And in a new Case or Experiment, for there Custom leaves him. They
are happy Men, whose Natures sort with their Vocations; Otherwise they may
say, Multum Incola fuit Anima mea: when they converse in those Things, they do
not Affect. In Studies, whatsoever a Man commands upon himself, let him set
Hours for it: But whatsoever is agreeable to his Nature, let him take no Care,
for any set Times: For his Thoughts, will fly to it of Themselves; So as the
Spaces of other Business, or Studies, will suffice. A Man's Nature runs
either to Herbs, or Weeds; Therefore let him seasonably Water the One, and
Destroy the Other.

Of Custom and Education. XXXIX.
Men's Thoughts are much according to their Inclination: Their Discourse and
Speeches according to their Learning, and Infused Opinions; But their Deeds are
after as they have been Accustomed. And therefore, as Macciauel well notes
(though in an evil favored Instance) There is no Trusting to the Force of
Nature, nor to the Bravery of Words; Except it be Corroborate by Custom. His
Instance is, that for the Atchieuing of a desperate Conspiracy, a Man should
not rest upon the Fierceness of any man's Nature, or his Resolute Undertakings;
But take such an one, as has had his Hands formerly in Blood. But Macciauel
knew not of a Friar Clement, nor a Rauillac, nor a Iaureguy, nor a Baltazar
Gerard: yet his Rule holds still, that Nature, nor the Engagement of Words,
are not so forcible, as Custom. Only Superstition is now so well advanced,
that Men of the first Blood, are as Firm, as Butchers by Occupation: And
votary Resolution is made Equipollent to Custom, even in matter of Blood. In
other Things, the Predominancy of Custom is every where Visible; In so much,
as a Man would wonder, to hear Men Profess, Protest, Engage, Give Great
Words, and then Do just as they have Done before: As if they were Dead Images,
and Engines moved only by the wheels of Custom. We see also the Reign or
Tyranny of Custom, what it is. The Indians (I mean the Sect of their Wise
Men) lay Themselves quietly upon a Stacke of Wood, and so Sacrifice themselves
by Fire. Nay the Wives strive to be burned with the Corpses of their Husbands.
The Lads of Sparta, of Ancient Time, were wont to be Scourged upon the Altar of
Diana, without so much as Queching. I remember in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's time of England, an Irish Rebel Condemned, put up a Petition to the
Deputy, that he might be hanged in a With, and not in an Halter, because it
had been so used, with former Rebels. There be Monks in Russia, for Penance,
that will sit a whole Night, in a Vessel of Water, till they be Engaged with
hard Ice. Many Examples may be put, of the Force of Custom, both upon Mind,
and Body. Therefore, since Custom is the Principal Magistrate of Man's life;
Let Men by all Means endeavor, to obtain good Customs. Certainly, Custom is
most perfect, when it begins in Young Years: This we call Education; which
is, in effect, but an Early Custom. So we see, in Languages the Tongue is more
Pliant to all Expressions and Sounds, the Ioints are more Supple to all Feats
of Actiuitie, and Motions, in Youth then afterward. For it is true, that late
Learners, cannot so well take the Plie; Except it be in some Minds, that have
not suffered themselves to fix, but have kept themselves open and prepared to
receive continual Amendment, which is exceeding Rare. But if the Force of
Custom Simple and Separate, be Great; the Force of Custom Copulate, and
Conjoined, and Collegiate, is far Greater. For there Example teaches; Company
comfort; Emulation quickens; Glory raises: So as in such Places the Force
of Custom is in his Exaltation. Certainly, the great Multiplication of Virtues
upon Humane Nature, rests upon Societies well Ordained, and Disciplined. For
Commonwealths, and Good Governments, do nourish Virtue Grown, but do not
much mend the seeds. But the Misery is, that the most Effectual Means, are
now applied, to the Ends, least to be desired.

Of Fortune. XL.
IT cannot be denied, but Outward Accidents co^duce much to Fortune. Favor,
Opportunity, Death of Others, Occasion fitting Virtue. But chiefly, the Mould
of a Man's Fortune, is in his own hands. Faber quisque Fortunae suae; says the
Poet. And the most Frequent of External Causes is, that the Folly of one Man,
is the Fortune of Another. For no Man prospers so suddenly, as by Others
Errors. Serpens nisi Serpentem comederit non fit Draco. Ouert, and Apparent
virtues bring forth Praise; But there be Secret and Hidden Virtues, that bring
Forth Fortune. Certain Deliueries of a Man's Self, which have no Name. The
Spanish Name, Desemboltura, partly expresses them: When there be not Stonds,
nor Restiuenesse in a Man's Nature; But that the wheels of his Mind keep way,
with the wheels of his Fortune. For so Liuie (after he had described Cato
Mayor, in these words; In illo viro, tantum Robur Corporis and Animi fuit, vt
quocunque loco natus esset, Fortunam sibi facturus videretur;) falls upon
that, that he had, Versatile Ingenium. Therefore, if a Man look Sharply, and
Attentively, he shall see Fortune: For though she be Blind, yet she is not
Invisible. The Way of Fortune, is like the Milken Way in the Sky; Which is a
Meeting or Knot, of a Number of Small Stars; Not Seen asunder, but Giving
Light together. So are there, a Number of Little, and scarce discerned Virtues,
or rather Faculties and Customs, that make Men Fortunate. The Italians note
some of them, such as a Man would little think. When they speak of one, that
cannot do amiss, they will throw in, into his other Conditions, that he has,
Poco di Matto. And certainly, there be not two more Fortunate Properties; Then
to have a Little of the Fool; And not Too Much of the Honest. Therefore,
Extreme Lovers of their Country, or Masters, were never Fortunate, neither can
they be. For when a Man places his Thoughts without Himself, he goes not his
own Way. An hasty Fortune makes an Enterpriser, and Remouer, (The French
has it better; Entreprenant, or Remuant) But the Exercised Fortune makes the
Able Man. Fortune is to be Honored, and Respected, and it be but for her
Daughters, Confidence, and Reputation. For those two Felicity breeds: The
first within a Man's Self; the Latter, in Others toward Him. All Wise Men, to
decline the Envy of their own virtues, use to ascribe them to Providence and
Fortune; For so they may the better assume them: And besides, it is Greatness
in a Man, to be the Care, of the Higher Powers. So Caesar said to the Pilot in
the Tempest, Caesarem portas, and Fortunam eius. So Sylla chose the Name of
Felix, and not of Magnus. And it has been noted, that those, that ascribe
openly too much to their own Wisdom, and Policy, end Unfortunate. It is
written, that Timotheus the Athenian, after he had, in the Account he gave to
the State, of his Government, often interlaced this Speech; And in this Fortune
had no Part, never prospered in any Thing he undertook afterward. Certainly,
there be, whose Fortunes are like Homers Verses, that have a Slide, and
Easiness, more then the Verses of other Poets: As Plutarch says of Timoleons
Fortune, in respect of that of Agesilaus, or Epaminondas. And that this should
be, no doubt it is much, in a Man's Self.

Of Usury. XLI.
MAny have made Witty Inuectiues against Usury. They say, that it is Pity,
the Devil should have Gods part, which is the Tithe. That the Usurer is the
greatest Sabbath Breaker, because his Plough goes every Sunday. That the
Usurer is the Droane, that Virgil speaks of:

Ignauum Fucos Pecus a praesepibus arce^t. That the Usurer breaks the First
Law, that was made for Mankind, after the Fall; which was, In sudore Vultus
tui comedes Panem tuum; Not, In sudore Vultus alieni. That Usurers should have
Orangetawney Bonnets, because they do Iudaize. That it is against Nature, for
Money to beget Money; And the like. I say this only, that Usury is a Concessum
propter Duritiem Cordis: For since there must be Borrowing and Lending, and Men
are so hard of Heart, as they will not lend freely, Usury must be permitted.
Some Others have made Suspicious, and Cunning Propositions, of Banks,
Discovery of Men's Estates, and other Inventions. But few have spoken of Usury
usefully. It is good to set before us, the Incommodities, and Commodities of
Usury; That the Good may be, either Weighed out, or Culled out; And warily to
provide, that while we make forth, to that which is better, we meet not, with
that which is worse.

The Discommodities of Usury are: First, that it makes fewer Merchants. For
were it not, for this Lazy Trade of Usury, Money would not lie still, but
would, in great Part, be Employed upon Merchandising; Which is the Vena Porta
of Wealth in a State. The Second, that it makes Poor Merchants. For as a
Farmer cannot husband his Ground so well, if he sit at a great Rent; So the
Merchant cannot drive his Trade so well, if he sit at great Usury. The Third is
incident to the other two; And that is, the Decay of Customs of Kings or
States, which Ebb or flow with Merchandising. The Fourth, that it brings the
Treasure of a Realm, or State, into a few Hands. For the Usurer being at
Certainties, and others at Uncertainties, at the end of the Game, Most of the
Money will be in the Box; And ever a State flourishes, when Wealth is more
equally spread. The Fifth, that it beats down the Price of Land: For the
Employment of Money, is chiefly, either Merchandising, or Purchasing; And Usury
Way-layes both. The Sixth, that it does Dull and Dampe all Industries,
Improuements, and new Inventions, wherein Money would be Stirring, if it were
not for this Slugge. The Last, that it is the Canker and Ruin of many Men's
Estates; Which in process of Time breeds a Public Poverty.

On the other side, the Commodities of Usury are. First, that howsoever Usury
in some respect hinders Merchandising, yet in some other it aduanceth it: For
it is certain, that the Greatest Part of Trade, is driven by Young Merchants,
upon Borrowing at Interest: So as if the Usurer, either call in, or keep back
his Money, there will ensue presently a great Stand of Trade. The Second is,
That were it not, for this easy borrowing upon Interest, Men's necessities
would draw upon them, a most sudden undoing; In that they would be forced to
sell their Means (be it Lands or Goods) far under Foot; and so, whereas
Usury does but Gnaw upon them, Bad Markets would Swallow them quite up. As for
Mortgaging, or Pawning, it will little mend the matter; For either Men will not
take Pawnes without Use; Or if they do, they will look precisely for the
Forfeiture. I remember a Cruel Moneyed Man, in the Country, that would say;
The Devil take this Usury, it keeps us from Forfeitures, of Mortgages, and
Bonds. The third and Last is, That it is a Vanity to conceive, that there
would be Ordinary Borrowing without Profit; And it is impossible to conceive,
the Number of Inconveniences, that will ensue, if Borrowing be Cramped.
Therefore, to speak of the Abolishing of Usury is Idle. All States have ever
had it, in one Kind or Rate, or other. So as that Opinion must be sent to
Vtopia.

To speak now, of the Reformation and Reiglement of Usury; How the
Discommodities of it may be best avoided, and the Commodities retained. It
appears by the Balance, of Commodities, and Discommodities of Usury, Two
Things are to be Reconciled. The one, that the Tooth of Usury begrinded, that
it bite not too much: The other, that there be left open a Means, to inuit
Moneyed Men, to lend to the Merchants, for the Continuing and Quickening of
Trade. This cannot be done, except you introduce, two several Sorts of Usury;
A Less, and a Greater. For if you reduce Usury, to one Low Rate, it will ease
the common Borrower, but the Merchant will be to seek for Money. And it is to
be noted, that the Trade of Merchandise, being the most Lucratiue, may bear
Usury at a good Rate; Other Contracts not so.

To serve both Intentions, the way would be briefly thus. That there be Two
Rates of Usury, The one Free, and General for All; The other under License
only, to Certain Persons, and in Certain Places of Merchandising. First
therefore, let Usury, in general, be reduced to Five in the Hundred; And let
that Rate be proclaimed to be Free and Current; And let the State shut it self
out, to take any Penalty for the same. This will preserve Borrowing from any
general Stop or Dryness. This will ease infinite Borrowers in the Country.
This will, in good Part, raise the Price of Land, because Land purchased at
Sixteen years Purchase, will yield Six in the Hundred, and somewhat more,
whereas this Rate of Interest, Yields but Five. This, by like reason, will
Encourage and edge, Industrious and Profitable Improuements; Because Many will
rather venture in that kind, then take Five in the Hundred, especially having
been used to greater Profit. Secondly, let there be Certain Persons licensed
to Lend, to known Merchants, upon Usury at a Higher-Rate; and let it be with
the Cautions following. Let the Rate be, even with the Merchant himself,
somewhat more easy, then that he used formerly to pay: For, by that Means,
all Borrowers shall have some ease, by this Reformation, be he Merchant, or
whosoever. Let it be no Bank or Common Stock, but every Man be Master of his
own Money: Not that I altogether Mislike Banks, but they will hardly be
brooked, in regard of certain suspicions. Let the State be answered, some small
Matter, for the License, and the rest left to the Lender: For if the Abatement
be but small, it will no whit discourage the Lender. For he, for Example, that
took before Ten or Nine in the Hundred, will sooner descend to Eight in the
Hundred, then give over his Trade of Usury; And go from Certain Gains, to
Gains of Hazard. Let these Licenced Lenders be in Number Indefinite, but
restrained to Certain Principal Cities and Towns of Merchandising: For then
they will be hardly able, to Color other Men's Moneys, in the Country: So as
the License of Nine, will not suck away the current Rate of Five: For no Man
will send his Moneys far off, nor put them into Unknown Hands.

If it be Objected, that this does, in a Sort, Authorize Usury, which before
was, in some places, but Permissiue: The Answer is; That it is better, to
Mitigate Usury by Declaration, then to suffer it to Rage by Conniuence.

Of Youth and Age. XLII.
A Man that is Young in years, may be Old in Hours, if he have lost no Time.
But that happens rarely. Generally, youth is like the first Cogitations, not
so Wise as the Second. For there is a youth in thoughts as well as in Ages. And
yet the Invention of Young Men, is more lively, then that of Old: And
Imaginations stream into their Minds better, and, as it were, more Divinely.
Natures that have much Heat, and great and violent desires and Perturbations,
are not ripe for Action, till they have passed the Meridian of their years: As
it was with Julius Caesar, and Septimius. Seuerus. Of the latter of whom, it is
said; Iuue^tutem egit, Erroribus, imo Furoribus, plena^. And yet he was the
Ablest Emperor, almost, of all the List. But Reposed Natures may do well in
Youth. As it is seen, in Augustus Caesar, Cosmus Duke of Florence, Gaston de
Fois, and others. On the other side, Heat and Viuacity in Age, is an Excellent
Composition for Business. Young Men, are Fitter to Invent, then to Judge;
Fitter for Execution, then for Counsel; And Fitter for New Proiects, then for
Settled Business. For the Experience of Age, in Things that fall within the
compass of it, directs them; But in New Things, abuses them. The Errors of
Young Men are the Ruin of Business; But the Errors of Aged Men amount but to
this; That more might have been done, or sooner. Young Men, in the Conduct,
and Manage of Actions, Embrace more then they can Hold, Stir more then they
can Quiet; Fly to the End, without Consideration of the Means, and Degrees;
Pursue some few Principles, which they have chanced upon absurdly; Care not to
Innouate, which draws unknown Inconveniences; Use extreme Remedies at first;
And, that which doubleth all Errors, will not acknowledge or retract them;
Like an unready Horse, that will neither Stop, nor Turn. Men of Age, Object
too much, Consult too long, Adventure too little, Repent too soon, and seldom
drive Business home to the full Period; But content themselves with a
Mediocrity of Success. Certainly, it is good to compound Employments of both;
For that will be Good for the Present, because the Virtues of either Age, may
correct the defects of both: And good for Succession, that Young Men may be
Learners, while Men in Age are Actours: And lastly, Good for Externe Accidents,
because Authority follows Old Men, And Favor and Popularity Youth. But for
the Moral Part, perhaps Youth will have the pre-eminence, as Age has for the
Politic. A certain Rabbine, upon the Text; Your Young Men shall see visions,
and your Old Menshall dream dreams; Infers, that Young Men are admitted
nearer to God then Old; Because Vision is a clearer Revelation, then a Dream.
And certainly, the more a Man drinks of the World, the more it intoxicateth;
And Age does profit rather in the Powers of Understanding, then in the Virtues
of the Will and Affections. There be some have an Ouerearly Ripeness in their
years, which fades betimes: These are first, Such as have Brittle Wits, the
Edge whereof is soon turned; Such as was Hermogenes the Rhetorician, whose
Books are exceeding Subtle; Who afterward waxed Stupid. A Second Sort is of
those, that have some natural dispositions, which have better Grace in Youth,
then in Age: Such as is a fluent and Luxuriant Speech; which becomes Youth
well, but not Age: So Tully says of Hortentius; Idemmanebat, neque idem
decebat. The third is of such, as take too high a Strain at the First; And are
Magnanimous, more then Tract of years can uphold. As was Scipio Affricanus, of
whom Liuy says in effect; Vltima primis cedebant.

Of Beauty. XLIII.
Virtue is like a Rich Stone, best plain set: And surely Virtue is best in a
Body, that is comely, though not of Delicate Features: And that has rather
dignity of Presence, then Beauty of Aspect. Neither is it almost seen, that
very Beautiful Persons, are otherwise of great Virtue; As if Nature, were
rather Busy not to err, then in labor, to produce Excellency. And therefore,
they prove Accomplished, but not of great Spirit; And Study rather Behavior,
then Virtue; But this holds not always; For Augustus Caesar, Titus
Vespasianus, Philip le Belle of France, Edward the Fourth of England,
Alcibiades of Athens, Ismael the Sophy of Persia, were all High and Great
Spirits, And yet the most Beautiful Men of their Times. In Beauty, that of
Favor, is more then that of Color, And that of Decent and Gracious Motion,
more then that of Favor. That is the best Part of Beauty, which a Picture
cannot express; No nor the first Sight of the Life. There is no Excellent
Beauty, that has not some Strangeness in the Proportion. A Man cannot tell,
whether Apelles, or Albert Durer, were the more Trifler: Whereof the one would
make a Personage by Geometrical Proportions: The other, by taking the best
Parts out of diverse Faces, to make one Excellent. Such Personages, I think,
would please no Body, but the Painter, that made the^. Not but I think a
Painter, may make a better Face, then ever was; But he must do it, by a kind
of Felicity, (As a Musician that makes an excellent Air in Music) And not
by Rule. A Man shall see Faces, that if you examine them, Part by Part, you
shall find never a good; And yet all together do well. If it be true, that
the Principal Part of Beauty, is in decent Motion, certainly it is no
marvel, though Persons in Years, seem many times more Amiable; Pulchrorum
Autumnus pulcher: For no Youth can be comely, but by Pardon, and considering
the Youth, as to make up the comeliness. Beauty is as Summer-Fruits, which are
easy to corrupt, and cannot last: And, for the most part, it makes a dissolute
Youth, and an Age a little out of countenance: But yet certainly again, if it
light well, it makes Virtues shine, and Vices blush.

Of Deformity. XLIIII.
DEformed Persons are commonly even with Nature: For as Nature has done ill by
them; So do they by Nature: Being for the most part, (as the Scripture says)
void of Natural Affection; And so they have their Revenge of Nature. Certainly
there is a Consent between the Body and the Mind; And where Nature erreth in
the One, she ventureth in the Other. Vbi peccat in vno, periclitatur in altero.
But because, there is in Man, an Election touching the Frame of his Mind, and
a Necessity in the Frame of his Body, the Stars of Natural Inclination, are
sometimes obscured, by the Sun of Discipline, and Virtue. Therefore, it is good
to consider of Deformity, not as a Sign, which is more Deceiuable; But as a
Cause, which seldom fails of the Effect. Whosoever has any Thing fixed in
his Person, that does enduce Contempt, has also a perpetual Spur in
himself, to rescue and deliver himself from Scorn: Therefore all Deformed
Persons are extreme Bold. First, as in their own Defense, as being exposed to
Scorn; But in Process of Time, by a General Habit. Also it stirs in them
Industry, and especially of this kind, to watch and observe the Weakness of
Others, that they may have somewhat to repay. Again, in their Superiors, it
quenches Jealousy toward them, as Persons that they think they may at
pleasure despise: And it lays their Competitours and Emulatours asleep; As
never believing, they should be in possibility of advancement, till they see
them in Possession. So that, upon the matter, in a great Wit, Deformity is an
Advantage to Rising. Kings in Ancient Times, (And at this present in some
Countries,) were wont to put Great Trust in Eunuchs; Because they, that are
Envious toward All, are more Obnoxious and Officious toward One. But yet
their Trust toward them, has rather been as to good Spialls, and good
Whisperers; then good Magistrates, and Officers. And much like is the Reason of
Deformed Persons. Still the Ground is, they will, if they be of Spirit, seek
to free themselves from Scorn; Which must be, either by Virtue, or Malice: And
therefore, let it not be Marvelled, if sometimes they prove Excellent Persons;
As was Agesilaus, Zanger the Son of Solomon, Aesope, Gasca President of Peru;
And Socrates may go likewise amongst them; with Others.

Of Building. XLV.
HOuses are built to Live in, and not to Look on: Therefore let Use be
preferred before Uniformity; Except where both may be had. Leave the Goodly
Fabrickes of Houses, for Beauty only, to the Enchanted Palaces of the Poets:
Who build them with small Cost. He that builds a fair House, upon an ill
Seat, commits Himself to Prison. Neither do I reckon it an ill Seat, only,
where the Air is Unwholesome; But likewise where the Air is unequal; As you
shall see many Fine Seats, set upon a knap of Ground, Environed with Higher
Hills round about it: whereby the Heat of the Sun is pent in, and the Wind
gathers as in Troughes; So as you shall have, and that suddenly, as great
Diversity of Heat and Cold, as if you Dwelt in several Places. Neither is it
ill Air only, that makes an ill Seat, but Ill Ways, Ill Markets; And, if
you will consult with Momus, Ill Neighbors. I speak not of many More: Want of
Water; Want of Wood, Shade, and Shelter; Want of Fruitfulness, and mixture of
Grounds of several Natures; Want of Prospect; Want of Level Grounds; Want of
Places, at some near Distance, for Sports of Hunting, Hauking, and Races; Too
near the Sea, too remote, Having the Commodity of Nauigable Rivers, or the
discommoditie of their Ouerflowing; Too far off from great Cities, which may
hinder Business; Or too near them, which Lurcheth all Provisions, and makes
every Thing dear: Where a Man has a great Living laid together, and where he
is scanted: All which, as it is impossible, perhaps, to find together, so it
is good to know them, and think of them, that a Man may take as many as he
can: And if he have several Dwellings, that he sort them so, that what he
wants in the One, he may find in the Other. Lucullus answered Pompey well;
Who when he saw his Stately Galleries, and Rooms, so Large and Lightsome, in
one of his Houses, said; Surely, an excellent Place for Summer, but how do you
in Winter? Lucullus answered; Why, do you not think me as wise, as some Foul
are, that ever change their Abode toward the Winter?

To pass from the Seat, to the House it self; We will do as Cicero does, in
the Orators Art; Who writes Books De Oratore, and a Book he entitles Orator:
Whereof the Former delivers the Precepts of the Art; And the Latter the
Perfection. We will therefore describe a Princely Palace, making a brief
Model thereof. For it is strange to see, now in Europe, such Huge Buildings,
as the Vatican, and Escuriall, and some Others be, and yet scarce a very Fair
Room in them.

First therefore, I say, you cannot have a Perfect Palace, except you have two
several Sides; A Side for the Banquet, as is spoken of in the Book of Hester;
And a Side; for the Household: The One for Feasts and Triumphs, and the Other
for Dwelling. I understand both these Sides, to be not only Returns, but
Parts of the Front; And to be uniform without, though severally Partitioned
within; And to be on both Sides, of a Great and Stately Tower, in the Midst
of the Front; That as it were, joins them together, on either Hand. I would
have on the Side of the Banquet, in Front, one only Goodly Room, above
Stairs, of some Forty Foot high; And under it, a Room, for a Dressing or
Preparing Place, at Times of Triumphs. On the other Side, which is the Household
Side, I wish it divided at the first, into a Hall, and a Chapel, (with a
Partition between;) Both of good State, and Bigness: And those not to go all
the length, but to have, at the further end, a Winter, and a Summer Parler,
both Fair. And under these Rooms, A Fair and Large Cellar, suncke under
Ground: And likewise, some Privy Kitchins, with Butteries, and Pantries, and
the like. As for the Tower, I would have it two Stories, of Eighteen Foot High
a piece, above the two Wings; And a Goodly Leads upon the Top, railed with
Statua's interposed; And the same Tower to be divided into Rooms, as shall be
thought fit. The Stairs likewise, to the upper Rooms, let them be upon a
Fair open Newell, and finely raild in, with Images of Wood, cast into a Brass
Color: And a very fair Landing Place at the Top. But this to be, if you do
not point, any of the lower Rooms, for a Dining Place of Servants. For
otherwise, you shall have the Servants Dinner, after your own: For the Steame
of it will come up as in a Tunnell. And so much for the Front. Only, I
understand the Height of the first Stairs, to be Sixteen Foot; which is the
Height of the Lower Room.

Beyond this Front, is there to be a Fair Court, but three Sides of it, of a
Far Lower building, then the Front. And in all the four Corners of that
Court, Fair Staire Cases, cast into Turrets, on the Outside, and not within
the Row of Buildings themselves. But those Towers, are not to be of the Height
of the Front; But rather Proportionable to the Lower Building. Let the Court
not be paued, for that strikes up a great Heat in Summer, and much Cold in
Winter. But only some Side Alleys, with a Cross, and the Quarters to Graze,
being kept Shorn, but not too near Shorn. The Row of Return, on the Banquet
Side, Let it be all Stately Galleries; In which Galleries, Let there be three,
or five, fine Cupola's, in the Length of it, placed at equal distance: And
fine Colored Windows of several works. On the Household Side, Chambers of
Presence, and Ordinary Entertainments, with some Bed-chambers; And let all
three Sides, be a double House, without Through Lights, on the Sides, that you
may have Rooms from the Sun, both for Fore-noone, and Afternoon. Cast it
also, that you may have Rooms, both for Summer, and Winter: Shadie for Summer,
and Warm for Winter. You shall have sometimes Fair Houses, so full of Glass,
that one cannot tell, where to become, to be out of the Sun, or Cold: For
Inbowed Windows, I hold them of good Use; (In Cities indeed, Upright do
better, in respect of the Uniformity toward the Street;) For they be Pretty
Retiring Places for Conference; And besides, they keep both the Wind, and
Sun off: For that which would strike almost through the Room, does scarce
pass the Window. But let them be but few, Four in the Court, On the Sides
only.

Beyond this Court, let there be an Inward Court of the same Square, and
Height; Which is to be environed, with the Garden, on all Sides: And in the
Inside, Cloistered on all Sides, upon Decent and Beautiful Arches, as High as
the first Story. On the Under Story, toward the Garden, Let it be turned to a
Grotta, or Place of Shade, or Estiuation. And only have opening and Windows
toward the Garden; And be Level upon the Floare, no whit sunk under Ground,
to avoid all Dampishnesse. And let there be a Fountain, or some fair Work of
Statua's, in the Midst of this Court; And to be Paued as the other Court was.
These Buildings to be for Privy Lodgings, on both Sides; And the End, for
Privy Galleries. Whereof, you must foresee, that one of them, be for an
Infirmary, if the Prince, or any Special Person should be Sick, with
Chambers, Bedchamber, Anticamera, and Recamera, joining to it. This upon the
Second Story. Upon the Ground Story, a Fair Gallery, Open, upon Pillars: And
upon the Third Story likewise, an Open Gallery upon Pillars, to take the
Prospect, and Freshness of the Garden. At both Corners of the further Side, by
way of Return, Let there be two Delicate or Rich Cabinets, Daintily Paued,
Richly Hanged, Glased with Crystalline Glass, and a Rich Cupola in the
Midst; And all other Elegancie that may be thought upon. In the Upper Gallery
too, I wish that there may be, if the Place will yield it, some Fountains
Running, in diverse Places, from the Wall, with some fine Auoidances. And thus
much, for the Model of the Palace: Save that, you must have, before you come
to the Front, three Courts. A Green Court Plain, with a Wall about it: A
Second Court of the same, but more Garnished, with little Turrets, or rather
Embellishments, upon the Wall: And a Third Court, to make a Square with the
Front, but not to be built, nor yet enclosed with a Naked Wall, but enclosed
with Tarrasses, Leaded aloft, and fairly garnished, on the three Sides; And
Cloistered on the Inside, with Pillars, and not with Arches Below. As for
Offices, let them stand at Distance, with some Low Galleries, to pass from
them, to the Palace it Self.

Of Gardens. XLVI.
GOD Almighty first Planted a Garden. And indeed, it is the Purest of Humane
pleasure. It is the Greatest Refreshment to the Spirits of Man; Without which
Buildings and Palaces are but Gross Handy-works: And a Man shall ever see,
that when Ages grow to Ciuility and Elegancie, Men come to Build Stately,
sooner then to Garden Finely: As if Gardening were the Greater Perfection. I
do hold it, in the Royal Ordering of Gardens, there ought to be Gardens, for
all the Months in the Year: In which, severally, Things of Beauty, may be
then in Season. For December, and January, and the Latter Part of November, you
must take such Things, as are Green all Winter: Holly; Iuy; Bays; Juniper;
Cipresse Trees; Eugh; Pine-Apple-Trees; Firre-Trees; Rose-Mary; Lauander;
Periwinckle, the White, the Purple, and the Blene; Germander; Flagges;
Orenge-Trees; Limon-Trees; And Mirtles, if they be stirred; And Sweet Marioram
warm set. There follows, for the latter Part of January, and February, the
Mezerion Tree, which then blossoms; Crocus Vernus, both the Yellow, and the
Gray; Prime-Roses; Anemonies; The Early Tulippa; Hiacynthus Orientalis;
Camairis; Frettellaria. For March, There Come Violets, specially the Single
Blew, which are the Earliest; The Yellow Daffadill; The Dazie; The Almond-Tree
in Blossom; The Peach-Tree in Blossom; The Cornelian-Tree in Blossom;
Sweet-Briar. In April follow, The Double white Violet; The Wall-flower; The
Stock-Gilly-Flower; The Couslip, Flower-De-lices, and Lillies of Natures;
Rose-mary Flowers; The Tulippa; The Double Piony; The Pale Daffadill, The
French Honny-Suckle; The Cherry-Tree in Blossom; The Dammasin, and Plum-Trees
Trees in Blossom; The White-Thorne in Leaf; The Lelacke Tree. In May, and
June, come Pincks of all sorts, Specially the Blush Pincke; Roses of all kinds,
except the Musk, which comes later; Hony-Suckles; Strawberries; Buglosse;
Columbine; The French Mary-gold; Flos Africanus; Cherry-Tree in Fruit; Ribes;
Figs in Fruit; Raspes; Vine Flowers; Lauender in Flowers; The Sweet Satyrian,
with the White Flower; Herba Muscaria; Lilium Conuallium; The Appletree in
Blossom. In July, come Gilly-Flowers of all Varieties; Musk Roses; The
Lime-Tree in blossom; Early Pears, and Plummes in Fruit; Ginnitings;
Quadlins. In August, come Plummes of all sorts in Fruit; Pears; Apricockes;
Berberies; Filberds; Muske-Melons; Monks Hoods, of all colors. In September,
come Grapes; Apples; Poppies of all colors; Peaches; Melo-Cotones; Nectarines;
Cornelians; Wardens; Quinces. In October, and the beginning of November, come
Services; Medlars; Bullises, Roses Cut or Removed to come late; Hollyokes; and
such like. These Particulars are for the Climate of London; But my meaning is
Perceived, that you may have Ver Perpetuum, as the Place affords.

And because, the Breath of Flowers, is far Sweeter in the Air, (where it
comes and Goes, like the Warbling of Music) then in the hand, therefore nothing
is more fit for that delight, then to know, what be the Flowers, and Plants,
that do best perfume the Air. Roses Damask and Red, are fast Flowers of their
Smells; So that; you may walk by a whole Row of them, and find Nothing of
their Sweetness; Yea though it be, in a Mornings Dew. Bays likewise yield no
Smell, as they grow. Rosemary little; Nor Sweet-Marioram That, which above all
Others, yields the Sweetest Smell in the Air, is the Violet; Specially the
White-double-Violet, which comes twice a Year; About the middle of April, and
about Bartholomew-tide. Next to that is, the Muske-Rose. Then the Strawberry
Leaves dying, which a most Excellent Cordial Smell Then the Flower of the
Vines; It is a little dust, like the dust of a Bent, which grows upon the
Cluster, in the First coming forth. Then Sweet Briar. Then Wall-Flowers, which
are very Delightful, to be set under a Parler, or Lower Chamber Window. Then
Pinks, specially the Matted Pinck, and Cloue Gilly-flower. Then the Flowers of
the Lime Tree. Then the Honny-Suckles, so they be somewhat a far off. Of
Bean Flowers I speak not, because they are Field Flowers. But those which
Perfume the Air most delightfully, not passed by as the rest, but being Trodden
upon and Crushed, are Three: That is Burnet, Wilde-Time, and Water-Mints,
Therefore, you are to set whole Allies of them, to have the Pleasure, when you
walk or tread.

For Gardens, (Speaking of those, which are indeed Prince-like, as we have done
of Buildings) the Contents, ought not well to be, under Thirty Acres of Ground;
And to be divided into three Parts: A Green in the Entrance; A Heath or Desert
in the Going forth; And the Garden in the midst; Besides Alleys, on both
Sides. And I like well, that Four Acres of Ground, be assigned to the Green;
Six to the Heath; Four and Four to either side; And Twelve to the Maine
Garden. The Green has two pleasures, The one, because nothing is more
Pleasant to the Eye, then Green Grass kept finely shorn; The other, because
it will give you a fair Alley in the midst, by which you may go in front upon
a Stately Hedge, which is to enclose the Garden. But, because the Alley will be
long, and in great Heat of the Year, or Day, you ought not to buy the shade,
in the Garden, by Going in the Sun through the Green, therefore you are, of
either Side the Green, to Plant a Covert Alley, upon Carpenters Work, about
Twelve Foot in Height, by which you may go in Shade, into the Garden, As for
the Making of Knots, or Figures, with Diverse Colored Earths, that they may lie
under the Windows of the House, on that Side, which the Garden stands, they be
but Toys: You may see as good Sights, many times, in Tarts. The Garden is best
to be Square; Encompassed, on all the Four Sides, with a Stately Arched Hedge.
The Arches to be upon Pillars, of Carpenters Work, of some Ten Foot high, and
Six Foot broad: And the Spaces between, of the same Dimension, with the Breadth
of the Arch. Over the Arches, let there be an Entire Hedge, of some Four Foot
High, framed also upon Carpenters Work: And upon the Upper Hedge, over every
Arch, a little Turret, with a Belly, enough to receive a Cage of Birds: And
over every Space, between the Arches, some other little Figure, with Broad
Plates of Round Colored Glass, gilt, for the Sun, to Play upon. But this
Hedge I entend to be, raised upon a Bancke, not Steep, but gently Slope, of
some Six Foot, set all with Flowers. Also I understand, that this Square of the
Garden, should not be the whole Breadth of the Ground, but to leave, on either
Side, Ground enough, for diversity of Side Alleys: Unto which, the Two Covert
Alleys of the Green, may deliver you. But there must be, no Alleys with
Hedges, at either End, of this great Enclosure: Not at the Hither End, for
letting your Prospect upon this Fair Hedge from the Green; Nor at the Further
End, for letting your Prospect from the Hedge, through the Arches, upon the
Heath.

For the Ordering of the Ground, within the Great Hedge, I leave it to Variety
of Device; Aduising nevertheless, that whatsoever form you cast it into,
first it be not too Busy, or full of Work. Wherein I, for my part, do not
like Images Cut out in Juniper, or other Garden stuff: They be for Children.
Little low Hedges, Round, like VVelts, with some Pretty Pyramides, I like well:
And in some Places, Fair Columns upon Frames of Carpenters Work. I would
also, have the Alleys, Spacious and Fair. You may have Closer Alleys upon the
Side Grounds, but none in the Maine Garden. I wish also, in the very Middle, a
Fair Mount, with three Ascents, and Alleys, enough for four to walk a
breast; Which I would have to be Perfect Circles, without any Bulwarks, or
Imbosments; And the Whole Mount, to be Thirty Foot high; And some fine
Banqueting House, with some Chimneys neatly cast, and without too much Glass.

For Fountains, they are a great Beauty, and Refreshment; But Pooles mar
all, and make the Garden unwholesome, and full of Flies, and Frogs. Fountains I
intend to be of two Natures: The One, that Sprinckleth or Spouteth Water; The
Other a Fair Receipt of Water, of some Thirty or Forty Foot Square, but
without Fish, or Slime, or Mud. For the first, the Ornaments of Images Gilt, or
of Marble, which are in use, do well: But the maine Matter is so to Convey the
Water, as it never Stay, either in the Bowls, or in the Cesterne; That the
Water be never by Rest Discolored, Green, or Red, or the like; Or gather any
Mossinesse or Putrefaction. Besides that, it is to be cleansed every day by the
Hand. Also some Steps up to it, and some Fine Pauement about it, does well. As
for the other Kind of Fountain, which we may call a Bathing Poole, it may
admit much Curiosity; and Beauty; wherewith we will not trouble our selves: As,
that the Bottom be finely Paued, And with Images: The sides likewise; And
withal Embellished with Colored Glass, and such Things of Luster;
Encompassed also, with fine Railes of Low Statua's. But the Maine Point, is the
same, which we mentioned, in the former Kind of Fountain; which is, that the
Water be in Perpetual Motion, Fed by a Water higher then the Poole. and
Delivered into it by fair Spouts, and then discharged away under Ground, by
some Equality of Bores, that it stay little. And for fine Devices, of Arching
Water without Spilling, and Making it rise in several Forms, (of Feathers,
Drinking Glasses, Canopies, and the like,) they be pretty things to look on,
but Nothing to Health and Sweetness.

For the Heath, which was the Third Part of our Plot, I wish it to be framed,
as much as may be, to a Natural wildness. Trees I would have none in it; But
some Thickets, made only of Sweet-Briar, and Honny-suckle, and some Wild Vine
amongst; And the Ground set with Violets, Strawberries, and Prime-Roses. For
these are Sweet, and prosper in the Shade. And these to be in the Heath, here
and there, not in any Order. I like also little Heaps, in the Nature of
Mole-hils, (such as are in Wild Heaths) to be set, some with Wild Thyme; Some
with Pincks; Some with Germander, that gives a good Flower to the Eye; Some
with Periwinckle; Some with Violets; Some with Strawberries; Some with
Couslips; Some with Daisies; Some with Red-Roses; Some with Lilium Conuallium;
Some with Sweet-Williams Red; Some with Beares-Foot; And the like Low Flowers,
being withal Sweet, and Sightly. Part of which Heaps, to be with Standards, of
little Bushes, pricked upon their Top, and Part without. The Standards to be
Roses; Juniper; Holly; Beare-berries (but here and there, because of the Smell
of their Blossom;) Red Currants; Goose-berries; Rose-Mary; Bays; Sweet-Briar;
and such like. But these Standards, to be kept with Cutting, that they grow not
out of Course.

For the Side Grounds, you are to fill them with Variety of Alleys, Private,
to give a full Shade; Some of them, wheresoever the Sun be. You are to frame
some of them likewise for Shelter, that when the Wind blows Sharp, you may
walk, as in a Gallery. And those Alleys must be likewise hedged, at both Ends,
to keep out the Wind; And these Closer Alleys, must be ever finely Grauelled,
and no Grass, because of Going wet. In many of these Alleys likewise, you are
to set Fruit Trees of all Sorts; As well upon the Walls, as in Ranges. And
this would be generally observed, that the Borders, wherein you plant your
Fruit Trees, be Fair and Large, and Low, and not Steep; And Set with Fine
Flowers, but thin and sparingly, lest they Deceive the Trees. At the End of
both the Side Grounds, I would have a Mount of some Pretty Height, leaving the
Wall of the Enclosure, Breast high, to look abroad into the Fields.

For the Maine Garden, I do not Deny, but there should be some Fair Alleys,
ranged on both Sides, with Fruit Trees; And some Pretty Tufts of Fruit Trees,
And Arbours with Seats, set in some Decent Order; But these to be, by no
Means, set too thick; But to leave the Maine Garden, so as it be not close,
but the Air Open and Free. For as for Shade, I would have you rest, upon the
Alleys of the Side Grounds, there to walk, if you be Disposed, in the Heat of
the Year, or day; But to make Account, that the Maine Garden, is for the more
Temperate Parts of the year; And in the Heat of Summer, for the Morning, and
the Evening, or Ouer-cast Days.

For Auiaries, I like them not, except they be of that Largeness, as they may
be Turffed, and have Living Plants, and Bushes, set in them; That the Birds may
have more Scope, and Natural Neastling, and that no Foulness appear, in the
Floare of the Auiary. So I have made a Platform of a Princely Garden, Partly
by Precept, Partly by Drawing, not a Model, but some general Lines of it; And
in this I have spared for no Cost. But it is Nothing, for Great Princes, that
for the most Part, taking Advice with Workmen, with no Less Cost, set their
Things together; And sometimes add Statua's, and such Things, for State, and
Magnificence, but nothing to the true Pleasure of a Garden.

Of Negociating. XLVII.
IT is generally better to deal by Speech, then by Letter; And by the
Mediation of a Third, then by a Man's Self. Letters are good, when a Man would
draw an Answer by Letter back again; Or when it may serve, for a Man's
Justification, afterward to produce his own Letter; Or where it may be Danger
to be interrupted, or heard by Pieces. To deal in Person is good, when a Man's
Face breeds Regard, as Commonly with Inferiors; Or in Tender Cases, where a
Man's Eye, upon the Countenance of him with whom he speaks, may give him a
Direction, how far to go: And generally, where a Man will reserve to
himself Liberty, either to Disavow, or to Expound. In Choice of Instruments,
it is better, to choose Men of a Plainer Sort, that are like to do that, that
is committed to them, and to report back again faithfully the Success; Then
those, that are Cunning to Contriue out of other Men's Business, somewhat to
grace themselves; And will help the Matter, in Report, for Satisfaction sake.
Use also, such Persons, as affect the Business, wherein they are Employed; For
that quickneth much; And such, as are Fit for the Matter; As Bold Men for
Expostulation, Fair spoken Men for Persuasion, Crafty Men for Enquiry and
Observation, Froward and Absurd Men for Business that does not well bear out
it Self. Use also such, as have been Luckie, and Prevailed before in Things
wherein you have Employed them; For that breeds Confidence, and they will
strive to maintain their Prescription. It is better, to sound a Person, with
whom one Deals, a far off, then to fall upon the Point at first; Except you
mean to surprise him by some Short Question. It is better Dealing with Men in
Appetite, then with those that are where they would be. If a Man Deal with
another upon Conditions, the Start or First Performance is all; Which a Man
cannot reasonably Demand, except either the Nature of the Thing be such, which
must go before; Or Else a Man can persuade the other Party, that he shall
still need him, in some other Thing; Or else that he be counted the Honester
Man. All Practice, is to Discover, or to Work. Men Discover themselves, in
Trust; In Passion; At unawares; And of Necessity, when they would have
somewhat done, and cannot find an apt Pretext. If you would Work any Man, you
must either know his Nature, and Fashions, and so Lead him; Or his Ends, and so
Persuade him; Or his Weakness, and Disaduantages, and so Awe him; or those
that have Interest in him, and so Govern him. In Dealing with Cunning Persons,
we must ever Consider their Ends, to interpret their Speeches; And it is good,
to say little to them, and that which they least look for. In all Negociations
of Difficulty, a Man may not look, to Sow and Reap at once; But must
Prepare Business, and so Ripen it by Degrees.

Of Followers and Friends. XLVIII.
COstly Followers are not to be liked; Lest while a Man makes his Train
Longer, he make his Wings Shorter. I reckon to be Costly, not them alone,
which charge the Purse, but which are Wearisome and Importune in Suits.
Ordinary Followers ought to challenge no Higher Conditions, then Countenance,
Recommendation, and Protection from Wrongs. Factious Followers are worse to be
liked, which Follow not upon Affection to him, with whom they range Themselves,
but upon Coffeehouse Conceived against some Other: Whereupon Commonly
ensues, that Ill Intelligence, that we many times see between Great
Personages. Likewise Glorious Followers, who make themselves as Trumpets, of
the Commendation of those they Follow, are full of Inconvenience; For they
taint Business through Want of Secrecy, And they Export Honor from a Man,
and make him a Return in Envy. There is a Kind of Followers likewise, which
are Dangerous, being indeed Espials; which enquire the Secrets of the House,
and bear Tales of them to Others. Yet such Men, many times, are in great
Favor; For they are Officious, And Commonly Exchange Tales. The Following by
certain Estates of Men, answerable to that, which a Great Person himself
professes, (as of Soldiers to him that has been Employed in the Wars, and
the like,) has ever been a Thing Civil, and well taken even in Monarchies;
So it be without too much Pomp or Popularitie. But the most Honorable Kind
of Following, is to be Followed, as one that apprehends, to advance Virtue
and Desert, in all Sorts of Persons. And yet, where there is no Eminent Odds
in Sufficiency, it is better to take with the more Passable, then with the
more Able. And besides, to speak Truth, in Base Times, Active Men are of more
use, then Virtuous. It is true, that in Government, it is Good to use Men of
one Rank equally: for to countenance some extraordinarily, is to make them
Insolent, and the rest Discontent; Because they may claim a Due. But
contrariwise in Favor, to use Men with much Difference and Election, is Good;
For it makes the Persons Preferred more Thankful, and the Rest more
officious; Because all is of Favor. It is good Discretion, not to make too
much of any Man, at the first; Because One cannot hold out that Proportion. To
be governed (as we call it) by One, is not safe: For it shows Softness, and
gives a Freedom to Scandal and Disreputation: For those that would not
Censure, or Speak ill of a Man immediately, will talk more boldly of Those,
that are so great with them, and thereby Wound their Honor. Yet to be
Distracted with many is Worse; For it makes Men, to be of the Last Impression,
and full of Change. To take Advice of some few Friends is ever Honorable; For
Lookers on, many times, see more then Gamesters; And the Vale best discovers
the Hill. There is Little Friendship in the World, and Least of all between
Equals, which was wont to be Magnified. That that is, is between Superior and
Inferior, whose Fortunes may Comprehend, the One the Other.

Of Sutours. XLIX.
MAny ill Matters and Proiects are undertaken; And Private Suits do Putrify
the Public Good. Many Good Matters are undertaken with Bad Minds; I mean
not only Corrupt Minds, but Crafty Minds, that intend not Performance. Some
embrace Suits, which never mean to deal effectually in them; But if they see,
there may be life in the Matter, by some other mean, they will be content to
win a Thank, or take a Second Reward, or at least to make Use, in the mean
time, of the Sutours Hopes. Some take hold of Suits, only for an Occasion, to
Cross some other; Or to make an Information, whereof they could not otherwise
have apt Pretext; without Care what become of the Suit, when that Turn is
served: Orgenerally, to make other Men's Business, a Kind of Entertainment, to
bring in their own. Nay, some undertake Suits, with a full Purpose, to let
them fall; To the end, to gratify the Adverse Party, or Competitour. Surely,
there is, in some sort, a Right in every Suit: Either a Right of Equity, if it
be a Suit of Controversy; Or a Right of Desert, if it be a Suit of Petition.
If Affection lead a Man, to favor the Wrong Side in Justice, let him rather
use his Countenance, to Compound the Matter, then to Carry it. If Affection
lead a Man, to favor the less Worthy in Desert, let him do it without
Deprauing or Disabling the Better Deseruer. In Suits, which a man does not well
understand, it is good to refer them, to some Friend of Trust and Judgment,
that may report whether he may deal in them with Honor: But let him choose
well his Referendaries, for else he may be led by the Nose. Sutours are so
distasted with Delays, and Abuses, that Plain Dealing, in denying to deal in
Suits at first, and Reporting the Success barely, and in Challenging no mero
Thanks then one has deserved, is grown not only Honorable, but also
Gracious. In Suits of Favor, the first Coming ought to take little Place: So
far forth Consideration may be had of his Trust, that if Intelligence of the
Matter, could not otherwise have been had, but by him, Advantage be not taken
of the Note, but the Party left to his other Means, and, in some sort,
Recompensed for his Discovery. To be Ignorant of the value of a Suit, is
Simplicity; As well as to be Ignorant of the Right thereof, is Want of
Conscience. Secrecy in Suits, is a great Mean of Obtaining; For voycing them,
to be in Forwardness, may discourage some Kind of Sutours; But does Quicken
and Awake Others. But Timing of the Suit, is the Principal. Timing, I say, not
only in respect of the Person, that should grant it, but in respect of those
which are like to Cross it. Let a Man, in the choice of his Mean, rather
choose the Fittest Mean, then the Greatest Mean: And rather them, that deal
in certain Things, then those that are General. The Reparation of a Denial,
is sometimes Equal to the first Grant; If a Man show himself, neither
dejected, nor discontented. Iniquum petas, vt Aequum feras; is a good Rule,
where a Man has Strength of Favor: But otherwise, a man were better rise in
his Suit; For he that would have ventured at first to have lost the Sutour,
will not in the Conclusion, lose both the Sutour, and his own former Favor.
Nothing is thought so Easy a Request, to a great Person, as his Letter; And
yet, if it be not in a Good Cause, it is so much out of his Reputation. There
are no worse Instruments, then these General Contriuers of Suits: For they are
but a Kind of Poison and Infection to Public Proceedings.

Of Studies. L.
STudies serve for Delight, for Ornament, and for Ability. Their Chief Use for
Delight, is in Priuatenesse and Retiring; For Ornament, is in Discourse; And
for Ability, is in the Judgment and Disposition of Business. For Expert Men
can Execute, and perhaps Judge of particulars, one by one; But the general
Counsels, and the Plots, and Marshalling of Affairs, come best from those that
are Learned. To spend too much Time in Studies, is Sloth; To use them too much
for Ornament, is Affectation; To make Judgment wholly by their Rules is the
Humor of a Scholar. They perfect Nature, and are perfected by Experience: For
Natural Abilities, are like Natural Plants, that need Proyning by Study: And
Studies themselves, do give forth Directions too much at Large, except they be
bounded in by experience. Crafty Men Contemn Studies; Simple Men Admire them;
and Wise Men Use them: For they teach not their own Use; But that is a Wisdom
without them, and above them, won by Observation. Read not to Contradict, and
Confute; Nor to Believe and Take for granted; Nor to Find Talk and Discourse;
But to weigh and Consider. Some Books are to be Tasted, Others to be
Swallowed, and Some Few to be Chewed and Digested: That is, some Books are to
be read only in Parts; Others to be read but not Curiously; And some Few to be
read wholly, and with Diligence and Attention. Some Books also may be read by
Deputy, and Extracts made of them by Others: But that would be, only in the
less important Arguments, and the Meaner Sort of Books: else distilled
Books, are like Common distilled Waters, Flashy Things. Reading makes a Full
Man; Conference a Ready Man; And Writing an Exact Man. And therefore, If a Man
Write little, he had need have a Great memory; If he Confer little, he had
need have a Present Wit; And if he Read little, he had need have much Cunning,
to seem to know that, he does not. Histonies make Men Wise; Poets Witty; The
Mathematics Subtle; Natural Philosophy deep; Moral Grave; Logic and
Rhetoric Able to Contend. Abeunt studia in Mores. Nay there is no Stond or
Impediment in the Wit, but may be wrought out by Fit Studies: Like as Diseases
of the Body, may have Appropriate Exercises. Bowling is good for the Stone and
Reins; Shooting for the Lungs and Breast; Gentle Walking for the Stomach;
Riding for the Head; And the like. So if a Man's Wit be Wandering, let him Study
the Mathematics, For in Demonstrations, if his Wit be called away never so
little, he must begin again; If his Wit be not Apt to distinguish or find
difference, let him Study the Schoolmen; For they are Cymini sectores. If he
be not Apt to beat over Matters, and to call up one Thing, to Prove and
Illustrate another, let him Study the Lawyers Cases; So every Defect of the
Mind, may have a Special Receipt.

Of Faction. LI.
MAny have an Opinion not wise; That for a Prince to Govern his Estate; Or for
a Great Person to govern his Proceedings, according to the Respect of
Factions, is a Principal Part of Policy: whereas contrariwise, the Chiefest
Wisdom is, either in Ordering those Things, which are General, and wherein
Men of Several Factions do nevertheless agree; Or in dealing with
Correspondence to Particular Persons, one by one. But I say not, that the
consideration of Factions, is to be Neglected. Mean Men, in their Rising, must
adhere; But Great Men, that have Strength in themselves, were better to
maintain themselves Indifferent, and Neutrall. Yet even in beginners, to
adhere so moderately, as he be a Man of the one Faction, which is most
Passable with the other, commonly gives best Way. The Lower and Weaker
Faction, is the firmer in Conjunction: And it is often seen, that a few, that
are Stiff, do tire out, a greater Number, that are more Moderate. When One of
the Factions is Extinguished, the Remaining Subdiuideth: As the Faction,
between Lucullus, and the Rest of the Nobles of the Senate (which they called
Optimates) held out a while, against the Faction of Pompey and Caesar: But when
the Senates Authority was pulled Down, Caesar and Pompey soon after brake.
The Faction or Party of Antonius, and Octauianus Caesar, against Brutus and
Cassius, held out likewise for a time: But when Brutus and Cassius were
overthrown, then soon after Antonius and Octauianus brake and Subdivided.
These Examples are of Wars, but the same holds in Private Factions. And
therefore, those that are Seconds in Factions, do many times, when the Faction
Subdiuideth, prove Principals: But many times also, they prove Ciphars and
Casheer'd: For many a Man's Strength is in opposition; And when that fails, he
grows out of use. It is commonly seen, that Men once Placed, take in with
the Contrary Faction to that, by which they enter; Thinking belike that they
have the First Sure; And now are Ready for a New Purchase. The Traitor in
Faction lightly goes away with it; For when Matters have stuck long in
Ballancing, the Winning of some one Man casts them, and he gets all the
Thanks. The Even Carriage between two Factions, proceeds not always of
Moderation, but of a Trueness to a Man's Self, with End to make use of both.
Certainly in Italy, they hold it a little suspect in Popes, when they have
often in their Mouth, Padre commune: And take it, to be a Sign of one, that
means to refer all, to the Greatness of his own House. Kings had need
beware, how they Side themselves, and make themselves as of a Faction or
Party: For Leagues, within the State, are ever Pernicious to Monarchies; For
they raise an Obligation, Paramount to Obligation of Sovereignty, and make the
King, Tanquam vnus ex nobis: As was to be seen, in the League of France. When
Factions are carried too high, and too violently, it is a Sign of Weakness in
Princes; And much to the Prejudice, both of their Authority, and Business.
The Motions of Factions, under Kings, ought to be like the Motions (as the
Astronomers speak) of the Inferior Orbs; which may have their Proper Motions,
but yet still, are quietly carried, by the Higher Motion, of Primum Mobile.

Of Ceremonies and Respects. LII.
HE that is only Real, had need have Exceeding great Parts of Virtue: As the
Stone had need to be Rich, that is set without Foil. But if a Man mark it
well, it is in praise and Commendation of Men, as it is in Gettings and Gains:
For the Proverb is true, That light Gains make heavy Purses; For light Games
come thick, whereas Great come but now and then. So it is true, that Small
Matters win great Commendation, because they are continually in Use, and in
note: whereas the Occasion of any great Virtue, comes but on Festiuals.
Therefore it does much add, to a Man's Reputation, and is, (as Queen Isabella
said) Like perpetual Letters Commendatory, to have good Forms. To Attain
them, it almost suffices, not to despise them: For so shall a Man observe them
in Others: And let him trust himself with the rest. For if he Labor too much
to Express them, he shall lose their Grace; Which is to be Natural and
Unaffected. Some Men's Behavior, is like a Verse, wherein every Syllable is
Measured: How can a man comprehend great Matters, that breaks his Mind too
much to small Observations? Not to use Ceremonies at all, is to teach Others
not to use them again; And so diminishes Respect to himself: Especially they
be not to be omitted to Strangers, and Formal Natures: But the Dwelling upon
them, and Exalting them above the Moon, is not only Tedious, but does Diminish
the Faith and Credit of him that speaks. And certainly, there is a Kind, of
Conueying of Effectual and Imprinting Passages, amongst Complements, which is
of Singular use, if a Man can hit upon it. Amongst a Man's Peers, a Man shall
be sure of Familiarity; And therefore, it is good a little to keep State.
Amongst a Man's Inferiors, one shall be sure of Reverence; And therefore it is
good a little to be Familiar. He that is too much in any Thing, so that he
gives another Occasion of Sacietie, makes himself cheap. To apply Ones
Self to others, is good: So it be with Demonstration, that a Man does it upon
Regard, And not upon Facility. It is a good Precept, generally in Seconding
Another, yet to add somewhat of Ones Own: As if you will grant his Opinion,
let it be with some Distinction; If you will follow his Motion, let it be with
Condition; If you allow his Counsel, let it be with Alleging further Reason.
Men had need beware, how they be too Perfect in Complements; For be they never
so Sufficient otherwise, their Enuiers will be sure to give them that
Attribute, to the Disadvantage of their greater Virtues. It is loss also in
business, to be too full of Respects, or to be too Curious in Observing Times
and Opportunities. Solomon says; He that considers the wind, shall not Sow,
and he that looks to the Clouds, shall not reap. A wise Man will make more
Opportunities then he finds. Men's Behavior should be like their Apparel, not
too Strait, or point Device, but Free for Exercise or Motion.

Of Praise. LIII.
PRaise is the Reflection of Virtue. But it is as the Glass or Body, which
gives the Reflection. If it be from the Common People, it is commonly False
and Naught: And rather follows Vain Persons, then Virtuous: For the Common
People understand not many Excellent Virtues: The Lowest Virtues draw Praise
from them; The middle Virtues work in them Astonishment, or Admiration; But of
the Highest Virtues, they have no Sense, or Perceiving at all. But Shows, and
Species virtutibus similes, serve best with them. Certainly, Fame is like a
River, that bears up Things Light and Swollen, And Drownes Things weighty and
Solid: But if persons of Quality and Judgment concur, then it is, (as the
Scripture says) Nomen bonum instar vnguenti fragrantis. It fills all round
about, and will not easily away. For the Odours of Ointments, are more Durable,
then those of Flowers. There be so many False Points of Praise, that a Man may
justly hold it a Suspect. Some Praises proceed merely of Flattery; And if he
be an Ordinary Flatterer, he will have certain Common Attributes, which may
serve every Man; If he be a Cunning Flatterer, he will follow the
Arch-flatterer, which is a Man's self; and wherein a Man thinks best of
himself, therein the Flatterer will uphold him most: But if he be an Impudent
Flatterer, look wherein a Man is Conscious to himself, that he is most
Defective, and is most out of Countenance in himself, that will the Flatterer
Entitle him to, perforce, Spreta Conscientia. Some Praises come of good Wishes,
and Respects, which is a Form due in Civility to Kings, and Great Persons,
Laudando praecipere; When by telling Men, what they are, they represent to
them, what they should be. Some Men are Praised Maliciously to their Hurt,
thereby to stir Envy and lealousie toward them; Pessimum genus Inimicorum
laudantium; In so much as it was a Proverb, amongst the Grecians; that, He that
was praised to his Hurt, should have a Push rise upon his Nose: As we say; That
a Blister will rise upon ones Tongue, that tell's a lie. Certainly Moderate
Praise, used with Opportunity, and not Vulgar, is that which does the Good.
Solomon says, He that praises his Friend aloud, Rising Early, it shall be to
him, no better then a Curse. Too much Magnifying of Man or Matter, does
irritate Contradiction, and procure Envy and Scorn. To Praise a Man's self,
cannot be Decent, except it be in rare Cases: But to Praise a Man's Office or
Profession, he may do it with Good Grace, and with a Kind of Magnanimity.
The Cardinals of Rome, which are Theologues, and Friars, and Schoolmen, have
a Phrase of Notable Contemptand Scorn, toward Civil Business: For they call
all Temporal Business, of Wars, Embassages, Judicature, and other
Emploments, Sbirrerie, which is, Vnder-Sheriffries. As if they were but matters
for Vnder-Sherifles and Catchpoles; Though many (...), those Vndersherifferies
do more good, then their High Speculations. St Paul, when he boasts of
himself, he does often enterlace; I speak like a Fool; But speaking of his
Calling, he says; Magnificabo Apostolatum meum.

Of Vainglory. LIIII.
IT was prettily Devised of Aesope; The Fly sat upon the Axle-tree of the
Chariot wheel, and said, What a Dust do I raise? So are there some Vain
Persons, that whatsoever goes alone, or moves upon greater Means, if they
have never so little Hand in it, they think it is they that carry it. They
that are Glorious, must needs be Factious; For all Bravery stands upon
Comparisons. They must needs be Violent, to make good their own Vaunts.
Neither can they be Secret, and therefore not Effectual; but according to the
French Proverb; Beaucoup de Bruit, peu de Fruit: Much Bruit, little Fruit. Yet
certainly there is Use of this Quality, in Civil Affairs. Where there is an
Opinion, and Fame to be created, either of Virtue, or Greatness, these Men are
good Trumpetters. Again, as Titus Liuius notes, in the Case of Antiochus, and
the Aetolians; There are sometimes great Effects of Cross Lies; As if a Man,
that Negotiates between Two Princes, to draw them to join in a War against
the Third, does extol the Forces of either of them, above Measure, the One to
the Other: And sometimes, he that deals between Man and Man, raises his own
Credit, with Both, by pretending greater Interest, then he has in Either. And
in these, and the like Kinds, it often falls out, that Somewhat is produced of
Nothing: For Lies are sufficient to breed Opinion, and Opinion brings on
Substance. In Militar Commanders and Soldiers, Vainglory is an Essential
Point; For as Iron sharpens Iron, so by Glory one Courage sharpneth another. In
Cases of great Enterprise, upon Charge and Adventure, a Composition of Glorious
Natures, does put Life into Business; And those that are of Solid and Sober
Natures, have more of the Ballast, then of the Sail. In Fame of Learning, the
Flight will be slow, without some Feathers of Ostentation. Qui de contemnenda
Gloria Libros scribunt, Nomen suum inscribunt. Socrates, Aristotle, Galen, were
Men full of Ostentation. Certainly Vainglory helps to Perpetuate a Man's
Memory; And Virtue was never so Beholding to Humane Nature, as it received his
due at the Second Hand. Neither had the Fame of Cicero, Seneca, Plinius
Secundus, borne her Age so well, if it had not been joined, with some Vanity in
themselves: Like unto Varnish, that makes Seelings not only Shine, but Last.
But all this while, when I speak of Vainglory, I mean not of that Property,
that Tacitus does attribute to Mucianus; Omnium, quae dixerat, feceratque, Art
quadam Ostentator: For that proceeds not of Vanity, but of Natural
Magnanimity, and discretion: And in some Persons, is not only Comely, but
Gracious. For Excusations, Cessions, Modesty it self well Governed, are but
Arts of Ostentation. And amongst those Arts, there is none better, then that
which Plinius Secundus speaks of; which is to be Liberal of Praise and
Commendation to others, in that, wherein a Man's Self has any Perfection. For
says Pliny very Wittily; In commending Another, you do your self right; For
he that you Commend, is either Superior to you, in that you Commend, or
Inferior. If he be Inferior, if he be to be Commended, you much more: If he
be Superior, if he be not to be commended, you much less. Glorious Men are
the Scorn of Wise Men; the Admiration of Fools, the Idols of Parasites; And
the Slaves of their own Vaunts.

Of Honor and Reputation. LV.
THe Winning of Honor, is but the Revealing of a Man's Virtue and Worth,
without Disadvantage. For some in their Actions, do Woo and affect Honor,
and Reputation: Which Sort of Men, are commonly much Talked of, but inwardly
little Admired. And some, contrariwise, darken their Virtue, in the Show of it;
So as they be vnder-valued in opinion. If a Man perform that which has not
been attempted before; Or attempted and given over; Or has been achieved,
but not with so good Circumstance; he shall purchase more Honor, then by
Effecting a Matter of greater Difficulty, or Virtue, wherein he is but a
Follower. If a Man so temper his Actions, as in some one of them, he does
content every Faction, or Combination of People, the Music will be the
fuller. A man is an ill Husband of his Honor, that enters into any Action,
the Failing wherein may disgrace him more, then the Carrying of it through can
Honor him. Honor, that is gained and broken upon Another, has the quickest
Reflection; Like Diamonds cut with Fascets. And therefore, let a Man contend,
to excel any Competitors of his in Honor, in Out-shooting them, if he can, in
their own Bow. Discreet Followers and Servants help much to Reputation.
Omnis Fama a Domesticis emanat. Envy, which is the Canker of Honor, is best
extinguished, by declaring a Man's Self, in his Ends, rather to seek Merit,
then Fame: And by Attributing a Man's Successes, rather to divine Providence and
Felicity, then to his own Virtue or Policy. The true Marshalling of the
Degrees of Sovereign Honor are these. In the First Place are Conditores
Imperiorum; Founders of States, and Commonwealths: Such as were Romulus,
Cyrus, Caesar, Ottoman, Ismael. In the Second Place are Legis-latores,
Lawgiuers; which are also called, Second Founders, or Perpetui Principes,
because they Govern by their Ordinances, after they are gone: Such were
Lycurgus, Solon, Justinian, Eadgar, Alphonsus of Castile, the Wise, that made
the Siete Partidas. In the Third Place, are Liberatores, or Saluatores: Such as
compound the long Miseries of Civil Wars, or deliver their Countries from
Servitude of Strangers, or Tyrants; As Augustus Caesar, Vespasianus,
Aurelianus, Theodoricus, K. Henry the 7. of England, K. Henry the 4. of France.
In the Fourth Place, are Propagatores or Propugnatores Imperij; Such as in
Honorable Wars enlarge their Territories, or make Noble defense against
Inuaders. And in the Last Place, are Patres Patriae; which reign justly, and
make the Times good, wherein they live. Both which last Kinds, need no
Examples, they are in such Number. Degrees of Honor in Subjects are; First,
Participes Curarum; Those upon whom Princes do discharge the greatest Weight
of their Affairs; Their Right Hands, as we call them. The Next are, Duces
Belli, Great Leaders; Such as are Princes Lieutenants, and do them Notable
Services in the Wars. The Third are, Gratiosi; Favorites; Such as exceed not
this Scantling; To be Solace to the Sovereign, and Harmless to the People.
And the Fourth, Negotijs pares; Such as have great Places under Princes, and
execute their Places with Sufficiency. There is an Honor likewise, which may
be ranked amongst the Greatest, which happens rarely: That is, of such as
Sacrifice themselves, to Death or Danger, for the Good of their Country: As
was M. Regulus, and the Two Decij.

Of Judicature. LVI.
IVdges ought to remember, that their Office is Ius dicere, and not Ius dare;
To Interpret Law, and not to Make Law, or Give Law. Else will it be like the
Authority, claimed by the Church of Rome; which under pretext of Exposition of
Scripture, does not stick to Add and Alter; And to Pronounce that, which they
do not Find; And by Show of Antiquity, to introduce Novelty. Judges ought
to be more Learned, then Witty; More Reverend, then Plausible; And more
Advised, then Confident. Above all Things, Integrity is their Portion, and
Proper Virtue Cursed (says the Law) is he that remoueth the Land mark. The
Mislaier of a Mere Stone is to blame. But it is the Unjust Judge, that is the
Capital Remouer of Land-markes, when he Defines amiss of Lands and
Property. One Foul Sentence, does more Hurt, then many Foul Examples. For
these do but Corrupt the Stream; The other Corrupts the Fountain. So says
Solomon; Fons turbatus, and Vena corrupta, est Iustus cadens in causa sua coram
Aduersario. The Office of Judges, may have Reference, Unto the Parties that
sue; Unto the Advocates that Plead, Unto the Clerks and Ministers of Justice
underneath them; And to the Sovereign or State above them.

First, for the Causes or Parties that Sue. There be (says the Scripture) that
turn Judgment into Worme-wood, And surely, there be also, that turn it into
Vinegar; For Injustice makes it Bitter, and Delays make it Sour. The
Principal Duty of a Judge, is to suppress Force and Fraud; whereof Force is
the more Pernicious, when it is Open; And Fraud, when it is Close and
Disguised. Add thereto Contentious Suits, which ought to be spewed out, as the
Surfeit of Courts. A Judge ought to prepare his Way to a Just Sentence, as God
uses to prepare his Way, by Raising Valleys, and Taking down Hills: So when
there appears on either side, an High Hand; Violent Prosecution, Cunning
Advantages taken, Combination, Power, Great Counsel, then is the Virtue of a
Judge seen, to make Inequality Equal; That he may plant his Judgment, as
upon an Even Ground. Qui fortiter emungit, elicit sanguinem; And where the
Wine Press is hard wrought, it yields a harsh Wine, that tastes of the
Grapestone. Judges must beware of Hard Constructions, and Strained Inferences;
For there is no Worse Torture, then the Torture of Laws. Specially in case of
Laws Penal, they ought to have Care, that that which was meant for Terror,
be not turned into Rigor; And that they bring not upon the People, that
Shower, whereof the Scripture speaks; Pluet super eos Laqueos: For Penal
Laws Pressed, are a Shower of Snares upon the People. Therefore, let Penal
Laws, if they have been Sleepers of long, or if they be grown unfit for the
present Time, be by Wise Judges confined in the Execution; Iudicis Officium
est, vt Res, ita Tempora Rerum, etc. In Causes of Life and Death; Judges ought
(as far as the Law permits) in Justice to remember Mercy; And to Cast a
Severe Eye upon the Example, but a Merciful Eye upon the Person.

Secondly, for the Advocates and Counsel that Plead: Patience and Gravity of
Hearing, is an Essential Part of Justice; And an Ouer-speaking Judge is no
well tuned Cymball. It is no Grace to a Judge, first to find that, which he
might have heard, in due time, from the Bar; or to show Quickness of Conceit
in Cutting off Evidence or Counsel too short; Or to prevent Information, by
Questions though Pertinent. The Parts of a Judge in Hearing are Four: To
direct the Evidence; To Moderate Length, Repetition, or Impertinency of Speech;
To Recapitulate, Select, and Collate, the Material Points of that, which has
been said; And to Give the Rule or Sentence. Whatsoever is above these, is too
much; And proceeds, Either of Glory and willingness to Speak; Or of
Impatience to Hear; Or of Shortness of Memory, Or of Want of a Staid and
Equal Attention. It is a Strange Thing to see, that the Boldness of
Advocates, should prevail with Judges; Whereas they should imitate God, in
whose Seat they sit; who represseth the Presumptuous, and gives Grace to the
Modest. But it is more Strange, that Judges should have Noted Favorites; Which
cannot but Cause Multiplication of Fees, and Suspicion of By-waies. There is
due from the Judge, to the Advocate, some Commendation and Gracing, where
Causes are well Handled, and fair Pleaded; Especially toward the Side which
obtains not; For that vpholds, in the Client, the Reputation of his Counsel,
and beats down, in him, the Conceit of his Cause. There is likewise due to the
Public, a Civil Reprehension of Advocates, where there appears Cunning
Counsel, Gross Neglect, Slight Information, Indiscreet Pressing, or an
Ouer-bold Defense. And let not the Counsel at the Bar, chop with the Judge,
nor wind himself into the handling of the Cause anew, after the Judge has
Declared his Sentence: But on the other side, Let not the Judge meet the Cause
half Way; Nor give Occasion to the Party to say; His Counselor Proofs were
not heard.

Thirdly, for that that concerns Clerks, and Ministers. The Place of Justice,
is an Hallowed Place; And therefore, not only the Bench, but the Foot-pace, and
Precincts, and Purprise thereof, ought to be preserved without Scandal and
Corruption. For certainly, Grapes, (as the Scripture says) will not be
gathered of Thorns or Thistles: Neither can Justice yield her Fruit with
Sweetness, amongst the Briars and Brambles, of Catching and Poling Clerks and
Ministers. The Attendance of Courts is subject to Four bad Instruments. First,
Certain Persons, that are Sowers of Suits; which make the Court swell, and the
Country pine. The Second Sort is of those, that engage Courts, in Quarells of
Jurisdiction, and are not truly Amici Curiae, but Parasiti Curiae; in puffing a
Court up beyond her Bounds, for their own Scraps, and Advantage. The Third
Sort is of those, that may be accounted, the Left Hands of Courts; Persons that
are full of Nimble and Sinister Tricks and Shifts, whereby they pervert the
Plain and Direct Courses of Courts, and bring Justice into Oblique Lines and
Labyrinths. And the Fourth is, the Poler and Exacter of Fees; which iustifies
the Common Resemblance of the Courts of Justice, to the Bush, whereunto while
the Sheep flies for defense in Wether, he is sure to loose Part of his
Fleece. On the other side, an Ancient Clerk, skillful in Presidents, Wary in
Proceeding, and Understanding in the Business of the Court, is an excellent
Finger of a Court; And does many times point the way to the Judge himself.

Fourthly, for that which may concern the Sovereign and Estate. Judges ought
above all to remember the Conclusion of the Roman Twelve Tables; Salus Populi
Suprema Lex; And to know, that Laws, except they be in Order to that End, are
but Things Captious, and Oracles not well Inspired. Therefore it is an Happy
Thing in a State, when Kings and States do often Consult with Judges; And
again, when Judges do often Consult with the King and State: The one, when
there is Matter of Law, interuenient in Business of State; The other, when
there is some Consideration of State, interuenient in Matter of Law. For many
times, the Things Deduced to Judgment, may be Meum and Tuum, when the Reason
and Consequence thereof, may Trench to Point of Estate: I call Matter of
Estate, not only the parts of Sovereignty, but whatsoever introduces any
Great Alteration, or Dangerous president; Or Concerns manifestly any great
Portion of People. And let no Man weakly conceive, that Just Laws, and True
Policy, have any Antipathie: For they are like the Spirits, and Sinews, that
One moves with the Other. Let Judges also remember, that Salomons Throne, was
supported by Lions, on both Sides; Let them be Lions, but yet Lions under the
Throne; Being circumspect, that they do not check, or oppose any Points of
Sovereignty. Let not Judges also, be so Ignorant of their own Right, as to
think, there is not left to them, as a Principal Part of their Office, a Wise
Use, and application of Laws. For they may remember, what the Apostle says,
of a Greater Law, then theirs; Nos scimus quia Lex bona est, modo quis ea
vtatur Legitime.

Of Anger. LVII.
TO seek to extinguish Anger utterly, is but a Bravery of the Stoickes. We
have better Oracles: Be Angry, but Sin not. Let not the Sun go down upon
your Anger. Anger must be limited, and confined, both in Race, and in Time. We
will first speak, How the Natural Inclination, and Habit, To be Angry, may be
attempred, and calmed. Secondly, How the Particular Motions of Anger, may be
repressed, or at least refrained from doing Mischief. Thirdly, How to raise
Anger, or appease Anger, in Another.

For the first; There is no other Way, but to Meditate and Ruminate well, upon
the Effects of Anger, how it troubles Man's Life. And the best Time, to do
this, is, to look back upon Anger, when the Fit is thoroughly over. Seneca
says well; That Anger is like Ruin, which breaks it Self, upon that it
falls. The Scripture exhorts us; To possess our Souls in Patience.
Whosoever is out of Patience, is out of Possession of his Soul. Men must not
turn Bees; -- Animasque in vulnere ponunt.

Anger is certainly a kind of Baseness: As it appears well, in the Weakness
of those Subjects, in whom it reigns: Children, Women, Old Folks, Sick
Folks. Only Men must beware, that they carry their Anger, rather with Scorn,
then with Fear: So that they may seem rather, to be above the Injury, then
below it: which is a Thing easily done, if a Man will give Law to himself in
it.

For the Second Point; The Causes and Motives of Anger, are chiefly three.
First, to be too Sensible of Hurt: For no Man is Angry, that Feels not
himself Hurt: And therefore Tender and Delicate Persons, must needs be often
Angry: They have so many Things to trouble them; Which more Robust Natures have
little Sense of. The next is, the Apprehension and Construction, of the Injury
offered, to be, in the Circumstances thereof, full of Contempt. For Contempt is
that which puts an Edge upon Anger, as much, or more, then the Hurt it
self. And therefore, when Men are Ingenious, in picking out Circumstances of
Contempt, they do kindle their Anger much. Lastly, Opinion of the Touch of a
Man's Reputation, does multiply and sharpen. Anger. Wherein the Remedy is, that
a Man should have, as Consaluo was wont to say, Telam Honoris crassiorem. But
^^^all Refrainings of Anger, it is the best Remedy to win Time; And to make a
Man's Self believe, that the Opportunity of his Revenge is not yet come: But
that he foresees a Time for it; And so to still Himself in the mean Time, and
reserve it.

To contain Anger from Mischief, though it take hold of a Man, there be two
Things, whereof you must have special Caution. The one, of extreme Bitterness
of Words; Especially, if they be Aculeate, and Proper: For Communia Maledicta
are nothing so much: And again, that in Anger, a Man reveal no Secrets: For
that makes him not fit for Society. The other, that you do not peremptorily
break off, in any Business, in a Fit of Anger: But howsoever you show
Bitterness, do not Act any thing, that is not Reuocable.

For Raising and Appeasing Anger in Another; It is done chiefly, by Choosing of
Times. When Men are frowardest and worst disposed, to incense them. Again, by
gathering (as was touched before) all that you can find out, to aggrauate the
Contempt. And the two Remedies are by the Contraries. The Former, to take good
Times, when first to relate to a Man, an Angry Business: For the first
Impression is much. And the other is, to sever, as much as may be, the
Construction of the Injury, from the Point of Contempt: Imputing it, to
Misunderstanding, Fear, Passion, or what you will.

Of Vicissitude of Things. LVIII.
SOLOMON says; There is no New Thing upon the Earth. So that as Plato had an
Imagination; That all Knowledge was but Remembrance: So Solomon gives his
Sentence; That all Novelty is but Oblivion. Whereby you may see, that the
River of Lethe, runs as well above Ground, as below. There is an abstruse
Astrologer that says; If it were not, for two things, that are Constant; (The
one is, that the Fixed Stars ever stand at like distance, one from another,
and never come nearer together, nor go further asunder; The other, that the
Diurnall Motion perpetually keeps Time:) No Individual would last one
Moment. Certain it is, that the Matter, is in a Perpetual Flux, and never at a
Stay. The great Winding-sheets, that bury all Things in Oblivion, are two;
Deluges, and Earthquakes. As for Conflagrations, and great Droughts, they do
not merely dispeople, and destroy. Phaetons Carre went but a day. And the
Three years Drought, in the time of Elias, was but Particular, and left People
Alive. As for the great Burnings by Lightnings, which are often in the West
Indies, they are but narrow. But in the other two Destructions, by Deluge, and
Earthquake, it is further to be noted, that the Remnant of People, which hap
to be reserved, are commonly Ignorant and Mountanous People, that can give no
Account, of the Time past: So that the Oblivion is all one, as if none had
been left. If you consider well, of the People of the West Indies, it is very
probable, that they are a Newer, or a Younger People, then the People of the
Old World. And it is much more likely, that the Destruction, that has
heretofore been there, was not by Earthquakes, (As the Egyptian Priest told
Solon, concerning the Island of Atlantis; That it was swallowed by an
Earthquake;) But rather, that it was desolated, by a Particular Deluge. For
Earthquakes are seldom in those Parts. But on the other side, they have such
Pouring Rivers, as the Rivers of Asia, and Afric, and Europe, are but Brooks
to them. Their Andes likewise, or Mountains, are far higher, then those with
us; Whereby it seems, that the Remnants of Generation of Men, were, in such a
Particular Deluge, saved. As for the Observation, that Macciauel has, that the
Jealousy of Sects, does much extinguish the Memory of Things; Traducing
Gregory the Great, that he did, what in him lay, to extinguish all Heathen
Antiquities; I do not find, that those Zeales, do any great Effects, nor
last long: As it appeared in the Succession of Sabinian, who did revive the
former Antiquities.

The Vicissitude or Mutations, in the Superior Globe, are no fit Matter, for
this present Argument. It may be, Plato's great Year, if the World should last
so long, would have some Effect; Not in renewing the State of like Indiuiduals
(for that is the Fume of those, that conceive the Celestial Bodies, have more
accurate Influences, upon these Things below, then indeed they have) but in
gross. Comets, out of question, have likewise Power and Effect, over the
Gross and Mass of Things: But they are rather gazed upon, and waited upon in
their Journey, then wisely observed in their Effects; Specially in their
Respective Effects; That is, what Kind of Comet, for Magnitude, Color,
Version of the Beams, Placing in the Region of Heaven, or Lasting, produces
what Kind of Effects.

There is a Toy, which I have heard, and I would not have it given over, but
waited upon a little. They say, it is observed, in the Low Countries (I know
not in what Part) that Every Five and Thirty years, The same Kind and Suit of
Years and Weathers, comes about again: As Great Frosts, Great Wet, Great
Droughts, Warm Winters, Summers with little Heat, and the like: And they call
it the Prime. It is a Thing, I do the rather mention, because computing
backwards, I have found some Concurrence.

But to leave these Points of Nature, and to come to Men. The greatest
Vicissitude of Things amongst Men, is the Vicissitude of Sects, and Religions.
For those Orbs rule in Men's Minds most. The True Religion is built upon the
Rock; The Rest are tossed upon the Waves of Time. To speak therefore, of the
Causes of New Sects; And to give some Counsel concerning them; As far, as
the Weakness of Humane Judgment, can give stay to so great Reuolutions.

When the Religion formerly received, is rent by Discords; And when the
Holiness of the Professors of Religion is decayed, and full of Scandal; And
withal the Times be Stupid, Ignorant, and Barbarous; you may doubt the
Springing up of a New Sect; If then also there should arise, any Extrauagant
and Strange Spirit, to make himself Author thereof. All which Points held,
when Mahomet published his Law. If a New Sect have not two Properties, fear it
not: For it will not spread. The one is, the Supplanting, or the opposing, of
Authority established: For Nothing is more Popular then that. The other is, the
Giving License to Pleasures, and a Voluptuous Life. For as for Speculatiue
Heresies (such as were in Ancient Times the Arrians, and now the Arminians)
though they work mightily upon Men's Wits, yet they do not produce any great
Alterations in States; except it be by the Help of Civil Occasions. There be
three Manner of Plantations of New Sects. By the Power of Signs and Miracles:
By the Eloquence and Wisdom of Speech and Persuasion: And by the Sword. For
Martyrdomes, I reckon them amongst Miracles; Because they seem to exceed, the
Strength of Human Nature: And I may do the like of Superlatiue and Admirable
Holiness of Life. Surely, there is no better Way, to stop the Rising of New
Sects, and Schisms; then To reform Abuses; To compound the smaller
Differences; To proceed mildly, and not with Sanguinary Persecutions; And
rather to take off the principal Authors, by Winning and Advancing them, then
to enrage them by Violence and Bitterness.

The Changes and Vicissitude in Wars are many: But chiefly in three Things;
In the Seats or Stages of the War; In the Weapons; And in the Manner of the
Conduct. Wars in ancient Time, seemed more to move from East to West: For the
Persians, Assyrians, Arabians, Tartars, (which were the Inuaders) were all
Eastern People. It is true, the Gauls were Western; But we read but of two
Incursions of theirs; The one to Gallo-Grecia, the other to Rome. But East and
West have no certain Points of Heaven: And no more have the Wars, either
from the East, or West, any Certainty of Observation. But North and South are
fixed: And it has seldom or never been seen, that the far Southern People
have invaded the Northern, but contrariwise. Whereby it is manifest, that the
Northern Tract of the World, is in Nature the more Martial Region: Be it, in
respect of the Stars of that Hemisphere; Or of the great Continents that are
upon the North, whereas the South Part, for ought that is known, is almost all
Sea; Or (which is most apparent) of the Cold of the Northern Parts, which is
that, which without Aid of Discipline, does make the Bodies hardest, and the
Courages warmest.

Upon the Breaking and Shiuering of a great State and Empire, you may be sure
to have Wars. For great Empires, while they stand, do eneruate and destroy
the Forces of the Natives, which they have subdued, resting upon their own
Protecting Forces: And then when they fail also, all goes to ruin, and they
become a Prey. So was it, in the Decay of the Roman Empire; And likewise, in
the Empire of Almaigne, after Charles the Great, every Bird taking a Fether;
And were not unlike to befall to Spain, if it should break The great
Accessions and Unions of Kingdoms, do likewise stir up Wars. For when a
State grows to an Ouer-power, it is like a great Flood, that will be sure to
ouerflow. As it has been seen, in the States of Rome, Turkey, Spain, and
others. Look when the World has fewest Barbarous Peoples, but such as
commonly will not marry or generate, except they know means to live; (As it is
almost every where at this day, except Tartary) there is no Danger of
Inundations of People: But when there be great Shoales of People, which go on
to populate, without foreseeing Means of Life and Sustentation, it is of
Necessity, that once in an Age or two, they discharge a Portion of their People
upon other Nations: Which the ancient Northern People, were wont to do by Lot:
Casting Lots, what Part should slay at home, and what should seek their
Fortunes. When a Warre-like State grows Soft and Effeminate, they may be sure
of a War. For commonly such States are grown rich, in the time of their
Degenerating; And so the Prey inuiteth, and their Decay in Valor encourages a
War.

As for the Weapons, it hardly falls under Rule and Observation: yet we see,
even they have Returns and Vicissitudes. For certain it is, that Ordnance was
known in the City of the Oxidrakes in India; And was that, which the
Macedonians called Thunder and Lightning, and Magic. And it is well known,
that the use of Ordnance has been in China, above 2000. years. The Conditions
of Weapons, and their Improuement are; First, The Fetching a far off: For
that outruns the Danger: As it is seen in Ordnance and Muskets. Secondly, the
Strength of the Percussion, wherein likewise Ordnance do exceed all
Arietations, and ancient Inventions. The third is, the commodious use of them:
As that they may serve in all Wethers; That the Carriage may be Light and
Manageable; and the like.

For the Conduct of the War: At the first, Men rested extremely upon Number:
They did put the Wars likewise upon Maine Force, and Valor; Pointing Days
for Pitched Fields, and so trying it out, upon an even Match: And they were
more ignorant in Ranging and Arraying their Battles. After they grew to rest
upon Number, rather Competent, then Vast: They grew to Advantages, of Place,
Cunning Diuersions, and the like: And they grew more skilful in the Ordering of
their Battles.

In the Youth of a State, Arms do flourish: In the Middle Age of a State,
Learning; And then both of them together for a time: In the Declining Age of a
State, Mechanical Arts and Merchandise. Learning has his Infancy, when it is
but beginning, and almost Childish: Then his Youth, when it is Luxuriant and
Iuuenile: Then his Strength of years, when it is Solid and Reduced: And
lastly, his old Age, when it waxes Dry and Exhaust. But it is not good, to
look too long, upon these turning Wheels of Vicissitude, lest we become
Giddy. As for the Philology of them, that is but a Circle of Tales, and
therefore not fit for this Writing.

FINIS.

