A LETTER FROM THE THE LORD OF ROSny, Great Treasurer of France to the Queen
Regent of FRANCE.

Concerning the resignation of his Offices.

FAITHFVLLY TRANSLATED out of French, by E. D.

LONDON Printed by Tho: Creed, for William Wright, and are to be sold at his
shop on S^^re-hill, at the sign of the Harrow. 1613.

TO ALL CHAritable good Christian Subjects in general, and most especially to
the Protestants wheresoever.
INdifferent Readers,
this Gentleman is a Protestant who did carry himself so worthily in his
offices in the time of the late King his Master, that he was very well thought
of, according to the worth and suffitiencie of him in his so great and weighty
Employments. As you may hereafter perceive in this following discourse of his
Letter written unto the now Queen Regent of France, howsoever it has pleased
her, and her Council since, otherways to dispose of his offices, and remove
him from those his so weighty affairs, wherein it does appear, the French
King his worthy master, had great reason to hold him well worthy of those
high places (wherein it seems) he has been a provident, painful, and
careful Treasuror, Officer, and Servant, and a most faithful, Religious, and
worthy Subject: Howsoever it has pleased God (by his Queen) to work in him
and his Estate, so great an alteration, for the trial of his faith and
patience. All which he in great humility does doubtless well apply to his
own Rest, ease, and more divine Employments, the content of Charitable minded
people, and the comfort of his own soul; which comfort of soul, I beseech
our good God to impart to all Religious, Virtuous, Charitable, and well minded
people: To live in happiness, and die in peace.

Farewell.
A LETTER FROM THE LORD OF ROSNY, GREAT Treasurer of France, TO The Queen
Regent of France, Concerning the Resignation of his Offices.
MADAME,
AMong all the honorable Conditions of a French Gentleman, I always held that
to be of most of esteem, which was employed in the Important Affairs of his
Country, in the happy Administration of the seem: and in obeying the
Commandments of his Prince: Throughout the course of many years, I have
managed the principal of this Estate, with unexpected success: under my King,
from a bottomless Eulphe of misery, I have guided them to the top of all
glory.

At this day ( MADAME) I do obey the desire and express will of your
Majesty, I remit into your hands the two fairest Tokens of the benefits and
rewards of my good Master, The Bastile, and the Treasury, which (so long as
he lived, I possessed;) Now that he is deceased, I restore them to you: and
well content my self, that the Effects of my services may remain engraven in
the hearts of your people. An other not so faithful as my self, might all all
France with his complaints: But my perpetual devotion to the place of my
Nativity, and to my King, do restrain^ and bridle my Tongue, and makes me
to seek rather in mine own incapacitie, then in any other consideration, the
cause of so great an alteration.

In one only point is my spirit impatiently tormented: that is; Of that more
then absolute resolution of your Majesty, to vrg^ me to take money in
recompense for my Offies: Not that I do not sufficiently judge how necessary
this course is, for the good of your service: But on the other side, it is to
my self so preiudicall, and so contrary to my demands, that whatsoever power I
have over my self to content you, yet have I not sufficient to accept it. But
contrariwise ( MADAME) I am forced to refuse it, and contrary to my duty in
this occasion, to prefer my particular Interest, before that of your
Majesty: of all the means provided to wade through this business, this must
needs be to me the most odious: and indeed I do abhorr^ it, and hold it as
proceeding not from your goodness, but from the malice of mine Enemies.

For ( MADAME) wherefore do they not rather lay this pretense upon my
ouerwild humor, an incompatible estrangement from all gratification of
whatsoever society, and dissimulation upon the weak order that I may
paradue^ture have taken in the affairs of my Offices: upon my had Husbandry,
in matter of the Treazurie: upon the evils that have proceeded of such strong
intelligences as I have practiced, as well within as without the Realm: and
upon such extreme care as I took to establish my self in the preservation of
my Fortunes: Wherefore (I say Madam) have they not rather chosen this
foundation, rather then any other: neither so fair in show, and yet far
more unlikely? For, to publish or give out, that I never craved any other
recompense, then for my Office of the Treasury, neither yet any other reward
then the Office of a Marshal of France, It is a matter that cannot be truly
maintained; The impudency of mine Enemies, and the complaint of some of my
Friends, shall never be of force sufficient, otherwise to testify it.

But if your Majesty do accuse me, that of my self I have offered you all
that I did possess, I confess it: Neither do I deny, but that many times I
have assured your Majesty, that all that was mine depended upon you; yea, even
my very life it self.

But surely ( MADAME) I will also aduow, that at that time I could not imagine
that such Offers to a man's Sovereign, could be offense sufficient to be
therefore deprived and put from his Dignities. So as if now you do so take it,
it is a principle in my opinion, very new: Yet shall not this novelty
nevertheless ever make me to repent that I have done my duty.

But contrariwise ( MADAME) at this present, I do again offer to your
Maistie, not only my honors, my goods, but also my very life, with the lives
of my Children: Neither do I present them unto you upon any condition, but to
use them according to your pleasure; Yea, even to honor my very Enemies with
them, if to take them from me simply be not matter of content.

If my passed Actions have tended to the advancement of this Crown, I will
also that my obedience shall be the first to show the means to preserve it.
And whatsoever my Enemies do publish of my love to that I possess, or
whatsoever other men's humors may help to breed belief, yet is it true (
MADAME) that I will abandon all that my services have purchased me, with more
constancy, yea, with a thousand times more resolution, then an other shall
possess them with pleasure. It shall suffize me in my solitarines, to learn
how your Majesty does daily make your Scepter to flourish, and preferring in
these Affairs a goodly Order, and in your Coffers Treasure sufficient to
support this Estate, which principally subsisteth upon the support of these
two Pillars.

This is it wherein I will most quietly entertain my idle cogitations, and
comfort my self over the loss of my good King, without being constrained (if
it may so please you) to accept or reserve any other recompense for my Offices,
then my contentment to receive none, and the honor of your express
Commandments, but if nevertheless, for a final Resolution, and that I may
not show my self disobedient to your wills, your Majesty do absolutely
enjoin me to the contrary.

This then ( MADAME) is the greatest favor, and that which I most desire,
wherewith I do most humbly beseech you to recompense me, that it may please
your Majesty (MADAME) immediately to command my greatest enemies to go into
the Chamber The Millions are of Crowns and not of Pounds.
of Accounts, there to verify and take view of the profits or detriments of
my 12. years watchings. Then if it be not found, that during the said time,
under the power and authority of my great King, I have by my dexterity and by
my trauails, rooted out the greatest confusion that ever was in the Treasuries
of France: that beside the sparing of eight Millio^s every year: whereof he
yearly became indebted to his Officers, besides the payment of all charges, and
of all the ordinary Expenses of the Estate, of all the wages of the sovereign
Courts, of all the wages of the men of War, of all the Garrisons, Embassages,
the Kings house, the Voyages and Marriages, giving of Rewards and Recompenses,
with a thousand other expenses, too tedious to be here set down, besides also
the Guardes ordinary sums, without augmenting either Taxes or Impositions in
the Realm.

Yea contrariwise, If they find not that I have yet for the entertainment of
three great Armies, whereof the one recovered Amuns an other reduced Bretaigne,
and the third conquered Bresse, and Sauoye: found means extraordinarily to
furnish above twelve Millions: for the discharge of the debts of France, grown
by Treaties, above five and twenty Millions: for the payment of those of
Switz^rland, Germany, Italy, and England, above thirty Millions: For the
payment of Pensions, both within and without the Realm, above four and
twenty Millions: For the succor of foreign Provinces, above eight Millions:
For the refurnishment of the Artilleries, Fortifications, Highways, and
Buildings, above eight Millions: For the relief of the poor, above six
Millions: To lay up in the Treasury, in the Coffers of the Bastille, or to
leave in Deposito, in the hands of the Treasurer of the Espargne, above
seue^teene Millions: To satisfy many other Expenses, which may easily be
verified, above twenty Millions: If I have not also besides procured Contracts
for the redeeming of the Demaynes of France, that were engaged, whereof the
greatest part is daily put in Execution; Such Redemptions, amounting to above
forty Millions.

Finally, ( MADAME) If I have not in my great care, by my only Vigilancie, put
in practice these sparings: If also to continue the same duty to France, I have
not at all times offered to your Majesty, to loose my life, or to support the
affairs, and that in the same eminency, yea, even to present them in a higher
degree.

If I say, I have not preferred all these things and more, then do I submit my
self ( MADAME) to any punishment for my presumtion, to receive such odious
recompense, that you shall appoint me, as the price of my honors and of my
offices: But if also ( MADAME) there be not any one of these Articles found
false, (unless it be that they speak too little) and that my former affection
has received no other alteration, but to be grown more ardent and strong,
suffer me ( MADAME) for my more worthy satisfaction, to endure the harm that
you do me, without accepting the good that you offer me. Revoke and call in my
offices without this gracious charge. Or if necessarily ( MADAME) you will
vouchsafe yet to honor me with some favor, Let it be only, if it may so
please you, a perpetual remembrance of my fidelity: A favor which I desire
of your Majesty: not that hereafter I might be recalled to the painful
travel of the affairs: but only to leave me in rest, that I may still live
in the remembrance of her, who is this day the Regent of my country: the living
soul of my master, and the mother of my King. And surely ( MADAME) it is also
an honor, and last acknowledgement which you Madame cannot justly deny me: for
since all they whom in my offices I may have offended, do labor to see me
deprived, much more may they remember my services that do triumph in them.

Farewell house, farewell fortress, which I have had in keeping and government
above twelve years. Farewell Temple of the Goddess Moneta Money, who have
procured me so great envy: Let me now go, now that I am weary of these
affairs; Return me to a private life, wherein I may no more have such cares.
I am he, who strong in spirit and courage, having comprehended the very ground
of the riches of the King and Kingdom, have governed them: I am he, unto whom
the selicitie of this estate, augmented in new revenues, and the coffers of
our young masters, replenished by just and lawful means, stand bound for that
plain and assured order that I have established; I have reaped great honors
and large recompense for that industrious care that I took under a great king.
I was of great power, and had great authority, but even in the turning of a
hand, in his bloody fall, I have seen all fallen and ruined. In the same
mishap, have I seen extinct, all that envy, that made diverse many times to
threaten my undoing and utter ruin, whiles I procured the good of the estate,
and that I sought nothing but to purchase only my masters favors, without
any regard of the great ones, and never knowing what it was to seek the favor
and good will of the people, evermore bending my self wholly to this purpose.

But now in the end, depart from me all troublesome carking care, I am now
resolved to mew up my ship in a calm, and safe haven: peradventure the state
having lost me, shall better acknowledge wherein I have been profitable unto
it, and the people shall find it, albeit ouerlate, when favor and affection
shall succeed hatred: but I do not so highly esteem my own grace and good,
as that I should desire to obtain it, by the disasters and calamities of my
country: But contrariwise, grant O God, that the fortune of this Realm, may
evermore continue in good estate, that I may never see it overthrown, and that
it may never have cause to be sorry for the loss of me, or to wish for me
again.

FINIS.

