ADAM IN HIS INNOCENCE.

BY WILLIAM BLOYS, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Young, for George Lathum, at the sign of the
Bishops head in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

ADAM IN HIS INNOCENCE
I Have heretofore engaged my self to show, how, Medit on 42. Psalm. Ver. 6.
those places that in themselves are most delightful, may by our good
improvement become most profitable; Which I intended of the pleasures of a
Garden: the best fruit whereof will be, to carry up our thoughts into heaven.
And this being the time wherein I see every thing put forth, I am admonished to
do likewise, and thereby to discharge my promise.

It may be thought a strange enterprise and unadvised choice, to undertake this
new discovery; and to attempt a reformation in that, Instrumentum duorum
vitiotum, vanitatis and torporis, desidioe sepulchrum. Lips.
which has been the instrument of two vices, vain Ostentation, and dull
Stupidity: wherein many do offend, as by intemperate eating of the fruit, to
the prejudice of the health of their body; so likewise by excessive delight in
affected rarities, and fond curiosities, to the depravation of their mind:
whereas if they were endued with divine wisdom, and could restrain their
extravagant desires within the proper limits of reason and moderation, they
might gather singular contentment in the use thereof. It was the employment of
Adam in the estate of innocence, to dress and keep the garden of Eden; which
(in respect of the fertility of the place) needed no husbandry; but that he
might be a law to his posterity. The knowledge of trees and herbs did well
beseem Solomon himself, who was the wisest of men. Having named him, Cyrus,
Attalus, Massanissa, Cato, etc.
it will be superfluous to rehearse other Kings and Potentates, who have
seriously addicted themselves to this work. Abraham would not plant a grove,
Genesis 21.33.
but he would call upon the Name of the everlasting God; then much more ought
we in planting an orchard (the apple tree so far excelling the trees of the
wood) to worship the Lord. Cant. 2.3.
It pleased the Almighty to forbid his people to eat of the trees that they
should plant in the first three years; Deuteronomy. 20.20.
in which time the fruit was to be counted as uncircumcised: Levit. 19.23.
but in the fourth year all the fruit should be holy to praise the Lord
withal. During the time of their abstinence they might consider, that by
reason of the sin of man, who had corrupted his way, and filled the earth with
violence and contagion, this good creature of God was not so pure unto them,
but that it had need to be sanctified by the word of God and by prayer: and
ever after, the first of the ripe fruits were to be offered unto the Lord
without delay. Yea, Exodus 22.29.
Nec ante gustare quam diis consecrassent. Turneb.
the very Heathens, when their fruit came to maturity, dared not so much as
taste of it, until they had consecrated some part thereof unto their gods.
Should we accomplish this work of plantation without seeking for a blessing,
it were just with God to blast our endeavors with barrenness, that the trees
of the Land should not yield their fruits; or though they do, that we should
not gather them; or though we do, that we should not eat of them. The story
is not unknown of him, Ancaeus in Na^. Com. Mythol.
who gave occasion to that Proverb, Senex in Perotto.
Many things fall between the cup and the lip: Or lastly, though we did
brutishly devour them, without looking up to the giver, God may punish our
usurpation, as he did the excess of Noah: they may be in the mouth as honey
for sweetness, but bitterness in the end. To avoid these punishments, and to
obtain Gods blessing upon us in all that we set our hands unto, let us labor
to make an holy use of the creatures, and to be heavenly minded in all our
actions.

It was anciently thought, Hortosque contra invidentium effascinationes dicari
videmus. Plin. Sec.
that gardens had a special immunity against the charms and machinations of
the malignant: If we could exalt our selves in these high contemplations, that
infernal Serpent should never fold himself about us. It is reported of
Caesar, Ut assectatorem a se ablegaret. Turneb.
that he selected a garden remote from the city, being on the other side of the
river, that he might free himself from petitioners and attendants: It will be
our greatest wisdom in these places to retire into our selves, laying aside
those weighty cares and troubles, whereby we are pressed down, lifting up our
hearts unto the Lord; looking unto Christ, and he also will look upon us in
mercy, and behold us under the tree, as he did Nathaniel. John 1.48.
And as Amos, being a gatherer of Sycomore fruit, was taken to be made a
Prophet of the Lord, unto whom he revealed his secret; so we shall come to be
more perfectly instructed in the good pleasure of God.

The invisible things of God, Romans 1.20.
that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the
world, being considered in his works. Man's special vocation was the study of
the creatures, wherein he might discern the wisdom of the Creator. There
is plentiful variety of good meditations obvious to every believer, and able
to satisfy the understanding with endless contentment. The great volume of
nature, the book of the creatures is laid open before us; and in every leaf,
and page, and line of it, God has imprinted such evident characters of his
divine properties, such-lively representations of his glory, that we may run
and read his excellency therein. Psalm. 145.10.
All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee*
they shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. Thus
every good Christian, being a tree of righteousness of the Lords planting, is
full of sap, replenished with the influence of that gracious Spirit, and filled
with prudence, duly to ponder the infinite majesty and incomprehensible
greatness of God, by those visible expressions, which are continually
presented unto him: The ungodly are not so, but, as if they had eaten of the
fruit of the Lote-tree (which made them that eat of it to forget their native
country) they remember not whose offspring they are, Dulcedine Loti liquerat
and patriam. Alciat.
they be unmindfull of the celestial Jerusalem, which is the mother of us all:
and do as much neglect to seek that heavenly Canaan, as Abraham did to return
to Haran from whence he came. These may fitly be compared unto that bird, Humi
aliquo casu deprehe^si, Apodes nullo negotio capiuntur. Scal. in Arist.
which if by any casualty it happened to be upon the ground, it was readily
taken, as not being able to raise it self: In like manner they are readily
overwhelmed by the snare of the fowler, while they subject themselves to the
love of the world, and the things of the world. Velut si prolapsus cecidisset,
terran osculo contigit. Live. Ant. Muret. Var. Lect.
And as Brutus, by direction of the Oracle, did cast himself down, and kiss
the earth, that he might come to govern; so they regard not before whom they
do fall down and worship, that wealth and power may be given unto them. It is
related of a covetous wretch, that he most corruptly perverted that place in
the Psalm, where it is said, The earth has he given to the children of men,
Psalm. 115.16.
as a forcible allegation for his greedy pursuit after worldly commodities;
whereas if we did rightly weigh it, we might be excited to bless the Lord for
his bounty, in filling the earth with his goodness, and giving it to the
sons of men, who are educated at Gods footstool (as Paul at the feet of
Gamaliel) where we have many good things, Acts 22.3.
many virtuous instructions committed unto us, which we by the help of the holy
Ghost ought to keep for our future comfort. And now speaking of the earth, I am
come to the foundation upon which I must erect my future discourse; desiring to
have the soil well prepared, that so there may arise the more fruit and
benefit by this ensuing Treatise.

First then (that I may proceed the more methodically, being to extract mine
observations out of a place of order, and not out of an intricate wilderness
of confused wandering,) in the beginning of our egresse and stepping forth, that
there may be an enlargement of the mind as well as of the body, even in that
motion and exercise of the body manifold good thoughts may accompany us: and as
we walk out for our refreshing, so our heart, Palpitat, and quasi alterum
movetur animal. Plin. Sec.
which is as another creature ever stirring within us, may be directed unto the
Lord, and may draw nigh unto him, through faith in Christ, who is the only way
that leads unto the Father; We have great cause to praise the Lord, who has
given us strength and liberty thus to walk: He did, as he speaks of
Ephraim, Hos. 11.3.
teach us to go, taking us by the arms, and guiding us in our unstable
years, preserving us from the fall and lamenesse of Mephibosheth. 2 Samuel 4.4.
He has kept us ever since from any exceeding great disease in our feet, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
as Asa had: we do not rightly consider Gods love herein. If we had been
smitten, and after received strength, we would enter into the Temple, leaping
and praising God, Acts 3.8.
as the man did, who was lame from the womb, and raised by Peter. He has
delivered us from the restraint which Joseph endured, Psalm. 105.18.
whose feet were hurt with fetters: yea, he has given us a pleasant path to
walk in, having bestowed many blessings and comforts upon us: whereas others,
as well deserving, have their ways beset with briers, do meet with many
crosses and encumbrances. He has sent us the light to walk in, that we may
discern whither we go; having rightly informed our judgments, that we might
eschew errors, and walk before him in truth with all our heart: whereas
others are in darkness, and have many stumbling-blockes in their way; their
evil troubled conscience being possessed with many impertinent scruples,
insomuch that they walk like them that were to be tried by Fire-ordeal,
Verstegan.
who being blind-folded, did pass over many glowing hot irons; they fear
every step they set to fall into some inevitable danger. Now in our going out,
and returning back, there seems to be some resemblance with the life of man,
Psalm 104.23.
who goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening. He
enters into the world in his childhood, where he meets with much commotion
and agitation: After which he begins to ebb, and retire in his old age:
Having ascended the hill of his full strength, he then descends and walks
through the valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4.
1 Kin. 2.2.
which is the way of all the earth, as Joshuah called it, Josh. 23.14.
who before conducted the people into the Land of the living, who then showed
them the way to their rest, where they should sleep in the dust. Man is always
going to his long home; as well in the sweet walks of recreation, as in the
tedious journies of important necessity; as well in the smooth allies of
joyful contentment, as in the deep and difficult road of vexation and sorrow.
In our walks our faces are not always toward the rising, but sometimes we
look toward the declining Sun; and thereby we may be put in mind to set our
faces, as though we would go to Jerusalem, Luke 9.53.
and to prepare for that time, when we shall lie down in darkness; which that
we may do, we ought seriously to consider, whether it be a good and a straight
way that we walk in, or not. No man will take many turns in an uncouth path
that is inconvenient for his passage, being overgrowne with weeds and bushes,
or offensive to his senses, by reason of evil savours, and hateful objects:
And yet how many be there that go on, yea that run headlong in the dangerous
ways bringing them to destruction? The drunkard staggers in the broad way that
he makes to be defiled: The adulterer goes an obscure shady way in the
evening, Prove. 7.9.
in the twilight, that he may not be discovered: The extortioner walks in
crooked ways: The ambitious climbeth up the rocky way, whose feet stand in
slippery places: The covetous man goes in a by-way, on the other side with the
Levite, Luke 10.32.
that he might avoid occasions to exercise charity. All these are impure and
unclean ways, and they that walk in them may rightly be said to go in the
Dolorous way, tending to sorrow and confusion, while they violently press
forward in wickedness. 1 Kin. 13.24
There was a Lion in the Prophets way, that slew him for his disobedience:
there is roaring Lion, watching to kill and devour all those, which run
astray in these disconsolate ways going down to the chambers of death. As the
people stood still in the way when they came to the place where Amasa was
slain; 2 Samuel 20.12
so it will behoove us, when we see how many have miscarried, and perished by
wandering in these ways of misery, not to proceed any further therein, but to
step into that good and upright way, whereby we may be conducted into eternal
life. It is a dreadful sign of Gods displeasure, when he suffers any man to
walk on prosperously in his stubborn way and ungodly council, as in an even
alley, without any obstacles or impediments, not sending his messenger to stop
him in his sinful course. It were much better that the Lord should hedge up
our way with thorns, and make a wall that we should not find our paths, Hos.
2.6.
than to permit us to run greedily after licentious errors: Psalm. 23.3.
Blessed is the man whom God leads in the paths of righteousness for his
names sake: He does always hear a voice behind him, saying: This is the way,
Isa. 30.21.
walk in it. Having once entered into the way of truth, we must persevere in
it, always going on cheerfully, without fainting or weariness; like the
Cherubims in Ezechiel, Ezech. 1.9.
which went straight forward, and returned not again: Although in our walks
we go first forward, and then turn again; yet in this passage we must
proceed constantly, without turning back; Luke 9.62.
for then we are not fit for the Kingdom of God. Having begun well, who should
hinder us from persisting in our obedience? It had been better not to have
known this way, than having known it, 2 Pet. 2.21.
to turn from the commandment delivered unto us. Genesis 5.22.
Did Enoch walk with God three hundred sixty and five years? and shall not we
walk in his ordinances the short term of our life, which is but a span long?
He had a spacious ground to walk in, of a vast extent like Paradise it self;
whereas we are concluded within narrow bounds, and can never go far, but
that we are called back, Psalm. 90.3.
Return ye children of men. Although we cannot keep pace with him, and
Abraham, Genesis 24.40. Psalm. 116.9.
and David, yet if we walk in the steps of their faith and obedience, we shall
in the end finish our course with joy: In the mean time, Romans 4.12.
as we are preserved from discouragement; so we must be awakened from
security: there ought to be a continual pressing forward in the good way; By
using our legs in walking, we become the more fit and able to perform that
exercise: So we, setting our selves in the right way, it pleases the Lord to
establish our goings, and to strengthen us for the better discharge of all holy
duties. We walk with speed and agility, when we desire to obtain heat
thereby; so there must be a cheerful forwardness in Gods service, and a
fervent zeal after his glory, that our hearts may be warmed by his grace, and
our souls refreshed by his love.

Thus by revolving such pious thoughts in our minds, we may be preserved from
evil; as the sea by its fluctuation is kept from putrefaction: Hic motus aquas
maris a putrefactione tuetur. Magir.
but how few be there who retire into their own hearts, when they go forth
into their walks? and do more desire the influence of the Spirit to come upon
them, Cant. 4.16.
as the North wind (purging them from the infectious settlings of corruption)
and to blow upon them as the South wind (watering their roots by sweet showers)
that their graces as spices may flow out, than they do the gentle breath of
cool air for the refreshing of their bodies?

It is the common practice of most men in the very beginning of their days, to
enter into an intricate Maze of endless wandering, walking on every side, Impii
ambulant in circuitu. Psalm. 12.8.
as the Psalmist speaks, Running round in a circulation until they wax
giddy, and fall into extreme peril: or else be as far in the end from any
true rest and solid comfort, as they were in the beginning. Job 1.7.
It was the Devils vagrant course to go to and fro in the earth, and to walk
up and down in it: Whom do these men choose for their leader, while they
subject themselves to these serpentine windings; being involved and environed
with the turbulent affairs of this life, out of which they know not how to
extricate and unfold themselves? and yet they think their way to be safe,
while they seek to compass their designs in this turning Labyrinth, when as
they have never set foot into the path of life, but are as far from arriving
at the port of bliss, as they be from good success, who would press through
the North-west passage; and at last (if ever) return back with naught but
emptiness and desolation. These men seem to be driven with the unsettled
error of Copernicus, Quod terra moveatur, and sol sit omnis motus expers.
Clavius.
who thought that the earth did move, and the sun stood still; so they are
whirled about with the world, and do compass sea and land for gain, or to
accomplish their designs; but they stir not in pursuit of heavenly
blessings, 2 Cor. 4.4.
their minds being blinded by the god of this world, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them;
like the Egyptians, Exodus 10.23.
which rose not from their place in the three days of thick darkness; so
they, during the three days of their youth, middle age, and old age, never
rouse up themselves to seek for the treasure in heaven, or to discover the
sweet light of Gods Word; whereas they make haste to obtain the fading
benefits of this transitory life with such violent forwardness, that the swift
pace of Asahel or Jehu does not exceed their furious speed: Having spent their
breath, and tired themselves in following this shadow that flies away from
them, it were their only happiness to consider their erroneous ways: And as
Alexander did cut that knot he was not able to untie; so if they can find no
place where they may go forth, then to break the circle, and free themselves
from that restless succession of worldly cares, in which they were before
entangled; Homines tibi molesti? Hic apud te eris; Occupatio exhausit? hic
replevere. Lips.
and having escaped those tumults and vexations, whereby they formerly wasted
their vigor, and consumed their best strength, now to repose themselves under
the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1.
as in an arbor of rest and refreshing, where they may cast off those tedious
molestations which formerly oppressed them: and being exempted from the throng
of the multitude, Psalm 4.4.
may commune with their own heart, and so come to discern that sore travel,
wherewith all they are exercised under the Sun, who spend their vain life as
a shadow, and their days in sorrow and grief, while they seek after leasing,
Judge. 9.15.
and trust unto the shadow of Jothams bramble, that will rend and tear them;
or of Manasses thorns, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. Jonah 4.7.
that will deceive them; or of Jonas gourd, that will soon forsake them,
placing their confidence in the instable benefits of this life, which before
the morning may be dried up from the roots, like the barren fig tree: Mar.
11.20. Luke 12.20.
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall
those things be that thou have provided? Such as rely upon these outward
helps, for the fruition of good, and protection from evil, declare plainly
from what stock they are come, viz. that they be the offspring of Adam, the
common root of mankind, who, after his rebellion against Gods word, did think
to hide himself from the presence of the Lord among the trees of the garden;
whose example might occasion the Jews to report, that Cain his son, after he
had sinned, and had drunk the dregs of the cup of trembling, did lurk in
secret places among the trees and bushes, and so was killed like a beast by the
hand of Lamech. But could Adam think by the great knowledge he had lately
acquired, to hide himself in that thick covert from Gods all-seeing eye? Or
how dare he approach so nigh unto the trees, when the sound of a shaken leaf
might chase him, Levit. 26.36.
and make him flee, as fleeing from a sword, even from that flaming sword,
which afterward was placed to keep him out of Paradise? Did he resolve with
Jacob to go down into his grave? and having deserved that the terrible
sentence of judgment should be speedily executed upon him, he would in that
obscure shade compose himself for his death and burial? but he might not be
freed so soon from his horror; death then fled from him, as he from God,
though at last it turned again like Abner, 2 Samuel 2.23.
and smote him to the ground. Could he imagine in that secret place to be
covered from the Divine vengeance? as if God that planted the garden should not
know the most private and utmost parts thereof: Surely, Isa. 28.15.
he made lies his refuge, and under falsehood he hid himself. Stat pervia
nullis solibus. Statius. Nulli penetrabilis ast^o Lucus erat. Ovid.
Though some trees may defend from the scorching heat of the Sun, Gods eyes
are brighter than the Sun, and darkness hides not from him, but the night
shines as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to him. The
Lord, who planted the ear and formed the eye, heard that sweet counsel which
he and Eve did take in this their desolate misery, and saw their nakedness,
whereof they themselves were sensible: and yet such was their brutish stupidity
(when they lost their understanding, and became as the beast that perishes)
that they thought to cover that from God, which was so openly discovered unto
themselves. They saw the tree was to be desired to make one wise; but they
found not such operation therein: O ye fools, when will ye be wise? The wisdom
they gained thereby descended not from above, but was earthy, sensual,
divellish: They saw it was pleasant to the eye; but why would they look upon
that, which was not lawful for them to eat? and what fruit had they in that,
whereof they are now ashamed? They saw it was good for food, when as the
deadliest poison in the serpent had not been so hurtful. There is mention of
one Gruvelius, Obiit improviso lapsu ex arbore, cum filiolis pyrum vellet
decerpere. Grasserus in Poem.
who gathering some fruit for his children to eat, by a fall did kill
himself; but our parents eating this fruit, by their fall did not only break
and dissolve themselves, but did grind their posterity to powder: for dust we
are, Genesis 3.19.
and unto dust we shall return. When they were in the midst of the garden, as
taking surest possession, being far remote from the border and bounds, in
greatest security, not observing where their enemy might enter to deprive them
of their happiness, then were they nighest unto ejection and exile, being
ready to be cast out of their native soil, into a cursed land made barren for
the wickedness of them that were to dwell therein; where they did, and we
their children throughout all generations ever shall continue strangers and
pilgrims, having no abiding city. In the beginning God took the man, and put
him into the garden of Eden, having made him in his own image and likeness,
full of majesty and beauty, not needing any garments, which though they had
exceeded the royalty of Solomon, yet might not be compared with that
illustrious splendor and dignity which shined in Adam: But after he had
divested himself of this excellency, and stripped himself naked and bare, like
a dry tree, or a withered branch, when all things which were dainty and goodly
were departed from him, then his glory was turned into corruption, and his
comeliest parts had abundant uncomeliness. The branches of the trees were an
excellent bower to shelter him; and a few fig leaves, or the skins of beasts
were the best garments to clothe him. Thus this goodly tree, Dan. 4.11.
whose height reached unto heaven (like that in the vision) who would have been
as God, knowing good and evil, was hewne down, and must have been cast into
the fire to have burned evermore, like Moses bush, and never to have consumed;
but Christ our Redeemer, the root and offspring of David, did interpose between
him and Gods anger: Luke 1.78.
The Branch from on high has visited us; Non ficut alia sunt germina, quae a
terra germinant. Beza. Nazaret ab Hebraeorum voce, quam alii surculum, alii
florem interpretantur. Causabon.
This Nazarene was planted here upon earth; He humbled himself, and was found
in the likeness of man, being a Tree of life in raising the dead, continually
yielding fruit better than gold, yea than fine gold, always doing good, and
filling the hungry with good things: Whose leaves were for the healing of the
Nations; who did communicate his virtue to them that came under his shadow,
seeking for help, curing the diseases of the body, and the infirmities of the
soul: Yet this fruitful bough (prefigured by Joseph) was sorely grieved, Sub
hoe typo depicta est nobis imago Christi. Calvin.
and shot at by the archers; he was wounded and pierced in many parts and
members of his body, and the blood came forth at the breaches that they made in
this Vine: Lam. 1.12. Vindemiavit me. The Bishop of Wint. Passion Sermen.
He was bereft of the dry leaves, of humane comforts; of the green leaves, his
Disciples which forsook him; and of the fruit of divine consolation. The tree
was hewne down, the branches cut off, the leaves shaken off, and the fruit
scattered: If this was done to the green tree, what should have been done to
the dry? If Christ our Surety were thus afflicted, we who were the objects of
hatred, and subjects of wrath, must have been plucked up and destroyed for ever,
without Gods mercy toward us herein: But there is hope of a tree, if it be cut
down, Job. 14.7.
that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease;
Christ ascends from the lower parts of the earth: He does arise in the garden,
God not suffering his Holy One to see corruption. Mar. 4.27.
As the seed cast into the ground does spring and grow up, the husbandman
knows not how; so though it be beyond the hope, besides the belief, above the
apprehension of the Apostles, Christ being dead is again quickened, and become
a beautiful and glorious branch, Quam multos aestu laborantes, ramorum
opacitas texit? Senec.
a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, protecting us from his
Fathers wrath, when by our provocations it begins to be kindled against us:
From him we receive this blessed fruit, that in peace and tranquillity we can
sit every man under his vine, Micah 4.4.
and under his fig tree, Zech. 3.10.
that in abundant plenty we can eat every one of his vine, and every one of
his fig tree; that in perfect charity we can call every man his neighbor
under his vine, Isa. 36.16.
and under his fig tree: whose love does not determine in the outward
benefits of this life; for then our shadow would be turned into darkness: but
he gives us the gracious promises of a better life, when the times of
Refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Tempora refrigerii. Acts
3.19.
that, the Sun shall not any more light on us, nor any heat: These are the
blessings we should chiefly seek after, which will never leave us, nor forsake
us; as for the delights and pleasures of this life, they are like a fleeting
shadow, of no continuance: If God blows upon them, they do wither and fade
like a leaf. In the calm and bright days of Summer, we receive some
contentment by using our arbours; but when the storm arises, or the Winter
approaches, or the day grows to an end, we then return into our houses. In
the time of health and strength, we are ready to say, I shall never be moved,
and do place too much confidence in the profits and comforts of the world; but
when God shall send some pining sickness, that shall shake us like a mighty
tempest; when the winter of old age causes our desire to fail, and the years
are come in which we have no pleasure; when the night does overtake us, and we
go to the gates of the grave, even to the land of darkness, and of the shadow
of death; we shall then be removed like a shepherds tent, our earthly house of
this tabernacle shall be dissolved, and we shall arrive at our long home (as
Barzillai was buried in the grave of his parents) where we may say to
corruption, 2 Samuel 19.37
Thou art my father; and to the worm, Thou art my mother, and my sister. Oh
that we were wise, that we understood this, that we would consider our latter
end; and not set our hearts upon these transitory trifles that deceive us when
we have greatest need of them: Think upon the renowned Patriarchs and
obedient Rechabites (blessed of the Lord) who dwelt in tents; it was but the
plucking up of a pin, and they were gone. Psalm. 120. Indesinenter vagare, and
errare cogor. Jun. Job 27.18.
Though thou live in an house of Cedar, it is but as the tents of Kedar, or a
booth that the keeper makes, as Job speaks, or a lodge in a garden, often
removed, or of short continuance: God can sweep away thy web with the besome of
destruction; or cut thee off, and make thee go to the generation of thy
fathers, where thou shall never see light.

We will not abide any longer in this our arbor, the use whereof does so
expire.

Now, because a plantation is vain, unless it be environed with a sufficient
defense against the beast of the field that destroies the trees, Cant. 2.15.
as the little foxes spoil the vines; and against the beast of Ephesus,
brutish and unreasonable men, who will not be content to eat their fill at
their pleasure (as God did permit in our neighbors vineyard) but will put into
their vessels, Deuteronomy. 23.24.
robbing the owner of the fruit of his labor: we will therefore in the next
place walk about our garden, and go round about it, marking well her walls,
and considering the strength of her enclosure, by means whereof it is
preserved from ruin and desolation. In the Parables, Mat. 21.33.
when God plants a vineyard, he provides for the safety thereof, either hedging
it round about, Isa. 5.2.
or making a wall about it; thereby declaring his providence and care in the
preservation of his Church and Chosen: Isa. 27.3.
Lest any hurt his vineyard, he will keep it night and day: As the mountains
are round about Jerusalem, Psalm. 125.2.
so the Lord is round about his people, from henceforth even for ever: Thus he
made an hedge about Job, Job 1.10.
and about his house, and about all that he had: thus he does compass us about
with his loving kindness, and keeps us from the adversaries of soul and body.
We have a vigilant enemy, ever ready to assault us: he walks about, as Peter
speaks, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and would take any advantage to make a breach, and enter, as he did into
Judas: And having once climbed up, and got possession, like a thief he would
steal, and kill, and destroy; robbing us of the fruit of righteousness, and
depriving us of all heavenly comforts, making us to become a reproach, a waste,
and a curse. Now it is by the favor and goodness of God that we are
protected, Cant. 4.12.
as a garden enclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed: The Angel of the
Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them; wherefore
let us fear to offend against the Lord: for in so doing we lay our selves open
to the rage and cruelty of all our enemies. There are diverse kinds of plants
that will get rooting in the joints of walls and buildings, Caprificus, ficus,
hedera, and alia virgulta. Causabon.
and there increasing, will break them asunder, and overthrow them: Such are
our sins, if we suffer them to grow up, and do cherish them, they will
batter down the wall, and expose us to confusion. Ever remember that there is
no strength nor fortification that can secure us against the judgments of God,
when we transgress his laws: If he gives power unto man to leap over a
wall, Psalm. 18.29.
then he himself is most able to surprise us wheresoever we be. Though our
foundation abides sure, the God of hosts can muster up his armies, the
locusts, Exodus 10.15.
the palmer-worme, the caterpiller, Amos 4.9.
the canker-worm, the frost, Joel 1.4, 7.
blasting, and the like, to eat the fruit of the trees, and consume the
increase of our labor. No mighty man can be delivered by much strength: God
can take him away as with a whirlewind both living and in his wrath. As we are
to be sensible of Gods love toward our selves in particular; so likewise we
ought evermore to be thankful for his wonderful mercy and unspeakable
goodness toward this his Church, which he has hitherto so graciously
preserved. There is a City that is described to be compassed about with fire,
Silicum lapidicinae, unde cinctum igne Madritum. Mercator.
in regard of the quarries of flint adjoining thereunto: But I am sure the Lord
has been unto us a wall of fire round about; Zech. 2.5.
and not of fire only, but as the waters were a wall unto the Israelites on the
right hand, Exodus 14.22.
and on the left; so he has surrounded us with his favorable protection on
every side; whose providence and love toward us have been a surer defense than
a wall of brass could have been: When our cruel enemies beset us round, and
thought to have laid waste defenced Cities into ruinous heaps; God knew their
rage against us, and their tumult came up into his ears; he put a hook into
the nose of that great Leviathan, and a bridle into his lips, driving him
whither he pleased, and turned him back, though not by the same way by which
he came: Since that, there arose a generation, who were the Serpents in this
our Paradise, full of all subtilty and all mischief; such as attempted to beat
through a stone wall, to overthrow the foundation, Winter in Bishop Carltons
Remembrance.
to strike at the root (as one of them spoke) to overturne and dissipate the
Royal state, and chief supportation of the Land: but God turned their
council into foolishness; they who were folden together as thorns, and
strengthened themselves in their wickedness, are devoured as stubble fully
dry: The Lord did pluck them out of their dwelling place, and root them out of
the land of the living; Now praised be the Name of the Lord for these former
deliverances, and blessed be the Lord for the benefits and comforts, which at
this present we do enjoy, that peace and prosperity that are within the walls
and palaces of this our Sion, and above all, that our Land does flow with the
sincere milk of the Word, and we have the righteous judgments of God, which
are sweeter than honey and the honey-combe; without which, though our Vines did
bring forth clusters, like them at Eshcol, Numb. 13.23
though we had abundance of all outward helps, yet we were most miserable. In
former times there have been manifold rebellions and insurrections in the Land;
when the trees would anoint a King over them; the subjects would depose one,
and exalt another: and though England were then a garden of deliciousness unto
the Popes, Innocent. 4. Hortus deliciarum, and puteus inexhaustus. Abbot
against Hill.
as one of them boasted, and a fair flower in their garland; yet in it self it
was a valley of slaughter, where thousands did fall on the right hand, and ten
thousand on the left. And besides them which were cut off in the civil wars;
as in the destruction of the Moabites, 2 Kin. 3.19.
every fair and good tree was felled; so here some of the most fruitful and
godly were hewn down as unprofitable trees, and cast into the fire: Frustra
dicens folia decuti, ramusculos amputari; Radicem hanc, and Haereticorum spem
unicam excindendam. Bishop Godwin.
Yea that cruel GARDENER, who then raged, could not be satisfied with
shreading off so many branches, but he would have laid the axe to the root, and
have taken away the life of Her, who was overshadowed by the rich mercies of
the Almighty, that she might afterward excel all the Daughters in doing
virtuously, and become a refuge for them in distress: Since the beginning of
whose reign, our Kingdom has been as a watered garden, Isa. 58.11.
and like a spring of waters: Our spears have been turned into pruning-hookes,
Mic. 4.3.
and here have been the happy Islands, Apud Graecum Gram. reperi Insulas
Fortunatas in Britaunia esse, ubi frondent arbores, etc. Muretus.
where all things have flourished in excellent beauty and perfection. So long
as we have the dew of Heaven, we may expect the fatness of the earth; while we
have the Sun, we may hope for precious fruits to be brought forth thereby;
while we have the Word of truth, we may hope for the blessings that do attend
upon the same. But as there was a fig tree, Quamdiu ea viveret, libertatem
pop. Romans incolumem mansuram. Festus and Jos. Scal.
which was ominous to the Romans, if it withered; so there is a Vine, that the
Lord brought out of Egypt, and has planted it amongst us, causing it to take
deep root, and fill the Land: If this be laid waste, we may justly fear the
anger of the Lord; if we (being freed from the darkness of Popery) shall
become unfruitful, we may look for judgment and fiery indignation. Where God
bestows great cost, Luke 20.
he requires fruit proportionably: Isa. 5.
if we be planted as against a wall, where the heat of the Sun is more strong
and united; if we have powerful means to help us forward in producing good
fruit, and yet continue barren, then our sins will soon be ripened thereby,
like the basket of summer fruit which Amos saw; Amos 8.2.
and Gods vengeance will more speedily fall upon us, like the rod of an almond
which Jeremiah saw: Jer. 1.11, 12.
for he will hasten his word to perform it; he will take away the hedge, and
break down the wall, and leave us as a prey to our enemies. Now where is that
good Nehemiah, who labors night and day to repair the breaches of the wall?
Where is the man that makes up the hedge, Ezech. 22.30
and stands in the gap before the Lord for the land, that he may not destroy
it? Who is there, like Israel, that has power as a Prince, and prevails with
God for blessings? Who is there, like Moses, that is mighty and potent to
hinder Gods punishments from entering in amongst us? By variance and dissension
we raze down the wall, and are subject to ruin and destruction: Oh that we
were strongly knit, and firmly joined under our head cornerstone: Behold how
good, and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! Such as
shall raise up the partition wall formerly demolished, and shall cause
difference and opposition to grow up, may fear that curse to fall upon them,
which is denounced against the builders of Jericho: Josh. 6.26.
We ought rather to be as a firm and sure wall, fixed and immovable, standing
fast in the faith, supporting and strengthening the weak, restoring such as
are overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6.1, 2.
in the spirit of meekness, bearing one another burden, reflecting that
warmth and influence we receive from above, for the benefit of them that are
nigh unto us, to bring them to maturity; and not to be wavering-minded and
instable in all our ways, like a bowing wall, Psalm. 62.3.
and a tottering fence; not to be malicious against others, Eccles. 10.8.
like that hedge which has a serpent hidden in it; not to be fierce and
violent in sharp invectives, like a thorn hedge piercing them through with
many sorrows, Mich. 7.4.
which come nigh unto us. Wicked men are often compared to briers and thorns,
Ezech. 2.6.
increasing and multiplying upon the face of the earth, boasting that they can
do mischief.

Sinue at first cumbred the earth with thorns: If Adam had abode in his
integrity, the ground should have been freed from this burden, and all things
should have been common, as they were in the beginning of the Gospel; Acts 4.32.
neither should any man have said, that ought of the things that he possessed
had been his own. But now the blessing is turned into a curse; Yet even in Gods
righteous judgment there is a manifestation of his providence: For since by
eating the forbidden fruit we are corrupted, and that evil root of
covetousness lies covered in the heart (like Achans wedge buried in the earth)
and we are so far from that happy communion and overflowing bounty, Josh.
7.21.
Quam arborem conseruisset, sub ea legere alium fructum indignum esse. Livi.
whereby others might partake with us of those things unto which we have most
proper right, that we rather (with Fabius) think it derogates from us, if we
plant the tree, and another eat the fruit; Et sua retinere privatae domus, de
alienis certare egregiam laudem esse. Tacit.
Supposing it belongs to private and obscure men, to maintain their own
bounds; but to them of dignity, to encroach upon the territory and jurisdiction
of other men. Neque quisquam Ger. manorum proprios sines habet, ne potentiores
humiliores possessionibus expellant. Caesar. Ne familiae rixentur cum vicinis,
ac limits ex litibus judicem quaerant. Varro.
Now it pleased the Lord, in the beginning of the disease to ordain a remedy;
and when men's desires were so enlarged, that they could not look upon that
which was another man's, as if it had been their own; but were ready to
transgress by injurious intrusion, Then, to prevent discord and enmity, and to
set limits to our greedy appetite, he did cause these thorns to spring up,
which in succeeding times might be most useful and commodious, as well to
withstand the insatiate avarice of them, who would devour that which pertaines
unto their neighbor; as also for the quiet fruition of the portion which is
justly due unto us: Testudinem ubi collecta in suum tegimen est, tutam ad omnes
ictus video esse, etc. Livi.
that as the Torteise is safe, while it keeps within the shell, but such parts
of it as are put forth become subject to harm and danger; so we be culpable by
exceeding the lot that is fallen to us, but are free and secure containing
within our proper bounds. Wheresoever then that we see these thorns, whether
in the confines, or adjoining to the walks and other divisions of this our
plantation, we may be put in mind of Gods curse that did produce them.

And not only by viewing the thorns, but likewise by observing the barrenness
of the earth, Exossatus ager. Persius.
wherein we are to fix our trees, which has lost its prime vigor and
strength that God gave unto it, to bring forth the tree yielding fruit after
his kind: So that no useful tree will prosper therein, without much culture,
and labor, and cost; but of it self it can multiply briers and weeds, Nil
nisi cum spinis gramen habebit ager. Ovid.
which are for the most part hurtful and prejudicial unto us. It was just
with God, when man did withhold the most acceptable fruit of obedience from
him, and did-bring forth bitter clusters and grapes of gall, Deuteronomy. 32.32.
that the ground should likewise detain its increase from sinful man, being
cursed for his sake, who by his sin turned Paradise into a desert: And now
beholding the earth (out of which he was taken) rejected of God, Heb. 6.8.
whose end is to be burned, he may acknowledge it to be a fit receptacle for
himself in his death, who for his wickedness deserves to be rooted out of the
land of the living. Ac saepe videas laetam nitentemque arborem, si in locum
alterum transferatur, succo terrae deterioris elanguisse. Macrob.
Adam in the beginning was a tree of righteousness planted in a rich and
fruitful soil; but afterward he was transplanted into a desolate wilderness,
where we his branches are shot forth; and now what good fruit can be expected
from us? The seed does partake of the property of that land into which it is
transported: man is become vain and unprofitable; the earth is corrupt and
filled with violence: for all flesh has corrupted his way upon the earth. Genesis
6.11.
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Can any acceptable fruit arise
from sinful man? Many times we may discern the outward surface of the ground
is green and flourishing (though soon parched in the heat of the year) but
searching into the hidden part, Soli superficies aestu facile siccatur. Scal.
in Theop.
in which the root should be dilated and spread, both for the better
establishing of the tree, Plus alimenti consequitur ex profundo, planta firmius
haeret, etc. Idem.
and that the moisture might from thence be derived unto the uttermost boughs,
and outmost branches, where meeting with the outward warmth, it might be
concocted and ordered for the strengthening of the tree, and bringing forth
pleasant fruit: I say, if we dig into that part of the land which is covered,
we shall soon meet with not only a dead, but a killing earth, which cannot
afford any good nutriment unto that which is placed therein: Even such is the
condition of man; There may be an outward form of godliness, an appearance of
religion, some show of piety; but let them try and prove themselves, and
inquire into the hidden man, and they shall find as much want of deepnesse of
earth for this heavenly plant of grace, as there was for the good seed of the
Word; Mat. 13.5.
the stony ground resisted that, and our hearts of stone do withstand this:
Yea, the most perfect do acknowledge that sin dwells in them, and there is
a law in their members, Romans 7.
warring against the law of their mind: Translatu facta est melior, quae noxia
quondam in patria. Alciat. Pierius.
And as that Persian fruit was poison in its own soil, but being removed into
another country, became safe and useful; so we, abiding in our estate of
nature, have no good thing dwelling in our flesh; but being changed and altered
by the working of the Spirit, we may fructify, and become profitable: yet we
ought always to be sensible of our corruptions remaining within us, which do
encumber our faith, being as a strange and foreign plant, not growing so
readily, not thriving so speedily as our carnal lusts do that prevail
against us, and overtop this grace with vanities: and being thus oppressed, we
ought to pray unto the Lord (who is able to bring a clean thing out of an
unclean) to break up the fallow ground of our hearts, putting his law into our
inward parts, that we may bear the image of the Second man, which is heavenly,
as we have borne the image of the First man, which is of the earth, earthy: And
as at the last day we look for a new earth, 2 Pet. 3.13.
wherein dwells righteousness; so now in this life, having our part in the
first Resurrection, we may be enabled to grow in godliness, and to bring forth
fruit in true holiness; and in the end may receive a blessing from the Lord,
who has dressed us, and gathered the stones out of us, taking away that which
did oppose, and bestowing all things requisite for our furtherance in the way
of life.

Thus we have walked into this our Orchard, we have refreshed our selves in our
Arbor, we have observed the defense thereof, we have discovered the nature
and condition of the soil; we should now enter among the trees themselves:
And although there be but a small portion enjoyed by us of this Land, or
brought over to us by the painful travels and learned works of other men, in
comparison of that innumerable and unspeakable variety, pleasing to the sight,
and good for food, which were placed by God himself in that glorious
plantation; yet even by these we now possess, we may be taught to admire and
adore the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: Romans
11.33.
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! When one
plant finds not learning and art enough to unfold it; but as there is some part
of it covered in the earth from our sight, so there is some property or quality
thereof reserved from our knowledge: And if we be not able rightly to discern
the use of one, then who is sufficient to discourse of many? Let us in humility
confess the truth, and testify against our selves; How can we deserve to take
delight in the sweet taste of any fruit, or to receive comfort and benefit by
observations collected from any tree, when as our gracious Father in the
beginning gave us liberty freely to eat of every tree of the garden, yea even
of the Tree of life (excepting only the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil) and yet we in the height of ingratitude did rebel against his word?
Some have taken pains to show what kind of fruit it was that Adam ate; but we
in the state of ignorance cannot judge of the fruit of the tree of Knowledge:
we now know it not; but we feel it, we feel it, even the coare of it still
abiding in our hearts; and are justly scourged out of the garden, never to
taste of these excellent fruits, but to eat of the herb of the field; Genesis
3.18.
Our former plenty being turned into penury, we are joined in commons with the
beast. Being fallen from the tree to the herb, from our first habitation to
this poor estate, we might easily have been suppressed and kept down by the
divine justice, and for ever have continued void of counsel, and without
understanding; Or at least if we had been in some measure enlightened, it might
have been to this end, that we should be more apprehensive of our misery, and
our knowledge should have been as the opening of the Syrians eyes, 2 Kin. 6.20.
when they were in the midst of Samaria, to have augmented our fear, being
compassed about with so many enemies; we might then have feared to come nigh
unto the tree, lest it should put us in mind of our disobedience by shunning
us, Fugiant ut introrsum in fundum se reclinent. Varre. Arbor pudica
appropinquante homine ramos constringit. Scal. exer.
and bending away, as the fruitful Olive from the Oak; or by closing the
branches, should shut it self up, that we who are unworthy might not taste of
the fruit; or though permitted to approach, yet that the shadow thereof should
be as disastrous unto us, Qui sub Sorbo arbore jacent, rursus in rabiem
vertantur. Fracastor.
as that of the Service tree is reported to be unto such as have bin furious,
bringing us to our former weakness; or like the Gourd withering in an instant;
or like the Apples of Sodom, turning to dust in the gathering; or else turning
us to dust while we eat them, killing by their poison; as many fruits have
done; the danger whereof has taught men, in the discovering of remote parts of
the world, Sir Richard Hawkins observat.
not to adventure beyond their knowledge, unless the birds and other creatures
do first feed upon them: Psalm. 103.9.
But the Lord will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever:
he has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities. For although since the fall we are constrained to supply our
scarcity by a more frequent use of the herb than otherwise should have been;
and the fruit did then degenerate from its primitive perfection, Terra post
lapsum vitiosos fructus proferre coepit: sed in diluvio major facta est
mutatio. Calvin. Quibus annis tempestas uda nimis fructus insipidi Seal. in
Theop.
and was again more impaired, and made much worse, the earth being corrupted
by the flood (a fit remembrance whereof we may have, when in a wet year our
fruit becomes unsavory) so that now it is like Barzillai, having lost its
former taste: Yet notwithstanding God left not himself without witness, Acts
14.17.
in that he still does us good (far above our deserts) filling our hearts
with food and gladness, Psalm. 104.15.
giving us such food from the trees as cheares the heart; which may excite us
with David, to call upon the fruitful trees to praise the Lord, in regard of
that virtue that is still remaining in them. The rigor of the first sentence
was afterward so mitigated, that the Lord by a special law does provide for
the preservation of fruit trees: When they besieged a City, Deuteronomy. 20.6.19.
they should not force an axe against them (for the tree of the field is man's
life.) And also he propounds a reward unto the industry of that man which
should plant a vineyard, that he should be dispensed with, and not go to the
war, until he has eaten of the fruit of his labor: whereby he does
encourage all men to be diligent in preparing to bequeath these helpful
benefits unto their posterity, Dii me non accipere tantummodo haec a majoribus
voluerunt, sed etiam posteris prodere. Cicere.
which they have received from their progenitors. I do not deny but there may
be much offense herein, by such as do wholly addict themselves to these present
contentments; it was one of the sins of Sodom, Luke 17.28.
their great security and excessive delight in planting, whose trees were all
turned into fuel; we are forewarned, that the same evil will be predominant
among us in these last times: Let us take heed, lest for want of moderation
therein, we become bestiall, yea worse than the beast, be changed into the
trees themselves, and be without sense or apprehension, Genesis 9.21.
as he was that planted the vineyard; Wherefore the time being short, we
should use the world, as not abusing it; for the fashion of this world passes
away. If an Heathen, 1 Cor. 7.31. Quam nodosi and retorridi rami^ quam tristes
and squallidi trunci^ Senec. epist.
upon the sight of some trees which were at first planted by himself, and
after became seere and decayed through age, could be admonished of his own
mortality; then much more may we by these outward helps be put in mind of our
frail condition here upon earth: And as the Peare-tree (which has its name
from fire) does grow upward; Bacon Cent. Becman de orig.
so we in our thoughts and desires should aspire unto heavenly blessings. Man
is like a tree turned upside down; Homo planta inversa.
not because he brings forth bad fruit in stead of good (though that be true
in most) but as the mouth of the tree is in the earth, and from thence draws
its vegetation; Ut illinc nostrarum actionum principia hauriamus. Scal. exer.
so our root is above, and from heaven we should derive our power, and the rule
of all our actions. Christ himself is our root, and from him we should
extract grace and strength, that we may bring forth good fruit. Is there such a
fullness of power in him, and do we continue as withered branches, without any
sap or nourishment? Is there such perfection in him, and do we still abide in
this estate of corruption? Adam was banished out of Eden, and we shall never be
admitted to come nigh unto the tree of life here upon earth, to find any
permanent joy, any settled assurance of contentment here in this world. If we
seek for any constant felicity here, our labor will be in vain: Our Tree of
life is in heaven, Revel. 22.
and from Christ alone we must receive all blessings, whereof we stand in need.
Without him we can do nothing; but we can do all things through Christ, which
strengthens us: In our selves we are as wild olive branches by our fall cut
off from that life, which at first was given unto us; Now there is no other
means whereby to preserve us from destruction, but only by being graffed into
that good Olive tree, Romans 11.
who left his fatness, not to be promoted over the trees, but to be humbled
and abased, that he might exalt us unto glory: There was an Incision into him,
that there might be an Insition of us; His side was opened, that we might enter
in, and with Thomas apprehend him for our comfort and salvation. If the touch
of the garment drew virtue from him for the curing of the body, then our laying
hold upon him, and applying him to our selves, will cure our souls: We must
not be in Christ as a dead branch is in a tree, only cleaving to the body of
it for a time (resembling formal professors in the Church, without the life
of grace) but by real participation of that heavenly influence, when we are
strongly knit unto him, and there is an union between him and us: When my
Beloved is mine, and I am his; when we abide in him, John 15.4.
and he in us; he receiving us by love, we applying him by faith, and
extracting grace and holiness out of him, Ut coalescant est responsus mutuus,
suppeditantis arboris, haurientis surculi. Scal. in Theop. Quo turgent tempore
plantae ad germinationem, recte inseri. Ibid.
as the cyon sucks the nourishment from the stock; this yielding, and
offering, and supplying; the other drawing and receiving. We make choice to
graffe in the Spring, when the sap does rise, that there may be moisture to
nourish the cyons; so we should seek for Gods blessing upon us in his
ordinances, at which time he is most ready to extend the arms of his mercy
toward us. It is said in Saint Luke, The power of the Lord was present to
heal them: Luke 5.17.
Not that his might was at any time defective or diminished, but it did now
shine forth more gloriously in his willingness to confer his favors upon
them that came unto him; so in the use of his Word and Sacraments, he does most
frequently lift up the light of his countenance upon us, opening and bringing
forth his treasures, whereby we may be enriched. After we have fixed the
cyons, we do apply some clay, Lutum adhiberi, ut ne reficcentur. Scal. in
Theop.
or the like, to prevent the dryness by reason of the wound, and to help to
fasten it; wherein we may consider, that substance whereof we were framed,
which was red earth, Nos argillam primum statim apponimus. Ibid.
as some conjecture from the signification of Adams name; being like the
potters clay, which is commended as most fitting for our present use. Where the
Lord speaks by the Prophet, Jer. 18.6.
that we are in his hand as clay in the hand of the potter, it is added in the
following Verses, Inutilesque falce ramos amputans, foeliciores inserit. Horat.
that he will pluck up that Nation and Kingdom which does evil in his
sight; and he will plant that Nation and Kingdom which turn from their evil:
This gives us just occasion to magnify the Name of the Lord, who suffering
others to continue in the estate of nature, as wild olives (and such were we of
this Land in former time, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers
from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world)
Yea, which adds to the riches of his mercy and love, has broken off the
natural branches, and has graffed us in, that we might partake of the root
and fatness of the Olive: Then let us receive the grace that is offered, and
not count our selves unworthy of so great salvation. We know that every graft
that is put into the stock does not grow; there may be two at the same time,
whereof the one does prosper, and the other is dried up; like two men in one
bed, the one taken, Luke 17.34.
the other left: They are not all Israel, that are of Israel; they are not all
endued with the Spirit from above, and with saving gifts, who assume the name
of Christians, and are incorporated into the visible Church: There is an
indisposition in many men, which makes them incapable of the grace that is
propounded unto them. When we take notice of the tenderness of the graft in
the beginning, how apt it is to be broken off by any casualty, we may ponder
our own weakness and frailty, how soon we may be shaken, having no
sufficiency in our selves; and therefore it was a necessary caveat, which the
Apostle gives to them newly graffed in, Romans 11.
Be not high-minded, but fear; Thou bear not the root, but the root thee:
We stand not by our own power, but by faith in Christ. Being thus feeble at
the first, we must imitate the trees in growing, who case not until they
obtain perfect strength, and be armed and fortified against the violent rage
of the wind, and hardened with the cover of the bark against all opposition,
and advanced by the height of the branches above the danger of enemies; so we
should be strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.
and in the power of his might, that we may be able to withstand in the evil
day, and having done all to stand. We see how flexible a young tree or a
branch is, that we can bend it, and make it grow which way we will; so should
we be tractable, and governed by the rule of the Word, never resisting the
good will of the Almighty God, lest he punish us, as he did the Israelites
which were his Vine that he brought out of Egypt, intending to plant them in a
fruitful land: but when they walked stubbornly before him, and would not be
ruled by him, nor observe his statutes, being a stiff-necked people, he then
subdued them, and led them which way he pleased, making them bend until they
did break, and fall in the wilderness: As for the tender branches which were
lately sprung up, being more humble and obedient, he caused them to take deep
root, and fill the land. In viewing the young trees that stand diverse years,
and require much labor and diligence in watering, and supporting, and
preserving them, before they bring forth fruit, we may call to remembrance the
time of our childhood and youth, which were vanity, when we spoke as children,
understood as children, thought as children, bringing forth no fruit, or if
any, no better than wild grapes, walking according to the course of this world,
having our conversation among the children of disobedience: So that the Lord
might justly have left us unto our selves, Prove. 1.31.
that we should have eaten of the fruit of our own way, and been filled with
our own devices. Let not us despise the riches of his goodness, and
long-suffering, and forbearance, which should bring us to repentance: He has
permitted us to stand three years, Luke 13.
like the fig tree in the Vineyard, seeking fruit upon us, and has found
none: He in mercy adds a fourth year, that we may in some measure recompense
his cost, and satisfy his expectation. The time past of our life may suffice
us to have walked in lasciviousness, when we were foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures; but now let us no longer live to
the lusts of men, but to the will of God, and bring forth the fruit of the
Spirit. It is time to awake out of sleep; the winter is past, the rain is over
and gone: The branch of the fig tree is tender, and puts forth green
figs, the vines with the tender grape give a good smell, the almond tree does
flourish, the flowers appear on the earth; The spring of our youth is far
spent, the summer of our perfect strength is at hand: Verba sunt folia, fructus
quaeritur.
The green leaves of good words are not sufficient; we must blossom as the
Rose in our good purposes. Can we look for fruit upon those trees in summer,
that have no blossoms upon them in the spring? Can we expect an increase of
grace and holiness in the ripe age of them, who have not so much as the
hopeful blossoms of godly resolutions and pious endeavors in their younger
years? This is impossible with man, but with God all things are possble.
Blossoms alone are not sufficient; for such as proceed not beyond fair
promises and laudable beginnings, are like unto that Cherry-tree that has
double blossoms, The Floripondio, etc. Purchase. Statim a subeunte fructu
pellitur flos, atque aboletur. Scal. in Theop.
but never yields any fruit: Or like some trees in America, that bear flowers
at all times, but no fruit at any time. We know the fruit increasing does
thrust off the blossom that did formerly enclose it; so we should not rest in
short essaies or weak attempts, but go on to absolute performance. A
longitudine digitali dactyli appellati sunt. Perot.
David says, The righteous man shall flourish like the Palm Tree; whose fruit
does grow like fingers, and are thereof named. The works of our hands, the
actions of our lives, are of the fruit of righteousness, that does justify
our faith, and is acceptable in the sight of God. Think not to please the Lord
with thy cold devotions in old age, with thy sorry repentance in the latter
end: He requires the first fruits, and do thou think to be received, when
thy summer fruits are gathered, thy days are spent in vanity, and thy service
and obedience is no better than the grapegleaning after the vintage, two or
three olive berries after the shaking, or the figs so bad they could not be
eaten? such may forsake their own mercy while they believe lying vanities, and
expect a long continuance here upon earth. It is true, God promises his
people, that their days shall be as the days of a tree, Isa. 65.22.
in regard of their strength and duration; and when they rest from their
labor, they are transplanted into Paradise: But let no impenitent sinner
deceive himself, and proceed in his wickedness; rather let him consider his
frailty, by observing that the young tree dies as well as the old; Poma si
cruda sunt vi avelluntur, etc. Cicero de Sen.
and as the ripe fruit falls off, so the green is plucked off by force: In like
manner, one dies in his old age, Job 21.23. and 24.20. and 9.17.
another in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet; his breasts are
full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow. Wickedness shall be
broken as a tree, even suddenly confounded, and overthrown as with a tempest;
like that flourishing Olive (described by the Qualem si quis aquis, and
fertilis ubere terrae educat, cum subito immissis praeceps Aquilonia nimbis:
Venit hyems, nigraque evulsam tendit harena. Val. Flac. lib. 6.
Poet, and may well be applied unto himself, whose untimely death prevented
the consummation of his work) which was planted in a fertile soil, and
watered with much diligence, and afterward was plucked up by the roots by a
violent North Wind, before it had yielded any fruit: Ingenium foelix, immatura
morte preventus. Seal. Poet.
Even so many strong men, who are accommodated with all things requisite for
the preservation of their lives; yet God does weaken their strength in the way,
and take them away in the midst of their days. Job 15.32.
Vanity shall be the recompense of them that trust therein: He shall be cut off
before his time, and his branch shall not be green: He shall shake off his
unripe grape as the Vine, and shall cast off his flower as the Olive: Wherefore
be not mocked, as if thou should not be moved, when thy foundation is placed
upon so weak a substance; but rather prepare for thy death: for in a moment
thou may go to the grave, and lie down in the dust. And if the tree fall
toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the tree falls
there it shall lie: If thou have inclined to the Sun of Righteousness, and
have extended thy branches in seeking for the beams of his mercy, and the
influence of his grace to refresh thy soul, that thou might be enabled to
bring forth good fruit; then thou shall have comfort in the end: but if thou
have withdrawn thy self from the light of Gods countenance, and art best
pleased in the dark shade of rest and ease, never seeking for heavenly
blessings, then great will be thy fall. How can any man think for a long time
to escape unpunished, John 15.2.
when God does take away every branch, and hew down every tree that bears
not fruit? Infoecundas vivere diutius. Scal. in Arist. Quae coluntur arbores
celerius senescere: cogimus eas multum operis facere. Idem in Theop. See Bishop
Juels life. Doctor Reynolds, and Master Boltons life.
And yet if the Lord should defer his speedy execution of judgment against
thine evil works (as it is noted, that the barren trees live longest, and the
most fruitful consume themselves by much bearing, representing those holy men,
which have wasted their strength by their godly labors;) yet notwithstanding
if thou do persist in impiety, thou shall not be acquitted, Job 21.30.
but art reserved to the day of destruction: Eccles. 8.12.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet it
shall not be well with him, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a
shadow, because he fears not before God. Quid tu^ ignoras magnas diu
crescere, una hora extirpari^ Q Curt.
The tree which has been many years growing up, may be cast down in an
instant: Although thou have been spared for a long time, yet vengeance may
suddenly overtake thee; wherefore let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, Dan.
4.27.
and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity. The longer
thou continuest in thy sins, the stronger are the cords of vanity; thy nature
is corrupt of it self, being as a law in thy members, and an inveterate
custom of doing evil is as a second nature, and both do war against the
Law of God. The young plant that has been set but a short time, may be plucked
up with small labor, whereas that which has been fixed diverse years, cannot
be removed without much difficulty: If thy corruptions be firmly rooted by
ancient residence within thee, how can thou get the dominion over them? How
will thou be able to prevail against them? There is no means under heaven,
whereby thou can hope for deliverance, but only by the favor and love of
God: Then pray unto him to have mercy upon thee, and to make thee the branch of
his planting, the work of his hands, that he may be glorified. Our help
stands in the Name of the Lord; It is he that does cause Israel to blossom
and bud, Isa. 27.6.
and fill the face of the world with fruit. If we had not the dew of heaven, we
should not have the fatness of the earth: If we had not the comfortable heat
of the sun, we should not have the fruit of the trees: without the grace of
God, there can neither be beginning nor increase of spiritual blessings. The
bud of a good desire, the blossom of a pious resolution, the fruit of a
virtuous action proceeds from the Lord; the readiness to will, the power to
perform is the gift of God, and does come from the Father of lights: All our
labor is in vain, except the Lord gives his blessing; It is vain to rise up
early, to sit up late, to spend the whole day in digging, and planting, and
watering, unless that he does cause the work of our hands to prosper. Now
being sensible of this our infirmity, that we can do nothing of our selves,
we ought to be the more thankful, in remembering the benefits that we have
received from the good will of the Almighty God, who has not left us destitute
of any meet help, whereby we may be fitted to bring forth good fruit. Psalm.
40.5.
Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: If
I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. There are
diverse things required to make the plants sprout, and yield their increase; as
the kindness and fertility of the ground: and has not God enriched us with
his blessings, and refreshed us with his mercies? The dropping of the air: and
has he not sent his Word, as a sweet shower, to satisfy our thirsty souls?
The changes and seasons of the year: and has he not given us a Winter, Feigus
and cohibet intus calorem, and corroborat. Scal. in Theop.
wherein to gather strength, and prepare for future time; and a Summer, wherein
to show forth his goodness, and to produce good fruit? The influence of the
Sun: and has not the Sun of Righteousness shined clearly unto us, and
seemed to be even fixed in this our Hemisphere? How few be there that can
remember the bright and cheerful morning of this glorious day? I pray God to
make this one day as a thousand years, that never any may see the end of this
time, until the end of all things come, when time shall be no more: Having so
constantly enjoyed such excellent blessings, Sands trav. Laetissimae arberes
atque fertilissimae. Non fit contrariorum vicissitudo, nihil obtundit, est
aequabilitas. Scal. in Theop.
let us be fruitful. In Egypt many of the trees bear fruit, and most of them
their leaves all the year, in regard there is no contrariety in the air; but
always an equality, that does promote and further the trees in their bearing.
Now we having uncessantly the happy fruition of all good means that may be
helpful unto us, ought to abound more and more in good works, and to walk
worthy of so great love. What could the Lord have done for us that he has not
done? We have been planted as a tree by the waters, Jer. 17.8.
and that spreads out her roots by the river, and sees not when heat
comes, but her leaf is green; and she is not careful in the year of
drought, nor cease from yielding fruit. And as the tree is pruned, and many
of the boughs cut off, that the residue may be more fruitful; so the Lord
has corrected and rebuked us, that we might be free from security, and learn
to amend our lives, and walk in obedience: Rev. 3.19.
He does chasten as many as he loves, and scourges every son whom he
receives; which is as the sprinkling on of salt, to keep us from corruption.
The trees of the field are little regarded, Planta ferax falcem patitur,
petitque frequentem. Putationes redintegrant, and juventam afferunc. Scal. in
Theop.
but those of the garden are often looked unto and repaired. In exercising of
us, God deals with us as with sons, correcting us in judgment for our
reformation, not consuming us in fury to our destruction. A plant cut
unseasonably dies; but cut in due time, it prospers the better. The times and
seasons are in Gods hands: he does then purge his children, when it may be most
for their discipline and amendment; that our old errors and infirmities may
pass away, and we being regenerated may walk in newness of life; as in
pruning the withered and dry branches are taken away, and young twigs do shoot
forth, that may be fruitful: Let us never forget Gods dealing with us, when
he did stretch out his hand, Anno 1625.
and did threaten to destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and to cut off
branch and rush in one day by the noisome pestilence, lopping off many ten
thousands, and leaving the chief body of the tree naked and bare; yet then he
preserved us in safety: we were delivered from the mouth of that Lion, and we
are still defended by the shield of his favor, that we may glorify his Name
by a godly conversation. Will not all this move us to return unto the Lord? His
benefits conferred, his fatherly reprehension, his protecting us by his
providence, when he severely punished others? Behold, I have set before you
life and death; I have declared Gods mercy toward us, and his judgment upon
others; Now what tribute or offering does the Lord require of us, but only the
fruit of our thoughts, in meditation upon his word and works; the fruit of our
lips, in showing forth his praise; and the fruit of our lives, in serving him
acceptably, with reverence and godly fear? We all profess that we are
branches of that Root, Mat. 7.17. and 12.33.
Christ Jesus: Now every good tree brings forth good fruit, and a corrupt tree
evil fruit; for by their fruit ye shall know them: Can a fig tree bear olive
berries, Jam. 3.12.
or a vine figs? If the root be holy, so are the branches: If we be members
of Christ, Romans 11.16.
we must do the works of our heavenly Father. Do we desire that every tree
in our ground should be fruitful, and yet will we our selves be barren? As
some parents would have their children walk in a good way, yet they themselves
will run into excess of riot; Shall others be excited by the divine
blessings, and powerful means that they have enjoyed, to bring forth the good
fruit of obedience? and will thou, who have been a partaker of the same
blessings, bring forth impiety and rebellion? As the influence of the same
Sun ripeneth the sweet grape, and the sour crab; but such wild trees are not
suffered long to continue in the Paradise of the Church: Every plant which my
Father has not planted shall be rooted up; only the fruitful trees shall be
supported and strengthened; Being planted in that garden, in the midst whereof
is the Tree of life, which does distribute of its grace and virtue unto all the
trees that are round about it: Of Christ's fullness have all we received, and
grace for grace. Ulmus and vitis, Ruta and ficus.
It is observed what a sympathy there is among the trees, how diverse of them
prosper best, when they have such and such stand nigh unto them; and some of
them will never bear, Exciso mare palmite, sterilescit foemina. Perottus.
Sands trav.
This we know assuredly, that we can do no good thing, unless we have our
ability from Christ, who is that tree which is described to bear twelve manner
of fruits, and to yield the fruit every month: Rev. 22.2.
As he is so in himself full of grace and truth, evermore doing good unto us,
and bestowing all kinds of blessings upon us; so he gives power to us, who
receive him, to become the sons of God, enabling us in some measure to bring
forth not one, or some few kinds, but diverse and sundry fruits. The Apostle,
when he speaks of the fruit of the Spirit, he names love, and joy, and
peace: then he adds, longsuffering and gentleness; and yet these are not all:
for he annexeth goodness, faith, Gal. 5.22.
meekness, temperance. And elsewhere expressing the fruit of the Spirit, he
mentions righteousness and truth. He that delights in planting, Dapibus
mensas onerabat inemptis, Primus vere roosam, atque autumno carpere poma. Virg.
will not be satisfied with some few sorts of fruit, and in being provided for
a short time, or a part of the year; but will be desirous of the best choice
and variety that may be; and to have such fruit as may be useful, during the
whole year: Some that may be ripe with the soonest, and other that may endure
a long time; taking special contentment in that which is most durable, that he
may be provided when others are destitute. Oh that we were wise for the good
of our souls! we would be more delighted in seeking for graces, that we
might be perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto every good work, than any man
can be in these outward contentments; and with an holy emulation we would be
more covetous of the spiritual gifts, wherewith others are adorned, than ever
Ahab was of Naboths vineyard. 1 Kin. 21.
What diligence would we give to add to our faith, virtue; 2 Pet. 1.5.
and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly kindness;
and to brotherly kindness, charity; for if these be in us, and abound, we
should not be Barren nor Unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Wherefore, when we see the Almond tree of any man to blossom betimes, and to
promise a plenteous increase; when we see a young man cleansing his way, by
taking heed thereunto according to Gods word, let us also be thereby provoked
to redeem the time, and to remember our Creator in the days of our youth.
When we observe another man's Vine to be laden with goodly clusters; when we
take notice of a man who does good, and rejoices in the works of his hands
(as Solomon speaks) let us also be excited to labor for that gladness in our
hearts, Eccles. 3.12.22.
which is better than the increase of come and wine. Morus quafi (...), per
Antiph. Serior at Morus, nunquam msi frigore lapso Germinat, and sapiens nomina
falsa gerat Alciat. Psalm. 74.47. For Mulberries, now it is Sycomores.
When we view the Mulberry tree of another man to forbear sending forth any
buds, until the danger of frosts be past; when we consider how such a man does
wisely decline what may prevent or hinder his bringing good fruit unto
perfection, let us be stirred up to ask wisdom of God (who gives liberally)
that we may avoid the society of such as are congealed in their sins, and
their hearts frozen as hard as stones; by means whereof our good desires may
be nipt in the bud, and we may be occasioned to cast our fruit before the
time: It had been as good not to have begun, as not to continue until the
appointed time. Psalm. 92.14.
Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts
of our God: they shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat
and flourishing. Though other trees be seere, and full of moss when they are
old, and bear less than formerly; yet the trees of Righteousness must abound
more and more, growing unto perfection and holiness. Christ is come, that we
might have life, and might have it more abundantly. A true believer ought
always to grow in strength, and to bear good fruit, that he might be found
doing the will of his Master. We must not be like the hasty fruit before the
Summer, which when he that looks upon it sees it, Isa 28.4.
while it is yet in his hand, he eats it up; We must never desist from the
performance of holy duties. Christ cursed the fig tree, upon which he found
nothing but leaves: But why should that tree be dried up from the roots, when
the time of figs was not yet? Mar. 11.13.
Thereby he taught his children, that they must continually bring forth fruit:
Let not the young man say, the time of bearing is not yet come: Let not the old
man say, the time is now past, lest both of them be blasted by the vengeance
of God, who is a consuming fire. If we be graffed in among others, and partake
of the root, we must show it forth by a fruitful conversation. The Word does
quicken us; and where there is life, it will appear. If God does not forsake
the gray headed, nor cast us off in the time of old age, then we also should
not cease, while we live to praise the Lord, Psalm. 146.2.
and to sing praises unto our God, while we have any being. That we may receive
the more strength and virtue, whereby we may be enabled to persevere unto the
end, we must labor for humility. Excelsae arbores fructum pusillum ferunt.
Scal. in Arist.
The lofty trees are not only exposed to the raging storms, but also the
fruit they bear is small. It is observed, Bacon Centur.
the lowness of the bough makes the fruit greater, and to ripen better,
because it does participate of the root more effectually than other branches
can do, that are more remote: God resists the proud, but he gives grace to
the humble. Such as have learned of Christ to be lowly, shall be filled with
good things, whereas the rich shall be sent empty away. As we are to bear
fruit at all times, without fainting or being weary in well-doing; so we must
be fruitful in every part of us. There is a fabulous report concerning our
spice, that it should all proceed from one tree, and one kind is the root, and
another is the bark, and a third is the fruit, which is folded up in a fourth,
etc. though this be not true in it self, yet it is significant to set before
us a faithful Christian, who seeks to glorify God in every power and
faculty, offering up himself as a sweet odor, presenting his body as a living
sacrifice, Romans 12.1.
holy, acceptable to God, which is his reasonable service: As there is no
member of Christ that is not lively and operative, so there is no part of a
Christian that should not be exercised as an instrument of praise and
thanksgiving unto God. Some plants we have in estimation, Glycyrrhiza.
in regard of the root only, that is very helpful unto us: Others are
maintained in regard of the commodious use of the leaves. Alba morus: Est
bicolor morus, bombyx vescetur utraque. Vida.
Some trees do power out a pleasing liquor out of the body, The Palmeto tree.
Herberts trav. They bore the barks full of holes etc. Sands trav.
which does refresh the weary traveller; Others have their fruit growing out of
the bole and branches, as most of them in Egypt. We should not be like any one,
but all of these in our abundant fruitfulness; and should be filled and
adorned with all the gifts and graces of the Spirit: And as every part was
created by the power, and is supported and nourished by the favor of God; so
it should return some fruit of thanksgiving and obedience: for there is a
schism in the body of that man, when the same member brings forth contrary
fruits; as for the tongue to bless God, James 3.
and curse men; or when one part seems to bear good fruit, as in lifting up
the hands to God in prayer; And another part bears grapes of gall, when the
feet are swift to shed blood. We may observe how David, who compares himself
to a green Olive tree in the house of God, Psalm. 52.8.
was fruitful in every branch: He did consider that it was God who planted him
at first, Psalm. 139.13.
who made him fearfully and wonderfully, covering him in his mothers womb,
whose eyes did see his substance, and in whose book all his members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned. And as he does acknowledge, that
he received his beginning from God; so he desires, that both the inward and the
outward man may be devoted to Gods service: he stirs up his soul, Psalm.
103.1.
and all that was within him to bless the Lord. and 40.8.
The law was within his heart; and 16.7.
His reins did instruct him in the night season; and 35.10.
All his bones did say, Lord, who is like unto thee? He was purposed, and 17.3.
that his mouth should not transgress; and 25.15.
His eyes were ever toward the Lord; He did incline his ear to a Parable: and
49.4.
he washed his hands in innocence. Psalm. 26.6.
God gave him strength in his arms, and kept his feet from slipping. In like
manner, we, hoping to be glorified in the whole spiritual body, should praise
God in every part of our mortal body: O come let us fall down, and kneel
before the Lord our Maker; let us go to the house of God; let our eyes wait
upon the Lord; let us join our hands, and lift them up in prayer, thereby
remembering to pray for other members that are united unto the same body.

Again, let us divide them, that one may not know what the other does, and
extend them in giving with simplicity, Romans 12.8.
doing good to all, even to them on the left hand, though with more fullness
and alacrity to them on the right hand, the household of faith. Let our tongue
be our glory in praising God. And as the leaves of the tree of life were for
the healing of the Nations, so let our words be seasoned and tempered with
wisdom and love, that they may reform what is evil, and minister grace unto
the hearers. As there is some similitude in the shape and proportion of the
tongue, Fert folium linguae, fert poma fimilima cordi. De Persico pomo in
Alciato.
and of the leaves of diverse trees, as also of very many herbs, (which
therefore have their names given them from that part) so there is some
resemblance between them. For as we can discern what tree it is that we
behold, by the leaf, although there be no fruit remaining upon it at that
time; so we can understand the disposition of the heart by the words of the
mouth: for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Yet because
the tongue is a world of iniquity, and an unruly evil, we can distinguish more
perfectly by works than words. As in the parable of the two Sons, the first
said, he would not go into the Vineyard, but afterward he went; the second
said, I go, Sir, and went not: the younger did bear the broader leaves, Mat.
21.29.
but the elder had the goodliest fruit. Words are soon uttered, and many times
rashly spoken, like the leaves that in a short time come to their utmost
extent: whereas the fruit of action is more deliberate, and requires much space
and leisure to bring it to perfect maturity. Although we should, for want of
that bridle which David speaks of, Psalm. 39.1.
sin with our tongue, Junipero spina pro folio est. Plin. Soc.
and our words be like the leaves of the Juniper, sharp and piercing as a
thorn; yet let not our deeds be like the fruit of the Pine, Cadentibus ex alto
f^uctibus, si forte feriatur, saepe interficitur, etc. Imag. deor.
wounding or killing such as are under them when they fall: Let not our anger
by lying longin our hearts be as the kernel and seed of malice, which will
grow up into deadly hatred. Where there is a fair promise of amendment and
reformation, there may be some forbearance. The fig tree was spared for a time,
Luke 13.7.
in regard it was green and flourishing; whereas if it had been withered, it
should have been cut down in the first year, and not suffered until the
fourth. Uvae contra vehementisfimum solis ardorem muniantur. Kecker. Et contra
pluviam et frigus. Id.
A gentle answer pacifieth wrath, even as the leaves protect the fruit from the
burning heat of the sun; and as they cherish and defend it against storms when
it is young and tender, so the truth of our word, whereby we are engaged,
should be a strong motive to produce the real and absolute performance:
Otherwise if we have a torrent of words, and no actual discharge of our
fidelity; if the showers of our deeds be not in some sort answerable to the
mighty thunder of our voice, we may be likened to that Indian fig tree, Peltae
effigiem habet, fructum integens crescere prohibiet. Sca^exer.
the leaf whereof is as large as a buckler, and the fruit no bigger than a
bean. The consideration of our weak condition may occasion us to bring forth
that in our lives, which was formerly conceived in our hearts, and is come to
the birth in our words. While we have opportunity let us do good: The time is
short, the fashion of this world passes away: Esaias 64.6.
We all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken us
away. Job 13.25.
Job compares himself to a leaf driven to and fro. Such is our feeble estate
here upon earth; if God does blow upon us, we are scattered; if nipt with the
frost of sickness, Quam mult in sylvis, autumni frigore primo, lapfa cadunt
folia. Virg l. 6. Ut nunc canae frigora brumae nudent sylvas. Sen. Hippol.
or wasted with the winter of age, we fall to the ground; and yet how few there
be that do remember their latterend! but rather, in the fall of the leaf,
they hope for new strength, and perfect recovery of former health, and never
think of the fall of the tree it self, that before this winter be ended thou
may be brought down to the pit. The Lord give us wisdom to lay this to
heart, and to wait for our appointed change. In the conclusion of the year
behold thine own dissolution; in the budding of the spring, Terra viret
rutilantque suis poma aurea ramis. Bal Castil. Redit ecce anni melioris origo.
Sincerus.
when the trees begin to be apparelled with a fresh beauty, when the branches
that lately seemed to be dead are again covered with their leaves, and adorned
with their fruit, thou may observe a strong proof to confirm thee in thy
hope of a glorious resurrection. If all other things do shoot forth for man,
then shall not man himself revive and spring up? God who restored a vegetative
life to Aarons rod when it was a dry stick, Numb. 17.
causing it to bring forth buds, to bloome blossoms, and to yield Almonds,
will much more raise Aaron himself from the dead. Tamen abdita quaedam vitalis
superat vis in radicibus imis, et trunco exciso nova vere tepullulat arbos.
Vida.
We are joined unto Christ, who is the root: in the winter of death our life is
hid in him; but when the time of refreshing is come, we shall be raised to an
estate of glory. Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: Esaias 26.19.
for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. If
we did look unto the joy that is set before us, and by the eye of faith did
see that recompense of reward that is reserved for us at that day, we would be
more industrious in laboring to be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the praise and glory of God. Eccles. 11.1.
As they that cast their bread upon the waters shall find it after many days,
so they that have brought much fruit unto God in this life, shall have it
restored unto them at the resurrection of the just. Saint Paul speaks of having
some fruit among the Romans, Romans 1.13.
not only because he was an instrument to gather it, but also in regard of
that gain and advantage it would bring unto himself at the latter end.
Nothing can deprive us of this best fruit. The worm may destory our bodies,
and the fruit of them, and may consume the fruit of the ground: The worm of
conscience will torment such as brought forth fruit unto death by unfruitful
works of darkness; but this fruit is committed unto God, who is faithful, and
able to keep it against that day. 1 Timothy 6.19.
Hereby we lay up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time to
come, that we may lay hold on eternal life.

The world may be compared to an Orchard, wherein the voluptuous man eats of
the fruit with as much haste and greediness as was used by the Pharisees in
devouring Widows houses, or by the Israelites in eating their quails, as if
they should never take their fill of delights and pleasures. The covetous
wretch gathers with as much diligence as may be, filling his garments, and
lading himself; but God has not given him power to eat thereof: and when he
comes to depart out at the door, he is not suffered to carry any part of that
with him for which he labored; Only the godly man does eat with moderation,
and knowing that as he came in, so he shall depart, and carry nothing out. He
distributes to them that cannot help themselves, 1 Samuel 30.12.
(as David gave the figs to the languishing Egyptian) which afterward he finds
again for his future benefit: He does exercise himself in duties of charity,
and extends his goodness to the Saints that are in the earth, and the Lord
does render unto him glory, and honor, and peace. He that has pity on the
poor, lends unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17.
and that which he has given will he pay him again. If God does account that
to be done unto himself which is done unto them, let us bring forth fruit unto
God, which like the alms of Cornelius may come up for a memorial before him.
The fowls of the air be as ready to devour our fruit upon the trees, as our
seed upon the ground. The Pharisees seemed to be full of good fruit, but then
came the wicked one and took it away; they gave to the poor, but it was to
this end, that they might have glory of men: they had their reward in being
applauded here in this world. It was not likely that their fruit growing in so
public a place, should come to the due perfection. Beware of vainglory and
sinister respects: if thou do perceive any of these fowls to be hovering
about thy fruit, drive them away, Genesis 15.
as Abraham did from the carcasses. Subdue all evil thoughts and vain
imaginations that may arise in thine heart: consider, it is God which gives
both the will and the deed; and all this store that thou have, or give,
comes of his hand, and is all his own. 1 Chro 29.16.
Such as entertain any arrogant conceits, are not only robbed of the fruit
and comfort of the present duty, but by nourishing their impure corruptions,
they do endanger the tree it self, and may destroy their own souls: For sin
does eat as does a canker, spreading from the crown of the head to the sole of
the foot, and entering even to the joints and marrow. This is to be cut out of
the body, and to be cut off in the smaller branches. If thine eye offend thee,
pluck it out; if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off: in what part soever
we can discover any wickedness, we must take it away by the sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God. All fleshly lusts are to be vanquished, our
carnal members that are upon the earth must be mortified, and then whatsoever
we do shall prosper: For if we have been planted into the likeness of
Christ's death, Romans 6.5.
we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection: If we always bear
about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10.
then the life also of Jesus shall be made manifest in our body.

Thus we have considered how Christ is the root, and we are the branches
graffed into him, deriving our being in this life, and our well-being in the
life of grace, from his goodness and mercy: Let us in the next place observe,
how we our selves are the root, and the Word of God the cyons which is put into
us, that we may be fruitful. This we are warranted to do by the testimony of
St. James, who teaches us to receive the engraffed word, Jam. 1.21.
which is able to save our souls.

We may well be compared to the root; for as that is the most earthy part of
the tree, so we by nature are of the earth, earthy, and have no good thing
dwelling in this our flesh; Romans 7.
but many sins and corruptions, that are deeply and strongly rooted within
us: and therefore may fitly be resembled unto some wild fig tree, growing in
the walls of a building, hiding and defacing the beauty thereof. The boughs
and branches may be cut and broken off; but the root, which is wrapped into
the stones of the building, cannot be taken away, unless the walls be thrown
down: Even so sin is inwrapped into the joints and entralls of this our
building, into our nature, and the parts of it; and though we may lop off the
branches, yet the root remains, while we carry about this body of death:
Sin abides until our dissolution. The scraping of the house within, would
not take away the fretting leprosy; Levit. 14.45
it must be broken down: Our original concupiscence cleaves so close to our
nature, that it will never leave us, until this earthly house be demolished.
As the roots are diffused and spread abroad round about that place where the
tree stands; so our corruptions are dilated into every part of the body, and
faculty of the soul: And as the roots are covered in the earth; so manifold
sins are hidden from the knowledge of men, being works of darkness. The heart
is desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.
The wisdom of this world is earthly: Jam. 3.17.
1 Timothy 6.10.
The love of money is the root of all evil; yea, every sin is a root of
bitterness, which if permitted to spring up, will trouble us; As Jonah, when
the weeds were wrapped about his head, Jonah 2.5.
prayed unto the Lord; so we being infolded with our corruptions must seek
unto God for deliverance. He is able to destroy the fruit from above, and the
roots from beneath, Amos 2.9. Isa. 5.24.
and to turn them into rottenness and dust, that they shall not have dominion
over us. Such as the root is, such are the branches also: In the estate of our
birth, before we be changed by the work of the Spirit, we are no better than
the Crab-tree producing sour fruit; Our best performances are impure and
unclean in Gods sight. The Crab-stock is full of thorns; so we by nature are
subject unto the curse. It must be a divine power that can free us from
condemnation, by renewing us in our minds, that we may bring forth fruit meet
for repentance. In graffing, all the branches that before did flourish are
taken off, and usually the stock is cut down not far from the ground; so we
are to be cast down in acknowledgement of our unworthiness, and to humble our
selves as a little child, that we may be partakers of the divine nature. This
is intended by the Apostle, when he says, James 1.
Receive with meekness the engraffed word. When the heart is made lowly, it
will be more ready to receive the Word, and the Word will be more ready to
incorporate into it: We must not only lay aside our greatest sins, our
boasting that we could do mischief, our delight in folly and wickedness; but
also all confidence in our own seeming virtues, as of temperance, liberality,
moderation, and the like, lest we be puffed up thereby: See this in Saint Paul,
who says, Phil. 3.3.
we are the circumcision who have no confidence in the flesh; and though he
were blameless touching the righteousness that was in the law; yet those
things that were gain to him, he counted loss for Christ. Thus David says,
His soul was even as a weaned child; and thus we should be weaned and
estranged from taking any contentment in our own strength and ability; and
should put on (as the Elect of God, holy and beloved) humbleness of mind,
meekness, and lowliness. In the next place, there is an incision or wound
made into the stock, by which it may be made capable and fitting to receive
the cyons. In like manner, we must rend our hearts, and open our selves, that
Christ may enter into our souls; Our hearts must be broken and opened, like
the heart of Lydia, that we may receive the Word of life. Was Christ wounded
for our transgressions? and shall not we be pricked to the heart with sorrow
for our former provocations? After this, we put the cyons into that breach and
division that is made in the stock; so after sorrow and humiliation, God puts
joy into our hearts, and his law into our inward parts, implanting his graces
in our souls, and rejoicing over us to do us good. Surculi vis ea est, ut in
tantillo corpusculo, tamen praeponderet arboris viribus totius: Non enim
arboris prodit, sed surculi fructus. Scal. in Theoph. Bacon Cent.


Although the Cyon be small in the beginning, yet it grows to be a great
tree, overruling the stock, and bringing forth fruit of its own kind; so
although the beginning of grace be weak and little, like a grain of
mustard seed, yet there is a continual increasing and growing unto more
perfection, when we yield our selves unto God, as those that are alive from the
dead, and our members as instruments of righteousness, not living any longer
in sin, but living by the faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave
himself for us, that he might reconcile us, who were sometimes alienated, and
enemies in our minds by wicked works, and delivering us from the power of
darkness, might translate us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.

As after graffing, the stock being nigher unto the root than the cyons, and
still abiding in its proper place where it formerly did prosper, is ready to
send forth many young twigs, that will arrest and anticipate that strength and
virtue, which should ascend for the nourishment of the cyons, and are therefore
diligently taken away to prevent that mischief: So there is a combat between
the flesh and the spirit, the one lusting against the other; there is the body
of death, and the old leaven of corruption remaining within us. Our sins and
infirmities are continually interposing, and hindering us from apprehending the
favor and love of God with that strength and fullness which we do desire;
and therefore we must cut off these sprigs with pruninghookes; not suffering
sin to reign in our mortal bodies, and have dominion over us; but
mortifying the deeds of the body through the Spirit, and casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

The Kingdom of God is compared to leaven hid in three measures of meal, Luke
13.21.
until the whole were leavened: A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump; the
grace begun should grow strong and powerful within us; the leaven of holiness
should work out the leaven of malice. If the tree does not flourish, we will
impute the cause unto the barrennes of the ground, or the want of a good root,
Crassitie sua cortex obstat, quo minus a terrae humore augeatur acinus; non
enim transmittitur. Scal. in Theop.
or the thickness of the bark that binds the stock; but not unto the graft it
self, which did grow very happily before it was converted to this use. From
whence is it that there is such imperfection and weakness? such backwardness
in the good way? and that our fruits relish so much of the stock, so little
of the graft? Comes it not hence, that our corruptions and lusts do still
war in our members? and we do not labor to perfect holiness in the fear
of God? O wretched men, in whom the Cross of Christ has not yet worn out the
bitter taste of that first tree! The Cyon is taken from the tree of life: Every
good gift comes down from the Father of lights, who gives liberally, and
upbraideth not: Oh that we were enlarged in apprehending and applying what is
so freely offered: If our hearts were opened wide in holy desires, the Lord
would fill them with spiritual blessings; but we are straightened in our own
bowels; and being in this great strait, we are as unable to free our selves, as
the Prophet was to deliver himself out of the belly of the Whale. We cannot
relieve our selves, and vain is the help of man, who is subject to the same
misery. We may not trust to the arm of flesh, or ascribe the praise to humane
power, as Adrian did, who wrote over his Hospital at Lovan; Adr. 6. Trajectum
me plantavit, Lovanium me rigavit, Caesar incrementum dedit. Ergo Deus nihil
fecit.
Utrecht planted, Lovan watered, Caesar gave the increase: Whereunto it was
fitly subscribed by another, Therefore God had nothing to do in this man. We
know, that neither he that planteth is any thing, neither he that waters,
but God who gives the increase: So Noah began to be an husbandman, and planted
a vineyard. Genesis 9.20.
He is the Husbandman, says our Savior; and we are his husbandry, says the
Apostle; both which places are to be understood of a Plantation, as appears by
the context, where it is said, John 15.1.
That Christ is the Vine, and we the Branches, whereof he purges some, and
takes away others. Also there is frequent mention of planting and watering, 1
Cor. 39.
which is some part of country labor: And then the Apostle concludes, We are
Gods husbandry, we are Gods building; and except the Lord build the house,
they labor in vain that build it: Except the Lord gives a blessing, our
pains and industry will be fruitless. In demanding, who built such an house,
or planted such an orchard, we intend not the inferior workmen, but the chief
owners, at whose expense they were performed; so likewise, although men may be
laborers and workers with God, and some builders, 1 Cor. 3.9, 10. 2 Cor. 6.1.
and some master builders; yet God is the supreme Agent, working in us both to
will and to do, of his good pleasure. He that built all things is God, who
does still uphold them by the word of his power; who likewise planted Paradise,
and the whole world, who sends us yearly the spring, and makes our gardens
green, and our trees to flourish. Exodus 15.17.
He has planted us in the mountain of his inheritance, in the place which he
has made for himself to dwell in. Terram pressit, minus movetur, and ob hoe
nascentes radices exire patitur, ac solum apprehendere. Senec. epist. 86.
And as trees in the beginning are surely fixed, that they may not be carried
about of every wind, by means whereof the roots cannot be fastened in the
earth; so we ought to stand fast in the faith: which grace must be wrought in
us by the Almighty God, Romans 16.25.
who is of power to stablish, 1 Pet. 5.10. Heb. 13.21.
strengthen, settle us, and to make us perfect in every good work to do his
will. He is able to supply all our wants, and to work in us that which is well
pleasing in his sight. Wherefore in the first place we should seek unto the
Lord for his supportation, that we may stand complete before him, and be
thoroughly furnished unto every good work; 2 Timothy 2.6.
and then as the husbandman that labors must be first partaker of the
fruits, so we, being enriched and strengthened by the divine blessing and
power, working in us mightily, must offer up our first fruits in a sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving unto the Lord. Now as in the parables the Lord of the
Vineyard has his husbandmen and vine-dressers under him. So God requires that
we should be diligent and industrious in laboring to bring forth good fruit. 2
Chro. 27.28. Item vinitoribus Schimhi. i. exercentibus opus vinearum. Jun.
David the King appointed Baal-hanan over the Olive trees and Sycomore trees,
and Shimei over the Vineyards, who ruled and directed the inferior laborers,
which did the work that belonged thereunto. The Lord has ordained his
Ministers to instruct us in the truth, and to declare all his counsel, not
keeping back any thing that is profitable unto us; and he expects our pains
and endeavors, in reforming what is evil, and in seeking for helpful means
for our furtherance in all godliness and honesty. Redit agricolis labor actus
in orbem. Virg.
There must be a continual care and attendance in planting of an Orchard; the
young trees must be assisted and defended against the power of the wind, and
watered in time of drought: Falce rescindendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
such branches as wither should be cut off: if any of the trees be dead, they
must be renewed and supplied; Luke 13.8.
if barren, they must be helped, as the fig tree was: Also by pruning, and
other cost, we should repair such as begin to decline and cease from yielding
fruit. Even thus is our condition: Psalm. 104.23.
Man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening; I speak
not of bodily labor, and the sweat of the face, without which we should not
eat our bread; but of the inward labor of the mind, which is more difficult,
when we work out our salvation with fear and trembling. And although we begin
at the third hour, or early in the morning, yet we persevere until the
evening, that we may be workmen which need not be ashamed, being approved of
God when he comes and finds us so doing. If we did consider the quantity of
work to be done, the manifold duties to be performed, the brevity of the time,
and our own weakness and unsufficiencie, we would not be sloathfull in this
business, nor expect any ease or forbearance until the appointed time, in
which we shall rest from our labors. Herein we ought to be followers of that
chosen vessel who never desisted from his office, and therefore might well
join his watchings to his labors and painfulnesse: For he was vigilant in his
labors, 2 Cor. 6.5. and 11.27.
and laborious in his watchings. When he had an auditory he ceased not to warn
them night and day, Act. 20.11, 31. and 16.25.
continuing his speech until midnight, yea, till the break of day; and when
absent from them, 2 Timothy 1.3.
at midnight he praised God, and night and day prayed for himself and others.
In so doing he was a follower of Christ, who that he might finish the work
for which he was sent, he daily taught the people; and when others slept, he
continued whole nights in prayer. If some men did think upon this, it might
restrain them from consuming many nights in works of darkness, that shall not
be so much as named by me; and from spending many precious hours, and from
spending many good days, and from spending many happy years, and from spending
a long life without the least profit unto their souls. When there are so many
expenses, and nothing coming in all the time, no inward grace or blessing,
what account will be given in the conclusion? The wicked Steward was commended
for his wisdom and providence, but these ungodly servants will be condemned
for their folly. Let us lay this to heart, and show forth our moderation in our
lawful and seasonable use, not in our inordinate and excessive abuse of
worldly pleasures. Insectatio hostium vel ferarum. Jun.
Although pursuing might hinder Baal from regarding of his sacrifice, let it
never take away our due regard of Gods sacrifice. To keep us from love of
vanity, and seeking after leasing, we should remember that work whereunto we
are called, and reflecting upon our selves, should search every part of the
inward and outward man, seeking for redress and amendment in that wherein we
have revolted, and are defective. Wherefore we will begin with that part which
is deep and hidden, and requires most exact inquiry, as being the chief
fountain of all. For though the decay of a plant appears first in the
withering of the twigs and branches, yet it arises, for the most part, from a
decay in the root: so the decay of grace may appear to the view first in our
speeches and carriage, yet the original cause of the same is want of Gods
fear, and weakness of faith in the heart. As the Mariners went down into
the sides of the ship, where they found Jonah fast asleep, who was the cause of
all their trouble: so let us enter into the bottom of our heart by strict
examination, let us search every corner thereof, as with a candle, that we may
discover our deadness and security, from whence this barrenness in our
conversation and uncomfortable walking before the Lord do proceed: when we
find any coldness or backwardness in Gods service, we must be more
inquisitive in discovering that which has stolen away our graces, than Laban
was in seeking for his gods. Genesis 31.35.
No fair allegation may satisfy us, no goodly pretense may content us: There
may be an image laid in the bed in the place of David: There may be a strong
delusion in the heart, in stead of the lovely truth, or the lively grace.

Saul was very diligent in seeking to find out him that did eat any food
contrary to his unadvised adjuration; 1 Samuel 14.
but he did never look into his own heart to prove himself, that he might
remember from whence he was fallen, and repent, and do his first works,
strengthening the things that remained, which were ready to dye in him. He
professed that he knew God, when in works he denied him, being abominable and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. He boasts of performing the
commandment, when he was cursed for doing the work of the Lord negligently:
God commands him to destroy Amaleck, but he will save a King, though he lose a
Kingdom; He destroys that which was vile and refuse, and spared the best of
the sheep and oxen for a sacrifice unto the Lord, or rather unto Mammon, out of
avarice and rebellion. And, as if himself were not so devout, he says, the
people spared the best to sacrifice, when as he is named to be the chief
agent in that confederacy. It may seem he had little reason to speak of a
sacrifice, and to charge God thus foolishly and falsely, 1 Samuel 15.9, 15.
considering the little acceptance and bad success he found after his forme^
^^ffering. Samuel had told him, he would come down to Gilgal, and sacrifice
sacrifices: yet he would not defer until he came, but (without any warrant
from Gods Word) he forced himself, 1 Samuel 13.12
and offered burnt offerings: Whereupon the Prophet charged him with the breach
of Gods commandment, and told him, his Kingdom should not continue. Let his
example admonish us to be vigilant in taking heed, lest we leave our first
love, and be beguiled of our reward: We cannot be too careful in trying our
selves, and discovering any loss or impediment, whereby our spiritual estate
is impaired. In the Parable there is a woman propounded worthy of our
imitation, who when she had lost one of her ten pieces of silver, she sought
diligently till she found it. Psalm. 119.72.
The Law of God is better than thousands of gold and silver: If we have broken
any one of the ten Commandments, we should seek for Gods mercy in forgiving
our transgression, and restoring unto us the joy of his salvation; and should
rejoice more in his love, delivering us from perdition and condemnation, than
any one does that finds great spoils. The Image of Almighty God in the
beginning was stamped upon man, and the superscription of his power and
dominion, by which he did apprehend that loyalty and subjection, which was
due to the King of glory. Now since our gold became dross, that inscription
was obliterate, and that image defaced, which is again renewed by the merits
of Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
As he has purged our sins, Heb. 1.3.
so he expects that we also should purify our hearts, Jam. 4.8.
and purge our selves from all evil, that we may be prepared unto every good
work. 2 Timothy 2.21.
There are diverse and sundry helpful means to be used about the roots of
trees, Plin. Sec. l. 17. c. 27. de stercoratione.
and some especially belonging to particular trees, either to revive them, and
make them flourish, or to cause them to bear fruit, or to meliorate and amend
their fruit: In such great choice, I will select those two, which are mentioned
by the Dresser of the vineyard, who says, Luke 13.8.
I will dig about the figgetree, and dung it: Not that he intends to dig
about it, only to make way for that which he should apply unto the root; In
laxiore solo plantae laetiores, in denio saepe strangulantur. Fitque quasi nova
terra quae vetus erat; Interpolatur, enim Aer edomat, simul imbres patitur.
but when either of these remedies apart, and both together are commodious, he
would use them jointly for the more certain cure of that barren tree: First
then we observe, that digging about the roots is very beneficial unto the
tree, which is apt to be strangled in a stiff and stubborn earth, where the
root can find no passage to spread it self; Densato solo in crustam, nequit
subire alimentum. Scal. in Theop.
but grows very kindly in a loose earth, that is refreshed and dissolved by
this means, and becomes more capable of the showers, and made every way more
favorable unto the plant. Etiam radices circumcidisse prodest. Plin. Sec.
Also such of the lesser roots as are cut asunder, do send forth many small
strings, which disperse themselves in the ground, and are effectual for the
good of the tree. Now if men be thus industrious in laboring to make their
trees fruitful, then we ought to use all means possible (so much as in us
lies) that our hearts may be fruitful; Let us put off the old man with his
deeds, and put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge; Col. 3.10.
and be careful to maintain good works, Tit. 3.8.
that are profitable unto us. This digging about the tree may fitly be
represented by that which Saint Paul writes in his two Epistles to Timothy: In
the former he says, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee; Let not the grace of God in thine heart
be there buried, as dead earth, that lies at the root of the tree, and is not
profitable: And not satisfied with that which he had spoken before, in the
second Epistle he does again press upon him that former exhortation, with a
description of the manner how it ought to be performed, 2 Timothy 1.6.
I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God which is in
thee; as the earth is stirred in digging: If there be any power or virtue
therein, it will then appear. If there be any grace or holiness, we should
excite the same by the work of the quickening Spirit: Do not thou abide in a
dead estate void of the new life; but come forth with Lazarus, arise out of the
grave of corruption, that God may be glorified by thy good conversation. In the
next place he says, He will dung the fig tree, that it may bear fruit. I
intend not to rehearse the several substances, which are nominated by diverse
Lotium suillum aut stercus ad arborum radices addi praecipit, ut Favulum
malorum fiat, etc. Cato. Vel Pabulum malorum, i.e. pro cibo (vel quod immundo
lotio mala delectentur.) Turneb. Stercoratio fit ex animantium excrementis, vel
e stipulis, culmis, aut terrae medulla.
Authors, as conducing to fructification, when laid about the roots of the
trees; being so applied, there is virtue and efficacy in them: but here to set
them down, would not yield that profit which I most desire: As they are to be
covered in the earth; so they shall be concealed from the Readers view, and
passed over in silence; My principal aim is to do good in amending the
barren heart, rather than the barren earth: Wherefore let us attempt to draw
some benefit unto our selves. The Apostle tells us what he accounts to be
dung, Phil. 3.8.
Even all his own worthiness and works, all his own privileges and
prerogatives whatsoever: He was so far from being exalted above measure by
them, that he rather casts them down to the root, and esteems them of no
value: And surely, he was a plant of renown, raised up by the Lord, whose
height reached unto heaven, when he was caught up into Paradise it self;
whose leaves were fair, and his fruit much, preaching the Gospel to many
Nations; yet he assumes not any praise to himself, but gives the glory to
God: He does not attribute his good fruit to any humane power, but to the
divine mercy; Not to any inferior cause in himself, but to the Sun of
Righteousness, which shined upon him, who before was in darkness. The humble
heart is most fruitful; when we are abased in sense of our own
insufficiency, we shall be enriched with Gods favor: Such as trust wholly to
their proper gifts, do rest upon the foot of pride, which will slip away, and
overthrow them; Much of that hot substance applied does consume the root, and
destroy the tree: They that are high-minded, and conceited of their abilities,
do seek their own subversion: We should be so far from ascribing any
excellency or dignity to our own power, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
and the might of our hand, that we should rather in all lowliness confess,
that we are all as an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6.
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. There is just cause to be
humbled and abased when we observe how barren we have made the earth by our
sins, so that we are constrained to use diverse compounds and ingredients (the
naming whereof would be offensive) of very mean estimation, to help to revive
it, and restore it to some part of its former strength and vigor.

In like manner we may bewail and lament the deadness and perverseness of our
hearts, whenas all the furtherance and comfortable encouragement we can use is
not sufficient to rectify them, and bring them to good perfection. So great is
their crookedness they cannot be made straight; so many are the graces
wanting, they cannot be numbered. And yet we must not couch down under our
burden, for then our field will be all grown over with thorns, and the face
thereof will be covered with nettles, and the stone wall will be broken down;
our souls will be filled with vice and impiety: But let us with much labor
seek to reform what is out of order, and to supply what is defective; Laudato
ingentia rura, Exiguum colito. Virg. Quae cura totum postulat virum ^sibi.
Baudius.
that as the heart is one of the little members of the body, so it may be like
the poor man's small tenement, well manured.

It is a common practice to lay some choice earth and good mould about the
roots of the trees, that they may grow, 2 Pet. 1.4.
and be fruitful: so we should apply unto our selves the exceeding great and
precious promises which God has given unto us, Ephesians. 2.7.
and the exceeding riches of his grace which he has showed in his kindness
toward us, through Christ Jesus; and thereby we shall find virtue to come into
our souls, and shall be enabled to bring forth good fruit.

Leaving the root, we will contemplate the body of the tree, and from thence we
will ascend unto the branches. Bacon cent. v. 440. Vectigal intercipit sibi
vafer ille atriensis, heri sobole demenso suo defraudato. Scal. in Theop.
It is an usual practice to hacke the trees in the bark, both downeright and
acrosse, which does great good to trees, and especially delivers them from
being bark-bound, and kills their moss. Something we may perform which
shall in part be answerable hereunto. I intend not to approve of their custom
who scourge themselves, 1 Kin. 18.28.
as the Priests of Baal did cut themselves with knives and lancers, till the
blood gushed out upon them; which is like that humor of Artaxerxes, who would
have the robes of his Nobles scourged for such offenses as their bodies should
be beaten; In cord, non in cortice.
Our wounds must pierce deeper than the bark, even to the heart, which must be
rent by contrition. There may be an inward bruise, though there be no outward
breach: there may be true compunction without vain ostentation. The Pharisees
did dis-figure their faces when they fasted, Mat. 6.16.
by art they composed themselves to look pale and lean, that they might
appear unto men to fast; 1 Cor. 9.27.
But Saint Paul, not regarding man's day, did keep under his body, and bring it
into subjection: So we by fasting and humiliation should subdue the body, that
the souls burden may be light, and the yoke easy, when the body does not
rule as a tyrant, but is ready to go and come like a servant.

Lastly, we cut off such branches as are not profitable, and the water-boughs,
which are overshadowed by the superior branches: so we must lay aside all
earthly affections, and carnal desires; And as the reapers in Gods harvest do
gather out all things that offend, Mat. 13.41.
so we his husbandmen ought to cut off all corrupt and unfruitful branches,
all wicked actions and worldly cares, whereby we may be overcharged and hindered
from obtaining true happiness. 1 Cor. 5.2.
God has given the pruning hook into the hand of the Church, that it may have
power to take away wicked persons from among us: And God has put the pruning
hook into the hand of every Christian, to judge, and try, and prove himself,
that he might reject and cast off all impiety, destroying the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

As it is required that we should thus labor to make our selves fruitful; so
likewise we must be industrious in seeking to bring them into the same good
condition which are committed to our charge; Pro. 22 6.
especially to train up our children in the way they should go, and when they
are old they will not depart from it: Quae laceris ramis, perstrictoque ardua
libro Certatim fundis per latus omne petor. Infelix, fructus in mea damna fero.
Alciat.
If we neglect the performance hereof, we may fear that will come upon us
which does befall diverse trees, whose branches are broken, and they smitten and
beaten, because of the fruit that grew upon them: so we should be punished for
the transgression of our children, 1 Samuel 2.31.
as Eli was, who neglected to prune and correct his sons, and therefore the
Lord did threaten to cut off his arm, and the arm of his fathers house; he
did not chastise them for their apostasy and backsliding from the right way,
and therefore he himself, by Gods judgment upon him, fell backward, and his
neck brake, and he died. The chief care of the parent must be to bring up
that young nurcerie in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: Ephesians. 6.4.
Persicus and prunus ex ossibus optimae. Scal. in Theop.
that as the peach and some plumbs are good arising from the kernel; so they
from their childhood may know the holy Scripture, which is able in that tender
age to make them wiser than their teachers, and to understand more than the
ancients. Trees not regarded become crooked and unfruitful; but duly tended,
they grow to perfection. The branch at first shooting out is tender and
flexible, but at last it grows to a hard and stubborn bough. Ut corpora ad
quosdam membrorum flexus formare, nisi tenera, non possunt. Quintil.
In the beginding if any member of their body grow out of order, we will be
careful to seek for help, before their joints be knit, and their bones be
stiff; Oh let us be as provident for their souls as we are prudent for their
bodies. What is Absaloms beauty, or Saul's stature, without Solomon's wisdom?
David says, Psalm. 128.3.
thy children shall be like Olive plants round about thy table: not like the tall
Cedar, but the fruitful Olive; Their praise and dignity shall not consist in
outward form and comeliness, but in heavenly endowments and divine gifts; and
being so qualified, they may well be likened to the Olive, the fatness whereof
was used to honor God in sacrifices, and to make the face shine in anointing.
Judge. 9.9.
They do seek to advance Gods glory, Psalm. 104.15.
and they make their father rejoice, and have a cheerful countenance, when
they behold them walking in all the commandments and ordinances of God
blameless. Psalm. 144.12.
If we desire our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, we must
command them to keep the way of the Lord; and as we are burning lights by
godly instruction, so we must be shining lights by virtuous example. For what
they have seen us do, they will make have to do as we have done. Be not too
indulgent; you see how Adonijah rewarded his fathers love, 1 Kin. 1.6.
who had not displeased him in saying, Why have thou done so? And yet he would
displease his father, and though not in word yet in deed would question his
authority in disposing of the kingdom to Solomon, who was chosen by the Lord
God of Israel. We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, Heb. 12.9.
and we gave them reverence; It may be the more reverence for their correction,
when it was without provocation or discouragement. There is no young tree that
does not send forth some twigs that would be cut off; In youth there is
something to be taken away. Do not add the evil of rioting and excess unto
the vanity of youth. Such as bring them up in luxury, Vinoirrigare consuevit.
Macrob. Tantumque honoris increvit, ut mero infuso enutriantur. Plin. Sec. Esaias
16.9.
deal by their children as Hortensius did by his trees, who powered wine to the
roots of them in stead of water. We should rather imitate the Prophet, who
says, I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon. We must bewail their
offenses, and be humbled for our former sins; Consider from what stock they
did proceed, and when we behold their infirmities, let us remember that such
were some (if not all) of us; But we are washed, 1 Cor. 6.11.
but we are sanctified, but we are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the spirit of our God. Our planting and watering, and all our labor about
them will be vain, unless God give the increase. Multae istarum arboaum mea
manu sunt satae. Cicero. Plutar. in Artax.
Cyrus might speak of the trees planted by himself, but his own name (in the
Persian tongue) did put him in mind of the Sun, without whose influence the
work of his hands could not prosper. God is able to change Benoni into
Benjamin, to make thy son become a plant of righteousness; The child of so
many prayers, of so many tears, cannot miscarry: Thou may think thy sons
heart to be as dead and barren as Sarahs womb: The Lord, who strenthened her
to bring forth Isaac, is able by the operation of the Spirit to form Christ in
his heart, causing you both to laugh and rejoice.

There is some fruit that is harsh and unsavory when it is gathered, but
useful and pleasant after it has been kept a long time: Although for the
present thy son be as grievous unto thee, as Esau to his mother; yet through
the Lords mercy he may hereafter prove as comfortable and obedient, as Joseph
to his father. In the last place, I will add another care and charge of the
Parent, which is the first and last, yea the only aim and desire of most men,
who labor to perform, or rather to pervert that place, where it is said,
Fathers ought to lay up for their children; that as the branches derive their
sap and nourishment from the root, so children should receive some estate and
means from their parents: Which ought to be done decently and in order; Not
that the father, Quae quantum vertice ad auras Aethereas, tantum radice in
tartara tendit. Virg.
like an earth-worm, should be hidden as the root under ground, living in
wilful penury and obscurity, that afterward his branches may flourish in
greatness, and spread themselves abroad. He is worse than an Infidel, that
provides not for his family; and he is worse than an Infidel, that does
provide for his family in this manner, when he forgets to distribute to the
necessity of the Saints, and excludes all works of piety and charity: thinking
that there is but one thing needful, which is, to be troubled about many
things, to be overcharged with cares, to be entangled with worldly affairs,
to eat the bread of sorrows, that he may heap up riches, and the glory of his
house may be increased: He seeks not for the beginning and increase of grace,
but places his godliness in gain, and uses all crooked ways and sinister
means to obtain his wretched ends, viz. that his estate, which formerly was
small as a grain of mustard seed, may wax a great tree, Ramorum pondera adeo in
terram curvantur, ut annuo spatio infigantur, novamque sibi propaginem faciant
circa parentem. Scal. exer. de Indica ficu. Mangle in Purchase.
and shoot out great branches; and so in the end become like that tree, whose
branches spreading from the body, do bend themselves downwards to the earth,
where they take hold, and with new rooting multiply themselves into a wood;
Arbore de raise.
They enlarge their borders, joining house to house, Isa. 5.8.
and field to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in
the midst of the earth. The plant which was a long time in growing up, may soon
be hewn down: Et quas fallacis collegit lingua parentis, Has eadem nati
lingua refudit opes. Claudian. Dirae filius est rapacitatis. Martial.
Nothing is more usual than for the son to cut down those trees, which were
cherished and maintained by the father; to waste that substance with riotous
living, which was gotten with avarice and rapine: wherefore be not herein just
overmuch, neither make thy self over-wise: Wholly to cast our selves upon the
Lord, and to neglect all lawful means, is a presumptuous temptation: Again,
to sacrifice to our net, and trust to our own wisdom, not leaving any space
where God may work by his power and providence, is a desperate contempt of the
divine blessing, which is the best inheritance. Fortunam (...) avide vorare
pergas, eandem male concoquas necesse est. Sincer. Job 20.15, 28.
He that has swallowed down riches, shall vomit them up again: God shall
cast them out of his belly. The increase of his house shall depart, and his
goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath. If God prepares a worm to smite
the tree, it withers: If he blows upon the same, it perishes suddenly, and
comes utterly to an end.

This is the conclusion of the covetous man, and the same confusion belongs to
all other ungodly men: Psalm. 37.35. Luco dilectior omni Laurus hane imo stipite
caesam vidit. Claudian.
I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green
baytree; yet he passed away, and lo he was not: yea, I sought him, but he
could not be found: Such men may be compared unto that tree, which does ever
bear leaves, and never any fruit; so they may make show of piety, and seem to
be religious, but do not bring forth the fruit of the Spirit. The Bay Tree
prospers best in the shade; so they seek not to be enlightened from above, and
to have the Sun of Righteousness arise and shine into their hearts: Traditur
non feriri ipsam a fulmine. Fracastor.
That tree is not blasted nor consumed by lightning; so they are not moved nor
awakened, when they hear Gods judgments denounced against sinners: But as the
ancient Conquerours were crowned with Laurel; Hac victores Delphi coronari,
and triumphantes Romae. Plin. Sec.
so they do triumph as victorious when with their carnal weapons they seem to
overcome such as they think to be their enemies, because they tell them the
truth, breaking their bands asunder, and casting their cords from them: yet let
them remember, that as the branches of this tree are used in solemnities of
rejoicing and mourning; so their present solace and delight may soon be
finished, and they be called to sorrow and lamentation. The Bay-trees, which
for many years have flourished, are smitten by a great frost, and do wither
away; En frigidus orbs, Purpureos jam somnus obit. Val. Flac. Corpus inane
animae frigus letale secutam est. Ovid.
Such as heretofore have lived in prosperity, and enjoyed their health and
strength, may soon be surprised by that cold sleep, and have their bodies
benumbed by death; After which, as the Bays does crackle and make a noise when
it is burnt; Laurus Terribili sonitu flamma crepitante crematur. Lucret.
so they, being cast into unquenchable fire, shall continue in weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth: Fragiles incende bitumine lauros. Virg. Quod
inter urendum fragorem edunt. Turn.
There shall be desperate yellings, and hideous outcries; the mighty voice of
Thunder, the raging of the Sea, the Cataracts of Nilus, the sound of the
Ordnance, the roaring of Lions, howling of Wolves, lowing of Oxen, barking of
Dogs, all the most dreadful and offensive clamours in the world are not to
be compared to the torments that shall be inflicted upon the sons of
perdition in this their sense of Hearing. In the time of their life God gave
them this sense, by which faith does enter into the soul: Ears they had, but
not an ear to hear and hearken to the Word of truth; and therefore neglecting
to improve this gift to their comfort and salvation, they are justly therein
punished after their decease: Not laboring now to receive good things thereby,
afterward they receive evil things. When such as stand in the way of sinners,
do hear what evil of punishment the Lord does threaten to bring upon the
impenitent, I wish that both their ears may tingle, that they may be moved
with horror and fear of the vengeance of eternal fire; and having a space
given them to repent, if not for love of God, and the joy that is set before
us, yet for dread of the fiery indignation, that they may return unto the Lord
in an accepted time, while they may be heard, before that day does overtake
them, in which they shall be as far from succor, as from audience. Job 8.9.
Our days upon earth are a shadow, whereof we may fitly be admonished by this
green tree, whose leaves do never fall: We may soon be changed from a
flourishing to a languishing estate; and therefore as this tree does produce
some berries for medicine, though not for meat; so let us bring forth fruit
meet for repentance, that the diseases of our souls may be healed, and the
issue of our corruptions may be stopped.

It may be expected, that as we have compared wicked men in general unto this
Bay Tree mentioned by David; so we should now descend to some particulars, that
we may see such men, as trees, walking; as the blind man of Bethsaida did,
Mar. 8.24.
when he began to be restored to his sight. It is true, that such men are
resembled to diverse kinds of trees: As the proud man to the Cedars of Lebanon,
Isa. 2.13.
and the Oaks of Bashan; The ambitious to the Bramble, Judge 9.15.
and the like: But within the compass of our ground we desire to maintain
only such trees as are fruitful. We will herein follow the example of Christ,
who oft-times resorted to the garden with his Disciples; not of John the
Baptist, who went into the wilderness: Wherefore omitting to speak of wild
and barren trees, we will apply our selves unto the Vine, Fructum vitis qui
prae ali^s omnibus excellit. Calvin.
whose fruit being rightly used, does excel the fruit of all other trees, and
is said to cheer both God and man; God in a drink offering, and man when he
does use it with moderation: and is therefore prescribed to be given unto those
that be of heavy hearts, that they may forget their misery: But as commonly
abused, it is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes; At the last
it bites like a Serpent, Pro. 23.32.
and stings like an Adder. The blood of the grape does occasion such as exceed
therein, Res epulis quondam, nunc bello and caedibus apta. Ovid.
to power out their own blood, and to shed the blood of other men. And as this
plant is not able to subsist without some supportation; so the bodies of such
as do transgress thereby, are made weak and unable to uphold themselves:
Also their understanding is darkened by clouds and vapors, ascending from the
dead sea of a defiled body, which do hinder the influence of the divine light
upon their souls.

In former times, they that were drunken, were drunken in the night; 1 These.
5.7.
but now sin is grown impudent, and that evil which heretofore was secretly
committed, is now acted before all Israel, and before the Sun. It would be
superfluous to attempt any further discovery of this bestiall pollution (I may
be taxed of error in calling it bestiall, Omne brutum a vino naturaliter
abhorret. Aelian.
because every beast does abhor wine) when as the offenders themselves have
neither will nor power to conceal their sin from the view of all men. I will
not subscribe to the practice of Lycurgus, who to reduce his subjects to
sobriety, caused all the Vines to be rooted up: Edixit ne quis in Italia
novellaret. Sue^on. Nervii, nihil patiuntur vini inferri. Sic Suevi. Caesar de
bell. Gal. l. 2. and l. 4.
Nor to Domitians Edict, that none might plant Vineyards: Nor yet to that
custom of diverse Nations, who interdicted the importation of wine; but as the
smell of the Vine in the time of its flourishing does drive away Serpents and
venomous Creatures; so it would be a great happiness, if these impure wretches
were prohibited from partaking of this good fruit, that makes glad the heart
of man: and then, as by Gods gracious providence, our Vines in this Land are
not, Now, hurtful unto the people by producing wine; so likewise the people
may not be hurtful unto the Land by their provocation of Gods anger to punish
them for their uncleanness; but we all may be free from intemperance herein:
and if any, that only such Nations, Rev. 18.3.
as have drunk of the wine of the wrath of the cup of fornication, may exceed
in the abuse of the wine that grows among them. And yet I would to God that
they also were the Lords people, and altogether like unto us (or such as we
then should be) in being delivered from the bonds of spiritual and corporal
drunkenness. While I reprove this excess in others, I my self may seem to
exceed and to wander from my present purpose; but the Vine (whereof we now
treat) is a luxuriant plant, Serpentem multipliei lapsu and erratico. Cicero
whose branches run far. A large digression may be tolerable in me, when I
reprehend a great transgression, that is into lerable in very many. Having
related what harm and loss it brings to others, we will now enter upon our
vintage, and see what gain and benefit may redound unto our selves.

The Church in diverse places of Scripture is resembled unto a Vine that was
planted by God himself, Ferro amputans coercet ars agricolarum, ne sylvescat
farmentis. Cicero. Nisi putetur sylvescit, atque ut ludamus, labruscescit. Scal
in Theop.
who does fence it and bestow cost upon it, and looks that it should bring
forth grapes. There is no plant that requires such frequent pruning as the
Vine, which will become wild and unfruitful if the loose and spreading
branches be not cut off every year. By which we are again put in remembrance
how needful correction is for us, lest this pleasant plant, this noble vine,
be turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine; Jer. 2.21.
lest we wax wanton against the Lord, and forget him that nourished us, and
brought us up. Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, Heb.
12.11.
but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby. The goodly cluster may
seem to be spoiled, being cast into the wine press to be crushed and
strained, when as by that means comes forth the new wine, which is so useful
and comfortable; but if it had remained as before, it would have been of short
duration and small benefit. So then both from the tree and the fruit we may
conclude that afflictions are good for us, and are a testimony that we are
sons, Heb. 12.6, 7.
and such sons as are beloved of our father; though some twigs be taken off,
other more profitable will shoot forth in their place. God who is able to
graffe those branches in again that before were broken off, is likewise able
to make other branches spring up in lieu of them that were taken away. It is
better for the Vine to be pruned, and still to grow in a fat and fertile soil,
than not being dressed and tended, Ezekiel. 19.12, 13.
at last to be plucked up in fury, and planted in the wilderness in a dry and
thirsty ground. It is better that the branch should be purged by the
husbandman, that it may bring forth more fruit, John 15.2.
than to suffer the Vine, being not regarded, to be rooted up by the Bore of
the forest, and trodden down by the wild beast of the field. It is better to be
chastened of the Lord, than condemned with the world. In time of persecution,
or the greatest extremity, there is an argument of comfort from the Vine: for
as that in winter seems to be more seere and dry than any other tree, as if
it were fit for nothing but the fire; yet in the spring it recovers the former
beauty, growing more, and putting out the branches further than any other tree
that is fruitful: Even so when we are pressed out of measure, above strength,
in so much that we despair of life; yet even then God who raises the dead, is
able to deliver us from so great a death; He that can make the withered
branches to shoot out, and the dry bones to live, can also raise us, even when
we are lowest, unto an estate of consolation and thanksgiving.

The Church is like a Vine, and every Congregation may be compared unto a
cluster, in which many grapes do grow together. So the people ought to be
firmly knit together in love and unity, to draw their nourishment from the same
root, Fulgentes sole racemos. Silius.
and to be ripened by the same influence of the Sun, and to be refreshed by the
same dew of the divine grace. Although the Spies which were sent by Moses, and
brought the cluster of grapes out of the land of promise, did not partake of
the blessings of that land; yet Gods messengers, who do carry these clusters
into the heavenly Canaan, shall for ever enjoy the felicity of that better
Country.

If we take the Church to be the Vineyard, (as it is ofttimes called) then we
must consider every true believer to be a Vine, unto which he may well be
likened. Ut ex ea fluat quod nimium est. Scal. in Theop.
For as in graffing of the Vine it was usual to let the stock, in regard of
the abundant moisture, to bleed diverse days before the Cyons was fastened
thereunto; so there is a time of mourning before the Lord does put joy into the
heart. We do first lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
before we receive the ingraffed word. This is the weakest of all plants, and
must be sustained by the sides of the house, Psalm. 128.3. Jamjam contingit
summum radice flagellum. Catul. Qualiter aequaevo sociatam palmite vitem Ultuus
amat. Stati.
(as David speaks) or by some wall, or frame, or such like stay, or else be
joined to some tree: so we being feeble and infirm in our selves, are
supported by the favor and goodness of God. Such as make flesh their arm, or
trust to any outward help, 2 Kin. 7.17.
do as Joram did, who leaned upon the hand of that man which was soon trodden
down: That shore and strength upon which they rested may suddenly be taken
away from them. Si quid attigerit ultro amabit, and quidem viriosius
amplexabitur, etc. Tertul.
The Vine being thus weak in it self, does by the tendrels or small strings
seek to catch hold upon any thing it does touch, and to grasp it fast, Ut se
erigat claviculis suis quasi manibus, etc. Cicero. Adeo ramos string it, ut
crasse scere prohibeat. Scal.
that it may be sustained thereby: Thus we, being sensible of our own frailty,
should apprehend the gracious promises and rich mercies of Almighty God, and
adhere unto Christ by a lively faith. Genesis 32.26.
Jacob would not let the Angel go except he blessed him: so we by applying the
merits of our Redeemer unto our souls, do receive a blessing from the Lord.
When we do tie our selves unto our Creator by the cords of love, (which is
the bond of perfectness) as a Sacrifice unto the Altar, we shall be kept from
falling, and the Serpent shall not have power to fold himself about us, who
are so nearly united to our heavenly Father. The Vine-tree is not fit for any
use but only to bear fruit: shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or
will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon? Ezekiel. 15.3.
An unfruitful Christian is the most unprofitable creature that is; a heavy
burden to the earth, a cumbrance to the ground, no better than the wild gourds
in the pot, a vexation to the righteous soul, and a stumbling block to the
wicked.

Other trees may bear fruit upon the young sprigs that did shoot out in the
former year; but this does exceed them all, bringing forth grapes upon the new
branches, in the same year in which they did proceed from the body of the
Vine: thereby teaching us even in the very beginning of our profession to
become fruitful, and profitable in our conversation, running the ways of Gods
Commandments, Psa. 119.32.60.
and without delay making haste to keep his Statutes.

How can they that have neglected so great salvation, and deferred to return
unto the Lord, expect that he should hear them, when in affliction they seek
him early (seeming fervent in prayer when they first begin to call upon his
Name) and cry unto him, O God make speed to save us, O Lord make haste to help
us, whereas they during their whole life, it may be these forty years long,
have grieved the good Spirit, and erred in their hearts, putting the evil day
of Gods judgment, and the good day of true repentance far from them? But there
is fruit of a better relish to be gathered from the Vine; if that be prevented
by the frost, Gelatione cohibita, in sequenti anno duplum dabit. Scal. in Theop.
and hindered from bearing one year, in the following year it will recompense
that loss by a twofold restitution. If we have been as trees without fruit, we
must not still persist in impiety, and live to the lusts of men, but labor to
redeem the time, by abounding always in the work of the Lord; that as
Ahimaaz, overran Cushi, 2 Samuel 18.23.
who was sent before him; so we may supply by our diligence and cheerful
obedience what was wanting in time: And as Saint Paul, who was last called, 2
Cor. 11.5.
was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles; so we in spiritual
endowments and glorious reward may be made equal unto them, who entered the
work before our selves. Where the fruit of this tree is most esteemed, In agro
Aureliano vina excellentissima; Nulla vinea vetula, sed etc. Ibid.
they do not suffer any old Vines to grow, but replenish the ground with new,
whose fruit is most acceptable; thereby teaching us to put off the old man, and
to be renewed in our mind, putting on the new man, Ephesians. 4.23.
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. The Lord
satisfies our mouth with good things, Psalm. 103.5.
so that our youth is renewed like the Eagles: And the Lord satisfies our
soul with his mercy, so that his graces are revived and repaired in us by the
work of the quickening Spirit; John 2.8.
He turned the water into wine at the marriage of Cana in Galile; and he sends
the comfortable showers, Initia vini esse aquea. Ibid.
that do moisten and cherish the roots of the Vine, causing them to produce
their fruit, in which there is a blessing; He turns our sorrow into joy,
Isa. 65.8.
our weeping into rejoicing; John 16.20.
He makes the barren woman to be a joyful mother of children; and he makes
the barren heart to bring forth the fruit of the Spirit, Psalm. 113.
and gives wisdom and all heavenly blessings liberally, above that which we
can ask or think; Our lot is fallen to us in a good ground, we are planted in
a fertile soil, we receive the best gifts from the open hand of a bountiful
Father. Now as the Vine does draw much virtue and nourishment out of the earth,
Necesse est eam multum quoque trahere. Ibid.
that it may produce abundance of goodly clusters, and great plenty of large
leaves, and long branches; so we should derive much strength and power from
that fullness which is in Christ, that we may be complete, and furnished unto
every good work; being fitted to perform any holy duty, being prepared to
suffer any trial or affliction, which the Lord shall be pleased to impose upon
us: As upon the Vine there be great store of grapes joined together in one
cluster; so in the soul of a Christian there should be all kinds of graces
accumulate and heaped together, in stead of that mass of sin and lump of
corruption, which we brought into this world: We should be filled with all
knowledge, and all joy, and peace in believing; we should be full of goodness,
ready to communicate, willing to distribute to the necessity of other men:
Which works of charity, and all other pious actions, are like the fruit of the
Vine; for as we have the comfortable use and benefit of that, a long time
after it has been trodden in the wine press; so likewise, of Gods free grace
we do receive the reward of the good things done in our body after our
dissolution; and do then drink the cup of salvation, when we enter into our
Masters joy, and are delivered from all weakness in the body, and infirmity in
the soul; from all inward and outward frailties, even as the grapes in the
winepresse are freed and cleared both from the husks and kernels: Such is our
corruption and imperfection here in this world, that our best performances are
polluted by the contagion of sin dwelling in our members, and may in that
regard be likened to these grapes, or or other fruits, which have either
something without to be pared off, and cast away, or else some coare, stone,
or kernel within to be rejected. In our most devout exercises, and godly
endeavors, there is either some defect and error to be discerned by man, who
looks to the outward appearance; or though we should be blameless before
man, yet there is some inward rebellion and iniquity, that is naked and
manifest before the Lord, who looks to the heart. When we are sensible of our
former excess and superfluity, and are cast down in acknowledgment of our
transgressions, we should not thereby be deterred from continuance in
well-doing; but rather seek to amend that in which we have failed, and gone out
of the way; that as such fruits are esteemed best (in their kinds) in which
there is the least waste, Mollusca, quod caeteris nucibus mollior sit. Macrob.
either in the shell, or any other part that is unprofitable; so our
performances may be most acceptable, when they are not defiled by any gross
error or presumptuous sin. The Lord, Mat. 3.12.
who is able to purge the wheat from the chafe, will approve of our good
endeavors and godly desires, being the fruit of the Spirit; and will be
pleased to pardon our swerving and deadness, which proceed from the bitter
root of a deceitful heart.

In diverse of our fruits there is some kernel, that being sown does grow up
in such a plant, as may bring forth more fruit of the same kind; in like
manner, the end of one good action should be the beginning of another: we
should labor to increase and multiply in heavenly graces, and spiritual
gifts, and our reward shall be great in heaven; For unto us it shall be given to
eat of the Tree of life, Revel. 2.7. and 22.2.
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: A tree that bears twelve
manner of fruits, and yields her fruit every month: Such fruit as does for
ever exempt us from the dominion of death; such fruit as does open our eyes,
for we shall see God face to face; 1 Cor. 13.12.
such fruit as does make us to be as gods, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2.
for we shall see him as he is; such fruit as is good for food, so very good,
Isa 49.10.
that when we taste thereof, we shall never hunger any more, John 6.34.
nor thirst any more: But as the Disciple said, Lord, evermore give us this
bread; so we shall always desire, and for ever enjoy this food that endures
in everlasting life: Such fruit as is pleasant to the eye; 1 Cor. 2.9.
for since the beginning of the world, the eye has not seen the things which
God has prepared for them that love him; Such fruit as is to be desired to
make one wise, even wise unto salvation; without which all the wisdom of this
world is foolishness, and enmity against God: But this wisdom is a Tree of
life to them that lay hold upon her; Pro. 3.18. and 4.9.
a Crown of glory shall she deliver to them. Did our first parents think that
the fruit of the tree of Knowledge was to be desired, Genesis 3.6.
when it was forbidden? And shall we by a stronger delusion believe that this
fruit of the Tree of Life is to be neglected and avoided, when we are
commanded to labor for it? All the trees in the garden of Eden could not
satisfy them, but they would eat of the forbidden fruit, though they became
subject to the curse thereby. The abundant variety of all the precious fruits
brought forth by the Sun, should not please nor content us, without this
blessed fruit of the Tree of Life. Adam was prevented, that he might not put
forth his hand to take of that Tree, lest having eaten unworthily, he deceived
himself with a vain hope of life, when death should suddenly overtake him;
But we have time and liberty granted unto us, that we may stretch forth the
hand of faith, and receive this fruit, whereof if we eat, we shall not dye;
He might not gather it upon earth, but we may receive it from heaven. The
Manna, which was kept until the holy Sabbath, had no worm in it: If we now
treasure up this good fruit against the Sabbath of Rest for our souls, it
shall never be taken away from us; He that gathers little, shall have no
lack: But if in this day of salvation we gather great plenty thereof, we may
then confidently say, Soul, take thy rest for evermore, thou have much goods
laid up for all eternity.

The Tree of Life is in the midst of the Paradise of God: Oh that the fruit
thereof were hidden in our inward parts, that we could lay it up, and keep it
in our hearts! we would then esteem all the dignities and delights in the
world to be of as short continuance, Isa. 28.4. Ita in manibus consenescit.
Plaut.
as the hasty fruit before the Summer, which when he that looks upon it
sees it, while it is yet in his hand he eats it up; And to be no better than
that fruit, which was stolen out of the Orchard, Non erant forma, nec sapore
illecebrosa.
that had neither form to catch the eye, nor relish to allure the hand; For
which that blessed man in his repentance paid the dearest price that ever was
paid for any fruit, which was eaten by any of the sons of Adam. We give fruit
unto froward children, that they may forsake that which is of more value; Shall
we be such children in understanding, for the trifling vanities of this life,
to reject the durable riches of the heavenly Kingdom? Shall we for the three
Apples of honor, Atalanta, sive Lucrum. Bacon Sap. Vet. Victa cursu dum malis
tribus colligendis retardata. Not. Com.
pleasure, and profit, which are cast before us, be stopped in our race, and so
lose an incorruptible Crown, an eternal weight of glory? The commodities of
this world may seem to be like the fruits about the dead sea, delectable to the
eye as Apples of gold; but being touched, they fall into ashes: when we think
to take surest hold of them, they deceive us. We are not like the Cadusians,
Plutar.
who were a strong people, and yet fed upon nothing but Apples and Pears, and
such like fruit; from these we receive the least part of our nourishment: So
likewise all outward benefits do not conduce to our true happiness, unless
we use them as we sometimes use our fruit, to procure an appetite unto that
which is more solid; So we by tasting of the Lords bounty in these external
blessings, should be excited to hunger after Righteousness, and the spiritual
food of our souls, that we so we may be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of Gods house, and may drink of the river of his pleasures for evermore.

Now, as the industrious Be does gather honey, not only from the blossoms
which are upon the trees, but also from the flowers which grow upon the earth;
so we, having formerly labored to receive instruction from the trees, will
now endeavor to take some permanent benefit from the fading flowers. I will
not insist upon the reproof of them, who are worthy to be blamed for their
violent desire, to exceed in all kind of strange novelties; Quorum literae in
Thraciam, Graeciam, Indiam discurrunt. Lips.
whose letters are sent into remote parts of the world, for some small seed, or
root, which they cherish as the mother does the child; Quib. aegrius fit
florem aliquem novum mori, quam etc. Idem.
and grieve more for the death of a new flower, than of an old friend. We
know, that Adam in Paradise was foiled, whereas Job sitting among the ashes did
overcome the Tempter. There is offense by vanity and superfluity, when we
seek wholly to please the outward senses of the body, and do never project
how to strengthen the inward powers and faculties of the soul: Which error
we will now reform, hoping by our pains and diligence herein, we may
recover some part of that excellent happiness of our first estate, rather than
be driven further off from the comfortable fruition of true felicity.

First then we do admire and adore the wisdom and power of Almighty God,
whose hands have made all these things. Who can behold the Sun and Moon, and
all the Stars of light, but he must with all reverence acknowledge the glory
of God, which is declared by them? and who can view and observe the rare beauty
and riches of the earth, but he must confess the excellent perfection that is
seen in them? There was no more spirit in the Queen of Sheba when she beheld
the state and pomp of Solomon; 1 Kin. 10.5.
and yet even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one Lily: Matt.
6.29.
That goodness and providence of God which does shine forth in one flower,
does exceed the greatest roialty of that most magnificent King. Liliorum
inscriptio vinetur aptissime convenire, etc. Flamin.
The same word in the inscription of the Psalm is expounded either of the
Lilies, or of the Instruments of six strings: As the sound of those
Instruments, so the six leaves of the Lilie may excite us to praise the name
of the Lord. Immiscens varios natura colores. Sincer. Parthica quae tantis
variantur cingula gemmis? Claudian.
If this one flower be arrayed in this manner, then what incomparable luster
and splendor is in that rich wardrobe when it is brought forth? With what
wonderful variety of colors is the earth enamelled? What sumptuous robe of
the most mighty Potentate may be compared to this raiment of diverse colors,
wherewith this terrestrial globe is adorned? Alba verecundis Lilia pinge
Rosis. Sincer. Lilia prato candida. Propert. Et Rosa purpureo crescit rubicunda
color. Virg. Sanguineo splendore Rosas. Claud.
The Lilies exceeding white as snow, so as no Fuller on earth can white them;
the Roses of such an absolute and perfect red, that the most exact imitation by
art, is no better than Joseph's coat dipped in the blood of the Kid, if compared
thereunto: Et dulce Violas ferrugine pingit. Claud.
the Violet, whose grave and stately color does surpass the Purple of the
rich man; the Tulippa, and many others, whose yellow is to be preferred before
the clothing of Pharaoh's daughter, which was made of wrought gold; And
besides this pre-eminence of the color, wherein there is great diversity in
the same kinds, let us consider the differing shapes and proportions in which
they grow, the times and seasons in which successively they blow and open
themselves, that we may never want the abundant choice of fragrant odours,
and sweet savours, that most of them do cast abroad: Psalm. 104.24.
And we cannot forbear to say with David, O Lord how manifold are thy works!
in wisdom have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches. If the
eternal power and goodness of God be made manifest in these things that are
of least continuance, then how much more in the durable riches that are
provided for us? If such beauty be conferred upon a fading flower, Cujus rei
inveniri potest brevior aetas: Quintil.
then what unspeakeable glory is reserved in the heavenly Kingdom? If such
sweetness may be found in these things which spring out of the earth, then
what solace may be received by the good gifts that descend from above? If such
comforts here in this life, what pleasures for evermore at the right hand of
God? If while the King sits at his table, the Spouses spikenard sends
forth the smell thereof, and he be unto her as a bundle of myrrh, Cant 1.12.
and a cluster of Cypres; If Christ being absent does impart and communicate
such blessings unto us, now in our pilgrimage, by the Word and Spirit, then
what fullness of joy will there be when we appear with him in glory? As we are
delighted with the smell of sweet herbs and flowers, when they are composed in
one bundle; so God is well pleased with the plenteous variety of sundry graces
in a true believer: and then do we offer up a sweet odor, an acceptable
sacrifice unto the Lord.

In the Scripture flowers are frequently named to describe our frail estate
here in this world: Job says, Job 14.2.
Man comes forth like a flower, and is cut down. David says, As a flower of
the field, Psalm. 103.15.
so man flourishes: the wind passes over it, and it is gone. Saint James
says, Jam. 1.11.
The Sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but the flower falls, and
the grace of the fashion of it perishes. Esaias 28.4.
The glorious beauty of Ephraim shall be a fading flower, says the Prophet Esaias:
and in another place he says, and 40.6.
that the goodlinesse of all flesh is as the flower that fades; 1 Pet. 1.25.
Purpureus veluti cum flos succisus aratro Languescit moriens. Virg. Pubentesque
rosae primos moriuntur ad Austros. Statius. Ut cum sole malo tristique rosaria
pallent Usta Noto. Idem. Alioqui tu illos in vetustatem reservabas, etc.
Quintil.
And Saint Peter (as it is probable) alluding to that place, confirms the same
truth, that the glory of man is as the flower that falls away. All outward
gifts and endowments are as flowers, long in planting, and cherishing, and
growing up, but short in enjoying the sweetness of them. We may as well
resolve to keep our flowers continually fresh and beautiful, as to expect any
constant possession of the transitory benefits of this world. Floribus tam diu
gratis donec recentibus. Sidon.
Wherefore let us use them as we do our flowers, which do please us well
while they be fresh, but we cast them away when we have had the sweetness of
them: So long as these outward comforts are helpful unto us, and do excite us
to praise and thanksgiving, we may safely use them; but when they come to be
livelesse and uneffectuall, we should renounce them.

Such are the commodities of this life, and such is our life it self; it is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, Jam 4.14.
and then vanishes away. The longest life that ever any man lived, was not so
much as one day in Gods account. 2 Pet. 3.8.
How many do wither away before they be grown up? Qualem virgineo demessum
pollice florem, Cuineque fulgor adhuc nec dum sua forma recessit. Virg.
How many are gathered in the flower of their youth, in the perfection of
beauty and strength? Even as soon as the Sun is risen, and shines upon them,
they fade away: Or if we do bear the heat of the day, yet when the evening of
old age is come, like our flowers of Peru, Una dies aperit, conficit una dies.
we then fall to the ground.

In regard of the brevity of our time we may change that speech of Bildad, Job
8.9.
We are but of yesterday, and know nothing: We need not go so far as he
did; for we may say, We are but of this day, and know nothing; and which is the
greatest misery in this our ignorance, we care not to know or consider the
shortness of our lives; We know not that Adam abode one day in the state of
knowledge before he fell; we know that we shall continue one day in this state
of ignorance before we return to the dust. The wicked cannot hope for length
of days, but rather to be snared suddenly in an evil time, Eccles. 9.12.
when it falls suddenly upon them. The godly do neither expect nor desire
long life: Heb. 11.38.
the world is not worthy of such who are the Lords Jewels, Mal. 3.17.
Ostentatus raptusque simul, solstitialis velut herba solet. Auson.
which he brings forth, and shows them to the people, and then makes them up
again. If our stay be so short, it behooves us ever to be prepared for our
end, and with Saint Paul to dye daily, in our readiness to be dissolved. In
this our latter giving our selves unto the Lord, in commending our spirits into
the hands of our Father, God loves a cheerful giver; we must not do it
grudgingly, Abeamque ex hac vita, non ut ejectus, sed ut emissus. Lips.
or of necessity, but with a willing mind. The Lord of the Vineyard, as he
has power to send laborers into the work at what hour he pleases, so he
has power to call them from their work at what hour he thinks good. Blessed
are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them; To such to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. Better is
that Rose which is gathered in the bud, Ecce and defluxit rutili coma punica
floris, Dum loquor and tellus tecta rubore micat. Auson.
that an excellent water may be distilled from it, than that which hangs
longer, and at last falls to the earth without any use or benefit. Better is
the short race of the faithful man, whose good name is as precious ointment
that fills the house with the sweet odor, than the long residence of the
ungodly, who are not profitable either in life or death.

Having mentioned the Rose, Roseus color a principe florum. Scal. Exer.
the Prince of flowers, it will not be impertinent to extract the spirit
thereof, to try what virtue we may draw from the same: When we behold the
Rose growing upon a Brier, we may again call to remembrance that curse
denounced in the beginning, Thorns and thistles shall the earth bring forth to
thee; We may think upon our sin, which did provoke the Lord to inflict that
punishment. And then from the color of this flower we may learn to take
shame unto our selves, Extremus roseo pudor errat in ore. Val. Flac. Genesis 2.25.
which is one of the attendants of sin; for in the estate of Innocence, Adam
and Eve, though naked, yet were not ashamed.

Being thus cast down in sense of our unworthiness, we must seek for mercy
through the merits of Christ, who became subject unto the curse, and was rent
and wounded by the thorns that were fastened unto him; Who in his resurrection
was the Rose of Sharon, full of grace and majesty, bringing sweet consolation
unto all that approach nigh unto him by faith; Through his favor the
malediction is turned into a blessing, and we may receive much delight and
comfort by the use of this excellent flower; yet always remembering that the
way to Heaven is not strowne with Roses and Violets, with delicacies and
pleasures: For although we have inward peace and joy, we must meet with many
afflictions, and suffer manifold tribulations, before we can enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. They would pull a Rose without pricks, who would embrace a
godly life, without opposition and enmity from the world.

As the Rose does teach us modesty; so the Violet humility: which does not lift
up it self, like the empty ears of corn; or like the Bramble in the Parable,
Judge. 9.
that other trees may come under the shadow of it: but in all lowliness
adheres to the earth that gives nourishment thereunto. Job 37.18.
Elihu says, God has spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten
looking-glass: In that glass we may see the lively color of the Violet, and
may observe, that the right way to true honor is by humility: Pro. 15.33.
They that have learned to humble themselves, shall in due time be exalted. The
former color of the Rose, Vel mista rubent ubi Lilia multa Alba Rosa, etc.
Virg.
this of the Violet, and that of the Lilie, are esteemed the three chief
ingredients in beauty: Where there is shame for their former disobedience and
other sins, 2 These. 3.14.
whereof they have been guilty; and true humility in the acknowledgement of
their unworthiness and imperfection; Romans 6.21.
and an holy desire to keep themselves pure, and without blemish for the time
to come. Those souls are all glorious within, they are all fair like the
Spouse, Cant. 47.
and there is no spot in them. If we could find a prescript, how our bodies,
which are as the garments unto the soul in this our pilgrimage, may endure in
the prime beauty, like the clothes of the Israelites in the wilderness, Deuteronomy.
29.5.
which did not wax old upon them; how our youth might be renewed like the
Eagles, Psalm. 103.5.
and we may continue until our latter end in perfect comeliness, not having
our best form obscured by the wrinkles of age; there be very many who would
rejoice herein, more than he does that finds a great treasure: And such a
Physician as could thus help them, should be liberally paid, though they did
endure many days torture to gain this harm and loss. Now, which is much
more, here is evidently set before us an approved experiment, Not how to
retain our former favor; but how to increase more and more in divine beauty,
and excellent loveliness, by washing in the blood of that immaculate Lamb,
and by being adorned with the graces of the holy Spirit, that we may be as
the Sun when he goes forth in his might, Judge. 5.31.
which does not reveal its complete majesty, when it first comes out at the
door of the Tabernacle, but after ascends to great glory: Though our
beginnings be weak, yet we shall attain unto a more perfect estate: And as
Moses eye was not dim, Neque aufugit Viror ejus. Calvin. Viriditas ejus. Jun.
nor his natural force abated when he died, but was then as green and
flourishing as in former time; so we in old age, and in death it self shall
still retain the vigor of the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness; And after our dissolution the soul shall
appear in glory, as the lamps in Gideons Army did then shine forth, when the
pitchers were broken. Though for the present this divine Light be eclipsed by
the interposition of the body of the earth; yet at the last day the body also
shall become spiritual, and we shall put on, not rich robes and costly array,
not pearls and flowers, and such like ornaments; 1 Cor. 15.53.
but Incorruption and Immortality; Phil. 3.21.
And our body shall be fashioned like the glorious body of Christ; That is the
last and lasting fashion; the fashion that will follow all other: Oh that all
other would follow that fashion, that we would labor for holiness; And so
being espoused unto one husband, 2 Cor. 11.2.
we may be presented to Christ without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27.
or any such thing; As a chaste Virgin, caring for the things of the Lord, that
she may be holy both in body and spirit. 1 Cor. 7.34.


I do not deny, that diverse ornaments are tolerable, and there may be some
distinction and difference, according to order and dignity: The Crown that is
fit to be set upon the head, is not meet to be placed upon any other part of
the body: But there must be abstinence in some things, Non tantum mediocritas
colenda est, sed etiam abstinentia. Calv.
and moderation in all. Such as are captivated by their own chains, such as
are inthralled by fond affectation, and notorious ostentation, should break
those bands asunder, and cast away their fetters from them: Shall we with the
Pharisee look only to the outside, which may be like a painted Sepulcher?
Shall they that profess themselves to be Gods servants, be of as little use
in the Church, as is commonly made of the Tulippa in the garden, which is only
for show? And yet even by viewing of that various flower, we may observe
something that may be helpful unto us: For as that falls, and the grace of
it perishes; so shall the rich man, clothed in goodly apparel and fine
linen, Jam. 1.11.
fade away in his ways; Yea, so shall the fashion of this world pass away, 1
Cor. 7.31.
and the lust thereof; but he that does the will of God abides for ever: 1
John 2.17.
He shall live an eternal felicity; And may in that regard be compared unto
this flower, which in Winter shrinkes low into the earth, but in the Spring
does rise again with great beauty; so although for the present he may be cast
down in godly sorrow for his sins, yet he shall be lifted up with comfort
and consolation, when the Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing in
his wings, and shine upon him with grace and favor.

Then let us learn of this and other flowers, which do open themselves,
Helotropium, etc.
and turn toward the Sun when it shines upon them, that they may be
refreshed by the influence thereof; to open unto Christ, that he may enter into
our souls; to incline our ears unto his Word, and our hearts to keep his
Commandments; And to turn unto the Lord with all our strength, that we may
be enlightened by his glorious truth, and supported by his almighty power.

The Word of God is as seed sown in our hearts; it may be, we have for a long
time been unprofitable hearers, and the Word we have received has been as the
seed of this flower before named, which does not satisfy our desire, until
many years after it is sown: Yet let it not for ever be buried within us;
for then it will prove the savor of death unto death: 2 Cor. 2.16.
but rather let it be as the seed we sow, 1 Cor. 15.36.
which first dies, and then is quickened.

That seed which fell among stony places sprung up forthwith, Matthew. 13.
and was as suddenly scorched: If this seed has for a great space been hid
within us, let it take the deeper root, and at last bring forth an hundred
fold. Does the earth bring forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed?
Heb. 6.7.
Does the garden cause the things that Isa. 61.11.
are sown in it to spring forth? And shall not man, Terra nunquam recusat
imp^rium, nec unquam sine usura reddit quod accepit, etc. Cicero.
who receives these blessings of the fatness of the earth, become fruitful
himself, that he may likewise be blessed with all heavenly blessings in
spiritual places in Jesus Christ? Gal. 6.7.
Does man (for the most part) Does man (for the most part) reap whatsoever he
sows? and shall God reap nothing but tares, having sown such precious seed?
Shall the good things committed unto us produce such bad effects, like unto the
wheat that is sown, Infoelix lolium and steriles dominantur avenae.
which in a barren year does degenerate into darnell? Far be it from us to
requite the Lord in this manner: If he call, and we refuse; If he stretch
out his hand, and we regard not, then he will laugh at our calamity, and we
shall call upon him, but he will not hear; we shall seek him early, but
shall not find him: but if we do hearken to his Word, and obey his voice,
then our prayers shall come up as a memorial before God, and be as seed
sown, not in the earth beneath, but in heaven above, and shall cause a rich
and plentiful increase of all heavenly blessings to come down upon us, that
our souls may be filled with good things: Yea, then our works of charity,
and all godly actions, shall be as seed which we cast abroad, and sow to the
Spirit, Gal. 6.8.
that of the Spirit we may reap life everlasting: 2 Cor. 9.6.
He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Pro. 11.25.
The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that waters, shall be also
watered himself. Dare we trust the earth with our seed? and dare we not
trust our faithful Creator in these works of charity?

The earth has no power nor sufficiency in it felfe, but only from his
benediction; Shall we doubt of his goodness and mercy, who is most just and
righteous in himself, and who does give this fidelity and ability unto the
earth, that it may make an abundant return of that wherewith it is trusted?
Are we of such little faith? And do we thus fear in dispencing these outward
commodities, these transitory benefits? Then how shall we be able to commend
our spirit into the hands of our Father? With what courage and comfort shall we
commit our bodies to the earth (being the last seed we do sow) which shall be
raised in power and great glory, excelling that of the pure Lilly, more than
that does the royalty of Solomon? Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust; for
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Isa.
26.19. and 11.1. In illo loco Messiah express vocatur Flos; and consentit
Hieronymus. Causabon. Job 38.27.
The Flower of the stem of Jesse did spring up in a garden, and our graves
shall be turned into garden-plots. As the rain causes the bud of the tender
herb to spring up; so the Lord is able to raise us up unto eternal joy and
felicity; Yea in this first resurrection he does raise us up from the death of
sin, to the life of grace: I will be as the dew unto Israel, Hos. 14.5.
even as the cloud of dew in the hear of harvest. Isa. 18.4.
God makes the small drops of water; they power down rain according to the
vapor thereof, which the clouds do drop and distill upon man abundantly, Job
36.27.
to satisfy the desolate and waste ground.

In like manner he does sendus the showers of his grace, he gives us the
increase of all spiritual gifts, he does refresh us with his favor, and
satisfy our thirsty souls with his loving kindness. Apollo's watering is to
small effect, unless God gives his blessing; Deuteronomy. 11.10.
Although the seed we sow may grow when we water it with our foot, yet the seed
of grace in our hearts can never prosper, unless the Son of man, who began
that good work, does likewise perfect the same.

When the sweet and comfortable showers do fall upon the earth, they do not
only cherish the flowers and herbs, but also do occasion many offensive weeds
readily to grow up: so the good gifts that come down from the Father of
lights, the gracious blessings that descend from above, do bring forth the
acceptable fruit of praise and obedidience in the godly, but the cursed weeds
of rebellion and provocation in the wicked. The goodness of God, which, as a
gentle shower mollifying the dry earth, does lead the humble soul to
repentance; but does harden the impenitent heart, which is fully set to do
evil, and to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. The Word of God, in
season like the former, and out of season like the latter rain, is the true
bread that comes down from heaven, and does refresh him that is weary and
ready to faint, and does satisfy him that is hungry, that he shall never
hunger any more; but it causes loathing in the full soul; As the Israelites
did not find any sweetness or good relish in the spiritual meat, the food of
Angels, 1 Cor. 10.3. ^s. 78.24, 25.
the corn of heaven that God rained down upon them: Our soul is dried away,
there is nothing at all besides this Manna before our eyes: Number. 11.6.
Here is Manna, and Manna, and nothing but Manna: they called it light bread,
Number. 21.5.
and as lightly they esteemed of it.

Thus the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.14.
for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: he cannot apprehend the lively power of the hidden
Manna; Rev. 2.17.
he cannot discover the secret of the Lord, which is revealed unto them that
fear his name. The tares that appeared in the field were suffered to grow unto
the harvest; Mat. 13.30.
but the weeds that come up in the garden must be taken away in the very
beginning; Our vices must be plucked up by the roots before they be surely
fixed by long continuance. Abdolonymus hortum, malas herbas eligens,
repurgabat. Q. Curt.
The Historian makes mention of a Gardener who was found destroying of bad
weeds, when Alexander sent for him, and advanced him to a kingdom: So we,
supplanting our corruptions, and casting out the unfruitful works of
darkness, shall attain to a crown of life. As Adam was to dress the Garden
of Eden, so we are to keep our soul and body blameless from the pollution
of sin: and in the end, when we rest from our labor, we shall enter into
our Masters joy. Christ says to the good Thief, Luke 23.43.
To day thou shall be with me in Paradise: Before God said to the rich man,
and 12.20.
This night thy soul shall be required of thee; There the night is mentioned:
death shall come suddenly upon him as an enemy, as a thief, and find him in
greatest security, in the dead sleep of sin: He delighted in works of
darkness, and shall be cast into utter darkness; But here the day is named,
To day thou shall be with me; a day of salvation unto the good thief, the
first day of his life, and such a day as never had any end. Christ is the true
Light, John 1.9.
which lights every man coming into the world, with the light of reason; and
every Believer with the light of happiness and glory, when he goes out of
this world into the holy City, that does not need the Sun, Rev. 21.23.
for the Lamb is the light thereof.

To day. The performance of this gracious promise is limited to a short time,
and therefore all doubting is excluded. Our Savior is crucified in the midst,
as nigh to one malefactor as the other: Both formerly were brethren in evil,
consenting in wickedness; Both began to revile him before their death; yet one
is rejected, and exposed to vengeance, the other is taken as a brand snatched
out of the fire: Christ does overshadow him in mercy, and delivers not from
death, but from condemnation.

Thou shall be with Me. A blessed change, to be freed from the fellowship of
an impenitent sinner, a blasphemous reprobate, and to be admitted into the
society of Saints, yea for ever to be with the Lord; An unspeakeable mercy,
that he, who by his own confession suffered justly, should be with him who
had done nothing amiss. The righteous died for the ungodly, Christ for us
sinners; he became Emmanuel, God with us, that we may live with him in his
kingdom of glory.

Thou shall be with me in Paradise. What we gain by the second Adam is much
better than that we lost by the first; in the beginning Adam was in Paradise,
but God was not with him, nor the fear of God before his eyes, when he
yielded to the tempter: and he was not with God, neither dare he appear
before him when he walked in the Garden: Then the presence of the Lord was a
terror unto Adam having sinned; Now the presence of Christ was the best of
comforts unto the thief being penitent.

Paradise it self was not Paradise unto Adam after he had offended: But when
we shall be set at liberty from the prison of the grave, and acquitted from
the sting of death, we shall be as incapable of sin, as of mortality; Oh
then let us ever aspire unto this most blessed estate. Although this good
thief did suddenly, as it were with holy violence, break into heaven (to show
that there is no end of the rich mercies of God) yet let not us presume upon
this example of grace, and so become examples of judgment unto others; Our
whole life is given us to this end, that by patient continuance in well-doing,
we should seek for glory.

The taste of Gods goodness in these outward benefits, should excite and
quicken our desire to obtain the full fruition of eternal happiness: If we
rest contented in the commodities of this life, we think the pleasures of
this life to be as acceptable as the joys above; As Lot thought the plain of
Jordan to be as the garden of the Lord: Genesis 13.10.
And then we cannot be delivered from the common destruction, without the
wonderful mercy of God. But let us seek a better country, even this
celestial Paradise: Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads
thereunto; and therefore our best diligence is required to find it; Yet, for
our encouragement, there are not Cherubims in the entrance to keep us from
approaching nigh unto it; but the Angel of the Covenant is the way whereby we
must walk, and which does guide us in the truth; And the door whereby we
must enter, and which does admit us that we may be saved: Yea, all the Angels
rejoice, when we enter into this path of life; and do keep us in this way,
ministering unto us the heirs of salvation, who (as some have thought) were
created to supply the defect of some of them, and to repair the breach that
their fall had made in this heavenly Paradise: There is not a flaming sword
turning every way, which may strike a terror into us, that we should not come
near; But the Sword of the Spirit is given unto us, by which we may withstand
and vanquish all enemies that shall encounter us in this our passage.

There be diverse who go to the Holy Land, which is now the spectacle of Gods
wrath; but let our journey be to the Jerusalem above, which is, and ever will
be the Seat of Mercy, and the Throne of Glory. While other men labor to plat
and describe the place where Paradise was upon earth, let us seek for this
place that Christ is gone to prepare for us, into which when he comes again he
will receive us, that where he is, we may be also.

FINIS.
Perlegi Librum hunc, cui titulus est [Adam in his Innocencie] atque illum
typis mandari permitto.

Martis penult. 1637. ex Aedibus Londin. SA. BAKER.


