THE UNREASONABLENESS of the separation.

Made apparent, by an examination of Mr. Iohnsons pretended reasons, published
an. 1608. Whereby he labors to justify his schism from the Church
Assemblies of England.

1. Tim 1.5.6.7. The end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart,
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. From which some having
swa^^ed, have turned a side unto vain Jangling, desiring to be teachers of
the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

AT DORT, Printed by George Waters. 1614.

TO THE WELL meaning Reader.
THink not evil, if thou meanest well, we intend not to insult over him that
is down, or to pursue a man that is flying of himself: but to lend him a hand
that knows not well which way to take. Mr. Johnson in deed, is rather to be
pitied, then much opposed: we need but stand still as lookers on: he falls
willingly on his own sword but that his fall may be a rising again, not
only to himself, but to others also, both armour-bearers and followers of his:
it was judged necessary, to guide them a little while their heads are dizzy,
and bring them fairly from of the bogge they have stood on.

It is not Mr. Johnson that is dealt with alone for change the name only, and
put in Mr. Ainsworth, or any such: themselves will not say but the reasons are
theirs, and the answer, to them, as well as to him. It may be that they having
less acquaintance with logical forms of dispute, will look for large
discourse, or heaped quotations out of scripture. But reason will tell them,
that many words do rather hide them untie the knot of a syllogism: and much
quoting may prove something, but answers not directly to any thing. Now the
wrighters meaning was, not to gather proofs, but to point at the weakness of
such as these men have gathered. Read therefore with understanding, and learn a
mean betwixt All and Nothing.

THE MAINE CONclusion of Mr. Johnsons Reasons, as it is propounded by himself,
is this, That it is not lawful to hear or have any spiritual communion wit
the present Ministry of the Church, Assemblies of England.
WHich he labors to prove. 1. By Reasons (as he fancieth) drawn from
Scripture, and other Testimonies.

2. By Arguments collected from the writeinges of them, whom he styles (in
disdain) forward Preachers. And this he performs as far as the remainders
of his logic skill will give him leave, in mood and figure. But the figure
for the most part is of his own shapeing, such as never came forth of any
logic Schools: yet feing the truth he opposes receaueth noe disadvantage
thereby. I can (for my own part) be content that his Syllogismes still retain
those forms and figures, that he has put upon them, and spare the labor of
Translating them into nue. And so without any further expense of words, I come
to the Examination of the first sort of Reasons.

THE FIRST SORT OF Reasons from the Scriptures and other Testimonies Examined.
The first Reason Examined.
All are bound in the worship of God to hear and communicate only with that
ministry which Christ has given, and set in his Church for that work. But
the present Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England, is not that which
Christ has given, and set in his Church for the work of his Ministry.
Therefore it is not lawful for any in the worship of God to hear or
communicate with the present Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England.
Answer.
Not to contend about the Proposition. I deny the Assumption: and affirm, That
the present Ministry of our Church Assemblies (how soever it may in some
particular parts of the execution, happily be defective in some places) is,
(for the substance thereof) that very same Ministry which Christ has set in
his Church for the work of his ministry whether it be the ministry of those
which he calls the forward Preachers, or of those which being qualified
according to the true intent of the law, do subscribe, and conform according
to the laws of the State.

Fr. Ihon.
The Ministry which Christ has given, and set in his Church, is, of Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers spoken of Ephesians. 4.11.12. But the
present Ministry of the Church of England is none of these spoken of Ephesians.
4.11.12. Therefore it is not the Ministry which Christ has given and set in
his Church.
Answer.
The present Ministry of the Church of England (1. of the Church Assemblies of
England) is the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers.

Fr. John.
The present Ministry of the Church of England is of Prelates, Priests and
Deacons. But nether Prelates, Priests, nor Deacons of that Church, are Pastors
or Teachers spoken of Ephesians. 4.11.12. Therefore it is none of those spoken of
Ephesians. 4.11.12.
Answer.
I deny both Preposition and Assumption. For 1. Though our Preletes, do
sometimes voluntarily and occasionnally perform the same work and service in
some of our Church Assemblies, which our ordinary Ministers do, yet their
Prelaticall or Episcopal office or Ministry is not the proper Ministry of
any of our Church Assemblies. But (in the intent of our laws) their propre
Ministry consists in overseeing the Ministers and Ministry of our Church
Assemblies.

2. Though sometimes our Ministers be called PRIESTS and DEACONS yet the
MINISTRY under those names assigned unto them, and which they exercise is not
the proper and essential Ministry of either Priests or Deacons; but of
Pastors and Teachers: So that they are only in aequivocation, and name, or
Metaphorically Priests and Deacons: But really Pastors and Teachers, and
therefore such Priests and Deacons, may be, and indeed and truth are such
Pastors and Teachers as are spoken of Ephesians. 4.11.12.

Fr. John.
The Preposition is manifest. 1. The Law of that Church admits not any other
Ministry, but that of their Prelacie Priesthood and Deaconry, received
amongst them selves or from the Papists. 2. Their Constitution is such as all
the Ministers of that Church must be Priests or Deacons, and these also
either in a Superior degree as the Prelates, Arch. Bishops Suffraganes etc. or
in an inferior, as Parsons, Vicars, Stipendaries, Chaplins.
Answer.
1. It is not necessary that the Ministry of a country or nation should be
always such as the law establishes or admits: The Ministry (at least in
some places) may be good though the law in general should admit and establishe
such a one as is bad: as on the contrary side, the ministry may at some
times, and in some cases be bad, though the laws admit, and establish never so
good; for the Governors of Churches and common wealths who have the
dispensation of laws, may in their Christian wisdom, and moderation permit
a ministry in sundry respects different from that which the laws require; yea
and our own Governors in fact have permitted the ministry of some, who never
received ordination, either from Papists or themselves. And he cannot be
ignorant but that some by connivencie are yet suffered in some points of their
ministry to swerue from some observances which the laws require. The Argument
therefore will not follow, from the quality of the ministry, except he can
prove that our Ministry is in all our Assemblies, in all respects aimswerable
to our laws.

2. The Preesthood which the law admits is not called Sacerdotius but
Presbyteratus, and the Priests are not called Sacerdotes or sacrificers but
Presbyters, (as sufficiently appears by our orders in Latin.) Therefore the
Law does not intend any true and proper Priesthood but only boroweth the name
to express an office of another kind.

3. To be Persons, Vicars, Stipendaries, Chaplins, etc. is not to have a
diverse kind of Priesthood or deaconry, or Ministry (as he foolishly
conceiteth:) only variety of Tytles is given to the same kind of Ministry,
in diverse persons, in respect only of a diverse kind of maintenance or
dependence, for Parsons are such as have all tithes in kind; Vicars such as
have only the smaller Tyths, the other being impropriated by the Magistrate for
other purposes; Stipendaries are such as are maintained by the voluntary
Contribution of their Churches or by some such like means. Chaplins are such
as depend upon great men; The Ministry of all which (If they duly execute the
same) is one and the same, even that (and noe other for substance) which is
proper to true Pastors and Teachers.

Fr. John.
The Assumption is proved by their 7. Arguments following. The. 1 Arg.
The Pastors and Teachers spoken of Ephesians. 4.11. have their offices, callings,
administration and mainetenaunce ordained by Christ in his Testamente, Ephesians.
4.8.11.12. and Romans 12.7.8. Act. 14.23. and 20.17.28. Heb. 5.4. Col. 4.17, 1.
These. 5, 12.13.14, 1. Pet. 5.1.2.3. Reu. 2. and 3. and 22.18, 1. Cor. 14.1. and
5.4. and 9.14. and 11.23. and 12.28. Gal. 6.6. But the Prelates, Priests and
Deacons of the Church of England, have not their offices, Callings,
Ministration and Maintenance ordained by Christ in his Testament. Ergo. They
are not Pastors and Teachers spoken of Ephesians. 4.11. The Assumption appears by
their Constitution and practice, in as much as their offices of Prelacie,
Priesthood, and Deaconry, their calling, and entrance, according to their
Pontifical, Their choice of their people, who stand themselves under
Antichrist, and vnseperated from the world, and are noe true visible Churches
of Christ. Their Ministration by their own, and other Popish Canons, Arts
Injunctions, and book of Common prayer, their maintenance by Tyths, Lordships
etc. were never ordained by Christ for his Ministry, but diriued from
Antichrist and his Apostasye, as has been proved by us in diverse treatises.
Answer.
1. The Proposition is not true, except he understand by offices, Callings,
and administration, the Substantial, or Essential parts thereof. Otherwise
those very Pastors and Teachers there spoken of, may have diverse accessory parts
of their offices callings and administration not ordained by Christ in the new
Testament. Nether is it true, If by maintenance he mean any special kind of
maintenance. It is to be granted in general. That Ministers, are to have
sufficient maintenance, and the texts a ledged for that proves noe more, and
therefore that which they prove, is nothing to the purpose; As little to the
purpose are the other Texts, for it will not follow from any force in them, but
that there may be sundry accidents cleaving as parts to the offices, calling,
and maintenance of true Pastors, and Teachers, which Christ never ordained.

2. Concerning the Assumption. 1. whether Prelates have their office, calling
etc. ordained by Christ is besides the present question. Except M. Johnson can
prove that they are ordinary Ministers of our Church Assemblies; which I am
sure he cannot. 2 So many of our Ministers (who in the book of ordination
are called Priests and Deacons) as in all points concerning the substance of
their Ministry, are qualified according to the intent of the laws, have their
offices, callings, administration and maintenance for the substance thereof,
ordained by Christ: And yet I deny not, but there may be some accidental
defects, or Superfluityes in and a bout them all; yet such as do or cannot be
proved to destroy the nature and substance of any of them.

3. All that is brought to prove the Assumption is falce, and as much if not
more controuersal then the Assumption it self. For 1. he can never prove,
that either the practis of all our Ministers, is in all things according to
that Constitution, or their constitution according to their practis, or either
of them answerable to the strict terms of the law in all points. 2. He can
never prove, that either in their constitution, or practis, or by the law they
are in proper speech, either Priests or Deacons; only he presumes them to be
such, because through some liberty of speech used in the laws, they are
termed such. Though it should be granted that our people stand under, some
kind of observances, and offices which in their own nature, and first
original, are in some kind Antichristian; Yet they are of such a nature, that
diverse worthy Martyrs of Jesus Christ, that have with stood Antichrist unto
blood, have stood under as much as we. And therefore such a manner of standing
under Antichrist, cannot be said to overthrowe though it may somewhat stain the
Ministry of Christ. But howsoever, he herein shamefully begs the question,
in the naked affirming, without any prooffe, That all in this kingdom are
under Antichrist.

4. Though (for avoiding further controversy) that should be granted him,
that some parts of our ministratio^ by the Canons, etc. was never ordained by
Christ. Yet at the least the maine principal, and Essential parts thereof
performed according to the Canons and book a foresaid, are ordained by Christ;
yea by M. Johnson himself. Nether has he proved or ever can prove, That that
part of our ministration, by our Canons, and book a foresaid, which Christ
has not ordained (If any such be) is of that nature and quality, that it
necessaryly destroys or makes a nullity of the other parts of their
Ministry, which use them.

5. Though Tithes and Lordshippes and manners in perticulers, be not ordained
by Christ for the maintenance of Ministers, yet they are as much ordained as
any other particular, or special kind of maintenance, It is the will of
Christ that the Ministers of the Gospel should live of the Gospel. i. should
be manietanied for their Ministry sake by them to whom they preach the
Gospel. But in what particular manner that maintaynaunce should be raised,
he has noe where defined and therefore left it to the discretion of Christian
Magistrates or Churches.

6. Whereas for the proofs of these maine points, he refers us to the
general Tytles of certain Treatises formerly published, he might as well
send us (as they say) to seek a needle in a bottle of hay, and why does he
not in all other points of this book, as well as in the is, send us to the
said Treatises? seeing he says nothing throughout this in effect, that he
has not all ready said in some one or other of his former books.

Fr. Ioh. page 8.
The Ministry of Pastors and Teachers spoken of Ephesians. 4.11. The 2. Arg.
is the ordinary and perpetual Ministry given by Christ to his Church, and
such as the Princes of the Earth nether may nor ever shall be able to
abolishe, seeing Christ has appointed it to continue to the end of the world.
But the Prelacie Preesthood, and Deaconrye of the Church of England is not the
ordinarije and perpetual Ministry given by Christ to his Church, but such as
the Princes of the Earth may and ought to abolish out of their Dominions. Rev.
17, 16 1. Tim. 2.2. Romans 13, 4. with 1. Kin. 23.3. deu. 12.2. Psa. 72.1.
Therefore the Preesthood Prelacie and deaconrye of the Church of England is not
the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers spoken of Ephesians. 4.11.
Answer.
Idenye the Assumption. Understanding by Prelacie Preesthood and deaconrye, The
ordinary Ministry of our Church Assemblies against which he propounds to
himself to Dispute; And answer. That it is the ordinary and perpetual
Ministry, given by Christ to his Church, and such as the Princes of the Earth
are bound by Gods Laws to maintain and protect by their Authority; And if
their be any corruption in and about the same, which they ought to abolish
that yet they are accidentiall and personal; and not so Essential as that
they do Distroy the Ministry.

The places of Scripture anexed to the Assumptio^ for the proof thereof, are
all abused and profaned for not on of them does any way so much as colourablye
prove either of the Clauses in the Assumption, but only they prove in general,
That the Idolatry and Idolatrious Ministry of Antechrist is to be abolished:
So that the man in his symplicitie, takes it as granted; That our Ministerye
is such an Idolatrious Ministry; which is the maine matter in Controversy, and
in effect the general question of his whole book.

Fr. John. page: 9.
The Office of Pastors and Teachers ordained by Christ in his Testament, The.
3. Arg.
are such as did or could stand, with the offices of the Apostels, Prophets
and Evangelists. But the offices of the Prelates, Priests or deacons of the
Church of England, are not such as did, or could stand, with or under the
offices of Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists: which if any deny, let him show
the Countrary, by the Scriptures; Light has no fellowship with darkness; nor
Christ with Antichrist. And suppose the Apostles were a live in their Persons,
and were in England, It were worth the knowing, whether they and the ordinances
given by them, should give place to the Prelates, and their Canons, and whether
they should be suffered to preach, etc. without subscribing, and conforming.
Their Canons urge all upon pain of Excommunication ipso facto. Therefore they
are not the Pastors, and Teachers ordained by Christ in his nue Testament.
Answer.
1. What a shameless man is this to affirm, That our Ministry nether did nor
could stand with the offices of the Apostles etc. and for proof thereof bid us,
If we deny it show the contrary by Scriptures. Does not the burden of proving
by the very law of Common Reason ly upon the accuser? If I should in like
manner reproach his Ministry, and say it is a Ministry that stands upon
Sorcery, witch croft and Coniuration and for proof thereof bid him, If he deny
it show the countrary by Scripture, were I not worthy at least to be laughed
out of the Schools. This is a sufficient justification of our Ministry; that
such Malitions adversaries thereof, who would seem so expert in the
Scriptures; are no better able by Scripture to prove their unchristian
accusation.

2. It is true, that light has noe followship with darkness, nor Christ with
Antichrist. Yet there is no light in men in this life, but it is mingled with
some darkness; and the best Christians that are, or ever have been since the
Apostles times, may be infected with some points of Antichristianisme. Many of
the late Martyrs since the revealing of Antichrist, were worthy lights, and
renoumed Christians, and yet the light of many of them, was mingled with more
darkness, and their Christianity with more Antichristianisme, then can be
found in our Ministry.

3. Our Bishops have as good reason, to make the like supposition against him,
and as much worthy the inquiry that were, if the Apostles, etc. were a live
now in their own Persons where he lives, and should profess the Church
Assemblies in England to be true Churches, and their Ministry in general to
be a lawful Ministry, and their worship for substance to be a true worship,
whether M. Johnson and his Church would suffer them to be so much as private
members, of their Society, much more to preach, etc.

4. Though our Bishops should herein be so impious as to advance in such a
manner, their own Authority, and ordinances above the Apostles. Yet what is
that to prove that the Preesthoode and Deaconry of the Ministers of our Church
Assemblies, (who many of them in these points are mere patients, and esteem
of these things as burdens) cannot stand with the offices of Apostles, etc.
does M. Johnson think that none of our Ministers in England would suffer the
Apostles to preach in their Cures, without wearing a Surplice, If they might
have their own wills, or should this any whit derogate from their Ministry,
that the Bishops therein would not suffer them to have their will.

5. It is besides the present question, and a needless thing to spend time in
justifying the Canons herein: If the Bishops therein have gonne too far, it may
seem to be the fault of the Parsons, rather then of the Prelacie it self,
and therefore to make and urge such Canons, and Traditions as are a fore said
does not prove, but that for all that, the Prelacie and in of it self, might
stand well enough with the offices of the Apostles etc. for those offices may
of themselves, (If their be noe other impediment) stand well one with an
other, which in the actions thereof do not (but by accident only) one
overthrowe or oppugn the other.

Fr. John. page 9.10.
The offices of true Pastors, The 4. Arg.
and Teachers are by the ordinance of Christ set in the Church, and imployd in
the Ministry of the word, Sacraments and Church Government, so as they may
not, with their Ecclesiastical functions receive Cyvill offices, and callings,
nor take upon them princely Titles and dignities. Ephesians. 4.11, 1. Pet. 5.1. Romans
12.2.4. Luke 12.14. and 22.25. 1. Cor. 12.5.8. 1. Tim. 4.13.15.16. 2. Tim. 2.4.
But the officies of Prelates, Priests, and Deacons of the Church of England,
are not so, but by their own Constitution we set in the Church, and imployd
in the Ministry so as they may also receive Cyvill offices and Callings, as
to be Justices of Peace, etc. Therefore they are not true Pastors and Teachers.
Answer.
There are 4. Terms in this Syllogism, The gross Sophisterye whereof may
appear by the Explanation thereof in others words.

True Pastors and Teachers may not (viz. by Gods law) take upon them Cyvill
offices. The Ministers of England may (viz. by Man's law) take upon them Cyvill
offices. Therefore they are not true Pastors and Teachers.
This is the effect of his Argument, and who is so blind, but he may see the
fallacy thereof. And it is as though we should reason in the like manner
against their own Ministry, thus,

True Pastors and Teachers may not be Drunckards, Anabaptists, Familists. The
Ministers of the Separation at Amsterdam may be Drunckards, Anabaptists,
Familists. Therefore they are not true Pastors and Teachers.
This Assumption is as true as the former, for the same kind of Authority
that permits our Ministers to be Cyvill Magistrates, does permit them to be
Drunckards etc. The government under which they live, permits the one to
more, then our state does the other.

But I answer more particulerly.

1. That by the same law, that our Ministers may take upon them Cyvill
Magistracy; Any true Pastors, and Teachers, may take upon them, the same
Authority, and by the same law that true Pastors and Teachers, may not take
Cyvill Authority upon them our Ministers may not take the same upon them.

2. All our Ministers may not (noe by the laws of our State) take upon them
Cyvill Authority; But such only as are called specially thereto, by the favors,
and grace of the Cyvill Magistrate, not as they are Prelates, Priests or
Deacons, or by virtue of those functions; but in respect of other
qualifications. Nether are the forced by any law to adjoyne any such Authority
to their Ministry, but permitted only. But what if by the laws of men,
Ministers might be Murderers, Adulterers, Theeus, etc. should these laws
change the nature of their Ministry? what? of their Ministry that deny unto
themselves that license; would it not rather the more justify their Ministry;
when in Conscience of Gods law, they shall for bear that which flesh, and
blood and human laws would permit unto them.

3. Suppose not only that it is unlawful for any true Pastors, and Teachers,
to be Cyvill Magistrates, but that also by our laws, all our Ministers, were
forced thereunto, and that by virtue of their Ministry, will it thence follow,
that for this cause, they are not true Pastors and Teachers; May not true
Pastors and Teachers, in their weacknesse, ignorance, and infirmities (the laws
of the State requiring the same) admit of some kind of office or Authority,
for bidden them; but they must needs there upon cease to be true Pastors, and
Teachers? does the admitting of every unlawful thing change the nature of the
Ministry, and make it either noe Ministry, or a Ministry of an other kind.

Fr. John.
The Ministry of Christian Pastors, and Teachers, The. 5. Arg.
stands by the word, and ordinance of Christ, so as all Churches under
Heaven, are bound to receive, and submit thereunto. But the Prelacie, Preesthood
and Deaconry of the Ghurch of England staundeth only by the Authority and Law
of man, so as other Churches else where, nether are nor need to be subjecte
thereunto; which even themselves of all sorts have acknowledged; for which see
Whitgifts defense in the Preface. The Answer to the Abstraucte page 58. The
Admonition to the Parliament; The defense of the Godly Ministers the
demonstration. Therefore it is not the Ministry of Christian Pastors and
Teachers.
Answer.
I deny the Assumption. The Ministry of our Church Assemblies of England,
whether of Prelates, Priests or Deacons, or by what other names soever they be
called, for the substance thereof, stands by the word, and ordinance of
Christ, and not only by the Authority and law of man: And all other true
Churches, are and ought to be subject, to the same kind of Ministry, and to
noe other, that shall in any Essential point of Ministry differ from ours.

If any Particular Parsons amongst us, have been so unadvised to grant the
Assumption, let them answer for themselves; He has noe more reason to bind
us to their opinions, then we to bind him unto whatsoever his predecessors
Brown, Barrowe, and Greenwood have held before him. Concerning some of the
particulers, Doctor Whitgifts words are these, The substance, and nature of
Government must indeed by taken out of the word of God, and consists in these
parts. That the word be truly taught, the Sacraments rightly administered,
virtue furthered, vice repressed, and the Church kept in quietness and order:
The offices of the Church, whereby this Government is wrought be not namely, and
particulerly expressed in the Scripture, but in some points left to the
discretion, and liberty of the Church, to be disposed according to the State
of times, Places, and persons. The Author of the Answer to the Abstract in the
place aledged says, That it cannot be proved that any set and exact
particular form of discipline is recomended unto us in the word of God. Now
are either of these to affirm, That the Ministry of our Church Assemblies
staundeth only by the laws and Authority of Man? Has M. Johnson any shame
left in his face that thus shamefully abuses the names of learned, and
reverent men, so directly contrary to their words and meaning. Is there not
cause to suspect that the other Authors, are in like manner abused, and that
for the better hideing of his fraud, he forbeareth to quote any particular
places; Being therefore convinced of depravation, in the places particularly
quoted, we may presume, that if the other places had been more pertinent, he
would have given us some particular directions also for the finding of them;
And the rather, for that he cannot be ignorant, that those whom specially he
fights against in these Arguments, do rely upon the judgment of the
Authors following, more then of the former.

Fr. John.
The offices of Pastors, The 6. Arg.
and Teachers, which Christ has appointed, are such as they which have them
must be members of a true visible Church, and bound to one particular
Congregation for the Ministry and Government thereof. But the Offices of the
Prelates, Priests, and Deacons of the Church of England, are such as they which
have them, need not be, neither in their State can be members of a true
visible Church, but of a falls, neither are bound to one particular Congregation
for the Ministry and Government thereof, but the Prelates are our whoele
Provinces, and Diocesses and other inferior Priests, may have in that State
plurality of benefices and Ecclesiall Cures etc. which none can deny. Therefore
they are not the Pastors and Teachers that Christ has appointed.
Answer.
Though some parts of the Proposition be disputable; Yet because other besides
the Separation do hold the whole for truth. I will leave it in medio.

The Assumption is falce; especially if it be understood (as it ought to be)
of the offices of such Prelates, Priests, and Deacons as are Ministers of our
Church Assemblies. For most of those which have such offices are, and are bound
to be members of true visible Churches; And cannot in their Estate (they being
in all points answerable to the laws) be members of a falce Church; They are
all (such excepted as have special dispensations) bound to one particular
Congregation, and may not by law, have more Cures then one; but admitting of a
second, the first is void; Yea the Prelates themselves; though in regard of
their Prelaticall office, they are Governors of whole Provinces, and diocesses,
yet it is possible for them (not withstanding) to be members (in their Estate)
of a true visible Church, and be bound (as are the Prelates of Scotland) to one
particular congregation for the special Ministry and Government thereof. And
though the other Ministers may have in that estate plurality of benefices, and
Cures, yet it does not follow, that therefore they are such, as in their estate
cannot be members of a true visible Church; except they have the^ indeed, yea
and though they should be pluralists indeed, yet (for ought he has proved to
the contrary) they may be members of true visible Churches, and may each be
bound to one particular Congregation, for the Ministry and Government thereof.

But what man, except he were half frantic, would reason, thus, Our Ministers
may be Pluralists therefore they neither are nor can be true Pastors and
Teachers; Is not this rather one of the honors then blemishes of our Ministers;
That they may be pluralists, and yet are not. If by our laws their own
Assemblies were established If by the same laws their Pastors and Teachers,
might be non residents or pluralists, or worse, would they think hemselus ever
the worse for this? would they not rather think themselus the better that they
are not so bad, as by man's law they might be.

Fr. John.
The Offices Condition and Government of Pastors and Teachers, The 7. Arg.
are such as noe way impair the Authority and Supremacy of the Syvill
Magistrate. But the offices, Condition and Government of Prelates, Priests and
Deacons, are such as do many ways impair the Authority Supremacy and
dignity of Kings, and all other Magistrates both in Civil, and Ecclesiastical
Causes. For the Prelates will have their presence, voice, and Authority, to be
at Parlaments, for enacting of laws and Statuts for the Common wealth. They
are Rulers of whole Provinces, and diocesses in the Ecclesiastical causes
thereof. In Civil State, and dignity, some of them are above all, and all of
them, above some of the Nobles, Justices, and other Magistrates of the Land.
Themselves their Courts and officers handle and determine sundry Civil Causes,
and affairs, appertaining to the Magistracy; They inflict Civil Mults, and
punishments; In their forbidden times they give license to Mary. The beneficed
Priests swear Canonical obeidience to the Prelates. All the Priests and
Deacons are exempt from the Magistrates Jurisdiction in diverse things
appertaining unto them, and answerable only or chiefly to the Prelates and
their officers. Therefore they are not the only Pastors and Teachers spoken of
Ephesians. 4.11.
Answer.
The Assumption is falce, nether do the instances prove the same. 1. The
Prelates claim their voices in Parliament not as divine ordinances appartaining
to their Prelateship, but as an honor annexed to the same by the Civil
Magistrate.

2. Their Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical over Provinces, etc. is either
such as the Civil Magistrate himself may execute, and administer in his own
person if he please; or such as is not for them, as they are Magistrates, to
execute. The first sort they administer only, by virtue of the Magistrates own
Commission, and therein they cannot impair either his dignity, or Supremacy
much less in the other part of their Authority, which belongs not to the
Magistrates themselves to execute especially when they use it not nether,
without their consent, license, and approbation.

3. That all are above some, and some above all of the Nobles, and Justices,
etc. is a free and voluntary honor granted unto them by the Civil
Magistrate, and held in tenure from him, and not claimed (as I think) as
belonging to their Episcopal function, by divine right.

4. Their Courts determine noe other Civil causes, then the Civil Magistrate,
and his laws do permit, or if they do the falt is in the Parsons, and not in
the Prelatship; further they inflict Civil punishments, give lycences, exact
Oaths, etc. by Authority from the Magistrate whose subsistutes therein they are.
And therefore the Prelates neither in these, nor in any of the former instances
can be said to impair the dignity, Authority, or Supremacy of the Civil
Magistrate, when herein they do all things, in and by the protection of his
Authority, much less can other inferior Ministers who have noe dealing in the
aforesaid matters. Lastly if all our Ministers be exempt from the Magistrates
Jurisdiction, in some things appertaining unto them (but wherein I know not)
this very exemptio^ it self, is an act of the Magistrates Jurisdiction and
depends, only upon his pleasure! and how can it the^, any ways impair the
same. and hitherto he has dealt by Syllogismes such as they are, now for a
conclusion of this first Argument, he shoots at rouers as follows.

Fr. John.
To this end diverse other reasons might be aledged, for example If they say
that Arch Bishops have the Pastors, then they have but two. If Lord Bishops,
then but 26. and what office then have the Arch Bishops amongst them. If the
other Priests, then what office have the Arch Bishops: and Bishops seeing God
has or dayned noe higher ordinary Ecclesiastical office, as some of
them-selus acknowledge. If they say the deacons have the Pastors office, the
same absurdity follows as in the former besides that the works of the deacons
office are opposed to the work of the Ministry. Act. 6.2. with. Ephesians. 4.11.
Romans 12.8. If they should say they have the Teachers office, it would be known,
which of their officiers have it amongst them, and to whom they are adjoined
for the work of Ministry, as Teachers are to Pastors, and what office the
rest have whom the account not to have the Teachers office and whether the
Teacher spoken of Ephesians. 4.11. must first be deacons; and then Priests and
permit obeydeince to the Prelates; and that also is to their ordinaires, and be
sylenced and deposed at thtir pleasure.
Answer.
Here he thinks he has knitt such Guardian knotts as cannot be untied,
without a sword or a bill; but the Simplicity of the man here in is to be
laughed at, for 1. though some should say, that either our Arch Bishops: or
Bishops have the Pastors office, yet there in they do not exclude the other
Ministers, from that which is the substance, and effect of that office, though
they should from the name; No nor from the name neither, but should therein
only make degres of pastors, viz. of Arch Bishops. over Bishops and their
Diocesses of Bishops over Ministers and their Churches, and of Ministers over
their own Congregations; Leaving unto them (not with standing the Superiority
of the other Pastors) that maine and Substantial office of the Pastor which is
enough to define and denominate a Pastor. And therefore they may make such
Pastors, as are over whole Provinces but two, and such as are over whole
diocesses but, 26. and yet hold also without any absurdity, that their are
also as many Pastors besyds, as there are Ministers of a particular
Congregation. And though it should be granted that herein they were deceived
in making Provincial and diocesme Pastors; yet the sorteing of improper
Pastors; with true or the subiecting of true Pastors unto other sorts of
Pastors, does not necessarily make the true Pastors falls, so long as under
them they perform, the name, and substantial duties of true Pastors; which
all the Ministers of our Church Assemblies do, or by the laws ought to do.

2. If any hold that the Ministers of particular Congregations, only are
Pastors, the^ they may without any absurdity hold that they Arch Bishops, and
Bishops, are general Commisioners under the King to see that the Pastors do
their duties, and in that regard, may also Metaphorically, and in another sense
be called Pastors, as Princes themselves are so called, in good and approved
Authors; and what absurdity can follow upon this? Or what if they which hold
the Ministers of particular Congregations to be Pastors, could not tell what
to make of the office of Arch Bishops and Bishops, what is that to the purpose?
are not our Ministers, and Teachers therefore Pastors, because they which shall
hold them to be so, cannot tell what to make of the Calling of Arch Bishops
and Bishops?

3. Though this should be yielded unto him that all Pastors are equal, and
that the Pastors of particular Congregations, are the highest ordinary
Ecclesiastical officers; yet should this make nothing to the confirming of his
conceit, That our Ministers are not therefore true Pastors and Teachers, because
then Arch Bishops and Bishops should be excluded; for this does not exclude
them from being Commissioners, and Visitors in causes ecclesiastical under the
King over the Pastors, and Churches, of such and such Provinces and Diocesses,
which is to give the^ their principal honor, and due. 4. Concerning the
Teachers office (not to contend needlessly, with him about the nature and
quality thereof but to suppose a Teacher in that sense which he means) This
may reasonably be held; That some of our Ministers, (whether Priests or
Deacons so called, or whether Parsons, Vicars, Curats or Stipendaries) are
Pastors and some Teachers, That so many of them as have and use the gift, not
only of doctrine and instruction, but of Exhortation, are Pastors, That those
which wanting the power of Exhortation, and yet have and use the gift of
instruction and doctrine are such Teachers, as he means. And therefore herein
also if it should be yealded unto him, That it were fit that every
Congregation should have both these offices; and that the Teacher should be the
Pastors Assistant, yet it does not follow, but that in want of sufficient men,
for both these offices in every Congregation, some may enjoy one, and some an
other. For if the Churches of their own way, and constitution, may be without
both Pastors and Teachers, and that for a long time, till men may be chosen
unto that office? Why may not a Church much more in the like necessity retain
a Pastor without a Teacher, or a Teacher without a Pastor, Can he prove by any
color out of Gods word, That one cannot be called unto, or execute the office
of a Pastor until he have a Teacher to assist him, or that he cannot execute
the office of a Doctor, except he do it as an actual assistant of some
Pastor? If not, then is this a most frivolous demand, when he asks to whom
our Teachers are adioynd for the work of their Ministry: nether do the
places he quoteth viz. Ephesians. 4.11. Ro^. 12.7. prove any such matter. 5. As idle
and impertinent is that demand which follows whether the Teachers spoken of
Ephesians. 4.11. must first be Deacons, and then Priests, and promise obeidience to
Prelates, and be silenced and deposed at their pleasures. For what if noe such
matters be required of Teachers by Paul, either in that or any other place,
does it thereupon follow, that their submission to such things, makes them noe
Teachers! may not Magistrates, and others also require, some things of Teachers,
not required by the Apostles, but they must needs thereupon, become no Teachers?
But what repugnauncie is their in these matters, to the office of a Teacher? To
be a Deacon in the intent of our laws what is it, but (as himself out of our
book of ordination has in effect published it) To read the Seriptures, Page
31.
and to pray in the Church to Catechize the Io^ger sort, to baptize and to
preach if the Bishop shall think him sit. what is it to be a Priest, or
Presbyter in our law? has not himself also taught us? viz. Page 32.
To have authority to Preach the word, and to Minister the holy Sacraments in
the Congregation, where he shall be appointed, what obeidience do they (promise
to Prelates in the intent of the law? but only in things that they shall judge
honest, and lawful, and not repugnaunt to the word of God; what is it to be
sylenced and deposed, but to forbear to Minister publiquly (as themselves do
also forbear) upon the Magistrates pleasure: for the Bishops pleasure so far
as they proceed according to the laws, is the Magistrates pleasure, otherwise
it is but a personal fault. And wherein Imarvaile do any of these acts, so
oppugn the office of a Teacher, that they cannot stand together! where does
Paul forbid any of these acts unto the Teacher? or if he should, does every
Act forbidden to a Teacher, make him noe Teahcer?

Fr. John. page 14.
Whereas some allege that the people were to hear the Scribs and Pharesees
sitting in Moses Chair it is to be noted, that they were Leuits and Priests
and therefore had the true offices appointed by Moses. This therefore is nothing
for a falls Ministry, such as theirs is proved to be. further to be a
Pharefye was not to have a new kind of Ministry, but to be of a special
Sect amongst the Jews that pretended more strict observances of the law, and
might be of any Tribe. Lastly though the were corrupt, yet did the hold, that
very true Minister must be from heaven: and this have the forward Preachers
acknowledged, as T. C. page 83. Answer.
Here absurdly, and Childishly he goes about to answer such an objection, as
nobody ever made against any thing contained in the former Argument. This
Argument only is used in general to show, that some corruptions in Ministers
and Churches are not of that nature, that men should therefore separate from all
Spiritual Communion with them, And where he says, that this is nothing for
any falls Ministry never ordained of the Lord, such as ours is proved to be:
Noe man ever brought it to prove any such matter; But only to prove that such
corruptions as are in our Ministry, ought noe more to hinder, communion with
our Ministers, then the corruptions in the Ministry of the Scribes and
Pharesees, did hinder the communion, with their Ministry, and that the
corruptions in our Ministry do noe more argue our Ministers to be falls
Ministers, then their corruptions, did argue them to be falls Ministers: Nether
has he brought any Argument to prove our Ministers falls Ministers, but either
such corruptions, as the Scribes and Pharesees were guilty of, in as high if
not a higher degree, or in respect of their names, in that they are called
Priests and Deacons; So that if the Scribes and Pharesees were true Ministers,
not with standing their names, and other corruptions, our Ministers cannot be
falls, in regard of the like names and corruptions: furthermore if to be
expounders of the Law, be sufficient to argue their Ministry to be a true
Ministry, nothwithstanding their names of Scribes and Pharesees, with other
vile and gross corruptions; why may not the Preaching of the word, and
administration of the Sacraments be sufficient to argue, our Ministers to be
true Pastors, and Teachers, notwithstanding that in the mouth of the law, they
are sometimes called Priests and Deacons. For otherwise in the mouths of men;
even of the Bishops themselves they are not so called; except sometimes by
Metaphorical allusions to the Leviticall Preesthood; But they are usually so
called only by profane Atheists, or ignorant people, with whom in this point,
the Separation goes hand in hand.

2. To be a Pharesie was not only (as he minceth the matter) to be of a
special Sect amongst the Jews, that pretended more strict obseruances of the
law then others. But also (which as it is to be feared with a fraudulent mind
he concealeth) to join mainy human Traditions, and will-worships to the
worship and service of God (whereby they are said by Christ himself, in vain
to worship God, and to make the commandments of God of none effect;) making
more account of; and urging with more severity the said Traditions, then Gods
own laws; And in like manner, we affirm, That to be a Priest and Deacon, in
the intent of our law (whatsoever the words may ring to the contrary in some
men's ears) is (at the worst) to be such a kind of pastor and Teacher, as is
content, over and besides those duties of the Ministry which Christ requires of
them to yeald conformity also to human Traditions, of noe worse nature and
quality in themselves, then those which the Pharesies used in or about Gods
service, wherein to suppose that they sin, yet cannot this their sin be so
repugnant to the Ministry of Christ as that of the Scribes and Pharesies,
which they are forced to acknowledge to be a true Ministry, In that they were
the vrgers of Traditions, whereas our Ministers (for the most part) only yeald
unto them, either in obeidience and love; or fear of the Magistrate that
commaundes them. Lastly whereas he argues them true Ministers by this, that
though they were very corrupt, yet the did still hold that every Ministry
must be from Heaven, and not of men. It deserves rather to be laughed at,
then answered. For may not yea do the falsest Ministry that are or ever have
been, hold so much, at least in such a sense and meaning as the Pharesies
might hold it. And can he name any amongst us, that houlds not as much?

THE SECOND REASON. EXAMINED.
Fr. Ihon.
NOne may hear or have any Spiritually communion with the Ministry of
Antichrists Apostasy. Such is the Ministry of the Church Assemblies of
England.
Ergo,
None may hear have any Spiritual communion with the same.

Answer.
I grant the Proposition; taking the words in the plain and common sense viz.
understanding by the Ministry of Antichrists Apostacy. The administration and
dispensation of the things of Antichrist; otherwise to communicate spiritually
with any Ministers what soever only in the holy things of Christ, is not to
communicate with the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy, no though the Ministers
be Ministers thereof. Nether do the 5. Reasons following whereby he needlessly
proves his preposition, prove it unlawful to hear or have any spiritual
communion with the Ministers of Antichrist, then, when they Minister the things
of Christ.

For the proof of the Assumption he makes a terrible muster if no less then
7. Arguments. But let us pull up our Spirets, and see what is in them, one by
one.

Fr. John.
The Ministry of Deacons and Priests ordained by the Prelates thereunto is the
Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. The 1. Arg.
The Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England, is such a Ministry.
Ergo,
It is of Antichrists Apostasy.

Answer.
He brought this very Argument to prove the first Reason and now he brings it
again for a proof of his second Reason: And is not this a learned kind of
reasoning? when he will make a show of multitudes of Reasons against us, and
yet all of them come to one issue and lie upon one ground, and depend upon one
proof; so that the overthrowe of one, is the overthrowe of all: But his
childish vanity herein we shall better perceive in that which follows.

Both the Proposition and Assumption are falls; For 1. It is not necessary, that
the Ministry of Priests, and Deacons, though ordained by Antichrist himself,
should be the Ministry of his Apostasy; But not withstanding his ordination,
their Ministry may be the Ministry of Jesus Christ; As was the Ministry of
Luther, Husse, Wickliffe and others.

2. The Ministry of such manner of Priests and Deacons, as the Prelates
ordain, (or by the laws ought to ordain) is the true Ministry of Jesus
Christ, and for the substance thereof, directly contrary to the Ministry of
Antichrists Apostasy.

3. The Ministry of our Church Assemblies, is not (as I have showed before)
the Ministry of Priests and Deacons properly so taken, but of Pastors and
Teachers.

The Proposition he proves as follows by two Arguments.

Fr. John.
The Ministry of Deacons and Priests which accounts it self to be Christ's,
and yet was not set by Christ in his Church, for the work of his Ministry, is
the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. Such is the Ministry of Deacons and
Priests, ordained by the Prelates thereunto.
Ergo,
It is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy.

Answer.
This Argument is it which he brings for the first Reason of all; and here
he brings it to prove that which before was brought to prove it. For he
proves, That our Ministry is not set by Christ in his Church, by this because
it is the Ministry of Priests and Deacons, and so by consequent of Antichrists
Apostasy. Here he proves, That the Ministry of Priests and Deacons is the
Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy, Because it is a Ministry, that was not set
by Christ in his Church; This does he most grossly run round in a circle, as
if I should prove that his Ministry is unlawful, because he is a
Schismatic, and that he is a Schismatic, because his Ministry is unlawful.
The 2. Reason whereby he proves his Proposition follows.

Fr. John.
2. If the Prelates of the Church of England have such offices, and Government
as be special parts of Antichrists Apostasy, then the Ministry ordained by
them thereunto must needs be the Ministry of that Apostasy. But the Prelates
of the Church of England have such offices and government, as be special parts
of Antichrists Apostasy. Therefore the Ministry ordained by them is the
Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. The consequent is manifest, because the
fruit must needs be as the tree is. Mat. 7.16. and who can bring a clean thing
out of filthiness. Job 14.4. The Assumption is proved. 1. Whosoever (besides
Christ) have such offices and Government, whereby the claim to be spiritual
Lords, the have the offices, and Government which are special parts of
Antichrists Apostasy, and are indeed very Antichrists themselves. But such are
the Prelates of the Church of England. Therefore the have such offices and
Gouerments, as are special purts of Antichrists Apostasy. The Proposition is
proved by those places of Scripture which teach that there is but one
spiritual Lord, the Lord Jesus. The Assumption is proved by the laws, and
Statutes of the land, wherein they are called Lords Spiritual, and in their
Canons they take upon them to prescribe their own ordinances to the Ghurch
for the worship of God, and bind the spiret and couscience to the
acknowledgement, and approbation thereof, and to give the holy Ghost. 2. The
offices and Government of such Bishops, as are over Diocesan, and Provincial
Churches, and exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over all the Ministers and
people therein, are special parts of Antichrists Apostasy. But such are the
Prelates of the Church of England.
Ergo,
They have such offices and government as be specially parts of Antichrists
Apostasy.

Answer.
1. I deny the co^sequent of the Proposition of the 1. Sillogisme. The officers
and governors of Antichrists Apostasy, may and have ordained some things that
are Christian, Nether does the saying of Christ or Job prove the consequent;
for though it should be granted unto him, that the governors of Antichrists
Apostasy have ordained this Ministry; yet does it not follow that it is
therefore a propre and mere fruit of Antichrist, but may be an dentall effect,
as are many other things which he ordains agreeable to Christ's own
ordinances, so that he must prove that our Ministry ordained by the Pope or
Bishops, does as properly flow from the nature of their office and government,
as figs from a fig tree, or grapes from a vine, or filthy water from a foul
fountain; The contrary whereof is in this case most evident. For leave the bare
names and tytles, and consider our Ministry in all the essential parts, and
offices thereof, and it is a possible, either for a Presbythery, or for any
particular Church, such in constitution as their own, to ordain the like
Ministry in all points and respects, with all the defects and faults thereof.

2. Concerning the first proof of the Assumption, The Proposition may be
denied; It being one thing to be, and another to make claine to be, for every
one is not that which he claims to be, The Instances alleged to prove the
Assumption, either are falls or prove it not. The laws may give their titles,
to men which they do not claim. Neither do either their Canons or practis
show that they prescribe their own ordinances for worship or propound to bind
men's consciences to the acknowledgement of any such matter. The profess the
contrary, and urge their own ordinances only under the name of things
indifferent, Though therefore in error of judgment, they may, and happily do
command such ordinances of their own, as are divine worship, and in such a
manner as it binds conscience (which M. Iohnsons own Church in many cases
may do, except they think themselves privileged from error) yet they
protesting against any such power and authority, they cannot be said therein to
arrogate the office of Spiritual Lords, in that sense at least, in which
Christ is said to be the only Spiritual Lord. And though in their ordination
of Ministers, they use as a ceremonial speech to say, Receive the holy Ghost;
and therein peradventure offer some force unto the Scripture unto which the
allude; yet they disclaim al actual power and authority of giving the person
or gifts of the holy Ghost unto men.

It shall be needless in this controversy, to spend time in the defense of
the calling of Bishops any further then the necessity of the argument requires,
Only for the further clearing of the truth in the differences of them of the
Separation not only from the Bishops, but from the other sort of Ministers
also, which do not approve of their callings, I offer these points unto them
to consider of advisedly.

1. Whether the Supreme Magistrate have not power to over see, and Govern all
the several Churches with in his dominions, yea whether he be not bound so
to do?

2. Whether for his further help and assistance herein he may not make choice
of grave learned and reverent men to assist him in the same government.

3. Whether by virtue of his power these persons thus called to assist the
Supreme Magistrate, may not lawfully try the gifts of all the several
Ministers with in his dominions, and give public approbation of the worthy,
and inhibit those which they find unworthy, from the execution of their
Ministry, and whether they may not visit the several Ministers and Churches,
convent them before them, examine them, how they have behaved themselves in
their places, and punish the blame worthy.

4. Whether for the more easy and orderly Government of the said Churches, so
far forth as appertains to him, he may not devide his kingdom (as ours is)
into Provinces assigning over each of them under himself some special
Magistrate for learning and experience to oversee, and govern all the
particular Churches there, and whether he may not subdevide those Provinces
into Diocesses, assigning also to them, other more inferior officers, under
him, and his provincial officers, to over see the several Churches with in
such, and such a precinct?

5. Whether it do destroy the nature of a Ministerial or a particular true
visible Church, that many of them should appertain unto one Provincial or
Diocesame government, though in that respect they should be held and reputed,
but for one Provincial, or Diocesame Church?

6. Whether Antichrist having usurped the Kings Supremacy, and taken into his
hands this authority and corrupted the same, has made it now unlawful for the
Magistrate to execute the same in manner and form a fore said; or whether the
Jurisdiction a fore said do not directly and properly belong to the Civil
Magistrate, and not to Antichrist. But by usurpation; And whether his
usurpation of this office can make it a part of his Apostasy in those places
where it is restored again to the Supreme Magistrate.

7. Whether the Supreme Magistrate recerving this his right from Antichrist,
and together with it happily taking also to himself some thing also that
belonges to the Kingdom of Antichrist: and executing the same either in his
own person or by others, together with his own lawful right, whether (I say)
this do destroy his own lawful right? and whether the subject is ever the
less bound to subject themselves unto the same right, either in his own
person, or his substitute.

Hither to he has indevoured to prove the Proposition of the first Argument,
whereby he would confirm, the Assumption of his 2. reason, and now he sets
upon the proof of the Assumption. Namely, That the present Ministry of the
Church Assemblies of England, is the Ministry of Deacons, and Priests
ordained by the Prelates there unto. This he says is proved by the Canons
constitutions and observation of our Church; And this he confirms first by a
long, tedious and idle rehersall of the form of ordination of our Ministers,
bestowing cost to print, in a manner our whole book of ordination.

2. By certain of the late Canons pressing subscription, conformity, and an
acknowledgement of the lawfulnes of the calling of Bishops, and of their
ordination.

3. By certain sharp speeches of some Martyrs and of some others of our own
Nation against the Archbishops, Bishohs, and other of the clergy of their
times. In the relation of which points he spends some 5 leaves; wherein still
he runs in a circle begging one of his arguments to prove an other, So that
one of his Arguments are as good as all, and all no better then one; This may
suffice for answer. 1. That if all particulars mentioned in the book of
ordination should be strictly, and precisely practiced (as always they are
not) yet there is not one clause in the whole form of ordination by him cited,
that does necessarily argue them, which are so ordained, to be true and proper
Priests, and Deacons; But if there were and if also the Ministers ordained, were
anointed with oil, if their crowns were shawen, and they had power given to
offer the abominable Idol of the Mass, yet this is not sufficient to argue,
that their Ministry is the Ministry of Priests, etc. except in their
Ministry they should execute the same. If their own Church should ordain one
to the Ministry of a Pastor, and should in their ordination require him only
to preach the word sincerely, and to administer the Sacraments according to
Christ's institution, and yet in his practis and execution, he should do
nothing, but sing Mass and Mattens, and they should accept of this Ministry,
and no other, at his hands; would any that is in his wits, say that this man's
Ministry, is the Ministry of a Pastor: because he was in formality of words
and ceremonies ordained to that office, how much less can any say that our
Ministry is the Ministry of Priests, when they do not only execute any such
office, but the clean contrary; and when in their ordination not so much as any
part of a Priests office (properly so taken) is assigned unto them, but only
the name; and not so much as their name in their orders written in Latin, which
are to interpret the meaning of the English word.

2. Though the Ministers should do all things required, by the canons, and
should be every way answerable unto them, And though the Testimonies of our
Martyrs and others were yealded to be true, yet must he streiue hard, that
can from either or both, argue that our Ministers, are indeed Priests, except
in a Metaphorical, and borrowed speech.

The other Arguments whereby he proves the maine Assumption of the 2. Reason
viz. That the Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England, is the Ministry
of Antichrists Apostasy, follow.

Fr. John.
The Ministry of the Prelacie professing it self to be Christ's, The 2. Arg.
and yet standing in such an estate as it does not obey Jesus Christ in his
ordinance of Ministry, worship and government of the Church, as their Prophet,
Priest and King, is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. Such is the present
Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England.
Ergo,
It is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy.

Answer.
To the Proposition I answer, That not only the Ministry of the Prelates, but
of a Presbytery, or any Church whatsoever that stands in such an estate, is the
Ministry of Antichrists Apostacy; And not only the Ministry of the Prelates,
but any other Ministry else upon earth, may stand in such an estate, as that it
may in diverse, and sundry Perticulers of (ignorance or infirmity) disobey
Christ in his own ordinances of Ministry, worship, and government of the
Church, and in that respect, and so far forth be the Ministry of Antichrists
Apostasy, and yet be also the Ministry of Jesus Christ. He proves the
Proposition by 19. places of Scripture; to as much purpose, as if by as many
Testimonies, he should prove that it is day light at high noone; Except he
mean, That that is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy, does not in every
particular obey Christ in his own ordinances of Ministry. But which his 19.
proofs have no more force to prove it, then to prove that their is a man in
the moon, as any may see that has nothing else to do, but to examine them.

2. I deny the Assumption; The Ministry of our Church Assemblies, though it
be ordained by the Prelates, and be subject unto them, yet it is not their
Ministry, but the Ministry of Jesus Christ; They preaching his word, and
administering his Sacraments; And it does (if it be answerable to the law:)
obey Christ in all the maine essential parts of his own ordinance of
Ministry, etc. And in all other points (for ought he can prove to the
contrary) as far as the Lord has revailed the truth unto them which exercise
the same.

But (says he) the Assumption is evident by that which has been said in the
1. Reason and their Constitution it self shows it, in that they are so far
from obeing Christ in his ordinances of Ministry etc. as that they execute the
Ministry and government of an other Arch Bisschop, L. Bishop then Christ of an
Archdeacon, Parson, Vicar, etc. as also in their reading; prayers out of a
book, and observing other human inventions, and in their Church Government
according to Canons, Courts, etc. which were never appointed by Christ. To omit
that here again, he begs his first reason to prove his second, If the
Assumntion have noe better evidence, the evidence is false, as I have made it
evident, in the Answer to the first reason? Nether has he there or else where
(in any of those other of their wrightings which he sends us unto page 40.)
proved that our Ministers do not obey Christ, in his ordinance of Ministry,
worship, and Government, yea though it should be granted that they execute the
Ministry, and Government of other Arch Bishops, and L. Bishops besides Christ.
And though they should be Arch Deacons, Parsons, Vicars, reading stinted
prayers, etc. For all this may be done yea and they may sin some way in
doing all this, and yet they may obey Christ in all the maine essential and
substantial points of his Ministry worship and Government.

Fr. John.
The Ministry of Christians which is opposed against and exalted above the
holy things, Ministry and ordinances of Christ, The 3. Arg.
is the Ministry of Autichrists Apostasy, 2. These. 2.3.4. with 1. Ioh. etc.
Such is the Ministry of their Church Assemblies.
Ergo,
It is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. The Assumption is evident, 1.
Aman may peaceably receive or administer, their holy things in their manner, by
virtue of their Deacoury or Priesthood, received from their Prelates. But if
any do administer or receive the holy things of God by the offices of Pastors,
and Teachers entered into and executed according to the Testament of Christ,
they are reviled and persecuted. 2. Their Prelacie, Priesthood, and Deaconry
is the very means of thrusting away and keeping out of the Church the
Ministry and order which Christ has appointed, which some of themselves
hereto fore have acknowledged, and written.
Answer.
1. The Ministry of our Church Assemblies being answerable to the laws, is
not a Ministry exalted in any thing, above the Ministry of Christ, but the
very same in nature and quality, though in some accidents it may differ. In
which difference, if there be any sin, it is of ignorance, or infirmity in
the Ministers; which may in as high or a higher degree befall unto the best
Ministers that ever were since the Apostles times.

2. The holy things which they administer are the holy things of Jesus Christ,
and not of their own, and by virtue of that Priesthood and Deaconry which
they have received they may not administer any other holy things but what
Christ Jesus requires. The other things which they administer are judged by
them which administer them; only things indifferent and matters of order,
wherein if they which use them be deceaved, it is but such an error as worthy
Martyrs of Jesus Christ have been subject unto, and not sufficient to make
their Ministry an Antichristian Ministry.

3. The Prelates do not persecute any true Pastors and Teachers, so much for
Ministering any of the holy things of Christ, as for refusing to conform to
some special ordinances of their own, which they do not hold to be holy
things, but matters of order, and which by reasons they have indevoured to
prove to be so: wherein the practis of Prelates is noe more extreme, then
their own, who censure as far as they can, in all extremity, all them who
do not in all points, conform and agree to their own orders, ceremonies and
Church policy.

4. It can never be proved, that the admittance of this Ministry, is a
hindrance of a better, but rather it is a means to keep out a wors, and away
in time to bring in a better, if a better be to be brought in, for by yealding
to some things that may be bettered and is so wished and indeavored, a door is
opened to Minister many holy things, which otherwise should be shut. And if it
be as lawful, for us to conjecture, as for him, Their general Schism and
rent from this Ministry, has been one maine and principal means to vphoulde
it as it is.

Fr. John.
The Ministry which is such as in the nature and condition thereof it
pertains not to any body or estate either civil or ecclesiastical but only
to the body or kingdom of Antichrists Apostasy. The 4. Arg.
Such is the Ministry of their Church Assemblies.
Ergo,
It is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. The Assumption is clear, in as
much as their Prelacie, Priesthood, and Deaconry; is such that the Civil State
may be perfect without, them and the Church of Christ may be complete without
them, only the body, and Kingdom of the Romish Antichrist, cannot be full
and furnished in all the offices thereof without them.
Answer.
For Answer to the Assumption,

1. Concerning the Prelacie (though it be not any Ministry of any of our
Church Assemblies, and therefore Idly urged, in this and all the other
Arguments) this may be said; 1. That the principal, and most honorable parts
thereof is only usurped by Antichrist, and does not appertain to him, but to
the Jurisdiction of the Supreme Magistrates, and States.

2. That the State of a Christian common wealth cannot be perfect, without
some general visitors, and overseers of Churches. 3. That though a particular
Church or congregation may be complete without them, yet for the necessary
union, and agreement of the several Churches in Christian Provinces, and
Kingdoms, it is fit and agreeable to reason, and noe ways repugnant to Gods
word, that under the Supreme Magistrate there should be, other Governors to
protect, and incorrage those Ministers, and Churches which do their duty, and
to punish those which shall offend. Wherein if either through warrant of
human laws, or some personal corruption, they shall in some things pass
their bounds, they do no more then any other officers either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, through frailty, and infirmity may do. 4. That the kingdom
of Antichrist cannot be furnished, in all the offices thereof without the
Authority of Civil Magistrates, and therefore this seems to make as much
against the calling of civil Magistrates as Bishops.

2. Concerning the Ministry of our Priests and Deacons, such as it is, or by
law ought to be in our Church Assemblies, the Church of Christ cannot be
complete without it; yea it is noe Church without it. Nether can the kingdom
of Antichrist stand before it, Nether will he ever prove the contrary.

Fr. John.
The Ministry which is such as the body of Antichrist the man of sin, The 5.
Arg.
cannot without it be complete in all the members and canonical functions
thereof is the Ministry of Autichrists Apostasy. Such is the Ministry of the
Church Assemblies of England. It is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy.
The Assumption is proved by the Canons, Pontifical, and estate of the Romish
Antichrist.
Answer.
This Argument is but the tail of the former, and therefore needs noe further
Answer, it being cut of in the answer to the former. The Canons Pontifical,
and State. of the Romish Antichrist do manifest the countrary, which have and
do curse and persecute with sword and fire, such a Ministry as is the
Ministry of our Church Assemblies: if it be in all points to the intent of
the law.

Fr. John.
The Ministry of Deacons, Priests, and Prelates which accounts it self to be
Christ's, and yet indeed is such, as the Kings and Rulers of the Earth may and
ought to suppress, and root out of their dominions, is the Ministry of
Antichrists Apostasy. Such is their Ministry. Therefore it is the Ministry
of Antichrists Apostasy. The Assumption is proved in the former reason and in
other Treatises, and by some of themselves in their Suites to Parliament, and if
the Prelates and their conforming clergy, deny it they are by their own Canons
excommunicated ipso facto.
Answer.
This sixth Argument is borrowed from the first Reason where it is brought to
prove that our Ministry is not the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers, as here
it is brought again to prove, that it is the Ministry of Antichrists
Apostasy; Thus then he reasons, the King may and ought to suppress this
Ministry, Therefore it is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. But how does
he prove, That the King ought to suppress this Ministry? He refers us for
the proof thereof especially to the former Reason, how does he prove it there?
Thus. It is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. Therefore the king ought to
suppress it. Is not this learned stuff?

Concerning his other Treatises, which he so often sends us unto, as if they
were in every street and market place of the land, we have not so much idle
time to seek after them: and we presume we shall find noe better stuff in
them then in this; If any amongst us have put up any such suit to the
Parliament, for the Abollishing of our Ministry in general, let them answer
for themselves; But the Prelates may well laugh at his simplicity, and
seelinesse of wit, that thinks to fright them with such a bug-beare as this, in
making them believe that they are by their own Canons excommunicated ipso
facto, if they deny that the King may, and ought to abolish our Ministry.

Fr. John.
If it be such as shall be abolished by the Lord throughout the power, and
light of his Gospel, The 7. Arg.
then is it the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. The first is true. Therefore
the latter is true also.
Answer.
The same answer will serve to this Argument, that was given to the former; For
the Assumption is false, The light of the Gospel shall more, and more, confirm
establish, and perfect it, and remove all the defects and blemishes in it, his
proof is as ridiculous, and sophistical, as is the former; for he proves it
by the same question, that here it is brought to prove, for so in effect
proceeds his disputation.

That which shall be abolished is Antichristian. Our Ministry shall be
abolished. Ergo, It is Antichristian.
But how does he for our learning prove that our Ministry shall be
abolished, very learnedly and profoundly thus.

That which is Antichristian shall be abolished. Our Ministry is
Antichristian. Therefore it shall be abolished.
For this is the effect of that idle discourse of 2. or 3. leaves, viz. page
46.-51. tending to prove, That Antichrist, and all his offices shall be
abolished.

THE THIRD REASON. EXAMINED.
WHat soever Ministry is such none can hear or have any spiritual communion
with it, but in so doing he shall worship the Image of the beast, and receive
his Mark, in his forehead or hand. That Ministry may none hear, or have any
spiritual communion with all. But the present Ministry of the Church
Assemblies of England, is such as none can hear or have any spiritual
Communion therewith but in so doing he shall worship the Beasts image, and
receive his mark in his forehead or hand.
Ergo,
None may hear or have any Spiritual communion therewith.

Answer.
This Reason for the effect and substance thereof differs not from the
second, for what is it (by his own interpretation) to worship the beasts
image, but to subject himself to the Ministry, and worship of Antichrists
Apostasy, and how is it possible for him to prove this but by running to the
former Reasons, for their help therein.

For the proof of the Assumption he sets us down a tedious and impertinent
discourse of some six leaves of paper, teaching what is meant by the beast and
his Image, and by receaving the mark in the forehead or hand, The some and
effect whereof is this,

That by Beast we are to understand the Roman Dominion and Antichrists
hierarchy, withal the offices, laws, Page 51. -- 63.
and authority appertaining thereunto, That by worshipping the Beasts Image may
be understood the yealding of spiritual subjection to that Antichristian
kingdom in the laws offices and Jurisdiction thereof, That by receaving the
mark in the forehead or hand, is publicly to profess and observe them not
being a shamed of the beasts ways. And this do all they who submit to the
goverm^et of Prelates, Priests, Parsons, Vicars, book worship, etc. Not to
contend about this interpretation, but to suppose it true, there is nothing in
substance here brought to confirm the 3. Reason, but that which is in the 2.
Reason, viz. that therefore we worship the beast, in communicating with our
Ministry, Because it is the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy. And therefore
it needs noe other Answer, then what has been given already. Only thus much
further, That for men so far forth to submit to the Government of such Prelates,
etc. as our laws do require, is not to yealde spiritual subjection to the
Kingdom of Antichriste, nor without shame to profess the Beasts ways. For
they may not withstanding that be subject to Christ and his laws, and to
fight against the beast. Yea though it should be granted, that there, in sundry
perticulers they yeald to some things, in their use Antichristian and
unlawful; which the best reformed Churches and Ministers, sometimes of
ignorance or infirmity may do; and yet remain the Churches and Ministry of
Christ.

THE FOVRTH REASON. EXAMINED.
NOne may hear or join in any Spiritual Communion with that Ministry which
deriveth not their power and function of Ministry from Christ, which is the
head for the edification of his Church, which is his body. Such is the
Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England. Therefore none may hear or join
in Spiritual Communion therewith.
Answer.
This reason is the same with the first; for it is all one, To be derived from
Christ, and, To be set by Christ in his Church, The other words which here he
adds, Does noe more vary the force of the Argument, then a new garment put
upon the same witness would make him a nue and different witness from
himself.

In the proof of the Assumption he daubes 6. pages, bringing therein, nothing
but his old brokery, the substance whereof is as follows.

1. Page 64. -- 70.
That our Ministers have not these offices which Christ has given to his
Church for the work of his Ministry. 2. That it is the Ministry of Deacons
and Priests made by the Prelates. 3. That they were left in England by the Pope,
and are still in the Kingdom of Antichrist where they first rose, and theefore
is devilish, and by consequent the more gifts and truth the Ministers bring
with them, the more the vphould the Ministry of iniquity, and intisse unto
their stolen waters and hid bread. 4. That our Church assemblies are not true
visible Churches of Christ vnseperated from the world not joined together in
Communion of the Gospel by voluntary Profession of the faith and submission to
the Government of Christ, but standing in bondage unto Antichrist.
The very rehearsal of which reasons is answer sufficient, he being notable to
prove, any of these assertions, but either by the Assumption it self, that
they are brought to prove or one by another circularly; Contrarily I affirm.

1. That there is no ordinary Ministerial office that Christ has given unto
his Church, for the work of his Ministry, but our Ministers either have or by
our laws ought to have the same.

2. That it is a Ministry as opposite for the substance thereof, to the
Ministry of Popish, Priests, and Deacons, as light is opposite to darkness.

3. That the Pope left not such Priests, and Deacons as ours are, nor has any
such in his Kingdom; But that our Priests and Deacons, have been under God and
the Prince, the principal Persons that have driven, the Pope and his Priests
and Deacons, out of the Realm; That it is devilish for any to say that they
are devilish except they can prove it by better reasons. That they that have
the best gifts, do not entice any to stolen waters, or hidden bread, or to
vphould any Mystery of iniquity; Except the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the
true and only means of salvation; be the Mystery of iniquity.

4. That our Church Assemblies being such as by the laws of the land they
ought to be; are so far forth separated from the world, joined together in the
communion of the Gospel, by the voluntary profession of faith, etc. and freed
from Antichrist, as is sufficient to make them true visible Churches of Christ,
notwithstanding that many things may be wanting, to the full and desired
perfection of them. And I doubt not but we shall be far more able at any time
by reason out of Gods word, to prove these points, then ever M. Johnson will
be to prove the contrary. And yet it were easy to prove any thing, by such a
juggling Method of Reasoning, as M. Johnson has gotten; For he can prove you
the 1. Reason by the 2, the 2. by the 1. The 3. by the 1. and 2, the 1. and 2.
by the 3. The 4. by the 1.2. and 3. and every of them by the 4. and all 4. by
that question which here they are brought to prove.

THE FIFTH REASON. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
NOne may hear or have any Spiritual communion with those Ministers, which
Minister the holy things of God, and work upon the Consciences of men, by
virtue of a falls Spiritual calling. Such are the Ministers of the Church
Assemblies of England.
Ergo,
None may hear or have any Spiritual communion with them.

Answer.
This Argument which here he brings against our Ministry, is the very same
with the 2. For by a falls Spiritual calling, he means a calling proceeding
from the Apostasy of Antichrist.

The Preposition for brevitie sake he proves by five and thirty places of
Scripture: And yet who soever shall pleas to take the pains to examine them,
shall find, that nether severally nor jointly, they prove the same.

The Assumption whereon the whole weight of the controversy, leans, he
proves only by the first Argument, whereby he proved the Assumption of the 2.
Reason viz. Because they do it by virtue of their Ministry received of their
Prelates, from their Spiritual Authority, which is usurped and Antichristian;
And this is all this witness has to say; and all the answer it needs; Only
he wandreth into certain objections, and queries, grounded upon some supposed
defenses of some of our Ministers; Unto which I will (though I need not) give
a brief answer from point to point.

Obj. Some say they preach not by virtue of their Ministry taken from the
Prelates, but by virtue of some other calling and Authority. Ans. I know none
having received ordination from the Prelates, that need deny that they preach
partly by virtue of the Ministry which they have taken from them; Noe though
they hold the calling of Prelates unlawful: For what is the Ministry which
they have taken from them, for the substance thereof. But (after a trial of
their gifts) a liberty, and leave granted unto them to preach the word of
God, and administer the Sacraments, in such Congregations as they shall be
called unto.

Obj. Why will such seem to renounce that calling, received of the Prelates,
and yet blame us for doing the like. Ans. They may acknowledge a further
calling, then that of the Prelates, and yet not therein renounce the calling
received from the Prelates, but rather ratify the same; For the Prelates being
learned divines, and having approved of their gifts, and by words, and letters
Testimonial given, liberty to execute the Ministry of the Gospel; they do
not thereby thrust them into a Ministry, but they leave them to be further
called or chosen, either by the people, or those Patrons, unto whose fidelity
the people have committed this charge: And therefore this acknowledging of a
further calling, makes nothing to the justification of the proud and ignorant
schism of this Persons.

Obj. If they preach by virtue of another calling how then stand they
Ministers of that Church where noe other is allowed, and how impose they
themselves upon any of their Parish Assemblies, seeing the laws of the land
allow only the Prelacie, Priesthood, and Deaconry a foresaid, Ans. Though
this should be granted (which he in his ignorant simplicity does suppose)
that some amongst us, having been ordained by the Prelates did exercise our
Ministry, by virtue of another calling, and though the law of the land, allow
noe other, yet (especially so long as they are permitted to execute their
Ministry by those in Authority, though it be by virtue of another calling)
they are to be reputed Ministers of that Church, that has use of their
Ministry.

Obj. How also herein can they avoid to be both intruders and hipocrits,
intruders in taking upon themselves a public office in that Church against
the public laws and constitutions thereof, hipocrits, because they pretend in
show one thing to the Prince, and State, and yet perform another indeed. Ans.
All these inferences are upon a falls supposition; yet if there were any such
Persons, they could noe more therein be said to be intruders, and hipocrits
then they of the Separation are; For though the public laws should be
against any other calling, yet so long as they take an office by a good
calling, they cannot be said to intrude themselves. Nether do any such
amongst us (if there be any such) pretend in show any more then they do indeed
perform, for so far forth as any differ in judgment from the public laws,
of the State, they are ready to profess it, being called thereunto, and they
practis only that, which they judge lawful, being as ready, as any of the
seperatio^ to suffer, rather then practis approve, or assent unto any thing,
which they judge unlawful, and unwarrantable.

Obj. But suppose they had some other lawful calling yet they also retaining
this unlawful calling of the Prelates this were but to halt between two
opinions, and to set their threshould by Gods threshoulds and their posts by
Gods posts.

Ans. How can such be said to retain the unlawful calling of the Prelates,
which protest against the same, and profess that they preach not by that, but
by another calling? But if there be any such, that exercise their Ministry by
another calling besides that of the Prelates, they therein refuse; obeidience, and
conformity to what soever in the Prelates calling they judge unlawful, and so
do not join an unlawful and a lawful calling together, but reject the
corruptions, retain the good, and supply the defect with another calling; and
this is the worste that can be made of it; But this is not to join man's
Treshoulds to Gods, etc. but clean contrary, to separate them, as much as may
be; And how can they be said to halt between two opinions, when so far
only as the truth (in their judgment and opinion) is established by public
laws they embrace it, acknowledging their subjection to the same laws, and
contrarily, where they judge that the law swerves from the truth, they take
another course, But still he begs this, (which is the maine controversy) that
our Ministers have received an unlawful calling from the Prelates.

In the next place he labors to prove by reasons that howsoever some pretend
another calling, yet it is evident, that the execute all the duties of their
Ministeries, by virtue of their calling taken from their Prelates; But what of
that; This will stand him in noe steed, unless it be given him of alms. That
every Ministry executed by virtue of a calling taken from the Prelates, is an
unlawful and an Antichristian Ministry; For prove it he cannot, And if we
should, except this also be given him, That our Ministry is executed ONLY by
virtue of a calling taken from the Prelates; and not by any other power, or
virtue besides, taken either from God or man. But let us see his reasons.

1. They cannot stand public Ministers except they receive of the Prelates the
Priesthood and Deaconry a foresaid.

2. They are excommunicated ipso facto, if they affirm that they who are made
Bishops, Deacons, and Priests, are not lawfully made, until thie have some
other calling.

3. The people have not the liberty of the Churches of Christ nor power in this
their estate to chose and submit unto the true and lawful Ministry appointed
by Christ.

4. Without and against the peoples consent, they are by the Prelates a lone
silenced, deprived, and degraded from exercisiing any Ministry in those
Assemblies.

These reasons do not prove, That they exercise their ministry ONLY by virtue
of a calling received from the Prelates, and therefore whether true or falls are
nothing to the purpose, and unworthy any further Answer.

After this he fetches another Rode out, and labors to prove, that our
Ministers ought not to suffer themselves to be silenced, and deposed from
their public Ministry, no not by lawful Magistrates, which is not only falls
and seditious; as shall appear afterward, but idle and impertinent, to the
present controversy, for if it were true that Ministers ought not to do in
this case, as ours do; yet this does not argue, any corruption in the calling
of their Ministry, but a weacknesse only in the Persons that execute it, in
yealding further from their own right, then they need to do; But let us
consider the perticulers, that he objecteth against our Ministers in this
respect.

Obj. The Apostles being true Ministers of Christ would not at the commandment
of lawful Magistrates, leave to preach, much less should true Ministers, at
the appointement of usurping Prelates. Nether did the Apostles make, their
imediate calling from God the ground of their refusal, but this, That they
ought to obey God rather then man, which is a duty required of all Ministers
and Christians.

Ans. 1. Where he distinguishes between silencing, and depriving, by Prelates
and lawful Magistrates, it is in our case, where the Prelates do it by
Authority, and commission from lawful Magistrates; a distinction without a
difference. 2. Though the Apostles did not assign, their imidiate calling from
God, as the ground of their refusal, in so many letters, and sillables, yet
that which they do assign, is by implication, and in effect the same with it;
for it is as much as if they had said; God himself has imposed this calling
upon us, and not man; and therefore except we should rather obey man, then God,
we may not forbear, this office, which he has imposed upon us. For opposing
the obeidience of God to the obeidience of man, he therein pleads a calling
from God; and not from man: otherwise if they had received a calling from man,
there had been incongruitie in the answer, considering that in common sense and
reason, they ought so far forth to obey men, forbidding them to exercise a
calling, as they exercise the same by virtue of that calling else by this
reason, A Minister should not ceas to preach, upon the commandment of the
Church, that has chosen him, but should be bound to give them also the same
answer which they Apostles gave, which were absurd. So that by this gross
conceit of M. Iohnsons, their should be no power, in any sort of men
whomsoever, to depose a Minister from his Ministry, but that notwithstanding
any commandment: of Church or State the Minister is to continue in his
Ministry. But for the further answer of this his ignorant conceit plainly
tending to sedition, we are to know; That though the Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, preached publicly where they were not hindered by open violence,
And did not, nor might not leave their Ministry upon any humain Authority and
commandment whatsoever; because they did not enter into or exercise the same,
upon the will, and pleasure of any man whatsoever; yet they never erected and
planted public Churches and Ministeries in the face of the Magistrate,
whether they would or not, or in dispite of them. But such in respect of the
eye of the Magistrate, were as private and invisible as might be: Neither were
some of the Apostles only forbidden, so as others should be suffered to
preach the same Ghospel in their places: but the utter abolishing of Christian
Religion was manifestly intended in the silencing of them. But our Churches
whereof we are Ministers, are noe private and secreat Assemblies, such as hide
themselves from the face of a persecuting Magistrate, and State. But are
public professing their worship, and doing their religion in the face of the
Magistrate and State, yea and by his contenance, authority and protection; And
we are set over those Churches, not only by a calling of our people, but also
by the authority of the Magistrate who has an armed power to hinder any such
public Action: who is willing also to permit and maintain other true
Ministers of the Gospel in those places where he forbids some. If therefore
after our public calling, to Minister to such a known and public Church,
but by the Magistrate also, The Magistrate shall have matter against us,
(whether just or injust it skilleth not) and shall in that regard forbid us to
Minister to our Church. I see not by what warrant in Gods word, we should
think our selves bound not withstanding to exercise our Ministry still;
Except we should think such a law of Ministry to ly upon us, that we should
judge our selves bound, to run upon the sword point of the Magistrate or to
oppose sword to sword. It being not the use of the higher powers, in such
cases nakedly to forbid, but to set a sword to the breast, thereby to force
them, which shall refuse. And suppose the Magistrate should do it injustly,
and against the will of the Church, and should therein sin; yet does not the
Church, in that regard ceas to be a Church, nor ought she therein to resist
the will of the Magistrate; Nether does she stand bound in regard of her
affection to her Minister (how great and deserved soever) to deprive her self
of the protection of the Magistrate, by leaving her public standing to follow
her Ministry in private and the dark; refusing the benefit of all other
public Ministry, which with the leave and liking of the Magistrate she may
enjoy; Nether do I know what warrant any ordinary Minister has by Gods
word in such a Case so to draw any such Church or people to his private
Ministry, that thereby they should hazard their outward state and quiet in the
Common wealth where they live, when in some competent Measure they may
publicly, with the grace and favors of the Magistrate, enjoy the ordinary
means of their Salvation, by another, (and except he have a calling to
Minister to some other Church) to be content to live as a private member, till
it should please God to reconcile the Magistrate unto him, and so call him
again to his own Church, laboring in mean while, privately upon particular
occasions offered, to strengthen and cofirme, in the ways of God those people
that are deprived of his public labors, and I take it to be the duty, of
the people in such a case, if they will approve themselves, faithful
Christians, and good Subjects, so to submit to the Ministry of another, as
that by prayer and all other good dutiful and loyal means, they may do
their best endeavor to obtain him of whom against their will, they have been
deprived and still to affect and love him as their Pastor. Now if the people
do thus, then is that Minister called to be silent not only by the
Magistrate, but by them also, though with much grief.

Obj. It is the duty of all Ministers, and Christians as will as Apostles, to
obey God, and not man, when man forbids that which God commands, or
commands that which God forbids.

Ans. True, but God noe where that I can find, commands either a Minister to
Minister publicly in a public Church maintained by the Magistrate, against
the will, and in despite of the Magistrate, noe more then against the will and
in despite of the Church it self.

Obj. Vriah at the commandment of the King made an Alter after the fashion of
that of Damascus but therein sinned, though he offered thereon such
burnt-offrings as God had appointed; much less may the Ministry under the
Gospel, be framed after any nue manner devised by man least of all after
Antichrist, though in that Ministry many doctrines of the Gospel be taught,
and such Sacraments administered as God has ordained.

Ans. This Example of Vriah the Priest is altogether impertinent, unto that
which goes before. It being one thing upon the commandment of the Magistrate
to forbear the public exercise of a true Ministry, another thing upon his
commandment to frame a nue Ministry after a nue manner devized by man or
Antichrist.

After this he runs out of his way again to satisfy an objection, that he
had propounded and indevoured (as far as his learning would give him leave) to
answer before; And which does nothing at all depend upon any thing that goes
before in this Argument, wherein he resembles some wanton Curs, that takes
delight to turn round about to catch their own tails; But let us see what it
is he says.

Obj. Here again concerning such as plead that they teach the truth, and many
excellent points of Doctrine. It is to be observed, that yet none may therefore
hear their Ministry under Coler of learning the truth because in yealding to
receive and hear it from Antichrists Ministry, They defile the Temple of God,
and become the Subjects of Antichrist, page 75.

Ans. Where he again, takes it as matter that must whether we will or not,
be granted unto him, That our Ministry is Antichrists Ministry, which needs
noe other answer then before, yet thus much further. 1. That noe Ministry
whatsoever (so far forth as it teaches the truth of Christ especially a truth
opposite to the doctrine of Antichrist) is the Ministry of Antichrist; And
those which shall submit and subject themselves unto any Ministry whatsoever,
only so far forth as they Minister and teach such truth, cannot therein be
said to defile the Temple of God, or to be Subjects of Antichrist, but be
obedient to Jesus Christ.

2. Our Ministry in diverse Congregations of the land at the least, Teach not
only many excellent points of doctrine. But so much doctrine as is sufficient
to the Salvation of him that believes the same; even all the maine
fundamental points of Salvation clearly set down in Gods word; yea and for
ought any can prove to the countrary. All other less necessary points, so far
forth, as God has revealed, and convinced their consciences of the truth of
them.

3. Those amongst us who make conscience of hearing our Ministry, do not
hear them under a Color of learning the truth, but only to this very end,
and purpose, that they might learn the truth, and therein the true way of
serving and worshipping God according to his own will.

Obj. And not to speak of the many errors and falsehoods which they also teach,
it is no nue thing that the Ministers of Antichrist, should in diverse things
teach and bring the truth with them, for when Satan cannot by falsehood utter
his wares, ordinances, Ministry worship, he will be glad to utter the same
by teaching the truth. page 75.76.

Ans. 1. Our Errors whether for weight or member, or quality, are not such, so
great, so many, but they may be fall unto true Christians, whether Ministers or
people, yea (as M. Johnson well knows) many of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ,
have lived and died, in more and greater Errors of the same kind, and therefore
well may he pass by this point. This is but a piece of his simple thetoricke,
carelessly to seem to pass by that which he cannot prove. For how many
Errors, can he name or number, that he is able to justify to be taught in the
Ministry of our Church Assemblies? what one truth of Religion can he name,
that is not or has not been (when just occasion has been offered) taught by
some of our Ministers? I am not ignorant that in his treatises against M. A. H.
and M. H. I. he mustreth a whole troup of pretended Errors, but suppose them
to be so many destinct Errors, how does he prove they are taught in our
Ministry or that they are required by law to be taught? There is indeed a
Conformity and Subscription required to some of them, and a Canon that
requires that the late Canons be read in Churches some times in the year, as
also that the book of Articles be read at the first entrance upon an
Ecclesiastical Church, with a testification of assent unto it: But is this
Ministerially to teach the Errors contained in the said books? May not a man
in the weacknesse of his judgment, and in infirmity at his first entrance
into a calling, conform and subscribe unto some things, not so warantable, and
true, and yet not teach them for truths; yea may he not, for all that teach
doctrine in it self directly countrary to those untruths, yea and yet satisfy
also the mind of the law, which being human, and therefore not always
perfect, may command that very truth to be taught, which being thoroughly
followed, will destroy some untruths, which the same law also requires? Further
it is one thing to read the Canons to the people, thereby to declare unto them
what is required at their hands, by their Governors, another thing to teach,
and justify the Errors countained in them, and to testify an assent unto some
Errors, is not Ministerially to instruct the people in those Errors.

2. Though it be noe nue thing that the Ministers of Antichrist, should in
diverse things bring the truth with them; Yet this is a nue thing and never hard
of before, That the Ministers of Antichrist, should teach the wholl truth of
Christ Jesus for the substance thereof. That they should oppose directly and
zealously against the maine, and foundamentall doctrins of Antichrist; That
they should profess him to be Antichrist, and that man of sin, and to the
sheeding of their blood, should exercise their Ministry against Antichrist and
his kingdom, protesting against him and his Service, were it not nue strange
that a man should be counted a true Subject unto a Prince, then when he does
openly protest against him. Counting him a usurping Tirant, and employing all
the wit power and strength he has against him? such subjects of Antichrist
are our Ministers, or by the laws such they ought to be. Could he be said
to be a Minister of Christ, that yealding to some external kites, and
professing some doctrines of Christian faith, does not withstanding, directly,
openly and professedly, renounce Christ and his Service, and profess himself
to be an enemy to him, and his Kingdom, If it hold not in the one, it is
not both a nue and strange thing that it should hold in the other.

3. M. Johnson out of his knowledge must teach us; how Satan can be said, by
teaching the truth to utter his own Ministry, or worship, or how a
Sathanicall Ministry can be uttered when in and by the Ministry, nothing but
the truth of Christ is administered; what is the Ministry of Satan but the
Ministry of Error? how can the Ministry of Error be uttered by teaching the
Truth? or how can a Ministry be said to be uttered, by a truth, when it is the
Ministry it self that utters the truth, Surely noe more then a Merchandise
can be said to be uttered by selling of wares, and were it not a wonder, if a
man should utter his bad Marchandice, by selling good and sound wares? Satan
and Antichrist indeed together with some truths, seek to utter much falshoode,
which otherwise (they know) would not be received: And many of our Ministers
are content to yeald to some things which they judge not so counvenient (if it
did otherwise some good to the State) to the end they may utter the truth. But
that like Antichrist and Satan our Ministers should propound this unto
themselves, to teach some truths to this end that they might, thereby utter
falsehood and lies, falls Ministeries and worships is a Malicious imputation, and
can never be justified.

Obj. Beza says, Though Antichrist teach the truth (which sometimes he does)
to the end he may more easily seduce to believe his lies, yet we are to
stop our ears against him, least under his pretense, we be deceaved by
him. page 76.

Ans. Well, but it is yet to prove, That our Ministers are Antichrists, and
that they teach the truth to any such wicked intent; the contrary is manifest,
when many of them in regard of the times, are countent, to yealde to some
colorable untruths, that they might thereby purchase liberty unto themselves,
to advance the truth of Christ, They yeald to some things in appearance
Antichristian, that they might with more liberty fight against Antichrist.

Obj. Who knows not that Antichrist and his Ministers are hipocriticall
friends to Christ under the name of Christ fighting against him.

Ans. But who knows not that our Ministers, if they be such as our laws
require them to be, are sworn enemies to Antichrist, and in the name of
Christ, and under some of Antichrists own Rites do fight against him and
resist him unto blood; And who knows not, that many of them have died for
Christ at the foot of Antichrist.

THE SIXTH ARGUMENT.
IF the present Ministry of the Church of England be a strange Ministry,
then is it not lawful in the worship of God, to hear it, or have any
Spiritual communion therewith. But such is the Ministry of the Church
Assemblies of England. Therefore it is not lawful in the worship of God to
hear it, or have any Spiritual Communion therewith. The Assumption is
manifest, for a strange Ministry is that which is not by the law ordained, and
given for that work, as themselves here to fore have published, and as is
proved in the first Reason.
Answer.
This Reason differreth not in substance from diverse of the former, for what is
it to be a strange Ministry, but to be a Ministry that is not set by Christ
in his Church which is his 1. Reason. But to be a Ministry which deriveth not
the power and function from Christ, which is his 4. Reason. But to be a
Ministry that works upon men's consciences by virtue of a falls Spiritual
calling which is his 5. Reason. Might he not with as great facility out of
this method of reasoning have brought forth 7000. Reasons as these seven. But
how does he prove the Assumption of his reason? by sending us back again (as
you may see) to the first Reason. So that all the reason of this Reason is
borrowed from the 1. Reason and is answered all ready in the Answer thereof.

But before he passes to the next reason, he runs out after the wonted
fashion, into an idle discourse, nothing at all appertaining to the Argument in
hand, bringing in some idle observations upon the Story of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, and also of Naaman, falsely Misapplied unto our Church Assemblies and
Ministry. For he taking it as granted, or as a thing that could not be
denied him, That our Ministry is Antichristian, and that our worship is
Idolatry, he makes our Ministers, and people even the best of them wors then
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram and them which were of their conspiracy, and our
Assemblies and worship as bad as the Temple of Rimmon, and the idolatry therein
performed. And where he brings the example of Naaman, as brought by some of us
to justify our joining with our Church Assemblies I persuade my self he does
against the knowledge and light of his own conscience belly us; and that there
cannot be one of us brought forth, that ever made this plea; we hold it as
unlawful (as themselves) outwardly and but in appearance to join with
Idolators, in their Idolatry: and we see noe warrant why for every particular
Act, that in a large sense is Idolatrous, adjoined to Gods true worship, we
should forbear our presence, at the true worship it self. Or that our
presence, for the true worships sake alone, should in respect of some point of
false worship thereunto a nexed be (as he speaks) the submitting our bodies
to a strange worship. Especially when we are not particular Actors in it, but
only present, behoulding it with grief, and suffering it in others for the
true worship sake unto which it is adjoined, If this should be held unlawful;
then can noe man present himself with a good conscience, at any public
worship of God whersoever. Because (except it should be stinted and prescribed,
which M. Johnson holds to be a falls worship) he can have noe asseurance, but
that some errors in matter or form will be committed; yea if he be a man of
understanding, and learning, he may presume in a manner, that in the public
worship, some error or other in matter or form, greater or lesser will be
committed, before which he must present himself. But what? were the Jewish
Sinagoges in Christ's time free from all parts of falls worship? the Scripture
witnesses the contrary. Did they when Christ came into them, for bear their
Assemblies? The Scripture confirms the contrary, was Christ presence then (as
here he says our presence is) a very bowing down unto them? was he also
therein an unconscionable dissembler. Did he therein embrace the bosom of
Strangers? break his covenant, go a whoreing with the inventions of man. For
(such fiere as this he spits at us) if not, why should it be such a sin in
us? who have not such eyes to pearce into the impiety of man's traditions, as
our Savior had.

THE SEVENTH Reason. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
IF the present Ministry of the Church of England be not from Heaven, but of
men, then is it not lawful in the worship of God to hear or have any
Spiritual Communion therewith. Such is the Ministry of the Church Assemblies
of England. Ergo, It is not lawful in the worship of God to have any
Spiritual communion therewith. The Assumption is evident, because God has not
appointed the Ministry of the Church Assemblies, but man, as appears by their
book or ordination, And if they will say the contrary, let themshew their
callings out of the word of God.
Answer.
This Reason is the very same with the 4.5. and 6. and has noe ground, or
proof but from them: And therefore is Answered also in the Answer of them. And
this may be sufficient to show, that our Ministry is from Heaven, when so
malicious, and excercised an Adversary whose whole Religion seems to lie in
opposing to our Ministry, can say noe more against it.

THE SECOND SORT OF REASONS TAKEN AS is pretended forth of our own Writers.
EXAMINED.
THE FIRST ARGUMENT TAKEN from the twelve Arguments. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
AL will worship is Sin. To hear or communicate with the present Ministry
of the Church Assemblies of England, in Church Service in manner and form
prescribed, is a will worship. Therefore to hear or communicate with that
Ministry is Sin.
Answer.
This Sillogisme is Sophistical, consisting plainly of four terms, Except
he make his conclusion this. There fore to hear or communicate with that
Ministry in manner and form prescribed is a Sin. For the third Argument
being will worship. All the other terms they being no parts thereof, must be in
the conclusion: If so be the sillogisme be true as every Sophoming boy, in
the university knows: And therefore he must either exclude them out of the
Assumption, or include them in the conclusion, which he cannot do, it being
his intent, by these Arguments to prove it a sin to communicate therewith not
only in manner or form prescribed, but any other way, And therefore he
Sophistically, or rather in ignorant and witless simplicity, concluds a
general from a Special thus, It is a will worship to communicate with our
Ministry in manner and form prescribed. Therefore it is a sin to communicate
therewith whether in manner or form prescribed or any other way.


Whereas a Child may know this, That an Action done in some manner and form
prescribed may be a will worship and a sin, which done otherwise may be
true worship; A man may therefore (if need be) grant both his premises and
deny his conclusion. Nether will it help him, that the Author of the 12.
Arguments, concluded against the Ceremonies, in the same form of words, that
he does here against the Ministry, It being plain by the scope of his wholl
disputation, That though he do not express those words in manner and form
prescribed, in the conclusion; That yet he understands them, It being not
his purpose to dispute absolutely against all use of them, but against the use
of them, in that manner and form that they are prescribed.

But whatsoever his Conclusion is, The Assumption is false, yea though it should
be granted that in our Ministry there is some will worship performed; yet let
us see how he proves the Assumption.

Fr. John.
All parts of divine worship and Service imposed only by the will and pleasure
of man upon the Communicants in divine service and that of necessity to be
done, is will worship. But to hear and Communicate, with the present
Ministry of the Church Assemblies of Eugland, in Church Service in manner and
form prescribed, are such parts of divine worship, as is a foresaid.
Ergo,
To hear and Communicate with the present Ministry of the Church Assemblies
of England in manner and form prescribed is a will worship.

Answer.
The Proposition is taken forth of the 12. Arguments and therefore needs noe
Answer.

The Assumption is false, But he proves it thus, 1. Man imposes this
Ministry upon man, and God in his word has not appointed these offices and
Callings, Nether required any to communicate with them in Church Service in
manner and form prescribed. And 2. the people stand bound to hear, and
communicate with them upon pain of Suspension, deprivation, etc. and God must
have noe solemn worship in England except it be with communion to the same.
Ergo, To hear and communicate with the present Ministry, etc. is a part of
divine worship imposed as a fore said.


The first part of the Anticedent is false and is not proved by any ground taken
from the 12. Arguments, for not man only, but God also has imposed this
Ministry, and has appointed for the substance thereof their offices and
Callings of the Ministers of our Church Assemblies; And has required us to
communicate with them in Church Service, in that form and manner, which the
law in the true meaning thereof, prescribes, and which many at the least do
practis.

Nether does the consequent follow upon the second part of the Antecedent, for
though human laws under never so great punishments, should bind us to never
so great corruptions in Gods Service; yet so lang as we do not actually
communicate in those corruptions, but only in the true parts of Gods worship,
our communicating is never the wors; for the said laws of men, but rather the
better. Nether do we herein stand more bound, then M. Johnson and his people
do, when they are in these dominions: So that it makes as much against
communicating with their Ministry as ours: Though therefore (as the Author of
the 12. Arguments has indevoured to prove) the Ceremonies in Controversy
should be held to be a will worship, and therefore a sin to use them in Gods
worship, yet it follows not, by the same Argument that it is a sin, to
communicate with the Ministry of our Church Assemblies, noe though it should
use the said Ceremonies, much less, where and when it uses them not, as in
some places, or at some times it does not, nether is it by law required so to
do.

THE SECOND REASON taken from the twelve Arguments. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
IT is a sin against God for Christians to partake with the Ministry of
such, as accounting thomselues to be Servants of Jesus Christ, yet do in the
execution of their Ministry give special honor to Antichrist, and his
officers. But the Ministry of the Church of England is such. Therefore it is a
sin for Christians to partake therewith.
Answer.
First I deny the Proposition, The true and best Ministers of Jesus Christ,
that ever were or shall be since the Apostles, may in their ignorance, or
weacknes, do some act in their Ministry, that may bring some special honor to
Antichrist, and yet Christians may lawfully, and without sin partake with
such in their Ministry. It being not necessary, that whosoever pertaketh,
with a Ministry should partake also with the accidental corruptions thereof.

He tells us like a bold and blind biard. That the Proposition is manifest and
clear to any that have an ey of Reason, and any light of divinity shining in
it. And yet it has not so much as any color of truth, but in the eyes of such
owls and bats as himself is; It is a sin against God, for him that is by
way of excellency a Servant of Jesus Christ (without a precise and direct
warrant from him at any time especially in the Solemn worship of God) to give
special honor to Antichrist and his members; What? must it needs follow upon
this, That it is a sin to partake any manner of way with such a ones
Ministry, as shall in any measure commit such a sin? must the joining with
them in any other parts of their Ministry needs be a communicating with them
in this sin? He bids us see for this 2. Cor. 6.14.17. Rev. 18.4. but what is
this to the twelve Arguments, from which he says this reason is taken? And to
what end should we see those places, except he had first made us to see, That
our Ministers in their Ministry are Infidels and Belials. That their Ministry
for the substance thereof is unrighteousness and darkness. That the God we
served in our Ministry is an Idol, That our Assemblies are Babylon. And all
this because some thing happily is done, by our Ministers, which (and yet
contrary to their intent) is some honor to Antichrist. For except all this be
granted unto him, these Texts are of noe force to confirm the Preposition.

The Assumption is as falls as the Proposition, Nether does it follow from the
Assumption, of that Argument of the 12. from which he would ground it. For
though it should be granted, That to use the Ceremonies in Controversy in
manner and form prescribed were to give special honors to Antichrist and his
officers. Yet it does not follow, That the Ministry of our Church Assemblies,
are such that in the execution of their Ministry give special honor to
Antichrist, and his officers. For some of our Ministers, from whom he
seperateth, do not in the execution of their Ministry use the said Ceremonies
at any time, Nether do any of our Ministers at all times in the execution
thereof, use them, nether are required so to do. The Assumption
not-withstanding he proceeds to prove thus.

Fr. John.
Such a Conformity to Antichrist and his officers as is not only besides the
word of God, but in a special manner derogatory to all reformed Churches that
have departed from the Synagogue of Rome, is a special honor to Antichrist
and his Officers. But the Execution of the Ministry of the Church of England
is such.
Ergo,
The Execution of that Ministry in manner a foresaid is to give special
honor to Antichrist and his officers.

Answer.
The Proposition is word for word in a manner taken out of the 12. Arguments.
And therefore for this controversy not to be stood upon, whether it be true,
or falls.

The Assumption is false, and has noe ground at all from the 12. Argumets. For
though it should be granted. That to use the Ceremonies in Controversy in
divine worship is such a Conformity to Antichrist, and his members, as is
specified in the Proposition; yet noe man except he have some Crack in his
brain, can from thence infer, That the execution of our Ministry, is such a
conformity, especially then when in the execution thereof, they do not use the
said Ceremonies, which none do at all times, and some do never.

He proceeds to prove the Assumption, not by any ground taken from the 12.
Arguments, but by some of the fragements of his own former reasonles reasons,
and therefore the maine issue of the Argument, lying not upon any thing, in the
said Arguments. This second reason of his, cannot be said to be taken from
the 12. Arguments. And therefore they are noe wise guilty of his schism, nor
do any ways herein this place, patronize the same.

THE THIRD REASON TAKEN OVT OF THE TWELVE Arguments the London Ministers
exceptions, and the Abridgement, etc. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
IF such be the State of the Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England, as
they are bound in their Ministration unto such things, as the using of them in
Church Service, in manner and form prescribed, is a will worship, a giving of
specially honor to Antichrist and his members, a performing of honors more
then Civil, even Religions, only to a human power, a warranting of the like
use of Jewish, Turkish, Paganish or Popish observations; a doing of
Scysmaticall Actions, an having of Spiritual Communion with Papists, in the
Mysteries of their Idolatry, and Superstition, Amingling of profane things
with divine, an using of unlawful things in divine worship; An administering of
Sacraments, that are not of divine institution. A solemn acknowledging of
Special homage, to the Spiritual usurped authority of Lord Bishops, an using
of human Traditions in Gods worship as necessary to salvation, an apparent
means of the damnation of many Souls. An observing of a lieturgy which in the
wholl matter, and forms thereof, is too like unto the mass book, etc. Then is
it not lawful to communicate with the Ministers in their Ministry. But such
is the estate of the Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England. Therefore
it is not lawful to communicate with them therein.
Answer.
M. Johnson thinks surely, that in this Argument he has out of our own
writings, for ever disgraced our Ministry; But whether here or in the
Arguments following, he deal faithfully with our writers, I know not, his bad
dealing in this kind, we have discoured in part before, and does most
evidently appear in one particular following, wherein he most shamfully and
lewdly, as a man void of all common honesty and grace, makes the Ministers of
Lincoln to affirm, See page 98.
That the Prelates are reveiled to be great Antichrists, and their Ministry,
and constitution, to be great troublers of the Church at this day, and that it
cannot but be very sinful and hurtful, to retain or communicate with them.
The Devil himself would have been a shamed in this open manner to have told
such a ly, and therefore he is to be trusted, no further, then he is seen;
And herein his lewdness is the more to be suspected, That where he rehearses
many harsh, bitter, and unsavory speeches against our Ministry and worship, as
written by some of our selves, that retain communion with the Ministry, and
worship of our Church Assemblies; He does not quote the particular places, but
only refers us to the Authors in general, as though we had nothing else to
do, but to reed over wholl books to find out his Allegations, or that we
must take them upon his word to be faithfully reported. But let us suppose,
that our men have so written; yet there is noe consequent in the Proposition:
For what if our Ministry were bound to say Mass, to sing Mattins. To worship
the Virgin Mary. To acknowledge the Popes Supremacy, etc. yet for all that it
might be lawful to Communicate with our Ministers, in their Ministry: Except
that in the execution of their Ministry they submitted unto that which they
were bound unto. It being one thing, to be bound, and another thing to fulfill
the bond; he might contrarily with as much wit and understanding have
reasoned thus, If this be the estate of the Ministry of the Church Assemblies
of Rome, that they are bound in their administration, to the renouncing of
Antichrist, and all his Idolatry, offices, and will worship; to conform only,
in their Ministry to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to such or dinances as
are agreeable to the same, then it is lawful to communicate with them in their
Ministry and worship. M. Johnson would quickly discern the inconsequence of
this Proposition; And why? because in the execution of their Ministry, they
fulfill not this bound; And yet he cannot deny, but that they are, by a
stranger bond, even a divine bond, bound unto this, then our Ministers to the
contrary.

The consequent he says is proved by the Ministers of Lincolneshire,
Abridgement page 17. But to pass by his depraving of them before touched, noe
such matter can be concluded from the words, which he here cites, yea though
he had dealt faith-fully in the citation of them. For though it should be
granted that some act of spiritual fornication should be done in our
Ministry, That we are to separate from Idolators and Antichristians, and to
be as unlike them as may be, in their religious observations, Though God do
bear a detestation of Idolatry, and all the Inticements thereof, as unto
special whoredom. Though we ought to be a shamed of the monuments of
Idolatry, and cast them away with detestation. Though we should be in some
danger by them to be corrupted in Religion, by conforming unto Idolators in
their Ministry and worship. Though keeping communion with such Ministers
should be a special means to harden them in their sins. Though the Prelates
were revealed to be great Antichrists. Though the Godly learned have
constantly taught, that Christians are bound to forsake and cast of the
Ministration, Ceremonies, and religious customs of Pagan, Jews, Antichristian
Idolators, and Heretics, and carefully to shum all conformity with them
therein; Yet it does not thereupon follow, That if the Ministers of our Church
Assemblies be bound as a foresaid, that then it is not lawful to communicate
with them in their Ministry.

M. Johnson therefore must be put to this pains, To prove this consequent.

For further proof of the former consequent, he brings six Reasons more out
of his own old and fusty horn of store which prove the consequent just a
baculo ad augulum. To which it shall be needless to give answer, they being
profes clean besides the purpose of these reasons, which is to justify their
schism by grounds taken from our own writings.

The Consequent then of the Proposition being evidently falls, The Assumption
though it should have never so much ground from our own writings, will stand
him in noe stead.

THE FOVRTH REASON TAKEN OVT OF THE ADMOnitions to the Parliament. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
IF the Offices of Arch Bishops, Arch Deacons, Lord Bishops, Suffraces,
Parsons, Vicars, etc. be Antichristian and contrary to the Scriptures, then
the people of God may not communicate with them in their Ministry.
Ergo,
The first is true. The later also.
Answer.
The Consequent is false, and he goes not about to prove it, by any thing
taken out of our own writings but by a stale proof that has been answered
before; and therefore it requires noe answer, only thus much of free bounty.
That the offices of Arch Bishops etc. quatenes tales, are not of the essence of
the Ministry of our Church Assemblies but mere Accidents.

The Assumption therefore will stand him in noe steed whether it be true or
falls, and therefore I leave it to their maintenance from whom he says he
borrows it.

THE FIFTH REASON TAKEN OVT OF THE offer of Conference. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
IF the Propositions propounded to be maintained in the offer of Conference
be true, To avoid tediousnes, I forbear to set them down as M Johnson has
done, but thou shall discern what they are afterward in the Answer.
then is it not lawful to hear or have any special Communion with the
present Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England. But those Propositions
are true.
Ergo,
It is not lawful to have any Special Communion with the same.

Answer.
The Consequent is false; and does not follow from the said Propositions.

1. Though it should be granted, That all matters merely Ecclesiastical,
lawfully imposed upon any Church are such as may be concluded necessarily from
the written word of God. Yet in a true constituted Church some matters merely
Ecclesiastical may be imposed through human frailty, that cannot so be
concluded.

2. Though, all human ordinances used only or specially in Gods worship,
whereunto they are not necessary of themselves were simply unlawful. Yet is not
every such human ordinance of that nature, that it makes the Church and
Ministry where it is used, to be a falls Church, and Ministry, much less
those Churches, and that Ministry, wherein it is not used, but injoined only.

3. Though it were generally granted of all, That every true visible Church of
Christ is such a Spiritual body politic as is specially instituted by Christ,
or his Apostles in the new Testament. Yet it will not thence follow, That those
Churches, and Ministeries are not to be communicated withal, that have any
thing in or appertaining to the constitution thereof not instituted by Christ;
or that such Churches are not true visible Churches.

4. Though, every true visible Church of Christ or ordinary Assembly of the
faithful, has by Christ's ordinance power in it self immedialy under Christ,
to elect and ordain, deprive and depose, their Ministers, and to execute all
other Ecclesiastical Censures. Yet will it not follow from thence, That all
they are falls Churches, and not to be communicated with all. That do not or
by the laws of man are not suffered to use that power, Nether is it sure the
meaning of them who offer the Conference, To maintain, That they are no true
visible Churches of Christ that cannot use that power; but are therein subject
to others; for one may by Christ's ordinance have a power to do that which yet
in regard of man he has noe power to do.

5. Though, the Pastor of a particular congregation should be yealded to be
the highest ordinary Ecclesiastical officer in any true constituted visible
Church of Christ. Yet ca^ it not hence be concluded, That those Pastors are
falls Pastors, who are outwardly by man's laws, subjected to a Superior
Ecclesiastical officer. The Father ordinary is the highest officer in the
family; yet if the Magistrate subject the father in some matters appertaining
to the family to another, Though therein it may be he may do the father some
wrong, yet does not the father thereby become a falls father, or the family a
falls family. Admit then that this prerogative due to Pastors, to have noe
Spiritual officers superior unto them, yet is it not so essential unto him,
that without the Actual use and possession of it, he cannot be a true
Pastor; And yet take a true visible Church in that sense, which the officers of
the conference do viz. for a particular ordinary Assembly or Congregation, And
then in our own Churches, The Pastor is the higest, there being noe
Ecclesiastical Officer in any such Churches, a boue him.

6. Grant this, That it is the office of every true. Pastor to teach and
Govern Spiritually one Congregation immediately under Christ. Can it from
hence be concluded, That they are noe true Pastors, which govern more
congregations then one, or which are subject in some outward things to some
others besides Christ.

7. Admit, That the offices of Provincial and diocesan Bishops were contrary
to the word of God; must it needs there upon follow, That those Ministers, and
Churches which are under them by the laws of man, are falls: such especially
who obey them only in things which they judge honest, and lawful, and who
under this subjection do no more then they would do, if they were not subject
at all unto the Bishops.

A man must therefore bring a better head, and wit with him, then M. Iohnsons,
That by the Propositions of the offer of Conference (how harsh soever they may
seem to be) can conclude it unlawful to join and communicate with our
Church Assemblies.

For the proof of this consequent he brings nothing out of our own writings,
but only to give his reader thereby a vomit, some of his own Coleworts, not
twice, but twice twenty times sodden; To which we give him leave to look an
Answer, from some as idle headded as himself.

THE SIXTH ARGUMENT TAKEN OVT OF Diverse Treatises Answered. This Proposition
being a whole leaf in his book. I forbear any further anser down, there being
in effect little difference in the matter from that which he has formerly
brought.

Fr. Ihon.
IF the is Assertious be true, That that Church calling for which the
Scripture give noe express warrant, is merely usurped, and utterly unlawful,
That as it is not lawful to bring in any strange doctrine, so is it not lawful,
to teach the true doctrine under the name of any other function then is
instituted by God, etc. But the aforesaid Assertions are true. Therefore it is
unlawful to have communion with that Ministry.
Answer.
This Argument being a collection out of our writers does not differ from the
former; as himself grants, and therefore needs noe further Answer.

The Consequent is false, and he proves it not by any of our own writers, as
he ought to do, but still brings us profes out of his own musty Aumbry.

The Assumption therefore borrowed out of our own writers, will do him noe
pleasure.

THE SEVENTH REASON TAKEN OVT OF THE twelve Arguments viz. the tenth. EXAMINED.
Fr. John.
IT is a sin against Christ the sole head of the Church, to have spiritual
communion with those Ministers, which in their Administration of divine things
do either by word or deed solemly profess and yeald a spiritual homage to an
usurped spiritual Authority in the Church. But so do the Ministers of the
Church Assemblies of England. Ergo, It is a sin to have communion with the
same.
Answer.
The Proposition is false; And has noe ground from that Proposition in the 12.
Arguments unto which he would match, and forth of which he would draw it. The
Proposition there is this. It is a sin against Christ, the sole head of the
Church, for any one of his Ministers, especially in the administration of
divine things, either by words or signs, solemly to profess, and acknowledge,
a spiritual homage to a usurped Sperituall authority in the Church. Can he
conclude his proposition from this does it hence follow, That because our
Ministers in their Ministry if they conform do in some measure in infirmity
or ignorance commit some such sin, That therefore it is a sin to communicate
with them, in other divine things, wherein they do not commit the same sin?

He tells us, That the Proposition may not be gaine-said, and why does he
tell us so? because the Author of the 12. Arguments says, his Proposition may
not be denied. As though there were just the same reason for the one as is for
the other; But why may not the Proposition; Because all Spiritual power
usurped over the Churches of God is an Antichristian Authority, and to
communicate with those Ministers which Profess Spiritual homage thereunto, is
to communicate which such as profess Spiritual homage to Antichrist, which
must needs be a sin against Christ the head of the Church. A deep and
learned Reason. It can be no sin against Christ, to communicate with them,
which in some action profess Spiritual homage to Antichrist, except in their
communion, they also profess the same homage, which like an ignorant
disputant, he makes noe question of. As though to join with one, that does
evil, in that which is good, is always to join with him in the evil, as
though to join with a glutton in eating necessary food, were to join with him
in his gluttony, or to join with a blasphemer, in the act of his blaspheming
in rescuing an inocent out of the hands of Robbers, were to communicate with
him in his blasphemy; But herein he propounds only to play the Ape imitating
the Author of the twelve Arguments, who says his Proposition may not be gain
said, Because all Spiritual Power usurped over the Churches of God, is an
Antichristian Authority, and to profess spiritual homage thereunto, is to
profess spiritual homage unto Antichrist, which must needs be a sin. But
what? is there no more Reason in this reason then in his? If this be a good
Argument to prove that Proposition for which it is brought, must his Argument
needs, be as good to prove his proposition? what because it is a sin to
profess Special homage unto Antichrist must it needs also be a sin, to
communicate also with them, who do profess some homage unto Antichrist, what?
to communicate with them in other matters?

The Assumption is as falls as the Proposition, And has noe ground for the
twelve Arguments, for though it were granted, That to use the controverted
ceremonies in manner and form prescribed were even in the solemn worship of
Christ by solemn signs to acknowledge a spiritual homage to a spiritual
usurped Authority of Arch Bishops and Bishops. Yet does it not ther-from
follow, That our Ministers in the administration of divine things, do the
same; for none of our Ministers do always in the administration of divine
things profess any such homage, and some do never profess it. And those who
profess it, when they do profess it, propound, and intend noe such matter.

He proves the Assumption, Thus

They preach the word and administer the Sacraments by virtue of their calling
received from the Archbishops and Bishops, etc. The vanity whereof has been
sufficiently showed all-ready he therein begging one of his stale reasons, and
not borrowing any thing, from the twelve Arguments. That which follows,
whereby he would prove, That the Authority of L. Archbishops, and Bishops is
usurped, which he makes the 2. parts of his Assumption; is altogether idle, and
to noe purpose, and done only of malice to the Author of the twelve Arguments
for otherwise, had he intended herein the convincing of the said Author, and
of them which are of his mind, (which is the only use of the later sort of
his reasons, and which can serve for noe other use) it had been sufficient to
have produced his Assertion without his profes; for that had been enough to
declare, The Authors conceit.

He concludes crowing as if he were some Cock of the game, that had picked
out the eyes and broken the necks of all that have been set against him. And
thus (says he) the cause is yealded by themselves. And is it not (think we)
finely yealded? is it not a field stoutly won, Is it any mervaille, that he
makes such out cries against the wholl Christian world, that will not follow
such a leader.

But I leave him to his vain conceits of his own cause, Trusting that any
sober and judicious Christian, will be able to discern, therein his fond and
ignorant vanity. And where as in the Answer of his Reasons, I have omitted to
answer to many particular passages. All things considered I shall not need to
ask him pardon, I should rather have cause to expect thanks, if I had to deal
with a reasonable and good natured adversary.

REASONS OR ARGVMENTS, TENDING TO PROVE THAT IT IS A sin to separate from the
public Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England.
DIRECTLY CONTRARY TO Mr. IONHSONS OWN Reasons.
AND VSVALLY IN THAT REgard made in the same mood and figure.
The first Argument.
It is a sin to separate from that Ministry which is set by Christ in his
Church for the work of his Ministry.

But such is the Ministry of the Church Assemblies of England.

Therefore it is a sin to separate from it.

The profes which he brings to confirm the maine Proposition of his first
Reason, will serve to prove this.

The Assumption may be proved thus. The Ministry of true Pastors and Teachers
is the Ministry which is set by Christ in his Church. The Ministry aforesaid
is the Ministry of true Pastors and Teachers. Therefore it is a Ministry set
by Christ in his Church.
The Proposition is his own.

The Assumption I prove thus.

The Ministry which has in it all things essential to the office and calling
of true Pastors and Teachers is the Ministry of true Pastors and Teachers.

But such is our Ministry.

Therefore it is the Ministry of true Pastors and Teachers.

I think he is not so simple as to deny the Proposition.

The Assumption is proved thus.

To have such gifts as Christ ascended to heaven to give for the work of his
Ministry. To be outwardly called to that work by such a Church as professes
the fondamentall points of the Gospel. To instruct the people committed to
their Charge, in the doctrine of the law and Gospel: To administer unto them
the holy Sacraments of Christ, And to be their month in prayer unto God; Are
all things essentially appertaining to the office of true Pastors and Teachers.

Such is the Ministry of our Assemblies.

Therefore it is the true Ministry of Pastors and Teachers.

If he deny the Proposition, he must show, what other matters do essentially
appartaine unto their calling which yet he has not done.

For confirmation of the Assumption it shall be sufficient that we can set
forth unto him, such a Ministry in sundry of our Church Assemblies, of which
all these points may be truly verified, their conformity to the State, and
their sin therein (if any be) not withstanding.

The second Argument.
The Ministry of our Church Assemblies is not the Ministry of Antichrists
Apostasy.

Therefore it is a sin to separate from the same.

The consequent must be true until he can bring forth any other exceptions
against our Ministry then such as appertain to the Ministry of Antichrists
Apostasy.

The Assumption is proved thus.

The Ministry of the Church Assemblies of Antichrist is of Priests and Deacons.

But the Ministry of our Church Assemblies is not the Ministry of Priests and
Deacons.

Therefore it is not the Ministry of Antichrists Apostasy.

The Proposition is his own.

The Assumption if I should follow his learning, I might prove thus, The
Ministry of true Pastors, and Teachers is not the Ministry of Priests and
Deacons.

But such is the Ministry of our Assemblies. Ergo, and for the proof of the
Assumption, I might send him back again to my first Argument. But I will leave
such a kind of disputing to himself, as his own peculier, and prove it
otherwise thus.

That Ministry which in the maine and essential faculties, and offices
thereof, is opposite to the maine, and essential faculties, functions and
offices of Priests, and Deacons is not the Ministry of Priests, and Deacons.
But such is our Ministry. Therefore it is not the Ministry of Priests and
Deacons.
The Proposition is undeniable.

The Assumption may be proved thus.

That Ministry which is opposite to the Sacrafice of the Mass, is opposite to
the maine and essential faculties, functions and offices of Priests and
Deacons. Such is our Ministry. Therefore it is opposite to the maine and
essential faculties of Priests and Deacons.
I do not see, which of these Premises he can with any colorable reason
deny. I will therefore for bear to proceed further in this Argument: until I
see what he can say against it.

The third Argument.
That Ministry which professing Christ by maintaining his covenant with the
seals of it, does directly and professedly war against the Beast and against
all that worship his Image, and receave his mark in their forehead and hand,
cannot without sin be separated from.

Such is our Ministry.

Therefore it cannot without sin be separated from.

The Proposition is true. For noe Ministry so professing Christ, but the true
Ministry of Jesus Christ, does directly and professedly war in manner, and
form aforesaid.

The Assumption I prove thus.

That Ministry which so professing opposes it self professedly to the Pope of
Rome as that great Antichrist, which directly and expressly renounceth all
Ecclesiastical homage unto him, or any of his professed clergy, That denies
and disputes against (most effectually) all the maine and foundamentall points
of Popery, which opposes it self to the uttermost of the strength and Power
thereof, to all the professed friends of the Pope, and Church of Rome, That
houldeth and maintains all the members thereof to be heretics and Idolators,
and in the state of condemnation, and such as no good Christian ought to
communicate spiritually withal, That Ministry (I say) does directly war
against the beast, and against all that worship his Image, etc. But all this is
done in and by our Ministry. Therefore it does directly, and professedly
war against the Beast, etc.
I know not which of these Propositions he can with any face deny; but deny
either when he will, I shall be ready to prove them.

The fourth Argument.
That Ministry which, deriveth the power and functions thereof from Christ
cannot without sin be separated from.

The Ministry of our Church Assemblies deriveth the Power and functions thereof
from Christ. Therefore it cannot without sin be separated from.
The profes of the maine proposition of this fourth Argument will serve to
prove this Proposition.

The Assumptio^ is as sufficiently proved by my third and first Argument as his
contrary, is by his third and first. But I further prove it thus.

If the Power and functions of our Ministry for the substance thereof, be the
very same, for which Christ ascended up into Heaven to procure for the
edification of his body the Church, then does it for the substance thereof,
derive the Power and functions thereof from Christ. But the first is true,
therefore the later is true also.
The Consequent of the Proprosition is undeniable.

The Assumption is as undeniable, Except he can show any substantial
difference between the one and the other.

The fifth Argument.
That Ministry which works upon the Consciences of men, by a true spiritual
calling cannot without sin be separated from. Such is our Ministry.
Therefore it cannot without sin be separated from.
The Proposition cannot be gain said.

The Assumption is proved by my 2. Argument, but I further prove it in this
manner.

That Ministry which works upon the Consciences of men only by a spiritual
gift and grace given by Christ, and directed by the word of God, does work
upon the consciences of men by a true Spiritual calling. These does the
Ministry of our Church Assemblies. Therefore it works upon the consciences of
men by a true Spiritual calling.
The truth of either of these Propositions, I shall easily prove, if they be
deinde.

The sixth Argument.
The Ministry of our Church Assemblies is noe strange Ministry. Therefore it is
a sin to separate from it.
This Anticedent is better proved by my first Argument: then his contrary
Assumption is by his first Argument. I prove it not withstanding thus.

That Ministry which for the substance thereof, was practiced by Christ, the
Apostles many worthy and famous Martyrs and witnesses of Jesus Christ in Church
Assemblies is no strange Ministry. Such is our Ministry for the substance
thereof. Therefore it is no strange Ministry.
Surely he will never deny the Proposition.

Nether can he deny the Assumption, except he can show a Substantial
difference, between the Ministeries aforesaid.

The seventh Argument.
That Ministry which is from Heaven cannot without sin be separated from.
The Ministry of our Church Assemblies is from Heaven. Therefore it cannot
without sin be separated from.
The Proposition is plain.

The Assumption is proved by all the former Arguments, which in his logic
Schools, in his own cause is proof good enough. But I ad a further proof.

That Ministry which in all the parts and Power thereof is principally
excercized and directed, to bring men to Heaven is a Ministry from Heaven.
Such is our Ministry aforesaid. Therefore it is from Heaven.
The Proposition is firm. It being not possible, that that Ministry which is
from Earth or hell should be principally directed and excercized in all the
parts and Powers thereof to bring men to Heaven.

The Assumption may not be denied, except he can show in what other thing it
is more principally excercized, and to what other end, directed, which he can
never do.

AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN DEMANDES OFTEN PVBLISHED by M. Johnson, the deciding
whereof (as he says) will end the controversies between him and us.
The first Demand.
WHether the Lord Jesus Christ have by his last will and Testament, given unto
and set in his Church, sufficient ordinary officers, with their calling, work
and maintenance: for the administration of his holy things, and for the
sufficient ordinary instruction, guidance and service of his Church, to the
end of the world.

1 I Answer directly (understanding by Officers, spiritual officers) that he
has; And that it is a Sin herein to break his will and testament, either by
depriving the Church of any of those officers, or by bringing into it any other
kind, with any other kind of calling, or work, then he has appointed in
the same.

2. That not withstanding this, the Civil Magistrate has power, to set over
the Churches of Christ in his Dominions, Commissioners and overseers, which are
not specially appointed by Christ in his Testament, civilly to guide and
govern the Churches, and to maintain those privileges, liberties, offices
and orders, that Christ has endowed them with all, against all the enemies,
both without and within the same.

3. Concerning the maintenance of the Ministers: Christ has set down no more
in his Testament, then this in effect, That the labourer is worthy of his
hire: And that for their Ministration of Spiritual things, the Churches that
enjoy their labors, ought to Minister to them, of their Temporals. But after
what especial manner, they shall be maintained, he has (for ought appears
yet to the contrary) either left it to the discretion of the Churches, if they
have the free disposition of their temporal goods in their own hand: or of
the Christian Magistrate, who in such cases may see what is fitter, then the
Churches themselves.

The second Demand.
Whether the Offices of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons and Helpers, be
those offices appointed by Christ in his Testament before said? Or whether the
present ecclesiastical offices of Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Suffraganes,
Deanes, Prebendaries, Cannons, Petty Cannons, Priests, Deacons, Archdeacons,
Doctors of Divinity, Chaplins or House-Priests, Commissaries, Officials,
Proctors, Apparitors, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Vagrant or Mercenary, Preachers,
Churchwardens, Sidemen, Clerks, Sextons. and the rest now had in the
Cathedral and perishionall Assemblies, be those offices oppointed by Christ
in his Testament, as is aforesaid or no?

1. I grant, that the Offices in the first place mentionned, are those very
offices which Christ has appointed that there is no Church of Christ, but has
use and need of them; And that such are someway defective, that want any one of
them.

2. That yet not withstanding, they may be true Churches, that want some of
them; yea the chiefest of them, as those Assemblies of our own profession in
England, have for many years (as I take it) bin without, either all or chiefest
of them; And yet they judge themselves true Churches: yea, though they have not
so much as the Sacraments administered amongst them.

3. Where the Civil Magistrate does his duty as he ought: and where the
Churches have the benifit of his help, for the suppressing of sin, and the
relieving of the poor, and those that are in any distres (which the
Apostolical Churches wanted) there the want of some of these offices, may be
the better borne with all: and the Church less defective, that does want them,
especially the two latter.

4. I grant that none of those offices here mentioned in the latter part
(excepting that of Deacons,) are in name those offices which Christ has
appointed: some of them, nether in name, nor in deed: some in deed, though not
in name; Some have the name of that, which indeed they are not; Some though
they be set over the Churches: Yet are not indeed any proper offices of the
Church; Some offices here named nether in deed nor name, as they are such, are
ecclesiastical offices, but only school Titles and dignities given to men
eminent in learning, for encouragement of others to study good letters,
especially divinity.

5. All the offices appointed by Christ to be in his Church* to the end of the
world, in effect and substance may be found contained under some of these,
though somewhat disguised with strange names, borrowed from the Church of Rome:
and the principal and most necessary, are under some of these. For many of
these which you dispitfully call, mercenary Preachers, Priests, House-Priests:
yea, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, are in very deed and truth, in office and
practice (whatsoever they are in name) The very Pastors and Teachers, that
Christ has ordained, ministering in his Churches, according to their places and
callings: And those gifts which Christ had bestowed upon them al, the ordinary
means of salvation. As for these varitie of names, most of them arise, from
that varitie of maintenance that is in our Churches, and not of their
spiritual offices; So that in this manner to dispute against our Churches,
because the Ministers thereof, have such and such names, is: as though one
should dispute against the Church of the Jews in Christ's time and have denied
communion with it, asking; whether Priests, Levites, and Prophets, were not
those officers which God had appointed to govern the Church of the Jews with
all? Or whether Scribes, Pharisees, Saduces, Captains of the Temple, Rulers of
the Synagogues, Doctors of the Law, Centurions, Soldiers, the Highpriests
Servants, etc. were those Officers? Or as if one disputing against your own
Churches, or those which have (though not so fully, as you would have them)
interteined the same discipline with you, should: to warrant their separation
from you, and their condemnation of you as false Churches, move the very same
question in nature unto you; Asking you whether Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Deacons and Helpers, be not those Offices, which Christ has appointed in his
Testament: Or whether Schismatics, Refractaries, lay-Aldermen; Parish Bishops,
Consistorians, Parish Popes, Proctors of spitle houses, Dawbers, Thackers,
Tailers, Tinkers, etc. be those Officers? for thus it has pleased some, to put
these odious names upon those, which bearre and exercise the offices of
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc.

The third Demand.
Whether the callings and entrance into the ecclesiastical offices aforesaid,
their administration and maintenance, now had and retained in England, be the
manner of calling, administration and maintenance, which Christ has appointed,
for the Offices of the Church, above named, or no?

Not to stand (for the avoiding of multiplicity of vnnessarie questions) upon
defense of the calling, entrance, administration and maintenance of all; I
answer directly and plainly, That the Calling, entrance, administration and
maintenance, of many (at the least) that are called into ecclesiastical
offices, is in very effect and substance the same, that Christ has appointed.
They are men instructed in the knowledge of good Letters, especially in
divinity. They have a gift in some good measure, to devide the word of God,
according to the necessities of the people, over whom they are set. They have a
desire, to do Christ and his Church service in his Ministry, and a purpose to
give themselves over unto that work. They have in some good measure, (for none
has them in perfection) all those graces and gifts that Paul to Timothy,
requires to be in Bishops and Elders; They are so judged and esteemed to be
of other Ministers, and well grounded Christians, and of those people which
submit unto their Ministry, who accepting of them and their Ministry as sent
of God, desiring and yealding themselves to live under them, as is fitting for
Christians: And they resolving to guide and govern them, as becomes
spiritual leaders and guides; Such calling and entrance as this, have many of
our Church Officers; more then this in substance and effect, is not appointed
by Christ. Those defects and errors which over and besides, many time; they
yeald unto in their calling, entrance and administration, are not of that
nature and quality, that they make anullitie thereof, or make it a falls, and
Antichristian calling, entrance or administration. The maintenance they live
by, as it is no where in special appointed of Christ: so is it no where in
general, or special forbidden; In the yealding wher-of unto the Ministers,
they fulfill the Testament of Christ, in giving of their temporal things, for
spiritual, in giving hire to the Laborers, etc. and do not therein break any
parts else thereof, he having no where forbiden, any such manner of maintenance,
but left it indifferent, to give money or fruits, In fruits to give the
twentieth, the twelfth, the tenth, the eighth of the increase, according either
to their estate, or the necessity of the Ministers, wherein the Magistrate
has authority to rule and define, who has in his hand, the power of men's
temporal estates; or the Church, if the Magistrate leave unto them, the free
use of their own Temporalties; Nether is the tenth required to be given by the
Magistrate, or yealded to be given by the Church, to the maintenaince of the
Ministers, any more ceremonial or Judicial, in regard of the number, then in
regard of the matter; Nether did their any Ministry, lie so much in the
quantity of the thing given, as in the very gift and offering it self; So that
by the same reason, that you make it unlawful, for Ministers to be maintained
by tithes, you make it unlawful for them, to have any kind of maintenance
from the Church, there having bin a Ceremony, in the very matter it self, as
much as in the quantity, or number. For not only their giving the tithe of
their increase, but also the very giving of their increase it self, out of
that consideration, was ceremonial.

The fourth Demand.
Whether every true visible Church of Christ, be not a company of people
called and separated out from the world, and the false worship and ways
thereof, by the word of God: and joined together in the fellowship of the
Gospel, by voluntary profession of the faith, and obedience of Christ?

I answer, 1. That every true visible Church of Christ is such a people.

2. That yet, not withstanding they be such; they may in their infirmity and
ignorance, walk in some of the ways, and practice some parts of the false
worship of the world, not withstanding their said separation, conjunction and
profession.

3. They may in time become, the true visible Churches of Christ, which at the
first were not, in the said manner and form, called, separated and joined
together, but forced and constrained against their will by the sword of the
Magistrate. 4. Many of those Churches in our kingdom from which you separate,
as they now stand, are such a company of people, so called, separated and
joined together: though in all three, there may be some kind of defects and
wants.

The fifth Demand.
Whether the Sacraments, being the seals of righteousness which is by faith,
may be administered unto any other, but to the faithful and their feed: or in
any other Ministry, or manner then is appointed by Jesus Christ, the Apostle
and high Priest of our profession? And whether they be no otherwise
administered, in our Cathedral and Parishionall Churches in England.

1. I grant, that the Sacraments ought to be administered, only to the
faithful in outward profession, and their seed, and in no other Ministry, or
manner, then is appointed by Christ.

2. In many of our Churches (at the least) they are administered in no other
manner, from and by no other Ministry, then Christ has appointed: nor to no
other persons. 3. Every error and defect, in some part of the matter, and
form, and ministry, a rising of ignorance, or infirmity, makes not the
Churches falls Churches; except you hold, That no true particular Church can
err, which is a more gross opinion, then that of the Papists.

The sixth Demand.
Whether the book of Common Prayer, with the feasts, fasts, holy days,
stinted Prayers and liturgy prescribed therein, and used in these Assemblies,
be the true worship of God, commanded in his word: or the devise and invention
of man, for Gods worship and service.

1. Though it should be granted, that the book of Common prayer in all the
parts and percels thereof, is not the true worship of God, but contains in it
some devises and inventions of man; yet, the true worship of God (not
withstanding) is prescribed in it.

2. So much of it as is used in many of our Churches, is the true worship of
God, and in effect commanded in his word.

3. Those devises and inventions of men, with the feasts, fasts and holy days
therein prescribed, though they should be granted, to be sins and corruptions
in our Churches, and such as ought not to be conformed unto: and such as we
ought rather to separate from our Churches then either by subscription,
conformity, or any other means, to approve; yet are they not of that nature,
that the simple use of any, or all of them, does destroy the very being of
those Churches, which use them: making them falls Churches, and such as we may
have no spiritual communion withal, no not in the best things.

The seventh Demand.
Whether all people and Churches without exception, be not bound in Religion
only, to receive and submit unto that Ministry, worship and order, which
Christ as Lord and King, has given and appointed to his Church? Or whether any
may receive and join unto another devised by man, for the service of God? And
consequently, whether they that join to the present ecclesiastical Ministry,
worship and order of the Cathedral, and Parishionall Assemblies, can be
assured by the word of God, that they join to the former ordained by Christ,
and not to the latter devised by man, even the man of sin, for the worship
and service of God?

1. I grant that we are bound in Religion, to do that which is specified in
the first part of your question.

2. To join with our eccleasiiasticall Ministry, worship and orders (at least
in those Assemblies, whether Cathedral or other, when and where all things are
not performed, according to the rigor of our laws) is not to join with a
Ministry and worship, devised by that man of sin: but (though not in all the
specialties and formalities thereof) with such a Ministry and worship, as is
required and instituted of God.

3. They which join to the present ecclesiastical Ministry, worship and
order of the Cathedral or Parishionall Assemblies in those things which are
performed therein, according to the true intent and meaning of our laws,
though some things be done not warrantable by the word: yet they may be
assured by the word of God, that they join to the substance of that Ministry,
worship and order, which Christ as Lord and King, has given and appointed to
his Church; At least they may be as well assured thereof by Gods word, as any
that join with the present ecclesiastical Ministry, worship and order of the
Assemblies of those of the Separation, can be assured by the same word, that
they join to that form, which is ordained by Christ.


