RAGLANDS NIOBE: OR, ELIZAS ELEGY: Addressed to the unexpiring memory of the
most noble Lady, ELIZABETH HERBERT, wife to the truly honorable, EDWARD
SOMERSET Lord HERBERT, etc.

By RI. BRATHWAIT, Esquire.

-- Surrepta, refulsit in orb
Clarior --
Imprinted by F. K. for Robert Bostocke, at the Kings head in Saint Paul's
Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE HONORABLE, EDWARD SOMERSET, Lord HERBERT, my most noble and
accomplished Lord;
Treasures of Comforts, after these Tributes of tears.
PEruse your own, my Lord, and be content;
Co^cluding hence, on earth naught permanent:
But if in this inferior Globe of ours
Ought constant be, it is my Zeal to yours.
NIOBAEUS.

ELISABETH HERBERT.
Anag. Here a blessed birth.
Hear, here blessed birth, with thy divinest ears
Thy true-devoted Servants funeral tears;
That 't may appear; our Muse has done thee right
In throbbing to this Age thy last good night.
RAGLANDS NIOBE: Or, ELIZA'S Elegy.
STil-silent Night unveile thy sable eyes,
And eye ye loss of this unequalled prize
Our Family bemones: resolve to tears,
And sympathize with every one that bears
A share in these sad rites. When Stars do fall,
Thou make that Astrolabe thy Funeral:
Straight thou immasks thy face, contracts thy blood,
And shrowds thy virgin beauty in a cloud.
Hear me, Latona! of all stars that were
Or ever shone in this inferior Spheere,
The truly purest and refinedst One
Is from our Orb, to gain more glory, gone.
Why should not we then imitatours be
Of that compassion we conceive in thee?
Admit these Halcyon days give Her increase
Of honor, glory, beauty, plenty, peace,
With that blessed confluence of heavenly store,
Which crowns pure souls when they arrive a shore.
We that are Mortals ever have more sense
Of our own want, than others affluence.
Tell me thou State-surrounded STRAND, can find
Through all thy Prospects a selecter mind
Clothed in a choicer dress! Pray, look about,
Thou can not choose but see some face peep out
T'attract the forced Spectator; but that skin
Is it so sleeke as't has no stains within?
Is it a native tincture? do'es it woo
The gazer without art? or if it do,
Is it accomplished with some better part
To pollish nature with diviner art?
Has it adorning graces to make good
The splendour of her beauty or her blood?
Can it converse with fashion, and appear
Discreet in her election what to wear?
Can it send out her cies, and not be taken,
Or to take Others make it not her aim?
Can it discourse without affected state,
Or hearken Lightness with a blushing hate?
Can it distinguish times and persons too?
Reserve a state without a seeming show?
Can it pursue the Object it affects
With more divine than sensual respects?
Can it esteem of beauty as it is?
Imparadize her thoughts in future bliss?
Can find me this rare Phoenix? I much doubt,
Thou loosest time in seeking of her out.
Two Phoenixes at once were never seen,
It is enough, that such an One has been.
Thou have indeed, a choice varietye
Of mortal beauties to surprise the eye
Of a Zenocrates; but so divine
Would not suite well with fashions of the time.
Complete and complementall are two things,
Which different constructions ever brings:
For what is an outward dress, or seeming fair,
A vading breath resolving into air?
What Is permanent is good, nor can it be
So styled, that is short of this eternity.
But thou had One in that Elysian grove!
A precious Sprigge of virtue, beauty, love;
Yea, such a Seat, as no diviner grace
But in her Saintly bosom had a place.
One richly stored with all the gifts of nature,
Of graceful presence and attractive feature;
And what was richer far than all the rest,
An heavenly fancy in an holy breast.
For show me One within this Orb of ours,
That was so young in years and old in hours.
So sweetly humble and compassionate,
So well composed in the posture of her state;
So loyal in her love, so firm to those
Who in her Honor did their hopes repose.
And now, me thinks, in this high overflow
Of boundless sorrow, I am fixed on you,
You sad Attendants, whom she used to cheer
With pleasing language, while she breathed here.
The loss you feel is poised above compare,
Yet, as I live, I love to bear a share
In such depressive burdens: for these be,
As I am yours, reflecting upon me.
Let Us then a mutual sorrow entertain,
And moisten this dry earth that wants rain,
With our distreaming tears: for Heavens have kept,
Thus long their Conduits shut, and have not wept,
That with profuser treasures they might store
Our native Mother, and wet eyes deplore
This sad Occasion: Sad, indeed, to us
Who eye the Countenance of that heavy house,
Where every Habit, Object as we pass,
Proclaim thus much, time is not as it was.
While every silent accent seems to breath
The last farewell of our Elizabeth.
Divine Elysian Lady! O that eyes
Made Niobe's, could rescue such a prize!
There is no mortal could so highly err
As did our last years weak Astronomer,
Who found no Eclypse in our Zodiake here,
Nor any darkness in this Hemispheere.
I have found One, (I Am sure) and more than I,
With a great inundation in each eye;
So as, that part which we call Christalline
Is now dissolved to a Sea of brine.
Tears be those Treasures which we mortals use
To pay to such we loved: nor can we choose
To do less to this Shrine, the scattred dust
Of that diviner part, which amongst the just
Holds her eternal Annall: tell me where
I may my Object take without a tear.
No where, O no where! though all humane state
Be by injunction subject unto fate,
Which solely makes distinction 'twixt the good,
And those who with foul actions stain pure blood:
For these make State a Subterfuge to guilt,
Ttriumphing in those conduits they have spilt
Through their profuser bounty: whereas those
Who are to none but vice professed foes,
Live in their dissolution, and receive
A lasting odor from a dying grave.
Yet when such glorious Lights their splendour loose,
Not to themselves but to our earthly house,
As those fair structures have their glory lost,
Which by their breathing beauty shined most,
Who can dispense with grief, surcease to moan,
Unless he be a Stoicke or a stone?
I must confess, the Thracians did express
An Emblem of our humane wretchedness;
Who in a various strain of moan and mirth,
Wept when men came, joy'd when they went from earth.
Which temper, sure, in earthly walls enclosed,
Seems in my judgment pretiously composed,
And such as we should imitate: yet when
Like men, we think how we conversed with them
Who now are closed from our longing eyes,
How much we their society did prize,
What choice delight we took in their resort,
How much their fame improved our report,
How short quicke-vading minutes dropped away,
How the closing Evening crowned the cheerful day,
What sweet Communion of Comforts too
Which friend on friend did mutually bestow,
With what a rare Confection of relief
In the communicating of their grief,
One drained from another; and that one
Divorced now from his sight, dislodged and gone;
He far transcends the mould of humane state,
Who scorns in this to be effeminate.
Deaths Lachrymae, indeed, is such a song,
So short's the Scene of grief, it lasts not long:
Yet where impressive virtues did appear,
They have an Anniversall every year.
And such were thine, blessed Saint, whose light shall give
Direction unto others how to live.
Is It irreligious then to shed a tear
For one, where such choice virtues lodged were?
A Gardener would discontented seem
If that prime flower he held in most esteem,
Should be mel-dew'd or cropped before the time;
Can we do less for her, who in her prime
Was cropped by the hand of D^^eh? much wonder I
At popular amazement, who descry
A strange distraction in perplexed eyes,
When they contemplate vulgar rarities:
And such as from mere natural causes spring,
As when they see the Sunbeams wrestling
With interposed shades: this eclyps'd light
Darts an astonishment unto their sight.
Good God (thus will they say) that which did show
Such beauteous rays, how is it darkened now?
Where is that beaming glory which revived
The inferior Orb? how is it now deprived
Of his late full-spread vigor? how it is spent
Which gave to all things life and nourishment?
Draw nearer wondering Mortals, and see here
A glorious Light reft from our Hemispheere!
One, upon whose clear brow no Cloud e're sat,
Nor e're eyed Object that she aimed at
But what she might affect: nor personate
An unbeseeming introduced state:
Nor gloze in painted goodness: nor express
More than her Soul did inwardly profess:
Nor feed her fancy with conceits of time,
But closed her Life's Act with a Scene divine.
And this same taking beauty now is gone,
Reft from our sight! which while we think upon,
It Is not sufficient to bemoane her death,
But to observe how sweetly virtues breath
In her expired Corpse; and that her Fate,
Blessed Fate! h'as left what wee're to imitate.
"Death from oblivion will exempt no blood,
"Unless that Highness be recorded good.
For Monumentall structures may be said
E^ected more for the living than the dead.
These have their date and period, and must turn
To dust, like mouldred ashes in an Urne.
Where virtue scorns such confines, being known
To lean on no supportance, but her own.
Nor do I muse why thou should virtuous be,
Being derived from such a Family,
Whose Actions stream in goodness; they who gave
First life to thee, no less Memorialls have
In Times deserving Annals: DORMERS name
Retein's in the accent a sufficient fame
To second our assertion: and to show
Thy Mothers house was corresponding too
In lineall acts of goodness, and what might
Give to a noble line a living light,
I Will only name Him, whom never age could tax,
The all-approved-loved MVLLINAX.
Dear to his own, to strangers debonaire,
Dear to the Muses, who Joves darlings are,
Firm where he does profess, entire to such
Who know, but make no boast of knowing much:
And to sum all in one, such a right Lord
He scorns naught more then sleighting of his word.
Derived from these; that runs through all thy veins,
Which by descent peculiar title claims
In thine now after thee: to whom I mean
In this expiring Ode t'addresse my Scene.
Blessed Babes! Sweet Graces! for you are but three;
And may you be, as your House shows to me,
Still gracious; my suit shall be but one,
That you may represent Her that is gone
In your surviving virtues. First, to you
Right Noble Sir, let 't be your task to show
His name, and nature From HENRY now Earl of WORSTER, his Grandfather.
whence you took your name,
Believe your Servant, 'twil improve your fame,
And make you live, beloved; I do not care
For gilded honor, it is a vading air
That Is soon dispersed; a painted Trophie torn
From tainted Heraldry, displayed in scorn.
"Goodness clothes greatness with a graceful dress,
"And shines most glorious when it shows naught less.
So pleasing's humble Honor to each eye
It wins affection in the Stander by;
Let but your Infant Honor think of this,
Summer shall rise in love and set in bliss.
Now, to you Noble Ladies, who may see
Store of examples to endoctrine ye,
Some to deprave; but in your tender breast
Such numerous seeds of native goodness rest,
Which freely ripened as they are begun,
May in due time to their perfection come.
With an exacter Pattern none can store you,
Then Her example who is gone before you:
Let her Life be the Line to regulate
Your actions by; the posture of her state
Your constant'st Model; her sweet moderation,
In her discourse, employment, recreation,
Your clearest mirror: for ye cannot err
In any these by imitating her.
Confirm your Mothers Anagram on Earth,
With this Emphatick Mott: HERE A BLESSED BIRTH.
These Observations, I may safely vow,
Will multiply more honors upon you,
More real honors, than these who incline
To the fantastic fashions of our time:
For these are but admired for one day,
And straight their melting varnish drops away:
Whereas your grounded Colors did in grain
Shall represent a State admits no stain.
Reteining these, Sweet Ladies, you will become
Exemplar Paragons in Albion.
NOW I approach, my dear sad Lord to you,
Who having taken your late last adue
Of your unequalled Spouse, are full of grief,
To which divinest comforts breath relief.
Excuse me, Honored Lord, that you are placed
In this sad Scene of serious Sorrow, last;
'Twas my desire, that you should first digest
These grounded griefs wherewith you are deprest
Before revivall of them; alas you know
I owe as much to you as I do owe
To the whole world (without private aim
To me or mine) Save to my sovereign.
Yea, should you flow in tears, as you do flow,
You should not find your poor MVSAEVS slow
In the like tribute: be it only yours
To yield your will unto the Superior powers.
She Is reft from you ('it is true) but she is given
By your division to be spous'd in heaven.
Nor had she left her Mate, her choice dear Love,
But only for His love she had above:
In whose translation there appeared here
A civil Combat 'twixt two Months in the year,
So as, none could definitively say
She did the first of June or last of May.
Both wrastled like two Champions for the wall,
Which might give convoy to her Nuptial.
A solemn sacred Nuptial! Where Heavens King
Becomes the Bridegroom: and where Angels sing
Their Epithalamies; and Saintly Quires
With choicest airs accomplish their desires.
"Cloze then with your dear servant; Heavens appeased,
You from your tears, she from her griefs released:
Which done, your late ELIZA's Elegy
Will wipe all tears from RAGLANDS Niobe.
Niobem mutamur in ipsam.
Epitaph.
PUre Shrinel to wc that treasure is confined, Obiit lun. 1. Anno Dom. 1635.

Till it be reunited to her mind,
Where every grain rose to so high a rate,
It past the inferior Orb to estimate.
Nor had we lost the richesse of this Mine,
Had it not been too precious for the time.
Nor by enjoyment of it so long blessed,
But for His Sake by whom it was possessed.
Who, as his virtues style him man of men,
Only deserved to wear so rich a gem:
For whose content Heavens might have pleased to spare
And crowned the joys of such a peerless Pair.
But Stars shine clearest in their proper Spheere,
So she more glorious than she showed here.
o were Earth numerous in such a birth,
It might be justly styled Heaven on Earth!
GENTIS HONOR, VIRTVTIS AMOR, SPECTABILIS UXOR, CONDITA SVNT TVMVLO, NON
MORITVRA, TVO
Finis.
LEt 't not distaste my Lord, that I have here
Annexed the Elegiack raptures of my Dear:
It Is said that Polo the Tragedlan.
When he on Stage to force some passion came,
Had his Sons ashes in an Urne enshrined
To work more deep impressions in his mind.
The Emblem's good: this Fun'rall pile of ours
Struck passion in each line addressed to yours.

