map of the seige of Breda (...) third and last mape, Both of the Sedg of
Breda by Spinola and how the Princ of Orage ^ath enquarterde his forces*
(...)at form and place (...) English Corronelles (...)ampet them selves (...),
with the last pr^^edings.


THE LAST DESCRIPTION OF THE SIEGE OF BREDA, WHICH IS NOW ENVIRONED BY THE
Forces of the King of Spain, under the Command of the Marquess SPINOLA: And a
delineation of the Camp of the high and mighty States of the United
Provinces, who sent lately the Prince of Orange, with the four English
Colonels, and the Duke of BRVNSVVICKE, to relieve the Town.
GEntle Reader, you have here the siege of the strong Town of Breda, with all
the fortifications and out-workes of it, besides the declarations of them. This
Town of Breda lies three leagues from Geertruydenberg, and as many from
Seuenbergen: 3. leagues and a half from Oudenbosch, 5. leagues from
Roosendael, 6. leagues and a half from Bergen up Zoome, Turnhout, and
S'hertogenhosch, 9. leagues from Antwerpe, 16. leagues and a half from Lillo,
9. leagues and a half from Lier: It is a fair and stately Town, and of a
reasonable bigness, and has a stately Palace, which is belonging to the
Counts of Nassau, and Barons of Breda, whose Tombs are both in the Church and
Castle to be seen. It is mightily strengthened and fortified since it was last
of all taken by the States of the united Provinces.

But to come to the siege of Breda, it is manifestly known how that his
Excellency the Marquess Spinola having caused many horse and foot to meet on
the 19. and 20. of July about Lier, he went presently toward Hoochstraeten,
and when he had fortified it, and Turnhout, he inquartered his forces in the
villages of Chaem, Baerle, Alphe and Gilsen, and let them lie there until the
midst of August, about which time he sent Count Henry Vanden Berg toward the
Town of Grave, and caused Count John of Nassau to march likewise thitherwards,
with many thousand foot, and a thousand of horse to make a show as if he would
have besieged the same Town. But on the 26. of August his Excellency the
Marquess Spinola sent the Colonel Don Francisco de Medina with his Regiment,
with many other Companies, and 1000. horse.

The 27. of August came the Marquess Spinola with his whole Army before the
Town of Breda, and he pitched his own tent presently down in the village of
Ginneken.

The 28. of this Month the Marquess Spinola appointed his Army to be divided
in three several quarters and to be laid about it. The first quarter
extends from the Boschgate unto the gate that leads toward Tetteringen,
and continues unto the River of Mark, which was given to Signeor paulo
Baglioni who has under him his Regiment of Italians, besides other Italians,
and 5000. Wallons, which began to entrench themselves presently. And it
happened that the same day about noone there were twelve Barks and a Pinnace
by the Spanish taken about ter Heyden being bound for Breda.

And afterward Signior Baglioni laid a strong bridge upon the before mentioned
River, and raised two forts of each side.

The second quarter is at Ginneken, in which village is the Marquess Spinola
and the Count of Salasar lodged, besides diverse other Lords

The third quarter is in the village called ter Hage, and stands under the
command of Count John of Nassau, who is some 5000. men strong both horse and
foot.

The 30. of August began the Spanish to make five royal Forts besides many
Redouts and Sconces round about the Town.

The sixth of September was the town wholly environed, notwithstanding that
they within made sallies, and played continually with their Ordnance upon the
trenches and other works of their approaching enemies.

The Prince of Orange having understood that the Marquess Spinola meant
earnest with the siege of Breda (seeing that he had not only compast it about
with many Forts, Redouts, and strong Trenches, but sent moreover for more aid)
he gathered presently all his old soldiers, with the forces of the four
English Colonels, and marched up with them as if he would have besieged either
Wesel, Goch or Berch, but altering his course afterward very suddenly, upon
some aduises given to his Excellency, he came down with his whole Army with
an intention to relieve Breda, and sat down with it on the 29. of September at
a village which is called ter Heiden, being but a league from Breda, and having
mustred his forces he got some companies of his in the Town. And we have even
now gotten tidings that the Prince of Orange has made an assault upon the
Camp of the Marquess Spinola, and defeated many of his soldiers, but
specially in the quarter of Signior Paulo Baglioni, although the Marquess got
lately 5000. foot and 1000. horse of Monsieur Tilly in his camp, besides Count
Henry Vanden Berg with his whole Army.

A declaration of the Town of BREDA.
1. Is the Market. 2. The great Church. 3. The Towne-house. 4. The Chapel of
S. John. 5. A Key, called Markendal. 6. A Street, which leads toward the
Hagish Gate. 7. A Street, which leads toward the Ginneken Gate. 8. A Street,
in which the Hospital of the Town stands. 9. The Gates of the Town.
A declaration of the Walls and Out-workes.
a. The Castle of the Town, in which the Governor Justinius of Nassau
dwells. b. The Bulwark called Spite Mansfield, and was raised in the life
time of Count Mansfield, who was Governor of the Duchy of Luxemburg. c. The
Horne-worke without the Bos-gate, being the Quarter of the Regiments of Sir
Horatio Vere and Sir Charles Morgan. d. Lamberius Bulwark. e. The Bulwark and
Horne-worke, called Mauritius. f. Two Batteries which stand on the Wall. g. The
Bulwark Nassau. h. The Ginniken Gate, and the Horne-worke without it, betwixt
which and the next Bulwark that lies without the Bos-gate, is the Quarter of
the French and Wallons, which are commanded by Monsieur Oteriue and Monsieur
Gris. i. The Bulwark, called the North. k. The Water-mill, with a Sluice, by
which means the water may be kept in, to drown some Land without the Town.
l. The Bulwark Holland. m. The Bulwark Barnevelt. n. A great Horne-worke,
which lies near the Gate that leads toward Antwerpe. o. The Bulwark,
called the Schors. p. The Bulwark Blanckenberg. q. The Bulwark, called
S^oeck, betwixt which and the Bulwark, the North is the Quarter of the
Low-Countrey-men, which are under the command of the Lord of Lotkeren. r. An
I Will in the River of Merke, which is entrenched against the approach of the
enemies.
All the other works which lie betwixt the Horne-workes, are lately made for
the defense of the Town.

A declaration of SPINOLA'S CAMP.
A. Designs the Royal Forces. B. The Quarter of Paulo Baglioni, with the
Ships-Bridge. C. The Water-Mill. D. The Village Ginneken, or the Quarter of the
Marquess Spinola. E. The Quarter of Count John of Nassau. F. The Quarter of
Count Henry Vanden Berg, with some Forces of Monsieur Tilley.
A declaration of the Camp of the States.
G. The Prince of Orange, who lies right against the Italian Quarter. H. The
Earl of Essex, who lies not far from Oosterhout. I. The Lord Willoughby is
placed near adjoining to the maine River, which passes through the Leaguer
into the Town. K. The Earl of Oxford, who lies by the Village ter Heyden. L.
The Earl of Southampton is enquartered ouer-against the Trenches of the
Burgonians. M. The Duke of Brunswick is pitched near the Hage. N. The Village
of ter Heyden. O. Oosterhout, from which Village the Prince of Orange, with all
his Army, marched through, toward the places aforementioned. P. The breadth
of space betwixt the Outworks of the Town of Breda, and the Camp of the
Marquess Spinola.
Printed at London for THOMAS ARCHE^, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, over against the sign of the Horse-shoe.


