Emaricdulfe.

SONNETS WRITTEN BY E. C. Esquier.

Non sunt vt quondam, plena fauoris erant.

printer's device, McKerrow 273b: "Framed device of clasped hands emerging from
clouds, holding a caduceus and two cornucopias." BY WISDOM PEACE BY PEACE
PLENTY

AT LONDON, Printed for Matthew Law.

1595.

TO MY VERY GOOD friends, John Zouch, and Edward Fitt^n, Esquiers.
BOth loving friends, forasmuch as by reason of an ague, I was enforced to
keep my chamber, and to abandon idleness, I took in hand my pen to finish an
idle work I had begun, at the command and service of a fair Dame, being most
exquisitly well featured, and of as excellent good carriage, adorned with
virtue: and understanding the story, and knowing you both to be of sufficient
valor, wit, and honesty, presumed to dedicate the same to you, not doubting
but that you will vouchsafe for my sake, to maintain the honor of so sweet a
Saint. Thus craving you my dear friends to be patrones of these few Sonnets:
being well persuaded you will excuse my unlearned writing, in regard you may be
assured I am no scholar, as does appear by this my worthles verse: hoping
you will receive my goodwill with content, as I my self shall be then best
satisfied. And so wishing you both as much comfortable happiness, as to my
soul: I bid you heartily farewell.

Yours in all true friendship. E. C.

EMARICDVLFE.
SONNET. I.
WHen first the rage of love assailed my heart,
And toward my thoughts his fiery forces bent:
Eftsoons to shield me from his wounding dart,
Armed with disdain, I held him in contempt.
Curld headed love when from mount Erecine
He saw this geere, so ill thereof he brooks,
That thence he speedes unwilling to be seen,
Till he had taken his stand in thy fair looks.
There all enraged his golden bow he bent,
And nockt his arrow like a pretty elfe:
Which when I saw, I humbly to him went,
And cried hold, hold, and I will yield my self.
Thus Cupid conquered me, and made me swear
Homage to him, and duty to my dear.
SONNET. II.
HOmage to love, duty to thee my dear,
Dear mistress of my thoughts, Queen of my joy:
Then my life's gracious planet bright appear,
My hearts deep grief and sorrow to destroy.
Be not (I thee beseech) my cares maintainer:
For in thy power it lies to save or strike,
To kill the grief, or else the griefs retainer,
With love or hate the infant of dislike.
O if that cruel love did not command
To slay my heart without remorse or pity:
Or if he did that sad doom countermand,
And be a gracious Queen of gentle mercy:
Sweet show thy self divine in being pitiful,
For nature of the gods is to be merciful.
SONNET. III.
WHy do I plead for mercy unto thee,
When from offense my life and soul are clear?
For in my heart I near offended thee,
Unless the hie pitch of his flight it were.
I* that is it, I to too well consider,
Thy sparkling beauty is the sun that melted:
My thoughts the wax that joined his wings together,
And till my very fall I never felt it:
Despair the Ocean is that swallowed me,
Where I like Icarus continue drowned,
Till with thy beauty I revived be,
And with loves immortality be crowned.
True love immortal is, then love me truly:
Sweet do, and then thy name I Will honor duly.
SONNET. IIII.
MY forlorn muse that never trod the path
That leads to top of hie Pierion mount,
Nor never washed within the liuesome bath
Of learnings spring, bright Aganippe fount:
Mine artles pen that never yet was dipped
In sacred nectar of sweet Castalie,
My louesicke heart that ever has I clipped,
Emaricdulfe the Queen of chastity:
Shall now learn skill my Ladies fame to raise,
Shall now take pains her virtues to record,
And honor her with more immortal praise,
Then ever heretofore they could afford:
Both heart, and pen, and muse shall think it duty,
With sigheswolne words to blaze her heavenly beutie.
SONNET. V.
NAture ( Emaricdulf) did greatly favor,
When first her pourtrait she began to pencill,
And robbed the heavens of her chiefest honor:
There sacred beauty all her parts does tincill.
Heavens Hyrarkie is in her bright eyes spheered:
The Graces sport in her cheeks dimpled pits:
Trophies of majesty in her face be reared,
And in her looks stately Saturnia sits.
Modest Diana in her thoughts does glory,
Loue-lacking Vesta in her heart inthroned:
The quired Muses on her lips do story
Their heaven sweet notes, as if that place they owned.
But aye is me, Cupid and Venus fair
Have no degree, save in her golden hair.
SONNET. VI.
WIthin her hair Venus and Cupid sport them:
Sometime they twist it Amberlike in gold,
To which the whistling winds do often resort them,
As if they strove to have the knots vnrold:
Sometime they let their golden tresses dangle,
And therewith nets and amorous gins they make,
Wherewith the hearts of lovers to entangle*
Which once inthral'd, no ransom they will take.
But as to tyrants sitting in their thrones,
Look on their slaves with tyrannizing eyes:
So they no whit regarding lovers mones,
Doom worlds of hearts to endless slaueries,
Unless they subiect-like swear to adore,
And serve Emaricdulf for evermore.
SONNET. VII.
I Will persevere ever for to love thee,
O cease diuinest sweetness to disdain me:
Albeit my loves true types can never move thee,
Yet from affection let not pride detain thee.
Although my heart once purchased thy displeasure
With ouerbold presumption on thy favor:
Yet now I Will sacrifice my richest treasure
Unto thy name and much admired honor:
Tears are the treasure of my griefe-gal'd heart,
Which on (thy love) my altar I have dropped
To thee, that my thoughts temples goddess art,
Hoping thy anger would thereby be stopped.
If these to get thy grace may not suffice,
My heart is slain, accept that sacrifice.
SONNET. VIII.
EMaricdulf, thou grace to every grace,
Thou perfect life of my imperfect living:
My thoughts sole heaven, my hearts sweet resting place,
Cause of my woe and comfort of my grieuing.
O give me leave and I will tell thee how
The haples place and the unhappy time,
Wherein and when my self I did auow
To honor thee, and give my heart to thine.
Weary with labor, labor that did like me,
I gave my body to a sweet repose:
A golden slumber suddenly did strike me,
That in deaths cabin every sense did close:
And either in a heavenly trance or vision,
I then beheld this pleasing apparition.
SONNET. IX.
A Wight was clad most Foster-like in green,
With loyal horn and hunting pole in hand:
Whose chanting hou^ds were heard in woods and seen
The dear amasde before the rider stand:
The keeper bids go choose the best in heard:
The huntsman said, my choice is not to change:
And drawing near the dear was sore affeard,
Into the woods the rider spurd to range:
There did he view a fair young barren do
Within the hey fast by the purley side,
And woodman-like did take the wind then so,
Whereby the dear might better him abide.
At length he shot, and hit the very same
Where he best likte and loved of all the game.
SONNET. X.
But stay conceit where he best likt to love,
Yea better he if better best might be:
The Rider thought the best of better prove,
Till fortune signed his fortune for to see.
Now weary he betook himself to rest,
Devised where he might good harbor find:
Emaricdulf (quoth he) I am her guest,
And thither went: she greeted him most kind:
Welcome said she, three welcomes more she gave:
His hand she took, and talking with him then,
What wine or beer to drink wilt please you have,
Six welcomes more, and so she made them ten.
He drank his fill, and fed to his desire,
Refresht himself, and then did home retire.
SONNET. XI.
FOrthwith I saw, and with the sight was blessed,
A beauteous issue of a beauteous mother,
A young Emaricdulf, whose sight increast
Millions of joys each one exceeding other:
Fair springing branch sprung of a hopeful stock,
On thee more beauties nature had bestowde,
Then in her heavenly storehouse she does lock,
Or may be seen dispersed on earth abroad.
Thrice had the Sun the world encompassed,
Before this blossom with deaths winter nipt:
O cruel death that thus have withered
So fair a branch before it half was ripte!
Half glad with joys, and half appal'd with fears,
I wak't, and found my cheeks bedewed with tears.
SONNET. XII.
MY cheeks bedewed, my eyes eue^ drowned with tears
O fearful storm that causde so great a shower*
Grief tied my tongue, sorrow did stop my ears,
Because earth lost her sweetest paramoure.
O cruel heavens and regardlesse fates!
If the worlds beauty had compassion'd you,
You might by power have shut deaths ebongates,
And been remorsefull at her heavenly view.
O foolish nature why did thou create
A thing so fair, if fairenes be neglected?
But fairest things be subject unto fate,
And in the end are by the fates rejected.
Young Emaric yet thou crossed the destiny,
For thou suruiu'st in feign, that nere shall die.
SONNET. XIII.
THat I did love and once was loved of thee,
Witness the favors that I have received:
That golden ring, pledge of thy constancy:
That bracelet, that my liberty bereaved:
Those gloves, that once adorned thy lilly hands:
That handkercher, whose maze inthral'd me so:
Those thousand gifts, that like a thousand bands
Bound both my heart and soul to weal and woe.
All which I wear, and wearing them sigh forth
You instancies of her true loyalty:
I do not keep you for your sovereign worth,
But for her sake that sent you unto me:
It Is she, not you, that does compel my eyes,
My life's sole light, my hearts sole paradise.
SONNET. XIIII.
ONe day, o ten times happy was that day,
Emaricdulf was in her garden walking,
Where Floras imps joyed with her feet to play,
And I to see them thitherward ran stalking,
Behind the hedge (not daring to be seen)
I saw the sweet sent Roses blush for shame,
The Violets stained, and pale the Lillies been:
Whereat to smile my Lady had good game.
Sometimes she pleased to sport upon the grass,
That changed his hew to see her heavenly presence:
But when she was imasked, then (alas)
They as my self wail'd for her beauties absence:
They mourned for that their mistress went away,
And I for end of such a blessed day.
SONNET. XV.
WHat mean our Merchants so with eger minds
To plough the seas to find rich iuels forth?
Since in Emaricdulf a thousand kinds
Are heaped, exceeding wealthy Indias worth:
Then India does her hair afford more gold,
And thousands silver mines her forhead shows,
More Diamonds then the Egyptian surges fold,
Within her eyes rich treasury nature stowes:
Her honey breath, but more then honey sweet,
Exceeds the odours of Arabia:
Those precious ranks continually that meet,
Are pearls more worth then all America.
Her other parts (proud Cupids countermate)
Exceed the world for worth, the heavens for state.
SONNET. XVI.
Look when dame Tellus clad in Floras pride,
Her summer veil with fair imbroderie,
And fragrant herbs sweet blossomed having did.
And spread abroad her spangled tapistrie:
Then shall thou see a thousand of her flowers
(For their fair hew and life delighting savors)
Gathered to deck and beautify the bowers
Of Ladies fair, graced with their lovers favors.
But when rough winter nips them with his rage,
They are disdained and not at all respected:
Then love ( Emaricdulf) in thy young age,
Lest being old, like flowers thou be rejected:
Nature made nothing that does ever flourish,
And even as beauty fades, so love does perish.
SONNET. XVII.
I Am enchanted with thy snow-white hands,
That mase me with their quaint dexterity,
And with their touch, tie in a thousand bands
My yielding heart ever to honor thee:
Thought of thy dainty fingers long and small,
For pretty action that exceed compare,
Sufficient is to bless me, and withal
To free my chained thoughts from sorrows snare
But that which crowns my soul with heavenly blis,
And gives my heart fruition of all joys,
Their dainty concord and sweet music is,
That poisons grief and cures all annoyes,
Those eyes that see, those ears are blessed that hear
These heavenly gifts of nature in my dear.
SONNET. XVIII.
EMaricdulf, if thou this riddle read,
This dark AEnigma that I will demand thee,
Then for thy wisdoms well deserving meede,
In loves pure duty thou shall ay command me.
A Turtle that had chose his loving mate,
Sat seemly percht upon a red-rose breere:
Yet saw a bird (airs paragon for state)
That far surpast his late espoused dear:
He changed himself into that lustful bird
That Juno loves, and to his love resorted:
And thought with amorous speeches to have firde
Her constant heart: but her in vain he courted.
When bootles he had wooed her to his pain,
He took his leave and turned his shape again.
SONNET. XIX.
THe Heavens and Nature when my Love was borne,
Strove which of both should most adorn and grace her:
The sacred heavens in wealthy natures scorn
With wisdoms pure infusion did embrace her:
Nature lent wings to wisdom for her flight,
And decked my Lady with such heavenly features,
As nere before appeared in humane sight,
Ne ever fithence in terrestrial creatures.
(Quoth Wisdom) I will guide her constant heart
At all assaies with policy to relieve her:
(Quoth Nature) I will cast those gifts apart,
With outward graces that I mean to give her.
Yet were they reconciled, and swore withal
To make her more then half celestial.
SONNET. XX.
THat thou art fair exceeding all compare,
Witness thy eyes that gaze upon thy beauty,
Witness the hearts thou daily do ensnare,
And draw to honor thee with lovers duty:
That thou art wise witness the worlds report,
Witness the thoughts that do so much admire thee,
Witness the heauen-borne Muses that resort,
And for their mistress meekly do desire thee:
That thou art both exceeding fair and wise,
Witness the anguish of my silly heart:
Thy heavenly shape has caught me by my eyes,
Thy secret wisdom that gives art to art,
So circumuents me and procures my pain,
That I must dye, unless thou true remain.
SONNET. XXI.
AL those that write of heaven and heavenly joys,
Describe the way with narrow crooked be^dings,
Beset with grief, pain, horror and annoyes,
That till all end have never perfect endings.
The heaven wherein my thoughts are resident,
The paradise wherein my heart is sainted,
Through street-like straight hie-waies I did attempt,
Nor with rough care nor rigorous cross attainted
I must confess faith was the only mean,
For that with some for want thereof did miss,
Only thereby at length I did obtain,
And by that faith am now instal'd in bliss:
There sleep my thoughts, my heart there set thy rest,
Both heart and thoughts think that her heaven is best.
SONNET. XXII.
YE subjects of her partial painted praise,
Pen, paper, ink, you feeble instruments:
Unto a higher strain I now must raise
Your mistress beauteous fair abiliments.
Thou author of our hic Mconian verse,
That checks the proud Castalians eloquence:
With humble spirit if I now rehearse
Her several graces natures excellence:
Smile on these rough-hewd lines, these ragged words
That never styled from the Castalian spring:
Nor that one true Apology affoords,
Nor never learned with pleasant tune to sing:
So shall they live, and living still persevere
To deifie her sacred name for ever.
SONNET. XXIII.
YE modern Laureats of this later age,
That live the worlds admirement for your writ;
And seem infused with a divine rage,
To show the heavenly quintessence of wit:
You on whose weltun'd verse sits princely beauty,
Decked and adorned with heavens eternity,
See I presume to cote (and all is duty)
Her graces with my learnings scarsitie.
But if my pen ( Marcias harsh-writing quill)
Could feed the feeling of my thoughts desire,
And show my wit coequall with my will,
Then with you men divine I would conspire,
In learned poems and sweet poesy,
To send to heaven my Ladies dignity.
SONNET. XXIIII.
OFthaue I heard hony-tong'd Ladies speak,
Striving their amorous courtiers to inchant,
And from their nectar lips such sweet words break,
As neither art nor heavenly skill did want.
But when Emaricdulf gins to discourse,
Her words are more then wel-tun'd harmony,
And every sentence of a greater force
Then Mermaids song, or Sirens sorcerie:
And if to hear her speak, Laertes heir
The wise Ulysses lived us now among,
From her sweet words he could not stop his ear,
As from the Sirens and the Mermaids song:
And had she in the Sirens place but stood,
Her heavenly voice had drowned him in the flood.
SONNET. XXV.
LEt gorgeous Tytan blush: for of her hair
Each trannel checks his brightest summers shine:
The cleerest Comets drop within the air
To see them dimmed with those her glorious eine:
Juno for state she matchles does disgrace,
Surpassing eke for stature Dyan tall,
Venus for fair, fair Venus for her face,
In whose sweet looks are heap't the graces all:
For wisdom may she make comparison
With Pallas, yet I wrong her overmuch:
For who so sounds her policies each one,
Will swear Trytontas wit was never such:
Her she exceeds, though she exceed all other,
Being Jove's great daughter borne without a mother.
SONNET. XXVI.
EMaricdulf read here, but reading mark
As in a mirror my true constancy:
The golden Sun shall first be turned to dark,
And darkness claim the Suns bright dignity:
The stars that spangle heaven with glistring light,
In number more then ten times numberless,
Shall sooner leave to beautify the night,
And thereby make the world seem comfortless:
First shall the Sea become the continent,
And red-gild Dolphins dance upon the shore:
First weary Atlas from his pain exempt,
Shall leave the heavens to tremble evermore,
Before I change my thoughts and leave to love thee,
And plead with words and direful sighs to move thee.
SONNET. XXVII.
SWeet are the thoughts of pleasures we have used,
Sweet are the thoughts that think of that same sweet,
Whose sweetness is too sweet to be refusde,
That virtuous loue-tast for my faith was meet:
The taste whereof is sweeter unto me,
Then sweetest sweet that ever nature made.
No odours sweetness may compared be
To this true sweetness that will never fade.
This Sonnet sweet with cheerful voices sing,
And tune the same so pleasing to mine ear,
That Emaricdulf thy praises so may ring,
As all the world thy honors fame may hear.
Once did thou vow, that vow to me observe,
Whose faith and truth from thee shall never swerue.
SONNET. XXVIII.
IF ever tongue with heaven enticing cries,
If ever words blown from a rented heart,
If ever tears shed from a Lovers eyes,
If ever sighs issue of grief and smart,
If ever trembling pen with more then skill,
If ever paper, witness of true love,
If ever ink, chief harbenger of will,
If ever sentence made with art to move,
If all of these combinde by Cupids power,
My long-borne liking to anatomise:
Had but the art, with art for to discover
What love in me does by his art comprise.
Then might the heavens, the earth, water and air,
Be witness that I think thee only fair.
SONNET. XXIX.
MY heart is like a ship on Neptunes back,
Thy beauty is the sea where my ship sayleth,
Thy frowns the surges are that threat my wrack
Thy smiles the winds that on my sails soft gaileth
Long tossed betwixt fair hope and foul despair,
My sea sick heart, arrived on thy shore:
Thy love I mean, begges that he may repair
His broken vessel with thy bounteous store.
Dido relieved AEneas in distress,
And lent him love, and gave to him her heart*
If half such bounty thou to me express,
From thy fair shore I never will depart:
But thank kind fortune that my course did sort,
To suffer shipwreck on so sweet a port.
SONNET. XXX.
ON Tellus bosom spring two fragrant flowers,
The milkwhite Lilly, and the blushing Rose,
Which dainty Flora for to deck her bowers
Above all other colors chiefly chose.
These in my mistress cheeks both empire holding
In emulation of each others hew,
Continually may be discerned folding
Beauty in looks, and majesty in view.
Sometime they meet, and in a skarlet field
War with rebellious hearts neglecting duty,
And never cease, until they force to yield
Them coward captives conquered by beauty.
Emaricdulf thus did thou play the foe,
And I the rebel, and was conquered so.
SONNET. XXXI.
IN tedious volumes I do not intend
To write my woes, my woes by love procured,
Nor by my infant muse implore the end
Of loves true life, this (love) I have abiured:
Only my face (fair dear) shall be the book
Wherein my daily care shall be rehearsed:
Whereby thou shall perceive when thou do look,
How by thy beauties darts my heart was piersed.
My eyes shall witness with distilling tears,
And heart with deep fetched sighs shall manifest
My painful torments causde by griefs and fears,
And hourly labors mixed with deep unrest:
Both heart, and eyes, and face shall all express,
That only thou art cause of my distress.
SONNET. XXXII.
THy image is plain porturde in my thought,
Thy constant mind is written in my heart,
Thy seemly grace and pleasing speech have wrought
To vow me thine, till death a sunder part:
Thy favors forced me subject unto thee,
Thy only care extended to my good,
Ty lovely looks, commanded all in me
For thy dear sake to spend my dearest blood:
My joy consists in keeping of thy love,
My bale does breed if I enjoy it not:
My service true, from thee none can remove,
Unless both life and love I shall forgot.
Though life and love in time must have an end,
Yet ever I have vowde to be thy friend.
SONNET. XXXIII.
EMaricdulf my Orphan muses mother,
Pure map of virtue, Honors only daughter:
Bright gemme of beauty, fair above all other,
True badge of faith, foul ignominies slaughter,
Ensign of love, sour enemy to lust,
The graces grace, fair Ere^ines disgrace:
Wrongs chief reprouer, cause of what is just,
Aduices patron, councels resting place:
Wisdoms chief fort, wits only pure refiner,
Grave of deceit, the life of policy,
Fates best beloved, natures true diuiner,
Nurce of invention, hold of constancy,
Poison of pain, Physician of anoyes,
Eliziums pride, and paradise of joys.
SONNET. XXXIIII.
EMaricdulf, love is a holy fire
That burns unseen, and yet not burning seen:
Free of himself, yet chained with strong desire:
Conquered by thee, yet triumphs in thy eine:
An eye-bewitching vision thee in seeming,
That shadow-like flies from a lovers eyes:
An heaven aspiring spirit void of seeing:
A gentle god, yet loves to tyrannize:
Bond-slaue to honor, burden of conceit,
The only god of thine eyes Hyrarkie,
Decay of friendship, grandsire of deceit,
More then a god, yet wants a monarkie:
Bastard of nature that to heaven did clime,
To seem the misbegotten heir of time.
SONNET. XXXV.
O Faith, thou sacred Phoenix of this age,
Into another world from hence exiled
Diuorc'd from honor by vnheedfull rage,
Pure virtues nest by hateful vice defiled:
Thou faith that cal'st thy firname Constancy,
Christened above the nine-fold glorious sphere,
And from the heavens deriues thy pedigree,
Planting the root of thy fair lineage there:
Let this thy glory be above the rest,
That banished earth where thou did once remain,
Thou yet may harbor in my mistress breast,
So a pure chest pure treasure may contain,
And in her living beauty never old,
Seem like a precious Diamond set in gold.
SONNET. XXXVI.
WHen I behold heavens all behoulding stars,
I do compare them to my woes and smart,
Causde by the many wounds and mighty scarres
That love has trenched in my bleeding heart:
And when I think upon the Ocean sands,
Me thinks they number but my ladies bewties,
And represent the infinites of bands
Wherein my heart is bound to endless duties:
And when I see natures fair children thrive,
Nursed in the bosom of the fruitful earth,
From my chaste vows they their increase derive;
And as they spring, so have my vows their birth:
And as the stars and sands have endless date,
So is my love subject to naught but fate.
SONNET. XXXVII.
O Lust of sacred love the foul corrupter,
Usurper of her heavenly dignity,
Follies first child, good councels interrupter
Fostered by sloth, first step to infamy,
Thou hel-borne monster that affrights the wise,
Loue-choking lust, virtues disdainefull foe:
Wisdoms contemner spurner of advise,
Swift to forswear, to faithful promise slow,
Be thou as far from her chast-thoughted breast,
Her true love kindled heart, her virtuous mind,
As is al-seeing Tytan from the west,
When from Auroras arms he does vntwinde.
Nature did make her of a heavenly mould,
Only true heavenly virtues to infould.
SONNET. XXXVIII.
MY thoughts ascending the hie house of fame,
Found in records of virtuous monuments
A map of honors in a noble frame,
Shining in spite of deaths often banishments:
A thousand colors Love sat suited in,
Guarded with honor and immortal time,
Lust led with envy, fear, and deadly sin,
Opposde against fair Loves out-liuing line.
True Constancy kneeld at the feet of Love,
And begged for service, but could not procure it:
Which seen, my heart stepped forth and thought to move
Kind Love for favor, but did not allure it:
Yet when my heart swore Constancy was true,
Love welcomed it, and gave them both their due.
SONNET. XXXIX.
IMage of honor, Virtues first borne child,
Natures fair painted stage, Fames brightest face,
Siren that never with thy tongue beguild,
Sibill more wise then Cumas Sibill was,
When learnings sun with more resplendent gleames,
Shall with immortal flowers of poesy,
Bred by the virtue of Bram bigning beams
Deck my invention for thy dignities
With heavenly hymns thy more the^ heavenly parts
I Will deifie, thy name commands such duty,
Though many heads of poisest poets arts
Are insufficient to express thy beauty,
Thy name, thy honor, and loves purity,
With Stanzas, Lays and Hymns I Will stellifie.
SONNET. XXXX.
SOme bewties make a god of flattery,
And scorn Eliziums eternal types,
Nathes, I abhor such faithles prophecy,
Least I be beaten with thy virtues stripes,
Will thou suruie another world to see?
Delias sweet Prophet shall the praises singe
Of bewties worth exemplified in thee,
And thy names honor in his sweet tunes ring:
Thy virtues Collin shall immortalize,
Collin chaste virtues organ sweetst esteemed,
When for Elizas name he did comprise
Such matter as inventions wonder seemed.
Thy virtues he, thy bewties shall the other.
Christen a new, whiles I sit by and wonder.
Mea fortuna tua Vt hodie sic eras, and semper. quoth. E. C.

FINIS.

