THE SIGNS OF THE WICKED MAN.

Together with Directions that show how the several Gifts and Graces of Gods
Spirit may be attained.

NEEDFVLL For such as want those Graces, and for such as desire to increase in
them.

By N. BIFIELD, Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOVV for RALPH ROVNTHVVAITE, and are to be sold
at his Shop, at the Flower de-luce and Crown in Paul's Churchyard.

1619.

TO THE MVCH Honored Lady: the Lady BRIDGET TRACY, NICHOLAS BIFIELD wishes
all prosperity in the things of the Kingdom of CHRIST.
MADAM,
BEING destitute of a better gift to bestow upon your Ladyship, to testify my
thankfulness or observance, I present this little Treatise unto you. It may
have more use then it shows for: for if things shine more clearly when their
contraries are set by them; then may this description of the estate of a wicked
man by Signs, serve much to establish the godly in the point of Assurance,
when he sees himself freed from those fearful and forlorn marks. And if
men use to make much of all those directions by which any gain or treasure may
be certainly compassed: then ought the Directions not to be despised, that
show how the Spirit of God, and the graces thereof may be attained:

For by these directions, both those that want the true graces of Christ, may
here learn how to get them, and such as have them but in weak measure, may by
the same Rules learn how to increase them.

I have been induced to think of your Ladyship in this Dedication, partly in
acknowledgement of the great respect due to the Family out of which you came,
as it has been a principal means of causing the light of the Gospel for
many years to shine in those places where the people had sitten in darkness,
and in the shadow of death: And partly drawn by the many praises I have
observed in your Ladyship, since the time of your soiourning in the noble
Family you now live in: Your great respect of my Ministry, and your constant
pains to employ your self about Religious duties, deserve from me more
acknowledgement then so mean a gift as this can discharge. Madam, you are
happy above many, that GOD has inclined your heart to bear the yoke of Christ
in your youth, and discern the glory of the spiritual Kingdom of Jesus
Christ. Your meekness assures me liberty to beseech you to go on in the good
way of God, and to cleave fast with all hearty affection unto the Truth, as you
have learned Jesus Christ, It shall be a great increase of your glory, to
increase in the knowledge and grace of Christ, and (in sound denial of your
self, and contempt of the world) to fashion your self to all the courses by
which you may be pleasing in the eyes of God, whiles multitudes in the Gentry
of the Land of both Sexes, by following foolish vanities, forsake their own
mercy.

Now the God of peace sanctify you throughout, and so prosper his own work
in you, that your whole spirit, and soul and body may be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, March. 9. 1618.

Your Ladyships to be commanded in Christ Jesus, N. BIFIELD.

The Contents.
THE Preface, showing the necessity of the trial of man's estate, and the
causes why wicked men will not try themselves; and also why diverse godly
persons are negligent herein, page 1. to 18. CHAP. I. THirty signs of an open
wicked man. p. 18. to 33 CHAP. II. Thirteen signs of an Hypocrite. p. 33. to
40 CHAP. III. Sixteen Signs of such Professors as are likely to fall away. p.
40. to 47 CHAP. IIII. SEVEN Arguments of hope, that show a wicked man that he
may be saved, if he will be directed. p. 47. to 52 CHAP. V. HOw he may get
faith. p. 53. to 59 CHAP. VI. HOw he may get to be poor in spirit. p. 59 to
68 How he may attain godly sorrow. p. 68. to 77
CHAP. VII. HOw the Spirit of Adoption may be had. pa. 78. to 81 How he may
get a love to the Word. p. 81. to 86 How he may get the gift of prayer. p. 86.
to 94 How he may attain to the fear of God. P. 94. to 95 How he may be made
to love his enemies. p. 96. to 99 CHAP. VIII. HOw saving knowledge may be
gotten and increased. p. 99. to 102 How the love of God may be wrought in us.
p. 102. to 106 How the love of the godly may be attained, and how it may be
preserved. page 106. to 111
CHAP. IX. HOw uprightness and sound sincerity of conversation may be
attained. p. 111. to the end.
The Preface to the Christian and careful READER.
HOw necessary it is for all sorts of men in the visible Church to try their
estates whether they be true Christians or no, may appear by the express
charge given in the Scriptures concerning it. The Apostle Paul charge men to
examine themselves whether they be in the faith, and whether Christ Jesus be in
them, unless they be reprobates, 2. Cor. 13. 5. And the Apostle Peter would
have all Christians, diligent to make their Calling and Election sure, 2. Pet.
1. 10. And the like commandment lay upon men in the Church of the Jews in the
old Testament, as may appear by that exhortation, Lam. 3. 40. Let us search
and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord: and the Prophet David in
this case, charge men to commune with their own hearts, Psalm. 4. 4. How can
men draw near unto God in the full assurance of faith, if they will not be at
the pains to examine themselves? Heb. 10. 22. Or how shall we ever know that
we are of God, or attain unto any confidence of faith, as we ought to do? 1.
Ioh. 5. 19. Ephesians. 3. 12.

How fearfully this point of sound trial is neglected, and how miserably most
men are deceived for want of it, may appear by this observation, which may
usually be made of men in the most places, viz. that many that are carnal
men, say they are godly; and many that are godly men, say they are but carnal:
Besides that a multitude of men, both good and bad, live in security; the one
not caring to get out of so woeful an estate; and the other not regarding the
riches of Assurance.

The causes of this miserable security, may be observed and noted both in
wicked and in godly men.

In wicked men these things may be easily discerned.

1. A lothnesse to examine Why wicked men neglect the trial of their estates.
1. Because they are afraid all is not well.
themselves and try their estates exactly, for fear lest they should find that
they are not in a good estate: Their hearts secretly condemn them, and they
think, if they should take particular notice of their own condition, it would
be found, that they have indeed no true grace in them; and therefore they
rather choose to live in that doubtful estate, then to be put out of doubt,
and made to know, that they have yet no right to the kingdom of heaven; never
considering that the knowledge of our misery may be one degree to get out of it.

2. In such as see all is 2. They are slothful.
not well with them: the cause is slothfulness, mingled with horrible
presumption; they had rather wear out their days in danger, then be at the
pains to use the means for their own repentance and reformation: They will
wretchlesly put it to the venture.

3. Others will adventure 3. They rest upon the common hope
upon their common hope of mercy: They have certain general confused
apprehensions of mercy in God, upon which they wilfully engage their hopes,
without care of reformation, or the particular warrant of their hopes from the
Word of God, and so miserably perish: their hopes proving, but as the house of
the spider; and, the imaginary mercy failing them, they die either as stocks,
without sense; or as Judas, in horrible despair.

4. Others rest themselves Or 4. upon their outward profession of Religion.
upon their outward profession of Religion, and some general things wrought in
them, and the good opinion others have of them, and so being somewhat near the
kingdom of God, they are content to rest there, as the Israelits did near
Canaan, though they never possessed it. We see many think, there needs no
more to be sure they are in a good condition, then to hear Sermons, and
abstain from gross outward profaneness, and to be well reputed of among
the godly, etc. pleasing themselves with the show of godliness, though as yet
they deny the power of it, as having attained no other righteousness, then the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.

5. In multitudes of Or 5. they have evil opinions about Assurance.
men there are seated evil opinions about assurance: They think either it is
impossible to be had, or it is needless, or it is presumption to seek it.

6. All wicked men are hindered by their beloved 6. They are let by their
beloved sins
sins, which they are not willing to part with, but of purpose forbear the
care of heaven, that they may the more securely live in sin.

Thus of wicked men: It is true also, that many godly Christians have been,
and are extremely Why some that are godly, neglect, the trial of their estates.
faulty in neglecting the trial of their estates, and their Assurance: and the
causes of this negligence in them are diverse: As

1. Some are so much 1. Evil opinions.
misled by the surmises of their own hearts, that they think that Assurance
would breed security, and that it is a better way to keep their own hearts
humble, to be somewhat doubtful: not knowing, that unbelief is the chief
cause of slothfulness and security; and that the assurance of faith is the
chief means to purge the heart, and quiet the soul, and works effectually
in all the duties of love.

2. In the most, Ignorance 2. Ignorance.
of their own gifts and Gods promises, is the cause: for if Christians did see
distinctly, how far the Lord had brought them by his grace, and withal did
behold the evidences of their faith, and hope in Gods promises, they could not
fail of comfort, and establishment of heart.

3. Smothering of doubts 3. Smothering of doubts and temptations.
and temptations, is a great let in many: Diverse Christians are secretly, and
daily assaulted with certain strange doubts; which if they did propound, and
get sound answer unto, their hearts would heal within them, and the work of
faith prosper.

4. Some Christians are They are wicked overmuch.
kept without Assurance, through the overmuch viewing of their own daily
infirmities in all parts of Gods service: They are wicked overmuch; whereas if
they would study those Scriptures, that show how graciously the Lord stands
inclined toward his people, notwithstanding their daily wants, their hearts
would be much eased, and their minds clearly resolved to trust upon the
everlasting mercies of their God.

5. In some, the cause is 5. Melancholy.
found in the disease of their bodies: Melancholy, when it is grown to a
disease, is a most stiff and pertinacious adversary to Comfort and Assurance:
It does fill the heart with so many sad conceits and fancies, and is a humor so
unteachable, that comfort for the most part is as water spilt upon the ground:
And the more difficult it is to remove this let, because usually the parties
possessed by this humor, are so far from seeking help, that they will not be
persuaded that they are troubled with any such disease.

6. Some Christians are 6. Passions
hindered by their own Passions; they are so froward and unquiet in their
dispositions, that their hearts are daily lifted off from the benefit of
settled Assurance by their own habitual discontents: Frowardness is a
mischievous distemper, that weakens both body and mind; and assurance and
strength of faith, seldom dwells in an unquiet mind.

7. Others want assurance, 7 Neglect of the means.
because they neglect the means of Assurance: they do not try all things, and
keep that which is good; or they call not upon God daily, fervently, and
constantly, to give them the spirit of revelation, to show them the hope of
their Calling, and their glorious Inheritance, Ephe. 1. 18, 19.

8. A barren life is an 8. A barren life.
uncomfortable life: and contrariwise, to abound in 1 Cor. 15. 58.
good works, has steadfastness, and a secret rest of heart, as an inseperable
companion of it.

9. The love of earthly 9. Too much love of earthly things.
things is another great impediment: many Professors have their thoughts and
cares so eaten up with worldliness, that they cannot seriously seek Gods
Kingdom, nor constantly hold out in any course for the attainement of
Assurance: This degree of faith requires some degree of the contempt of the
world.

10. In some, there lodges 10. Secret sin.
some secret sin, which they know, and do not judge themselves for, and does
daily prevail in them; and this either keeps out faith, or keeps it down in
the cradle, that it can get no strength. When I say secret sins, I mean
secret from others, not from themselves. For sins of mere ignorance God does
not scourge in his servants so, as to withhold his graces from them.

CHAP. I.
Containing the signs of open wicked men.

THE trial of the estates of all sorts of Christians, may be performed by
examining themselves by two sorts of signs; some are such as describe the
wicked man, and some such as describe the godly man; and of the trial of the
godly man, I have entreated before. Wicked men in the Church are not all of a
sort: for some are manifestly profane and careless of the Kingdom of God;
and some are in outward show, such as profess the seeking of Gods Kingdom,
but yet in deed and in heart are without God and without Christ, and such are
all Hypoctites. Wicked men of the first sort, are discerned by such marks as
these: and so he is a wicked man,

1. That can spend whole 1. He is a wicked man, 1. That lives without God.
days or weeks without seeking after God, or Christ, that accounts it no part
of his care to look after God, or any secret acquaintance or communion wirh
God in Jesus Christ, that lives, as the Apostle says, without God, and without
Christ, and therefore without hope in the world: that seldom or never thinks
seriously of God, Ephesians. 2. 12.

2. That continually 2. That auoids the society of the godly.
shuns and strives to avoid the company and society of such as fear God, and
in his heart loves not such as be religious, and make conscience of their
ways: This man is certainly in darkness, that hates Gods children, as the
Apostle John often shows in his first Epistle; especially when he hates them,
because they follow goodness.

3. That savors only the 3. That savors only earthly things.
things of the flesh, that finds a taste and relish only in earthly things,
that places al his contentment in the things of this life: Romans 8. 1. Ioh. 2.
15.

4. That is incapable and unteachable in the things of God, and godliness, 4.
That is, discerns not the things of God.
having the Gospel and the glory of Religion hid from his heart, so as he sees
nothing in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ to be admired, and desired of him, and
when he enioyes the means, cannot discern the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.

5 That willingly haunts 5. That sorts with wicked men.
with wicked and profane persons, and delights in them, and chooses them for
the companions of his life, Psalm. 50. 2. Cor. 6.

6. That of malice persecuteth 6. That of malice persecuteth the Truth.
and reprocheth and despighteth the known Truth, speaking evil of the good
way of God, which he himself has known, and acknowledged before, Heb. 10.

7. That has in him 7. That allows himself in Atheistical thoughts.
thoughts of Atheism reigning, conceiving vile things of God, without sorrow
or trouble of heart for them, or rather desiring he could prove them to be
true, wishing there were no God at all, Psalm 14. 1.

8. That calls not upon 8. That calls not upon God
the name of the Lord, who is such a one, as wholly neglects this service of God
in himself and his Family, unless it be for fashions sake, without care or
understanding, Psalm 14. 4.

9. That was never chastned 9. That is not chastened of God.
of the Lord: For they are bastards and not sons, Heb. 12.

10. That can spend his 10. That never examines himself in known sin.
days without examining himself, whether Jesus Christ be in him or not: That
minds it not to be sure, that he is in the faith, 2. Cor. 13. 5. Ioh. 17. 3.

11. That flattereth himself 11. That applauds himself in known sin.
in his own eyes, when he is threatened for sin, and blesses himself in his
heart, when his iniquity is found worthy to be hated, Psalm. 36. 1, 2. Deuteronomy.
29. 19.

12. That secretly lothes, 12. That lothes the Word of God constantly.
and contemnes, and in his heart constantly frets at the Word, when it is
conscionably and powerfully preached, that finds in the good word of God a
deadly savor, 2. Cor. 2. 15.

13. That lives in hypocrisy, 13. That allows himself in Hypocrisy
and knows he dissembles constantly in the service of God, and does not desire
to leave it, nor take any course to resist it, or humble his soul in secret
for it.

14. That desires not the 14. That refuses knowledge.
knowledge of Gods ways, and seriously accounts good courses to be
unprofitable courses, Job 21. 14, 15, 16.

15. That having the 15. That in great distresses humbles not himself.
hand of God upon him, and lives in sorrow and misery, and yet never seeks to
God, nor humbles his soul before God, nor acknowledges Gods hand, or if he
do, does not labor to make his peace with God, 2. Cor. 7. 10. Ier. 5. 2, 3.

16. That cannot be touched 16. That cares not for the afflictions of the godly.
with compassion, or care for the afflictions of the Church and people of God,
Amos 6. 5. and is merciless, Mat. 25. Iam. 2. 1. Ioh. 3.

17. That has no desire 17. That will not understand to do good.
to be taught to do good, but either cares not for Heaven and godliness, or
thinks himself wise enough to find the way without asking, Psalm 36. 1, 3.

18. That is not affected 18. That is insensible of spiritual Judgments.
with fear or sorrow under spiritual judgments, such as the famine of the
Word, absence of God, hardness of heart, or the like.

19. That is a customary 19. That is an ordinary swearer.
swearer, and repents not of it: God threatens he will not justify such
offenders, but pursue them as his enemies, Com. 3.

20. That makes not conscience 20. That is careless of Gods Sabbaths.
to keep Gods Sabbath: for God has given the Sabbath as a sign between him
and the people in the point of their Sanctification: so, he that cares not to
profane the Sabbath, by that sign is known to be none of Gods people, Exodus
31.

21. That not only commits 21. That is a worker of iniquity.
sins against his knowledge, but serves sin, and is a worker of iniquity,
loves it, defends it, and resolves to continue in it, and places his felicity
in it.

22. That believes not in 22. That believes not in Christ.
the Son of God, as they do not, that either deny his coming in the flesh,
or his person, or his offices, or else rest not upon him for life and
happiness, Mark 16. John 3. 17. 1. John 4.

23. That in any one 23. That hates to be reformed.
particular sin, knowing it to be a sin, hates to be reformed, Psalm. 50.

24. That has not the 24. That has not the Spirit of Christ.
Spirit of Christ. For if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his, Romans 8.

25. That cannot forgive 25. That cannot forgive his enemies.
his enemies, nor pray for them that hate him, and wrong him, Mat. 6. For if
men forgive not unto men their trespasses, neither will God forgive them their
sins, as is likewise showed by the parable, Mat. 18. 32.

26. That loves not God, 26. That loves not God.
and shows it,

1. By an habitual forgetfulness of God, of which before.

2. By his unwillingness to do Gods work, his commandments being always
grievous unto him, and it seeming evil to him to serve the Lord, 1. Ioh. 5. 3.

3. By insensiblenesse of the dishonor of God.

4. By loving his pleasures, or profits, more then God. 27. That fear not God.


27. That fears not God, and shows it,

1. By not caring for Gods displeasure, so he might escape Gods punishment.

2. By coming into Gods presence constantly, without any awful regard of Gods
Majesty.

3. By sinning in secret withal security, being only careful to avoid the
eyes of men.

4. By contempt of the threatenings of God in his Word.

28. That is dead in trespasses 28. That is dead in sin.
and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. that can be guilty of many and monstrous crimes,
and that as if he were a dead man, continues under the burden of them without
sorrow, or fear, or remorce, or care of amendment, Ephesians. 2. 1.

29. The Apostle Paul 29. That is guilty of any of his sins in the Apostles
Catalogue.
puts a number of offenders in diverse gross sins into a Catalogue, and
pronounces of them all, that without repentance they cannot inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven, 1. Cor. 6. 9 Fornicatours, Idolaters, Adulterers, the
Effeminate, Sodomites, Thieves, Covetous persons, Drunkards, Reuilers, and
Extortioners: and so in the Gal.

30. All those that cannot repent, 30. That cannot repent.
that is such as cannot pray, nor confess their sins to God, nor bewail them,
nor any way set themselves soundly to reform them.

CHAP. II.
Containing the signs of Hypocrites.

THus of the marks of notorious and wicked men: The signs by which hypocrites
may be known, follow, and these are of two sorts.

First, such as describe 2. sorts of these signs
them so, that themselves may thereby know themselves.

Secondly, such as give occasion to men to fear their soundnes, and show, that
they are likely to fall away, though for the present they make show and
profession of Religion, and do escape much of that filthiness, which is in
the outward lives of others.

For the first, these are the signs of an hypocrite.

1. To profess Gods 13 Signs of hypocrites.
Covenant with his mouth; and deny it in his works, Psalm. 50. 16.

2. To do his works of purpose to be seen of men, when he might conceal the
knowledge of them, and does this of purpose chiefly, because he would have the
praise and applause of men, not seeking the approbation, or praise of God, Mat.
6. Romans 2. 26.

3. To make clean the outside of the platter, and let the inside be foul: To
be like a painted sepulcher: To avoid apparent outward faults, and yet to
harbor a world of wickedness in his heart, without any true repentance for
it, Math. 23.

4. To censure small matters in others, and be guilty of great crimes himself:
To see a moate in another man's eye, and not care to cast out the beam in his
own eyes, Math. 7.

5. To pretend care of piety toward God, and yet be unmerciful to men; or
neglect works of mercy to the poor, that he is able to do; and yet
unconscionably omits it, Iam. 1. 26.

6. To require many things of others in their practice; and yet make no
conscience of observing them in his own practice: To bind heavy burdens upon
other men's shoulders, and not to touch them with his own finger, Math. 23.

7. To arrogate to himself the titles of godliness, and yet envy and hate
goodness in others, and to endeavor to hinder them, or oppose them, that would
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Math. 23.

8. To praise the dead, or the absent servants of God, and yet despise and
persecute such of Gods faithful servants, as are set over them, and to disobey
them, Math. 23.

9. To speak fair to men's faces, and behind their backs to revile and
slander them.

10. To draw near to God with his lips, when his heart is far from him: In the
daily service of God to allow himself in the habit of distractions, making no
conscience to worship God in his spirit, Esaias 28.

11. Never in secret to make conscience of prayer to God; and not to cry to
God, except it be in sickness, or great adversity; dis-regarding prayer in
health, and prosperity, Job. 17. 9, 10.

12. With profaneness to neglect Gods commandments, and to be only diligent
to urge and observe men's precepts, or the traditions of men, Math. 15.

13. To punish, or reprove sin in some, because he hates them; or to forbear
reproves or punishments of others, because he fears or favors them.

CHAP. III.
Containing the signs of such as are likely to be unsound, and will not hold
out.

THus of the first sort of signs of Hypocrites: Now follow such probable
signs of hypocrites, as men may take notice of, and do usually foreshew their
falling away at length, though for the present they make great shows. Amongst
them 16. Signs of an unsound Professor.
then that make profession of Religion above the common sort of people; these
are likely to be unsound, and not hold out*

1. That join not themselves to Gods people, but forbear constantly, or
forsake apparently their fellowship, Heb. 10. 24.

2. That are not careful and desirous to reform their households, and to set
up Gods worship in their Families; that are good abroad, but practice not
godliness at home.

3. That customarily live in any sin known to be so to themselves, without
sorrow, or amendment, whether it be in their particular Calling, or general
Conversation.

4. That constantly and with delight choose out ungodly men to be their chief
companions and friends.

5. That are wilful in the use of the vanities of the world, and will not be
reclaimed from their excesses, or offenses that way.

6. That are stiff-necked, and will not abide reproof and admonition, but
show themselves conceited, and selfe-willed.

7. That are full of rash zeal, and show it by passions, and violent furies
about lesser matters, and yet have some notable faults in themselves, which they
make no conscience of.

8. That are swift to speak, and full of words, and forward to express their
masterlike conceits, when they neither have calling, nor fitness, or power of
the holy Ghost. The language of an humble Christian, that has true grace,
differs wonderfully from the empty and impertinent language of the hypocrite,
who is seldom assisted with efficacy of matter.

9. That lives inordinately, being idle, and attends not the labors of a
lawful Calling, that is found ordinarily in his neighbors house, and is
apparently negligent and slothful in the duties of his Calling.

10. That is more vexed for want of respect from others, then for his own
disabilities in his conversation.

11. That seems glad of the company of some that fear God, but cannot abide
others, either for the meannesse of their place, or because the world contemnes
them, though without cause, and though there be no just exception against their
sincerity. They that have Religion in respect of persons, love not any for
Religions sake.

12. That live customarily in the sin of swearing, or lying.

13. That is careless of the sanctification of Gods Sabbath.

14. That has had no manner of affliction of spirit for particular sins.

15. That is pertinacious in the defense of gainful and delightful sins.

16. That confirms himself in the customary neglect of some of Gods
Ordinances altogether, either public, or private.

CHAP. IIII.
Showing unto the wicked the hope to be saved, if the fault be not in
himself.

HItherto of the signs of wicked men, who must be persuaded to abide the
trial without despair; for the signs do not show them, that they cannot be
saved; but only, that for the present they are not in the estate of salvation
actually, which though it may, and ought to be grievous unto them, to consider
in what fearful misery and sin they live in: yet they have reason to know
and believe, that they may be saved as well as others: yea, the
acknowledgement of their misery is one step to salvation.

Now that wicked men may not die, but take a course to be saved, two things
are by them to be attended: first, the arguments of hope, that prove
Arguments of hope.
they may be saved, and that there is a remedy for their misery. Secondly, the
rules, that show them what they must do, which being done, they may be
certain of their salvation.

For the first, that they be saved, these things may hopefully assure:

1. That God has sworn, 1. Gods oath.
that he desires not that the wicked should die, but rather that he should
turn from his evil ways, and live, Ezech. 18. 21.

2. That God has with 2. Gods patience.
singular patience borne with him all this while, and has not laid him beneath
for all his sins, who long since deserved Hell; and the Lord has taught it
too, that he is patient, that men might repent and be saved, Romans 2. 4. 2.
Pet. 3. 9.

3. That God offers his 3. The offer of grace to all.
grace to all, and has made no exception against any particular man, and
therefore why should thou except thy self from salvation, when Gods grace
is tendered to thee as well as others? God sends his Gospel to every creature,
even to all Nations, Mark. 16. 13.

4. That God has sent 4. Sufficient satisfaction made by Christ.
his own Son to be a sufficient sacrifice and propitiation for the sins of
all men: He is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world,
Ioh. 1. Romans 3. 25. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. and in him is God well pleased, and would
have all men know, that he is content to take satisfaction from Christ, Math.
3. 17.

5. That God has placed 5. The means continued
them in the visible Church, and does yet continue the means that is able to
save their souls, Act. 20. 32. Iam. 1. 21.

6. That God has declared himself concerning sin, that there is one only
sin that in it 6. One only sin simply unpardonable.
self is simply unpardonable; All the rest may be forgiven.

7. That God has saved 7. As great sinners saved.
as great sinners as they, such as were Manasses, Mary Magdalene, David, Paul:
Many amongst the Corinthians were fornicators, drunkards, raylors, and the
like, yet were justified, sanctified, and saved, 1. Cor. 9. 10, 11. And these
have obtained mercy, that in the^ Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should afterward believe to
everlasting life, 1. Tim. 1. 13, 16.

CHAP. V.
Showing how faith may be gotten.

THE rules of direction follow. This then is the question: What should a man
do, that he may be sure of his salvation, the man, I say, that for the present
does not find the grace of Christ in his heart? I answer: That his principal
care must be to use all means to get the graces of the godly Christian formed
in his heart: And herein the Lord has showed unto men singular mercy, that as
he has showed ways in his Word, how his servants may discern the graces,
that are as so many signs and pledges of Gods love, and their own salvation;
so has he in the same Word laid down clear directions, that show how every
grace may be attained and formed, and nourished in the hearts of men.





1. He must in the first 1. He must consider of Gods promises.
place betake himself to Gods promises: For without the promise of grace it is
impossible, faith should ever be formed aright in a man, he must labor to see
what the Lord says distinctly unto sinners: I will instance in that one
promise, Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting: Now his care must be, seriously to mark, and clearly to
understand Gods meaning, which in this promise is to assure salvation to any in
the world, that will believe in Christ.

2. He must then consider 2. He must take notice of Gods commandment to
believe.
Gods commandment concerning faith, that God does require him to believe, and
is so far from being displeased with him for believing in Christ, that for
this cause he will damn him in Hell, if he believe not, Ioh. 3. 17. 1. Ioh.
3. 23. He does as exactly require us to rely upon this course of salvation by
Jesus Christ, as he does require any thing of us in the Moral Law: and as we
ought not to swear, or commit adultery, or steal; so ought we not to dare to
live without belief in Jesus Christ.

3. He must pray heartily 3. He must pray for faith.
to God to give him a heart to believe, and to form faith in him; for faith is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. He should pray over the promises, and beseech God
to incline his heart to rest upon them, as the best treasures in the world: cry
unto the Lord, Lord help my unbelief.

4. He must absolutely lay aside all thought of his own righteousness by the
4. He must renounce his own righteousness.
works of the Law, and look only to Jesus Christ, and the righteousness in
him, else he will fail of the righteousness of God, Romans 10. 3.

5. He must wait upon 5. He must wait upon the Word preached.
the powerful Preaching of the Gospel, as the only outward ordinary means
to beget faith, offering his soul daily unto God, and attending to the Word of
God, ready to obey the motions of the Spirit, knocking at the door of his
heart in the Ministry of the Word, knowing that from this Ordinance of God,
he is to expect the gift of faith: He should betake himself to it, with
resolution to wait with daily expectation, till the Lord be pleased to send
the Holy Ghost into his heart: And this is a general rule for this, and all
other graces of the Spirit: as men love their own fowls, so they must provide
to live where the Word of God is preached constantly, and in the power of it:
for from thence they shall receive unspeakable help and furtherance in all the
ways of God, Romans 10. 14.

CHAP. VI.
Showing how true humiliation may be attained.

THVS of faith: In the next place he must labor for true and sound humiliation
for his sins: and to this end he must distinctly strive to get formed in him
two things: 1. Poverty of spirit, 2. godly sorrow, for to these two belong all
the branches of true humiliation.

For the attaining of spiritual 1. Gather a Catalogue of thy sins, either* by
memory,
poverty, these rules are of great use:

First, make a Catalogue of thy sins, which thou may do either by memory or
by book: By memory thus: Go aside, set thy soul before the Lord, as if thou
we rest presently to be judged of him; call to mind particularly, whatsoever
thou can remember by thy self; consider thy wants, thy Omissions, and
Commissions of evil, in youth or riper age: in heart, or life, in things that
concern God, or men, or thy own soul, and disposition, thoughts, affections,
words, or deeds. Thou may then see an Army of rebellious evils thou have
been guilty of. By book Or by book.
thus? Procure thee the labor of some reverend Divine, that has briefly
gathered the sins of every Commandment, and from thence gather out so many
sins, as thou know by thy self that thou have been guilty of: Lay those
sins daily before thy conscience, and consider how many ways thou have made
thy self guilty.

Secondly, consider then 2. consider Gods* Justice.
the Justice of God, how he hates all sin, which thou may be assured of,
if thou remember how he plagued our first Parents, the old World, Sodom, and
Gomorrha: how fearfully he neglected the Gentiles, cast off the Jews, yea how
he spared not his own Son Jesus Christ, when he became a surety for other men's
sins.

Thirdly, think of the 3. Think of his threatenings.
terrible woes, and threatenings, and curses which are denounced every where in
Scripture against such offenses as thou art guilty of.

Fourthly, force upon 4. Remember thy latter end.
thy self the remembrance of thy latter end, and thy appearance before the
tribunal scate of Christ, to receive according to all that thou have done in
thy flesh.

Fifthly, observe with 5. Observe Gods Judgments upon the wicked.
what judgments the Lord every day fights against wicked men, in all parts of
the world, sometimes by common Plagues, sometimes by special and particular
calamities.

Sixthly, above all things, 6. Especially Gods goodness to thee.
mark with all thy heart Gods goodness to thee in particular; in during all
this at thy hands, his blessings of all sorts daily bestowed upon thee,
chiefly his mercy offered to thee in Jesus Christ, that can be content to
forgive thee all thy debts, so thou be sorry, and weary of offending. Nothing
can more break thy heart, then to observe how God deals with thee, even with
thee in particular, that have deserved so much evil at his hands.

Seventhly, try thy self 7. Try thy self by the signs.
by a particular examination of thy own estate, by every particular of the
signs of Gods children, and then thou may see, what a poor creature thou
art, what show soever thou make in the world, and what natural gifts or
praises soever thou have; for then thou shall find, how exceeding empty thy
heart is of sollid gifts, and the best graces, and that many a poor creature,
that makes little show in the world, has a heart better graced by far then
thine.

Eighthly, thou must beg 8. Beg an humble heart of God.
heartily an humble heart of God, and a greater discerning of thine own
vileness. The Lord will be sought unto, and he is ready to be found, if thou
seek him constantly and diligently: It is not a small work to break the pride
and stoninesse of thy heart. It needs power from above.

Ninthly, provide to live, 9. Live under a searching ministry.
if it may be, under a forceable ministry: where thou may hear such doctrine
daily, as will search thy heart, and ransacke thy life; where thou may feel
the Word of God go down into thy heart and reins.

Tenthly, mark what 10. Watch against the things thou art naturally proud of.
things they are, which by nature thou art proud of, and labor seriously both
by arguments and restraint, to alienate thy affections from them: In
particular, take heed of the snare that is in gay clothes, delicious fare,
worldly titles, and the like.

Eleuenthly, shun and avoid 11. Avoid the flatterer.
with detestation the flatterer, and seek unto thee a righteous companion,
that may smite thee for thy faylings, and reprove thee, and not hate thee in
his heart.

Twelfthly, labor to 12. Think still of some of thy worst fruits.
keep in thy memory and thoughts, 6. or 8. or more, or fewer of thy faults,
that thou would be more ashamed off, and thou have more offended in, and
compel thy self daily to remember them: this will wonderfully do thee good* and
tame thy pride, and make thee more meek and more tractable, and merciful, all
the day after thou have duly thought of them.

Thus of the way how to get thy spirit to be truly poor and humble.



1. Consider Gods promise about a soft heart.
of Gods promises, who has bound himself by covenant to take away the stony
heart, and give a heart of flesh unto them that seek unto him for it, Ez. 36.
26, 32.

2. He must daily in the best words he can, keep a 2. Daily confess thy sins
to God,
constant course in the confession of his sins before God, begging of God
with all importunity this mercy, And beg sorrow.
that he would melt, and soften his heart, and resolve, that he would never
stand before the Lord, but he would remember this petition, always judging
himself, giving glory to God: It may be the Lord will hear at the first, or
second time of prayer, but if he do not, thou must resolve to watch and pray
still, without limiting God to the time of effecting thy desire, as knowing
that it ought not to seem grievous unto thee, that the LORD does not presently
work what thou prayest for, considering how long the Lord has called upon
thee, and thou did not answer, and withal the Lord is well pleased with
these preparations in thy heart, and accepts thy endeavor to mourn because thou
can not mourn.

3. He must observe 3. Be tha^kfull for every mercy in prayer.
how the Lord deals with him in prayer, and be sure with all thankfulness to
acknowledge any mercy God shows him in prayer, as if he make him willing to
pray, or give him words in prayer, or let him feel any joy in the time of
prayer, or that he find his heart in any degree to melt, he should be
wonderful thankful, if he can get but one tear in prayer, or that he find
his heart in any degree to melt: and this observation of Gods goodness letting
him know, that he regards his particular requests, will melt his heart indeed
further, and perhaps set him all on a flame in desires to praise God, and to
abase himself even to the dust before the Lord, Hosh. 3. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.

4. That Rule of the 4. Acknowledge thy faults to others.
Apostle James is sometimes of singular use in this case of breeding softness
of heart, and that is acknowledging your sins one to another, when in secret
we make our moanes to wise and merciful Christians, and shame our selves for
our special offenses, it many times has melting of heart joined with it: so
as that heart, that before seemed hardened and dry, now easily dissolues into
tears, Iam. 5.

5. To go into the house 5. Go into the house of mourning.
of mourning may be in this case profitable: resort to such as be in sorrow
for the hand of GOD upon them, especially such as mourn through the affliction
of their Spirits: Converse with humble and tenderhearted Christians, Eccles. 7.

6. In all the services of 6. Take heed of distraction in Gods service.
God be sure to draw near to God, and keep thy mind from distraction and
hypocrisy: The Sun cannot have such force to melt the wax, as the beams of
Gods presence have to melt the heart, Iam. 4. 6, 7.

7. The Apostle Paul being 7. Study the tenth Commandment.
a sturdy Pharise, had his heart beaten to powder with the fear of the tenth
Commandment, that told him, he must not lust: The knowledge and consideration
of the abundance of sinne-guiltinesse he had drawn upon himself, by the
inward fruits of his evil nature, killed him outright, brake his pride, and
mortified him, as he at large repeates, Romans 7.

8. Remember the Passion 8. Remember the sorrows of Christ for thy sin.
of thy Savior, the poverty, banishment, ignominy, temptations; the
apprehension, forsaking, arraignement, condemning, and cruel death, which he
suffered for thy sins: Look upon him that was pierced for thy sake, Zach.
12. 12.

9. If of thy self thou 9. Get others to pray for thee.
can not yet attain unto sorrow for thy sins, get some godly Christian,
that is endued with the gift of prayer, to join with thee in private, that so
the Lord may be pleased to grant in heaven, what we of him do ask on earth.

10. Lastly, If al other means 10. Use fasting.
fail, then set a day apart by fasting; for the day of a fast was called the
day of afflicting, or humbling the soul, Leu. 16. both because it was the
maine duty to be striuen after on that day, and besides, because the Lord
usually did bless his own Ordinance so, as he gave an humbled heart to those,
that sought it of him.

CHAP. VII.
Showing how the Spirit of Adoption may be attained, and also how the several
gifts of the Spirit may be framed in us.

THus of humiliation: It follows that I show how he may attain to the other
sacred gifts, which are marks of a godly man: as in the first sort of gifts,
how he may attain to the love of the Word, the gift of Prayer, the fear of
God, the love of his enemies, and the desire of the coming of Christ: But
before I enter upon these, it is necessary to show him how he may attain the
Spirit of Adoption, which is necessary for these and all other graces.

How the Spirit of Adoption may be had.
Spirit of Adoption, if any ask how it may be obtained: Or rather, how it may
be stirred up in us, that we may feel his working in us?

1. He must pray for it
and stirred up by invocation: God is pleased to declare himself willing, and
ready to bestow his holy Spirit upon men, if they ask him of him by hearty
prayer: He that has given us his Son, will not deny us the Spirit of his
Son to be given into our hearts, Gal. 4. 7. And this our Savior Christ
assures unto us in the Parable, Luke 11.

9. And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you: Seek, and ye shall
find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

10. For every one that asks, receives, and he that seeks, finds, and to
him, that knocks, it shall be opened.

11. If a son shall ask bread of any of you, that is a father, will he give
him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish, give him a Serpent?

12. Or if he ask an Egg, will he give him a Scorpion?

13. If ye then, which are evil, can give good gifts unto your children, how
much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Ghost to them, that desire
him?

2. We must wait upon 2. Wait upon Preaching.
the preaching of the Gospel, where the Holy Ghost usually falls upon the
hearts of men.

3. When we feel the 3. Cherish the motions of the Spirit.
motions of the Spirit knocking at our hearts* or any way surprising us, we
must with all readiness open the doors of our hearts, that the King of Glory
by his Spirit may enter into us.

How we may get a love to the Word.
then, what we should do to get and preserve in us the constant love to the
Word?

1. Settie under a powerful Ministry.
that we should seek to settle our selves under the powerful preaching of the
Word; even such a Ministry as does set out the glory of the Truth, and of the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

2. We must make a 2. Pray God to quicken thee.
conscience of it to pray unto God to quicken us, and inflame our hearts to the
love of his Laws, as David often did, Psalm. 119.

3. Take heed of excessive 3. Take heed of worldly cares.
cares, and the ouerteaching of thy desires in the employments of the world, or
the immoderate use of worldly delights; for those choke the seed of the Word,
and alienate the affections from it; and so does any gross, or beloved sin,
Heb. 3. Math. 13.

4. Take heed also of 4. And of personal discord with such as fear God.
personal discord with such as fear God, especially with thy Teachers; for
this does by secret degrees make the heart careless and negligent, and in some
things wilful; and if it be not looked to in time, will bring men from the
liking of the Word, as they have been drawn from the liking of such as love
the Word.

5. Take heed of ungodly 5. And of ungodly company.
company: For in such company is quenched the sparkles of liking* when they are
kindled; yea, and the flames of affection are much dulled, in whom they are
best excited, Psalm. 119. 115.

6. Such, as find some 6. And of neglect of the increase hereof:
beginnings of desire after the Word, and liking to it, must take heed, that
they estrange not themselves from the exercises thereof: For if they hear, or
read but now and then; either the heart will never be thoroughly heated, or if
it be, it will easily wax cold again: and yet herein Or excess
some are to be warned to take heed of disordered excess; for that will breed
dullness, as well as neglect: As when they will read daily for diverse hours;
or when they provide unto themselves a heap of Teachers, as some that live in
great Cities, think it Religion to hear all sorts of men, and all the Sermons
can be come unto: As if the power of godliness lay only in the use of the
means of godliness.

7. We must practice 7. Practice what thou hear.
what we hear, and labor to show forth the fruit of the doctrine. He that
would be in love with husbandry, must sow his seed in his ground, and then the
gain of the Harvest will still allure him to like the Trade: If we be
fruitless hearers of the Word, we cannot love it; or if we do, it will be
but for a flash, or small time.

Thus of the love to the Word.

He that would learn To attain the gift of prayer.
to pray, must follow these directions:

1. He must go to God 1. Pray God to teach thee
in the name of Christ, and beseech him to give him words, and by his Spirit to
teach him to pray: It is God only can make a man speak a pure language; for
he only can instruct the heart of man, and indue it with this heavenly gift,
Romans 8. 26. Ephesians. 3. 9.

2. It will much help 2. Join with such as can pray.
him to join himself to such as call upon the name of the Lord with a pure
heart, especially in the days of their humiliation, 2. Tim. 2. 22.

3. There are three distinct 3. How he may furnish himself in every part of
prayer.
things, which a man may with singular profit propound unto himself in his
prayers: Confession of sins: Petition for grace: and thanksgiving for
mercies received. Now the weakest Christian may be, through Gods blessing,
comfortably furnished for his own particular, if he take such a course as
this; To go aside, and with all 3. Questions.
secrecy, and attention of heart before the Lord, ask himself these three
Questions:

1. What sins have I committed, which either now do trouble me; or, if I were
to die, would make me afraid? Let him set them down in a paper, or in his
memory distinctly, till he can bethink himself of no more. It is no great
matter for the order, how he sets them down, so he be sure he have the
chief sins, in which he daily offends, or has offended.

2. What would I have the Lord do for me, if I might have what I wish? Let him
set the particulars down till he can remember no more: As for example, I would
have him forgive me my sins, and I would have him give me knowledge; and I
would have him give me strength against such and such sins; and I would have
him give me faith and assurance; and I would have him give me heaven, when I
die: and so go on with all the things he feels a desire in his heart to seek
of God, till he can remember no more: and if at any other time he remember
some special thing, which he would further have, which he has not in his
Catalogue, let him set it down, as from time to time he sees cause.

3. What special favors has God showed to me, which I see I ought to take
special notice of. Let him set them down distinctly, whether they be
deliverances, or such and such spiritual or outward mercies, preserving the
memory principally of the chiefest of them.

Now when he has thus furnished these three heads with things, that in
particular concern himself, they being all matters of weight, he must now
carry these things, or the chief of them in his mind, and frame his heart to
speak to God in the best words he can get, to signify his detestation of
those sins, his humble requests for those graces, and his unfeigned
thankfulness for those blessings: Howsoever he may be rude, or imperfect in
his language about these at the first, yet exercise will bring him to a
ripeness, and by this course he shall be sure to speak of things, that
concern himself nearly; and that God, which has taught parents to regard
the imperfect language of their little children, when they begin to speak unto
them, will himself much more delight to hear the desires of his servants,
that are grieved, that they cannot speak in a better sort unto him: The
profit and comfort of this course will appear by experience to be exceeding
great; Besides, it is an easy way, when there is in any a true desire to be
at the pains to learn this language of speaking to God by prayer, and Gods
Spirit will help and teach the poor Christian, and draw his Petitions for
him, and prompt him both with words and affections; and the Christian must know
this, that when he has confessed his sins, and showed what he would have
God do for him, with the best words he could in the truth of his heart, he
has made a most effectual prayer to God.

Thus of Prayer.

The awful fear of God, How the fear of God may be begotten in us.
and the reverent dreading of God, may be begotten and increased in us, if we
thoroughly remember and deeply ponder upon,

1. The surpassing glory and transcendent excellency and perfection of his
Nature, his absolute Purity, and exact Justice, and Holiness.

2. The wonderful works of God, especially those standing miracles showed in
the hanging of this mighty earth, and those huge heaps of water in the clouds,
and the bounding of these mighty feas, and such like.

3. His fearful threatenings of all sorts of woes against the transgressions
of men.

4. The terror of the last Day, and the dreadfulnesse of death and Judgment.

5. The fearful and sudden judgments which have fallen upon wicked men;
either recorded in Scripture, or reported in Histories, or observed in
experience.

6. Especially, if we think much and seriously of the great goodness of God
to us, how he has striuen with us to overcome us with his mercies.

Thus of the fear of God.

We should strive to stir up in us affection, and love to our very enemies, by
such considerations as these:

1. Because Christ, to whom we are infinitely bound, has expressly charged us
to look to this, that we do love our enemies; and therefore for his sake we
should deny our selves, and our own corrupt desires, and affections, and
strive to show the truth of our love even toward them, that hate and persecute
us.

2. There is none so wicked, but they have something good in them, and worthy
to be respected.

3. Our enemies do us good, though they intend it not, we ought to like the
very rod that mends us, and regard the water that washes us white, and make
much of the stone that tryes us, and the glass that shows us our spots, and
not mis-like the tents that search our wounds.

4. If ever God turn their hearts, they will be effectual instruments of our
praise and Gods glory in the day of their visitation, they will then willingly
bear the shame of their own sinful oppositions.

I forbear to set down the directions for the attainement of the love of the
appearing of Christ, because I have at large handled that point in the Treatise
of the Cure of the fear of Death.

CHAP. VIII.
Thus of the directions that concern the first sort of gifts, concerning the
attainement of the other graces: the directions now follow.

ANd first, for the attainment How to get and increase saving knowledge. 1. He
must be wise for himself.
of saving knowledge, and the increase of it, these directions are of excellent
use.

1. First, in hearing or reading the Scriptures he must be wise for himself,
that is, mark distinctly what he hears or reads, that may specially
concern himself, Prou. 9. 12.

2. He must study those 2. He must study only profitable things.
things exactly, which most concern him, avoiding vain questions, and
fruitelesse contemplations, and vain ianglings, and controversies: he must
especially labor to know Gods Nature aright, and the distinct manner of Gods
true Worship, how he may serve him: he must study to know his own particular
offenses, and Christ crucified as his Savior, with the benefits of his
meditation, and the necessary things that concern his own Justification,
Sanctification, and final Salvation.

3. He must redeem the 3. He must redeem the time.
time, and by forecast, and order provide so, that some time may be daily
allowed for holy studies to recover his former time lost.

4. He must inquire and 4. He must propound his doubts.
take counsel, he must take heed of smothering his doubts, but must
carefully seek satisfaction to his conscience, as occasion arises. There is
more profit in this rule, then many 5. He must not consult with flesh and blood.
Christians are aware of.

5. He must take heed of consulting with flesh and blood: He must not regard
other men's opinions, or his own carnal reason; but resolve to give the glory
to Gods Word, so as to submit himself to what he shall find therein required
to be believed, or done, or avoided.

Other Rules he may find in the directions for the private reading of the
Scriptures: as also in the Rules of life.

Thus of Saving Knowledge. How the love of GOD may be wrought in thee.


That thou may inflame in thy heart the love of God:

1. Thou must avoid with special care, these things.

First, Forgetfulness of 1. Thou must avoid forgetfulness of God, and the love
of the world.
God; Thou must not dare to go whole days, or weeks, without communion with
God, or remembering his holy presence.

Secondly, the love of the world: We cannot love the Father, while our hearts
dote upon any earthly things: Of necessity, some degree of the contempt of the
world must be bred in us, before we can love God.

2. We must labor for 2. Thou must study Gods praises.
a distinct knowledge of the dreadful praises of Gods Nature and Works, as
they are described in the Scriptures, or may be observed by experience: This is
a needful direction, and miserably neglected.

3. We must frequent 3. Thou must frequent his house.
his House; especially when his glory does most shine in the power of his
Ordinances in his Sanctuary.

4. We should especially 4. Thou must study Gods mercies.
study the mercies of God, and all the good things he has promised, or given
unto us, that we may after a solid manner cause our hearts to know, how
infinitely we stand bound to God.

5. We should observe 5. Thou must observe thy daily infirmities.
carefully and daily, our own sinfulness and vileness, and unworthiness:
For unless we cast out self. love, we shall never get in the true love of God.

6. We should pray 6. Thou must pray much.
much; for a holy course in prayer does breed in men a wonderful love of God,
and admiration of that fellowship, which thereby they have with God.

7. We should resort 7. Thou must resort to experienced Christians
often to such, as use to speak much of the praises of God, and mark the
experience of Gods wonderful providence, or the glory of his Word.

8. It will much further 8. Thou must behave thy self lovingly toward the
godly.
the love of God, to get and increase in us a loving respect of, and behavior
toward such, as fear God, and bear his Image.

Thus of the love of God.

Concerning the love of the brethren, two questions may be demanded: What we
must do to get the love of the godly.
The one what we must do to get a hearty love to the godly: And the other
what we must do to preserve it when it is gotten.

For the first, he that would heartily be affected toward all the godly with
a brotherly love, must observe these Rules:

1. He must not haunt 1. Avoid the company of the wicked.
with vicious persons, nor go with dissemblers, nor hold needless society
with such, as hate godliness, and godly persons, Psalm. 26. 4, 5.

2. He must much meditate 2. Meditate much of Gods love to us.
of Gods love to him, and of the great things were done by Jesus Christ, and of
those rich mercies are offered him in Christ, and of the wonderful love, that
God and Christ do bear to true Christians, and how glorious they shall be in
the Kingdom of heaven.

The arguments taken from Gods love to us, or Christ's suffering for us, are
often used in the first Epistle of John, to persuade us to the love of the
brethren, as 1. Ioh. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 16. 2, 3.

3. He must take notice 3. Consider Gods commandment.
of Gods peremptory commandment, who requires this of him as one principal
duty, that he love the godly; with an utter disclaiming of him, if he do not
love them, For the preservation of our love 3 things must be looked to.
1. Ioh. 3. 10, 11, 12, 23.

For the second, that he would continue and increase and abound in love.

1. He must seek, and hold, and not forsake the fellowship that he has with
the godly in the Gospel, but make them the constant companions of his life,
Heb. 10. 25.

2. When he finds his affections stirred up, he must make use of all
opportunities, by his deeds to show the fruits of his love upon all occasions
of mercy, and well-doing, else affections will die in him. The fruits of
righteousness must be sowed by practice, 1. Ioh. 3. 18. If affection be only
in show or in words, or in the corruptions of the heart, and be not expressed
and made fast by the engagements of practice, it will much decay, if not wholly
be lost.

3. He must by all means take heed of discord with any of them, striving for a
resolution to take things in the best part, to believe all things, and endure
all things, suffering long, without envy, or rejoicing in iniquity, doing all
things without reasonings or murmurings, or censuring, or complaining; avoiding
vain ianglings, and selfeconceitednesse, begging of God an ability to bear
with the infirmities of others. See further directions about this point, in the
Rules of life.

CHAP. IX.
Hitherto of the directions that concern the attainement of the sacred gifts
of the mind: now it follows to show, what thou must do that in all thy
ways thou might walk uprightly, and attain unto sound sincerity of heart
and life.

HE that would walk uprightly, or take a sound course to continue How sound
sincerity of conversation may be formed in thee.
in his uprightness, must earnestly look to these Rules:

1. If thou have bin guilty of any gross sin, know it is impossible, thy heart
should be upright, till thou have with special repentance humbled thy self,
before God for that sin, and that also by conscionable practice thou keep
thy self from the great transgression: Psalm. 19. 13.

2. Thou must in a special manner ^a^ch, and strive against Hypocrisy, and
that in two things chiefly: First, that in thy setting out into Religion, thou
fashion not thy course more to get credit then grace. 2. Secondly, that in Gods
service thou by all means avoid distractions, and so resist and check thy
pronenesse of heart thereunto, judging thy self severely, when thou so
offendest, till thou be able in some happy degree to serve God with thy spirit
as well as with thy body: The habit of dissembling with GOD is extremely
dangerous.

3. In thy conversation take heed of that fearful carelessness of the most
men, showed in the known and wilful practice of sin, upon pretense that it is
but a small offense, or secret: Take heed of the sins of deceit, how
gainefull soever they might be to thee: thou may together with uprightness
lose the Kingdom of heaven, for daring so wilfully to break one of those
little commandments, Math. 5. 19. Take heed in general of a stiff and
wilful heart: They are seldom upright, that are heady and peremptory, and
hard to be persuaded, Iam. 3. 17. Prou. 21. 29. Hab. 2. 4.

4. As much as may be, accustom thy heart to the observing of Gods presence,
walk, as before him, Genesis 17. 2.

5: Yield thy self over to be wholly guided by Gods Word; Without knowledge
the mind cannot be good, Prou. 19. 2. and he, that walks according to this
rule, shall have peace in his heart and conscience, Gal. 6. 16. Let Gods Law
be the light for thy feet, and the lantern for thy paths, Psalm. 119.
Labor therefore to get a particular warrant for the lawfulness of thy
practice in the occasions of thy Calling, either general or particular, where
thou doubtest enquire, so shall thou walk in a sure way, and delight thy self
in much peace.

6. Take heed of idleness, and provide to walk faithfully and diligently in
some honest calling of life.

7. Be sure thou hold a constant course of confession of thy sins to God, and
do it without hiding, or extenuating; judging thy self for every known sin
and especially praying against, and resisting the sin thou art most prone unto.

8. Be not well pleased with thy self, till thou can approve thy care to be
good at home, as well as abroad; look to this Rule, and take heed of
frowardness, and perverse behavior in thy Family; Thou will hardly get any
comfortable evidence, that thou art sound at heart, if the usual Family sins
reign in thee.

9. Thou might wonderfully advance, and establish uprightness of heart in
thee, if thou would carefully but acknowledge this honor to God in his
Word, that whenever thou did feel thy conscience wounded, or smitten for
any particular offense, by the Word of God, that then without delay thou
would in secret go to God, and humble thy self by confession, and from that
time forward remember to strive against that sin: And so likewise when God
with some special glory of his truth does affect thee in the hearing of some
needful duty to be done, not to dare to delay, but haste to the obedience of
that good Word of God.

FINIS.

