AN APOLOGY OF AN APPEAL.

ALSO AN EPISTLE TO THE TRVE-HEARTED NOBILITY.

By Henry Burton, Pastor of St. Matthewes Friday-Street.

ACT. 25. 11. No man may deliver me unto them: I appeal unto CAESAR.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1636.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOST DEAR AND DREAD SOVEREIGN,
When upon just grounds (as I humbly conceive, and am confident) I appealed
from Parties and Adversaries to your Sacred Majesty for justice in so weighty
a cause, as here is presented before you: I thought long ere this to have had
the happiness, to have presented both an humble Petition, and Apology to my
Appeal to your Majesty, in mine own person. But two causes especially
hindered me: the one, Gods hand of visitation in this City, which continuing
so long and great, I durst not make my approach to the Court, and chiefly to
Your Majesty's Sacred Person, least I might give offense: the other (and which
of the twain is much more perilous to my self) the Pursuivants continual
watch about my door, threatening to catch me, and make me fast, or run my
Country (as he says) so as I cannot pass in or out, without present danger.
And I confess I have small list to come into that Lions den, Quia me
vestigia terrent: not that I am afraid of any such terror, as not if conscious
to my self of any such crime as they lay to my charge; but (as the Apostle
said in the like case) If I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy
of death, I refuse not to dye: but if there be none of those things whereof
they accuse me (as matter of sedition) no man may deliver me unto them: I
appeal unto Caesar. And blessed be God, that I have such a Christian Caesar to
appeal unto. Neither yet have I neglected what possible, or probable means I
could use in Court (being an old outcast Courtier, worn out of all favor and
friends there) for the conveying of my said Apology to your Majesty but in
vain. So as being now out of all hope of acquainting your Majesty with so
great a cause, by that way and means as I desired: I am at length compelled to
give forth copies, in hope at least, that some well minded man, or noble
spark, may upon the sight thereof (considering how nearly it concerns the
peace, safety, welfare, and honor of your Majesty, and Kingdom) be inflamed
witb so much zeal to your Majesty, as overcomming all cowardly fears, to
dare to do you so much worthy service, in bringing a Copy to your Majesty's
hand, that so you may therein read the many and great disasters and dangers,
where into this your Kingdom is in a precipitancie of being ingulfed, and
accordingly in your Princely Prudence provide a timely remedy* before it be
past hope. And the rather conceived I this way so the more necessary, that
coming happily into the hands of some of your Wise and Sage Counselors, David's
friends, they might be a means not only to bring it to your hands, but the
more to engage your Majesty to the perusal of it; considering how many would
be ready to ease your Majesty of such a commodity: And now, my Gracious
Sovereign, as I have ever bent my chief Studies to your Majesty the best and
faithfullest service I possibly could: so I am persuaded I could not in all my
life have had a fairer and fitter opportunity to express my fidelity to your
Majesty then now, in a case so important, as if your Majesty shall but take
sound notice of it, it may prove the happiest service, that ever a poor
subject could do to his Prince and Country. Nor am I ignorant, how busy many
would be to divert your Majesty from the Consideration of such matters, as
this; as if the great affairs of a Kingdom pertained not to the King, but
that he might take his pleasure, and leave the care of his Kingdom to others.
But my Lord the King is Wise, as an Angel of God, considering whose vicegerent
he is, and before whose awful Tribunal he must give a strict account, how he
has managed so weighty a charge of so many souls committed to his trust.
Again, what censures may I expect of them, who cannot endure to have their
deeds brought to the open light? They will be ready to charge me with
Popularity, Faction, Sedition, and what not, and all for thus bringing their
actions upon the open stage. But first, they will (I hope) excuse me, when they
shall reflect upon themselves, and consider in cold blood how they have
provoked me, by their calling me forth upon the stage, and by their strange
molesting, and prosecuting of me, as if I were a fellon, or a traitor: and
secondly, for as much as they declare their deeds, as Sodom, and hide them
not, and with a high hand maintain them too, which is the highest pitch of all
impiety: can they with any reason blame me, for divulging their practices,
which they shame not to pester your Kingdom, and oppress your good people
withal, who therefore have need publicly to be warned of them, least they be
seduced by them?

But not to detain your Majesty longer, be pleased to read over this my
Apology of Appeal to your Majesty, that your Majesty may both discern the
depth of the whole business, and may be pleased thereupon to rescue your old
servant out of those troubles, which he suffers for discharging a good
conscience toward God, and your Majesty. Now the Lord give you understanding
in all things.

Your Majesty's loyal subject, and faithful servant Henry Burton.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Appeal of me Henry Burton Clerk, from the proceedings lately made
in the name of some Commissioners, for causes Ecclesiastical against me,
together with an humble Apology of the said Appeal.

THE occasion of my Appeal was upon the reading of certain Articles unto me
by the Register of the Court before Dr. Duke and by his appointment, who there
upon tendering to me the said Henry Burton an Oath to answer to the said
Articles, I replied in these words, or to the like effect. I humbly Appeal to
the Kings Majesty my Sovereign and Patron, as my Judge in this cause, before
whom I shall be both a defendant and a complainant; for I hold it unfit, that
they who are my Adversaries, should be my Judges.

Now the reasons and grounds of this my Appeal are these following: First, the
general matter of the Articles charge me with seditious preaching; more
particularly objecting unto me my Sermons, which I preached to my stock on the
5th of November last, upon this text of Scripture. Pro. 24. 21. 22. My Son
fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of
them both? And in the Sermons sundry specialties, and those chiefly concerning
diverse Innovations, which my text did naturally lead me to speak of, and to
reprove, to the end that my Parishioners might be admonished to beware of them,
in case they should ever come to be obtruded upon them; as namely these
Innovations in the Book of Common Prayer: First in the Collect for the Queen
and royal Progeny these words are put out in the later Editions: Father of
thine Elect, and of their Seed: as if they would blotte out the King, Queen
and the royal Progeny out of the number of Gods elect. Secondly, in the
Epistle for the Sunday before Easter, they have put out IN, and made it AT the
name of Jesus every knee etc. Which alteration is directly against the Act of
Parliament. The second book wherein I showed a notorious alteration, was that,
ordered by Parliament to be read on the 5th of November, in the First Collect
or Thanksgiving for the happy deliverance of his Majesty; the Queen, the
Prince, and the States of Parliament. For in the former book it is thus said.
(...) their Counsel, and root out that Babylonist (...) Antichristian Sect,
which say of Jerusalem, Down with it Down with it even to the ground. But in
the new book printed 1635. it is thus. Infatuate their Counsel and root out
that Babylonish and Antichristian Sect OF THEM, which say of Jerusalem etc.
Again in the old book it is said. And to that end strengthen the hands of our
gracious King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the Land with judgment and
justice to cut of these workers of iniquity, whose Religion is Rebellion,
whose Faith is Faction etc. But in the new book they have altered it thus. And
to that end strengthen the hands of our gracious King, the Nobles, and
Magistrates of the Land with judgment and justice to cut of THESE workers of
iniquity, WHO TVRNE RELIGION INTO REBELLION, AND FAITH INTO FACTION.

The third Book, wherein they have made many alterations, is the Fast-Book set
forth by your Majesty's Authority in the first year of your Reign, and which
your Majesty in your late Proclamation commanded to be reprinted and published
and read in Churches at this Fast: Yet notwithstanding we find these
alterations in the last impression this year in the first Collect these words
are expunged: Thou have delivered us from Superstition and Idolatry, wherein
we were utterly drowned, and have brought us into the most clear and
confortable light of thy blessed word, by the which we are taught how to serve
and honor thee, and how to live orderly with our neighbors in truth and
verity. Also they have left out in three several prayers the mention of the
Lady Elizabeth your Majesty's only Sister, and her issue. Also the prayer for
the Navy, and the prayer for seasonable weather. And a whole Collect beginning
thus. It had been best for us etc. Also in the last page. Order for the Fast,
are these words left out. To avoid the inconvenience that may grow by the abuse
of Fasting, some esteeming it a meritorious work, others a good work, and of
it self acceptable to God, without due regard of the end etc.

Again, they charge me that I spoke against altering of Communion Tables into
Altars, and against bowing unto them, and against setting up of Crucifixes over
them, and against saying a second Service at the High Altar at the end of the
Chancel, whence the people cannot hear, especially in greater Churches; and
against putting down of Sermons in the afternoones upon the Lords days, and
instead thereof nothing allowed, but Catechizing by bare Question and Answer
out of the Common Prayer Book, without expounding the Principles of Religion
laid down in the Creed, ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer; so that the
people and youth especially are left in their ignorance. Also they charged me
for saying, that Ministers might not safely preach of the Doctrines of Grace
and Salvation, and against the Arminians without being troubled for it. Also,
that Ministers in Norfolk and Suffolk were suspended from their Ministry and
means, for not conforming to new rites and Ceremonies imposed upon them
contrary to the Law of the Land. These things, with sundry other of like
nature, were objected against me in the said Articles, which because a Copy
cannot be procured from the Registers office, I cannot so punctually set down;
but refer unto the Articles themselves, remaining with the Register of the
High Commission. All which Innovations expressed, being found by evident proof
to be most true, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, the
established Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, your Majesty's
Declarations and Proclamations; and many of them of very dangerous consequence,
tending to justify and extenuate notorious treasons and traitors, advance and
usher in Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, and giving general distaste to all
your Majesty's loyal and faitfull Subjects, who here upon grow jealous of some
dangerous plot now in agitation by these Innovators, to undermine and overthrow
both our Religion and good Laws: yet my mentioning of them in my Sermons
merely out of loyalty and duty to your Majesty upon that solemn day for which
they were most proper to warn my flock to take heed of such Innovations, as
whereby Popery and Superstition do not only craftily creep and steal in upon
us, but is haled in with head and shoulders, is charged upon me as Sedition:
Here then let your Majesty be pleased to judge whither this be matter of
Sedition, as for which I should be suspended from my Ministry and means, and
openly defamed as a seditious person. As if a Shepherd admonishing his sheep of
the danger of the wolf, or a watchman the City of the approach of the enemy, or
a faithful and vigilant Servant to his Prince and Country, descrying Cunning
traitors, who under a color of freindship and fidelity to the King and State
do practice the overthrow of both, should therefore upon the outcry of the
wolf, or the complaint of the enemy, or the recrimination of the Traitors, be
adiuged and condemned of Sedition, for discharging that duty, which both God,
and his word, and the souls of Gods people require of him. Thus much of the
matter of the Articles, upon the very resoltancy where of I was moved to
Appeal, as aforesaid.

Again, for the further illustration of the just cause of my Appeal, I except
against the in competancy of those Judges, who plainly appear to be both
parties in the cause, and Adversaries to my person for the cause sake, and
therefore both by the Common, Civil, and Canon Law, yea by the very Laws of
God and Nature, which prohibit any man to be a judge in his own cause,
especially when the party is an enemy to him, that is to be judged by him; and
therefore by the Laws of God and man I have just cause of Appeal from them
unto your Royal Majesty. Where in the first place, I distinguish and put a
maine difference, between those Honorable Nobles, Judges, Counseillors of
State, and other Lay persons of the High Commission, whom I except not against,
but mention with all honorable and due respect, and between all those Prelates,
who are Innovators (and eo nomine as they are Innovators only) together with
all those that have a near relation unto them, and dependence upon them, as
bearing office under them, and hoping for grace and preferment by them, which
are the usual body of the Court, determining all causes brought before them.

First, that these against whom I except, are parties, thus I prove; because
the Innovations which I charge the Innovators with, are both done by them, or
by their Officers, and also they appear in the cause, as Patrons to Defend and
maintain the same against me; so as upon the very reading of the said Articles
I could not but presently apprehend, that the laying of these things to my
charge by way of recrimination, did professedly engage them parties in the
cause.

Secondly, because they are my Adversaries in the Cause, that this is so I
prove as follows. First, because they are Adversaries to those truths
delivered by me, and charged by them as matter of Sedition against me; which
notwithstanding I am ready to maintain against them with my life, although I
never so much as once dreamed, that impiety and impudency it self in such a
Christian State as this is, and under such a gracious Prince, durst ever thus
publickely have called me in question, and that upon the open stage, not only
for the manifest truth of those notorious and audacious Innovations contrary to
the Law, but also (and which I can never sufficiently admire) that these things
should be objected against me, which I preached upon the foresaid text and day,
alleged in the said Articles. My Son fear thou the Lord, and the King, etc.
Wherein, according to my duty, and the text, I so much urged and pressed all
manner of obedience and service to God, and to the King (as all those who heard
me can testify) earnestly admonishing Gods people and the Kings Subjects to
beware, and not to meddle with such Innovators, (as according to my text) are
enemies of God and of the King, and divide between the King and his people.

Secondly, they against whom I except, as aforesaid, are my Adversaries, in
that they usurp such a title of their Jurisdiction, as cannot consist with
that title of Jurisdiction, which the Law of the Land has annexed to your
Imperial Crown, from whence all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction what
soever has its immediate and sole dependence and derivation, as appears by
the Statute of 26. H. 8. c. 1. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1.
and 1. Iac. c. 25. which repealed Queen Mary's Act. of repeal of the said
Statute of Ed. 6. c. 2. whereby the same Statute stands now in force. And the
said Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 1. uniting all manner of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction whatsoever unto the Imperial Crown of this Realm, enacteth the
Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance eo nomine to that very end and purpose, that
none should presume to exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this
Realm, but by virtue of the Kings Letters Patents, and in the Kings Majesty's
name and right: notwithstanding these men against whom I except, as aforesaid,
having all of them severally often solemnly taken the said Oath of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and being undoubtedly bound thereby, do continually exercise
their Episcopal Jurisdiction without any such Letters Patents of your Majesty,
or your Progenitors in their own names and rights only, and not in your
Majesty's name and right, to the manifest breach of their Oaths aforesaid, and
to the manifest usurpation of your Majesty's right, and in high contempt of
your Majesty contrary to your Majesty's peace, your Crown, and dignity. And
therefore under your Majesty's royal favor I account all such my Adversaries,
and so in competent Judges of my cause aforesaid. The rather, because this very
Act, which they thus notoriously transgress, is the ground whereupon their
Commission in causes Ecclesiastical is erected, and that principally for the
better observation of the said Act, and the punishment of all Delinquents
against it, as appears by all the Commissions Ecclesiastical into which this
clause of the Statute is inserted. Now if these men thus daily infringe this
Act themselves, and so abuse that very power and Commission by which they now
clame to be my Judges, in affront of your Majesty's royal Jurisdiction, what
indifferent justice I may expect from them, I humbly refer unto your
Majesty's just and royal consideration.

Thirdly, they who are Adversaries of God and of the King, are my Adversaries,
But all Innovators either in matters of Religion, or of the Common weal, are
Adversaries of God, and of the King: therefore they are my Adversaries. The
first Proposition noe good Christian, or loyal Subject will deny, but that the
Adversaries of God, and of the King, are his Adversaries. And for the other
Proposition, the text proves it: for Innovators are there opposed to the fear
of the Lord, and of the King. And those men against whom I have excepted, as
aforesaid, either are the Innovators themselves, or chief Authors, Abbetters,
or Countenauncers of those Innovations; and therefore they are my Adversaries,
and so incompetent Judges of my Cause.

Fourthly, they are my Adversaries for this reason o^ argument. They which are
Christ's enemies, are my enemies. But these are Christ's enemies: therefore my
enemies. That they are Christ's enemies, I prove. They who oppose the word of
God in the Ministry of it, in stopping the mouths of Gods Ministers and
persecuting of them without and against all Law, are Christ's enemies. But these
do so. Therefore etc. That they do so is clear by their practice, which will
abundantly appear upon due examination.

Fifthly, they who are the Kings enemies, are my enemies. But these Innovators,
by overturning the State of Religion, in bringing in their new Superstitious
rites and Ceremonies, whereby both God is justly incensed to wrath against the
Land, and the peace of the same is disturbed, are the Kings enemies. Therefore
they are my enemies. They are the Kings enemies, that openly and affrontingly
with a high hand and shameless forhead trangresse and oppose his Majesty
royal Laws, Proclamations and Declarations against all Innovations in matters
of Religion etc. And thereby disturb the peace of his Majesty's Kingdom, and
weaken the State thereof distracting the peoples hearts, by making them both to
feel their present oppressions especially upon their Consciences, and to fear
the utter subversion of the true Religion by your Majesty's Laws established
amongst us. Again* they who with all their might and maine persecute and
op^ign^ those faithful, loyal Subjects, Ministers and people who most plead
and stand for his Majesty's just and royal Prerogative in Causes
Ecclesiastical, his Laws, Declarations, Proclamations, and the established
Doctrine and Religion of Christ in the Church of England, and most oppose all
Innovations, and enemies to them, must needs be the Kings enemies. But thus do
those from whom I Appeal. Therefore they are the Kings enemies, and so mine.
This suffice to prove those my Adversaries, and so incompetent Judges of me and
of my Cause.

Finally, I have just cause to Appeal from those Commissioners excepted
against unto your royal Majesty, for their illegality, which I have observed
in their Proceedings partly in their usual practice, and partly in this
present cause. First, for their usual practice, and that in administering the
Oath, which they term Ex officio, in which they transgress in these
particulars. First, in inforceing the same upon men before any Copy given them
of the Libel or Articles exhibited against them, yea for the most part before
any Articles drawn, upon their very first appearance: whereas in all other
your Majesty's Courts of Justice, noe Oath is either exacted or administered,
till after a Copy of the Information or Bill delivered to the party and his
answer thereunto drawn up and engrossed by advise of counsel upon the
putting in of his Answer into the Court and not before: which as it is
contrary to the very Commission itself, which expressly limits them to
administer Oaths in such manner and form as is used in the Chauncery before
the Masters thereof, where no man is forced to take an Oath, till the putting
in of his Answer to the Bill on Plaint against him: So as it deprives him of
the use and benefit of Law, by way of demurrer unto the Articles, if there be
occasion; no party being in forced, either in Star Chamber, or any other Court
of Justice in the Realm, to take answer, where there is just cause of
Demurrer, but puts in a Demurrer by advise of counsel, without any Oath at
all. And his so taking of a rash Oath, is directy against the 39 Article of our
Religion: Of a Christians man's Oath: In these words: As we confess that vain
and rast swearing is forbidden Christian men etc. So we judge, that Christian
Religion does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate
requires in a cause of faith, and charity, so it be done according to the
Prophets teaching justice, judgment and truth: Now such swearing to what a man
knows not, is vain and rash. It is also against faith and charity, when the
Oath is extended to accuse a man's self, or his neigbour unlawfully. Secondly
in making the Oath which they administer, an usual share to those which take
it. For although it be pretended, that thereby they are bound to answer to
Articles in Court against them no further then the Law of the Land bynds them,
yet being taken, they press it upon the man's conscience to answer in those
things, which neither Law nor conscience bynds him unto. And in case he shall
except against any Article, as not bound by Law to answer it, then they take
it pro confesso, and so (although it be for accusing himself, or others,
wherein he ought not, being a breach of charity and of that Maxim, Nemo
tenetur prodere seipsum: and contrary to all Laws of God and man) they
illegally proceed to Sentence without any just or further proof of the things
objected.

Moreover, their proceeding is illegal, in that the Deponent is not permitted
to have a Copy of the Articles against him, and to answer them by the advice
of counsel, as in all other Courts of Justice within the Kingdom has ever
been used, but must make a sudden answer without advise of counsel, wherein
men commonly through ignorance of the Law, ambiguity of certain terms, and
captious Interrogatories, are enforced to ensnare themselves even in cases
wherein they are Innocent.

Besides all this, after their first Articles, whereby they often draw men unto
the Oath, when they see they cannot have the advantage, of them, thereby, they
put in Additionals, and Additionals upon Additionals contrary to the course of
Justice in all other your Majesty's Courts within the Realm, which admit of
no Addition to the first Bill, Indictment, or Information exhibited, after
answer given to it, least causes should be infinitely protracted, and men
continually vexed, whereby many of your Subjects are there intolerably grieved
and oppressed, their causes protracted, expenses multiplied, and so never given
over or dismissed the Court, till they have brought them into their lurch. And
in fine, their imposing of fines, and imprisoning in such cases and for such
matters, as they neither may nor ought to do by Law. Thus for their
illegalities in their usual proceedings.

Secondly, their illegality in this their proceeding against me in particular
is a just cause of my Appeal; which consist of two particulars: First, in the
subject matter of the Articles objected against me, which themselves term
therein Sedition, of which (admit it true) yet they have no cognizance in point
of Law; Sedition being no Ecclesiastical offense against the Church, but a
Civil against the King and State; and therefore to be tried only in your
Majesty's Courts of Civil Justice, and not before the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, who have no cognizance of it. And therefore the Apostle Paul,
when he was most unjustly accused (as I am now) by Ananias the High Priest with
the Elders, and Tertullus their Advocate, that they had found him a pestilent
fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a
Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens (Acts 24. 5.) they did noe convent him
before them in their Ecclesiastical Consistory, but before Faelix the
Governor a temporal Magistrate, knowing well, that Sedition was not an
Ecclesiastical, but a Civil offense, of which Paul there purged himself,
without being put to any Ex officio Oath, putting them to prove the crime
objected by witnesses, saying, Neither can they prove the things, whereof they
now accuse me: as I presume my Accusers likewise cannot do in any Court of
Justice against me. Since therefore they are so unjust as to question and
Article against me for Sedition, of which they have no cognizance, I conceive
it to be a gravamen, and so a just cause of Appeal from them.

First, in the manner of their proceeding against me, which has been very
exhorbitant, illegal, and extraordinary, in these particulars- First, in
serving me with a Citation to appear only before one single Commissioner at
his private house, when and where there was not then, nor ever has been
heretofore any High Commission kept; whereas all appearance are to be made in
Court; and there tendering me Articles and an Oath to answer to them, contrary
to the Law, and their own usual course.

Secondly in excluding my neighbors and friends that accompagnied me thither,
out of the house, that they might not hear, or see what was done, and
tendering me both the Articles and the Oath in a private room where Dr. Ducke
and the Register only were present: Whereas all Courts of Justice ought to be
public, that all that will may see and know their proceedings, in them, and
not in a corner.

Thirdly intendering me an Ex officio Oath, to answer and accuse my self, in
a matter of Sedition, (which if true) might call not only, my reputation, but
also my life and liberty into question; whereas Whitgift Archbishop of
Canterbury in the Conference at Hampton Court, printed by Authority, there
publicly averred, that in matter of life, liberty or scandal, it is not the
course of that Court to require any such Oath, or to enforce any man that has
taken the Oath, to answer to any such Articles. And Paul himself, when he was
accused for Sedition by Ananias the High Priest and Tertullus, was neither
required nor enforced to take any such. Oath, as appears by Acts. 25.

Fourthly, in that they would enforce me to answer upon Oath, and bring in a
Copy of what I publicly preached in my Parish Church, which I conceive I am
not bound by the Law of God or man to do, nor ought they to require. For (John
the 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.) when the High Priest asked Jesus (being convented
before him) of his Disciples, and of his Doctrine: Jesus answered him, saying.
I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple,
whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said nothing. Why
ask thou me? Ask them which heard me what I have said unto them. Behold
they know what I said. And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which
stood by, struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying. Answerest thou the
High Priest so? Jesus answered him: If I have spoken evil, bear witness of
the evil, but if well, why smitest thou me? A plain testemony from our
Saviors own Doctrine and Example (which no man can condemn as unjust or
illegal) that no Minister ought to be put so much as to give an answer, much
less a Copy of what he publicly preached in the Church, and that upon Oath to
prejudice or accuse himself thereby, but what ever he delivered, ought to be
proved by witnesses, that heard him: and the High Priest being satisfied with
this answer of our Savior, I hope no High Commissioner, but ought to have
rested satisfied with the like from me, though as yet they still proceed to
press ^e to an Oath.

Fifthly, in calling a Private Commission out of Term, ^n or near Dr. Duckes
private Chamber at Doctors ^ommons, and no public Court, and there proceeding
to suspend me in my absence, under pretense of a contempt in not appearing
before them, when as first I had ^o lawful Citation under Seal then and there
to appear. Secondly no sufficient legal notice of the time and place of the
said Commissioners meeting, and so was not bound by Law to appear before them,
especially in a Corner, out of Term, in an unusual manner.

Sixthly in suspending me, notwithstanding my Appeal to your Sacred Majesty
entered formerly at Dr. Duckes house at Cheswick by their own Register before
the said suspension, of which my Appeal, being registered in the Court, they
ought all to have taken notice.

Seventhly, in suspending me against all Law and Justice, both from my Office
and Benefice, in my absence, as if formerly lawfully convented before them, and
publishing the said suspension in an unusual manner in my Parish Church, and
commanding all Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Clerks and Ministers within the City
of London to whom the said suspension is directed upon the Sunday next, and
immediately following the receipt thereof, openly to publish and declare me to
be suspended both from my Office and Benefice in their several Parish
Churches, when the Congregation shall be then and there assembled to my
intolerable disgrace and scandal.

Eighthly in taxing and condemning me of Sedition, and other misdemeaners in
their said suspension, before either heareing my Answer, or the Cause,

Ninthly, in denying me a Copy of the Articles exhibited against me, to perfect
this my Appeal to your Majesty by, and to annex them thereunto and refusing to
give me a Copy of the Acts of the Court and proceedings against me, though I
have often sent for them.

These, my most Gracious Sovereign, are the grounds and reasons of my Appeal
from the said Commissioners excepted against, to your Majesty, my Sovereign
Lord and Patron, which together with my person and cause I here humbly
prostrate at your Majesty's royal feet, imploring the justice of your royal
Throne (which is established by righteousness) and that in so important a
Cause of God and of the King, which I am certain you will never deny to your
meanest Subject, much less to your ancient Servant and daily Orator to the
Throne of Grace,

Henry Burton.

TO ALL THE TRVE-HEARTED NOBILITY OF HIS MAJESTY'S Most Honorable Privy
Council.
MY HONORABLE LORDS,
Expect not here from me the Court language or dialect; it will not suit my
person, much less the cause, which here I present to your Honors; being such a
cause, as I know not how the Court spirit will relish it, much less digest it.
Let me therefore be bold, in the first place, to awaken those Nobler spirits
(if happily either laid and luld asleep by the enchantments of these present
times, or otherwise smothered under the heap of Court employments, and the
like) yea spirits heavenly inspired, which respiring a while, and retiring into
the closet of your inmost Muse, may summon all your cares and powers to the sad
and solid eonsideration of a cause so important, as (all circumstances and
consequences well weighed) I dare say, the like has not come upon the stage
for these many years; being a cause so much concerning the honor of God, the
peace, welfare, and honor of the King, the State of Religion and of the
Commonweal by good Laws established, the liberty of our consciences, and the
honor of your Lordshipps, being Peers of the Realm, Counselors of State,
and so pillars of the Kings Throane, of Religion, and of the Republique; all
which do now exceedingly suffer, and are terribly shaken, yea ready to fall to
ground, if not prevented by some speedy and effectual remedy. And whence
should remedy be expected, but (next unto God) from his Sacred Majesty, and
from his prudent and faithful Counselors of State, the great chariots and
horsemen of Israel? To the end therefore, that his Majesty may take notice of
so weighty a cause in hand, and lay it to heart, and strengthen his hands with
Justice to vindicate his honor therein, I have humbly addressed my self to his
Majesty both by petition and Appeal, and next to your Honors by way both of
information and of solicitation to give your eyes no sleep, till you have
effectually moved his Majesty to a serious consideration of such a cause, that
so nearly concerns the weal or woe of this Kingdom. Not that I take upon
me to judge of such high matters, but that his Majesty would be pleased to
weigh the cause in the just scales of his mature wisdom, and unpartiall
judgment (all respect of persons laid aside) and also consult his sage
Senators therein, that some thing may be forthwith resolved on, and set on
foot, for the preventing (if possible) of the imminent ruins both of Church
and State: Nor let this motion be contemned, because it commes from so mean a
person, as (in the worlds opinion) a poor Minister of Christ. Certainly, I am
one of the watchmen of Israel (though the meanest) yet one who has obtained
mercy to be faithful. Nor have I inconsideralty or rashly rushed upon this
business, but have been by a strong hand drawn into it. Yea, my Lords, know
assuredly, that Christ himself, my great Lord and Master, has called me forth
to be a public witness of this great Cause, who will certainly mainteyne
both it and me against all the Adversaries of God and of the King. And being
so, does not the same Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
call both the King, your Honors and all his Nobles and worthies to lay to heart
such a cause as this, if with the whole Realm you will not be brought back
again under the Papal and Antichristian yoke, which, where ever it comes,
Lordeth, and tyrannizeth over souls, bodies, consciences, goods, laws, and
Liberties? What? shall we see Religion overturned, the Laws out lawed, our
Liberties captived, Christ Kingdom and the Kings throane together undermyned,
and Antichrists throane exalted over us, and that by a Faction of Iesuited
Poly-pragmatiques, and we like heartlesse doves sit trembling while the
Hagards do outdare us, as if we were made for nothing else, but for them to
prey upon? Certainly if we thus sit us down, and hide us under the hatches,
while the Romish Pirates do surprise our Ship and cut our throaths, and cast
us overboard, what volumes will be sufficient to Chronicle to posterity the
baseness of Degenerate English Spirits, become so unchristianized, as to set
up Antichrist above Christ, and his anointed, and to suffer our selves to be
cheated and nose-wiped of our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and all our Glory,
and that by a sort of bold Romish Such as Francis a Sancta Clara, and other
his Jesuitical Compli^^^.
Mountebanks and Iuglers?

Objection. But some will object, what does this concern any of the Laity. Do
not matters of Religion properly pertain to the Clergy? Have not they all the
power and Authority to determine such matters? Tractent fabrilia fabri, will
they say.
Answer. O egregious and pernicious error! The Clergy only (by which they
mean the Church) to have power in matters of Religion to determine them? As if
lay persons, who are Christians, be not members of the Church of Christ, and
Gods peculiar people, and inheritance. Again, what should become of our
Parliamentary Laws, by which our Religion has been established, and the
Popish abolished? Or what shall become of our Religion so established, if the
Authority thereof must now depend only upon nthe Clergy, and that Clergy for the
most part dependes upon the authority of one, who exercises a kind of Papal
power in dedermining matters of Religion? Then how easy were it for one
Archbishop of Canterbury (if he be possessed with a Papal spirit, and zeal
for Popery, and should have great favor and power in Court) in one assembly of
Prelates, at one clap to overthrow all our religion by Law established, and to
set up again the whole body of Popish superstition and Idolatry? Moreover, why
should it be unlaufull for lay persons, Nobles, and others, to look into
matters of Religion within the limits of their calling, whether general, as
Christians, or special, as members of the common weal; when Clergy men dare
(in affront to Gods word, to Christ's Doctrine and example, and of his Apostles,
to all Councels and Canons whatsoever) usurped and take upon them to
intermeddle in the managing even of the highest and weightiest affairs of
Princes, States, and temporal Kingdoms, which is incompatible with the
ministerial function? Again, have not all Christians souls to save? and are
not those of Berea Acts 17. 11. 12.
indigitated in Scripture, as being more honorable then others, in searching
the Scriptures daily whether those things were so, which even the Apostle Paul
himself did teach? And are not all Christians themselves enjoined to try the
spirits, whether they be of God? And the rather, because many false 1. Io. 4.
1.
Prophets are gone out into the world 1 John. 4. 1? And are not all Christians
so to know the Scriptures, as if any teach Gal. 1. 8.
otherwise, yea though Angel from heaven, to hold him accursed, Gal. 1. 8?
And are we not all Christians? And if every Christian how mean soever should
have a care of his own soul, and not to pin it upon any ones sleeve, as not
knowing whither he may carry it; how much more every great man, that is in
high place, and has greater gifts of knowledge, and is in Eccles. 10. 1.
estimation for wisdom and glory? It is a Iusuiticall principle, and that very
mystery of iniquity, which supports Antichrists throane, to require or render
blind obedience to the dictates of the Church, alias, of the Pope, or Prelate,
or Priest, then which servitude and spiritual bondage none in the world is
more vile and base, none more perilous and pernicious. Thus the Math. 1^. 14.
blind leading the blind, both fall into the ditch: thus the Pope carrying
with himself millions of souls to be tormented with the great Devil, and
none to reprove him for it (as their own Decretalls say) what amends will this
be to those souls thus miserably deceived by him? So as this new doctrine of
the Jesuits, so much cried up now adays in Pamphlets and Pulpits, thereby to
captivate the faith and Conscience of all the Laity, yea and of all inferior
Ministers to the dictates of the Metropolitan chair, is nothing else, but that
prime Article of the Antichristian and Papal Creed, to overture all the
Articles of our Christian Faith. And if this Jesuitical Doctrine be creapt
into the Court, and there begin to Lord it, the Lord himself root it up,
and cast it out. But your honors have not so learned Christ, as thus to come
under Ephesians. 4. 20.
Antichrists Babilonian yoke. And therefore in the name of Christ rowse up
your noble and Christian zeal, and magnanimous courage for the truth, and now
stick close to God and to the King, in helping the Judges* 5. 23.
Lord and his Anointed against the Mighty, and earnestly contend for the
maintenance of that Faith Jude. 3.
and Religion, which was once delivered to the Saints, and has been sealed
with the blood of so many holy Martyrs, and transmitted down to us from our
worthy Progenitors, and whereof our gracious King is entitled the Defender,
and has in sundry his royal Declarations and proclamations solemnly
protested, that he will never suffer the least Innovation, and which also your
Honors have bound your selves not only as Christians in your Baptism, but as
Counselors and Statesmen by Oath to mainteyne, not suffering any foreign or
other exorbitant and usurped power to be exalted over this Land in any other
Jurisdiction Ecalesiasticall, then is by the Law annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. To conclude, the Cause both of my petition and Appeal
to his Majesty, is this, That usurpers and Innovators of Religion, and of the
Laws of the Land, being occasionnally and justly charged by me in my sermons
(as here your Honors may see) may be inquired on, and called to a strict
account. And the rather when now they show by their recrimination in the
articles objected against me, how ready they are openly upon the stage to
maintain with an high hand those their usurpations and Innovatio^s; Which, as
it cannot be without impiety, so much as once imagined, that his Majesty would
ever countenance, against so many solemn protestations to the contrary: So it
cannot be without horror conceived, into what devouring gulfes they must needs
precipitate this otherwise goodly State, if with Gods good help the King and
State jointly and speedily put not to their maine strength to stay it. All the
world sees in what a distracted estate things do stand, and what a cloud of
divine displeasure hanges over us, how ill we thrive in our affairs how
heavily the chariots are driven. And can we wonder but that God should blast
all our beauty and glory, if men of Beliall, of that lawless one, be suffered
to make ^av^^ke of Christ's Kingdom, to destroy the true Religion and to set up
again Popish superstition and idolatry over the Land? Certainly, if such be
suffered to go on thus, as they do, God must needs destroy us. Therefore my
honorable Lords, give me leave again and again to press this upon your
Honors, as a main service which you owe both to God, to the King, to Religion,
and so to your Posterities, and to the whole State that your Honors will use
your best means thoroughly to acquaint and possess the King with this weighty
business; That upon the sight thereof his wisdom, directed by Gods spirit,
may find out a speedy course for the removing of those intolerable greivances
under which his whole Kingdom groaneth, ready to sink, and to breath out its
last. And what ever the present necessities be, this I am persuaded of, that
never could a fayrer opportunity be taken, if well followed, to vindicate his
Majesty's honor, and to make him the most happy and glorious King in
Christendom, when closing with God and with his good people, he should at
least reduce into order the troublers of Israel. Now the Lord our God fill your
heroical hearts with understanding, zeal and courage, that you may acquitte
your selfs as good Christians toward God, faithful Counselors to the King,
and true Patrons of the true Religion, and so strong pillars of the State, in
this cause of God and of the King; That so after many honorable days here,
you may be crowned with eternal glory in the Kingdom of heaven, which is the
prayer of

Your Honors humble Orator at the Throane of grace, Henry Burton.

TO THE REVEREND And Learned IVDGES.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
Your place and office of Iudicatury to which God and the King have called you,
ingageth you to do justice to all impartially, as being bound thereunto both
by law, and conscience. By law: For, Magna Charta. cap. 29.
Justice shall not be sold, deferred, nor denied to any man. And, 2 Edw. 3. c.
8.
No Commandment under the great or little seal shall disturb or delay
justice, or right in any point. And, the Justices of both benches, Assise etc.
shall do right to all men, without regard of letters, writs, or Commaundments
* 18. Edw. 3. State, 3. 20. E. 3. c. 1. 2.
etc. Secondly. by conscience; For the law prescribes, this Oath, unto you. Ye
shall swear, that well and lawfully ye shall serve our sovereign Lord the
King and his poeple in the Office of Justice and that lawfully ye shall
counsel the King in his business ye shall do even Law and Execution of Right
to all his Subjects rich and poor without having regard to any person etc. and
in case that any of what estate or condition they be, come before yau in your
sessions etc. to disturb the execution of the Common law, or to menace the
people, that they may not pursue the law, that you do their bodies to be
arrested, and put in prison. And in case they be such that ye may not arrest
them, that ye certify the King of their names, and of their misprision hastily,
so that he may thereof ordain a convenable remedy; and that ye deny to no man
common right by the Kings letters, nor none other man's, nor for none other
cause. And in case any letters come to you contrary to the law, that ye do
nothing by such letters, but certify the King thereof, and go forth to do the
Law, notwithstanding the same letters. And in case ye be from henceforth found
in default in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at the Kings will of
body, Lands, and goods thereof to be done, as shall please Him, as God you
help etc.

Now these things I recite (most Learned Judges) not as if you were ignorant of
them, or had altogether forgotten them, but that the remembrance of them might
the better prepare you to do justice in a cause which here I present unto you.
And yet when I do but name the cause, namely for God and the King, what needs
any other incitement to do justice, then your own propensity? In this case,
which of you will not profess to be For God and the King? Well. I take it for
granted, that you are and will be for God and the King. Only give me leave in a
word to intimate, what it is to be for God and the King. First for God. Christ
says to persecuting Saul, Why persecutest thou me? Yet he persecuted not
Christ's Person, but his members and Ministers. And to his Disciples he says.
He that honoreth you, honoreth me; and he that despises you despises me. Are
you then for Christ? Then you must be for his Ministers, to do them justice in
their just cause. If so, than what means the blearing of the sheep, the
grievous complaint of Gods Ministers in many places of this land, who are
unjustly oppressed, suspended, excommunicated, outed of their livings, and so
themselves and families undone in their worldly estate? You will say, why do
they not complain to us? If they do not, it is because some of them have done
so, and yet found little or cold relief, and because the common rumor goes,
that the course of Justice is stopped in such cases, so as none dare plead their
cause, or open their mouths against the Prelates. But I hope better. And if
none be found to plead this cause of God, I hope your Worships will give me
leave (according to the right of law) to plead it, and your selves will give
true judgment. For as I am Christ's Minister, so I am the Kings faithful
subject, and crave justice at your hands according to the Kings laws, and
oaths. Yea his Sacred Majesty himself has declared his will to this
purpose, in the Petition of Right, saying, The And shall the greatest Prelates
will or pleasure then countermand this his Majesty's will, and Royal printed
mantate to your Worships I prove not.
King wills that Right be done, according to the Laws and customs of the
Realm; And, that the Statutes be put in due execution, that his Subjects may
have no cause to complain of any wrong, or oppressions, contrary to their just
Rights and Liberties: to the preservation whereof he holds himself in
conscience as well obliged, as of His Prerogative. And in Person thus: I assure
you my Maxim is, that the Peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative,
and the Kings Prerogative is to defend the Peoples Liberties. This being so,
the Kings Prerogative, his just laws, and the Peoples liberties, are so
combined together that they must be altogether preserved entire, so neither,
can you be so for God, but you must be also for the true Religion, and for his
faithful Ministers; nor secondly so for the King but you must be also for his
Laws, and his peoples rights and liberties, since the King and his people make
one politic body; and he cannot love the Head, who seeks to hurt the
members; or who setts the Head against the members, or who for advancing the
Head, destroys the members; or who makes a Schism and rent between the Head
and the members. And are not the Laws of the Kingdom the ligaments, which
fasten and unite the Head and members, the King and his people together? It is
your charge to see that these ligaments be not dissolved, but preserved safe
and sound: else the whole, both Head and body, (of which your selves and
Posterity are members) must needs suffer together. O then, what a weighty
charge lies upon your shoulders at this time, when the whole frame both of the
Republic and Religion so shakes, as it threateneth sudden ruin, if the
Laws, whereon they are established, be not maintained in their full strength
and vigor? Do not your Wisdoms see a new generation of Innovators risen up
in this Land, who usurping and practicing a Papal and Antichristian Power and
Jurisdiction, exempted from the Kings Laws, and not depending (as they
pretend, and profess) on the Kings sole Prerogative and Authority, do thereby
begin to overtoppe the Royal Throne, and trample the Laws, Liberties, and
just rights of the Kings Subjects under their feet? What means that
difficulty of obteineing of Prohibitions now adays whereby the Kings innocent
Subjects should be relieved against their unjust molestations and oppressions
in the Ecclesiastical Court and high Co^missions? What means that
consternation of spirit among Lawyers, that few or none can be found to plead a
cause, be it never so just, against an oppressing Prelate and are either an
menaced or imprisoned if they do it? What means that timidity in Ministers
and people, who choose rather to sit down with loss of al, even of the cause of
religion it self, the^ go to law, against a Prelate? What means that
lawless insolency and boldness of many Prelates? who against law and
conscience, against the express Doctrines of our Church, and against Gods
word, the ground and rule of our Faith and Religion, dare of their own heads
bring in, set up in Churches, and impose upon Ministers new rites and
ceremonies (contrary to the Act of Parliament before the Communion Book)
Altars, Images, and Crucifixes, with sundry superstitious gestures of bowing,
ducking, and standing up, with other notorious innovations (as even your selves
cannot be altogether ignorant of, and may further in one view behold in those
sermons following) suspending, excommunicating, and outing those Ministers,
that will not, dare not conform unto them. What means that Antichristian
pride, and lawless power in vexing and conventing the Kings good subjects, for
observing the Kings Laws, and executing of justice upon, or lawfully suing and
indicting at the Common law, transgressors of the same by their bold
innovations? the very hight of Antichristian tyrranny, sedition and rebellion.
I beseech your Lordships well to examine the original root and cause of all
these insolent irregularities and illegalities, which not only tend to, but
hasten on inevitable ruin both to the Church and state, if not spedily
prevented? And so vindicate yourselves herein, as that you may clear
yourselves from being the prime and principal causes of all the mischiefs and
maladies in the land; by either fearing denying, or delaying to do justice
upon and against these insolent Innovators. Have we not the best King in
Christendom who has so frequently and solemnly, as in the late Petition of
right, so in his royal Declaration before the Articles of Religion And
Declaration of yet Causes of dissolving the Last Parliament: Printed by his
Majesty's authority. 1628.
Declaration protested, calling God to witness, that neither in Doctrine or
Discipline he will suffer the least innovation to creep in, but will maintain
that Religion, which was in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and under which this
Kingdom has so long flourished? Notwithstanding all which, shall any up start
Innovators dare to set up their Popish rites and superstitious Forms of
worship in our Churches, contrary to the express Laws of the Realm, and can
you the Reverend Judges but be touched both in conscience of your duty of
office and Oath, and in care of the peace an welfare of this Kingdom and
Church, and of the Kings honor, and safety? Can such furious and outrageous
alterations of Religion be in any state without drawing a long with it and
after it infinite distractions and rents in the Kingdom and intolerable
discontents and heart burnings in the peoples minds, both tending to stir up
sedition within, and to expose the state to foreign invasion? For Gods sake
therefore, since his Majesty has committed, to you the sword of Justice, draw
it forth to defend the laws against such Innovators, who (as much as in them
lies) divide between the King and his people. Your selves know better then I
can tell you that if there be oppressions in the Common weal, especially
against the ordinary Course of the Laws, and against the Liberties of the
subject established by law, how hardly it is digested, and what dangerous
discontents it may breed: how much more perilous are such alterations of
religion, which would by a strong hand, and that after so long and clear light
of the Gospel, bring us back again under an Antichristian yoke, which
tyranizeth over the conscience, soul, body, goods, and liberties, poisoning
religion with Idolatry, superstition, and all manner of Will Worship in human
inventions, and traditions, condemned by Christ and his Apostles? Up therefore,
and play the men; discharge that great trust, which the King has reposed in
you which your Sa-Oaths require of you, which all the good people of the Land
expect of you, and which Christ himself the great Judge of quick and dead
will call you to a strict account for, which you know not how soon he may
do; for though you be as gods, ye shall dye like men, and fall like one of
the Princes. Therefore, as Christ says, Be instructed, ye Judges of the
earth: fear and tremble before this great God: Kiss the Son, least he be
angry, and ye perish from the way; when his wrath is kindled but a little:
Blessed are all they that put their trust in him: Which that you may be, it
shall be the prayer of

Your Worships daily Orator at the throne of Grace, Henry Burton.


