A HUNDRED Sermons upon the Apocalips of Jesus Christ, reueiled in deed by
Thangell of the Lord: but seen or received and written by thapostle and
Evangelist. S. John: Compiled by the famous and godly learned man, Henry
Bullinger, chief Pastor of the Congregation of Zuryk.

Newly set forth and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queen's
majesty's, Iniuntions.

Thargument, wurthines, commodity, and use of this work, thou shall find in
the Preface: After which thou have a most exact Table to lead thee into all
the princypall matters contained therein.

Math. 17. This is my well-beloved sun in whom I take pleasure, hear him. Anno.
1561

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir Thomas Wentworth knight Lord Wentworth Lord
Lifetenaunt of the Queen's Majesty's County of Suffolk. etc. His singular good
Lord and Master. John Daus his obedient Servant wissheth health and peace in
the Lord with thincrease of honor and dignitye.
IF we weigh and consider as well this present piece of Scripture entitled the
Revelation, as also the whole body of the same (Right honorable and my
singular Lord) we shall find that the true Church of Christ has been ever
from the first creation of the world, is now, and still shall be to the
consumation thereof, subject to great adversities, persecutions, and troubles,
out of the which notwithstanding the Lord when he sees it good delivers and
preserves the same, and suffers her not to perysh. Whereupon the Romish have
a true saying, that Peter's ship may with billows and waves of tempestuous
storms be over whelmed, but can never be drowned, which saying is doubtless
most true, although they the^ selves sail not therein, but rather seek to
dround the same by ouerfraighting her with the heavy burden of men's
traditions. For certe^ly the Ship of Peter which is the figure of Christ's
Church is in deed often tossed and tourmoyled with outrageous storms and
tempests, but can never be drenched or swallowed up of the same. For Christ
both Master and owner thereof, can and will, for his mercy and truths sake
appeace all rages at his pleasure. Herin both the Papists and Gospellers do
agree. But whether of them are the true Church^ this matter is yet in
controversy and hangs before the Judge, which this present work shall
discern and put out of all doubt. And to enter a little into the matter as it
were with a certain preamble, the true Church of Christ is not called the
stony temple wherein we assemble to hear Gods word, receive the Sacraments,
and to pray in, for such are builded with hands, and with hands are
destroyed a(...), nether yet is it called the congregation of certain Bishops of
al nations assembled in a general Counsel, for they all though in the first
lawful and godly counselles, were many good men and excellent members of
Christ's Church, yet were they not the whole church which could not err, and
the which had authority to make new Articles of the faith, but the Church is
called the whole society of people that acknowledge the Gospel of Christ and
believe in him. And this Church not to be of one time only but of all times and
ages, as Adam with Eve his wife, his sun Abel and his family was the church,
Noah with his family was the church. Melchizedec with his family was the
Church, Abraham also with his family. Likewise Isaac, Jacob, David, the
Prophets and Apostles with their Auditors that believed in the Gospel of
Christ were the church, and where soever at this day the Gospel of Christ is
received and believed there is also the church of Christ which by a figurative
speech may be aptly called the Ship of Peter or Arcke of Noe. Now let us
consider the state of the church under Adam, whereof the chiefest member was
righteous Abel, but him does his brother Cain persecute for Religion and
slays him And this was the beginning of the tempest that arose aagainst the
Ship of Peter, the beginning I mean, of the persecution of the church which
shall last to the worlds end. Likewise did the church under Abraham suffer
persecution by Ismaell, under Isaac by Esau, under Moses of Pharao, under Eli
the high Priest the Ark of the Lord was taken by the Philistines, and then it
was thought that the church should have quyte perished under Achab and wicked
Iezabel, the Church was not only afflicted and sore oppressed, but also in a
manner extinguished where the Prophet Helias complained that he was left alone.
Under Jeremy, the City of Jerusalem was destroyed of the Babylonians, and the
church was not like then to perish, but rather utterly lost already, when
Christ the head of the Church, was crutified, it was judged that the church
had then ben clean destroyed. We had thought (say they) that he should have
redeemed Israel, what time king Pharao with his host had enclosed the
Israelites, that is to wit, the church between the mountains and the Red
Sea, it was like that the church should have perished, but Moses prayed and
the Lord miraculously delivered them: Again, the church seemed to be in
extreme danger when Sennacherib spoiled the kingdom of Judah, and meant to
destroy Jerusalem, but througe the prayer of Ezechias the King, God sent his
Angel and distroyed the host of the Assyrians. The church seemed to tend unto
ruin, when Herod had killed James with the sweard, and minded also Peter, but
the congregation contynewyng in prayer, the Lord sent his Angel to deliver
Peter. And to be short in those ten grievous persecutions which followed
immediately after the Apostles time the church many times seemed brought unto
utter decay, but always when God saw it good it was revived, and as it were
refreshed again. What should I recite the persecutions of the church in the
time of Athanasius wherein the Arrian Bishops so prevailed that the Emperor
and his whole Army so persecuted Athanasius, that the good Bishop was feign to
lie hyd in an holle, where he saw no sun by the space of six years. And who
would then have thought that ever the true church of Christ should have
flourished again? I need not here to rehearse the cruel persecutions of the
church under the Romish antichrist which nevertheless have been and be yet
still most tyranicall and blouddye. For that the same shall in this present
work more clearly appear, then that I need to make any discourse thereof, only
I would show, briefly as does my Author, at large, that Christ's true
church, is always subject to persecutions. To the intent therefore to pass over
many things untouched, and to come nerer our fathers memory, in the time of
the Emperor Sigismunde, there was holden a counsel at Constaunce, wherein,
the Bishops so conspired, to extinguish Christ's verity, that contrary to
thauncient liberty of a free and general Counsel, and contrary to the
Emperors saufconduit, they not only burned there John Husse and Hierome of
Prage, professors of Christ's Gospel, but decreed also, that the bones of
John Wickleffe, sumtime Person of Lutterworth, here in England: should be taken
up and brent. whose bestiall cruelty, of raging against dead men, our popish
prelacie of late days, rightly Imitatynge, as the children of one father, that
was a murderer from the beginning, practysed like tyranny with the bones of
Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius at Cambridge. Such raging surges of late days
did beat against the Ship of Peter. Blessed be the Lord Jesus, that has sent
us a goodly caulme, according to the saying of the Prophet David. The Just
shall suffer much tribulotion, but the Lord delyuereth them out of all. And
this is verily the argument and sum of this book, that Christ's church shall
suffer grievous persecution, but shall never be left destitute. For where the
dragon fights on the sand, the Lamb Christ like a conqueror, stands on
Mount Sion, right hable to succor all his, to the great comfort and
consolation of his chosen, which of necessity, must suffer with Christ, if
with him, we will be glorified: And as Christ him self, when he was rayled
upon, gave no evil words again. So is the true church of Christ known in this,
that it suffers persecution, and does not persecute again. Wherefore like as
wise king Solomon judged her, to be the true mother of the child, which had
such compassion on it, that she had rather forgo the whole, then have it
divided and dismembered, and the other to be the harlot, that had ouerlayne her
child which had also consented to the death of the other: Right so may we
discern evidently the whorish church of Antichrist by her bluddy persecutions
from the true church and spouse of Christ, the one with sweard and fire seeks
always to quench the treuth, the other through the sperite of lenity, to
win men to the same, the one by compulsion and violent oppression, the other by
persuasion: and meke intercession, the one by the sword, the other by the
word, the one goes about to pervert and deprave, the other seeks all
means, to convert and save. But lest I should excede here the just measure
of an Epistle, and through prolexitie, be to your honor tediouse, which ca^
(as the proverb says) discern a Lion by his claws. I will break of the
thread of my discourse, notwithstanding, that the matter is so ample and large,
that it would require an other work, wherein it is harder to find an end, then
it was a beginning, contented by these few examples of sundry times, to have
signified not to your Lordship, which know them much better then I: And have
red this present work in Latin as you do all others right diligently. But
through your ientil patience, to the plain English Reader, that the true
church of Christ has been in all ages persecuted, and that this present work,
written upon the Revelation of S. John, and into an hundred Sermons digested,
declares no less; and is as it were an Ecclesiastical History of the troubles
and persecutions of the Church, especially from the Apostles time, until the
last day, wherein Christ, the head of the same shall come a righteous Judge, to
condemn Antichrist, and all Antichristian hipocrites and bluddy persecutours:
But to receive his elect people and to crown them with glory: And shall
deliver up his kingdom, to his Father, and God shall be all in all. Which
work understanding right well, that it should to your honor be acceptable. I
dedicate and consecrate to your name, as you best have deserved. Which in this
and other like enterprises, have been to me, a golden spur, that by you all
others may receive commodity thereof, to the glory of God and salvation of
their own souls. The Lord Jesus with his principal spirit, strengthen and
confirm your good Lordeshyp in all your Godly desires.

From Ipsewich the kalendes of March. Anno. Do 1561.
A Sixain touching the contents of this book.
WHo list to move his lips,
and hereon look and read:
In this Apocalyppes,
these thing shall find in deed.
What Antichrist first is,
who, and where he does dwell:
And that his coming is:
from the deep pit of hell.
Then what is tholde Serpent,
the Dragon and the rest:
And also what is meant,
by the Image of the beast.
That Room is Babylon,
the beasts with her heads all:
The whore sitting thereon,
is Pope that down shall fall.
The three foul sprets like frogs,
are Legates of the side:
And shall have part with dogs,
though now Prelates of pride.
The Locustes to declare,
as flies in Summer ryfe:
The Popish clergy are,
a people full of strife.
Their song is nothing else,
but always coaxe, coaxe:
Holy church holy mass, holy bells,
holy bread, holy oil, holy wax.
By the mark of the Beast,
they may both by and sell:
And as they say at least,
redeem souls out of hell.
Their wayres yet shall decay,
and perish in an hour:
All shall be take away,
their oil, wine and fine flower.
And Rome shall down be cast,
and drowned in the deep:
(...) marchaunts then at last,
(...)ll wayle and weep,
The Dragon and the beast,
Satan that Serpent old:
Antichrist and the rest,
in pains shall aye ben hold.
All ye that Godly be,
from Rome quickly depart:
or else with her you see,
of plages ye must have part.
This book shall eke declare,
of Sun, Moan and of stars:
Candelstickes, what they are,
of battle and of wars.
Which Antichryst shall meue,
against Christ's church to fight:
And those that will believe,
in Christ, to death will dight.
But Christ on Sion Mount,
the Lamb shall aye prevail:
Of his makes account,
and will them never fail.
The sealed are the elect,
whom God has chosen free:
All others are reject,
and condemned shall be.
The Raynebow and white cloud
and maruels many one:
Thaungels cry aloude,
blessed be God in trone.
Thangels and spretes holy,
thelders and Beasts four:
Praise God continually,
so should we evermore.
The elect with good intent,
pray come Lord Jesus comes
unto the last Judgment,
to judge both all and sum.
They that dye in the Lord,
straight way do pass to blysses
This scripture does record,
where joy and glory is.
The troumps that Angels sound
and vialles of Gods ire:
Declare God to confound,
that withstand his desire.
The Harvest and vintage,
do plainly signifye:
That sin is ripe of age
and ought of right to die.
The woman clad with sun,
with stars eke crowned bright:
The church is, and her sun,
our Savior Christ a right.
The new Jerusalem,
of Christ the spouse so pure:
The church of faithful men,
in joy shall still endure.
In it no temple is,
no Sun no moan at all:
for Christ her glory is,
and God is all in all.
Then Reader by this book,
thou shall thee not repent:
if thou will heron look,
nor money better spent.
(...).
THE PREFACE OF Henry Bullinger upon the Apocalips of Jesus Christ setforth by
the Apostle and Evangelist s. John, unto all thexiles for the name of Christ in
Germany and Swyserland, of France, England, Italy and of other Realms or
nations, and generally to all the faithful where soever they be, abiding and
lokyng for the coming of Christ our Lord and Judge.
THat this Apocalips was reveled of Jesus christ king of kings and high
Bishop, our lord from the right hand of the Father, and setforth by
thapostolical spirit, for the salvation of al faithful chieflye of those that
shall be in the latter days, before the last judgment, both the matter it
self, which is treated, right necessary to be known, holsom and excellent,
proves: And also the simple manner and mean, whereby it is handled being
evident and plain, declares. I will speak of either briefly, Collectyng those
things only, which seem to be more profitable and more necessary. John.xvi.
The Lord had said in the Gospel, how he would ascend into heaven, and from
thence would send to his Apostles the holy Ghost, the comforter, which should
lead them into all truth, and show them the things that are to come. And that
which he said he would do in words, the same verily has he also performed in
deed abundantly. The holy Ghost being sent to his Apostles, which induced them
into all truth, and opened to them the things that were to come, especially
to the Apostle and Euangelyst. S. John, who received this Revelation, exibited
to him of Christ, from the right hand of the Father, by the mystery of an
Au^gel, in the holy Ghost, who also by Christ his commandment, committed the
same to writing. The sum and end of the which writing is this: The sum and
end of the Apocalipse.
That Christ Jesus our Lord, will never fail his church in earth, but will
govern it with his spirit and word, through thecclesiasticall ministry. But
that the church it self, whilst it remains in this world shall suffer many
things, and that for Christ and the truth of his Gospel professed. And it
opens al and singular evils in a manner, that the church shall suffer, showing
how it must be exercised with common Calamities, as war, plage famyne and
such other like, What it shall privately suffer of the false brethren through
heresies, schisms and grievous and continual stryfes, contentions and
corruptions in the matter of religion: Finally how terribly it should be vexed
by the most cruel persecutions of tholde Roman Empire, And last by the
wicked crafts and extreme Tyranny of Antichrist. All the which things
apperteyne to this end, that all the chosen being sufficiently warned before,
and provided, in all ages whilst this world shall endure, may with true faith
alone, cleave unto Christ our redemer, king and high priest, only and
eternal, and may purely and syncerely profess him, call upon him, in the
innocence of life, serve him, and patiently attend after him, coming to
Judgment, and to deliver and save the godly: But contrariwise, that they
despise all superstitions and the world it self with those his sondrye
religions, felicities and pleasures: and bewar of al ungodliness. And chiefly
that they flee Antichrist which shall com in the end of the world, usurping to
himself most unjustly the kingdom and Priesthod of Christ, and greuouslye
persecuting the church of Christ, even to the last Judgment. In the which
at the last he with all his adherentes, shall be thrown down hedlonge into
Hell.

And. S. John begins this wholesome matter of Christ himself, The first
Chapter of the Apocalips.
Lord, king and high Bishop, whose wonderful and most goodly description,
after the Apostolic manner, he places in the very beginning, as the
foundation of the whole work. The same description does so ^^ately
setfoorthe the Lord, that all the church may easily know, What things are
treated in this book, and in what order.
dispersed throughout the whole world, in Christ our Lord all things to be
accomplished, what so ever he had said before should be fulfilled in him,
namely that he should be exalted, one to the ryghthand of his father, into all
celestial glory, power and majesty and there to be king of kings, of all
other most mighty, and the true and only high Bishop. Savior governor, Lord
and general defendour of the Catholycke church. For blessed. S. John not only
saw him such him self, but also exhibiteth him such, to be seen of us all in
this his writing so godly, by a most bright and goodly vision. And moreover to
the intent it might be known to us all, in what sort our Lord Jesus Christ,
king and priest sitting or working in Heaven on the right hand of his Father,
is nevertheless in the mids of the catholycke church, whereof he has a
faithful care, how lovingly and fully he preserves it, and in best order
governs it. S. John shows in this his vision, that Christ walks among
the seven golden candlestickes, and holds in his right hand, seven stars.
And streyghtway declares what thing he understands by the candelstickes and
stars, calling the candelstickes churches, and the stars, Angels of the
churches. That is to wit, Seven churches.
Messagers, ministers and pastors. For the Lord chose unto him self seven
famous churches in Asia, with whom he treats now generally and
compendiously, using S. John for his interpretour: which he does perpetually in
all churches throughoute the world, and will never cease to do till the worlds
end. For the seventh number, which is most used in this book, Chap. 2, and.3
and is the number of fulness, comprehends in it all churches. Wherefore S.
John does so propounde, moderate, and temper all things that he treats with
these seven churches, that they may be applied unto all the Churches that
shall be in the world, until the worlds end, for their learning and edifiyng.
And for the same cause, these seven churches may be examples of all other
churches. For look what thing then, did please or displease the Lord in those
seven churches, what time these things were revealed: the self same in all
other churches, shall please or displease him, so long as the world shall
last. And as he would have those instructed and taught: so will he that all and
singular be instructed at all seasons. Therefore in these seven churches we
have examples of churches most excellent in deed, and of God derely beloved:
And again of most corrupt, mean also, and finally mixed. And in these al is
showed, what is, or shall be, the disposition, manners and virtues of all the
churches in the whole world, and of al times and seasons, likewise the vices of
them and remedies of the same. Therefore the Lord in these instructs,
reproves, chideth, threatens, exhorts, comfort, promises. Wherefore in
these we shall see, as it were in a table set before us, what the true and
right doctrine of the church is. And again, which is the false and the
corrupt doctrine. We shall hear and learn, that the church beloved of God,
must stand still in the preaching of the Gospel, once received of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ: and must look for no new, nor other mo
doctrines, and to have no need of other Revelations: For the church is already
instructed with a most complete doctrine. There is it taught also, what we
ought to do with corrupt doctrines, and teachers. And where it is easy to fall
into vices, this book does dilligently and plentifully minister medicines,
teaching, how the church falling down may be set up and repared again: And
here it treats much of true repentance, of the fruits of repentance, of
the duties of Saints or of very good works. Moreover, it exhorts the
afflicted to patience and constantie, and to the confession of Christ's name,
without fear, and to all godlynes: many times setting forth the most ample
rewards of god, And also affirming that tourmentes are prepared for the
disobedient and reuoltes. By this way and mean. S. John shows to the church
how our Lord Jesus Christ being in heaven, on the righthande of his father, in
the mean time, and nevertheless works in the mids of the congregation of
his faithful, inspiring, quickenyng, keeping and gouernyng it. And again, how
the church living in this world, may l^ue notwithstanding in Christ, and be
quickened of him, of whom it depends wholye, whom only it regards and in
whom it is preserved. And who will not acknowledge this handlyng of the matter,
to be all together Apostolic, and right well grounded in the doctrine of
Christ? But in the work it self, all and every thing, shall to us be much
more evidently declared.

But where as Christ in the Gospel has said, that the church his well-beloved
spouse, should be exercised with sundry afflictions, in the which
notwithstanding, The church is subject to temptations and persecutions.
he would never fail her: Now in deed from the right hand of his Father, he
recompteth most plentifully and in a most goodly order of all the dollefull
destenies of the church, to the intent that whilst the church is subject to
sundry euilles, she may remember these things, and coumfort her self, lest
she being discouraged with adversity, she begin to doubt of the good will of
God toward us, and fall again to Idolatrye forsaken, into the errors of
their Fathers, and into the slippery pleasures of this world: but rather that
she go forewarde in the Religion of Christ once received, that she hold on
through constante patience to profess Christ, to cleave unto him
unseparably, that at the length we may also be joined with the same, in ye
heavenly country. Which is verily the mark and end of our life, and the
course of all faithful in this miserable world. Howebeit, Chapter.iiii.
whereas in the calamities and persecutions of the faithful, and in the
felicity and triumphing of the infidels, the mind even of the holiest
servant of God, is sore moved, and grievously tempted, before he come to
declare the heavy and miserable destenies of the church, he sets forth unto
them, a most beautiful type or figure of the reverend, holy* and evermore
blessed Trinity, wherein is setforthe, to be seen of theyes of all men, the
unspeakable wisdom of God, power and majesty, the just government of the
same, and holy judgment in all things: And is also declared, that almighty
God the father, by that Lamb, that is, by his sun, our only redemer, in the
virtue of the holy Ghost, does govern well althinges, what soever they be either
in heaven or in earth. And also the very destenies of the church, which are
written in the book of his eternal providence, closed with seven seals. There
appears the Lamb of God, The seven horns of the Lamb. Chap. v.
setforth with seven horns: That is furnished with most full power as well
princely as priestly, the greatest of al, and in all the most absolute. The
Lamb receives, that book of the right hand of him that sits in the Throne,
and undoes and opens in order those seven seals. For he receives of his
father all power, both in heaven and in earth. And that the Lamb alone
opens those seven seals, it conteyneth a sweet mystery, and ministers a
singular comfort to the faithful. For where we believe, that the La^be of God,
our redemer Jesus Christ does love mankind so excedyngly, that neither in
heaven nor in earth, may any thing be found, that loves us more intierly:
And now see the very same, and none other to open the seven seals, Seven
seals.
which opened, sundry calamities issew out by and by, into the world: Who would
double, the same to be sent to him for his health, since they are sent not
without his providence and disposition, who directs al things for the
salvation of his chosen? unto all the which things, that notable matter is
added, that all the spirits Angelical, thelders also, and all heavenly
creatures, worship God and the Lamb, praise and commend his righteousness, and
for his excedyng good government, give him immortal thanks. For thereof we
miserable mortal men, environed with synful flesh, ought to learn, that we
should acknowledge also, the justice of God in all his works and not mumer at
his government and most rightful judgments: but rather to worship God, to
submit us unto him, to praise his righteousness, and give thanks for his most
holy gouernmente, and to cry with the prophet, thou art just O Lord, in all
thy ways, Chap. vi.
and holy in all thy works. These things, being on this wise promised, and
the minds of the faithful, thus instructed and prepared, in the opening of
the seven seals, severally is accounted and rekned up, what and how great
evils should invade men, from the which not so much as ye faithful living in this
world, should be free. Wares, slaughters, famine, pestilences are recyted, and
such other like plages: Again persecutions, seditions, Gospel or Consolation.
and a great deal worse then al these the seducyng, and distroying of men
through corrupt doctrine.

But because this book of the Apocalippes, is most evangelical and
apostolical, it mingleth doubtless in all that declaration, often times joyful
things with sorrowful, and comfort the faithful excedingly, in most and
greatest dangers. And therefore in the calamities, Chap. vii.
troubles, evils and corruptions declared hitherto, the Aungel of God is
brought in, who marketh the elect of God, in their foreheades: and all they in
deed, through the goodness and custodye of God, are saved from perdition. And
of these are accounted innumerable thousands. Whereby we learn that the mercy
of God is most ample in saving of men: and that we ought to hope well, of the
salvation of our elders, We must hope well of the salvation of our forefathers.
whereof though the most part lived under the corrupt time of Papistrie, yet
follows not thereof, their salvation to be doubtful, at the least even for
this cause, that we see, that God had, and has his church at all times, even
when they be most dangerous: To have his sealed, to have such as worship him,
which like as in times paste, have not bowed their knees to Baall. All the
which through his unspeakable goodness and mercy he has saved from perdition,
and mercyfully cleansed, from all corruption.

And out of the seventh seal, Seven trompets. Chap. viii.
are brought consequently seven tro^pets, by the which are denounced grievous
conflicts of the faithful and infidels. Yet before that these things are
expounded, Christ is showed before the Throne of God, making intercession for
us. And to him are the faithful sent, in their perils, to crave help of him,
succor, and deliverance. And the Devil, master of lies, blows the one,
sent to his men: Again the holy spitite of God, sounds the trompet to the
Saints. They join together in battle here, the godly and ungodly, the
disciples of the pure, and of the corrupt doctrine, the soldiers of Christ,
and of the Devil. Here are great dangers, and the minds of the godly ar more
grievously afflicted and tempted with perverse doctrynes in the church, then
with the cruel sword of tyrants, and almaner of calamities. Here are sundry
heresies resited, which impugn and corrupt the euangelical verity. And as by
the seven seals he understood al manner of calamities, by the just judgment of
God powered out upon the world: so under the seven trompets, he comprehends
al heresies in the world, and pernicious opinions against thapostolical
doctrine. And shows that among those corrupt deprauations, Mahometrie and
Papistrie, did most excel. He describes the wanton and tedious clergy of
the Pope, Chap. ix.
which to men is even intolerable, under the kind of grassehoppers. And
Lawrence Valla, a man excellently learned, though he was a Roman borne, and
that of a noble house. Where the liberty mete for Christ, was of him more
esteemed, then so hard and monstrouse a bondage, could not refrain, but
inueyghed against the Popish clergy, and said: I verily if I have any faith at
all, believe nothing to be more hateful, neither to God, nor to other men, then
so great a licentiousnes of the Clergy in temporal matters. And no less
evidently expresses, the Turkishe cruelty, under the kind of terrible horses
breathing out smoke and fyres. By all the which things, he sets forth the
church to be most miserably afflicted and tormented, utterly after the same
sort, that we see the^ vexed at this day, under the most unhappy papistrie,
and mahometrie.

Again yet lest any man should be in so great evils discouraged, and should
think that God, The Gospel, or consolation.
his promesses touching the ends of good and evil men, were vain, and also
concerning the deliverance of the faithful, by the last judgment. Again
after the disposition and manner Apostolical, he annexeth and sets against
all these perilles and calamities, Chap. x.
a most strong consolation. For he brings forth, the Lord Christ him self
confirming by a solemn oath, that doubtless an end of all these things
should come: And that God of his justice will assuredly render rewards to the
godly, and punishment to the wicked. Where he dissembleth not, that John
himself, shall prophecy again, to write in thapostolicall spirit and
doctrine, to kings, nations, and many people. Moreover, he affirms
manifestly that he will send in to the world, Chap. xi.
teachers of the verity, and of certain salvation, which also most sharply,
shall rebuke the wickedness, and wicked men, of the most corrupt last age, shall
preach Christ, sincerly, and accuse Antichrist most grievously. These he
shaddoweth by a figure of two excellent doctors. Whom he says, for the
liberty of preachinge, and constancy of faith, should be most cruelly slain
of Antichrist. But he adds, that these shall receive of God, most ample
rewards: And that Antichrist shall labor in vain to suppress by fire and
sword, the preaching of the Gospel: for so much as the Lord shall
oftentimes stire up new preachers, which shall lighten the truth obscured. He
adds furthermore, that many shall daily revolt from Antichrists kingdom, and
that the same finally by the coming of the Judge, shall be utterly brought to
naught, and he makes no conclusion, at this present in this place of the last
judgment of Christ, but differreth thexposition or treatyng of that matter, to
an other place more convenient, which he treats in the.xix. and.xx. Chapters.
And these things hitherto has he spoken generally of the perils, calamities,
contentions, troubles, sects, and persecutions of the church of Christ,
which shall exercise it from the time of Christ and his Apostles, to the worlds
end. He annexeth consequently, a singular or private, and that a plentiful
treatise of the most grievous conflictes and persecutions of the church. For it
behooves chieflye the saints, to have known these things, that in the very
perilles and afflictions, they may remember this godly admonition, and bear in
mind, that the Lord has told before, Chap. xii.
of the things that they now suffer, who rules and governs al things,
finally who can and will deliver them from al these euyls, when, how, and
as much as he of his good will shall see it good. First therefore he
propounds again, generally the parts of this conflicte or strife, a woman
clothed with the sun, crowned, traueling, which is a figure of the faithful
church: he sets against her a most fierce and cruel enemy, I say the great
dragon, Red, with seven heads, etc. A figure doubtless of that old serpente,
the Devil. After are setforth their attempts, nature, force and conflictes or
fight. Seven heads of the Dragon
And here again for a comfort it is expressed the victory of Christ the head,
and of the church, and members of the same. Afterward the Lord by John,
rehearses, severally in the vision, the special instruments or members of the
dragon, by the which he assaulteth, and most cruelly vexes, Chap. xiii.
and werieth the church. And these instruments are, the beast with seven
heads and ten horns, and the beast with two horns, that is, thempire and
false prophet, and the image of thempire. Seven heads of the beast.
These things he painteth out after the Imutation of Daniell so lively, and
(as it is said) with their own colors, in the.xiii. and.xvii. Chap, that no
man can chouse but feel, and much more perceive, of whom he speaks: verily
of the old Roman Empire, and of Papistrie. He calls beasts after the
imitation of Daniell, cruel kingdoms or empires. And the thing it self
declares, that our very Lord Jesus Christ, the head and king of all Saints,
suffered and was crucified under Ponce Pilate, governor of Iuri, but sent
thither from Rome, and governing althinges in the name of The Emperor Tiberius.
Again, every man knows that the first persecution against the Christians,
was styred up by Nero Emperor of Rome. The second by Flauius Domitian
Emperor of Rome, which intrapped also the Author of this work. And after
this we read of eight other persecutions or mo styred up by the residew of
Roman Emperors, against the faithful spouse of Christ by the which she was
cruelly rent in peaces and trodden under foot. And that for no other cause,
then for that she would not worship the beast: that is, that she would not
receive the superstions and heathen rites of the Roman Empire. I mean the
false Gods, and idolatry of the Heathen. And for that she worshipped one God,
alone through Christ, and cleaued to him and seruid him, after his Gospel.
Here therefore are excepted Constance, Constantine, Gracian, Theodose, and other
godly and christen princes or Emperors, which be not rekened under the
deuelish beast. For an Empire or kingdom of it self, as. S Paul says, is of
God: wherefore if good men rule, and give not over themselves to be ruled of the
Devil, they shall verily appertain to the body of holy church, and not to the
abominable bodi of the beast. In the mean time, whilst that old Rome would
not seriously repent, and turn to Christ, forsaking their false gods and
superstitions, at the last it was condemned of Christ, by the law of like
penalty. For with the same measure, that the Romans met to other nations,
with the self same, did other nations measure again to Rome. Wherefore the
Persians, Hunnes, Frencheme^, Alemans, west Gothians, Va^dalles, and East
Gothians, invaded thempire, and rent the whole Empire in pieces. And at the
last, beseged Rome it self, brake in to it, took it, spoiled, sacked, burnt and
destroyed it. And so at the length, the Lord Jesus by just judgment, revenged
the blood of his servants. And Rome lay, and yet lies in ruin, and shall
never be repared to the ancient beauty. And it behooves the ruin of it, to
remain in token of the verity, and reuengment of Christ Jesus: that even
thereof al godly may gather, ye God will be most true in the other promeses of
Christ also as yet not fulfilled. Moreover the Roman Empire westward, lay
neglecte without an Emperor, above three hundredth and twenty years, from
Augustulus, whom Odacer a Germane oppressed, til Charles the great king of
France. And in these times of desolation, that is, of thempire oppressed and
extinguished in the west. The Bishop of Rome, began by little and little to
gather to him no small power and possessions, by the authorytie which he took
upon him under the pretense of Christ and the Apostles Peter and Paul, till
such time as he began to reygne also. The fall of tholde Empire is the rysyng
of a new.
But tholde Popes, his predecessors, were not Princes in the Church, ruling
under pretense of Religion: but were ministers of the church, simple pastors
and poor. And Saint Paul prophesied, that of the ruin of the Empire, and
destruction of the city, Antichrist should spryng up. For he said, only this
holdyng now (or, only this let that now deteyneth) till it come to pass that
it be taken a way, and then shall that wicked be reuayled. He signifye^
therefore that Antichrist should not reygne, com, nor appear, before tha^ old
Roman empire were taken away. For this being overthrown, that the same See of
Rome should be erected. For Tertullian, who lived a thousand and three huddreth
years past, in his book of the resurrection of the flesh: Who, says he,
shall be taken out of the way, but ye state of Rome? whose departing, being
dispersed in to ten kings, shall bring in Antichrist. And. S. Hierom in the.xi.
question to Algasia. The Roman Empire, says he, which now possesses al
natyons, depart and shall be taken away: and then shall Antichrist come, the
welspryng of iniquity. The same authors, by Babylon in this book of. S. John,
The two horned beast.
understand Room. And John him self in this book shows, that the seven
headed and mighty old empire of Rome, being taken away, an other beast shall
arise, and that with two horns: that is to wit such a Prince, which shall
challenge to himself, a double rule or kingdom, fulness, I say, of power,
as well in things spiritual as temporal. And this same does the whole world
at this day acknowledge to be the Bishop of Rome, decked with his triple
crown (undoubtedly of the three horns, which according to the prophecy of
Daniell, Daniel.vii.
either brought low, or took away this base and contemned horn and Armed with
two keys, signifieng him to be king and Bishop, the most mighty Monarke, in
matters spiritual and temporal, Christ's vicar in earth, having full power in
Heaven and in earth. He him self in times past, caused men to set up the Image
of the beast: that is, to set up a new empire, after the Image and the
Imitation of the old Roman Empire. Which thing after it was begone in Charles
the great, a right noble prince, and furthermore auau^ced, and commen from the
kings of France, to the Germans, which in deed were stout, Godly, and worthy
Princes. The Bishop of Rome was not ashamed in strange wise to vex, trouble,
excomunicate, depose, and to substitute others in their place, and to styre up
wars in many Realms at ones, and set them together by the ears, so long till
those kings did frame themselves after his will and appetyte, and would fall
down to kiss his fete: And he him self at the length took upon him thempire,
and publishing his decrees to the whole world, boasted himself to be the
Monarche, or soul ruler of the world, who might at his pleasure both depose
kings, and set them up in kingdoms: Finally, that he was supreme judge in
earth, which may judge al men, but he him self, may in nowyse be judged of any
man. Therefore like as in tholde empire, we sequestered from the communion of the
beasts all good men, which were, or lived under thempire: so in this new also
we do always except the grave and witty, the good and godly men, and al
religious people, which mixed among them, not only abide still in Christ, but
also either abhor and comtemne the beast, or to their power fight against
him: The Characte of the beast.
Whereby they come not in the account of the beast. And this two horned beast,
marketh his worshippers with a Characte: And those that refuse this characte,
he excommunicateth out of al men's company, so that it is lawful for them,
neither to by nor sell: Yea more he condemns them for heretics and
schismatics, for damned and lost creatures. If thou confess thy self now to
be a Christian, and profess with a sincere and loyal heart the belefe or creed
of the Apostles, and one holy church of Christ and of al saints, and do not
above all things confess the Pope to be Christ's vicar in earth, with the
fulness of power, and the Romish church, which is the mother of all churches,
and can not err: thou shalt seem as yet to have confessed nothing, but shall
be said rather to be suspected of heresy, and therefore to be more straytely
examined. This thing can not be dissembled, for it is known to all men in the
whole world. But to the intent, we should not err in a matter so needful to be
known, and that we might more easily flee Antichrist once known. The nombre
of the name of the beast.
S. John also adds the number of the name of the beast, 666: by the which we
verily come to the name, or knowledge of Antichrist. For if we account from the
setting forth of the Apocalips, six hundredth threscore and six years, we shall
come to the year of our Lord.763. To the same time, I say wherein the Bishop of
Rome, forgettyng his humility, simplicicitie, poverty and also his office and
ministry, set his mind to bear rule, and received exceading great rewards of
king Pipine and of other Princes, and prepared him self away, whereby afterward
he climeth to the high dignity of thempire. Which thing in the work it self
shall appear more plainly out of historyes.

And as he did once or twice before, so now also. S. John after the Apostolic
manner comfort the afflicted and faithful Church, least happily in this
distress and continual persecutions of Antichriste it should fall,
Comfort. Chap. xiiij.
and should think that religion and the church were clean forsaken. He
shows therefore, how cruelly so ever both the ten horned beast and the two
horned beast do rage, yet stondeth the lamb nevertheless in mount Sion, not
as the Dragon in the sa^de: And that Christ, has in this wicked world
polluted of Antichrist, his chosen church, which he will most faithfully
preserve evermore and mainteyne, he adds, that how much so ever the beast
coueteth to have the sacred and holy preachinge of the Gospel oppressed, the
Gospel shall nevertheless be preached, and that clearly, and that Babylon
shall certainly fall, and the church of Christ be established. He adds
moreover for a comfort, that the souls of Saints that at in danger or suffer
for Christ, do assuredly and streightwaye flitte from this corporal death to
eternal life. Again, that the Lord is ready to take vengeance of all his
enemies, and to requyte them abou^dantly, which he shows trymly by ye
parables of vintage and harvest.

Of the rewards and, punishments of good and evil.
And these things handled on this wise, he proceeds to declare dilligently, not
the last place of this book, of thendes of good and evil, men, of most
ample rewards to be given to the worshyppers of Christ, and of most greuouse
pains and torments to be inflicted to the adherentes of Antichrist. Men of no
small estimation stick in these things doubtefull, and the common people
herin err more than shamefully: whilst for the present felicity of the
wicked and continual misery of the Godly they doubt whether pains be
appointed for the wicked, or so great rewards for the godly. For even for
this cause few keep their standing, and more laugh at Christ and his word,
and embrace the present pleasures of this present woorlde, followynge the more
happy and victoriouse part.

Chap. xv. Seven vials.
Therefore blessed Saint John, not without cause (the Lord commaundinge him)
bestows very much diligence in declaringe these things exactely. And first
after his manner he brings forth seven Angels, having cups of the plages
of God, and thaungels come out of the temple: signifienge the judgments of God
in punisshynge the wicked to be most ryghtuouse. And the seventh nombre
comprehends again all manner, and the most full plages of God. The Angels
power out these vialles upon the Antichristianes, Chap. xvi.
the enemies of Gods word, and the hard hearted that can not repent. For God
most rightuouse plageth the impenite^t woorlde with sundry torments:
reseruinge yet more greuouse then these, to punish them in the woorld to come.
Chap. xvij.
But especially he exhibiteth the judgment that is to wit, the punishment
of the harlot in pourple, I mean of the Pope and the beast, to be seen.
First he brought forth an honest and noble matrone, to wit, the very
spouse of Christ: Now as it were by opposition he sets against her a proud
whore, that false new start up Romish Church, who extollinge her self
braggeth more of her outward apparel then of inward furniture. And he
affirms that she shall perish for her great offenses, like as it is evident
that tholde beast was torn in pieces and burnt. And that strompet that is
called the whore of Babilo^, sits on the beast. For Rome is the seat of
the same church that is called both the Roman and most holy church. Whereby all
men may see that S. John has spoken so skylfully, that he has as it were
pointed with the fingarre (as they commonly say) whom he means, and of who^
he speaks, doubtless thauncient writers, as I told you a little before,
understood by Babylon Rome it self. But afterward he discourses at length
the destruction of Babylon with a maruelouse plentye of plain words, as it
were powringe out a certain fludde of eloquence: Chap. xviij.
and compendiously collectynge all amplifications and figures that beautify
the speech, which are any where to be found among the Prophets. But by the
way he places among these, certain most pleasant things of the marriage of the
lamb, Chap. xix.
and of the bryde preparynge her self to the marriage, and of the certenty of
the salvation of ye godly and what manner a thing that blessed felicity is.
Which finished, he descends immediately to ye same last judgment, which I
suppose is no where else in the whole scripture, as it is here not only so
described, but also painted out with lively couloures. For here is described
the person of the Judge coming to Judgment with his saints and with great
power and gloryes. There stand against him the ranks of his enemies breathing
most cruel things against the Saints of God. By and by succedeth the most
terrible judgment, but yet most just. For the false prophet is thrown down
into hell, down is the beast thrown, and down are cast all wicked and
impenitent persons. There is showed here moreover the justice and equity of
this universal Judgment in the end of the world, Chap. xx.
wherein is punishment taken of all persons of what nation, religion degree or
state and sex so ever they be, that are sequestered and alienated from the true
religion of Christ. Where both the resurrection of the dead is touched, and
the process of the whole judgment, is figured. Herunto he annexeth a most
joyful disputation of the blessed life, showing first generally, what it is,
and that it shall most certenlye be given to the faithful, by the which
treatise most strongely is beaten down the distruste or diffidence that is
naturally greffed in us. After pryuatly and plentifully under the Type or Image
of a most beautiful City, Chap. xxi. xxij.
he shadoweth after a sort, the place and palace of the blessed, omitting
utterly nothing at all, that is either ioyouse, comfortable, delectable, or
preciouse, which he affirms not to be in ye court celestial most abundantly
and world without end. Notwithstanding we know well enough that touching the
joy to come albeit s. John has hitherto spoken never so largely, yet has
there nothing be said worthy so great a matter, where both ye prophetical and
Apostolicalscrip. says, yt which the eye has not seen, nor ye ear has hard,
nor yet has ascended into the heart of man; the same has God prepared for
those that love him. But those things which I have hitherto drawn into an
abridgement (the title and conclusion of the work omitted, the order of the
book showed also by the way). S. John in his Apocalypse delivered by Christ
(as often I have said, through the ministry of a most excellent Aungel,
commends to the universal Church of Christ, and chiefly to us, in whom
the end of the world has chanced: wherein he has taught nothing at all
contrary to that, which he has taught in his evangelical story, and his
epistles. The doctrine of the Apocalypse is the apostolical doctrine. John.v.
In his story he resiteth certain things, concerning the persecutions of the
church, by the words of our Savior Christ Of Antechrist nothing, unless he
said this only, which many understood to be spoken of Antechrist: I came in my
fathers name, and you receive me not. If an other shall come in his own name,
him ye will receive. In thepistle, he touched by the way Antechristes matter,
and said: 1, Joan.ij.
dear children, the last time is at hand, and as you have heard, that
Antechrist shall come, even now many Antechristes have begone to be. But in this
last book of his. S. John took upon him to declare peculiarly, and in dew order
and plentifully, such things as our lord Jesus Christ, had distinctly and
plainly revealed to him of that great Antechrist, and of the perils and
persecutions of the church. And for that cause he appears to have used more
ple^tiful copy, and a kind of speech, better furnished, more painted, variable
and polished: so that it is no marvel, though the phrase of this book vary
somewhat from the style of his other books. Whereof we shall touch somewhat
also, in this that follows. In the mean time you will say, there wants
nothing in this book, if you way every thing more dilligently, which you
should require of a book most evangelical and apostolical. We have in the
same, not only expressed, but also well expounded the chief articles of our
belefe. Moreover, innumerable places of the prophets are expounded in this
book. For the which cause this. S. John was called of John Decolampadius, The
apocalypse is the paraphrasis of the Prophets.
not without cause thexpositour of the prophets. And as the Apostles had this
peculiar to themselves, to confirm such things as they taught, by the
wrytinges of the prophets: So in thexposition, of the book it shall appear,
that this holy writer. S, John, has either borrowed all his things of the
scriptures, or to beautify and confirm his writhinges by the scripture. What
excellent and profitable things ar treated in this book
Bat chiefly this book of. S. John sets forth the kingdom and priesthode of
our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, the power, glory, and majesty, of his
deity and humanity, the mystery and verity of his redemption. And I doubt,
whether after the Gospel there, may be found in any other book of the
scripture more goodly and more godly and fit descriptions of Christ. Neither
do I desire, that credit should be given to these my words, let the trial be
made of the thing it self. Yea the church also, the chosen spouse of Christ
is painted out most beautifully, and she with her virtues and vices is touched,
also the fall of her, and likewise, the reparation and reformation, and the
conflict or fight of the same: here be moreover described the perils, aid, and
victories: that you may seem to have herein, an abridgemente of the story of
the church. Moreover, it appears by this book what is the true and sincere
doctrine in the church of God, and which is false and corrupted. Furthermore it
shows us also sundry descriptions and figuratio^s of matters most weyghtie,
but first and chiefly of that honorable Trinity, of Christ also (as I said
before) our savior and judge. Finally protector and president, governing all
things most justly and in most goodly order for the salvation of his chosen,
watching over his word, and over his church, and ministers of the same:
Justifying also, sanctifieng and preserving all the faithful, in the fellowship
of the church: Punishyng likewise all the wicked, with all superstition and
ungodliness. Briefly no where neglecting the chose^, no where sparyng thenemies.
Besides this it sets forth to us, the description also of the Devil, and of
al his malice and war: And sets before our eyes also, the horrible
torments, and pains that they suffer in hell. It sets open to us heaven it
self, and shows what may be the hope of the faithful: And affirms the
true resurrection of al flesh. In this book is taught, how great is the grace
and mercy of almighty God, how rightuous he is and true. Here is taught, what
is the true repentance of the faithful, here are taught the true good works
of the true faith, what be the duties of true piety, and what be the holy
exercises, dew and to God acceptable of Saints in earth. Here are showed also
most diligently those wicked deeds, which are to God most hateful. Here is
showed most plenteously, what shall at the length be thend of good men and
evil, what shall be the sovereign felicity, and what the extreme misery and
infelicitie. In somuche that this book may even by the thing it self or
matter, that it treats and sets forth, commend it self to all godly
people, and may show and prove in deed, that it was written by the spirit of
thapostle.

Now all these matters are setforth and handled after the Apostolic manner,
and accustomed facion of holy scripture, By what mean and in what sort these
are setforth.
plain and full of perspicuitie. At the beginning God propounded divine
matters, and the which concerned our salvation, as it were under a veale, and
under figures, not to thintente to darken or obscure them: but rather to
unfold them and set them forth. For this manner of declaryng invisible things,
by visible, is more fit to teach, more mete to move, more apt for
perspicuitie, and most convenient and sitting, that things may be more depely
imprinted in mind, and the less fall out of the same. And therefore we read
that sundry visions, were exhibited to the Patriarchs, as to Abraham, Israel,
Joseph, Moses and others. Certes if you take from the books of the Prophets,
the visions, parables, and sundry figures of speech, how much, I pray you,
shall you leave of their doctrine? emongs these, be more notable in visions,
Ezechiel, Daniel, and Zachary. Neither is this manner of teaching by visions,
parables, and sundry figures, taken away in the new testament, like as I have
showed else where. The very story of the Gospel does figurate and teach most
things by parables. And. S. John himself in his Gospel, is very much in the
mention of light, darkness, of bread, water, of a Sheperd, and sheep, and such
other like. In the mean while I am not ignorant, how great a difference,
there is between parables, Metaphores or Allegories, and visions: But who
again knows not, that in teaching, and setting forth of matters the manner of
either to be after a sort al one, and of the same effect? For they serve for
plainnes and perspicuitie. But let such as think not a miss, that Parables
taken of earthly things, differ very much from heavenly visions. Consider,
how these celestial visions ar exhibited to the Apostle. S John, by Christ now
remaining in heaven, and requiring that his servants, having their minds
lifted up to heavenly things, should learn to savor spiritual matters. Where
he yet nevertheless has observed plains and perspicuitie. The book is plain
and may be understand.
I suppose verily this book to be simple and plain to the faithful, that will
read it atte^tiuely and with devotion. I grant that thold expositours of this
book have sticked full often in expounding the same, and could not always wind
themselves out: but in the mean season it is evident, that the same men have
said oftener the^ once, that hardely should this book be understand before it were
fulfilled. And in deed to those ancient fathers, the vision of Daniell seemed
utterly most obscure. But when such things were accomplished, as he had hid
under figures, there wanted not that said, how he had written a story of
things don, and not a prophecy of things to be don. And our lord him self also
in the Gospel of S. Matthew. When you shall see, says he thabomination of
desolation, which was spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy
place, he that reads let him understand. Does not Esaias also in a manner in all
his prophecies, after the coming of Christ, and most of the misteryes of the
kingdom of God accomplished, seem likewise to have compiled a most plain
history? And doubtless, if we read with diligence this same book of the
Apocalips, and confer those things which he speaks under a shadow, with the
same that stories testify to be done: We shall say also, that he tells
plain histories. I have verily loved this book from my youth upward, I have
gladly red in it, and bestowed much labor, there upon, observing what things it
had out of the books of ye prophets, and how the prophecies hereof did agree
with the other prophesies of ye prophets, and doctrins of the Apostls. I have
searched finally, after the capacity of my skle^der wit, diverse stories, which
I thought to make for ye openyng of the sense of this prophecy. I have
searched also thopinions of other expositours: And have diligentli compared
domestical matters, which are don now in our time, with this narration of John:
of all the which things, and chiefly being aided by the help of God, which I
called for, I have gathered such things as I now do communicate here to the
godly readers. Hereunto came also the singular learning and diligence, and
aptnes in expounding the holy scriptures of the most godly man. D. Theodore
Bibliander doctor of Divinity in the university of Zurick, Doctor Theodore
Bibliander.
who thirtine years past, red openly, and to his great praise, this book of
revelation: of who^, unless I would confess my self to be very much helped, I
were excedingly unthankful. There remains as yet a faithful relation of the
same, imprinted at Basyl the year of our Lord.1545. Wherein he disposes this
book of. S. John, and gives a light to it with his scoles. And both of thold
and new that I could get, I have red over Aretas, the successor of Andreas
bishop of Casaria, Who have written upon the Apocalips.
whose expositions upon this book, he allegeth oftener the^ once, S. Austen
also, bishop of Hippon, and Primasius Bishop of Vtica. Neither have I contemned
Thomas of Aquine, nor despised the ordinary gloss, as they term it, of the
newer sort. s. Sebastian Meter-minister of the church of Bernes.xx. years
since, a man of great virtue and learning, has faithfully, and not without
great fruit traueled in expowndyng this book, whose commentaries upon the
Apocalips were imprinted many years since at Zurick, by my friend Froschouer. And
D. Fraunces Lambart of Auenion, a most godly and excellent learned man has
labored in expoundyng the same book, who had first red it at Marsepurge, the
noble university of Hessia: And after in the same city he caused to be
printed and setforth, seven books of thexposition thereof, the year of our
Lord.1528, Moreover, there was imprynted at Witte^berg. in Saxony a commentary
upon thapocalipse, written an hundredth years past, and sent to D. Luther out of
the furthermost parts of Germany, namely out of Sarmatia and tartaria, which I
red also: as likewise certain things of D. Leuthers upon this book of
Revelation. And here I may not forget the most excellent learned men, and the
which have right well deserved of learning, Erasmus of Roterdame, and Laurence
Valla, who have also left their annotations upon this book. By all whose
labors I confess my self to be very much helped: which I recite franckly
for this pourpos, that I would dissemble nothing, nor seem toffend against
civility, or defraud any man wrongfully of his deserved praise: And therefore
would admonish the godly, that if I seem to any man to have don any thing in
this work praise worthy, he may know that I have don nothing without
coadiutours: And that he refer this whole benefit to God thauthor and fountain
of all goodness, and give him thanks therefore. And al these things of mine I
propound to be judged of the godly readers and auditors, that they may take
that shall seem good herin: and where I seem to have erred from the right rule,
they may eschew the same. Neither will I contend with any man, neither will I
envy better learned, or better exercised, whereof some have promised already
commentaryes upon this book if they shall bring forth better things: yea, I am
always ready my self, not only to receive better things, but also to give
them thanks that offer the same. In the mean season I put out my talent, which
I have received of the Lord, that I may win some lucre with it for my Lord. And
I beseech the Lord that he would prosper it well, and bless this my simple
traffic.

Here moreover I take God to witness, that I have taken this pain, for no private
hatred toward any man, for no desire of raylyng, That these co^cions are
fre^dly wretten.
nor for any intent to procure any ma^s displeasure: but simply to expound this
excellent and right profitable book of the new Testament which have lately with
my commentaries setforth all the residue of the boks of the new Testament. And
besides all this, many godly and learned men out of sundry places, in their
letters written to me, have required my exposition upon the Apocalips. To whose
judgment sins I gave very much, I did in deed more easily consent to this
editio^. And wherein ye mean time the hatfull cause of Antichriste (as many men
call it) came in the beginning of the work to be handled, I neither ought, nor
might dissemble it.

Moreover, this is plain, that I have brought forth nothing in this matter,
that is new, straung, or has not ben heard of: nor that I role this stone
alone. Now all the world cries out, that no other antichrist shall come into
the world, then he that is commen already in the Bisshops of Rome: Who shall in
the mean time be slain with the sword of God, his word in the hearts of the
faithful, and shortly shall be wholly abolished, by the glorious coming of
Christ unto judgment. If I shall suppress and conceal this thing, the
stones will cry out. For now is the time fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is
co^m^n. Blessed, and for ever blessed be those, Theldest and most common
doctrine is that the Pope is Antichrist. Gregory the first Pope.
that watch and look for Christ unto salvation. Ireney an holy Bishop said, a
thousand and four hundred years sins: Antichrist where he is but a servant,
will be worshipped as God. Tertullian and. S, Hierom, (as I have said now
oftener the^ once) have expounded this prophecy of. S. John touching Babylon of
Rome plainly. Gregory the first of that name, who was also Bishop of Rome, was
not affrayd to pronounce openly, that he was the vauntcurour of Antichrist,
that would suffer him self to be called the universal and high Bishop. But
then did the bishop of Constantinople, usurp to himself this title, who ran
before the latter bishops of Rome. And in the, xxxv. epistle to John Bishop of
Constantinople. Al things, says he, that are spoken before are don. The king
of pride, to wit antichrist, is at hand: And the which is not lawful to be
spoken, An army of priests is prepared for him. For they serve in the band of
pride, Arnulphus bishop of Orleaunce.
which were placed to be guides of humility. And these things wrote Gregory,
nine hundredth and fifty years since. Arnulphus a man very godly and learned,
Bishop of Orleance.550. years since in the counsel of Reins, speaking openly of
the Bishop of Rome, brake out at the last into these words. What think you
him to be that sits in the high seat, in the pourple garment, glistering
with gold, whom, I say, think you him to be? Vereli, if he be destitute of
Charity, and be puffed up, and extolled with only knowledge, he is Antichrist,
sitting in the Temple of God, and boasting himself, as though he were God. But
if he be neither grounded upon charity, nor yet exalted with knoweledg, he is
in the Temple of God as an Idol. Thus far he: who seems by these his words,
to have alluded to the places of holy scripture. Apocalips.xix.ii. Thessa. ii.
Zacha. xi. S. Barnard. Albeit that by reason of the infelicitie of his time, he
agrees not with him self in all things: Yet inueyhed so against the Pope,
bishops, and clergy of his time, that if any should at this day, omitting his
name, use his words, he should be called the greatest heriticke that lives.
Where notwithstanding al things ar now more corrupted, the^ they were in ye time
of s. Barnard. His sermon which he had to the clergy in the counsel of
Reins, remains. In his books of consideration he is most vehement,
especially in the.ii. and fourth book. He lived about the year of our
Lord.1150. In the year of our Lord 1240. was su^moned a counsel of Princes and
Bishops at Regenspurge, Eberhard bishop of Salisburge.
and that for the Tira^ny of bishops of Rome, most grievously oppressinge the
godly Emperor. Friderick the second of that name. In the which Eberharde
Archbishop of Salisburg standing dp. Under the Title, faith he, of the
greatest Bishop, we perceive in a Sheperds clothing, a most cruel wolf,
unless we be blind. Bishops of Rome have war against al Christians, by
attempting, disceyuing, and making war upon war, waxing great, they kill and
murder the pore sheep: peace and concord they drive out of the earth, Civil
wars, and domestical vprores, they conjure out of hell: daily more and more,
they weaken the forces of al men, that they may tread them all under foot,
may devour all, and bring all into bondage. Hildebra^d an hundredth and
threscore and ten years past, first under the pretense of religion, laid the
foundation of Antichrists kingdom: He first began this wicked war, which by
his successors, has been continued hitherto. And by and by: The bishops of
Babylon, covet to reign alone, they can not abide their pere, believe me for
my experience, they will not cease, til having brought the^peroure under, and
the dignity of the Roman empire dissolved, and the true pastors oppressed,
they may on this wise extinguish all things, tread al things under their
fete, and sit in the Temple of God, and be exalted above all that is worshipped.
He yt is servant of servant, seeks to be Lord of Lords, in like case as if
he were God. He has new devises in his heart, that he may establish thempire
for him self: He changes the laws, and sets forth his own laws: That
lost man, whom they are wont to call Antichrist, polluteth, Robs, spoileth,
defraudeth, sleyeth, in whose forhead is written the name of reproach: I am
God, I can not err: he sits in the temple of god, and rules far and nere.
And a little after, the majesty of ye people of Rome, wherewith in times past
the world was governed, is takin out of the earth. The kingdom is multiplied,
the government dispersed into many, cut of, lessened, I will not say, rent in
pieces. Themperoure, is a vain calling, and is only a shadow. There be ten
kings atones, which have parted the world, which in times, was the Roman
empire, not to govern it, but to consume it. The ten horns (which thing to. S
Auste^ seemed incredible) Turks, Greks, Egiptians, affricans, Spaniards, Frence
men, Englishmen, Germa^s, Sicilians, Italians do posesse the Roman provinces,
and in them have distroyed the Roman inhabiters: And a little horn has grown
up under these, that has eyes and a mouth speaking great things. It has
brought in subjection especially three kingdoms of Sicilie, Italy, and Germany,
and compelled them to serve him, with intolerable tyranny, it vexes the
people of Christ, and the saints of God, it confounds all things,
concerning God and man, and attempteth deuelish things. And the residew which
is to be red in the.685. leaf in the seventh book of Auentines cronicles,
which in the year of our Lord.1554. were printed at Ingolstad, by themperours
privilege, out of the which I wrote word for word all that I have hitherto
recited in ye name of Eberhard Archbishop of Salisburge. About the same time,
Abbot Ioachim. Frau^ces Potrarch.
lived Abbot Ioachim of Calabria, who likewise calls the Pope, Antichriste,
and setforthe thapocalips with prophetical pictures, and scolies in Italia^.
Frau^ces Petrark, a man excellently learned, and most worthy mortal fame
flourished about the year of our Lord.1350. Who also least such wrytyngs
behynd him against the Sea of Rome, against the court there, and against the
Pope, that if they were comparde with these things, which in our time.D. Luther
wrote most bitterly against Rome, he may seem to be utterly vanquished of him.
In the.xx. epistle, he calls the Popes court, both Babylon, and also the
whore of Babylon, syttyng upon the waters, the mother of all Idolatry and
fornicatyon. There is moreover a learned book of Marsilyus Patauinus, Marsilius
Patauinus.
written for Lewis the.4, Emperor, against the Pope, wherein he inueyeth
sharply against the bishop of Rome, and his tirannicall laws. In the same age,
to wit two hundredth years past, flourished also Micael Cosenas, Michell Cesenas.
general of the Minories, who openly accused the Pope as Antichryste, and the
church and See of Rome as the whore of Babylon dronken with the blod of
saints. An hundredth years since lived Laurence Valla, a gentleman of Rome of a
noble house, who also objected him self to the Pope and the Romish See,
Laurence Valla. Hieronimus Sauonarola.
for the which cause he was driven into exile: but of the king of Naples, he
was honorably received. Moreover, Hieronymus Sauonarola of Farrare. an
excellent divine and Philosopher in his time, a man in holiness of life (as he
is said of many) notable, preached openly in Italy, that the Pope was
Antychist: for the which cause he was most cruelly burnt at Florence by Pope
Alexander the sixth. This is had yet in the Fresh memory of men, where it was
don about the year of our lord.1499. Yet John Fraunces Picus, Count of
Mirandula calls the same Sauonarola, an holy prophet. Albeit that Nawclerus
signyfieth in his story that he did many things for ambition sake and for vain
glyrye. And Marsilyus Ficinus attributes to the same Sauonarola the spirit of
prophecye, in a certain epistle, Furthermore. Philippus Co^mines an
Historiographer witnesses that he was an holy man, and to have had the spirit
of Prophecye. For they say how he prophesied of the sackyng of Florence and
Rome, and the restauratyon or reformatyon of the church, and of many other
things that should chance unto Italy, which came to pass there in the mean
season. I remember, when I was young and followed my study in sundry
universities, to have heard certain black Freers say, that Sauonarola provoked
the indygnatyon of Alexander the sixth, the court of Rome against him by
nothing more, then for that he preached against them in Italy the Apocalips of
S. John. What should I say, that the Waldensians four hundredth years past in
France, Itali, Germany, Boheme, Poland, and in other parts of the world,
professing the gospel of Jesus Christ, accused the bishop of Rome with diverse
wrytings, and continual prechings as the verey Antichrist, prophesied by. S.
John thapostle and therefore to be abhorred. They themselves being put to most
grievous torments, have constantly testified their faith by glorious martyrdoms,
and still do at this day. For they could never be roted out, which thing
notwithstanding has been full often attempted by most mighty kings and princes,
inspired by the bishop of Rome, the will of God be^^g otherwise. But why
rehearse I these things, since this year 1556. was printed at Basil, a
register of the witnesses of the verity, All good men at all times have spoken
against the pope
which before our time, have spoke against the Pope, whereof the number in deed
is great, and the more part of them called the Bishop of Rome, with out any
proverb, that Antichrist, which should come into the world? Therefore it is
manifest, that I in this my work bring forth no unwonted thing, or that
has not ben heard of before, where now we do plainly understand that this song
has in so many ages b^ songen, written, painted, printed, and beaten in of the
best, holiest, and most excellently learned men, yea and confirmed to, with the
unmeasurable blood of martirs. Furthermore, if any remain that be desirous of
good things emongs the bishops or prelates of the church, and in the clergy
it self, let the^ not be offended with me, in case any where in expounding the
Apocalips, I bring forth their sayings and doings, and compare the^ with the
Apostls words: Let them rather be ^ipleased with their own words and deeds
spoken and done ^esydes and against Gods word, Let them leave doing that they
do: Yea, Daniel.xii.
let them do penance, so shall they have praise in the church of Saints. But
if they hold on even against their conscience to defend and maintain their
kind of life, their pleasures, their riches, their honors and dignities, and
to accuse, persecute and murder the preachers if the verity, as enemies of
the church: let them take heed, it chance not to the^ suddenly, that the Gospel
resiteth, of the dronke^ servant, Math. xxiiii.
who did vex and beat his fellow servant: but was of the chief Lord him
self oppressed, when he thought least of it, and hewn al to pieces.

But if there were ever any time heretofore, Thapocalips in our time is not
only profitable but necessary.
wherein it behooved to setforth, to urge, and beat in this doctrine to all the
people. This is chiefly necessary to be don in this our time. For this age of
ours has in the Popes kingdom, sharp and quick wits, which commend with
marvelous praises, both the Pope and the popish church, and persuade and drive
into the heads of the sort unlearned, clean contrary things to theuangelical
and Apostolical doctrine. Moreover they have wonderful crafts, wherewith the
wittier number are also disceaued. They have wealth and riches, authority,
armure, munitio^, threatenings, promesses and torments, whereby some strong also
are made weary, and ar hal^d away to the popish part. There be many without
experience, which esteem not this thing as it ought to be esteemed, such care
not, nor pass not what religion be preached, whether it be evangelical or
popish, or what thing be of either believed, or not believed. For they suppose
all these things to concern them nothing. In the mean season many perish and
are in danger, not a few fall away, diverse stick in perplexity, and the
kingdom of Christ is abbreuiated. For the papists omit nothing, which may make
for reparing of their kingdom, and pullyng down of the kingdom of Christ.
Therefore where these fellows spare in this case, nether pains nor cost, that
they may convert all things to oppress the faith of the Gospel, and to
drive the sympler sort to forsake it: We ought not to suffer that the
Church, and the simple people afflycted and tempted in the same, should want
that comfort, admonition, and doctrine, which in times past the lord Jesus him
self by S. John, has prepared for these hard things and times, by revealing
this Apocalips. And in deed these things here have a singular grace and virtue,
which are revealed to us of God. Neither shall the adversary and enemy of Christ
be overthrown with any corporal weapons, save only with the sword of Gods
word. For now it is nedeful that antichrist should wax vile, and perish in the
minds of men, that Christ alone might live again, and be glorified for ever.

And this my exposition I have divided into sermones, both for that I have
now, Conefonsor sermones.
these years of a.1555. and.1556. expounded this book to the faithful church
of Christ, which I serve, making in a manner these same sermons to the people:
and also that being requested, I would deliver some copy, to such as will read and
expound the same book to the churches committed to their credit also. Where not
withstanding I admonish the readers, that they look not for all thines of this
my work: or think that these things are to be rehearsed word for word to their
auditors. For certain things, which I propounded to the people for the
consideration of the time and place, I have not setforth in these my sermons,
studieng much, for brevity: And other things, namely such as concern the
conferring of tongs, and the kind and manner of speaking, and such other like, I
rehearsed not to the congregation: but have written them here in my sermons, to
the profit of those that will confer these things together more dillige^tly. It
shall be the part of the preacher to have a respect chiefly to such things as
make both for the plains of speech, that he may be understand, even of the
grossest sort: and also for the edifyeng of the audience, that he bring
nothing, that should little profit. Let every man therefore apply these things
to the edifieng of the church where he is, having consideration of the place,
time, and persons: Yet always observing the true sense of the book or of Gods
words. For violent wrestings, and long digressions far from the pourpos,
deserve no praise in preaching: or what time swaruing over much from the
plain sense of the scripture, we boult out I wot not what mysteryes.

The dedicating of the work.
And all this work compiled not without my great labor and travel, but chiefly
by the grace of God, to the glory of Jesus Christ, and written to the salvation
and confirmation of his afflicted church, I dedicate to you banished men, as
many of you as coming or driven out of France, England, Italy, and other
realms and nations for Jesus Christ and the gospels sake, dwell in Germany,
Swisserland, and other places, where God has permitted you: And also I
dedicate this my work to all you, which dispersed in sundry realms and
nations, are consecrated only to Christ our Lord, loking for his coming to
judgment, In the which we shall undoubtedly be delivered at the last from all
evils, and then shall be made that long looked for, and in all ages and most
fortunate restitution, most expressly and constantly promised, both of the
prophets and Apostles. Acts.iii.
And surely your Godly zeal, banished brethern, which had rather forsake your
country, then the Gospel, and to want your temporal commodities, then to be
polluted with a religion estraunged from Christ, deserves no small praise.
James.i. Math. xxiiij
But you have need of constancy, and wonderful patience, that after you have been tried, you may receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them which persevere unto the end. The heavenly regeneration does not so change
us, but that some doubtefull and trouble some dregs of old Adam remain.
Therefore always the regenerated feel sundry temptations, and hard conflicts:
then especially, when such things chance as they had least looked for. The
godly therefore had evermore need of consolation. But this book of the
Apocalypse does minister the same with great plenty: which if you will
read over diligently, you shall find all things that happen to you, and that
vex you now with painefulnes, to have been already so prophesied in this book,
as they now come to pass. Whereunto are added oftentimes most comfortable and
sweet consolations. Moreover ye are not ignoraunte right honorable and dear
brethren, what chanced to our fathers the holyeste of all others. How they
wandered in mansions uncertain, and how they demeaned them selves in those most
paynefull flittings, you understand me to speak of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and Joseph: whose peregrinations out of Chaldey into Palestine, from thence
into Egypt, and again into Palestine, and from thence again into Syria, and
again into Palestine and Egypt, are well known to the whole world. Now what
bannishements and perils abode that worthy servant of God and most
excellent prophet Moses, is not unknown so much as to those that be ignoraunte
in matters of antiquity. Whose faith the vessel of election S. Paul
commending: By faith (says he) Moses when he was great, Heb. xij
refused to be called the son of Pharaos daughter: And chose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, then to in joy the pleasures of sin for a
season: And esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater richesse, then the treasures
of Egypt, for he had respect unto the reward. What shall we say that our
Lord Jesus Christ him self was constreyned in his infancy to flee into
Egypt, even from his swaddlynge cloutes teachinge his to suffer exile: who is
red also in the Gospel to have said: Foxes have holes, and the birds thayre
have nestes. But the son of man has not where on to rest his head. Dan. xi.
Of Antechriste we read in deed that Daniel prophesied: whom who so will
acknowledge, he will promote him to great honors and make him the lord of
many, and shall distribute the earth for money. Contrariwise we shall hear in
the.xii. chapter of this Book, that both Christ and the Church his spouse,
suffer greuouse persecution of the dragon: That Christ is taken up into heaven,
a blessed has opened heaven also for ye fartheful: And there shows a place
permane^t country, to them that have in manner no habitation in earth. From
thence he will come to Judge the quick and dead, and to assumpte unto him the
faithful into joy everlasting, and to give them what things so ever he him
self in the Gospel and the Prrphets and Apostles have promised. Of ye which
most ^mple hope this book of Apocalypse most plentifully and goodly
discourses, instructyng all that desire to hear certain things and most full
of comfort unto all you therefore exiles and godly throughout the whole world,
desyringe the coming of Christ our Lord and judge of all, I offer and
commend and dedicate this my labor. Receive it with loving minds: which I
setfoorthe to non other end but that (fleenge Antichriste) you should cleave
to Christ alone, fixinge all your trust in him alone, where we look already
from heaven for the self same Lord, Philip. iij.
which shall change our vile body, that it may be like fashioned unto his
gloryouse body, according to the woorkynge, whereby he is able to subdew all
things to him self, he bless us all, and bring us in that day, into the
sight of his father: that we may see his glory, which he had before this
woorlde was made, to him alone be glory.

From Zurick, the month of January, in the year of our Lord. 1557.
An Index or table of the most notable things and words contained in this
work.
A
ABbadon. 265 Abominable parsons. 643 Abomination is Idolatry. 512 Abraham's
Bosum. 198 Absens and presens of Christ. 284 Accusacion of Christ is for
ame^dement. 56 Acknowledging of beleuers by God. 109 Adding or minishinge from
the script. 695. etc. Adoration external and inward. 153. Adversities
remedies. 385 Adversity conforted. 27 Adultry Nicolas fault. 60 Egypt for
Rome. 327 Affians of marriage. 563 Affliction is fourfold.64. is sum time for
trial.68. is felt of the godly and ungodly also. 487 is comforted. 27 Age
last corrupt. 599 Aid of ye Turks pernicious. 275 Air figure of holsu^
doctrine. 253 Alarik captain of the westgoths 526 Alleluya. 559 Al shall not be
saved, but the faith full only. 221.222.454.456. 628. Alteration figured by the
moon. 349 Ambassadore of the Pope. 493 Amen. 124.125 Amendment of life,
requires etc. 56 Amires Princis of Mahomete. 273 Anabaptists.662. etc.
wourthy to be sharply loukt unto.290 their counterfeit paciens. 53 Anadyplosis.
453 Anathema. 696 Antichrists beginning.387. holiness.111. kingdu^ co^tinews
til the worlds end.221. shall have an end.451. foundation thereof laid by
Hyldebrand.415. his palace where.618. his power. 388. his speech.389.390. his
subjects.421. he shall wourship God with gold and silver.511. he has reined,
and Christ shall reine.339. shall be slain, how. 318. his seat betwe^ ii.
seas. 508 he is set forth by the Prophets 1. he ouercumeth and kills. 323.
etc. he is lyuelye painted. 348. his time.434. his vau^tcurror. 388 Antipas
martired.77. is praised. 77. Apocalypse neglected of many, why.2. made by John
theuangeliste.4. approuid by judgment of many old writers.5. oght to be
commended to all men, 697. to be known and not hid.680. belongs to all ages
30. to the hool church.19. to all churchs.61. serves chiefly for our time.8.
is euangelical.214 is gospellyke.284.439. is the last book of the canonical
scripturs why.673. exposition thereof taken out of the scripture.348. doctrine
thereof, what it is, 1. method and perspicuitie.233. division.10.11.
Commodities 676. a prophecy.677. the end thereof.14. to know Antichrist and
beware.259. when and where it was written.26. whens it came.14. doctryn thereof
is general. 83 Appollyon. 265 Apostles doctryn perfyt.98. how they are the
foundation of the Church.652. etc. their humility.28. counterfeited and falls.
52 Apostolical Pope, Rome, and sea. 511 Apparill of the faithful. 132. to
miet the Lord in.565. defiled or undefiled.107. the use thereof 107. of
thehoore.510. of popish priests.262. of the Antechristians. 316 Ark of the
testament is Christ 345 Army of great number. 272 Armor of the faithful.
120 Arrius. 245 Arrianz. 125 Asia. 48 Ascension of Christ. 22 Asseueration of
the scrip. 673. etc. Assistauns of Christ. 50 Attila inuadith Rome. 527.
Augustinus Steuchus, a papist. 338. Augustus began and ended the Roman Monarch.
528 Altar signifies Christ. 197 Altar golden.267. is Christ. 236. Angels
good and bad.214. are ministers.651. ar men's kepers 486. ar pastors of churchs
45. are fugurs of preachers.446. their excellency.569. etc. 570. they oght not
to be nourshyp. 571.573.175. are our felo seruau^ts.572. their office and
dewtie 176. they prays Christ.175. their description.175. do differ from
blessed souls. 486 Angel signifies. etc. 589. for a hool nation.271.
wourshipped of John. 677 Angel of the botumles pit. 265 Aungelicall heretics.
177 Aurelianus. 194
B
Babel, confusion. 512 Babylon title of the Romyshe Church. 513 Babylon for
Rome. 451.502 Badge of Antechrist. 422 Badge of Gods children is faith 422. and
the sacraments. Balans, token of right and equity. 188 Balaams doctrine. 80
Bankets and masking. 81 Banishment of John. 27 Bastards threatened. 94 Bawl or
gloob figure of inconstancy. 655 Boastings of victories. 274. Bear Persian
monarchy. 372 Beast and image of the beast. 515 Beasts.iiij. sign. al
creaturs. 149 Bed in the script. used for siknes wherewith. etc. 94 Beginning
God has noon. 637 Beginning of creatures of God. 125 Beheaded for Christ. 602
Beleuers who. 109 Benedict abbot of Cassinea. 269 Beno a Cardinal against the
Pope. 412 Bible forbidden.214. uncorrupted 695 Bishopriks geui^g wro^gout of ye
emperors hands by the Pope. 416 Bishops and Priests ol an. 387 Bishop of Rome
head of churchs 519. chief murderer. 643 Blak coulor. 188 Blaming of sines by
Christ is for repentance. 104 Blamles life not to be trusted unto. 224
Blasphemies of the wicked.503. against ye faithful.66. of Rome 508 of the
Romans iii. ways 378 Blessedness of the faithful, what 568.459 consists in
ii. things 633. what it is. 230 Blessed, how they shall be occupied heaven. 670
Blessing, what it is.19. for praise 227 Blis of the soul. 457 Blis is rest from
all labor. 462 Blok man is not. 135 Blud in the scrip. 208 betokneth offens
and punishment. 319 Blud sheding of Rome. 557 Blud how it makes whyt. 230
Bludy garment token of a conqueror. 579 Blyndnes. 128 Blyndnes cured. 132
Bookz of life.109.625. of God. 156. open and shut.287. to eat a book. 302
Books of the holy scripture most excellent.232. uncorrupted.695 why they were
put in writi^g. 31 Body humain of Christ in one place. 34 Boldness necessary
for a preacher 681 Bonarges. 288 Boniface Bishop of Rome. 387 Bosum of Abraham.
198 Bottumles pit. 252 Bow. 182 Brethren of John and Christ 572 Brotherhod in
Christianity. 26 27 Brotherhods of Saints. 572 Bryd of the lamb. 563 Bulls of
the Pope. 458 Buryall denied by papists to the godly. 325 Burden taken for
doctrine. 98 Bying and barganing. 130 Bying and selling forbodde^. 424 Bying
and sellyng of pardons. etc 45^
C
Called who. 567 Calling of ministers. 300 Ca^delz watched by christ. 50. 51
Candlestiks what they signifye. 46. 34 Capacity of man very small. 228
Cardinals leaders of armies. 260. Carpocratytz. 59 Casting out. 307 Cat of the
mountain. 372 Cataphrygians. 90 Cataphrygianz bragz of new reuelacions. 97
Catholic church communion of saints. 24 Cerinthus heretic. 52 Certentie of
the scrip. 674. etc. Chalcolibanum. 37 Chariot of God. 148 Charity. 88 Charles
the great renewed the Empire of the west. decayed. 409 Chastisment of the Lord.
133 Chein token of captivity. 591 Chein that bynd the deuel, sincere doctrine.
608 Cherubin. 148 Children of God who. 109 Choinix a mesure. 189 Chosen
affia^sed to the lamb. 563 Chosen people lively temple of God. 305 Christians
worldly. 124 Christ described. 21.124.162.32 283.577. Christ has all power.
etc. given him.161.165. is king of kings and Lord of lords.522.581. is owner
of all kingdoms.338. sun of god.87. God and man. 87 very God.
36.96.16.137.163. 168.661.675. is very man. 162 163.42. his power.43. is a la^b
162.440. greter the^ Angels saints. etc. 163.177. Lord of angels.16. was slain
from the beginning.382. figured by Angels.356. by Eliachim.43. is head of the
Church.36. prelat of the Church.47. an altar. 197.236. a mighty Angel.284.
236. offreth up our prayers sitting on the right hand of God. 237. of the same
substanse with the father coequall.41.42.668 670. is not author of corrupting
the treuth though he open the sixth seal.205. cast out of ye church by the Pope
and Mahomet, shall return with glory.283. is not fought against but the la^b.
521 author of thapocalyps.688. very God and lord of angels.689. author of
salvation.218. begotten in us.350. no creature.125. our best apparil.108. king
and priest 35. true.112. holy.111. a lively fou^tain.252. word of God.579 most
necessari to be known. 159 Christ has charge of seven ca^dles 50.51. receives
things of ye father how.166. shall be subject to the father.339. must be honored
449. is not al or sufficient to sum 210. is set forth in thapocalyps 9. has
the kei of David.112. is the true ma^na.84. fiedeth, leads, quikneth. 232
receives power and reineth.340. opens the bouk. 158. knows our wurks 64.
nieds no vicar.35. his beginning.125. his cumming of ij. sorts.223. his
cu^ming to judgment.24. his image setforth 33 his body suffered.268. his humain
body in one place.34. godhed every where. 34 Church descrybed.350. is the city
of God.121. is both mother and doghter.366. is figured by the moon.207. by a
woman. 348 is belouid of God.116. dwells when Sata^s seat is.73. shall be in the
midst of troubles.305. hydeth it self.209. flies into wilderness.353. is among
the gentiles.365. shall be always in the world.183. has always in this life
that may be reprehendid.79. traueleth and brings forth ij wais.350. removed,
when 57. the garnishinge thereof.510. glory thereof is to cum.648. chief enemies
thereof.347. hystory thereof discoursid. 183 Church old of Rome distinguisshed.
542 Church of Rome, church of Rom etc. 496 Churchs fallible notz, peace and
tranquillity. 194 Churchs how they were governed at the beginning. 387 Circes of
Rome. 512 City great or heavenly. 648. etc. City great diuyded into three. 501
City great is the romish church. 510 City of God and name thereof. 121 Cities
greatest commendacion. 650 Citizens of the kingdum of God, who. 109 Clamitat in
celis vox sang. etc. 198 Cleannes fygured by fire. 266 Clergy compared to
locuste. 256. Clergy innumerable. 255 Clergy authors of wars. 260 Clermont
counsel. 613 Clothed in whyt what they be. 229 Cloud in the script. 285 Columnz
erecting. 120 Comfort excieding, in thapocalips 12 Comfort in tribulacion. 27
Committing of hordum in the script. 507 Commocions. 524 Commotions and their
causes. 206 Commodities of thapocalyps. 12 Condemned are justly condemned. 589
Confessing of beleuerz bp Christ. 109 Confessing of trespass is beginning of
repentaunse. 56 Confusion of Romish Religion. 512 Congregacions how they may
be kept. 115 Consolacion of the faithful. 305. 306. Consolacion in affliction.
62 Consolation in the Apocalypse. 12 Consolation foloeth humility. 40 Constancy.
73 Constantin emperor abhorred Rome. 383 Constitucions of man nied not. 299
Constancy and continans figured by a square. 655 Constantinoples destructyon.
275 Constans in faith. 113 Constitucions of men. 69. 100 Contemners of the
blessed life. 232 Contencion for tryfles oght not to be. 29 Contracting of
matrimony. 563. Conversation is our garment. 108 Copz and gorgious things in
the church. 510 Corn prospering or perishing cu^meth by God. 190 Coronacion of
a Pope. 511 Corrupt doctryns history. 234 Covetous rich men are poor. 128
Covetousness of the Romans. 393 Could nor hoot. 126 Coulor pale sign. etc. 190
Counsel can not judge the Pope. 406 Councels general. iiij. 268 Counsel
holsum. 129 Counsel of Clermont. 613 Counsels of God insearcheable. 380
Counsels to condemn impuritye, nied not. 80 Countenanse of Christ. 38 Cowl of
our lady. 132 Creaturs al submit the^ to Christ 178 Creatures are not to be
worshypped. 175.177.678. Creatures of Gods beginning. 125 Croun. 183 Croun of
life what. 69 Croun token of a kyngdum. 349 Croun, for honor, glory and victory
118.110 Cross foloeth Gods word. 303 Cruelty of Rome. 508 Cruelty of
Antichrist. 324 Cruelty of the Romainns. 369 Cruelty figured by Lions tieth
262 Crying for vengeaunse. 198 Comfort in persecution. 204.333. 326 Comfort
gospellyk, 234 Comfort against Antechryst. 285 Cumming of Christ of ij. sorts.
223 Curious inquiry of Gods judgments. 144 Curiosity in serching Gods
counsels repressed. 380 Curiosity repelled by reurrense and submission unto
God. 152 Curs banished. 670 Cursing of the Pope. 399
D
Damnacion eternal described. 455 Damnacion everlasting. 628 Damnacion
eternal for seducing 584 Damned are justly damned. 589 Damned parsons. 641
David is called Christ. 357 Day last or end of the world. 575 Death of ij.
sorts.605. spiritual 103 Death after this death. 70 Death for trewthz sake. 69
Death of Christ. 22.172 Death geues up the dead. 627 Dead rise again. 626 Decay
and spiedy ruin compared to sand 367 Decius Traianus. 194 Decretals.404.
decrees and decretalles. 100 Defectyue reason. 277 Defense figured by egles
wings. 364 Degrees of punishment. 585 Decking of the church. 510 Delais of
returning to God. 224 Delay of Gods help. 118 Deliuerans in persecution. 364.
etc Denial of God. 460 Denial of Christ and his gospel many ways. 76 Denial
of Christ's name. 114 Derth and famine. 189 Descending of Christ from heaven 284.
Desert of man. 248 Devil author of ill.185. a sclaunderer.356. vanquished. 591
bound.596. cast out, how. 595 608. where he reygneth.362. his four names.359.
etc. wourshiped. 279 Dioces. 403. etc Dioclecian. 194 Dionysius Alexandrinus of
the authoriti of thapocalyps. 6 Dianaz temple. 48 Discipline. 133 Diseaseas of
churches how they should be helped. 104 Despair of ill men what causes.
210.211.212. Despair removed. 278 Disposition or order of thapocalyps. 347
Disputacions clamorus. 264 Dissemblers.541.66. Iewls warm. 126 Dissentio^ in
the church, no news 52 Distroyers of the earth of diverse sorts. 344 Distroyer
Popes name, 265 Destruction of reames through reuolting from true religion, 271
Diversity of opinions. 98 Divinity of Christ. 64.13^ Do as ye would be done
unto, 383 Doctryn resembled by wynd, by leven. 214 Doctryn holsum figured by
air. 253 Doctryn evangelical shall be restored. 297 Doctryn new is not to be
loukt for. 118 Doctryn of Christ perpetual. 99 Doctryn corrupted. 205 Doctrine
peruers figured by smoke 253 Doctryn new. 447 Doctrine of Rome new. 443 Doctryn
peruers, is vncleanne^ of hoordum. 51^ Doctryn heretical compared to hail,
darnel, leven, chaff. etc. 242 Dogs in holy script. 687 Domz day. 575
Domitian. 194 Domitian banished Ihon. 27 would be called a God. 29 Donec for
ever. 604 Door open. 113 Dragon the great. 351 Dragon fights. 357 Drught and
heat. 488 Drunkenness. 82 Drunkenness of Rome. 513 Drawing. 135 Drawing to God.
129 Duleia and latreia. 570 Dwelling emongst the il is dangerous but not
simply wicked. 75.76 Dying in the Lord. 459
E
Earthquak in the script. 206.334. Earth helps the godly persecuted.366.
shall be burnt. 530 Eating of a bouk. 302 Egles wings. 364 Elders xxiiij. in
seats. 142 Elders whether they be saved or no. 217 Electors assigned. 411
Eliachim a figure of Christ. 43. Elias cuminge before the judgment. 298
Emperor Client to the Pope. 405.416 Emperor warring on Gods enemies in ye
east, the Pope sets upon him in the west. 615 Emperors under the beast sum
good. 407 Emperors excommunicated. 307 Emperors reins from Charles how long.
411 Empire converted from the french to the Germains.410. made desolate.418.
wurshipped, how. 376. is the image of the beast. 420. new, and image of the
old. 403 Empyres be of God. 380.406. 515. End well all well. 223 End of the
world.575. most corrupt. 599 End at hand. 295.500 Enemies who.119. of the
church. 347. of religion.114.116. praid for.199. their harms reioyst. at. 553
Englands fall reioysed at. 328 Enoch and Elias cumming. 298 312 Epicurism in
the papists. 308 Epicurz carlesnes in God confuted. 64 Epicurs confuted. 502
Ephesus light of Asia. 48 (...). 371 Equality of the city heavenly. 656 Errors
of saints. 571 Euerlastingnes of God. 340 Euerlastingnes signified by grie^nes.
142 Eucharistia, sacrifise how. 237 Evil used unto the good and profit of the
elect. 407 Euphrates river.270. dried up. 492. Exarchat given to the Pope. 435
Exarchat of Italy. 431 Excommunicacion. 306 Excommunication strongst link of
the popish tyranny. 307 Excommunicaion Popes thunderbolt. 399 Exposicion of the
scripturz best allowed. 3 Eye salve. 132 Eyes of Christ like fire.578. see all
things perfytly.165.87 quik sighted. 36.
F
Face of Christ shyning. 285.286 Face of man sign. 149 Faces of men for
humanity. 261 Faith of Rome, mark of the beast 424 Faith or promis keeping.88.
consists in the cause of ij. me^. 249 requires fighting and victory. 640.
where it appears. 626, is not without the word. 219. necessary in troubles.
385. is the badge of Gods children. 422 441. affects thereof. 640 Faithful only
shall be saved. 628. Falling down is wourshipping. 168. 678. Falls prophet a tail.
274. 351. Falls profets, wels without water. 483 Falls preachers figs vntymlye.
208. locustz. 254. 260 Falls teachers scorpions. 256 Famine and penury. 189
Father described. 20. 21 Fear of God. 448 Fear of God, what is foundacio^
thereof. 72 Fear of God of ij. sorts. 212 Fear of princes in a preacher, is to
be cast away. 368 Fear that is to be avoided. 67. Fear in professing treuth
oght to be banished. 77 Fearful. 641 Felicity chief to sie to God. 671.
Felicity of this world no dew estimacion of religion. 323 Feruencie in
godliness is necessary. 55 Few good at Sardis. 107 Fiet of the Pope kissed. 521
Fiet lyk bras. 87 Figs falls prechers. 208 Fight against wyckednes lefull. 119
Figurs utility and profit. 2 First and socond death. 70 First fruits. 444
Flattery figured in a tail. 351 Flight from Rome. 540 Fluds of sects,
discencions. etc. 365 Foundation of the church. 652 Fountain lyuly is Christ.
252 Forfathers damd or not. 217 Forgetting of God. 624 Forgiveness of sins.
23. whereby 247 Forgiveness, a whyt stoon. 84 Forhed represents the mind. 220
Fornication. 60 Fornication what. 506 Fornication simple sum take no sin.
102. ^03 Fornication of diverse kinds. 280 Foot setting on, figureth possession
286 Four sign, many. 214 Fourth number. 149 Frailnes of mankind to fall. 678
Fraternities of saints. 572 Frauncis Petratche of Rome. 537 Frederik Barbaros
Emperor trod under Popes fiet. 416 Frechmen defend the Pope. 432 Fry will.
159. 247. 248. etc. Fry willmen confuted, in that Christ is the beginning of
the creat. etc. 125 Fry justification. 639 Frienes of speech against Rome. 506
Friely sign. 639 Friars gray innumerable. 255 Friars and Nuns. 196 Frogs for
papists. 496 Furlong what it contains. 655 Fire sign. Gods vengeaunse. 467.
etc. Fyr figure of purity. 286 Fyr from heaven. 399 Fyr sent into therth. 238
Fyr out of preachers mouths. 317. etc.
G
Garments keeping clean. 498 Garments whyt were. 229 Garment to miet the Lord
in. 565 Garments pure or defiled. 107 Garnishing of the church. 510 Gats of the
heavenly city. 651 General Bish. Antichrists foor runner. 388 Gentilz called
to the kingdum of Christ. 20 Gentiles wilderness. 364. 353 Gentilism brought in by
the Pope 393 Gensericus inuadeth Rome. 527 Germain princes commended. 413
Germains emperors. 412 Glassie sea figur of the frail world and brittle. 473
Glory belongs to God, and how we shall give it unto him. 24. 151 Glory of the
saints. 632. 633 Glory of the church of christ. 648 Gnostici. 59. heretikz. 244
God one. 180. author of good. 185. no author of sin. 531. no blok. 342.
faults when we receive him not. 135. ready to receive repentaunt sinners. 134.
by his nature can not be diffyned. 141. is to be praised why 562. etc. is
creator of all things 155. Gods properties. 376. remembra^se of sin and
forgetfulness. 544. honor standith not in gold and silver. 511. word shall not be
stopped. 331. word, weapon of preachers. 317 Godhed of Christ. 137 Godhed of
Christ every where. 34 Godliness must increase, not stand at a stay. 89 Godly
life is necessary and hatred of papistry or Mahometry etc. is not enough. 277
Godly men's beginning. 125 Godly men subject to evil also, why. 192. 193. Godli
are they that kiep, not that hear or read only the commandments of God. 686
Godfrey of Bulloin. 613 God and Magod. 608. 610 Good intent. 226 Good men, louk
Saintz Good wourks. 89 Gold to honor God wythall. 510 Gold silver, and
precious things in the temple is gentilitye. 308 Gold tried. 130 Gospel is
everlasting. 447. is new doctryn. 590. was preached through the world, a
thousand years. 589. 447. had ever sum folders 600. causes no ill in the word.
527. is no heresy. 445. Gospels contents. 448. etc. Gospel preaching shall be
restored 297 Gothz burn Rome. 526 Gouernanse of God. 148 Grace of God is
original of all our goodness. 116. 117. is it that iustifyeth us. 640. is
compared to rain. 319. is not given for any desert of man. 248. comprehendith
al gifts of Christ. 698. what it is. 20 Grek tung called heretical of the
Papists. 428 Griennes sign. eternity. 142 Grudging at Gods government
rebuked. 178
H
Habergions heart inflexible. 263 Heretyk Pope. 604 Heretics aungelicall. 177.
principal. 268 Heresy how it oght to be confuted. 80 Heresye oght nether to
be maynteyned nor born wyih. 79 Heresies of diverse sorts. 244 Heretics may
be punyshed otherwise then by the words 318 Heretikz must be examined. 52.
53. ordered.iij. ways of iij. statz 53 Hail resembles corrupt doctryn. 242.
243 Hail lyk talents. 503 Hand of Christ is a token of. etc, 50 Hands holding
up for an oath. 292 Hand fasting or contract of matrimony. 563 Happy or unhappy
who are. 343 Harp in the scrip. 169 Harps of God. 474 Heart of ma^no^ knowz but
god. 96 Hearts inflexible habergions. 263 Harvest. 465 Hatred must be toward the
diedz not the parson. 58 Heads seven, are 7. hills. 517 Head of the churches.
519 Head of the churches. 253 Head of the church must be. etc. 51 Hear of weme^
for wa^tu^nes. 262 Hebeon. 52 Hebrew tu^g called Jewish of the papists. 4^8
Hebrew tungs majesty. 533 Heithen are all papists. 380 Heithennish religion
brought in by the Pope. 393 Hell what. 627 Hell figured by a wyn fat. 468 Hell
torments everlasting. 455. etc Helias cumming. 288 Heaven in the script. 209
Heaven is atcheued with ye mind in this world not with the body. 139 Heaven
opened to the faithful. 344 139 Hid can nothing be from Gods fyry eyes. 87
Hierom for praiyng to sai^ts. 595 Jerusalem new. 122. 632. Jerusalem ruin
what it teaches. 530 High priestz ministry. 5^ Hildebrand Pope touk upon him
the authority of the emperor. 414 History of corrupt doctrine. 234. of Rome.
525. etc. of the church 183 Hodgpotch of papistry and the gospel. 126 Holy
ghostz proceeding. 20 Holy ghost is seven spirits. 20. 21 Holy ghosts mystery.
146 Holy ghosts signs thunder. etc. 145 Holy ghosts operacions. 147 Holy
ghost, did not the Apostles give, but God. 399 Holiness of God. 150 Homicids.
643 Honor of God. 449 Honor dew to God. 152 Honoring or worshipping of sai^ts
154 Hoordum. 82. what. 506 Hoordum better then matrimony with papistz. 81
Hoordum and uncleanness by Baa^ religion. 91 Hoormongers and their kinds. 643.
281 Hoot and could. 126 Hope of the faithful is not vayn 283 Horn sign. power
and kyngdum. 165 Horns sign. kingdums and power. 371 Hornz ij. of the lamb. 44
Horse an image of pride. 260 Horse red. 185 Horses of sundry colors. 182 Hour,
day, munth and year. 271 Hour, for the same tym. 519 Humanity of Christ. 22
Human body of Christ in on place. 34 Humanitye figured by faces of men. 261
Humility to be learned. 340 Humility shall find comfort at the Lords hand. 40
Humility of Saints. 153 Humility of an apostle. 28 Hunz invade Rome. 527
Hungary lost to the Turk. 275 Hussis death reioysed at. 328 Hymn of Saints.
172. 560 Hypocrites. 127 Hypocritz always su^ in ye church 79 Hyre unto every
one. 343
I
Iacobyts heretics. 268 Iamz Syrus heretics. 268 Jasper stoon. 142 Idol what,
644 Idols of the^ Gentiles and Chrystians differ not. 280 Idolaters. 644. their
excuses for images. 374 Idolatry, Nicolas falt. 60. prohibited. 280. reducid,
by what men. 394. confirmed. 436 Jesus diffined. 21 Jesus face lively painted
by Pilate. 60 Jews conversion. 223 Jews falls. 115 Iezabel cast into a bed. 94
Iezabelism. 90 Ignoranse without a teacher. 229 Ignoranse of Christ without all
confort. 159 Ignoranse is a great ill. 128 Ignoran^se of the Turks etc. shall
not excuse them. 589 Isles be token nations. etc. 210 Image or shap is not
attributed unto God. 141 Image of Christ not in colors. 33 Image of the beast
set up. 402. the property thereof. 403 Image wourshipynge, against God. 280.
excused. 374. forbode^ 432 Images of fame. 120 Impacie^s what it wurketh. 89
Impenitent sinners. 278 Imperfytnes in Saints. 104 Impossible things three. 37
Imprisonment and bonds. 67 Incarnacion of Christ. 352 Incens. 169 Inchau^ting.
280. in Rome. 557 Inconstancy figured by a ball or bowl. 655. by waters. 524
Inheritauns spoken by part. 646 Intent good. 226. 375 Intercession of saints.
84 Intercession of saints in heaven. 170 Intercession of saints is noon. 203
Interpretacion of the script. best allowed. 3 Inuencions of men. 97. 375. 299
Invincible is Christ. 162 Invocation is but part of prayers 170 Inuocacion of
saints. 573 John the eighth Pope, a woman. 507 John theua^gelists prais. 17.
banished by Domician. 27. returns from exyl. 297. erreth. 571 wourshippeth
the aungel. 677. dyed at Ephesus. 49. shall return into the world before the
judgment, how. 299 Joys and triumphs of the godly. 473 Joys of heaven. 633.
etc. undoubtedly certain. 635 Irun rod. 580 Israel, all faithful. 222 Isreal's
restoring. 222 Italy no patrimony of S. Peter. 386. etc. Iubiley of Saints. 559
Judge inexorable Rhadamantus 212 Judge of the last judgment. 622 Judge c^meth
to judgment. 576 Judging the quik and dead. 25 Judgment of Christ. 24
Judgment belongs to god. 555 Judgment of God. 449 Judgments of God of ij.
sorts. 629 Judgments of God are pains of the wiked. 476 Judgment last. 575.
621. 465. 466. etc. is at hand. 295. is assured and just. 341. is certain and
spedie. 675. 676. is unknown to us. 337. is known to the father alone. 315. is
coueted of ye church. 692. 698 Julius Maximinus. 194 Justice of God commended.
342 Iustificacio^. 565. falsely attributed. 52 Justification where it is to be
sought. 299 Justification by the law, whoos heresy. 243 Iustificacions sequels.
640
K
Keeping of Christ's word. 116 Key of David. 112. of the boto^les pit. 261
Keys signify charge and government of the house. 43 Keys of the Apostles.
112. of biding and lawsing. 590. of hell and death are in Chrysts hands. 43. of
the Pope. 252 Killing gostly. 317 King of France most Christen. 433 King of
Saints. 475. of locustes the Pope. 264 Kings. 662 Kings, we are. 24 Kings
clients to the Pope. 416 Kingdums are of God. 370 Kingdums are all Christ's. 338
Kingdumes all, their proprietye belongs to the Pope, use to their princes.
419 Kingdum and priesthod chale^ged by the Pope. 389 Knoking that God uses.
134 Knowledge of God, necessary to be persuaded to the people. 72 Knowledge of
Christ. 73. 74
L
Labors effects. 51 La^b is fought against, not christ 521. is married. 563. is
a figure of innocence. 163. is slain. 164. killed from the beginnynge. 381
Laodicea. 123 Latin church. 428 Latreia and Duleia: 570 Law of God signified
by tan. 220 Leage figured by the rainbow. 285 Leag of God with us perpetual,
142 Legates a latere. 493 Leo Bishop of Rome. 387 Luke warm. 126 Liberty of
speakinge the truth. 368 Light heavenly, what. 650 Linsie wulsie. 126 Liar, who
52 Liars with their kind. 645 Lying. 688 Life of ij. sorts. 605. ought to be
loved above Christ. 362. proceeds from God alone. 668. is figured by the river
of the celestial City. 666. single. 443. present how it may be conte^ned 457.
spiritual. 103. after this life. 70. everlasting. 629. 648 Lion described. 372
Lions teeth figure cruelty. 262 Lion in the scripturs. 162 Locusts authors of
ill doctryn. 254. of locusts. 257 Long suffering of God. 128 Long suffering of
god conte^ned. 93 Love of God goes before our love 116 Love of God original of
all verteuz. 116 Love of Christ incomparable. 22 Love of our neibour
perteyneth also to christianity. 277 Lumbards planted in Italye. 431
M
Magik of Rome. 557 Magistrates office toward heretics. 53 Magistrates how far
they are to be obeyed: 370 Magog Iaphets sun. 610 Mahomets beginnynge. 269.
laws. 270. religion patched. 126 Mahometrye when it began. 608 Mammon. 124
Manhod of Christ. 162. 163 Manicheus heresy. 244. 248 Mankind divided in to
Jews and Gentiles. 223 Manna hid are secret. 83 Marchaundiez leful. 124
Marchaundiez of the Pope. 549 Marcus Anthonius verus. 194 Marriage corporal and
spiritual 443 Marriage in the script. 563. of the lamb. 564 Marks of the
faithful. 442. of Antichrist. 422 Martyrs most plentiful in heaven. 196 Martyrs
ought to be honored, not called upon. 78 Martyrs what makes. 77 Martyr, cause
makes, not turment. 197 Maruelling of John, Daniel, and the godly. 514 Mary
the virgin. 352. inferior to popish priests. 263 Mass. 170. patched. 126. 127
Masking and bankets. 81 Matrimony. 563 Matrimonye defiles no man. 443
Maximila prophetis. 91 Maximian. 194 Mayzim a God. 609 Measur for measure. 544
Measuring for ente^ding to build 305 Mediator only Christ. 203 Members how they
are attributed to God. 141 Men of ij. sorts. 256 Mercy of God trusty only. 224
Mercy of God toward sinners. 134 Mercy of God exceeding. 97 Mercy God forgets
not, even in the extremity of his punishment 190 Mercy of God justifies us,
and no merits of man. 639 Merits. 565. of man. 248 Merits of man have no place
in our iustificacion. 639 Merits of our own or others. 460. 462 Merits and
intercession of saints 84 Metropolita^s first ordained. 387 Michael Seruetus.
246 Michael captain against ye Dragon. 356 Michael typ of Christ. 356 Millan
wars. 190 Millenaries error. 221 Milston drowned. 556 Milston cast into the
sea. 536 Mingle mangle christianity. 126 Ministers of the Church, are
Angels. 589. are figured by witnesses. 313. are defended and preserved by
Christ. 103. are forbodden Government. etc. 386. their duty. and office.
300. etc. 590. to be obedient. 305. to be fervent. 302 Ministeries effect. 302
Ministry of the Thyatirenians 88 Miracles true and falls. 397 Mixture
unlawful. 126 Mockers of religion. 643 Modesty preposterous. 506 Monarchies
figured. 372 Moan token of alteracions. 349 Moan as blud. 207 Months.xlij.
310. five. 257 Monotelitans heretics. 269 Monsters and wunders. 435 Montanists.
90. 91 Montanistes heresy. 244 Morning star, knoledge increasing. 101 Mount for
spiritual meaning. 648 Mountains seven. 517 Mountains betoken reames. etc.
210 Mountains figures of kingdums 244 Mouablenes figured by waters. 524
Mourning. 550 Multitude is no good defense of error. 107 Multitude no dew
prouf of religion. 524 Mungrels gospellers. 127 Munks honest lay men. 255
Murmuring in persecucion. 195 Murmuring at God, removed 150. 152 Murder of
diverse kinds. 280 Murderers. 643 Musik. 169 Mutiny in persecution. 195 Myters
of Bishops. 261. 389
N
Nakedness. 128 Nakedness of the papists, open. 498 Name of the writer of
thapocalyps, why it is added. 677 Name new, what. 84 Names of men for number.
334 Names for notable men. 106 Name and estimacion. 66 Name of the beast. 424
Name of God. 578. of the judge. 579 Name of God written in forheds 671. given to
the faithful. 121 Name of Christ is faith of Christ 76 Nazarians heresy. 52
Nero persecutor. 194 New doctryn is not to be looked for. 118 New lerning. 447
New lerning of Rome. 453 New name. 122 New name, what it sign. 84 New song,
signifi. etc. 171 Newter. 127. 501. how they shall be orderd in the last
judgment. 588 Nicodemits. 541 Nicolas a filthy heretik. 59 Nicolaitans error.
80 Nicolaitans of our time. 81 Notes and marks of the elect. 443. 444. etc,
Number certain for uncertain. 334. 272 Number of the name of the beast. 424.
426 Nuns and friars. 196
O
Obediens to whom it is dew, and how far. 370 Odacer king of Rome. 528 Odours
ar prayers of saints. 237 Oecolampadius for authority of thapocalys. 4 Offens
punished. 556 Omnipotency of God. 487 Oppression sign by treading under foot.
309 Order of thapocalyps. 347 Organes. 169 Original sin. 247 Oath, what. 292.
294 Oath or swearing of God. 290 Ox and Ass yoked together. 126 Oil figureth
matter of preching. 31^
P
Paciens. 62. 117. necessary in trobles. 385. of saints. 456. of the
Thyatirenians. 89. lefull and unlawful. 51. 54 Paintings of the last judgment.
584 Paintings proffit and commodity. 2 Pains of the ungodly after this life.
619 Pains of hell everlasting. 455. etc Pale horse. 190 Palm token of victory.
225 Papists ar gentiles. 308. are figured by froggs. 495. are exhorted to turn
to Christ. 425. are Cataphrygians. 97. falls witnesses. 313. if they be saved or
no. 226. their cou^terfait Christianity. 66. 67. error about power of sai^ts.
154. their pride and bragges intolerable. 338. their idolatry. 644. their
stubbernes. 441 Papists described. 347. etc. begins. 386. is new. 447.
passes far all gentilitie. 610. is way to perdicion. 226. is figured by a
woman, why. 510. shall fall. 546 oght to be shu^d and virtuous life also
practyzed. 277. first and chief principle thereof. 390 Paradys. 666 Paradys is
everlasting bles. 61 Pardons. 640 Parricidie of Antichrist. 513 Part, for
inheritance. 646 Part second of thapocalyps. 32 Passion of Christ not feyned.
268 Pastors dewtie. 113. to watch. 104. their office toward heretics. 53^
Patmos the I Will. 28 Paulus Samosatenus. 245 Peace and quietness in the church
regarded. 29 Pelagians confuted. 640 Pelagius doctryn. 247 Penauns. 55. 55
Penny, sign. a great prys. 189 Perdicion is not to adnihilate. 344 Perfytnes and
imperfytnes in saints. 104 Perfytnes in non. 110 Pergamos church. 71. Seat of
satan. 74 Permission of God. 185. 532. etc. Persecutions premonished. 303. from
whens they cum. 323. by the Dragon. 364. by the Romans, ten. 379. by
Antichrist. 309. 321. makes not a martyr. 77. of the church. 193. causes
thereof. 195. when they shall end 451. shall never ceas till the worlds end. 584.
their time is short. 202 Persecutors set on by the Devil 68 Perseuera^s. 119.
in godliness. 118 in faith. 319 Persons thrie 180 Persons of the trinity
discerned. 20 Pestilens or plage. 191. 43 Peter heretik. 268 Peter's seat is
heaven. 490 Petrarch of Rome. 537 Phocas emperor made ye Pope head of churches.
519 Philadelphia a city of Lydia. 111 Philosophers patriarks of heretics. 243
Phrase of scripture. 45 Pictures of the last judgment. 584 People compared to
waters. 524 Peoples office toward heretics. 53 Pillars figure of treuth. 286
Pillars erecti^g, to what end. 120 inscripcion. 12 Pipin captain of the french
kings guard. 430. begins to rein. 435 is author of the Popes kyngdum. 409 Pit
bottumles. 252 Plages. 320. 191. their cause. 481 Pleasures what they bring.
538 Pleasurs of Rome 551. etc. Pledges of Christ. 564 Poderes a priestly
garment. 35 Poks. 582 Polycarp pastor of Smyrna. 63 Pope opens hell. 253. is
made king. 433. 434. is king of locusts. 264. Lord over the emperor. 405. is
both Pope and emperor. 419. is a Monarch. 415. etc. is Lord of all lands.
392. is almighty. 521. gives grace. 399. gives the holy ghost 399. is called
holy. how worthily. 111. is more feared then God. 448. has not Christ's power
given him. 43. has not the keis of David. 112. nor the government of things.
158. 159 holds anope^ heresy, of ye souls state after this life. 604. is
against. 390. speaks as the Deuell. 391. is not against Christ but against
the lamb. 521. is no head of the church. 36 51. is above the counsel. 406. is
undoubted Antichriste. 504. is author of all persecucio^. 323. is the cruelst
murderer of al. 643 was never without aduersaris 600. was resisted by many
both emperors and kings. 408. was deposed. 415. has nothing to sell. 131. he
and al papists arheithe^ 308. is to be preached against. 425. he and all
papists are to be dieply considered, not winked at and let alone. as sum
would. 426 Pope at the first had not so great power. 409. were under thobediens
of themperor at the beginning. 409. are omnipotent. 521. are sorcerers. 412.
etc. mouers of wars and treason. 484. were thrie at ons. 395. have had deadlye
wounds, 395 Popes title. 323. his talk lyk the Devils. 390. his power. 44. his
usurped power. 44. 404. 405. his pride. 417. his pride against princes 400. his
wars. 250. his army described. 259. his tyranny against princes. 416. his
legates described. 493. his kingdu^ passes Mahomets. 422. his co^firmacio^ of
the^peror neglected. 411 Popish church is the great city. 510 Popish doctryn
concerning prayer. 340 Popish priests ar Nicolaita^s. 81 Poperye how it oght to
be fled. 540. etc. Popery is not to be spared in sermons. 506 Possession of
the church entered by Christ. 286 Power all is of God. 370 Power universally is
submitted unto God. 153 Power have we non of our self to good. 135 Poverty
conforted. 65 Preachinge rorynge of a Lion. 287 Prayer is necessary. 301.
belongs only to God. 340. how acceptable to God. 169. it has ij. parts,
inuocacion and praise. 170 Prayers and thanks giving are the oblacio^s of
saints. 169. they are called sacrifice. 237. are part of Godly wourshyp. 168.
of Saints what they be. 237. Praying to Saints 170 Praises of Saints. 559.
562. etc Preachers have their original of Christ. 314. are called stars. 351.
208. 45. are called angels 590. 446. are slain and reuyued. 331. against
Antichryste what they must be and with what qualities furnyshed. 300. they are
in the hands of God. 45. and defended by God until their hour be cum. 322.
their rewards. 662. their victory is spiritual. 317 Preching directed by
Christ. 183 Preachinge called prophesying. 304 Preaching sincere is a chein to
bynd the Deuel. 608 Preaching prohibited. 214 Preaching of Gods word often
restored. 330 Preach to the good and bad. why. 681. friely and clearly. 535
Precious stoons. 658 Preface of thapolalyps. 18 Preparans fit to meet Christ.
565 Presens and absens of Christ. 284 Priests popish excommunicated 307
Priests popish ar Nicolaita^s. 81 Priests popish pas our Lady. 263 Priests mo
go to the Deuel then plowmen. 585 Priests, christen men be. 24 Priestly
garment. 35 Primate forbodden. 387 Princes aduertized not to strive against the
treuth. 368 Princes all suns to the Pope. 419 Priscilla and Maximilia
prophetisses. 91 Pride figured by horses. 260 Pride figured by Romans. 377
Printyng. 287 Proceeding of the holy ghost. 146 Profession of God oght to be
open 671 Profession most noble when persecution is most hoot. 77 Profession of
religion openly, is necessary. 76 Profyt of this Apocalypse. 380
Prognosticacion for ever. 181 Properties of God. 376 Prophets are promised.
312. are Gods messengers. 1 Prophets falls are dogs. 687. compared to a tail.
274 Prophets doctrine, of manners, repentans, and of Christ. 1 Prophecy of iij.
sorts. 16 Prophesying for preaching. 304 Prosperity not of true religion, the
world says. 374. 323 Prosperity abused. 546 Prosperity of the popish kingdu^
396. of the wicked. 224 Prosperous succes of vice. 282 Punishment prepared for
the wicked. 283. 686 Punishment sever for uncleanness 83 Punishment is by
degrees. 585 Purgatory over thrown. 461. 71
Q
Quiet is non besyds Christ. 211 Quietness in the church regarded 29 Quier
casting oui. 306
R
Railyng upon the faithful. 66 Rainbow, 285. 142 Rain signify the grace of
God. 319 Reames all subjects to Rome. 520 Reason defective is to be supplied
277 Rebellion against God repressed. 153 Rebuking of vice hateful. 303
Rebuking of the Lord. 133 Reconciliacio^ figured by the rainbow. 285 Red
color. 351 Redemption chyefest verteu of Christ's death. 172. 173 Reentrie of
Christ. 286 Reformation leful. 57 Reioysings of saints. 559. 338. at the
destruction of Rome. 553 Reign of saints. 173 Religion must be firmly holden,
and boldly confessed. 76. in words and wurks. 271 Religion consists in true
knoledge of the last judgment. 588 Religions patched. 126 Religion true
corrupted. 205 Reliks. 572 Remembrans of God. 624 Remission likned to a whyt
ston. 84 Repentauns. 94. 129. 278. 55 Repentauns apostolik. 105 Repentauns or
penauns, what it is. 82. 56. 57 Repentauns shall be rewarded. 83 Reproving of the
Lord. 133 Resurrection of the dead. 626. 585. 342. 22 Resurrection first and
second. 605 Reuelacions new. 97 Reuelacion from whense. 14. of three sorts. 16
Reuolting from Rome and popery excused. 542 Reward of faithful preachers. 332
Reward prepared for the godly. 283. 120. 121. 122. for good and ill. 685. 686.
for vertew. 109. 108 462. for wourkes. 342. for repentauns. 83. for iniquitye.
81. Rewl, how we shall ascribe it to God. 24 Rhadamantus. 21^ Riches. 128. of
the faithful. 131. spiritual. 65 Righteusnes. 565. effect of christ^ death.
173 River of water of life from whe^^ it springs. 668 Rivers for all kind of
afflictions. 365 Rod of irun. 580 Rome old and new. 508. is lady of all reames.
520. is taken and spoiled. 335. old, destroid and burnt. 525. taken thrys in
ou^ year. 529. seven times with^^ few yers. 384. thrie hundre^ years without an
Emperor 386. 40^. came to a Dukedu^ 431. is not head of all churches, 388. is
no patrimony of s. Peter. 387. is Babylon. 502. 45^ is to be shu^ned. 543. is
the sea^ of Antich. is it. 504. seat of S^tan. 74. 75. is a hoor. 506. (...) cast
down. 431. the tithes the rof. 3^^ Romans beast. 37^ Romain Empire. 368.
blasphemus. 371. is called a beast, wh^ 369. is chief enemi of the church 347.
bestowed upon straunger^ 518. new e^pyre. 385. now poo^ and baar. 403.
decaieth. 42^. falls. 38^ Romans pride. 377. power. 380. Romish king
confirmed by Pop^ 405. Bishop, star fallen from heaven. 251. papistry, a beast,
why 388. their new doctryn. 453. their religion received in frau^s 435. sea,
chair of pestilens. 396. cruelty and other vices. 544 Romish church, ons
notable. 250 set out with worldly furniture. 510. is the great City. 510. is
Sodom and Aegypte. 327. is dangerous to be spok against. 321. is no true
church. 209. shall fall. 451 Roaring of a Lion figured preaching. 288 Root of
David. 162 Root of a try nurs of it, compared unto Christ. 690 Rypenes to the
sickle. 466 Riot of Rome. 551
S
Sabbath changed into sunday. 29 Sacrament external marks of christians. 422
Sacrifices of Christians. 169. is thanks giving. 237 Sacrifice sign of Christ.
382 Sacrifice propitiatory for quik and dead. 170 Saint of saints. 111 Saints
give power to God and take it not to them selves. 154. their knoledge in heaven.
479. what they do in heaven. 670. 143. 474. what is their state. 230. are no
greater then men. wherefore not to be sworn by. 293. they have no
administracion of things. 158. nor rewl over the elements. etc. 486. are no
intercessors. 238. do not punish the wiked. 555. their humility in heaven. 153.
they are briethern and felo servants. 203 are not to be wourshiped. 571. 573.
394. nor praid unto. 170. their examples may we folo safely. 169 Saints fall.
56. how they desyr vengeance. 199. they shall be renewed and glorified. 631. are
never separated from their head. 579 Sak of hear. 207 Sakcloth morning apparel.
316 Salvation ascribed to whom. 225. of God through Christ. 227. where it is to
be soght. 299. whens it cums. 229. perfyt how. 361. what it is. 225. is of mear
grace. 633. cums to us friely. 639. is certain and sever 566. 457. and that
streght after death. 460. shall not be given to all. 456. 454. but to ye
faithful only. 628 Salvation of thapostles, what. 19 Sand figure of swift
ruin. 367 Saracens came out of Spain. 272 Sardin ston. 142 Sardis head city of
Lydia. 102 Sardis churchez infirmity. 103 Sathanas an adversary. 360 Sathanas
cast out, how. 595. loused. 598. etc. 608 Satisfaction true. 57 Satisfaction of
our own deuysing. 210 Saved be there sum of all nations. 225. Saved ar many at
point of death 224 Schism objected to the protestaunts answered. 542 Scourgz
of Gods wrath. 191 Scorpions nature. 256 Sclau^derz against the godly. 66
Sclaunder punished. 556 Scripturs is Gods word. 568. sealed, signi.
authentical and shut up. 289. an authentik. 49 their authority. 567. 30.
certeintie. 674. sufficiency. 673. and that without councelles. 689. ar
agreeable with themselves. 86 are perfect and sufficient to salvation. 98. their
phrase. 45. ye reading of the^ restreined, causes. etc. 215. they are swiet
and better. 302. that they are imperfect, is first ground of poprie. 390. are
not obscure. 45. doutful, uncertain. etc. to who^. 308. brought in doubt by the
Pope 390. Sea of Rome chair of pestilens. 396 Sea of Rome invaded by the deuel.
412 Sea glassy. 147 Sea shall be no mor. 631 Sea figure of the world. 244. 473
Seals whereto they serve. 157 Seal first opened. 182 Seal second. 185 Seal third
opened. 188 Seal fourt opened. 190 Seal fifth opened. 193 Seal of the living God
is Christ 218 Sealing. 288. used for ij. ends. 679 Seat described. 148 Seats
celestial. 603 Seat of Antichrist, where. 508. 618. of the Deuell where. 75
Seat of the beast. 489. of Christ and Peter. 490 Second death. 70 Security
from Antichrist, none whyls the world lasts. 221 Sedicions and their causes.
206 Seducer. 360 Seeing of God, is chief felicitye. 671 Selling of all things in
ye church 308. 309 Septicollis Roma. 517 Septimus seuerus. 194 Servant, an
ancient title of gods wourshipers. 16 Seruetus renewed the heresy of Arrius.
168 Seruetus urged. 163 Seruetans heresy. 42 Serpentold. 359 Seventh number.
19. frequent in thapocalyps. 11. sig. perfection and fulness. 165. 472 Seven
formed spirit. 103 Seven fold spirit of God. 145 Seven heads hills, kings. etc.
370 371. etc. Seven spirits, is holy ghost. 21 Seuerus heretik. 268 Shap of God
is there none. 141 Shauing popish. 261 Ship of S. Peter. 396 Sibylla of
thoriginal of antichrist 436 Sickle sharp. 466 Sied of God and of the woman.
366 Sight restored. 132 Signs for things signified. 382 Signs, look
miracles. Signs wherewith men are sealed. 219 Siknesses. 191 Silk is the
justification of saints 580 Simonie of the Pope. 492 Simony. 130. 131 Sins of
saints. 571 Sinners shall be punished of God and not only Papists, Mahometans.
etc. 277 Single life. 443 Sitting in the throne. 141 Sitting in a throne. sign.
etc. 156 Sitting sign. government. 148 Sitting in glory how Christ gives and
gives not. 137 Slain ghostly. 317 Sleeping of souls. 460 Smoke figur of the
wrath of god 253. of Gods presens. 479. etc. Smoke presumes fire. 560 Sodom
and Egypt. 327 Song new sign. 171 Song of all creatures. 150 Song of victory.
360 Sorcery. 280 Sorcerers and their kinds. 644 Souls and Aungel differ. 486
Soul, from death of the body. 34 Souls state after death before judgment. 603
Souls state after this life. 457. they sliep not. 460. 225. 604 Souls separated
from the body immortal. 196. where they remain. 197. in bles. 201 Spewing out
of newters. 127 Spirit seven formed. 103 Spirit how men are in. 140 Spiritual
understanding figured by a mount. 648 Spiritually of the Pope described. 259
Spous of Christ. 563 Square, figure of constancye. 655 Standing sign.
ministering. 240 Star of the morning compared to Christ. 691 Stars fall from
heaven. 208 Stars figure preachers and Bish. 250. 351 State of saints, what.
230 State of life everlasting. 648 Ston whyt what it means. 84 Story of Rome.
525. etc Stryf in churchs. 52 Subjects of Antichryste, who. 421 Submissio^ unto
god in all things 150. 151. 153 Suffering of ungodliness is punishable. 90 Sun
of perdicion. 265 Suns of the Pope are all kings 419 Sun of God must be believed
upon 449 Sun of man is Christ. 34 Sun coequall with the Father. 179 Sun token
of Christ. 349 Sun waping dark. 207 Sune third part darkened. 248 Sun passes
the moon, and popes kings. 417 Sunday, how it oght to be observed. 30 Sunday in
stead of the Sabath. 29 Supper for souls, etc. 582 Supper of the lamb. 568
Supping with God. 136 Supremacy. 409. 410 Supremacy forbodden to ministers.
386. etc. Surfitting. etc. 82 Surre^der of ye popes power. 411 Swearing of
Christ. 290 Sword sign. power to hurt. 185 Sword of the Judge. 580 Sword two
edged. 38. out of Christ's mouth. 73 Swords both in the power of the church.
404 Swords ij. of the Pope. 389 Sylens toke^ of attentiuenes. 235 Syluester the
ij. Pope follows the Deuel. 412 Synagoge of Satan. 115 Sines receive the
names of things. 45 Sion mount figure of Christ's kingdum. 440
T
Tables of the law, both are to be regarded. 277 Tail figure of a falls prophet.
274 351 Tartarians receive Mahomets religion. 270 Tau letter sign. the law. 220
Temples use. 660 Temple of God is heaven. 120 Temple of God for secrets of god
345 Temple for church of God. 305 Temptacions grievous. 282 Temptaco^ of the
godly has his defens. 117 Ten horns. 524 Ten times for often. 68 Ten, number,
for many. 518 Tents of saints for the church. 611. afflicted. 616 Testimony of
christ. 125. 572. etc. Testimony is sincere preaching. 322 Thanks giving for
victory. 340 Thanks giving, prayers. 237 Theft and his parts. 281 Third number
for strength. 495 Thirst for ardaunt desyr 640 This is my bodi, figuratiu
spiech 45 Thoghtz known only to God. 96 Thomas an Inglish preacher. 604
Thousand years. 593. 601 Thretningz of Christ. 57 Threatningz against the
impenitent. 82 Throon signifies. etc. 141 Throon of God. 136 Thunders.vij.
preachers. 288 Thunderbolt of the Pope. 399 Thyatira described. 86 Title of
thapocalyps. 13 Torment makes not martyrz. 77 Torments of the wicked,
perpetual. 582 Totila brent Rome. 528 Tradicions of men. 97. nothing niedful.
118. 673. 99. 100. 390. bring darkness. 207 Traian persecutor. 194 Translators
of the script. 533. etc Transubstantiacion, is called god Mayzim. 609 Treading
under foot. 309 True religion corrupted. 205 Treuth figured by pillars. 286
Treuth of Christ. 112 Treuth neglected all misery follows. 190 Treuth of the
Gospel, most, heinous to impugn. 584 Treuth is not to be kept in syle^s 368
Treuth always preached. 183 Treuth had ever sum patrons. 600 Treuth in
Polycarpz opinion, 63 Tribulacion of diverse sorts. 229 Tribut of a dead man.
550 Trinity. 163. described. 145. distincted into persons. 14 Tries sign. men.
243 Trouble in churchs. 51 Troubles and tumultes authors 206 Trumpets use. 241
Trustines of the Thyatirenians 88 Trial or temptacion of Saints 68 Tumultes.
206 Turks imagine bankets in heaven 136 Turks aid pernicious. 275 Turks receive
the religion of Mahomet. 270 Turkish emperors beginning. 273 Turning to God
proffitable. 3^ Two number. 312. etc Tym certain for uncertain. 310. 326 Tym
past for tym to cum. 535 Tym tyms and half a tym. 314 Tyranny of Antichrist.
513 Tyranny of the Bish. of Rome. 425
V
Valentinians heretics. 244 Vandals invade Rome. 527 Vengeauns of God figured
by fire. 467 Vengeauns of God against Papists. 464. 468 Vengeauns is desired
ij. ways. 200 Vengeauns reioysed at. 553 Vertew we have hoolly of God. 153
Verteuz reward. 108 Virtuous life necessary, hatred only of papistry and other
heresye is not enough. 277 Vial, a cup. 169 Vicar of Christ. 253. niedeth not
35 Vicar Christ never appointed. 389 Vicar of Christ, no true church. has. 441
Victory of Christ and christians 358 Victory of the faithful. 136. 119 Victory
of preachers is spiritual 317 Victories and felicitye of this world. 274
Victory of over the world. 100 Violent vocacion. 129 Virgins. 443 Visions
utility. 2 Visions of thapocalyps divided. 11 Visions godly terrible to weak
naturs. 40 Vision second. 138. 140. third. 347. fourth. 470 Unbelievers. 642
Understanding of man, is weak. 228 Uncleanness hated of God. 82 Uncleanness of
hordum, peruers doctryn. 512 Unction or anointing. 316. etc. Ungodliness or
wickedness must be hated, not permitted or winked at. 90 Unity of God with man.
135. 136 Unity of faith shall never be universal as sumthink. 606 Universal
Bishop. 251 Until, put for ever. 604 Vocation of ministers diverse. 300 Vocation
violent. 129 Voluptuousnes. 538 Voluptuousnes of Rome. 551 Voluptuousnes of ye
papists. 308 Vomiting out of mungrels. 127 Voice of Christ. 37 Voice loud or
low to prais god withal. 176
W
Wagis of every one. 343 Walls of the heavenly city. 650 Wantunnes figured by
wemens lokz. 262 Wantu^nes and uncleanness. 81. look mor in fornication and
adultry. Wars occasioned by the Deuell. 185 Wars are because men receive not
the gospel. 186 Wars moved by Popes. 484 Wars between Popes and Emperors lasted
200. years. 419 Wars of heretics. 243. 244. etc. Wars of the holy land. 611.
612. 613. etc. did hurt. 598 Warfar and victory of Christians 119 Warm lewk.
126 Warnings that God uses. 134 Was and is not. 515. 518. Water of life. 638.
etc. 668 Water into blud: grace into punishment. 319 Water in abundans sign. a
sea of all illes. 365 Water for doctryn. 483 Waters kingdu^s dispersed. 524
Waters sign. people. 442 Watching exhorted. 497 Weak in faith ordered a right.
51. 52 Weapons of preachers Gods word. 317 Well of life. 638 Wealth of Rome
compared to Euphrates. 492 Women prophets. 91 Whyt array. 108 Whyt color. 182
Whyt stoon is remission of sinnez 84 Wicked oght to be hated with a holy
hatred, and in no wis nourished or wenkt at. 79 Weping of the ignorant. 159
Will frye. 129 Will of man what it helps to salvation. 694 Wilderness figure of
the Gentiles 353 Wilderness for heithennes and gentilesm. 508 Wilderness Christ is
in. 213 Winning of brethern, how. 115 Winged locusts. 263 Wishing perteined
only to ministers 19 Witness of Christ. 125 Witnesses Apostles. 573 Witnesses,
figure ministers. 313 Witch craft.280. of Rome. 557 Woe, woe, woe. 249 Woe third.
336 Woman Pope. 507 Woman figure of the church. 348 Woman precher prohibited.
91 Word of God beginning of repentauns. 105 Word of god and Christ al one. 579
Word of God is tried gould. 130 is sweet and better. 302 Word of God and faith
are not without the holy ghost. 219 Word of God contemned, cause of all misery.
190 Word of God brought in doubt by the Pope, as by the Deuell at the first in
paradise. 390 Word of Christ contemned. 38 Word of Christ what. 114. how it is
kept. 114 Word of paciens, and of the crose. 117 World figured by the sea. 473
World is not everlasting. 500 World shall be renewed. 631 Worlds end at hand. 295
World frail as glass. 147 Worldlinges, 124 Wounds of Antechrist healed. 395
Wrytings. 636 Writing of ye scripturs, to what end. 567. 31. Writing why it is
used. 45^ Wullen cloth of Laddicea. 123 Wunders and monsters. 435 Wurks taken
for heel conversation of men in words and dieds both. 104 Wurks of the
faithful. 462 Wurkes shall we be judged by. 625 Wurks good of God, il of the
Deuell. 373 Wurks of men's hands. 279 Wurks of Christ in opposition to the wurks
of men. 100 Wurks must be preached in the church. 640 Wurks of every man
rewarded accordingly by God. 96 Wurinwud. 245 Wourshipping signified by falling
down. 168 Wourship God only. 340. 450. 573. no creature. 175 Wurship of God, is
not ingould and silver. 510. etc. is partly prays 168. external and in
spirit. 153 lawful and unlawful. 645. of Idols. 644. etc. of angels and
Saints. 678. of the Deuel. 279 Wurthynes of saints. 108 Wurthines figured by
wings. 263 Wurthines we have all of God 153 Wyn new in old bottels. 126 Wyn
fat figure of hell. 468 Wynd in the script. 214
Y
Yers, three and a half. 310
Z
Zeal godly. 55 Zeal fervent against heresies necessary. 86 Zeal and
feruentnes, remedy of warmnes or neutralitie. 133
FINIS.
RITHMI E VETVSTO CODICE DESCRIPTI Romanum quendam cognomento Lefranco taxantes.
PRopter Sion non tacebo
Sed ruinas Romae flebo
Quoadusque iusticia.
Nobis rurfus oriatur
Et vt lampas accendatur
Iustus in ecclesia.
Sedet vilis and in luto
Princeps facta sub tributo
Quod solebam dicere:
Romam esse derelictam
Desolatam and afflictam
Expertus sum opere.
Vidi, vidi caput mundi
Instar maris and profundi
Vorax guttur siculi.
Ibi mundum (...)
Ibi sorbet aurum Crassus
Et argentum seculi.
Ibi latet Scilla rapax
Et Charibdis auri capax
Potius quam nauium.
Ibi pugna galearum
Et conflictus piratarum
Id est, Cardinalium.
Syrtes insunt huic profundo
Et Syrenes toti mundo
Minantes naufragium.
Os hominis foris patet
In oculis cordis latet
In form demonium.
Habes iuxta rationem
(...) Perfranconem
Ne me credas friuolum.
Ibi duplex mare feruet
A quo non est qui reseruet
Sibi valens obulum.
Ibi-venti colliduntur
Ibi panni submerguntur
Byssum, Ostrum, Purpura.
^bi mundus sepeditur
(...) totus d^g^^itur
A^ France (...)
Franco nulli miseretur
Nullum sexum reueretur
Nulli parcit homini.
Omnes illuc dona ferunt
Illuc enin ascenderunt
Tribus, tribus domini.
Canes scyllae possunt dici
Veritatis inimici
Aduocati curiae.
Qui latrando falsa fingunt
Mergu^t simul and co^fringunt
Carmina pecuniae
Iste probat se legistam
Iste vero decretistam
Iudicem Gelasium.
Ad probandam questionem
Hic intendit actionem
Regendorum finium.
Vti reum prosequatur
Hic Charibdis debaccatur.
Idem cancellaria.
Ibi nemo gratus gratis
Nulli datur absque datis.
Gratiarum gratia.
Plumbum quod hic informatur
Super aurum dominatur
Et massam argenteam:
Aequitatis phantasia
Sedet test Zoecharia
Super Bullam plumbeam.
Qui sunt Syrtes and Syrenes
Qui sermon blando lenes
Attrahunt Bysantium.
Speciem praetendunt leuitatis
Sed Charibdi parcitatis
Superant marsupium.
Dulci cantu blandiuntur
Vt Syrenes and loquuntur
Primo quaedam dulcia,
Frater been te cognosco
Certe nihil ate posco
Nam tu es de Francia.
Terra vestra been cepit
Et benign nos excepit
In portu concilij.
Nostri estis nostri, cuius
Sacrosancte sedis huius
Spirituales filij.
Ita dicunt Cardinales
Ita solent dij carnales
In primis allicere.
Sic Iustillaim fell draconis
Et in fine lectionis
Coguntrursum vomere.
Tales regunt Petri nauem
Tales habent Petri clauem
Ligandi potentiam.
Hi nos docent sed indocti
Hi nos docent sed nox nocti
Indicat scientiam.
Cardinales vt praedixi
Nouo iure crucifixi
Vendunt patrimonium.
Foris Petrus intus Nero
Iulus Lupi, foris vero
Sicut agni ouium.
In galea sedet vna
Mundi lues importuna
Camelos deglutiens.
Inuoluta Cameleo
Cuncta vorat sicut Leo
Rapulus and rugiens.
Hic pyratis principatur
Et Johannes nuncupatur.
Sedens in insidijs.
Ventre grosso lota cute
Grande monstru^ nec virtute
Sed totum cinctum vicijs.
Maris huius non est dea
Thetis matter Achillea
De qua sepe legimus.
Imo vero Carlmorum
Sancta soror loculorum
Quam n^s bursam dicimus.
Nam si bursa detumescit
Surgunt venti mare crescit.
Et Carina deperit.
Sic a ventis circumlata
Et a scopulis vexata
periculo suberit.
Et occurrunt cautes rati
Donec omnes sunt priuati
Tam nu^mis quam vestibus.
Tum securus fit viator
Quia nudus and cantator
Fit coram latronibus.
Quod si verum placet scribi
Duo portus tamen ibi
Due tamen insulae
Ad quas licet applicari
Et iacturam reparari
Confracte nauiculae.
Petrus enim papiensis
Qui electus est Meldensis
Portus, recte dicitur.
Nam cum mare fluctus tolli^
Ipse solus mare mollit
Et ad ipsum fugitur.
Est and ibi mayor portus
Foetus ager florens hortus
Pietatis Balsamum.
Alexander ille meus
Meus inquam cui det De^
Paradisi thalamum.
Ille fouet litteratos
Omnis mali incuruatos
Si posset cerneret.
Verus esset cultor Dei
Nisi latus Olisei
Giesi corrumperet.
Sed mo rursus in boc mari
Ne contingat naufragari
Dictis finem faciam.
Quia dum securuseo
Ne submergar, ori meo
Posui custodiam.
FINIS.
SERMONS OF HENRI BVLLINger, upon the Apocalipse revealed to the holy Apostle
and Evangelist S. John.
Of the author of the book of Apocalipse, of the argument and parts thereof:
Finally of the sundry use, and most profitable commodity of the same. The
first Sermon.
THe Prophets of God of the old Testament, What were the old prophets, and
their doctrine.
were God his messengers to the people, expositours of Moses or of Gods law,
and even ecclesiastical preachers, which applied the doctrine taken out of the
law of God, to the people and times wherein they lived to thedifiyng of
Congregations. And they al with one ^ccorde have chiefly handled two things in
their Sermons. For first the^ have reproved the corrupt manners of al states ^n
their time, alleging the rule and prescript of Gods law: And exhorting all men
to repentance unto God most acceptable. And to many that were incurable they
threatened all kind of plages, which they setting forth with all beau^ie of
speech, showed them plainly to be seen with the eye, if ^aply they might so be
made afraid, and healed. Secondly ^hey promised and set forth by the mouth of
God, the Lord Christ, the true Messiah: Whom also they described lively, and
with all his holy church, teaching the faith in Christ, and ^oth what good
things are prepared for the faithful in Christ: And also what be the true
duties of piety and godliness. Neither have they concealed such things as
were needful ^o be known of Antichrist: Admonishing us most dillige^tly that
we should beware of that wolf, or rather the most deep ^ongeon of all
abominations, and that we should stand fast ^n the sincere faith of Christ. etc.

I have taken upon me, through the help of God and your ^rayers, to expound
unto you the Apocalipse, The Apocalipse.
which is a doc^rine concerning the matters of Christ's church revealed from
heaven of Christ in glory, and a some of all godly religion, an exposition and
brief declaration of the Prophets, and a prophecy of the new Testament and
story of the church

Howbeit, forasmuch as this book is despised of man good and well learned
men, and for that all men for (...) most part ar fully persuaded that it is an
unprofitable bo^ I will speak here somewhat of the same matter.

This book is full of figures.
First many abhor this book for this cause only that is full of visions, types
and figures, for they suppose ho^ this becomes not the Evangelical and
Apostolical d^trine of the new Testament. But by the same mean a go^ part of
Daniell should be cast away: Which neuerthele^ is commended to us of Christ
himself in Mathewe. Math. 24.
(...) greatest matter of all, namely the calling of the Gentiles, showed to S.
Peter by a vision, as appears in the acts.

Acts. 10.
And the Prophet Joel said also, how the people of (...) new Testament should
see visions. And so does the bl^sed Apostle S. Peter, expound the same place
in the A^^ of the Apostles, speaking of the people of the new Tes^ment. And
our Savior Christ in the Gospel, propoun^ and declared to the people the
most part of the mysteries parables, and in manner by feigned fables, as they
call the And how much think you do these visions, types, and ^gures of S.
John, differ from the same? This kind of sp^^ does not darken matters, but
makes them plain: And ^^keth much for the efficacitie and perspicuitie, and
for the c^firming of the memory. For by this mean, matters be (...) only
declared with words, and heard with the ears: (...) are set forth also to be
seen of the eyes, and after a sort be fi^ in the memory. The plains of the
scripture.
Many for this cause attribute much to pa^ting: But I suppose that I may much
more rightli attribu^ very much to this manner of speaking and teaching, where
the matter is uttered, not by a coulored, domme, and dead pa^ting, but as it
were with a speaking and lively manner set for to be seen of the eyes. Which is
therefore propounded, the men might rightly and exactly understand the same.
Alb^ therefore that this whole book in a manner consists of vision and figures:
What shall be the exposition of this book,
Yet shall we in deed, through the inspiration (...) Gods grace, show in our
exposition, that all that same m^keth for the perspicuitie and plainenes, and
not for the obse^ring or darkening of most high and godly matters. I wy^ bring
my exposition out of the very scriptures, by co^ferring joining thereunto the
rule of faith and charity. I will search out the circumstaunces, the things
that follow and go before: I will bring similitudes and dissimilitudes: I will
add also there unto the experience of things, and the faith of histories. Which
manner of expounding the scriptures all interpretours have always granted to be
sound and true. 1 Cor. 14 1 Tess. 5
If better things shall be revealed to others, I will gladly after the precept of
the apostle give place unto my betters. For I offer these my doings to be wayed
of ye godly, upon this condition, yt they should try al things, and that which
they shall find to be good, to hold fast.

Secondly they object, that as well new men as old, How men of late days have
doubted of thauthoritie of this book.
of no small authority, have both doubted of this book, and of the author
thereof, and also have contemned it, as full of fables, and unworthy to be
rekened canonical. Let those that so think give me the same liberty, I desire
them, which they usurp tho the^ selves, and think it lawful. For if the book
of the Apocalipse should therefore seem worthy to be contemned, for that some
notable men, both old and new, have doubted of the authority ^herof: Why may
it not recover his authority again, if I show that ye best doctors of the
church both old and new, have ^ad a right good opinion of this book? And here
to the intent (...) would dissemble nothing at al, I am not ignorant yt doctor
Martin Luther, a man right notably learned, D. Luther
in his first edi^ion of the new Testament in dutch, with a sharp preface set
before, has sticked this book as it were with a dagger. How ^e it good and well
learned me^ were offended with him for this ^is judgment, which in ye same
found lack both of wit and mo^estie. The same man therefore waying al things more
vpright^y and dilige^ly, what time he corrected his dutch Bible. etc. My
^orshipful master seems also not to have set very much by his book, and to
have ascribed it not to John ye Apostle, but to John who^ they called a divine.
But herein there is no doubt but yt he followed plainly Erasmus of Roterda^, who
is his annotations upon the new Testament. In all the Greek copies, ^aith he,
that I have seen, the title was not of John thapostle, ^ut of John the divine.
Erasmus adds that amongst the Greeks and certain old writers, men doubted of
this author, which thing he declares by the testimonies of Eusebius, and
Hierom, of whose opinion shall be spoken streightways. But the exempler or
Spanishe coppie which is set forth after the faith of the most ancient and
approved Greeks, exhibiteth to us such a title of ths book. (...): That is the
Apocalipse of the holy Apostle and Evangelist S. John Divine. For the ancient
writers say, how S. John the Apostle and Euangeliste, for his excellent writing
of the son of God, was commonly called, Divine. Whereof it follows, tha^
this title does attribute and not take from S. John this book. Certes Aretas
was also, a Greek Aucthour, an^ bishop of Cesaria: Of the auncientes, says
he, certain hau^ plucked this Apocalipse from the tongue of that welbeloue^
John, ascribing it to another: but it is not so. For that sam^ Gregory, which
as well as he, is called a Divine, accom^teth this amongst those scriptures,
which utterly want a suspicion of counterfeiting: saying, as the Apocalipse of
S^ John teaches me. And the same man a little after: But the this book was
written by ye mouth of the holy ghost, S. B^sil, Cyril, Papias and Hippolytus,
Hippolitus
fathers of the church, a mete men to be credited. Thus says he. What shall we
say^ that Erasmus confesses, that the consent of the world, an authority of
the church to be of such force with him, the he dare not refuse this book?

Let us hear now the judgment of that most excellen^ best man D. Ioh.
Oecolampadius, Oecolampadius.
the most faithful p^stour of the church of Basil, and excellently learned
in (...) prophetical and in all the Canonical scriptures, concerning this book,
which he left us written in the.xii. Chap. of their ^^cond book of his
commentaries upon Daniel: But S. Io^ the Paraphraste or expositour of the
Prophets, says he, ((...) how much he does attribute to this our author)
whom marvel, why certain with so rasshe a judgment do reject as a dreamer, and
frantic, and an unprofitable wryter^ the church: Where nevertheless he
propounds and sette^ forth very many of the most secret and hid things of the
old^ ^^stament and of the Prophets. But those great men do b^wray, what a
wening they have of themselves: Whose iu^gementes I would verily rather
contemn as prophan^ than I would cast away such a treasure. I could here
bring forth goodly testimonies of other new writers, but that I make haste to
the judgments of the ancient fathers.

The eldest of all after the Apostles, The judgments of thauncient doctors
of ye church of the Apocalypse. Iustine.
whose wrytynges as yet remain, Iustine and Ireney, the noble Martirs of
Christ, ascribe this book to John the Apostle. For Eusebius in the.xviii.
Chapter, of the fourth book of the Ecclesiastical story. Iustine, says he,
mentions of the Apocalypse of John, saying plainly that it is the Apostles.
S. Hierom also in the life of blessed Iustine writes, that Iustine expounded
the Apocalypse of S. John, but the same exposition remains not so far forth
as I know. The same author writes that Ireney Ireney.
set forth the Apocalypse of S. John, with a commentary, which also is not to
be had. He him self, who is red to have lived about the year of our Lord,
160. Witnesses plainly in the fifth book against the Valentinians, that this
revelation was exhibited to John the Apostle a little before his days. We
allege certain words of his in the.xiii. Chapter of this book. Tertullian,
Tertullia^.
who lived about the year of our Lord two hundred and.xx. in the fourth book
against Marcion. Albeit says he, that Marcion refuses the Apocalypse of John,
yet shall the order of Bishops rekened up to the very beginning, affirm S.
John to be author thereof. In grave matters, and reasoning against heretics,
he uses gladly the testimonies of this book.

The same things are also recited of the blessed Martyr S. Cyprian, S. Cypria^
under the title of John the Apostle in this Epistles, treatises and Sermons.
Eusebius also in the.xviii. Chapter of the fifth book of the Ecclesiastical
history, Apolloni.
shows, that Appollonius a most ancient writer uses the testimonies of the
Apocalypse of S. John: Theophi.
And likewise Theophilus Bishop of Antioche. Which he affirms in the.xxiiii.
Chapter of the fourth book of the Ecclesiastical story. Also Origin, Origin.
a great man in the church of God in the.xxv. Chapter of the sixth book of the
same Eusebius. And he wrote, says he, the Apocalypse, which rested upon the
Lords breast. etc.

I have hitherto recited the opinions of the most auncie^ Martyrs and Doctors
of the christen church, touchyn^ the Apocalypse, I mean Iustine, Ireney,
Tertullian, ^^prian, Appolonius, Theophilus, and Origin: I will shor^ly after
bring yet moo judgments boeth of the (...) and Latin writers, of most
authority in the church, ag^yng with the minds of them that we have alleged
(...) thereto: Howbeit I will first touch briefly such thing as Dionisius of
Alexandria, Dionisius Alexandria.
left written of the same boo^ in the five and twenty Chapter of the seventh
book of ^sebius, whom I suppose they have followed, as many^ after him have
spoken against this book. He says h^^ diverse that were his predecessors,
did utterly repr^ and reiecte this book. Neither hydeth he the cause, w^^ they
so did, for that the kingdom of Christ is affyrm^ therein to be earthly.
Whereunto doubtless they reser^^ that precious city, and the rest which
under terrestr^^ kinds, figured spiritual things. Which when we (...) in
the treating thereof have dissolved, declaryng this bo^ not to edify the
earthely kingdom of Christ, but a spi^^tuall and celestial, no man I trow,
will reiecte a good a^^ Godly book, for because certain abusyng the testimon^^
thereof, give unto it a wrong sense.

Heretics have wrasted verey many places of (...) scripture, Chiliastes, or
Millenaries.
to the defense of their error, should therefore authority of the scripture
it self be brought in doubt? I^^ favors nothing at all the Chiliastes or
Millenaries this book: He gives them no weapons.

Eusebius says very well in the end of the third bo^^ speaking of Papias,
the first author of the Millenaries He thought, says he, that after the
resurrection Christ should reign here corporally with his a thousand yea^^ in
earth. Which I suppose he thought for that he vnde^stode not well the Apostles
words, neither that he co^^^dered not well those things that were spoken of
him ^^der figures, for that he was indewed with a small iudg^ment.

But in the mean time Dionisius him self, I, says h^ dare not reiecte this
book. He adds by and by, that he thinks it not yet to be the book of John
the Apostle, but of some other, but yet who that should be, he knew not. He
gathers also by certain conjectures, by the phrase of speech, and handlyng of
the book, and by the vnlykenes of wit, that this book should be an other
man's, than his that wrote the Gospel, and Epistle. But seeing that the
arguments of the story and Epistle be so diverse, that neither they two be
like, and the argument of the book of Revelation most diverse of all: Why
should it seem marvel, though it agrees not with them in all things?

This can no man deny, but that in consent of doctrine there is great
agreement. The Epistle to the Hebrews seemed to many to favor in the syxt and
tenth Chap. The Nouatians or Catharites. The diversity of style was noted to
differ from the rest of Saint Paul's Epistles. But if we should so judge of
holy scriptures, I know not what should be firm and sure enough. Leaving
therefore this disputation in suspense, I will now proceed to bring forth the
judgments of other old writers concerning this book.

Eusebius Eusebius.
surnamed Pamphilus Bishop of Cesarea, living in the time of great Constantine
the Emperor, and a most dilligent reader of old writers, whom many suppose
in deminishing the authority of this book to favor them, right eloquently in
the eighte^th Chapter of the third book of his story, tauntyng the Tyranny of
Domitian, affirms that John exiled into Pathmos, wrote there his Revelation.

And where other Historiographers do also the same. He again in the.xxiiii.
Chapter in the third book, concerning the Apocalipse, says he, the opinion of
men is diverse, some approving, and others reproving the same. Again when he
should bring forth his opinion touching the Canon of the new Testament in
the.xxv. Chapter. He joins the Apocalipse with ye books undoubted: although
he dissembleth not that he will show in another place what other men think
thereof. Whilst he this performs, he reco^pteth many more and better, which
judged ye Apocalipse to be of S. John thapostle, and embraced it as a most
Godly book, than those which denied or reproved the same.

Epipha.
Epiphanius Bishop of Salamine in Cypres, a Greek Author also does manifestly
ascribe this book to S. John the Apostle. Read, that he has left written
against Thelogians in the.xv. heresy. And S. Hierome attributes very much to
this Epiphanius. Hierome.
And S. Hierome him self ascribes this book to John the Apostle, to Paulinus:
The Apocalypse of S. John, says he, has so many Sacraments, as it has
words. Moreover Philastrius Bishop o^ Griria, Philastri.
whom S. Austen says he saw with S. Ambro^^ at Millan, accompteth them for
Heretics, that reiecte the Apocalypse of John, and say that it is not of
John the Apostle, but of Cerinthus an Heretic. Verily S. Ambros^ Ambrose.
him self alleges in his books testimonies of the Apocalypse, under the name
of S. John the Apostle.

S. Austen Austen.
embraced this book as Apostolical: and re^^ the same to his church, leaving
certain treatises upon the same. Primasius also Bishop of vtica in Afric,
expounded the same as Apostolical. Primass. Bid.
Of Bid and the residue o^ that sort, I speak nothing, since his opinion is
know^ to all men. Andreas and Aretas.
Andreas also Bishop of Cesaria, wrote upon this book: As Aretas reports in
his commentaries, who opinion I declared before.

Me thinks I have sufficiently confirmed the authoriti^ of this book, against
them that diminishe the same. But the same seems strongest of all, that the
thing it self, and t^ handlyng thereof proves, that it did proceed from the
Ap^stle. Which thing we shall prove in the treatise it self. But in case
those blessed fathers in their time did expound the Apocalypse to their
churches, The Apoclipse must be expounded to the churches.
why should it not be lawful for us also in our time, to expound it to our
men, which are in the end of the world, where now all things (...) more
fully then they were than accomplyshed? Yea the^ things serve most chiefly
for us and for our time, fine that we travel and be exercised under
Antichriste.

In vain therefore many prattell, that this book is obscu^^ and can not be
understand: And for the same cause to b^ read in the Church without any
profit or fruit.

For to speak nothing hereof, that nothing is set forth in holy scripture,
which has not an excellent fructe: Neither must we by and by despair of the
true understanding, although at the first sight of the holy scripture it be
obscure, which is opened of God himself, and to be opened, is obtained by
prayers, and Godly exercises: Certes we are not ignorant that many had rather
nothing were spoken of Antichriste, to the intent he might reygne more
carelessly, and they them selves be less subject to perilles. But Christ
commands us to trouble him. Let us therefore go forward in the work of the
Lord.

And where it offends them, John makes much mention of Christ.
that John makes little mention or none of Christ, where notwithstanding the
manner of Apostles is, to intimate always Christ, and the grace of redemption:
We suppose this same book more thoroughly looked upon, to prove the contrary.
Whose argument now I will recite.

The Prophet Zachary in the third Chapter, A full description of Christ.
obiecteth the whole mystery of Christ to all men's eyes in a most evident
figure to be seen. For he sees Jesus the high priest, appareled in vile
garments, and like a coal that is taken out of the fire, to suffer much
contradiction of the Devil: by and by the same to have put of the vile
clothing, and put on white garments, to be glorified, and proclaimed king and
priest and Savior of all.

This figure the Apostle and Evangelist S. John expounds: And first in deed
the Gospel being set forth, he describes Christ in vile apparel, how much
contradiction being taken he suffered of the wicked, till at the length he was
nailed to the cross. He touches there also his glory: Which notwithstanding,
the Apocalypse thereto annexed, he declares more at large, showing the same
unto us in a white garment and in glory, how verily after this humblyng being
exalting, he obtained a name above all names: And now being in glory, how he
works nevertheless in the church, the savior of all the faithful in the
church. In his Epistle he commends this whole mystery of piety and beats
in to all men.

For the whole book is divided into six parts.

The diuition and particion of ye Apocalips
1 For first is set the title with the beginning and some o^ the work, and with
a brief narration: And all this in the first part of the first chapter.

2 Secondly from the mids of the first Chapter to the fourth Chapter, is
described Christ reignyng in glory, o^ the right hand of the Father, and is
declared, how he i^ conuersaunt in the Church by his spirit, and ministry
o^ his word. What thing he teaches from heaven, and what is the sincere
doctrine of the church: what is also the reparing of Churches that are fallen,
and the preservation of the same.

3 Than from the fourth Chapter to the.xii. Christ still admonishes his
Church diligently by seven Seals, and seven trompettes, what things shall
happen to the Church^ all the which are most justly governed of God him se^^
by the Lamb Christ.

4 Moreover from the.xii. Chapter to the.xv, is more fully described the
conflict of the Church with the old Serpent, and with the old and new
beast. Where also the f^^myshe Tyranny both old and new, and verey Antichrist
him self is trymly painted forth in his colors: N^withstandyng that
afterward also these things are agay^ more plainly declared.

5 And from the fiftenth Chapter to the two and twenti^ Chapter, are recited
the pains and tourmentes of Antichriste, and Antichristians, and the
destruction of the sam^ and the condempnation of all the wicked. Also the Iudg^
Christ is set forth, and the process of an external judgment is fygured.
There is also rehearsed the triumph, Joy, and reward of Saints. Where also
heaven it self is opened to be seen of our eyes, that now^ we may by faith
look in to the same. The depthe o^ Hell is opened, that we may look in to it
also: And may take good head that we be not thrown thither headlong.

6 Finally in the end of the.xxii. Chapter, follows the conclusion, and
commendation of the work, with the sealing up of the same.

And here I will not hyde an other division of this work not to be
contempned, The book divided by visions.
which I see the expositours have followed. For first they rehearse the Title
and beginning. After they annexe the whole work it self, divided by seven
visions. And in deed the seventh number is most frequent, and as it were
peculiar to this book. Finally they add to the conclusion of the work in a
manner comprised in the last Chapter. And these visions be compassed within
their limits.

In the three first Chapters the first vision is expounded exhibityng Christ
unto us reigning in glory, governing, ordering, correcting, and preserving his
church.

The second vision begins in the fourthand, reaches to the eight Chapter.
That sets forth God him self and his Christ to be looked upon, whose most
just government of all things in the world it commends, and opens seven
Seals.

The third vision has seven Aungelles soundynge with seven Trompettes. Which
treatise stretches to the xii. Chapter.

The fourth Vision shows the fight of the woman with the Serpent, and
sets forth to us the old seven headed, and the new two horned beast to
be seen, the description of Antichriste, and this in the.xii. xiii. and.xiiii.
Chapter.

In the fifth vision seven Angels power out seven vials of Gods wrath, unto
the.xvii. chapter.

From thence begins the sixth vision, and extends to the.xxi. Chapter, and
disputes of the most just judgment of God against Babylon, the whore of
Babylon, and the Antichristians, finally against all wicked and impenitent
persons.

The seventh and last vision propounds to the eyes of all the faithful, the
glory and bliss euerlastyng^ of Saints. And verily this division of the
work has a great grace and affinite with the rest of the things, which in
this book are all in a manner treated by the seventh nu^br^ Let the reader
follow which he will.

What profit is in the Apocalipse
Now of these things every man may perceive the this book is altogether
Apostolical, and exceadynge profitable to us all, especially whom the end of
the world^ has overtaken. And this book shall be easier for us, f^ that all
things now are in a manner accomplyshed.

Daniell was thought to have told of stark dreame^ when before the
Monarchies, he prophesied the Mona^chies. But after those things were
accomplished, which he prophesied, he seemed unto many to have compiled an
h^story. The self same, I am sure, thou wylt judge also: this same book of
Saint John. A few profittes only of many we shall recite.

First we have in this book a most full description Christ, reignyng in
glory, our king I say, and Bishop And how he governs the Church, and is
the Sauio^ of all faithful. We have also a most gallaunte descri^tion of
Christ's Church, and how the same may be bu^ded, repared, and maynteyned.
Than have we a perf^ description of Antichrist, of his members, and Synagog^ of
his counselles, crafty devises, kingdom, cruelty, a^ destructions of the
same: From the which it byddeth (...) beware. Moreover we have an abrydgement
of Histor^ from Christ's time, unto the worlds end.

Finally an absolute and certain prophecy of thyng^ to come, that we need
not to have the prophecies of M^thodius, Cyrill, Merline, Briget, Nolhard and
certain triflers

Furthermore we have a great consolation and comfort of the church in
adversity, whylest boeth we see the Lamb to open the Seals, and that all
things are do^ by Gods providence, and that there is an end of euylle^ And
that the church shall be evermore, in dispitee of all the Deuyls in hell.
Last we have a most plentiful and sure do^trine of the Judge and last
judgment, of pains and of t^wardes.

All these things I say, shall the treatise it self show plainly, for our
edefiyng through Jesus Christ our Lord.

OF THE TITLE OF THE whole work, and exposition thereof. The second Sermon. I
said the whole book was contained in six parts. Three members of the first
part.
Now must we look on the first part: Which has chiefly three members: The
title, beginning, and brief narration. For this present we will only speak of
the Title, which is thus.
THe revelation of Jesus Christ, The first Chapter.
which God gave unto him, for to show unto his servants, things which must
shortly come to pass: And he sent and showed by his angel unto his servant
John, which bare record of the word af God, and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of all things that he saw. Happy is he that reads, and they
that hear the words of the prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein. For the time is at hand.

This title is plentiful, The title of the work.
and utters all profitable circumstaunces, that are to be declared in the
beginnings of books.

First is set the Title, or inscription of the whole work, that is, the
Apocalipse, or revelation of Jesus Christ, which verily was opened or revealed
by Christ Jesus him self.

This title streightway proves, The revelation of Jesus Christ.
that this work is no man's invention, but a godly doctrine: As that which was
opened by our Lord, king, and priest Jesus Christ, out of heaven, from the
right hand of the father, executing there the office of the high Bishop, and as
yet teaching us profitable things. and albeit it be called also the revelation
of John, yet is it challenged to him for none other cause, than for that as
scribe he wrote and set it forth.

From whence is that revelation?
Again it is yet more plainly declared, from whence this Revelation is: Even of
God him self. For he says, which God, namely the Father, gave unto him, to
wit, to Christ. For in the holy and blessed Trinity, there is a distinction
of persons. And albeit that all things of the father, be the sons also: And
all things of the son, the fathers likewise: Yet the scripture mentions
the father to give unto the Son, and the Son to receive of the Father.

Which thing all the ancient writers, have full Godly expounded, to be done
by the mystery of dispensation. For the Son received somewhat of the Father,
as man which otherwise as the very Son of God says Father, John. 17
glorify thou me with the glory which I had with thee, before this world was.

Moreover the Son is the wisdom, word, and mouth of the Father, by whom God
in times paste and now, spoke and speaks to the Fathers, Prophets,
Apostles, and to the universal church. The Father by dispensation gave to his
Son this office, that he should be Bishop. For no man has seen God at any
time: The only begotten which is in the bosom of the Father, he has revealed
unto us. Let us know therefore, this same to be a Revelation Divine, which God
the Father, loving mankind, has revealed by the only Bishop Christ unto his
Church. And so it joins together the Father and the Son, that
nevertheless the holy distinction of persons remains safe.

To what use and to whom it is revealed.
Now also is added, to what end God the Father has revealed, or given the
gift of revealing, to wit, the office of priesthod, to his Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ: to the intent verily that the same being revealed, he might show
it, and as it were set it before the eyes of his servants, to wit, his
worshippers, and Christians, which are called the servants of God for their
wyllyng obedience. And as the servant of a Lord is a servant, and owes to
his Lord all that he has, or is worth: So we owe unto God our selves whole,
and all ours, or else we be free, and not bound.

Here is also declared, unto whom this revelation is opened: John. 8
To all the servants of God. If therefore thou be glad to be called the
servant of God, hear this book, and remember it: And know that this book is
prepared for thee of God.

After he compryseth in few words, What things are revealed.
what Christ revealed to John, things that must shortly come to pass. The
destenies therefore of the Church are recited, what good and evil things
shall happen to the Godly, and likewise what punysshementes must be inflicted
to the wicked.

And let no man gather of this word, must, necessity, as though God wrought
not freely: How good and evil things must be done.
Or that the wicked did evil, not through their own fault, but by Gods
compulsion. Good things must be done, because God wyllyngly byndyng him self
to us by his promise, can not but do that he does and promyseth:
Nevertheless he works freely.

Good things must be done in the Godly, for because the nature of grace and
faith is such, like as the property of ungodliness is to contemn and
transgress. Wherefore they must also be punysshed. And because the world is
such, as it is, there must needs be Heresies and calamities innumerable. And
he says these things must shortly be done that are revealed, for because
certain things began in the very time of S. John. And although many things are
found to be done a thousand years after, 2 Pet. 3
yet says the Apostle saint Peter. A thousand years before the Lord, be as
it were yesterday. Therefore this Revelation apperteyneth to the times of the
primative and last Church: And declares what things so ever shall happen unto
it till the last judgment. Yea and how it shall reign for ever.

Moreover the manner of reuealyng is also touched. The manner of revealing.
For Christ revealed those things, sendyng by his Angel, or his Angel sent
forth, unto whom he gave in commandment what he should say and do.
Whereupon this Angel is after also called Christ, because he represented the
person of Christ. Therefore must not the Angel in this book, but Christ
always be considered, the true Author of all these things. And in deed the
Divinity of Christ is here commended unto us, what time we hea^ that Christ is
the Lord of angels. Whereof S. Paul to the Hebrews has reasoned more at large.
Hebre. 1
Moses in the.xii.^ Numbres sets forth chiefly three manners of propheciyn^
or revelation. Three kinds of propheciyng. Act. 16.
First by vision, of the which sort many are ^scribed to Daniell, one notable
to S. Peter in the.x. of the Acts, and likewise to S. Paul. And into this
form Infer also the Apocalipse. Secondly by dream: of the which sort were
those of Pharao and Nabuchodonozer kings whereof Joseph and Daniel were
interpretours. Genesis 41 Daniel. 4.
The Prophet Joel in the second chapter, mentions of visions and dreams. For
in the new Testament also there be very many holy and prophetical dreams.
Last of all Moses rehe^seth a skylfull exposition, as many were made to
Moses* to the Apostles. Into whose fellowship the Apocalipse comes after a
sort also, where visions are openly expounde^ Here appears the unspeakable
goodness of God, which (...) many ways procures and works our salvation,
and s^ pleasauntly prepared offers it unto us to inioye. Unhappy is he, that
knows not these things.

To whom it was revealed, and by whom it was written
Besides this, much mention is made unto whom Christ has opened this divine
and most excellent revelation, eu^ to John. He commends him, that is himself
(for so was i^ expedient for the confuting of his adversaries, seeing yt Pau^
also many times maintained his authority against the fal^ Apostles) by four
Epithetes. For first he calls himself the servant of Christ. This is the
eldest and noblest title, which the fathers, Prophets, and Apostles have used.
For they b^ addicte and consecrate to God. Secondly John testified the word of
God amongst the Apostles, most expressly declaring ye divinity of Christ,
especially where he testified and said In the beginning was the word. John. 1
etc. Moreover he testifie^ the witness of Jesus Christ: Under the which name the
Lord himself in the Gospel, and S. John in the.xii. chapt. of his Gospel,
comprised the whole Evangelical doctrine. And was a seeing witness of all
these things. For in the first Chapter we have seen, says he, his glory. And
in the.xix. Chapter he saw water and blood gusse out of the Lords side. In
his Epistle, 1 John. 1
that we have seen, says he, and have heard. etc.

Aretas notes, that in certain Greek copies is added, that which is had also
in the Greek copy of Spain. And what things soever he has heard, and what
so ever be, and what so ever must be done after this.

That same John therefore is author of this book, The co^me^dation of John.
which as he saw the Lord in flesh upon earth, so he saw the same in
spirit revealing these things in heaven: and propounds to the church
sightes most certain and sure. This John was that beloved disciple of the Lord,
which in the last supper, rested upon his breast, unto whom in his last will
he bequeathed his mother on the cross, one virgin to another.

He alone stood by at the altar of the cross when Christ died: witness of the
true death, and of our purification. He lived til the time of the Emperor
Traiane, which thing Eusebius in his cronicles cites out of Ireney, in the
noting of ye year from the birth of Christ an hondreth and three. Dorotheus a
most ancient writer, affirms ye John lived.vi. score years.

Last is touched also the profit of this godly work or revelation, The
co^modite of this revelation
that hereby the readers and hearers might be provoked to diligence. Where this
book is called also a prophecy. For this book by reason of the telling before
of things to come, is the prophecy, of the new Testament: Moreover a
prophecy, that is an exposition, This book is a prophecy.
which opens and and expounds the old Prophets. And promises blessedness
to the readers, hearers, and kepers of the things that are written in this
book. Blessedness comprehends the benefits of the life present, so far
forth as the Lord permits them to the godly: but chiefly of the life to
come. If the profit of this book has been also spoken before in the first
Sermon. And mark, that it is not enough to read or hear this book. It must
be performed in deed, and kept dilligently.

For the Lord said also in the Gospel: Blessed are they that hear the word of
God and keep it. They therefore that shall frame their life after this book, are
happy. For both they fly the seducing of Antichriste, abide in the faith of
Christ, and live for ever more. etc.

And he finisheth the Title with an acclamation, by the which he moves the
hearers exceadingly: For the time is at hand, as thouge he should say: Let no
man think here, that strange things, and the which concern him noth^^ are
told here, which shall come to pass at length after man worlds, they belong
to every one of us. For they be wr^ten of matters that chiefly concern us, and
even of our o^ affairs. So shows he that this book is profitable for a
worlds, men, and ages. God the father by his son teach^ profitable things,
and admonishing time enough and dew season, be praised world without end.
Amen.

OF THE BEGINNING OF THIS book, and the Apostles salutation: wherein are
declared the mysteries chiefly of Christ, secondly of our whole faith and
redemption. The third Sermon.
John to the seven co^gregatio^s Asia. Grace be with you and pea^ from him
which is, and which was, and which is to come, and (...) the seven spirits
which are pr^sent before his throne. And from Jesus Christ which is a faithful
witness, and first begot^ of the dead: And Lord over the kings of t^ earth.
Unto him that loved us, and wassh^ us from sins in his own blood: And man us
kings and priests, unto God his father be glory and dominion for evermore.
Ame^ Behold he comes with clouds: And al ey^ shall se him: And they also which
pearsed hi^ and al kinredes of ye earth shall wayle over him Even so. Ame^. I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and thending, says ye Lord almight^ which is,
and which was, and which is to come.

The beginning or preface of the w^rke.
Another piece of the first part of this book, contains t^ beginning or
preface, wherein is the Apostles salutation, (...) the which he discribeth
first the whole mystery of Christ, ^^condly of our faith and redemption. For so
were the Apostles wont in the beginning of their writings to comprise a brief
some of salutation: Which thing in Paul's Epistles is every where to be seen.
By the same description he gets the benevolence and attentiuenes of al men.

The Apostles salutation or greting is nothing else, What is ye Apostles
salutation.
but a blessing. Blessing is an old accustomed order, by the which the
Patriarchs wished of God to their children al manner of good things, both of
body and soul. Which verily in Genesis is described at large. And also the high
priest had commandment given to bless the people: As we read in ye sixth of
Nu^bres, especially he commands to put his name upon the people. Therefore it
is a supersticion to say God verily, from whom every good gift descends
from above, blesses, that is gives good things: but ministers or men wish
only. And the Lord in deed in ye law promises, that he will grant those
things to the people, which the high priests should wish them. Therefore
another words nor shaven crowns: but ye truth and power of God give the
gifts. We ought not therefore to doubt, but yt God will grant to us also
thapostolical blessing, yt being reconciled and accepted of God we might have
peace. And first S. Iho^ repeteth his name, left we should any thing doubt of
thautour, John interpretour of Christ toward the congregations.
who^ we see Christ to have used as scribe and interpretour unto al
co^gregatio^s. But he repeteth not himself to be yt servant of god, and
witness or Apostle of Jesus Christ. It sufficed to have heard yt at ye first
beginni^g. Therefore he teaches the^ modesty and humility also, which have
obtained great gifts. Afterward he signifies, to who^ he writes, and to who^
this book apperteineth, to ye seven churches of Asia, ye names whereof he will
utter shortly after. And Aretas bishop of Cesaria, by ye.vii. churches, says
he, and by the.vii. nu^bre, he signified ye multitude of churches yt be in all
places. So also Primasius bish. of Vtica in Afric, expounds ye.vii. number.
Therefore this salutatio^, this book, and the whole doctrine of Jesus Christ,
written by s. Iho^, To whom this book apperteineth.
apperteineth to ye whole universal church of Christ throughout al ye world,
and in all times and ages. Whereupon it belongs to all us also as many as be
of us in ye church of Christ. For albeit thepistles be entitled to ye Romans
and Galath. yet follows it not therefore, yt they be not ours. And he writes
expressly to the churches of Asia, not to t^ churches of Jerusalem or Iewery:
that he might so shew^ that the kingdom of Christ, is comen also already to
the g^tiles. And as God from the beginning chose Israel, in whi^he might set
forth a perfect example of the church, and co^m^wealth: so from ye beginning of
ye new Testament, he chose thos^ seven churches of Asia, which he might set
forth to ye wh^^ Christen world. But in case Rome had been set in ye first pla^
amongst the churches, as Ephesus is, good God, ho^ much would the Romish sort
make of it, for the estabishing^ their supremacy.

The form of the Apostles bessing.
And the manner of the Apostles saluting wysheth gran^ peace. Grace is the favor
of the deity, and the reconc^ment, whereby God the father for Christ his sake
is made^ one with us, our sins pardoned, and we adopted for his chi^dren.
Thereof arriseth the peace and tranquillity of mynd^ and the desire of concord
with all men.

And here he shows abundantly, who gives ye church his blessing, that is to
wit, grace, reconcilement, and pea^ God, and God three in persons, the father,
the son, and the holy ghost, one God in essence. But here he discerns the
persons very well. From him that is, to wit, the father And from the seven
spirits yt is, from ye holy ghost: And from Jesus Christ, this is ye diversity
of persons. And the signification of the unity is, when after the proprieties
of persons d^clared, The holy ghost is placed in the mids.
he adds: I am Alpha and omega. etc. And that the ho^ ghost is set here in
the mids, it disordereth not the miste^ of the Trinity: but appears to be
an argument that he (...) the spirit as well of the father, as of the son,
and that h^ proceeds from both. As it is also proved by the words (...) our
lord, the.xiiii.xv. and.xvi. of John. Here is also describe^ the whole wholesome
mystery first of Christ, than of the catholic faith, and of our redemption, so
that herein you may find^ the chiefest articles of the Apostles creed, and have
here a mos^ goodly description of Christ our Lord. Hereof al me^ shall iudg^
how truly some men say, The father which is which was etc.
that this book, contrary to the ^^stome of thapostles, makes little mention of
Christ and of faith

The father as fountain and original, of whom the son is engendered, is first
described: for that it is he which is, which was, and which is to come. Those
words took John out of Moses in the.iii. and.xxxiiii. chap. of Exodus and out
of many testimonies of Esaias. And he says nothing, but that God the father is
an eternal ensence, which consists by and of it self, and is and gives life
to all, and in all preserves the same. And that this essence is such, that it
has been always with out beginning. For this is it, that he joins to being,
or existing, was. He adds, and he that shall come ((...)) which shall be, and
shall remain even to the end, and to euerlastingnes without end. The Greeks
derive (...) of running, for that conning and running, he medleth with all
matters: is every where present, bringing help to the godly, or restreining and
punishing the wicked.

And the holy ghost where he is but one, Seven spirits.
for the seuenfolde that is all manner of grace and gifts manifold, is here
called, as I may say, Septenarie or of the seventh number: And from the seven
spirits says John, that is from that spirit, which is indewed with the
seuenfolde grace. Those diverse gifts are after a sort declared of Esaias in
the.xi. Chapt. and else where in the scriptures. He is said to be in the sight
of the throne that is before the throne of God, joined verily in government
with the father and the son. For the throne is many times usurped for the
kingdom. The holy ghost therefore is of the same glory, power, and majesty with
God.

Now is he commen to Christ, The description of Christ.
whom by his properties he describes most abundantly. You know, that Jesus
is the proper name of Christ: which Matthew expounds, a Savior, Christ is
the surname of his office and dignity: as you would say, anointed, that is,
bishop and king.

1 First he calls Christ our Lord, a faithful wytnes, Christ a faithful
witness.
and that out of the.xlix. and.l. chapter of Esaias. For he was sent of the
father to the world out of heaven, an Apostle, which should testify the will
of God, what he would have done with men. To wit that he would save the world
by his son, Math. 18. 2 Petr. 3 John. 3 Math. 7.1
and by faith in him, which is obedient to the law of God. For he must do the
will of his father. This Christ is a faithful witness, that is sure, constaunt
and true: Of whose doctrine no man ought to doubt. No man has seen God at
any time: The only begotten which is in the bosom of the father, Math. 17. 2
Pet. 1
he has revealed. This therefore is the bishop and catholic d^tour of the
church. Who so ever dissent from him, are to (...) eschewed. Hear him, says
the father.

Christ is ye first fruits of the^ that rise.
2 He is the first begotten of the dead. For he died for o^^ sins verily: and
rose again from the dead, and was made t^ first begotten of the dead, Lord and
conqueror of death: I^ whom we se that we shall also rise again, and in what
sort. (...) whom the first of the Corinth. xv. And like as in the first
pr^pertie he shaddoweth the humanity of Christ, wherein h^ taught also his
deity, in that he was the faithful, true, and ^^tholique bishop, and is yet
at this day: So in the second, the articles of our belefe concerning the death
of Christ, and h^ resurrection are confirmed. To these also may be added t^
article of the resurrection of the dead.

Christ is Prince of kings.
3 Christ is prince over the kings of the earth, a monar^ verily, and Lord of
all rulers: Which has taken a name ^boue all names, the Lord of angels, and
of all creatures, (...) whom al things be subject: As thapostle expounds.
Colos^ Philip. 2. And he does not abolishe laws and Magistrat^ which will be
king of kings, and Lord of lords. For if tha^ were no kings, how should Christ
be king of kings? The mo^ sacred Emperors, Constance, Constantine, Theodose,
an^ Justinian, knew them selves to be clientes of Christ: Tha^ kingdom was
Christ's, and they to be subjects. These Christ acknowledges for his, by who^
he governs those he ha^^ redeemed with his blood. They that proudly rule over
ye people, boast the^ selves to be lords of althings, and acknowled^^ not
Christ to be monarch over all, be stark mad. And her^ are comprehended such
things as we confess in tharticles of our faith, that Christ ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of the father: that is, that he has
received high power of al things in heaven and earth. Ephe. 1. Act. 2.

Christ loved us.
4 Christ has loved us with incomparable love. For he hi^ self says: greater
love has no man, than that a man should leave his life for his fre^des. This
love the Apostle amplefiet^ in the fifth to the Romans. And it was exceading
great love (...) moved Christ to come down from heaven and be incarna^^ and to
redeem us by his death. With a free love he loue^ us, provoked by no desert of
ours. For as this same John in his Epistle canonical speaks the same of the
father. In this is charity, not yt we have loved God, but yt he has loved us,
and sent his son a propiciation for our sins: So is it to be understand of
the son, ye he has and does bear us great good will, not moved thereto through
our love, wherewith we have embraced him. And of ye fre love to mankind, he
gave him self unto death, and washed us from our sins. For straight ways is
added, by his blood. Christ washes.
Where three things seem of us to be observed. First that Christ washes,
purges, purifieth or cle^seth ye faithful: and that most fully, not partly. He
alluded to the washings of the law, which he expounded also. For David says:
Pourge me with Hysope, and I shall be made clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter
than snow. The same phrase of speech repeteth Esaias in the first chap. Micheas
also says: Miche. 7.
The Lord will return and will have mercy on us, he will tread under fete our
iniquities: And thou shall throw into ye depth of the Sea al their sins. And
the Lord says, Ezech. 36
I will cast upon you clean waters, and you shall be mundified from al your
filthiness. The Lord Christ these things accomplishing, washes us, purges and
cleanses thoroughly, as well from the falte as the pain. He cleanses us from our
sins, Christ washes all sins.
not from one, but from al. The which thing is proved both by former
testimonies, and again in the first and second Epistle of S. John. Last, the
manner also of purifiyng is set forth, by blood. For without the sheding of
blood no remission was made. Therefore through the mediation of death and
bloudsheding there was full remission of all sins obtained for the faithful.
He washes by blood. Hebr. 9
They that bring forth any other manner of forgeuenes of sins, ar injurious to
the death and blood of the son of God. And here we may se plainly set forth
an article of the Apostolical creed. I believe the forgeuenes of sins.

In the fifth place is showed theffect of our redemption and purifiyng. For
Christ has brought to pass, Theffect of Christ's redemption in ye faithful.
yt as many of us as believe in the father by ye son of God, should be kings and
prists to God and to his father. Aretas and the copy of complute read not
kings but (...), that is kingdom: the which is not red amiss. For we be ye
kingdom of God, for because God by his spirit, not the flesh nor the world,
ought to reign in us: And when we permit the government to the spirit, we be
ye kingdom of God: The which thing S. Paul handles at large in the sixth chap.
to ye Romans. Moreover we be made kings that is free, We be kings.
by Christ, that we should not serve the devil, the flesh, and the world,
according to that saying of Zachary, (...) being delivered from the hands of
our enemies, we might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. We be priests.
And Christ has consecrated v^ priests with his spirit and blood, that we
should offer up t^ God spiritual sacrifices, our selves pure, prayers and
pra^ses, 1 Pet. 2 To. 12.15. Philip. 4. Hebr. 13 Exodus 19
and almosdedes. For that these be spiritual oblation^ Peter and Paul do
testify. And these things took S. John out of Exodus: For we of the Gentiles
that have beleue^ have succeeded in the place of the people of Israel reiecti^
Christ through incredulity. And these things give a lyg^^ to that article of
the Creed, I believe ye holy catholic church the communion of saints. For we
be as many of us as b^leue, ye fellowship of Gods people, sanctified through
Christ to the service of God. Of whom be these things hitherto.

In the sixth place, in the discriptio^ of Christ he shows the glory and rule
is dew unto God alone through Christ (...) the church for evermore: The glory
and kingdom is of God.
We give glory unto God, wh^^ we ascribe to his goodness our salvation, and all
goodne^ not to our own strength and merits. We give him ru^^ when we
acknowledge him to be Lord and head in the church workyng by him self, not by
the saints in heaven, to wh^ he has granted power: Not by the Pope, whom he
ha^^ constitute Vicar in earth. The whole glory and rule is Christ's

Seventhly in the description follows the coming (...) Christ unto
judgment, Christ will com to judgment.
and the manner of his coming. F^ as a cloud took him up from the eyes of the
Apostles, e^ so shall he come in clouds to judge the quick and the dea^ The
scripture witnessing. And he adds, that the eyes of a^ men shall se the judge,
Math. 24 Act. 1 1 Tessa. 4.
even of those which have peased him Whereof we gather two things, first, that
the judgment sha^be universal. Wherein men arrising shall se Christ with th^^
own eyes. An other thing, that Christ shall come to iudg^ment in the same
flesh, Job. 19
in the which he was wounded and sticked, honge upon the Cross, was buried
and rose again This place is taken out of Zachary, and is cited also in S.
John's Gospel. zacha. 13 John. 19
And it behooves that his body be showed to the whole world full of printes and
marks, that hereof may be judged the Godly and also the ungodly: They that then
have believed in such a redemer: These, that then have rejected and contemned
such a one. Of these we understand that is added: And they shall wayle, for
that in deed they have neglected their own salvation: Which the wise man
discourses at large. Sap. 3.5
Moreover lest any may should doubt of those things that are spoken of the
judgment, and of the lamentation of the wicked (as S. Peter said, Things
spoken of ye judgment are certain 2 Pet. 3
the contemners and mockers of the judgment should be) he adds a kind of a
confirmation, even so. Amen.

In them also is expounded the article of the creed of Christ that shall judge
the quick and the dead. He concludes this place with these words: I am Alpha
and Omega, that which follows (the beginning and end) is omitted in some
copies: As though that interpretation of that same, I am Alpha and Omega, crept
in out of the margent. It is a proverb of S. John the Apostle, I am Alpha and
Omega. Heretics, as Basilides and Valentine, were wonderfully delighted in
letters. But against those lettered Heretics John speaks plainly by the
mouth of Christ. I am Alpha and Omega. If any thing ought to be ascribed to
letters, I am all this whole that everlasting virtue, essence, and eternity.
For the sense is, that God is the beginning and end, that is eternal,
unspeakable, best and greatest. Those things are repeted: He yt is, which was.
etc. Which were expounded before: There is added, almighty. For hereby is
declared the unity and majesty of God, of whom the Trinity was opened also
before. Hereby also the authority of this book is confirmed, the author
whereof is showed to be that God eternal and almighty. To whom be glory.

Of the Narration of this book, where also is discoursed of the place and time,
and of the author of this Revelation. The fourth Sermon.
I John your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and
patience which is in Jesus Christ, was in the I Will of Pathmos for ye word of God,
and testimony of Ies^ Christ. I was in the spirit on the Sunday and heard
behind me a great voice, as it ha^ been of a trompe, saying: I am Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last. That thou see^ write in a book, and send it to
the congregations which are in Asia, unto Ephesus, an^ unto Smyrna, and unto
Pergamos, and Thyatire, and unto Sardis, and unto Philade^phia, and unto
Laodicia.

Narration
The last place of the first shows unto us a brief narrati^ wherein the Apostle
S. John declares the time and place this Revelation, and by whose
commandment he wrou^ sent the same to the seven churches in Asia.

And again now ye third time is the name of John rehea^sed. He saw
undoubtedly, that there would be some which to the end they might take away
the use and fruit of the book, would doubt of the author: Against whom he
repet^^ and reiterateth his name so often, leest we should doubt and lac^ the
great commodity of so worthy a book.

S. John is the brother of the faithful.
He adds to his name certain things, which instruct^ touching the state of
the Apostle, and certain profitable ma^ters. First he calls him self a
brother, namely of those s^^ churches, and of al ours: As where I have
admonished yo^ that in the seventh number are comprised all churches of (...)
times throughout the whole world. We are all, so many (...) believe, the
children of one heavenly father: And therefore all spiritual brethren in Christ,
coinheriters with Christ, and heirs of God. Which thing S. Paul taught after
Christ. Romans 8 Math. 23
And seeing our dignity is so great, let us ones be ashamed of our misdedes,
least our memory be put out of this most noble and celestial family. It is a
shame the brother of Christ, of S. John and all the Apostles should degenerate.
etc. But why have not they so instantly urged this brotherhood, as the Munkes
have beaten in their forged fraternities, the Rosaries of the virgin Mary and
of Saints? Because that was fre, and cost nothing: But the Monks selle
theirs dear. They be therefore disceauers and seducers.

After he calls him self partaker in affliction, or oppression and
persecution, as he that was even now bannished by the Emperor Domitian, and
lived in exile. And he joins together and not separateth him self in the
evil: That is common to all the faithful brethren. The persecution of John
and of ye whole church.
And verily it is one and the same persecution, that vexed the Apostles, and
tourmenteth us at this day. Let us therefore rejoice, that we have the Apostles
and all the Martyrs of Christ fellows of our trouble and affliction, that we
be broken and bruised with the heavy burden of evils. Let us therefore be
pacie^t and long suffering. For it is not enough to be afflicted, and vexed with
all kind of evils (for many without any fruicte or praise at all endure most
grievous pains.) But it becomes us also to be patie^t in adversity. Therefore
S. John at this present joins with all, patince. For the Lord said in the
Gospel. In your patience shall you possess your souls.

After he adds unto tribulation and patience a kingdom, and that an heavenly
not a terrestrial kingdom. A kingdom prepared for the pacient.
And he brings in the kingdom for the comfort of the patient people. For also
the Apostle S. Paul said, a certain and sure saying. For if we die with Christ,
we shall live also with him: If we suffer, we shall reygne with him. etc. Let
us always here with comfort our selves in adversity. For we are thruste
down, that we might ones be exalted again.ii. Corinthians.iiii. And all these
things are concluded in Christ Jesus, by who^ we be both the children and
brethren of God, and suffer many things patiently, and are made partakers of
his kingdom. For even for these things must we thank him, and his m^rites,
and not our own deserte.

The state of humility of thapostle.
Let us here note also, what and how great has been the humility of the
greatest and worthy Apostle of God, wh^ was his state: Not plesaunt, but
hard, yet in the patience (...) Christ joyful. But where be they now, that
glory in the name of Apostles: Who in the mean time swellyng wit^ pride, are
addicte to filthy pleasures? Which I warn, the we flee from them, as from
Apostataes.

The place wherein the revelation was showed.
And now he shows the place, where this divine revelation was made him, where
also he was commanded of Go^ to write the same. The place was the I Will of
Patmos. The same is accounted among the Ilondes called Sporad^ of Pliny in
the fourth book and.xii. cha. It lay over again^ Asia, and the city of
Ephesus, and was in thu sight boeth (...) Europe and Affricke, so that it seemed
to be as it were a mi^dle seat, or holy chair, out of the which Christ
preached (...) John from heaven to the whole world. And in deed the co^selles
of God are wonderful, and his goodness is unspeakable, which reuealeth so great
mysteries, as it were in the Romish prison or Babilonicall captivity, to his
faithful.

John persecuted for ye Gospel.
Neither hides he the cause of his coming into the sam^ Island, I was there,
says he, for the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ. The word of
God is the very so^ of God, called of John by a singular propriety of speech
the word or sermon of God, as appears the first of John and the testimony of
Jesus Christ is the Gospel if self, which Jesus testified, and the which his
disciples have testified o^ Jesus. Therefore for the confession and preaching of
Ies^^ Christ, and of his wholesome Gospel (for so he expoundet^ also how he is
made partaker of thafflictio^) John was appr^hended in Asia, and by soldiers
led to Rome, yt he might plea^ his cause before the emperor Domitian, who of his
cruel nature condemned the inuoce^t. And he was put into a cawdro^ o^ hot
boiling oil. Out of ye which when he escaped without harm, he was carried into
Patmos. He answered no other matter before the emperor, than Paul did.27. years
past, before Nero. This was done in yt.xiiii. or.xv. year of Domitia^ And
the.xxiiii. year after ye destruction of the city Jerusalem and after the
birth of our Lord.lxvi. Domician who would seem and be called a God, being
slain of his own men, after many murders and cruel acts, died himself a
shameful death, the.xv. year of his reign. The authors hereof are, Suetonius
in ye life of Domitian, Tertullian in the heretic. prescript. Eusebius in his
chronicles, and in the third book of the ecclesiastical history, in the.xvii.
and.xviii. chapter. And hereto is added the common consent of all writers.

Moreover he notes the time also, The time of the revelation, and of the
sunday.
in the which these mysteries began to be revealed to him, (...), in that
solemn day of the Lord, namely the sunday. For so have the ancient fathers
called one of the sabbothes, that is to say the first day in the weke, wherein
Christ rose again from the dead. Math. xxviii. and Mark.xvi. And this day have
ye churches chosen to them selves in stead of the Sabbath day, as holy in the
remembrance of the Lords resurrection, wherein they might keep their sacred
and solemn assemblees. For that this day was solemnised and consecrated for
assemblees in the congregation of Corinthe, appears manifestly in the xvi.
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corintians, where the Apostle commands
to lay a part their collections in one of the sabbothes: The same day also the
faithful did celebrate their service with S. Paul, in the.xx. of ye Acts. Where
Sozomenus reports in the.viii. chapt. of the first book of the story
tripertite, that great Constantine made certain holy days, and even the Lords
day for one, which is called of the Heathen the sunday, it is to be
understand that he renewed rather the custom of the Apostles and catholic
church, than to have newly instituted the same. And freely of their own accord
have the churches received that day: for we read not that it was any where
commanded. And the congregations saw how it was altogether necessary that
there should be a certain time, in the which the saints should mete and come
together. They chose therefore the day of the resurrection, nether did they
maliciously contend among themselves for these things, as ye histories
testify was done in ye church afterward. And at this day verily, ye
supersticious holy days being abrogated, it is better to observe certain and
moderat days, and to keep peace and quietness in the church.

But where this Apostle knew, that the faithful on the so^day served God in
all assemblees, where he could not be p^sent in body, The Sunday ought to be
kept.
in spirit and contemplation he was with the^ And as he was thus in the spirit
and contemplation of m^ters divine, and in holy prayers, he heard a voice,
whereof (...) will speak hereafter. But here we are presently taugh^ what is
the religion of the sunday, and how it is mete to o^serue it. Finally wordly
men are reproved, which pollut^ break it with profane works and affairs.
David w^ time he suffered persecution of Saul, lamenteth chiefly, t^ he might
not come to the Lords tabernacle. Our men a^compt it a great felicity, never
to enter into the felloship Saints. And to abuse the sunday, in gamenyng,
drinkin^ dancing, and worldly business.

By whose commandment he wrote and sent the Apocalipse.
These things on this wise declared, he comes at len^^ to the revelation:
setting forth before the express commandment of God, whereby he was
commanded both to w^ the things ^euealed, and also to send the^ to the seven
church^ of Asia. To the manner and majesty of the revelation that sa^ chiefly
apperteineth, that he heard a voice, and that notab^ as the sound of a trompet.
For so we read it was done the law giving at the mount Sinay. Now is declared
who voice it was, and who was the author of the revelation Verily the eternal
God, which calls him self Alpha ^ Omega, that is the beginning and the end:
Or as it is sa^ in Esaias, first and last. Whereof else where.

Now follows the commandment which has ^partes. For first the Lord
commands S. John to w^^ And to write such things as he saw, that is to
wit, (...) Apocalipse. And that he should write another in the san^ nor on the
wall, but in a book: Verily for the edifiyng^ profit of the church present,
and of all posterity. After he^ also commanded to send those writings to
seven cong^^gations, and verily to all the churches of the whole world^ al
times and ages. Therefore al these things belong to ye pro^ of congregations,
and that of all that be, have been or shall

Thautoritie of the Scripture
Here of we learn, how great is the authority of the s^^turs. It was not
written nor co^piled in books, but by Go^ co^maundment. There be notable
testimonies of the bok^ of Moses, in the.xxxiiii. of Exodus and.xxxi. of
Deuter. And to say nothing of the residue of the Propetes, is not Jeremy
commanded to write his Sermons again, which king Ioachim had cut in pieces
and burnt? The scriptures are ours.
Doubts S. Peter bears manifest witness, that the Prophets received the
mysteries of God to none other end, than they should reveal them to us: Which
in deed might only be done by the scriptures. Now is John most apertly
commanded to write. What will we say, that he is also commanded to send his
wrytinges to the congregations? Whereof again we gather that God wills right
well to the congregations, and even to every one of us. Let us beware and take heed, that we put not from us unworthily so great benefits of God, to who^ be
praise and glory.

THE BEGINNING OF THE work is made, and a most goodly description to us
exhibited of Christ king and bishop in glory, and nevertheless woorkyng in the
Church. The fifth Sermon.
ANd I turned me, that I might see the voice that spoke with me. And when I
was turned, I saw seven golden candelstickes: And in the mids of the seven
candelstickes, one like unto ye son of man clothed with a linen garment
^owne to the ground, and gyrde about the pappes with a golden girdell. His
head and his ears were white, as white wolle and ^nowe: And his eyes were as a
flame of fire, and his feet like unto brass, as though they brent in a
fournace: and his voice as ye sound of many waters. And he had in his right and
seven Stars, and out of his mouth went out a sharp two edged sword, and
hi^ face shone even as the Su^ne in his strength.

Such things as have been treated of hitherto in th^^ book be in stead of the
prologue or preface, as they terme^ Now at last shall the matter it self be
propounded to us. The some of these things unto the.iiii. Chapter.
H^ therefore follows the second part of this book, which r^cheth to the
fourth chapter. In the which is Christ describe unto us with his catholic
church. For first in deed is set ^fore us the most sacred Image of Christ our
Lord, teachi^^ what a one he is on the right hand of his father in glor^ and
how he sittyng on the right hand of his father, works n^uerthelesse in his
church continually, never absent, prese^ always. Of what sort moreover the
church is here^ earth, is figured in those seven congregations. Here therfo^
are showed the excellent gifts of churches, and again i^ shameful errors:
How the Lord Christ confirms such^ are sliding and ready to fall,
establishes those that stande^ forteth the weak hearted, restreyneth the
folyshe hardy, a^ preserves things that are corrupt: Finally how faithful
^stours of the church must work and travel, with the people committed to
their credit. For here is exceadingly w^ taught, what is the reparing and
preservation of church^ Where also a brief sum of the whole ecclesiastical
and (...) some doctrine brought in to an abridgement, shall be set be^ us. For
here is repeted from heaven of Christ in glory, (...) doctrine of true
religion, which he had set forth more pl^tifully, when he was yet here in
earth: And here most ap^ applies it to churches, after consideration of the
same.

And in most goodly order the words are knit togethe^ (as likewise the whole
book is written with plain wor^ and hanging right well together, they are
disceaued yt thi^^ it to be lose besomes or broomes unbound) John heard voice
behind him criyng: Whereupon he turned backwa^ that he might se the voice
speaking, that is to wit, him t^ spoke. For Aretas also admonissheth, that
there is a trope^ the words. For no man sees, but hears the voice. A^
tourning him to see, he saw a figure of Christ our sauio^^ Therefore when the
Lord speaks, let us turn also w^ all our heart, Let us turn to ye lord
speaking.
that we may likewise deserve to se the mysteries of the kingdom of God, for he
gladly reuealeth him sel^ to such as turn, and desire heavenly things: And
from those that neglecte the mysteries of the kingdom of God, al things of
salvation are hid.

Further more S. John exhibiteth to us the Image of Christ, our catholic king
and high bishop sitting in glory: Thimage of Christ is set before us.
in the which description are comprised the chiefest matters of Christ. For
such a taste of Christ is here given us, as in this world may be of our weak
flesh perceived. But we shall se him at the length in the world to come such as
he is, in the fulness of his majesty, wherein shall be joy and life everlasting:
But this in this corrupt world, is yet granted to no man.

So much therefore is permitted unto us that live yet in this world to be seen,
as is profitable, 1 John. 2
and as our infirmity may perceive. But this same is not little or nothing: but
great and large and most full of spiritual pleasure, I mean if we behold
these mysteries of God with a faithful eye, and mind desirous of Godly
matters. And doubtless they be things certain and true, that here are revealed
unto us. For they be revealed by the very son of God. Let us not wysh than to
se more, or desire greater things than these are: But take pleasure in those
which Christ has granted us. And let us know for certentie, that a wonderful
benefit of God is given us in this vision. For who would not covet to se
Christ in glory sitting on the right hand of the father? Who desires not to
know what our Savior does in heaven? And home being in heaven, is nevertheless
present with his church in earth? But this sacred and holy Image instructs in
all these poinctes all the faithful of Christ most fully. Howebeit this
Image of Christ is not to be set forth with colors, since that colors can not
atteine to the majesty thereof: but with the ecclesiastical doctrine, which
has the promise of the spirit of Christ: And is therefore more evident, and
only mete for the true expressing thereof. Let us also prynt the same Image, not
upon any dead table with colors that will peryshe and fade, but in our hearts
through the lively spirit of God, which may also keep it in our minds, never
to be ^wipt out. And such things as are spoken in the second and third chap.
Of this book, are derived of this description^ Christ, that the majesty of the
thing might inuit us to a s^^gular diligence. The matter is very plain.

An angel represe^teth Christ.
First we are taught who it is, whose Image is to us ex^^bited: Not the son of
man him self in his own substaun^^ but like the son of man. The son of man
after the phr^ of the Gospel, is called Christ him self very God and m^ Here
he showed not him self to be seen of John in his ou^ substance, but in the
form of an Angel, that represent^ Christ: Which thing is oftener then once
found in the book. We shall therefore refer all these things unto Christ not
to the Angel, which is the minister of Christ in the mystery. And we shall
see Christ in his own substaun^^ what time our base body shall flitte from
hence, and bey^ raised from the dead shall be glorified. In the mean ty^ the
soull from the death of the body till it rise again, she clearly have the
fruition of the sight of Christ: Wherein, (...) I said before shall be the
chief joy and felicity. We she now therefore see Christ as it were in a
glass, and so much as shall suffice us. The Lord open to us the eyes of o^^
mind.

Where Christ is abiding.
He tells moreover, where he saw Christ, in the midd^ of seven candelstickes.
By and by we shall perceive that (...) the candelstickes must be understand
the churches. Christ is than in the mids of the church. He sits verily
on^ right hand of the father, and after the propriety of this ^^mane body, he
is but in one place, and in no mo. As S. A^gustin declares aboundauntly in
the.lvii. Epistle to Dor^nus. Yet for as much as he is also very God, he is
lykew^^^ in the mids of the church, as he promised in the Gosp^^ Whersoeuer
two or three be gathered in my name, Mat. 18.28
the^ am in the mids of them. And again: behold I am w^^^ you unto the
worlds end. Therefore by his power diui^^ Christ remains and works in the
church present, a^ not absent. (Leave therefore to inquire, what Christ does
(...) the right hand of his father, whether he sit continually?) And he is
verily in the mids of the churches, fyxed to (...) place, but showing him
self indifferently to all egall as helpefull. For he neither accepts
persons, nor slepe^ He is not painted, he is not Idle, nothing regardyng
matters of the church: But is chiefly and only attentive to the salvation of
the same. Such a one he promised him self to be in the.14.15. and.16. of
John. And seeing Christ is in the mids of the church, what Vicar moreover
shall he have? Shall he have that ennemy which is directly against him? Christ
has no vicar. 2 Tessa. 2.
For a Vicar is in stead of one absent: But Christ is in the middell of the
church, present, not absent.

In the text followyng Christ is described most plentifully, many things are
ascribed unto him: And is declared in what sort Christ is in the mids of the
church. And first indede is showed, what garment he has on: To wit both
priestly and princely. By the which thing is figured, what manner of one Christ
is in heaven and in earth: To wit bishop and king, intercessour, mediator, and
sacrifice, a most perfect sanctification and justification, a redemer and
deliverer of the faithful to his father, evermore working the salvation of his
faithful. As S. Paul teaches, Roma. 8. Hebr. 7. Poderes Poderes.
is found amongst the apparel of Aaron, and it is a priestly garment. Whereof
S. Hierome writes to Fabiola, of the priestly garment. The second vesture of
linen is a coat down to the foot, of double launde: Which Josephus calls
Bissina. And it is called in Hebrew ketheneth, in Greek, (...). This cleaves
just to the body, and is so narrow and strayte sleued, that there is no
wryncle at al in the garment, and came down to the legs. This was verily
white and clean. Girdel or a belte.
For the Lord Christ is an undefiled Priest. Hebre. 7. Neither wears he
again a foul vesture, as he did. Zachar. 3. Nor a purple, as in the.19. of
John. But a bright one, as he that has obtained a name above all names. But
his gyrdell or belte is worn of Soldiers and triumphaunt persons: And it
signifies in Christ the dignity royal. For Christ is king, delyuerer and
redemer of the faithful. His victory is ours. He has overcome Satan, Hell,
sin and death.

But the belte or girdle of Christ is not set in the wonted place, to wit,
about the loins. For as Aretas has also admonished, there ar no co^cupiscences
to be restrained in Christ. Therefore is he not gyrded after the manner of
sinners, but about the pappes or breasts: to the intent we should understand by
the girding, that he is king of kings, voyd^ of all affections: Most
rightuous and holy in judgments and government: But yet in the mean time
furnyshed for the defense of his church, as we have red it written in the.9^
Psalm. The Lord has put on strength and girded himself, etc. Christ might
seem to have girded him self not after the manner that priests or kings use,
for that he has obtained (...) more excellent priesthod and kingdom, enduring
for eue^ To accomplish these things it behooved him to use a temple, and
palace not transitory, but heaven it self. Hebre. vi^ and.ix. Yet in the mean
time the effect pearseth in to the church it self, that so he may be present
in the church also.

The head and hears of Christ.
But the head of Christ appears hoare, and his hea^ white, like most pure
wolle, and whytest snow. Such a head is ascribed also to the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, (...) the seventh Chap. of Daniel. For they be of the same
essen^ And hereby is signified wisdom and age, and also the e^nitie and deity
of Christ. And by reason that Christ is Gi^ therefore is he head of the church,
ministering to the body li^ spirit, wisdom, and all gifts celestial. Ephesians.
v. Ca^^ Pope of Rome, that most wicked man of sin do the What an head is he
than? without life, without brayne^ most folyshe. As he is described in
the.xi. of Zacha. And is a shame, that we will not se these things, being
blind ever. Christ is everlasting, omnipotent, and that knows thing: And he
may be the health and head of the body. I^ in the beginning, says he, was the
word, and the word (...) with God. etc. Christ him self: before Abraham was,
says (...) I am. Therefore the Heretics lie, deniyng Christ to be^ry God, of
the same substance with the father. He is the ^^^dome of God, all things are
subject to him. Ephe. the (...) And he him self fulfilleth all thing, after
the same sort be^ present with his church.

The eyes of Christ.
Now are his eyes also not darkened nor blind, but fy^ and bright. For Christ
knows all thing. Christ's eye^ watchful, nothing is hyd from him, he sees
all things (...) are done, both good and evil. And he sees to the intent may
judge and require. He is light in darkness, and the si^^^ of Christ is to good
men joyful in perils. Finally the judgments of Christ are rightuous. The
Prophet David: The eyes of the Lord, says he, upon the just, and his ears are
to their prayer. Again: The face of the Lord is on them that do evil. And
like as the head is not plucked from the body, so Christ can not be absent from
his church. And seeing that his eyes are quick sighted, and that the Lord
forseeth al our things, and has the charge over us, how is he absent from his
church? What needs there any vicar?

And the fete of the Lord are of copper, Brase^ fete
or like unto brass and frankensence burning in a furnace. For Chalcolibaum,
is a word compounded of brass and frankensence. Eusebius.
This notes Erasmus, and that Swidas shows also the same, that there is a
kind of Copper more precious than gold: which he says is made of Salt peter
and of a stone. Plin. in the xxxiiii. and.ii. Chapter. calls it a kind of
brass, which is dug out of the veins of the earth, in times paste had in
price. It should seem to me to be the same, which in the first and tenth of
Ezechiel is called Hasmal, a present remedy against poisons. For if wine
intoxicated be put into a cup thereof, it will hiss. And so is the death and
poison detected.

The most clean brazen and fiery fete, do signify the conversation, and the
ways of the Lord blameles, his judgments right and just. And that he so
walks in the church, and governs al things, that in ye mean season al
uncleanness be detec^ed and consumed, but he him self remains always most
holy and pure. For fire pourgeth. God is a consuming fire.

But the voice of Christ, The voice of Christ.
is as it were the noise of many waters, not so much for that all nations and
people do commend and praise him: But for as much as the Gospel and word of
God, came into the whole world. Which voice also most mighty kings could
less assuage and appease, than they could do the gusshing of waters, Romans 10
or to stop the wyndes in sackes. Therefore by the power of preaching the
Lord is always present in his church.

The hand is an instrument of all instruments, especially the righthande. The
right hand.
In this Christ holds seven stars, to wit seven prelates or pastors of
churches in Asia: And even all the bishops throughout the whole world Christ by
his power gives to us as Pastors, and instructs, comforte^ confirms and
defends them, to the end they should preac^ his word. Whereby he may join
him self to the church Christ works by them in the church and preserves the

A two edged sword out of Christ his mouth.
The same is more lively expressed in the words that f^lowe. For a sharp two
edged sword comes out of (...) Lords mouth. This swearde, is the word of
God, as (...) right well declared in the sixth to the Ephesians. and fourth to (...)
Hebrews. And this word or sword hangs not upon (...) wall nor sticks
fast in the sheathe, nor hangs by the f^ but comes out of the mouth. He
says not, it came foort^ it shall come forth: But it comes forth, as the
thing the in continual operation, or perpetual preaching through^ the world.
And it is two edged, sharp and pearsing, as^ in the heart of the Godly unto
salvation, as in the heart^ the wicked to pain and condemnation. And yet at
(...) day comes out that sword of the mouth of Christ by mouths of
Ministers. The word of Christ is in deed ^temned of the world, and is called
of many a fable: But (...) a sword, and that a sword out of Christ's mouth.
All (...) unfaithful do find and shall find this, how soever (...) resist.
With this sword Christ kylleth the wicked. And effect of this sword is
greater than was the sword of A^^ander, Pompey, Julius Caesar, or Marius,
Attille, or ^merlane. Neither makes it any skylle, though the w^ now
acknowledge it not. It shall do in time to com^ their greatest evil. Doubtless
with this spirit of his m^ the Lord continues always to comfort and
gouern^^ church, so that he is never absent from the same.

Finally the countenance of Christ shines as the (...) does in his greatest
strength about none, when it is (...) bright, clear, and plesaunt, by the
countenance we (...) men chiefly. Therefore by the countenance we know C^ The
countenance of Christ is light. Christ therefore is (...) And that verily a
divine and eternal light, lyghtyng a^^ that they may also be made the children
of light: and tha^ faces of saints may shine in that day, as bright as the si^
and as the face of Christ shone. Math. 13. and.17. And f^ he does thus
communicate this light unto us. ( John (...) and.1. John. 1.) How is it to be
thought that Christ should be absent from his church? Thou see how he is
present.

And so has our Lord Christ exhibited him self to us to be seen unto
salvation, and has opened him self wholly unto us, as he is, what he does for
us, and how he is in his church. In these things are all the mysteries of
the Gospel comprehended. For what can you say of Christ, that you have not
herein comprysed. Let us therefore remember them. and write them in our minds,
that we may embrace Christ king and bishop, and that we never let him depart
out of our arms. To him be glory.

How John was affected toward the vision to him exhibited, the comfort of
John, and the exposition of the vision, applied unto consolation. The sixth
Sermon.
ANd when I saw him I fell at his fete even as dead: And he laid his right hand
upon me, saying unto me: Fear not, I am the first and the last, and am alive,
and was ^ead. And behold I am alive for ever more, and have the keys of hell,
and of death, write ^herfore the things which thou haste seen, and the
things which are, and the things which shall be fulfilled hereafter: And the
mystery of the seven Stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the seven
golden candelstickes. The seven Stars are the messengers of the seven
congregations: And ^he seven candelstickes which thou saw, ^re the seven
congregations.

It follows how blessed S. John was moved with that celestial and wonderful
vision: And how he received consolation, more over the exposition of the vision
applied to his comfort, with a commandment to indite all these things
diligently.

John falls down and lies like one were dead.
What time he had fully seen this divine and heavenly sight of Christ our Lord,
sitting on the right hand of God i^ glory, his strength failing him, he falls
down on the earth: and liyng at the fete of the Lord, is like a dead body. W^
read that the same chanced to Daniel in the.x. Chapt. And other men of God
also have been feared with the visions o^ Angels. The women also in the new
Testament tremble^ at the sepulcher, seeing Angels. Peter was amassed at the
greatness of the miracle. Luke.v. And falling at the knees (...) the Lord,
cries out, go from me, Lord, for I am a synful m^^ For Godly visions bewray
our infirmity: The weakness of man's understanding
Neither be ^apte or sufficiently pourged, to behold those supercelest^ things
with eyes and minds sick and not yet well pu^^fied. Therefore must the elect
be glorified in an other life, the they may be made partakers of the glory
celestial. In the mean season here al godly are humbled and abased by hyg^
visions and revelations. 2 Cor. 12
For they auaunce not them selue^ proudly through the glory of revelation: But
perceiving the natural corruption, they crave pardon, and the augmentation of
the supercelestiall grace and light. For unless we b^ illumined with the
spirit of God, we shall lie like dead folk^ how so ever we receive with our
corporal senses the vision celestial.

Humility is comforted of the Lord.
But they that humble them selves before the Lord, fynd^ a most present
consolation at the Lords hand. Wherfo^ there came to S. John immediately both
in word and de^ a full consolation. For the Angel representing the person^
of Christ, lays his right hand upon John: The which is token of amity,
protection, and of present help. For in (...) pressing this manner of speaking
in dutche, we say therefore (...) laiyng on the hand is signified, that Christ
is good to John, ready to help him. Which incontinently he makes play^ by the
addition of words, saying, fear not. Fear not.
Which saiy^ is common every where in the story of the Gospel: And th^^fore is
most gospel like, that is to say most lucky. For God commands the humbled
to be of good hope, and to live assured under the protection of the highest.
Which verily we understand to be spoken not to John alone but to al us also,
that we in like manner, albeit that we feel ye infirmity of our flesh, should
yet hope well of the goodness and mercy of God. Here follows yt cause more
fully declared, why John should not be affrayed. For the vision showed was not
exhibited for the terror of him: but that John might perceive how great and
mighty he is which is prepared for the defense of him and all the faithful. As
though he should say. Where thou see how great he is, which has taken upon
him to defend thee, who finally protecteth and governs the whole Church,
there is no cause why thou should be affraide. But rather execute boldly,
that he commands thee. Write that he commands to be written. Be not
affrayed of men, fear God rather. For if good me^ be so sore afraid at the
sight of him, where shall the enemies and contemners of God appear?

Therefore consequently he expounds the vision, teaching who he is, which was
seen like to the son of man walking emonges the golden Candelstickes. And he
applies this exposition unto comfort: that both John and every faithful may
perceive, how mighty Christ is, and what the faithful have by him obtained.
For the Angel tempereth his speech so, that we may seem to hear al things
spoken to us not by ye mouth of the Angel, but of Christ him self. A
division.
And this exposition has his parts. For first he declares (as I said even
now) whose Image it was that was showed. Than is annexed a commandment to
write this book. After that is opened the mystery of the stars. Finally ye
secretnes of the ca^delsticks is revealed: And al these things right plainly
and briefly.

First thou have seen, says the Lord, a vision, Christ is represented by the
same vision, what he is, and how great he is.
whereat thou waste amassed: but fear thou not. For thou have not seen any evil
or fearful spirit, boding any misfortune: but my shape, which am thy redemer
and Lord. I am first and last. And this manner of speaking (as I warned a
little before) he took out of the Prophecies of Esaye, as it is to be seen in
the.xli. xliiii. xlv. and xlviii. chapters. And he signifies him self to be
coequall, and of the same substance with the father in all things, very God,
eternal, and inco^prehensible. For look what things the father attributes to
himself, the same also does the son usurp. But there is no order or time
certain to be understand in first and last, but plainly euerlastingnes.
Therefore Christ here signifies, Christ is egall with the father.
that he is very God, egalle and of the same essence with the father from all
eternity. As the same is also much confirmed in John 1.5.10.14. and 17.
chapter. This fights against the Heretics, which at that time also, as at
this day the Seruetanes, deny the eternal deity of Christ the Lord. And
thus, when the true God is of us acknoweledged and believed, he may be for our
Salvation. If Christ be not very God, he is not our salvation. For I am God,
says the verity: And besides me there is no God, no Salvation.

Secondly he says, I am living, and was dead: whereby he signifies that he
took the true humane nature. The which many also at the same time denied: In
like case as the^ be some at this day, which do plainly derogate from the
humanity of Christ. Against all such manner of heresies the Lord him self
confesses that he was dead. Whereby it is now manifest, that he is very man, as
he is also very God, of the same essence with his father in deity, as he is
also of the same substance with us in humanity, like unto us in all things,
sin excepted. For he took not the nature of Aungelles, but the sede of
Abraham. And it behooved in deed tha^ the son of man should be incarnate, that
both he might di^ and shede blood. Hebr. 9.
For the Testament in the dead is finally ratified neither is there any
remission made without blood she^ding. The Lord therefore dies, and shedeth
blood, to the into he might give full remission of sins, and confirm the
new^ Testament. Yet even he that was thought to be dead, now lives, Christ
that was dead lives.
and is that same living, who having vanquished death, the iii. day rose
again from the dead, and repared life for a^^ beleuers, and inspireth into
them his own very life.

And therefore adds immediately: behold I am liuing^ world without end. For
now Christ dies no more, death^ shall not rule over him. But rather he is the
life of al his fait^full, who in rising again, brought again life: and that
life everlasting, induringe I say world without end. As he him self
declares more at large. John. 5.6.10. chapter. And thapostle to the Romans 4.1.
Corinth. 15. and 2. Timoth. 1.

Moreover where many were wo^te to doubt of this life gotten and repared by
Christ, the Lord him self confirms, that he said, by an oath, and says.
Amen. As though he should say, this is altogether true and undoubted that I
say.

Finally he adds, Christ has the keys of hell and of death.
and I have the keys of Hell and of death. By the which words again he
comfort exceadingly, and expresses his power: and declares how great he
is, and what we have of him. Here must we speak by the way of the keep. The
ordinary gloss says very well: he that has the keys of any house, says he,
lets in whom he will, and keeps back whom he will from entering in.
Therefore Christ possesses the keys of death and hell, for that whom he will,
he delivers from perpetual condemnation of death: And whom he will, The keys
he suffers to remain justly in the same danger of damnation. And verily
Esaye in the 22. speaking of Eliachim, whom he says should be made Judge in
the court of Ezechias: I will lay says he the keye of the house of David
upon his shulder: which shall open, and no man shall shut: shall shut,
and no man shall open. Therefore are the keys put in the Scripture for the
charge and government of the house. Eliachim shall govern all thing in the
Court of Ezechias uprightly. What soever he shall determine, no man shall
infringe, that which he shall abrogate, no man shall restore. Christ
therefore, a figure of whom Eliachim represented, shall him self have also the
chief government in the house or kingdom of God: so that whom he will, he may
quicke^, and pluck back from hell and from damnation: And again whom he list
to condemn, he may distroie by his just judgment. For he has most full power
over death and hell. Ose. 13. 1. Cor. 15.
For both two has he ouercomen and made weak. And these things comfort the
faithful most strongely, and reteyne them in all Godly duties. And that same
is chiefly to be observed, that he says not, he had the keys, or shall have,
but I have, says he, I have I say. He gave not his power to the Bishop of
Rome, but has i^ him self, and will keep it still for ever. And he gave not
to the Apostles full power of life and death, of salvation and damnation, The
keys of heaven given to the Apostles.
and so unarmed him self: but he gave the keys of opening and shutting
heaven, as it were to his Ministers and seruitours, by the preaching of the
Gospel: by the which he promised life to all that believed, Christ him self
should give that life for the truth of the promise: To whom so ever they
should threaten damnation, Christ him self should condemn for the truth of his
word. We see therefore that the Lord keeps still and exercises the power, and
his ministers the ministry (by preaching, not by absolute power.) Therefore
the Pope is Antichrist, The keys of ye bishop of Rome.
which usurps and takes upon him this full power and authority in Heaven
and in Earth, and in the mids of the earth also, or beyond all the earth, i^
those unfortunate Islands. I mean purgatory. By ye which crafty devise he
has subtly emptied the purses, Coffer^, garuers and wine cellers, Apoc. 13.
of foolish people that swarne from the articles of their belief, to wit I
believe the forgeuenes o^ sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and life
everlasting. The beast dare usurp the two horns of the Lamb, Daniel. 7.
namely the authority of King and Bishop, and therefore to hang two keye^
under his triple Crown: that even by these Arms all the world may perceive,
that this is very he, which, hauin^ subdued three kings or horns, is crope^
up, and chalengeth t^ him self all power in heaven and in earth, signified by
the tw^ keys. And surely the blindness of our time is wonderful an^ to be
lamented, that having eyes it sees yet nothing. Let suc^ as be wise, remember,
that Christ has yet the keys of death and Hell, his ministers the denouncyng
of life and death.

John is commanded to write.
And now when he had declared these great and mos^ wholesome matters, and had
comforted the mind of John, h^ adds the commandment: write the vision
exhibited, f^nally write those things also which must be done shorte^ after
this. He places in the mids, and those that be: the is, which are in deed,
and true, and be not false. And these things are to get authority to this
book, finally to the who^ scripture, which is revealed with like truth of the
self sam^ Author. And as John is commanded to write without fear^ so are we
commanded to Preach and publish the same boldly though the world be never so
mad thereat.

He adds moreover, the exposition that remains, and says: The mystery of
the seven stars, etc. The reason seems almost vnpersit. Therefore must we
understand this is the mystery or sacrament of the seven Stars and
Candelstickes: that it may be as it were a proposition, Sacrament.
and that the exposition should follow immediately: the seven stars, are seven
Messengers, etc. And by Sacrament understand a secret mystery, and the very
exposition of the mystery. As if you would s^^^ here is to be noted the
goodness of Almighty God, The scripture expounded.
which declares to us him self the hardest places of the Scripture. Where be
they therefore that accuse the Scripture of obscurenes, and contend that it can
not be understand? let us here mark also the common manner of speaking of the
whole scripture: seven stars, The phrase of ye scripture.
be seven Messengers: The seven lights, are seven Churches. For signs receive
the names of the things, although they be, and remain in their own
substance, and be not changed into another. This the very contentiouse
persons do grant also, which in the words of the supper, this is my body,
will acknowledge no figurative speech at all.

Stars be called Aungelles. Aungelles be Gods Messengers, pastors of
churches, so called in the ii. and iii. chapter of Malachie. For God sends
preachers as Ambassadors to the people, and wills them to be heard in like
case as himself. Luke.x. John.xiii. Let no man therefore tarry till the Lord him
self come down from heaven again, and preach unto us. Even now he preaches
to us by his Messengers, which preach his, that is to say the word of
Christ, if ^ou contemn them, you contemn Christ. Preachers be ^alled stars,
by reason of their bright and Heavenly doc^rine, and for their pureness of life.
2. Peter. 2 Jude. 1.
Beware therefore you Preachers, that you be not wandering Planettes, leest ye
^aue no light at all, neither in doctrine, nor conversation of ^^fe. For than
ye shall be likened to stars that fall down ^ut of Heaven, as shall happen
here after in this book to the ^alse teachers.

But those stars are not in the head, or in the fete, The stars be in ye
right hand of Christ.
or on ^he back or sides: but in the right hand of Christ. Which ^^ing has
in deed a great consolation for the Pastors be in the right hand of God, in
Gods protection, neither she any man take them out of his hand. God him self
also ^^ueth pastors, and furnishes them with necessary good^ of the Church.
Therefore is the whole government and gl^ry his. Wherefore the Apostle says
also: he that water^ and planteth is nothing, but God that gives increase.

Now as concerning the Candelstickes, there was o^ verily in the Tabernacle of
Moses with seven sockettes, Candelstickes.
(...) set in seven Candelles. In Salomons temple were ten ca^delstickes. The
one represented a figure of Christ: And the ^^uen thereupon, and the ten,
betokened the vniuersalitie^ Churches, which are lighted all of the only
light Christ and have of this one, what light so ever they have. And the
candelstickes are of Gold. The mystery whereof Aretas e^pounding: They are all
gold, says he, for the purity a^ preciousnes of faith liyng hid in them.
And in deed the ^delstickes of them selves give no light, but be receptacles
(...) light. So of us arriseth no light, but darkness. But in (...) that light
everlasting, set a light in the candlestick, the lig^ shines: if Christ
illumine the Church with faith and ^^retie, than faith shows forth her
self in open confession and the pureness of life in conversation. And this the
Lord ^quireth of his church in the v. chapter of Matthew. So let yo^ light shine
etc. And the apostle in the ii. to the Philipp. In t^ mids of a froward and
crooked nation shine like lights the world.

And hitherto we have handled the consolation of Chri^ and the exposition of
that great and celestial vision, when we have learned the mysteries of the
faith of Christ and of his Church: to the end we should know that Christ is
the Lord reignyng in his Church, and applying al things to the salvation of
his faithful. That he sends Preachers, teaches by them, and keeps and
defends them. To him be Glory etc.

Of the Epistles revealed out of the throne of God from Christ by an Angel,
and received and sent of John. Where also a part of the Epistle to the
Ephesians is expounded. The seventh Sermon.
Unto the Messenger of the congregation of Ephesus write: These things says
he that holds the seven Stars in his righthand, and walks in the mids
of the Seven golden Candelstickes. I know thy works, and thy labor and thy
patience, and ^ow thou cannest not forbear them which ^re evil: And examinest
them which say they are Apostles, and are not: And haste found them liars:
and have suffered, and have patience: and for my names sake haste labored, and
^aste not fainted. Nevertheless I have some what against thee, because thou
haste left ^hy first love.

Your charity has seen a certain Image of the lord christ, Christ is prelate
of ye Church.
^itting on the right hand of the father in glory: yet so, that (...) no wise
he either forsakes or neglects his Church. Now follows it more fully and
plainly how our Saui^ur Christ in Heaven executes the office of the high
Bishop, and teaches the whole church by his ministers, rebu^eth, comfort,
and reteyneth it in her duty: Finally tour^eth always away things
hurtefull, and auaunceth it to greater things. For here follow seven Epistles,
to the seven Congregations: that is to wit, Seven Epistles.
unto all the churches in the ^hole world. For this most ample and wholesome
doctrine ^aye not be restreyned to a few, sins Christ is Bisshoppe ^niuersall.
Thautoritie of these ep^stels.


But great is the authority of these epistles. For they are revealed from the
throne of God, by the son of Go^ speaking by an Angel, which prescribes
what is to b^ written in those Epistles: S. John receives and writes the
same, through Christ his commandment, and sends the^ to the seven
congregations: And verily they aperteyne n^ less unto us, than if now the
bearer entering into the church should deliver these letters unto us.

Moreover in these seven Churches is figured unto v^ the nature, The epistles
be universal.
manners, vices, medicines, rebukes, praises of (...) Churches in all times, and
what soever is wont to chaun^ about them. Then by examples of most excellent
mean^ mixed, of Hypocritical also and wicked. And these our Lo^ does
evidently instruct, reprove, rebuke, and blame, prais^ correct, move, exhort,
comfort, the same he threatens, an^ promises them also joyful things, etc.
This is no light (...) common example, but of the son of God, the high and
mo^ blessed Bishop: teaching us, how we should deal with (...) congregations
after the capacity and disposition of every on^

And not without cause he chouseth unto him seven the most noble cities of
Asia. Certain it is, that Asia was of (...) first inhabited, and from thence
they were dispersed into ^ther parts of the world. Certain it is also, that
the Deu^ set up his Throne in Asia, and there reigned in men through Idolatry,
murder, ambition, avarice, uncleanness, and filth^ pleasures. For the proverb
is known, the laughter Iouica^ It is known what the apostle wrote to the
Ephesia^s in the iiii. and v. chapter. Therefore would our Savior Christ
oue^throwe that Throne of the devil, and set up that his Thron^ of
righteousness and holiness. Therefore goes he first and chiefly to them of
Asia, that by their example the whol^ world might be corrected and amended.

Ephesus.
And among other cities of Asia and Iouia, Ephesu^ was most famous, called in
the old time the light of Asi^ And among the xii. cities of Iouia accounted
the princ^pall. The temple of Diana.
Neither was there any other richer or more beautifu^ Church seen any where in
Asia, than the temple of Diana (...) Ephesus. It stood in the mids of the
city, a great wond^ of the Greek magnificence, as writes Pliny. This temp^
is said to have been two hundredth and twenty years in m^king of al Asia: And
set in a fenny ground, that it should feel of no earth quakes nor opening of
the earth. The length of ^t was.ccccxxv. foot, the breadth.ccxx. It had
pillars an ho^dreth twenty and seven, dedicated of so many kings. Seek the
rest out of the epitome of the famous D. Ioachim Vadiane. The apostle S.
Paul first illumined this city with the ^eame of the Gospel. Whose epistle to
the same city remains, and a plentiful story in the acts of the Apostles.
After Paull was executed, John went to Ephesus, Acts. 19.
and from thence preached to al Asia: from thence also was he brought to Rome
^o the emperor Domitian: To Ephesus he returned after his exile: and there at
length as the ecclesiastical stories do testify, he slepte in the Lord.

And before every epistle, much more to that of the Ephesians, is set a
commandment, write. This scripture is authe^tike.
This commandment gives authority to the writynge, so that we may not axe,
whether this writing, ought to be credited? and why it should ^e believed? For
here is the expres commandment of God, and the divine authority, whereof
curiousely to inquire is ^hought not without cause unlawful. Moses wrote by
the ^ommaundement of God. And by the same commandment of God wrote also the
prophets and Apostles. Whic than are not their wrytinges believed to be
Anthenticall? Certes John said truly and wittely: he that knows God,
hea^eth us: he that is not of God, hears us not.1. John.5. Curiouse questions
cease, where the mind of the godly, or of any poor sheep knows the voice of
his Lord and Sheperde.

And let no man think, that this epistle being written to one Aungel, that is
to a Bishop or pastor, apperteineth nothing to the Church. For to the end of
the epistle is added an acclamation. He that has an ear let him hear what
the spirit says to the congregations. Therefore the pastor is named, but ye
Sheep are not excluded. All degrees and states in the church know, what is said
unto them. Ignorance says: That which is written to ye Romans, concerns
me nothing. Yet nevertheless it is entitled to the Aungel, The argument of the
epistle to ye Ephesians.
to the intent they pastors may be admonished, what the state of ye Church is.

The arg^ment of the first epistle is thus. Christ declares that he rules
over his church, that he takes charge and government of the same. Some thing
therein he prayseth and somewhat he blames: In the mean time he exhorts to
repentance, threatening greuouse things, and promising most ioyefull. And
also he applies this epistle to al churches and co^municateth it to all
co^gregations in the whole wor^^. But the epistle is exhortatiue, for it
instructs the churches exhorts and directs.

And first in deed he shows, who he is, from whom the epistle proceeds,
that he may give authority thereunto: an^ may declare also that he is the head
of his church, the Bishop, Duke and governor. That part is taken of the imag^
set forth in the first chapter. And follows the prophetic^^ manner of
speaking: This says he which holds the seu^^ Stars in his rightha^de.
For the Prophets say likewis^ Thus says the lord God of Israel, thus
says the lord of hosts. Thus says the Lord, which brought thee out (...)
Aegipte, etc. And two especial things he repeteth of the f^^mer description,
Seven stars in the right hand of Christ.
whereby he will be known and do us to v^derstande, how he being Lord and
Bishop rules and m^keth in his church. First he affirms that he holds in
h^^ hand the seven stars. The hand is a token of working, (...) protection,
or deliuerau^ce. The stars we have heard to (...) the ministers, and the
ministry of the word, or the church Therefore Christ holds the ministry
in the church, and (...) ministers works the salvation of the faithful.
After he ^^firmeth that he walks, not slepyng, or doing nothing (...) the
mids of seven golden candelstickes. In the mids (...) said, to the end we
should understand, that he gives h^^selfe indifferently to al men, and rules
over al with like (...) and government. To walk amongs ye Candelstickes.
Fulwel wrote hereof D. Fraunces lambe^^ What, says he is to walk or to be in
the mids of cong^^gations, but to assiste them, keep, instruct, help them,
(...) by all means to watch over them. For the which cause (...) says also
in the last of S. Matthew. Behold I am with you ^^waies unto the worlds end.
Hereof you have a most (...) figure in the law: wherein among other things
which apperteined to the ministry of the high priest, he had (...) charge
of oil and of seven candels for those must he pour^^ and snafte, and pour in
oil, when it wanted. So Christ the high and true Bishop has the charge of
the seven candelles, that is to say, of al congregations: and is careful that
they want not that oil, which is mentioned in the 44. Psalm. He watches,
that they want not the fire and light of the verity. Finally he snafteth and
pourgeth by faith, what thing so ever has need to be pourged in them. Thus
far he. Which things when they hear, which make the Bishop of Rome head
of the church, It is marvel if by and by they understand not their folly and
madness. Here the lord adds also, that he knows the works to wit all
both good and evil, as well of the Bishop as of his Church. For the Lord
knows al things, and is head Bishop of the Catholic or universal Church
which also remembers the thoughts of al men in the world at one instaunte:
who sees what is done, and what is not done, and what things are needful,
nothing escapes him. And such in deed ought he to be, that is head universal
of his Church. And this sentence is repeted, I know thy works, in the
beginning of every epistle. And verily it is full of comfort, when we hear
that Christ knows all our doings. For we believe also that he has a
faithful care of all our matters.

Now this great Bishop commends some things in this congregation of Ephesus.
For good works in deed are allowed of Christ, and he praises the same, to
the end he might give a spur unto such as run in his way. For first he
allows the labor and patience both of the Bishop and Church. Labor and
patience.
Labor compriseth thought and care in the way of God, mortifiyng of ye flesh,
study of good works, but chiefly the cross and persecution, which the story
testifies to have been extreme and cruel in the time of Domitian. And except
the persecuted have patience, they can not endure the labor. Holy patience
keeps us in work and holy labor.

But leeste that patience should be stretched to those things wherein to be
impatient is accounted praise worthy, Not to bear evil.
he adds the second poincte that he prayseth in them, that thou can not
bear evil men. And by these evil he means not weaklings, or such as err
without maliciousnes: But ye prophet David says also, Psalm. 119. I have
hated ye wicked, thy law have I loved. What we should do with the weak in the
faith, or with them that err of ignorance, rather than of o^stinate
stubbernes, the Apostle has taught us in the 14. (...) the Romans. The
example of our Savior. Has thaugh^^ also, bringing again that strayed Sheep
upon his shulde^ into the shepefolde. Therefore the lord speaks here of t^^
obstinate, of the disceauers which delight to err the^ selue^ and to draw
others with them into errors, no Christian p^tience bids to bear with such
men.

And in the words followyng he declares of what sor^ those evil men were.
And thou haste examined them whi^^ say they be Apostles, and be not, and haste
found them^ayrs. Of false apostles in ye time of S. John.
Lo he speaks of the false apostles, of whom in s. John time there was
exceadyng great plenty. For they were ^^zareans mixing the law with grace,
and attributing I^^fication to the law and to our own righteousness. Wh^ the
holy and great counsel at Jerusalem condemned, a^ ^pereth in the xv. chapter
of the acts of the Apostles. S^^ a false Apostle was Hebion. Eusebius
mentions in the book of the Ecclesiastical story the xxvii. chapter. Here
(...) was added Cerinthus that heretic not Apostle. There (...) more also,
whereof some denied the humanity of Christ some his deity. Against whom
wrote John in his Gos^^^ and in his Epistle: And Ireney in the first book
against h^^^tickes. These the Lord denies to be Apostles, or Apost^^^call:
which the Apostles have also denied Acts. 15. And ^^wise the Apostle S. John
in his epistle canonical: who (...) liar, says he, but he that denies Jesus
to be Christ? But if such trouble were in Churches whilst the Apos^^^ were
yet living, Troubli^g of Churches.
if there were than so many disceaue^ what marvel is it, though in the
dregs of the world, wit in this our last time, there be not a few soun^
where be they now that wraste dissentions and troubles the defense of their
error? The Gospellers them sel^^ say they are at dissension. God is God of
concord, he^ than should I believe that God is among those that (...) sent?
So might the Sophisters also have reasoned in the ^postles time.

And here have we a pefitte way, in what sort the ch^ches should work,
whileste troublesome persons like f^ Apostles attempt to divide the Church a
sonder. How we should deal with heretics.
For such ringeleaders must be tried and examined: And tried must they be
after the christen belefe, and doctrine of the Apostles, and inquisition must
be made, whether they be Apostles and true men, or false Apostles and liars.
When we shall have found them to be false Apostles and liars, and that they go
forewarde obstinately in their wickedness, they be not to be suffered: as in
deed the Ephesians did not vouche safe to bear with such trompers. And we
must know that the Pastors ought one way, and the Christen Magistrate another
way, and the people the third way not to abide open heretics. For the
Pastor not only bears not with them, in dissemblyng and taking head to him
self of those wolves, but assayleth them with wholesome doctrine, and re^ulseth
them from the shepefoldes of Christ: But the Magistrate, because he is a
christen Magistrate, and by his duty also, not only as a private person but
also as a Magistrate, ^ught to serve Christ, he aught also with the swoorde of
justice to drive away poison from the church, and to pu^ishe manifest
blasphemies. The hatred that ye godly bear to the wicked.
And the people are commaun^ed, neither to hear them, nor receive them, nor to
have any thing to do with heretics, and so not to abide them. They may
therefore be ashamed of their naughtiness, and ^retence of their perverse
patience, which think it no shame ^o maynteyne Heretics, and to flatter the
manifest ene^ies of Christ and the Church. Psalm. 15. He is praised, ^hiche
makes not much of the wicked: that is to wit, ^n whose sight the wicked
manne is vile. Therefore is he ^^ghtly blamed, who so ever flattereth the
ungodly. And (...) the hatred in deed is rather against wickedness, than
a^aynste the person of the wicked, which of it self is com^aunded to be
loved. The Devil at this day reyseth up the ^de heresies of Hebion, Cerinthus,
and of others in Terueto a ^paniarde, and in the Anabaptists, Libertines, and
other ^onsters, so that the thing it self, and the danger ther^^ commands
us to watch, and to drive away the most ^uell wolves from the holy Church of
Christ, which ne^erthelesse do set forth nothing more than patience and
cha^^tie, for this intent verily that they might be spared, and might
unpunished teach what they lift against Christ, a^^ work against his
church, yea tear it in pieces with th^^ wicked tethe.

But when these evil men are not suffered, but impugn^^ which seduce and are
seduced, Patience and co^stauncie in batteil.
a great conflicte arrise^^ whereof again are labors, thoughts, carefulnes,
watc^ynges, injuries to be suffered for the name of Christ, and d^fence of the
verity. For unless we be here diligent and p^tient, the disceauers over come.
But herin did the church of the Ephesians behave them notably well, in so much
the the Lord now commends exceadingly the magnani^^tie, patience and
constancy of the pastor and of his church For neither ought these things to
be expounded, that (...) should refer them unto that patience, whereby evil
me^^ are suffered, and permitted to proceed in their malice a^^
disceiptfulnesse. For so should this place strive against the things which
went a little before. Which thing the ^^mon interpretour minded as it seems
to have eschew^^ For thus he reads, and thou haste patience, and have
suff^red, where it is in the Greek, and have suffered and have p^tience. He
altered the order, and would not set, haste suffer^ before: but haste patience:
lest any manne should vnd^^stande that they had suffered the false Apostles.
But set before patience and put after sufferaunce: That we might v^derstande
that they suffered not evil men, but evil wrought by evil men. So they
with patience travailed (...) Christ's name, to wit, to be mainteyned against
naugh^^ heresies. And he adds, thou have not fainted, being were and broken
with labors. For we are taught to ouerco^^ through patient constancy, which
is rightly called in d^^ the accomplishment of every good work.

All and every of these things we must apply unto (...) and understand with
what things we may now also this day please Christ our redemer, king and
Bishop, truly we walk in the same steps, wherein we see the congregation of
the Ephesians to have walked.

It follows what thing he blamed in the same church that they have left
their first love. What time they fir^ received the Gospel by S. Paul, and
after by John, a^^ other godly men, there was seen a great feruentnes in the
words and deeds of the faithefull: which thing may be gathered both by the
acts of the Apostles, and also by the epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians.
They loved God and their neighbors with a most fervent zeal. They burned in
reforming of manners. But in process of time this heat was well couled, and
they wared colder in true godliness. This great mischief he rebukes in them,
and as follows desires to have it redressed. And here let us note how not
only reuolting Idolatry, and other great crimes are imputed to the church,
but also if we slack any thing in holy zeal: so that hereof we may learn,
how holy and blameles we ought to be before God. Doubtless we can not here
excuse our selves before the divine majesty, which were xxx. years paste more
ferue^ter in this congregation, than we be at this day. etc. Our lord God
lighten our minds, that we may please him. To whom be glory.

The second part of the Epistle to the Ephesians where is spoken of Penance
and of the Nicolaites. The Eight Sermon.
Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works. Or else I will come unto thee shortly, and will remove thy Ca^delsticke
out of his ^lace, except thou repent. But this thou have, ^icause thou hate
the deeds of the Nicolai^anes, which deeds I hate also. Let him that ^ath
ears, hear what the spirit says to ^he congregations. To him that
ouercometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is ^n the mids of
the Paradise of God.

The end of ye lords rebukes.
The accusations of our Savior Christ, which he uses ^gainste his servants
that be sins, tend not to this en^^ doubtless, that men overwhelmed with
reproaches might b^ ashamed, despair, and perish: but rather that they should
ame^^ be restored and live. Therefore the Lord Jesus to his blameyn^ by and by
annexeth an exhortation to repentance, that the may be saved: And also
describes the true and lawful penau^^^

For we heard what thing he rebuked in the co^gregati^^ of the Ephesians: let
us hear now what the lord require^^ of the same, and how he seeks to have
the error reforme^ verily by repentance, to the which he exhorts. For
(...) have said that the Lord strikes and heals: chiefly in the case.
Which doctrine surely is proper and perpetual to the church of Christ.

He mentions chiefly of three things in this matter, in his counsel or
exhortation to amendment. He exhorts to repentance.
First he co^selleth or exhorts to remember, (...) from which they are
fallen: that is to say, with how great love they ha^^ burned hitherto, and
now how could they be wared: (...) how fortunate and blessed a state they
have stand hither^ and now in how unfortunate and shameful they lie (...)
For the acknoweledging of the trespass is the beginning repentance, The
knowledge of sin.
if being illumined by faith we consider we^ what benefits we have lost, and
in what misery we no^ are in. He that weneth he has lost nothing, will ne^
be moved to make any search or inquisition, he that th^keth him self to have
fallen from no felicity, he will thin^ of nothing how he may be restored.
Therefore in amen^ment of life it behooves that acknoweledgyng and conf^sion of
sins go before, by the which we may lament before God our poverty and
misery. And in deed they fa^ not from felicity, which were never in any
felicity. The^fore say we, Saints fall.
that holy men may fall, and also be restor^ by repentance. Than after the
acknoweledgyng of our ^^serie follows repentance: that is the coming
agayne^^ our mind, that we go not forth on always like mad^ men and
fools, walkinge in the way of vanity an^ unrighteousness. Repe^tau^ce
For repentance is a retourning a conversion and change, whereby we are
turned away from evil, and are converted to good, in retourning to our
wit, and working righteousness.

For last of all follows that, which expounds this repentance. Do the
fourmer works: To wit be hot again in love, work the works of faith,
which are fruictes worthy of repentance. Behold there needs no new laws,
True satisfaction.
or long disputations concerning amendment. Briefly, do the fourmer works,
not of the flesh, but those which thou beganst when thou first receiuedst the
Gospel, and wast borne again in Christ. Finally this is the true reformation,
to do the fourmer works of God. Not the latter, which the error of the
world has devised. This is verily, and shall be the true repentance, to wit,
the acknowledging of the sin, the conversion unto God and to good, and a
tourning away from the Devil and from evil, and working of the first good, or
Godly righteousness of the faith in Christ. There be many and sundry
disputations of repentance and parts of the same, of the contrition of the
heart, confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of yt work: But like as there
is none briefer tha^ this of Jesus Christ, so verily is there none better or
more certain.

To these his exhortations and Godly cou^celles he adds threatenings most
grievous, if happily peril might pearse, He threatens.
that love could not styre or move. And he speaks but few words in deed.
But he understands a great evil that can not be spoken nor declared. Except
thou repent, I will remove thy candelstick out of his place. The candelstick,
as the lord him self has expounded it, is the church. Which stands in her
place, whylest she leans to Christ: and is of Christ preserved, so long as
the preaching of the verity is in ye same maintained, and is in deed the
church of Christ: She is removed out of her place, when she is without the
preaching of the truth, and now leans no more upon Christ, nether is of him
defended, but is forsaken, and is no longer in deed the church of Christ. This
is done of Christ himself, by his ^ust judgment, what time our vnthanfulnes,
and life that can not repent, drives God to depart from us, to relinquish us
to our error and darkness, and leave us to disceauable men, etc. This sense
Aretas acknowledges, who: to remove the church, says he, is, when it is lest
bare and destitute of Gods grace: by reason of the which nakedness, it wauereth
in doubtful perplexity and in storms that are cast to her by wicked men. And
verily we se how at this day the church of the Ephesians is removed out of her
place, and no longer inioyet^ the wholesome doctrine of Christ nor that it
stands upon the wholesome rock Jesus Christ^ But is oppressed with the
pes^^ferous doctrine or rather madness of Mahomet, and lies i^ sorrow under
the fete of the Turks. We see at this day i^ Germany (more is the pititie)
many candelstickes removed out of their place, not without the great triumph
of Satan and loss of souls. Moreover that same is also to be observed in
this threatening, that without terror he says, I will come to thee shortly.
For it is a Phrase of speech. For we say also, The Lord comes to us shortly.
I will come to thee by and by: That is, I will come to revenge and punish, and
that perauenture sooner the thou lokest for. Most certainly, when so ever I
chance (...) come, I will take punishment of thee. Let no man therfo^^ think
to escape unpunished in a life that can not repent.

Repe^tau^ce is thonly and true amendment.
Again where ye Lord repeteth, except thou repent, he plai^ly testifies, that
the bosom of Gods mercy and clemency, i^ ready open, if we do penance, how
soever we have offended him before, in the mean time we learn here openly and
mos^ certainly that we can by no counselles or consultations, (...) no armies
nor policies prevail one whit on our perils, ^^les we repent. Therefore unless
we will have our churches to (...) subverted, and given over to be seduced and
distroied of ye devil (...) his seducers, let us repent in time, and receive
again ye first love.

Thou have hated the deeds of ye Nicolait.
Again he commends the singular virtue in this co^gregat^^^ especially for that
they have hated the doings of ye Nicolait^ which God him self also hates. Let
us here mark euer^ word. He says not thou did sly, or eschew and contin^^
but thou have hated. The force of hatred is great, moving (...) to persecute,
that thou hate.

God hates the deeds of the Ni^olaitans.
Moreover he says not, thou have hated the Nicolaita^^ but the works of the
Nicolaitans. For we ought to hate t^^ person of no man for it self, but the
vice in the man so ye w^^ we shall forsake it, we should love the man with all our
heart. A^^ that must needs be a great evil, which God him self co^fesse^ that he
hates. Here al congregations shall understand, yt the ought also to hate by all
means the heresy and abominatio^ of the Nicolaitans. Albeit yt at this day ye
name be extingwished yet the heresy and abomination of the Nicolaitans
remains.

This Nicolas was of Antioche, one of the seven deaco^s, of whom mention is
made in the.6. chap. of the Acts. He is said to have revolted from the purity
of faith, as Judas did: And where he was before a Gentile (for it is said how
he was a Proselyte) he returned in certain things to gentilitie as a dog to
his vomit. The Nicolaita^s be also Gnostici, and consortes of Carpocrates,
filthy and most wicked people. Cleme^s excuses this Nicolas somewhat in
Eusebius in the.3. book. 29 chap. of the Ecclesiastical history. But that
excuse seems not sufficient or just, since all the auncientes with one mouth
accuse the same, and namely the very judgment of God in this present and in
the Epistles following. Ireneus condemns him of this same place, in the first
book against the Valentinians chap. 27. etc. Tertulian in thend of Heret.
prescrip. touches here wittely the factes of the Nicolaitans, and detesteth
the same. Nevertheless he expounds them not, but passes them over. And I know
not how wittely Epiphanius has uttered and declared in order the wicked and
abominable acts, neither to be thought nor told, and most beastly filthiness,
such as has not been heard of the heresy. 25.26.27. and. 31. etc. Philastrius
also and S. Austen have touched the Nicolaitans, either of them in their
register of heresies. Shamefast^es will not suffer me to recite. It is enough,
if we know that same which in the epistle to Pergamum the Lord him self has
expounded, calling the doctrine of Nicolaitans, the doctrine of Balaa^ the
southsaier. But who knows not, what counsel he gave to Balaac king of Moab
and of Madian, and how he prostituted fair wenches to the young men of Israel,
by whose acquaintance intised, they both defiled the^ selves with fornication,
and did eat also of meats offered up to Idols, being made partakers of
Baalpeor. Let him yt will read Iose^hus in the.iiii. book of Antiquities. cap.
6. And doubtless the ^acrifices of the Nicolaitans seem to differ nothing from
the ^ecrettes of Priapus, or Gerecinthia, or the mother of God^es, and the
nightly service of Bacchus. Ireneus signifies ^penly yt the Carpocratites, who
ar called also Gnostici, did not abhor images, but paincted and facioned to
the^ selue^ the Images of Jesus and Paul, with the Images of certi^
Philosophers: And that the Image of Jesus, as they talk, was made expressly of
Pilate, who commanded the face (...) Jesus to be painted lively. etc. But
howsoever that was, the is certain, that thactes of the Nicolaitans were evil
report^ of for their fornications and adulteries: And that the Nicol^^tans
absteined not from images, nor from meats offered (...) idolles. 1 Cor. 8.9.10.
Fornication
Against the which error S. Paul wrote also ma^^ things.

Hereof let us learn to abhor and fly fornication, a^^ never to think of
restoring the Stews or other places (...) whoredom. Fie for shame. Let us
learn hereby to keep h^^ virginity, syngle life, and lawful marriages, fly
those d^^ the Nicolaitans, Let us learn hereby, to keep well our sel^^ from
Idols, idolatry, and from all strange kinds of w^shippinges. All those God
hates.

He yt has ears to hear let him hear.
And with an acclamation he pearseth the ears of al me^ moving al to
attentiuenes and holy obedience. And appli^ also this doctrine to all times and
to all congregation^ the world. He used his wonted speech, repeted so often in
t^^ Gospel: He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Not th^^ it is in our
strength to hear and obey God. For God pr^pareth our ears, and with his grace
frames and draw^ our hearts. And let them to whom the grace of God is g^^ted,
beware least through their negligence, vanity, and lig^^nes they lose it not.
Let them show such diligence, as G^^ in his word requires and prescribes.
They that do th^^ have ears to hear. He says therefore, take ye head to wh^
God now speaks, and whose hearts now he styreth a^^ moves, that you lose
not this grace through your neglig^^ be diligent, attentife, and circumspect,
styryng up in yo^ selves the gift of God.

The spirit speaks these things.
Now also he provoke to dillige^ce by authority diui^^ The spirit of God
speaks and reuealeth these things, (...) the spirit of men or of error, for
God speaks by his s^^rite, which is red to be the spirit both of the father
and o^ son. Moreover he applies all and every thing to all co^gregations,
where he says, what the spirit says to the co^gregations, not to the
congregation. It is now than manifest, and out of all controversy, These
things apperteine to all churches.
that those seven churches do represent a figure of al churches throughout ye
whole world, and that all they be instructed in those seven.

Furthermore least any thing should want to the just exhortation unto
repentance, to faith and diligence, last he annexeth a most ample promise,
and uses an allegorical speech, that it might have the more grace with it. A
most ample promis
To them that overcome he promyseth to give the fruict of the tree of life,
planted in the paradise of God. And alludeth to the.2. Chap. of Genesis. And he
translateth the sense from earthly things to celestial. The paradise Paradise.
of God (by the which some understand the church) is that eurlasting bless and
felicity, whereof the Lord spoke to the thief, saying: This day shall thou be
with me in paradise. Herein is the tree of life Christ, communicating to us his
eternal life: Which we enjoy and have the fruition of, whilst being conveyed
into heaven by him and with him we live. Finally this is that Ambrosia or Godly
drink, which ye heavenly father gives us to drink. But this great and
wonderful good chances not to every one, but only to him that ouercometh.
For Adam had not overcome, but vanquished had died. If we therefore shall
overcome the flesh, the Devil and the world, and that through Christ, we shall
live also in the world to come with Christ.

The complutention book has, which is in the mids of ^he Paradise of my
God. And Aretas expounds it, Of my God.
and ^ayth: Let no man herewith be offended. Al humble things ^gree to the
dispensation of the incarnation, which was made for our cause, since that he
himself in the Gospel says: (...) ascend unto my father, and your father, to
my God, and ^o your God. etc.

And thus far hitherto concerning the Epistle of Jesus Christ by John to the
Ephesians, and what profit our churches also, and every of us may receive
thereof. The Lord lyghten the eyes of our mind.

The second Epistle of Jesus Christ by John to them of Smyrna is expounded. And
is an exhortati^^ to patience, and consolation in afflictions. The.ix. Sermon.
ANd unto the Aungel of the co^gr^gation of Smyrna write. These things says
he that is first an^ the last, which was dead and i^ alive. I know thy works,
and t^^bulations and poverty, but thou art rich^ And I know the blasphemy of
them which call them selves Jews, and are not: but a^ the congregation of
Satan. Fear none (...) those things which thou shall suffer. Behol^ the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison to tempte you, and you shall have tribulat^^
ten days. Be faithful unto the death, and (...) will give thee a crown of
life. Let him the has ears, hear, what the spirit says to congregations,
he that ouercometh shall n^ be hurt of the second death.

The argument of ye second Epistle.
Jesus Christ from the right hand of the father, throu^ the ministry of an
angel by the Apostle and Euange^ S. John, exhorts the congregations of
Smyrna, than ^^flicted with all kind of evils for the word of God, unto
^^feraunce, and comfort the same sighing now under (...) cross, promising
great things to them that overcome. A^ verily there can not of this manner and
in this matter a be^ or briefer exhortation and consolation be found. For in
(...) wise it is couched of the eternal wisdom of the father, (...) unto all
times, A general comfort and exhortation to patience
and to all that mourn under the cross it (...) right well agree. For like as
Christ at the right hand of (...) father is the catholic or universal
Bishop: so verily is (...) doctrine general, which he him self also applies
to all c^^gregations in the end of this Epistle, and in others. And s^ he
declares that he loves his church, and is present in the same by his power
and aid.

And verily it is to be marueled, The congregation of Smyrna excellent.
that nothing is blamed in this church, since that some fault is found in
manner with all others. Therefore was the church of Smyrna right excellent,
howbeit not without any spirit. For the Lord of his goodness does not impute
unto us small faults (of the which the Prophet speaks, who shall say, my
heart is clean? And from my hid sins cleanse me) so that there be a fervent
desire or zeal of Godliness in us, and that we be void of great enormities.

First is showed, unto whom this heavenly letter is sent, Thepistle is written
to the shepeheard and to the flok
to the Pastor of the church of Smyrna, and to the whole flock. For the
captain is said to have soughten or fled, or to have taken peace, when the
whole army together with him has done this. And the stories bear witness that
Policarpus was that same messenger or pastor of the church of Smyrna, ordained
of the Apostles the^ selves, Policarpe.
namely of S. John, Bishop there, and that he lived in the mystery of this
congregation.lxxxvi. years. For so many he accompteth him self before the
Lieftenaunt Herod, what time he was brought to execution. For in the fourth
persecution of the church, Aurelius Antoninus, and Aurelius Comodus, being
Emperoures, he was taken and brought to the governor: And at length for the
open and sincere confessinge of Christ he was burnt. He had this very much in
his mouth: That nothing ought to be received for true, unless it were known
to be set forth by the Apostles. Ireneus affirms that when he was a child he
saw this old father a man of great years and reverence, in the third book
and third chapt. against heresies, where he tells many things of him
besides. As also does Eusebius in the.iiii. book of theccle. history ^he.xiiii.
and.xv. chapters. And S. Hierom in the register of ^he famous writers of the
Church. Eusebius in his Chro^icis, notes that he suffered Martyrdom in the
year of ^ur Lord a. C.ixx. Whereby it appears that he was ^ade Bishop of
Smyrna in the year of our Lord.lxxxiiii. ^r there about. For we said even
now, that he had been in that ministry.lxxxvi. years. And therefore had he
been Bishop of Smyrna many years before the setting forth of the Apocalipse
which was written in the.xcvii. year, would^ God all Pastors would set
before their eyes this good Policarpus to be followed, of whom there remains
a not^ble Epistle to the Philippians.

After again is the author of the Epistle Thauthor of the epistle.
declared, which is set forth with two titles, taken out of the fourmer visi^^
of John and description of Christ. Thus says the first and (...) last. etc.
Whereby is signified the eternal divinity of Christ^ which wants beginning
and ending. And of him self is ^uerlasting. There is added, that he was dead,
and lives again^ that is to wit, has risen from the dead. And this
begi^ning accords right well to the matter. For they perceiu^ that whosoever
are afflicted for Christ and his Gospel of m^ mighty kings and princes, have
a Lord and patron m^ mighty and more faithful, which in no wise can be ou^
comen. Who can also in death keep his, like as he raised (...) Christ from the
dead, to the intent we might have an op^^ testimony, that we shall live with
Christ, even in death it se^

Christ knows the works of his.
And now comes he to the matter it self, and the which thing he repeteth in all
Epistles, he says here also: I kno^ thy works, to wit both good and evil.
Think not that (...) neither know nor care for thy matters. Thou art verily
ro^ten out in my hands, I know, see and care for thee and (...) thine. And
these things boeth provoke us maruelously virtue, when we know that we have
God a loker on, (...) has a care of us: And also comfort us greatly, which
vnd^^stande, how he that loves us, and in no matter neglecte^ has us always
as it were before his eyes.

And here particularly he declares what he knew: A^ first in deed the
afflictions, Afflictions
which verily they suffered in t^^ present persecution of the Emperor
Domitian. And aff^^^tion is as it were a general word, to the four kinds
fo^wyng. For he rehearses, touching their substance the s^^ling of their
goods, and their poverty: In their name (...) estimation, co^tumelies,
reproaches, or blasphemies: In bo^^ imprisonment, and bonds, yea and death
also. For (...) these afflictions Godly men are exercised, for the truth sa^ of
the wicked. And in these may be co^prysed al other kinds of tribulation. The
which the Epistle of Jesus Christ recites in a Godly order. There is nothing
therefore of these matters which the Lord Christ knows not.

Poverty has the first place. The poverty of the faithful.
Neither ought we to take it here spiritually for the modesty and humblenes of
mind: although it be certain, that the church of Smyrna wanted not the same
virtue: But there was poverty and lack of all things by reason of the
spoiling of their goods. For in time of persecution, by virtue of kings
proclamatio^s, the goods of the faithful professors of Christ ar co^fiscated
to the kings use, or permitted to ye soldiers, nobles, or promoters to take at
their pleasure: The faithful thrust out of their houses, ar either driven into
exile, or go a begging: would God we wanted examples thereof at this day. Let us
hereof learn to bear and suffer patiently the like chances also, being
persuaded that God knows our necessity. And because it is an hard thing ^or
an honest man to honger and want with his family, for a ^omfort and
consolation he adds, but thou art rich.

This to the world seems a paradoxe, or incredible. Spiritual riches.
What will they say, is he rich that has nothing, and is brought ^o the state
of beggars? There be doubtless goods and ry^hes of the mind much better than
corporal substance.

For this may be had, without the true felicity, of rich men ^f this world,
that live a most miserable life. Again you shall see a poor man, concerning
worldly goods, but fur^ished with the richesse of the mind, for this cause
only to ^e happy and most blessed. He coueteth nothing, he is con^ent with his
vocation: Neither would he change his state with most welthie and rich
kings. Contrariwyse you shall see rich men but of an evil conscience, and
therefore ^houghtfull and burdened with cares, and never merry. You shall see
poor men, but with merry hearts to lead a joyful ^^fe. Why than should it
seem marvel, if he that is spoy^ed of his worldly goods for Christ, and
enriched with the ^iftes of the mind, is glad and reioyseth in God, and takes
a good part al chances, and for the same cause is judged ^o be verily rich?
Doubtless the wise men of this world ^we also, that the only wise man is trewly
rich. Which is gallauntly discoursed of Cicero. Aretas says, in spiritual
matters having a treasure hid in the field of thy heart, which is Christ, by
reason of who^ thou art rich also: Sinn^ thou have him thy protector, who
also when he was rich, for us became poor. etc.

Blasphemy against the faithful
In the second place is recited blasphemy, by the which we understand all
manner of raylinges and sclau^ders, whe^by the name and estimation of the
faithful is hurt. Of the which sort are these: They be heretics and
Schismatic^ so many as be favorers of this religion: They be wicke^ people,
dispisers of God and his saints, the ennemies of (...) Gods service, and
therefore the plages of the common wealt^ which if they be suffered, the common
wealth must needs (...) distroyed. And these things in deed many times vex
go^ men more grievously, than the loss of their goods. For w^ will not set
more by a good name, than by great ryche^ Therefore the Lord in Gospel of S.
Math. the.10. Chapt^ With many words heals this disease: And exhorts (...)
that for the avoiding of that infamy, they should co^mit^ thing unworthy the
name of christians.

What their persecuters be.
In the mean time he declares also, what moved the ^thours of this mischief,
whom he blames also exceadyn^ to the intent that ye godly should understand, how
greatly the ennemies of all Godliness are of God misliked: And the^ might also
care the less for their hatred and persecution. T^ say in deed, that they be
Jews, where they be nothing (...) Thus also S. Paul handled the Jews in
the.ii. to the ^mains. The Jews are called confessors, honorers, and faithful
seruau^ts of God. But these blaspheme Gods na^ they impugn the true faith, and
oppress them that prof^ and worship God. Therefore be they not Jews. W^
than? The Synagoge, congregation or assemblee of Sa^^ Thus the very son of
God plucketh of the viserne fr^^ these varlettes, to the comfort of all those
that suffer pe^cution, of them that set forth them selves with stout titles
the end it should never grieve them, that they are condem^ of such harlottes,
the children of the Devil. Christ att^^teth to them the true title, and
calls them not the o^^ holy, and catholic Church of God, but the conspir^^
and schole of Satan, as in whom, not the spirit of God, but of Satan,
inspireth lies, iuggelinges, disceiptes, blasphemies, fyres and deaths.
Therefore let it not grieve thee at this day, ^n case it be thy fortune to be
condemned for the Gospel, of those that call them selves most holy, most
shining, most reverent, and most irreprehensible Prelates and Patrones of the
old church, religion, and catholic faith, which have on their side,
counselles, fathers, so many successions of Bishops, the prescript of so long
time, and consent of so many Realms. They be nothing less than that they
desire to be called: But rather the champions of Antichriste, and the professed
ennemies, and treaders under feet of all christen piety. For whom is
prepared everlasting destruction.

After this he puts an exhortation and a consolation most evident, before
the which setting also the son, Fear not.
he says, fear nothing of all that thou shall suffer. The son of God him
self feared the cross and death, and it is a natural thing to fear euilles,
and death. Therefore we are not commanded, that we should non be men, and that
like ^toickes we should say how the same things grieve us not, which
nevertheless tourment us exceadingly: but ^he faithful are encouraged, that
they should stand strong ^n the faith, neither that they should do any thing
vnwor^hy the same for fear of punishment. We be therefore com^aunded boldly
and cherely to contemn or suppress fear, and to crave strength by the
spirit of God, and to exercise it (...) temptations.

There follow reasons, He prophecieth the euilles to come.
whereby he may obtain that he ^ath persuaded, may confirm, comfort and
exhort them (...) patience and constancy. He prophecieth therefore to the
Godly, what thing they shall suffer: And touches also the ^hird kind of
affliction, imprisonment and bonds, under ^hiche we understand all
punishementes whereby our bo^ies are tourmented. But to be warned before of the
evil, is great benefit. We are more easily overcome of vnproui^ed perilles.
And therefore the Lord in the Gospel after S. ^ath. the.x. Chapt. and after
John in the xv. and.xvi. Chapters ^lleth his disciples of many euilles that
should come unto them, and adds thereto: These things have I spoken to you,
that when the time shall come, ye might remembr^ them, that I have told you
before. So now also faithfully warns the faithful in this Epistle.

The devil afflicted ye faithful.
And he touches the author of these euilles, saying: The Devil will cast some
of you into prison. Therefore we perceive that those euillies arise of the
common ennemy of mankind, and of the salvation of the faithful: Whereof we may
conjecture, that he goes about to intercept our salvation, and that we ought
therefore to stand more earstly against him. The soldiers when they hear
that their old ennemy is at hand, wax not sluggyshe, but cherefull. But the
Devil inspireth evil men, corrupts Princes and Mag^strates, which attempt
persecution against the church. S^ we read that Satan afflicted Job, that is
to have prou^ked the Chaldeis and Sabeis to kill his servants and dri^^ away
his cattle. Here therefore they may see, with what s^^rite they are encouraged,
which at this day persecute t^ church of Christ, for the profession of the
verity. The Go^ly have that which may comfort them: For they hear the the
same filthy beast is set against them, which so often be^ vanquyshed of Christ
the Prince of the faithful, and of t^ faithful through Christ's aid, may
without any difficul^ be overcome. And verily the Lord permits to the De^^
and deuelyshemen power over his servants. If thou m^uell why, Chende of
afflictions.
hear: That you may be tempted. God permitte^ not his to Satan, that they
should peryshe, but that t^^ should be tempted and tried. Therefore to a good
end are (...) delivered to the fire, that we might be pourged from our thines,
that the virtue of our faith might shine, and G^^ might be glorified, and we
made the purer. Who therf^ will hereafter be impatient, when we hear that we
for t^ great good are put to evil? We read in the.iii. of Wisdom As gold is
tried in the fire, so are the faithful proved. T^ parable has S. Peter
expounded at large in the.iiii. Cha^ of the first Epistle. The time of ye
afflictions of ye ^aithfull.
Where he that will may have it more boundauntly.

Moreover the time also of tribulation is assigned (...) that for ten days.
The tenth nombre signifies a multitu^ For Jacob says to his father in Law:
Ten times haste thou changed my wages. Genesis.xxxi. and Numeri.xiiii. He
says he was tempted ten times, that is often, and many times. Job also
affirms him self in the.xxix. chapter. To have been iniuried ten times. The
Lord therefore says at this present. You shall be diversely and much molested
with euilles. Notwithstanding forasmuch as he puts not months, years,
nor ages, but days, he prophecieth that the euilles shall not be continual,
but that there shall always be spaces be twirte to breathe in, verily for the
shortness of persecution, first Esaias the.26. Chapter. Secondly S. Peter in the
first. Petri. 1. Do comfort the faithful. It is the part of the faithful
not to prescribe God: But whether we be put to pain a long time or short, to
take it patie^tly. Let us think rather, that in the long continuance of
euilles, there is some end also forsene of the Lord: And that in the same
time of breathing, we must repare the euylles, and return unto battle.

Last, Promise of life.
are the Godly encouraged by a most ample and large promise, in the which is
also included the fourth and most greuouse kind of affliction, also the bitter
death it self, through fire, halter, sword, water. etc. But in case thou be
not affraide of death, but vanquishing it also, shall offer up thy self unto
God, than will I give thee, says the Lord, a crown of life. Hereunto is annexed
the state of the Epistle, and some of all. Therefore be thou faithful,
cherefull, constant, even to the very death, For the Lord says also in the
Gospel: Who so perseuereth to the end, he shall be saved. And we read that the
Apostel has said, if we die with Christ, we shall live with him. And truly the
crown of life is none other thing, than eternal life, and that everlasting,
celestial and unspeakable joy. And the Lord alluded to conflictes, after
the which luckely finished, the victours are crowned. Blessed is the man,
says the Apostle S. James, that suffers temptation: because that when he
shall be tried, he shall receive a crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to those of whom he is loved. Like things has the Apostle S. Paul
written also in the first to the Corinthians the.ix. and in the second to
Timothee the.iiii. Chapter. Therefore let it be hard hereafter for no man to
lose this temporal life. Where as the same being lost for Christ, we shall
receive eternal life and otherwise will we nyll we must die. Let us therefore
b^ content rather to die blessedly, than to live miserably, so the we see we
may so please God.

Finally like as in the end of the first Epistle, he comm^nicated and applied
the same wholly to all times and chu^ches, All these things apperteine to al
churches
least any should suppose that these things concerne^ him nothing: So in the
end of this Epistle also, he both pre^cheth the spirit to be author of al
these things, and exho^teth all men to hear and obey dilligently, and
affirms thi^ to be written unto all congregations in the world for edifying.
Moreover the promise of life he communicates to (...) saying: He that
ouercometh shall not be hurt of the second death. This is spoken to all men
and women, if thou ouercom^ Therefore must we overcome the world, the Devil, the
flesh^ and all temptation. And we must overcome by him, which faith, by his
spirit, dwelling in us: And that we should wal^ that way, wherein he has
commanded us to walk. If tho^ overcome, The first and second death
thou shall not be hurt in the second death. Th^mas of Aquine says. That the
first death is of sin, the seco^^ of pain. We understand plainly by the
first death the na^^rall separation of the soul from the body, which also
comes to us for sin, as appears in the.iii. of Genesis. The same is comen
to good and evil. For we be all earth, and (...) to earth we shall return.
And by and by follows the ^^cond death and the second life: They that believe
in Christ, overcome, feel nothing of the second death, but live, as t^^ Lord
him self assures us in the.iii. and.v. Chapter of John He shall not come into
judgment, but has passed from dea^^ to life. But the wicked or unbelievers are
conveyed stre^ ways from the corporal death to death everlasting: N^^ that
their souls can die, yt is cease to be, or that their bod^ rise not again:
But that being deprived of that celest^ and divine life of Christ, they feel
everlasting tourment^ which state verily is ryghtly called death. These thing
are unknown to worldly men, which know no other life death but this temporal:
But Gods verity teaches us, th^ther is both an other life and death after
this, to wit the (...) celestial, and death infernal, or full of perpetual
sorrows. That same doubtless is full of consolation, that we hear how the
faithful after the debt of this temporal life paid once, they shall no more
feel any tourmentes. What than do the Monks and freres prate of purgatory?
bables. etc. Let us praise our savior Christ, which has delivered us from
death, and given us the hope of life everlasting, to whom be glory, praise.
etc.

The first part of the third Epistle of the cu^stancie and confession of Christ
in the time of persecution. The.x. Sermon.
ANd to the messenger of the Congregation in Pergamos write: This says he
which has the sharp sword with two edges. I know thy works and where thou
dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and thou kepest my name, and have not
denied my faith: And that in the days, in the which Antipas was my faithful
witness, which was slain among you where Satan dwells.

The third Epistle amongst those seven celestial proceeding from the right
hand of God, The argument of ye Epistle.
is written to the Pastor and congregation of Pergamos: Whereof the argument is
thus. First he commends the constancy of their faith in cruel persecutions:
By and by he rebukes those which clea^ed to the sect of the Nicolaitans:
After he exhorts them ^o repentance. And this doctrine he applies
afterward to all congregations throughout the world. Last he promy^eth most
ample rewards to the faithful. the church of Pergamos a t^pe
Hereof we vn^erstande that the congregation of Pergamos, is set forth ^s a
type or a glass to all churches, how it behooves them (...) walk before the
Lord: First so often as persecution shall arise: Secondly, when heresies
break out. For by the example thereof he teaches all to suffer adversity
patiently, and openly to profess the true faith: And also by the scripture to
reprove heresies, and in flying from them to despise the same.

Things common to al these seven epistles
Howbeit all the Epistles in manner have certain things common: And that
especially three. For it expressed plainly, t^ whom the Epistle is sent, as in
this present, to the messenger of the congregation of Pergamos, to wit unto
the P^stour whosoever he was, (perauenture Antipas) and to the whole
congregation, as is said before. It is showed moreover, Of the authority of
holy scripture.
who he is that speaks here, or who is the author (...) this Epistle: Even
the Lord him self. Which gets authority to the writing. For it is not thus
to be thought that the word of God is not as it is spoken, because it is
written (...) man, indicted of man, or written with ink, either in paper^
parchemyn. For these make no more that the word of Go^ should not be the word
of God, than that water should n^ be water, if it run out of a conduite of
wood, lead, brasse^ stone. For water evermore remains water. The diuersio^ of
the Conduite pypes makes it not that it should bee^ water, as his substance
is in deed. So says S. Paul, the he verily is bounden, but the word of God is
not bound A man may be stoned, hanged or burnt, being a preacher^ Gods word:
The word of God that was put in the mo^^ of the Preacher is not burnt. God
knows al things.
The Lord puts it in t^ mouth of an other, that the verity should not be
extinguish^ but continually might sound in the church. Finally (...) without
cause, in the beginning of every Epistle, Christ do^ intimate, that he knows
all things of the church. I sa^ before that this is as it were the foundation
of the fear (...) God, and of his true service. For imagine a man that is
p^^swaded with him self, that God neither sees what men (...) nor knows
what they think in their hearts. Shall not t^ man, think you, fall into all
ungodliness? He will cry, let^ do what we list, since God knows not what we
do. ^gai^e who will not cast of the hope of reward, and th^s^ of good works,
after he be once persuaded that God k^^weth not our works? But if he knew
them not, how (...) he judge the world?

Nevertheless in every epistle be certain especial and peculiar things. Of the
which sort in the epistle of Pergamos is, Out of Christ his mouth a two edged
sword.
that out of the first vision and description of Christ, in the beginning of
the epistle he takes to him the swearde, and that sharp and two edged, which
we heard to come out of the mouth of Christ. By this is signified the
judicial powerful of equity and justice, and also the deliverance of the
good, and punishment of the evil, for the sword is given to the magistrate,
as an authority to punish the evil, and defend the good. Christ him self
defends his, and his adversaries he heweth in pieces. The sword is the very
word of God most sharp, two edged and pearsing the very hearts, for it
animateth the godly, and discourageth the wicked. Christ therefore governs
his Church, as a Judge and defendour most rightful and just, which has
his sword not in his hands, but in his mouth, and with his spirit and word
comfort and preserves the faithful: but fears and wou^deth the
unbelievers. Full rightly therefore is this beginning applied to the cause that
follows touching the cross of the faithful: And expulsing and fliyng the
Nicolaitans. For it is Christ, by the virtue of whose word these things are
luckely brought to pass.

Moreover the particular works of this congregation follow. In this church
are some things commended, and some dispraised.
He prayseth in this Church the singular constancy in faith, and profession
of the same, in most dangerous perilles, temptations and persecutions. And it
seems to be a plain rehersall and narration, that the Lord knows what they
suffer, and how grievously they be afflicted: but praise is mixed with all. And
this commendation belongs to an exhortation, that the thing they did they
should persevere to do.

He says how he is not ignorant, where the church of Pergamos dwells:
even there verily where Satan has fixed his seat or throne. That is to say
I know in what case thou art, in what dangers, and with whom thou art
matched. He says not, the church dwells where Satha^s seats is,
I know that thou sit in the seat of Satan: but, I know that thou
dwell there, where Satan has his seat. Christ therefore is not ignorant
of the labors, sorrows and temptations of the faithful. And the knoweledge of
Christ has a certain peculiar thing. For Christ so knows the matters of the
faithful that he is both touched with the same, and has also a consideration
or respect of his servants. And we see how Christ also places his throne
there, where the Devil has his seat just by. At the length he thrusts him
out of his seat.

Pergamos the seat of Satan.
And for two causes Pergamos seems to be called ye seat, throne, and kingdom
of the devil. For first as Aretas has admonished, in superstition and
worshippinge of Idolles it excelled all Asia, which nevertheless was most
corrupt. Pergamos was the most ancient and famous city of Asia or of Misia
and Phrygia, renomed by king Attalus and Eumenus. For the same was the
Princelyke palace of king Attalus, which came into the hands of the Romans
by the legacy of kings, who were most addicte to idolatry. Strabo speaks
much hereof in the 13. book. Moreover this place was also, as Pliny seems to
signify in the 5. book, the 30. Chapt. most noble and frequented, by reason
the liftenant or governor there inhabited, who at the commandment of the
emperor. Domitian, persecuted the true faith of Christ, imprisonyng,
scourging and afflicting all that professed Christ. By good reason therefore is
Pergamos called the seat or Throne of the Devil. For he is a liar, and the
father of liyng, and a murderer from the beginnynge: which the Lord also
testifies in the 8. of John. For because therefore at Pergamos reigned
heathennes, liynge, Idolatry, superstition, the oppression and murder of good
men, it is rightly called the seat or throne of the devil. This appears to
be a sclaunder not to be dissembled, or suffered. For Rome seemed to her self
established for ever, Rome the seat of satan.
and the which the Gods favored, who had sent them victory over most
great nations, and given the Empire of the whole world: In the which city
justice and religion might seem to be observed. And therefore that this seat
of justice and religion should be called the seat of Satan, might be
thought both blasphemy, and treason. But this does the only begotten son
of God from the right hand of his father pronounce against Rome, against
Pergamos, and against all the confortes of Rome. Who shall accuse him of
temeritie, of rasshenes, or of bitter speaking? light persons are doubtless
angry, and very stro^pettes will be offended, in case they be called by their
own names, and be called as they are in deed. For such is the glory of
virtue, that all men coueth the same even the open enemies of virtue, so that
no man will seem to be void of virtue: and such is the corruption and darkness
of man's mind, that he would be that he is not, and would not be that he is.
Thereof comes all this impatience in the whole world: when a mattocke is called
a mattocke, and a fig a fig as the proverb is. Is an harlot therefore no
harlot, because she will not be called an harlot? yes verily is she an harlot,
and a shameful harlot, and though she deny never so often that she is a whore,
yet is she an whore nevertheless, and remains a whore. So the seat or
Throne of Satan is at this day Rome it self, which will seem to be the
seat of Christ and the seat Apostolical. For the work and instruction of
the devil therein abounds. Finally al Cities, Towns, Where is the seat of
ye devil.
and places, wherein verity, godliness, religion and virtue are exiled, wherein
the preaching of Gods truth, and correction of most corrupt manners have no
place, wherein filthiness and uncleanness, baudy songs and not spiritual
Psalms, wherein craft and disceipte, surfeiting, murder, aduoutrie,
oppression of good people and of godly religion triu^pheth, be the seats of
Satan, how so ever they be called the most christen and catholic cities,
and worshippers of the right and christen says. This thing Jesus Christ the
very son of God says, cries, affirms, repeteth, and even with a majesty
pronou^ceth. For by and by after the murder of Antipas, he adds: where
satan dwells. And these things are doubtless true, which Christ says and
pronounces in the Church: and most false be the things which this most
sinful world here alleges against the words of Christ.

But this same the Lord highly commends, that in so slipper and unfortunate a
place they have stand uprightly hitherto, and could not be subdued in the
very seat of Satan. To dwell in ye mids of a froward nation. Ephesians. 5.
Here we learn, that it is lawefull, as occasion shall serve, to dwell in the
mids of a froward nation: yet so yt we be not made conformable to the^ in
any wise either in manners or superstition. And for as much as it is dangerous
to dwell amo^gs the ungodly, and as it were to touch pitch with our hands:
Thou shall nothing offend against the Lord, if thou get thee to a safer place,
wherein is less danger and more occasion of al godliness. Yea rather when thou
may conveniently pass unto such places, thou stickest daungerously upon
the stony rocks, whereupon thou may chance at the last to suffer
Shipwreake.

Religion must be holde^ fast.
And two things he allows chiefly in this church, first that they hold the
name of Christ. For the Greek word (...) is not to touch lightly, but to
hold fast, so that it can not with force be plucked away that thou hold.
And so they held Christ most depely fixed in their minds. The name of
Christ is the wholesome workyng of our redemption and sanctification, besides the
which there is no other name, as S. Peter says, whereby we may be saved. They
cleaued therefore unto Christ, as we read of thapostles in ye 6. of John. And
necessary it is that every one of us hold fast the mystery of salvation
rooted in our hearts. Religion must be professed.
Secondly, it is not enough to retain the mystery of salvation in our heart,
unless we profess it also with full and open mouth. Whereupon he adds
streighte ways, and haste not denied my faith. Behold how he calls it
faith now, which of late he called the name of Christ. And he calls it
properly his faith, that is, not divised or invented by men, but set forth of
Christ him self by the word of his verity. This true, right, and
catholic faith must we confess and not deny: and profess it expressly
as well in words as in works.

The manners of deniyng the Lord.
Christ and his Gospel are denied by mo ways than one. They are denied by
silence, when we hold our peace, what time we should speak chiefly for the
glory of God. Christ again is denied through dissimulatio^, as where Peter
says, I wot not what thou say. For he knew right well what the maid
said: but fear caused him to dissemble. He is denied what time plainly and
with express words Christ and his verity is denied. He is denied with a
figurative confession, what time in deed we confess some what, but yet so
darkely and so diffusely, that it is unknown what it is that thou professest.
He is denied, when we feign in our heart, that we keep the true doctrine, and
deny it in our works, in bowynge our selves before Idolles, going to
profane churches, communicating with the ceremonies of Antichrist: kneling on
the ground and worshipping that thing which our conscience gave us, and the
faith set forth by the apostles taught us to be no God. And verily all this
denial arriseth of fear, and of our corrupt affections. If there where so
assuredly a reward propounded of men for the confessing of him, as thou art
sore affraide to be put to pain in case thou do confess, there would seem no
difficulty at all to profess Christ sincerely. Where therefore thou deniest or
dissemblest, thou do it for fear. But such timorouse and fearful deniers
the lord shuts out of his kingdom. The world therefore being despised, the
name of the Lord must be confessed boldly and without fear, according to
the doctrine of Christ Matthew. 10. Mark. 8.

And this confession of the congregation of Pergamos is amplified and highly
commended by reason of the time. We must than profess when persecution is
hot.
For it is a great matter to profess Christ in no quiet but in most
troublesome times. But it is manifest that the church of Pergamos confessed
Christ in the mids of the persecution, in the which was executed the holy
martyr of Christ Antipas: Whereof it follows that the profession was noble.
It is commonly said, but these men saw Antipas slain, and yet could not be
feared from the true faith, and these things in deed are set forth in few
words, but in sense most ample to be followed of all churches. Some others
read here in my days. But the complutensian copy is better, which has, in
the days wherein Antipas, etc. As though he should say, And thou haste
confessed my name in those days, wherein Antipas was my faithful witness,
which for the same cause was slain also.

Antipas is commended, The praise of Antipas and of martirs.
and as it were canonised of the very son of God. And he is praised that he
was a witness, that is a martyr: And that in deed a faithful witness, by
testifiyng, teaching, confessing, and keeping his faith to the Lord, even to the
end. Acts. 13. Perauenture he was pastor of this Church, or some other man
of singular constauncie among the faithful. Certes faith and not torment
makes martirs. And because this martyr is praised of Christ, we understand
that the agonies and co^flictes of martirs should be preached in the church of
Christ, and many be excited and exhorted to follow their steps. Therefore we
affirm that the holy martirs of God are honored, but not to be worshipped or
called upon. We condemn al those that speak against holy martirs, and
associate them with those that slew them. But touching the worshippinge of
Saints I have spoken else where more at large, we learn hereof also, that
they die not for ever, that die in this world for the name of Christ: neither
that the martirs be polluted with worldly reproach, considering how they be
commended by the mouth of God. To christ therefore king of martirs be honor,
praise and glory world without end. Amen.

The latter part of the third Epistle is expounded, wherein is spoken of the
Nicolaitans, which are damned. And exhortation is made to repentance. The.xi.
Sermon.
But I have a few things against thee: Nume. 24
that thou have the there, that maintain the doctrine of Balaa^ which taught
in Balacke, to put occasion of sin before the children of Israel, that they
should eat of meat dedicate unto Idolles, and commit fornication. Even so
haste thou them that maintain the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I
hate. But be converted, or else I will come to thee shortly, and will fight
against them with the sword of my mouth. Let him that has ears, hear what
the spirit says to co^gregations. To him yt ouercometh will I give to eat
Ma^na that is hid, and give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knows saving he that receives it.

In the first part of this epistle the Lord commends many things in the
church of Pergamos, The lord reprehendeth a few things in ye church of
pergamos, how?
in the second part he will reprehende a few. And he says a few things,
not that the error, of the Nicolaitans is a light offense, but that the sin
is in others rather, than in the true Church it self: to wit in them, which
notwithstanding that they were not of the body of the church in deed, yet
did they join with the church outwardely, and would be taken for members of
the same. After he speaks modestly, least by exasperatinge over much the
sin and error in the faithful, he should trouble their minds and
discourage them utterly. There is a measure in all things, as the common
saiynge is. And if in a Church so commendable, there is found of Christ that
is thought worthy reprehension, what shall we say of those that be less
commendable? the church has always that may be reprehe^ded.
yea why should we not see in all churches always some thing to be found,
that may be blamed: not so much for that the Saints are always troubled
with the infirmity of the flesh, as that ever more hypocrites and corrupt
persons join them selves to the church of God: such as were here the
Nicolaitans, and as Judas the thief and traitor was in the nombre of
Apostles. In Christ the church is without any spotte or wrincle as the Lord
says in the 13. of John. And in the country to come shall most fully be made
perfect: which S. Austen also affirms.

And the Lord Jesus reprehendeth in the church of Pergamos, not that they
mainteyne the Nicolaitan or Galaamitical doctrine, but that they have such as
maintain that doctrine. They offended therefore, for that they did not hate so
much the Nicolaitans as the Ephesians did: They offend that have them which
maynteyne wicked doctrine.
of whom we heard in the first epistle, that they could not abide the
wicked. Wherefore leesie the sowrenes of the leven should crepe further
through out of the whole lump of dowe, the old leven must be purged. It
must be tried, whether you fouour or cleave to Heresies: And furthermore the
Lord requires that we should not nurrish them, but that we should persecute
them with an holy hatred. Whereof is spoken in the first epistle.

Moreover he describes the heresy of the Nicolaitans to the intent we may
see, What is ye error of ye nicolaita^s.
wherefore he blames it, wherefore he condemns it, and wherefore it ought to
be hated. And he describes it trimly by the example of the Scripture, that
chaste cares or shamefastenes might not be hurt or offended. I told you
before how they were most filthy things, which the ancient writers report
of the Nicolaitans. But all things are most aptely and chastely declared of
Christ. They are taken out of the 22. 23. 24. 25. chapter of the fourth book of
Moses called Numeri. He calls the Nicolaitan doctrine, the doctrine of
Balaam, and that by a similitude. In Balaa^ the southsayer these wicked acts
are manifest: whereof it may easily appear, of what sort his doctrine was.
First he took the reward or price of iniquity as s. Peter terms it: And
would curse them whom God has blessed, doing clean contrary to his own
mind. Secondly he gives the king most pestilent counsel: which the
Scripture therefore calls a sclaunder or offense. For he taught the king a
way or mean, whereby he might intise the people of God into certain
destruction, into the most unclean feding of meats offered to Idolles, and
into most filthy whoredom. All this than shall be compted the doctrine of
Balaa^, which in hope of filthy lucre being uttered against Gods word and
his own conscience, teaches Idolatry, unclean eating, and fornication: or
reproves not, but counsels rather, when he knows the thing to be filthy.
Even so did the Nicolaitans, in speaking evil of the truth and of christen
pureness, gave naughty counsel to many, that they should be partakers of
meats offered up to Idolles, and couple with harlots, as in the first epistle
I declared more at large.

How heresies must be confuted.
Here we perceive by the example of our Savior Christ, how heresies should be
confuted, not with braweling nor railing words, but rather by the places and
examples of holy Scripture: like as here at this present most fittely is
condemned the heresy of the Nicolaitans. And being ones of the Lord
condemned, it abides condemned for ever: neither need we any new counselles,
wherewith to condemn impuritie. Again in case all the counselles in the world
decree the contrary, yet remains this true and sure, which the Lord Christ
here pronounces: accursed be he that determines otherwise.

And here it seems good now to consider, whether the Balaamiticall and
Nicolaitane doctrine in the church be clean extinguisshed. Of the Nicolaita^s
of our time.
The name verily of Balaam and Nicolaitans we abhor all, but the thing it
self as well in the states of men spiritual as temporal, is most openly
found. For there be men in high authority, in sondrie kinds of learning
right excellent, most expert in the laws both of God and men, who
nevertheless blinded with the reward of iniquity, curse both the persons
and things, which they know that God blessed. Of these S. Peter also made
mention in the 2. Chapt. of the 2. Epistle. The Same do suggeste evil
counselles to Kings and Princes, tendyng to the destruction both of the
preaching of the Gospel and safegarde of the Church. The same being given to
Idolatry, and drowned in fleshely pleasures, eat of the sacrifices of the
dead, and even feed of Idol offeringes, and in fornications run at riot.
Consider I pray you what be the most part of popish priests, whereof they
live and be fed, what opinion they have of holy matrimony, and how much they
abhor aduoutrie and whoredom. They dare be bold to condemn matrimony, and
to judge whoredom better: so that they may in joy the sacrifices of the
dead, and many ways take their pleasure. If any for ye avoiding of whoredom
be joined in lawful matrimony, he is though unworthy to sacrifice or to come
at the altar: but whore mongers are admitted thick and three fold. And all
they for the most part are the most beastly bondslaues of the bealy, of whom
you may believe that the holy Apostle of Christ s. Paul has spoken: whose God
is the bealy, and glory in reproach of them, that seek earthly things. And who
will not acknoweledge these. And affirm them to be very Nicolaita^s,
mainteyning the doctrine of Balaa^ the inchaunter? amongs the te^poraltie you
shall find men of al sorts which set more by the doctrine of Balaa^, and
wantonness of zambre, than they do by modesty, Nume. 25.
gravity and christen sincerity. They love the liberty and wantonness of the
flesh. They will not have youth and free people to be restreined by virtuous
laws. They will even at this day banquet and mask with the maidens of Madian,
and follow their fleshly lust. For they maintain surfeiting, dro^knes, and
whoredom. And these be also very Nicolaitans. And have another few nor
abiectes to favor their sect. And want not their worldly reasons both many
and great to maynteine the same.

God hates all uncleanness.
But let us hear what Christ him self, sitting on the right hand of his
father, judges of the^. Those or that same which these men think, teach and
do I hate, says the Lord. What thing can be spoken more grievously, than
that God hates the doctrine of the Nicolaitans? For the whole scripture of
both Testamentes condemns this Nicolaisme.

He exhorts to ame^deme^t.
After this description and reprehension of the Nicolaita^s, he proceeds like
as in the fourmer epistles to exhort them to amendment, or repentance. For
where he says, repent, he understands or co^prehendeth all penance, or
repentance. That we said to be a conversion unto God, whereby we amend evil
things for good, relinquisshing that is evil, and in stead thereof placing
that is good: and that of faith in the sincere love and scare of God. Thou
shall amend therefore in case thou do abstain from meats offered up to
Idolles and from fornication, and receiuest the true religion of Christ
instituted, and do possess thy body in honor, not in the lust of
co^cupisce^ce: as S. Paul says 1. Thessalon. 4. The church of Pergamos
repented, in case they disse^bled not nor winked at ye filthiness of the
Nicolaita^s, but stoutely with stood the same. The Nicolaita^s repented, if
laiyng their filthiness a side, they received again the puretie of faith and
life. And to al and singular is said, repent.

Threateninges against the impenite^t.
The Lord drives them now also to repentance with greuouse threatenings: except
thou amend says he, I will come to thee shortly of the which manner of
speakinge, has been treated before. He adds, and I will fight with the^ with
the sword of my mouth. With whom? with the impenite^t, and especially with
the Nicolaitans. He threatened not utter destruction or desolatio^ to the
church, whereof there was great hope yt they should pourge the old leven: but
he threateneth the people impenitent. And like as a judge, or magistrate or
soldiour uses the sword, so does Christ his word. And the word in deed
wounds or sleyeth no man but in ye mean time it shows Gods word so does
the execution of Gods power insewe. Therefore Christ, even as he shows with
his word, he shows yt he will iud^e idolaters, be^^^ gods, hogs, dogs, and
whoremo^gers, and not only judge, but punish the^: And as he threatens, he
does. Christ fights with his sword.
Thus fights he with the sword of his mouth. We have an example in the
Israelites, of whom were distroyed, for that they had followed the doctrine of
Balaa^. 25000. men. After were distroyed also the Moabites and Madianites,
neither were the corrupt women spared. Which Moses in the 31. of Numeri
discourses at length. We see also at this day the sword of God to go through
out the world, and to overthrow now these, now them, for none other causes,
than for the which the Lord slew and distroied Balaam with his adherentes.
Therefore let us fear the lord, and walk in his commandments. For he will
strike a far of more greuousely with his sword, when he shall pronounce in
judgment, go ye cursed into fire everlasting. etc. Math. 25. And he says not
expressly, I will cut you with the sword of my mouth. For we are many times
and often severed and cut with the word of God, to our great profit and
discipline, and for our amendment. At this present he says he will fight:
behold he will fight, namely against his enemies. Therefore he threateneth
destruction. And we doubt nothing but that the impenitents of those and of al
times shall be distroyed. For (as I said even now) at this day we want not
examples.

Again leest that notable and wholesome doctrine should seem to apperteyne to a
few men of Pergamos, This doctrine is common or general.
and not to all in the whole world, he applies this profitable doctrine to
all churches. Of the which application we have spoken ones or twice in the
former epistles.

Finally after his manner to thentent we should al be more strongly moved to
repentance: and obedience, he propou^deth a promise most ample: and yt to
them that strive and overcome the flesh, the world and the devil: not to
sluggardes, nor to such as lie in the mire of mischief. We are encouraged
therefore with yt promise, which is of three sorts. First he promises to
them that fight manfully and overcome, and do their duty, Manna, and that
secret or hid. Manna hid.
That external Manna to all men known, is not the true Manna. For the
unthankful Israelites do loathe it, as a meat most light, and had rather have
the flesh pottes of Aegipte full of meat, onions, leekes and garlic, that
they might eat their fille. They see not the Manna celestial figured by this
outward Manna, geuyng al sweetness and spiritual pleasure: The faithful see,
that this hid Manna is Christ, as he him self expounds it in the 6. of
John. Christ therefore gives him self to them that overcome, gives him to them
in meat, which fills in deed. He that shall ones with true faith have tasted
Christ, will wish to have none other meat given him. For in Christ he has al
things, in Christ he is complete, and with all good things fully satistised.
O that our subtle disputers understood these things, they would reason nothing
at all of the merits and intercession of Saints and such other things,
whereof whilst they reason after their woo^ted manner, they declare themselves
not to have tasted as yet how good and sweet is the Lord.

A white stone.
After he promises to give unto ye victours a white stone, to wit absolution
and remission of al sins, and that full undoubtedly. For Christ does verily
absolve us from our sins and from the pains dew for the same, and from
condemnation. And he alluded to thee custom of the ancient men in
judgments, in the which they condemned with black stones, and quitte men
with white. For these verses of Ouide are well known in the 15. book of
Metamorphos. The manner was in old time long agone to cast with black, and
quitte with a white stone, and here we give warning, that the remission of
sins is not granted to men living for their work or merit: but that faith
is the victory, that ouercometh the world. The which S. John him self
testifies: And yt faith in deed fights stoutely in our hearts, but in ye
mean time it acknowledges in all things the grace of God, neither makes it
void ye merit of christ. For as it is not slouthful, so is it again fearful.

A new name.
Last of all he promises, that he will write in the stone a new name, and that
such as no man knows, saving he that inioyeth the same. Christ will not give
us only remission of our sins, but ye glory morouer and communion of his
heavenly joy unspeakable. Of this new name both Esaye and other Prophets
have made mention. Co^querours had famous names. If we overcome we inioye ye
glory celestial. That is so unmeasurable that it may only be perceived by
feling, not by speaking. For what so ever thou shall say be it never so great,
famous, or excellent, that is greater that shall be given to the ouerco^mers.
For the Apostle S. Paull cites out of Esaye: That which the eye has not
seen, nor the ear heard, God has prepared for those that love him. And in
this present world also is given us a quiet conscience and joy unspeakable:
which they in deed feel, that do in joy the same. They yt have not tasted
thereof, can never believe that it is so much, as it is in deed. Whereupon S.
Paull said, and the peace of God which passes all understanding, etc. such
minds so affected our Savior Christ grant us. Amen.

The Epistle of Thyatirena is expounded, wherein are sundry virtues commended,
and the vice of Iesabell reprehended. The.xii. Sermon.
ANd unto the Messenger of the congregation of Thiatira write. This says the
son of God, which has his eyes like unto a fla^me of fire, and his fete are
like brass: I know thy works and thy love, service and faith, and thy
patience, and thy deeds which are mo at the last, then at the first.
Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, that thou suffer that
woman Iesabell, which called her self a prophetisse, to teach and disceaue my
servant, to make them commit fornication, and to eat meats offered up unto
Idolles.

The fourth epistle written to the Thyatirenians, The argument of the fourth
epistle.
is more plentiful then the residue, and with manifold fruits replenished.
For it commends and praises in that church excellent virtues, and singular
gifts not a few. Straight ways he reproves in them, that they suffer over
ge^tly the Iezabelisme, which he describes what, and how filthy it is. He
threateneth them sore, unless with perfect repentance, they amend their
sins and wickedness. Further more he warns, that they look for no new
revelations: but that they persevere and abide in those which they had learned
hitherto, and in the which they now are. Hither also with most large promises
he allureth them, and finally co^municateth and commends this doctrine to al
churches. And there is a wonderful likeness and correspondaunce in all epistles:
As the same may be seen also in all the books of the prophets, in the story of
the evangelists, The scripture is in all things like and agreeable to it self.
and in Paul's epistles. Whereof it may easily be gathered, that the doctrine
of the vexitie is most absolute perfect and plain, and agreeable to it self in all things. In so much that if all the writings of all other Apostles and
Prophets did remain, we should have had no more in those many and most
ple^tuouse books, then we now have in the holy Bible. God provided well for us
and for our infirmity by this brief way. Here be seven Epistles set in the
2. Chapter: but it is marvel to see how like they be all, teachinge in a
manner all one thing.

The use of this epistle
This fourth is chiefly profitable for those congregations which are sound in
the pureness of doctrine, and are pure moreover in holiness of life, but do not
with a fervent zeal enough persecute open heresies. There be other fruictes
and commodities, which we shall speak of in order. But like as in all other
epistles that goo before, first is set forth, to whom the epistle is sent, and
from whom it comes: So also in this epistle Thyatirene both the
superscription as they term it, The superscriptio^ of this epistle
and the subscriptio^ is expressly set. It is sent to the Messenger of the
church of Thyatira, and so to the whole church, as I have told you before
oftentimes. And Thyatira is a noble and famous city of Lydia, Thyatira.
in Asia, on the river of Hermus: where we read yt the woman was borne, that
sold purple, which was converted to Christ by s. Paull in the 16. of the
Acts, it was a populouse city, and much freque^ted, so that it is no marvel
though me^ diversely given, unclean, curiouse, and heretics did associate and
join them selves to the church of God. The Geographers write many things of
yt famous city of Asia.

Thautour of ye epistle
And the author of thepistle is the Lord Christ him self, the high king and
Bishop, which uses thapostle his pen, or blessed s. John for his Scribe or
Secretary, by whom he will have those things published through out the whole
world. And he gets the epistle authority, whilst repeting certain me^bres
of the former image and description, he shows him self in such sort to be
seen of the church, to be viewed in faith, that they help ye matter
wonderfully. He sees here heresies and the secrets of hearts, and treads
under his most pure and clean fete, what so ever auau^ceth it self against
Gods glory and verity.

He calls him self therefore the son of God, Christ the son of God and
man.
whom before we heard to be the son of man. He is therefore and remains
both, even in glory, as well the son of God as man. In the divine nature of the
same substance with the father, in the humane nature communicating with us in all things, except sin, the other nature is not swallowed up in glory but two
distinct and several natures without any permixtio^, abide in one person
undivided: which in deed be one Christ, very God and very man, to be worshipped
world without end. Hereof we have testimonies in the 1. of Luke, in the 1. of
John, and the 1. chapt. to the Romans. And which of the heretics or
persecutours will make war with the living son of God?

After he attributes to him self eyes, His eyes (...) flamme of fire.
casting out fire and flamme. For nothing escapes the knowledge and judgment
of Christ our Judge, he beholds the raynes and hearts. Moreover he lights
some, and some he commits to everlasting fire, therein to burn for ever.
Now then if any do imagine with them selves, that they can hide heresies and
malice in their hearts, they are disceiued. For in the eyes of Christ, the
darkness it self is light also. The same Lord also has fete most pourged
and clean, he treads down all ungodliness: And where so ever he walks with
his shining feet of brass, he consumes immediately all heresies and corrupt
life. Therefore this prelate most pure, and most fit and apt to pourge,
finally best furnisshed to boulte out the secrettes of hearts, shows to the
co^gregations these things that follow: he himself walks and is conuersaunt
in the mids of the church, both King and Priest.

And like as he has in all epistles testified, that he knew the works of the
same church, even so he repeteth here also, to the intent we should never
admit wicked security, as though the almighty and alwitting God knew not
us and al ours, of the which matter I have spoken sufficiently before.

Now does he set forth gallau^tly every work of this congregation, and
commends five most notable gifts or brightest virtues. Charity. 1
First Charity, which compriseth the love of God and our neighbor: whereby
is brought to pass, that we prefer nothing in the world before God, neither
hurt our neighbor, but rather heap upon him all duties and benefits. This
we owe to God and all our brethren in the congregation. Of Charity is spoken
else where most abonda^tly, as in the gospel and epistle of S. John. Secondly he
praises Diaconian, Ministry. 2.
that is, the Ministry. The which may be expounded two ways. For either he
understands, as Aretas supposes, ministeries toward the poor and nedy,
that is to wit duties and pains taken about the poor, by le^ding, relieuing,
succouringe, speaking faithfully in their cause, in giving them meat, drink,
clothing, and visiting them. For so this word Diaconia is used in the 2.
epistle to the Corinth. etc. Or else he means the ministry of the word, by
the which in teaching, exhorting, comfortyng and rebukinge, we auaunce very
much gods glory, and the health of souls. The Thyatirenians were doubtless
dilligent in either of both. And accuse us greuousely, which addicte to our
own affairs, do neglect our poor brethren: who finally make the ministry
of Gods word odiouse, by our raylinge and sclaundering, especially with them
that be ignorant as yet, and have heard nothing of gods word.

Faith. 3.
He commends also faith in the Thyaterians. Thomas of Aquine in his co^mentary
upon this book admonissheth that faith comes not of Charity, because it is
found set here in ye first place: but that Charity and good works spring of
faith? And ye John has recited charity before faith, for that faith has her
estimation of Charity and works. Howbeit how so ever it is faith seems here
not so much to be taken for trust in God, as for fidelity and truth and
promise kept. For faithfulness beautifieth all other gifts. Admit that thou
haste men servants and maid servants that are lucky enough in doing of
their things, but imagine that the self same be in ye mean time untrusty,
slipper and disceiptefull: what shall avail I pray thee, yt they be
furnisshed with sundry gifts? Imagine again that a preacher or Senator be
not so furnished with wisdom and experience of matters, but yet to be
nevertheless faithful, and with all his heart to do all things uprightly, and
to favor ye just cause: shall not fidelity here supply his want? Great
therefore is faith, that is, fidelity, and verity: That not with out cause the
Apostle required this of the ministers in the.14. chap. of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, saying: That same is chieflye required of Stewardes, that a
man be found trusty. This faith is also required of us at this day, this
faith, good brethren is rare: And therefore have evils ouerflowed every where.
Let us heartily pray to the Lord, that he will grant us the same, and that
we may expulse out of our breasts unfaithfulness, and disceiptfulnes.

Hereunto is added patience, Patience. 4.
which is praised also in the fourmer churches. Which is a necessary virtue.
For impatientnes causes us to murmur and grudge against God, that we stand
not strong in the confession of faith, whilst we refuse to suffer patiently
such things as the ennemies of faith threaten to put us to. But why defilest
thou thy self with theft? Why runnest thou into the wars of a foreign
prince? Why do thou practice usury and bawdrie? For because thou lackest
patience in thy poverty, which thou will releue with wicked doings.

To be short, ye Lord now recites al manner of good works: To abond in good
works. 5.
Wherein he chiefly commends, that many times they excelled them selves, in
doing more and greater things. And this is a worthy praise. For the
husbandman, that is to say, the heavenly father pourgeth and cutteth the
vines, that they may bring more plentiful fruit. It becomes not the Godly to
stand still at a stay, and not to proceed in Godliness.

And most shame of all it is, to be ever the longer the worse. As the finger,
the longer the less: Which is objected to children in schools that learn
nothing. Let us be ashamed of our sloughtfulnes. etc. Let us I say way these
things dilligently in our minds: and think often, that God allows them,
requires them, and that they be the true seals of the faithful walking in
the verity, and of such as boaste of faith only a vain name without the
thing. If thou feel thy self not to be utterly void of these gifts, praise
God: and know that none of all these things is of thy self, but of grace:
And pray for the increase of these gifts. If thou be destitute of these
virtues, mourn and lament before the Lord, humbly axe him forgeuenes, and
require the abundance of Gods gifts.

What things are reprehended in the same church.
In the second place he reproves some things in the same congregation, namely
that they permitted Iezabel to teach etc. That same he calls small, not that
the doctrine of Iezabel of it self is little, but forasmuch as though it be
found in others, rather then in the church, yet did the church suffer it more
gently, that is to say, did not persecute it with greater severity. But of
this phrase of speech I have spoken also before. Permissio^ and consent
We allow not the shameful acts of Iezabel nor co^ent not to the same: But
when we might let the^ by more severe punishment, we permit the^ to abound and
increase. Albeit therefore there be many goodly gifts in us: Yet has the Lord
ye same against us, that we suffer ungodliness to reign.

But in case the Lord blames that same permission, how much more blame
worthy suppose we the wickedness it self to be, I mean, the Iezabelisme?
Which how vile and filthy it is, I will briefly declare.

Cataphrygians or Mo^tanist.
In like case as before by the example of Balaam alleged out of the scripture,
he confuted the Nicolaita^s, even so at this present he brings forth the
example of Iezabel, therewith to confute the Cataphrygians, or Montanistes.
Aretas understands the whole place of the Nicolaita^s, which I dare not agree
to by reason of yt whole co^positio^ of the epistle. I grant that the
Mo^tanistes were partakers in filthiness with the Nicolaitans. But Iezabel has
a peculiar thing by her self.

The story of Iezabel.
Iezabel, as the sacred History testifies in the.iii. and.iiii. book of Kings,
the.xvi. and.xvii. Chap. etc. Was the daughter of Hethbahal king of Sidon,
which married to Achab, brought in the worshipping of Baal into the kingdom of
Israel, building a goodly temple in Samaria, and founding a great college of
Baal his priests. For Helias is red to have slain of Baalites.450. even of the
kings chapplains, and as it were Canons or prebendaries, and.400. ministers or
country chaplains that serves in hills, woods, and groves. The Same woman
therefore founded this religion and seeks to govern the propheciyng at her
pleasure. For poursewing sore after Helias, she slew very many of the
Prophets: Verily for that they would not teach after the womans appetite.
Moreover through Baal his religion was augmented whordome and all uncleanness.
King Iehu obiecteth to king Ioram her son ye whordoms of his mother. So
Iezabel also augme^ted the eating of meats offered unto idols, and all
idolatry throughout the whole kingdom: Even than also, what time the lord in a
solemn sacrifice by miracle in mount Carmel through the ministry of Helias,
had declared to yt whole Realm that the religion of Baal was most vain and
false, and that the religion of thonly God of Israel was most sincere and true:
For Iezabel nevertheless persecuted ye truth, and established falshod. Yea
moreover she took upon her government in civil matters.

For she usurped the kings seal, and countrefetied letters and sent them in ye
kings name to put Naboth to death, a right good and innocent man. Such in deed
was filthy Iezabel.

Now after thexample of this defiled woman, Women Prophets that is, heretics.
were women in the church of Thyatira which chale^ged to the^ selves a
prerogative in the religion and teaching in the congregation, taking upon the^
the spirit of prophecy: whereof they taught in deed but corrupt doctrine
seducing the^, who^ God by his doctrine had prepared to be his seruau^ts. But
these false prophetisses, corrupted their minds, and brought forth a new
doctrine and prophecy and many things not set forth in the scriptures, but
fetched out of their own deuelish dreams and disceiptfulnes. And amo^gs other
things they communicated with the Nicolaitans, in whordo^, and participating of
meats offered to idols. Whereof has been spoken before. And the lord seems
plainly to speak of the Cataphrygia^s or Mo^tanistes, whose foundation being
laid in ye time of S. John, after in process of time, and especially in
thempire of Antoninus.lx. years after the Apocalipse set forth, brake out more
strongly and plentifully. They say how Montanus had prophetisses Priscilla and
Maximilla, which had visions, and brought in wonderful reuelatio^s into ye
church. Of whom Eusebius treats at large in the fifth book of theccles. story,
Chap. 16. And Epiphanius in the.48. heresy. in Panario. Certes John, or Christ
him self by Ihon, going about at the first beginning to pluck up and distroy
the rotes of this heresy, by thexample of that wicked woman Iezabel, has
condemned that same heresy. The scripture also elsewhere prohibiteth a woman to
rule, teach or minister in the congregation. By and by the Lord him self will
confute the new prophecies, when he shall admonish us, that he will reveal
none other new kind of doctrine, besides that which he has committed or
delivered to his church. Now also fornication, and the eating of meats
offered to Idolles, are condemned else wherein the scripture most seueeely, as
before is said.

But since that those things so afflicted and troubl^ ^he church of God in
the time of the Apostles, it is not hard to gether how indiscreet they be,
which at this day (as I showed you before) for the hatred of the true
religion restored, accuse it of sects, which boil up in such plenty, as
though that filthiness did prove, that the Gospel yt we preach were not the
Gospel. For the Gospel that was preached of John and the rest of the
Apostles, was the most true and most pure Gospel, how so ever of the false
Gospellers crept up the Nicolaitans, Cataphrygians, and other sects
innumerable. Where nevertheless the Gospel impugneth and condemns all such
manner of sects, and mainteineth the Christian verity and unity of the
catholic church. Praise be to the Lord our God. Amen.

The Lord threatens sore the impenitent, as he yt renders to every man after
his works. The.xiij. Sermon.
ANd I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.
Behold I will cast her in to a bed, and them that commit fornication with her,
into great adversity, except they turn from their deeds. And I will kill her
children with death. And all congregations shall know, that I am he which
searches the reins and hearts, and I will give unto every one of you
according to your works.

To the fourmer errors and sins of Iezabell he adds an other sin nothing
light, to wit, The abuse or contempt of Gods longanimitie.
the abuse and even the contempt of God his long suffering. God does not by
and by and out of hand destroy such as be in error and sins also most
grievous. But sinners are wont for the most part to abuse that long animitie of
God unto the occasion and pretense of sinning more impude^tly, saying: If god
did so much abhor these offenses, he had distroyed us long or this: But now
he norisheth us benignly, therefore does he not so greatly mislike it. But this
is an abuse of Gods long suffering. For the Lord says at this present, I have
given Iezabell a time to repent her, and to leave her fornication, and turn
to the Lord: Howbeit she has not converted. Which thing the Lord takes in
most evil part, that his grace should be verily despised and set at naught.
Wherefore S. Paul to the Romans. Whether do thou contemn the riches of God
his goodness, long suffering and lenity, knowing not that the goodness of God
provoke thee to repentance. etc. If than the Lord has not suddenly in our
sins oppressed us, let us not thereof take unto us a liberty to sin, but
let us rather amend. S. Peter says, the Lord is patient toward us, whilst
he will destroy none, but receive all to repentance. ii. Petri. iii. Certes
Iezabel her self, when after the death of her husband Achab, and the mortal fall
of her son Ocosias she did not amend, nor within the.xii. years of her
son Ioram, wherein he is red to have reigned, did repent her: Felt the wrath
of God so much more greuouse, for that it was long or it came.

And in the text followyng the Lord Jesus in deed threateneth most grievously
the Iezabelines, that is to wit, Sore threateninges.
the Cataphrigians or Montanistes, unless they will yet repent in time. For he
opens again the gates of his grace to the penitent, reciting, how he will
plage the impenite^t. Whereby verily he assayeth to drive them into repentance
by threateninges. For in reciting the kinds or degrees of punishementes, he
shows also diverse kinds of them that be in errors, and declares to every
one his judgment, which they may by repentance eschew. And he is thought to
have rehearsed those kinds for this consideration, least any man happily should
think him self giltles and free, in case he be never so little partaker with
Iezabel.

Iezabel shall be cast into a bed.
First the Lord threateneth Iezabel her self, that he will cast her into a bed.
He speaks of the first authors of the evil and of the heresy, upon whom he
menaceth to send a sickness. For the bed in many times in the scripture taken
for the very diseases wherewith they be vexed that lie in bed. And we Germans
say, that he is taken with a most grievous and deadly disease. And the Lord
plageth the archheretickes with sickness of body and soul. In the mean season
also he weakneth the force of therrour, to the intent it might by little and little
vanish away.

They that meddle with Iezabel shall be afflicted.
Secondly he threatens great affliction to such as have to do with Iezabel:
that is to say, to such as cleave unto false doctrine, receive errors, delight
in heresies, and go about to set forth the same. To these, I say, he
threateneth most grievous afflictions, to wit of body and soul, of this
present and of the life to come. He seems to have said somewhat more, than if
he had recited certain kinds of punishment.

The children of Iezabel shall be slain.
Finally he menaceth death to the children borne of this copulation and
fornication, to wit whore sons, and bastardes. And those are chiefly the
children of heretics, which stire up a fresh, and restore newly again,
heresies already condemned, meakened, and wearing away. These the Lord
distroied with temporal and eternal death. And the ecclesiastical story does
testify, that ye Lord has in deed punished most grievously not only the
heresy of the Cataphrigia^s, but al heresies in general. And certain things
concerning the Cataphrygia^s or Mo^tanistes, are touched of Eusebius. lib. 1. of
the cl. story, Cap. 16.

The destruction of Achab and Iezabel with al their posterity.
The Lord seems here to me to have alluded to the old story of Iezabel and
Achab for them, as it were cast in a bed, from day to day, ever since they
began to worship Baal, he vexed with sickness, and brought them low: And the
people that received the religion of Baal, be put to much sorrow, evils and
afflictions. Finally their children he brought to a shameful death. Their
partakers also were slain, that would have had Baal his religion, safe and
sound, and even to have been restored again. For after the death of Achab his
father, not many days after. Ochosias the son of Achab and Iezabel, bruised
with an unhappy fall and cast in bed, died.iiii. Reg. Cap. 1. And Ioram an
other son of Achab and Iezabel, stricken through with an arrowe of Iehu was
slain. Athalia the daughter of Achab and Iezabel, the wife of Ioram king of
Judah, the son of Iosaphat, being divided with yt sweard of Ioiadas, fell down
before the gates of the temple. And Ochosias king of Judah, the son of Athalia
and Ioram, was slain also by the power of Iehu. And after were put to death by
the same Iehu, the.lxx. sons of Achab: And all ye pristes of Baal are slain
together in the temple, and before the Altar of Baal, and not one of so great
a nombre escaped. Yea the temple, the idol, and the service of Baal were quite
and clean overthrown. This old maruelouse, and wonderful history the Lord
calls to memory, signifiyng that he lives yet a revenger, and a punisher:
Who will neither ouerpasse the just limite, nor touch the same out of time.
For he adds and all congregations shall know. etc.

Notwithstanding this thing is notable and most worthy to be remembered, and
no less full of comfort, Hope is se^ open for ye penitent.
that in this rehersall of punishementes, he puts in as it were in the
mids a mention of repentance, as though he should say, let no man think him
self that he must be distroyed and perish through a certain fatal necessity.
For if any will repent, the gates of the grace of God are set open, his sins
shall be forgeuen, and he shall be taken in to favor, and shall be delivered from
all those euilles? And after this sort have taught also the Prophets, Jeremy
in the.xviii. Chapter, and Ezech. in the.xviii. Chapter.

But where as the punishment is not by and by executed upon the impenitent
persons, you shall have them that will exclame that God is a sleep, that he
sees or hears nothing. Therefore the Lord him self answers them, and
says: And all congregations shall know. etc. The Lord declares yt he is
reue^ger of the church.
When I shall doubtless at the last execute my vengeance in dew season. For
then shall all men learn, that I neither sleep, nor neglecte my servants at
any time, or will suffer those that deserve evil of me and of my Church to
escape unpunished. Furthermore Christ testifies that he searches the ^eynes
and hearts of all men.

And he means, that he knows all thoughts and devises of the heart,
finally the appetite it self and all the desires of man, so that he can judge
truly thereof, for nothing be it never so secret is hid from Christ. Christ is
God.
Therefore is he very God. For it is the property of God, and belongs to him
alone to know the hearts of tho children of men: As Solomon testifies in the
iii. book of kings. Chap. viii. Christ therefore sees the privy and filthy
works both of the Nicolaitans, and all other beastly men. Which S. Paul says
are unworthy, to come to light, or to be expressly declared to men. Ephesians. v.

Christ gives to every man after his works.
Another does Christ know only all the thoughts of men whatsoever they be, but
gives moreover to every man after his own works. And so the Apostle S. Paul
teaches saying: The just judgment of God shall be opened, which will reward
every man according to his deeds, that is to say: Praise, honor, and
immortality, to them which continue in well doing, and seek eternal life:
But unto them that are rebelliouse and disobey the truth, and follow
iniquity, shall come indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and angwish. etc. In
the.ii. to the Roma. For works be the touchstones of faith and infidelity:
And works whether they be good or evil, be judged of God and the Godly men,
according as they proceed of faith, or of infidelity. Therefore what so ever
any of us shall sow, the same shall he reap also. For God is the most just
rewarder of good, and revenger of evil. The same sentence as it is most true,
so is it the foundation of the true and Godly Religion. Glory be to God.

That the doctrine of pity is so fully s^^ forth to the church, that there
needs no new Revelations. And of the most large promesses of Christ made
unto the church. The.xiiij. Sermon.
ANd to you I say, and to others that be of Thiatira: Who so ever have not this
doctrine, and which have not known the depenes of Satan, as they say, I will
put upon you none other burden, but that which ye have already: Hold fast
till I come. And whosoever ouercometh and keeps my works unto the end, to
him will I give power over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron:
And as the vessels of a potter shall he break the^ to sheuers. Even as I
received of my father, so will I give him the morning star. Let him that has
ears, hear what the spirit says to the congregations.

He speaks here now to the Cataphrygians, The great mercy of God.
and also to the faithful of the church of Thyatira that believed rightly in
Christ, and heals their diseases. Wherein appears the unspeakable mercy of
God, which cease not to speak unto such as are yet entangled with heresy,
and to heal their pestiferous diseases. And he admonishes all men, that they
look for no new revelations, but know rather that God has through Christ and
his Apostles set forth a most perfect doctrine, whereunto he will add nothing:
And therefore that they keep fast in memory such things as they had learned
already, and wherein they were now exercised. A new holy ghost and a new
revelation.
For the Cataphrigians, called also Montanistes, bragged of a new comforter,
and a new revelation: As though al things had not ben fully set forth by the
Apostles, but that many things were left as yet to be revealed of them. As
also at this day the maynteiners of the Popish church most stiffly do affirm.
And like as the Cataphrygians covered their trifles under the pretense of the
holy ghost: So do the Papists likewise cloak the vain constitutions of men,
and set the^ forth under a false color of the holy ghost. As though the Lord
spoke of their decrees, when he said: I have yet many things to say unto you,
which now ye can not bear. Nevertheless the faithful people of Thyatira,
which had not the doctrine of Iezabell, but rather detested it, notwithstanding
as doubtful, said, that the Devil was a certain depenes, and had a thousand
crafts, which could also transform him into an aungel of light: And that they
were but simple men, who being ignorant of these his wonderful crafts and
subtilties, knew not what they might chiefly follow, whilst the false
Prophets also make their boast of the holy ghost, and shine in miracles, and
with great constancy avouch their doctrine to be true. Ye shall find at this
day which will say, I am a plain simple man, and know not whether part I should
cleave to, since the doctors of both parts affirm with great co^sta^cie that
they have the truth on their side, and therefore will some say, they shall agree
better or ever I will believe any of the^ al. etc.

What this in ye diversity of opinions the godly should follow.
The Lord therefore answering to both, shows what they should do: To you, says
he, I say that follow the doctrine of Iezabel, I say also to the rest of the
Thyatirema^s, that follow not the Iezabelisme, yet nevertheless complain in
such dissentions, and wonderful crafts of the devil, that they se not what is
best: To you all I say, if ye be simple in deed, as you pretend, if ye will
with all your heart embrace the truth, give your selves to ye simplicity
Apostolical, cleaving fast to such things as you have once learned of the
Apostles, neither loking for nor receiving any new religions, or additions,
constitucions or any other thing moreover, than that you have learned of the
Apostles. For these things which you have received are sufficient to obtain
salvation.

The Lord layth none other burden upon the church
And these words of the Lord must be wayed more dilligently, to the end we may
perceive the great fruicte that is in the^ (...): that is I will lay upon you
none other weight or burden, besides this that you have. The Lord affirms
that he will add nothing more to ye doctrine euangelical set forth by ye
Apostles, as to that which is most perfect. Certes if the doctrine of Moises
were so perfect, that the Lord him self did prohibit, that no man should add or
take away any thing from the same, but only should do that which was
commanded, as we read in the.4. and.12. Chap. of Deuteronomy. Who would doubt that
there should want any thing in the doctrine of Christ the son of God? He
therefore now affirms, that he will lay nothing upon them, more then he had
laid, and the which they bear at that time.

What burden is.
A burden in the sermons of the Prophets is taken for doctrine of grave and
weighty matters. The Apostles also call the law a yocke and burden. Where
therefore ye Lord says yt he will not lay upon the church any other burden, he
says how he will not reveal any other doctrine, nor further charge the^, with
other rites or ceremonies, than such as he had ordained and imposed already.
And with these words of Christ accord those things very well, which are red in
thapostles epistle Sinodical Act.xv. For by the common consent of the
congregation, and after the mind of the holy ghost, they say they will impose
nothing moreover upon the church, tha^ such things as they had received already
of S. Paul, and a few things yt they added for a declaration of ye same.
Whereupon S. Paul said to the Galath. If an angel from heaven preach unto you
an other Gospel, besides that which is preached, let him be accursed.

What than? (...) hold fast, The doctrine of christ is perpetual.
namely yt which you have received, suffering it not to be plucte out of your
hands: Hold fast I say, with touth and nail, til I come: yt is to say unto ye
last judgment. Therefore he testifies expressly, that this doctrine shall be
perpetual, and unchangeable, and therefore to be kept most stiffly of al me^, and
not to be shro^ke from, though all the world cry out, and persuade the
contrary. Aretas Bish. of Cesaria He required of the^ nothing else, says he,
but that they would keep safely the godly pledge of faith until his coming. This
if we shall do, we may easily eschew the crafts of the devil, and disceauable
clouds. For whatsoever they shall bring forth, whatsoever they shall forge and
feign, or die with the cou^terfeited color of ye holy ghost, we shall have
always recours to ye simple doctrine of Christ set forth by thapostles, wherein
alone we shall rest, rejecting althi^gs yt shall not acerd with ye same.

And this wholesome doctrine of Christ confounds al traditions, Against the
tradi^ions of men.
and subuerteth al constinitio^s made since the time of the Apostles. The godly
may always object this sayin of Christ to ye traditioners. I will lay none other
burden upon you, besides yt you have: That same hold fast until ye last
judgment. They shall allege that same also, that the Apostles deny that they
will add nothing more. Act. 15. Christ spoke this in the time of S. John, in
the year of our Lord.lxxxxvii. Therefore what so ever laws, traditions,
decrees have been made since that time, we know they were not imposed of
Christ, which says so expressly that he will lay none other burden on the
faithful. Where then become the decrees and constitutions of worshipping
Images in the church, for the consecration and celebrating of masses. What
shall we say to the decretalles of the Bishop of Rome? They are all overthrown
and stricken down as it were with a thonderbolte, by this only sentence of
Christ. I will impose none other burden, the^ that you have, keep that until
the judgment. Behold, he says, unto the judgment least any should imagine
in the mean season, that another thing had pleased the holy ghost. Let us
therefore persevere in the same.

Most large promesses.
Hereunto he annexeth after his wonted manner most ample promesses, yt through
hope of so great rewards he might pluck them from errors, and join them to
the true religion. And like as in the fourmer epistles he has said, he that
ouercometh, so here he repeteth the same, admonishing us not to sleep but to
watch, and fight ma^fully. And he ouercometh that keeps the works of Christ
unto the end. The works of Christ by a privy opposition are set against the
inventions and works of men. The works of Christ.
The works of Christ fignifie both doctrine and faith, and whatsoever good
works insew upon the same the service of worshipping of God, and the
observation of Gods word. For in the.28. chap. of S. Math. The Lord says to
his disciples, teace you them to keep those things which I have commanded
you. He speaks with an emphasie, which I have commanded you, not such as
you shall have invented of your own brain. For the Lord alleges out of the
Propheth in the.xv. of the same S. Math. saying: In vain do they worship me,
teaching the doctrines of men. Therefore these works have no promise: But the
works of Christ, which he him self has ordained, and the which are done of
his spirit, and of true faith, whilst we forsake our errors and cleave to the
truth, they have a promise most ample.

The victory of the h^ad Christ and his me^bres.
And promises two notable things. The first: like as my father has promised
me victory, and performed it, that I overcome all my ennemies, and triumphed
over them, the same being broken in pieces like vessels of clay or earth with
out any difficulty, so will I give unto you also power and victory against all
ungodly. And that same promise at ye last shall be fully accomplished in the
last judgment, in the which all the ennemies of Godliness shall be cast under
the feet of Christ: As it is declared in the Psalms, especially in the.ii.
and.Cx. Psalm. And in this world also Christ affirms that his servants
shall spiritually rule over his ennemies: Like as Christ, although he were
tormented and died, yet nevertheless he overcame his ennemies. The holy and
ecclesiastical stories bear witness of these things sufficiently.

The latter: I will give him the morning star. And he understood the
knowledge of Christ increasing daily more and more, and so even Christ
himself, The morning star.
in like case as the day in the rising of the morning star waxes brighter
and brighter: In the which sense the Apostle S. Peter is red to have used this
allegory in the.ii. Epistle first Chapter, or at the least he promised a
clerenes most bright. For Daniel says, how the faithful in the resurrection
shall shine like the firmament. The which thing also the Lord Christ alleges
the.xiii. of Math. And the Apostle alluding hereunto said, that one star was
brighter then an other: So likewise in the resurrection one shall be made
brighter then an other. These promises be most great, neither can I think
that any greater can be given us. God grant us grace, that we may be made
partakers of so great things.

Finally he applies this epistle to al churches and ages of the world. Whereof
since we have spoken oftener than once, there is no cause that by often repeating
I should be tediouse to any man. To the Lord our God be praise and glory.

He blames certain things in the congregation of Sardis: notwithstanding he
shows straight ways a remedy, whereby they may be healed, and be safe.
The.xv. Sermon.
AND write to the messenger of the congregation of Sardis, this says he that
has the spirits of God, and the.vii. stars. I know thy works: Thou have a
name that thou live and thou art dead. Be awake, and strength the things
which remain, that are ready to die. For I have not found thy works perfect
before God. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast
and repent. If thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a thief, and thou
shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

Two kinds of men in one church.
In one congregation of Sardis were two sorts of people, professing on either
side the name of Christ. But some in deed answered but little to the holy
profession, living more licenciously, than became them: And the others in
holiness of life set forth the doctrine of our savior that they professed. The
first sort the Lord Jesus accuses in this Epistle by S. John: And shows also
a medicine for the disease. And the later he exhorts to perseueraunce,
commending their integrity. Therefore this Epistle is divided in two parts,
verey fit and profitable for our time.

The first part of the Epistle co^teineth those things which we have now
recited: Nether does he proceed herein in other order, than we have seen him to
have proceeded hitherto. For first he shows to whom it is dedicated, and sent:
Namely to the Pastor of the congregation of Sardis, Sardis.
and therefore also to the whole church. Sardis is said to have been the head
city of Lydia or of Maonia, the metropolitan city of Cresus the most rich
king of Lydia, whom Herodotus writes that king Cyrus overcame, a town most
famous, and pricked and painted with pride, that it was a wonder: And addicte
to voluptuousnes. For Strabo in the.xiii. book of Geographie testifies that all the maidens thereof were harlots, who mentions more of the same city. Certes
it seems to have kept his old wont, even at such time also as it had
received the name of the Lord: And therefore to have been more given to
fornication, and al manner of filthy lust. The which thing the Lord seems to
have blamed in them, as S. Paul likewise persecuted the self same vise in the
Corinthians. The world can hardly believe that simple fornication is sin
whereupon in that great counsel of the Apostles, Acts. 15.
both they and the elders and the whole assembly with one mind decreed, that
the gentiles should abstain from fornication. The devil at this day goes
about many times to defile the church again with fornication, to set up stews,
and that by authority and openly whordom might be practiced. For so being cast
out, he takes seven worse spirits, enterprising to possess that place again
out of the which he was exiled by the preaching of the Gospel. We must
therefore resist him, least the Lord Jesus him self do accuse us, as he does
here accuse them of Sardis most grievously. Christ has and se^deth the spirit.
Then is the Lord Jesus declared to be author of the Epistle, not without
praise. For he is said to have the seven spirits of God, that is to have the
seven fourmed spirit, whom he also powers out upon the faithful, or else he is
one only spirit, and not seven: but seven, that is to wit, his graces be many
and diverse, as I declared in the first chapter, for the same has also in his
right hand seven stars, to wit, the whole multitude of all preachers and
ministers, keeping and instructing the^. And this beginning agrees not amiss
with this argument, which he treats in this Epistle. For of the spirit of
Christ is life: Of the want of the spirit, death. Christ preserves the
ministers, how angry so ever me^ ar in the church, with the^ for accusing
their wickedness. Privily therefore he warns them, to crave the spirit, to
norishe the life spiritual: And to trust in Christ, which will defend the
ministers, and auaunce them.

After, the same that he testifies in all other Epistles, he repeateth here
also. I know thy works. Whereof I have spoken before. The Lord is ignorant
of nothing that is done in the church, which is also the searcher of hearts.
And especially he blames this in this Church, The sickness of this church.
that she thought her self a live, where she was dead. He speaks not of the
corporal, but of the spiritual life and death. For Christ lives by his
spirit in his saints, and faithful, and shows lively works by them. Like
as the Lord teaches in the.vi. of John, and in many other places of the
Gospel of S. John. The Apostle said also, that he lived not now, Galat. 2 1 Timothy 5
but that Christ lived in him: The same Apostle said, yt wydowes living in
wa^tones, being alive were dead. They be dead therefore which have not Christ
living in the^ by faith and spirit. Which have not the virtue of Christ workyng
in the^, that is which brings not forth lively works. Math. 8
For the Lord is red to have said also in the Gospel: Suffer the dead to bury
their dead. The Sardensians therefore had the name of men living that is to say,
they were called Christians, spiritual, regenerated and holy worshippers of
God: but they were dead, to wit, hipocrites, in whom no spirit nor Christen
life appeared. The flesh, the world and corruption, as yet lived in the^. But
such churches displease Christ: There be many such at this day. But whether
does Christ reject them? Verily he blames such, but not to confound them,
(for so the world blames) but that they should repent. For he wills not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should convert and live. And therefore
consequently he prepares a medicine for the disease.

A medicine prepared for the sickness.
And first he prescribes to the stars or Bishops, what they should do in this
case: Then tells he also the whole congregation their duty. Whereof we learn
how like diseases of churches are to be helped. That belongs to the Pastors
that he commanded them to watch, verily over the flock: And to confirm that
remained of the flock, not yet in deed lost, but next unto perdition, unless
it be helped in time with sound and wholesome doctrine. He alluded doubtless to
that cure and charge pastoral, which the Lord describes in the xxxiiii.
chapt. of Ezechiel. The flock is confirmed by the word of God: by the same it
is retired from death, and preserved in life. etc.

The works of that church not full before God.
Now also he adds the reason, why he commands to confirm the flock least
they slide in to death. For I have not found thy works full or perfect before
God. The Greek copy Complutensian and Aretas have, my God. By works he
understands al things that are done, words works, and the whole conversation
of men. The works doubles even of Saints be evermore imperfect, if we have
respect to humane imbecillitie. For always so long as we live here, ye flesh
fights against the spirit: In so much that Job said, how he feared all his
works, and therefore fled to the cleme^cie of the judge: Notwithstanding they
be perfect and full in respect of Christ. For he is our fulness, and in him we
are co^plete, John. 1. Ephesians. 1. Coloss. the 12. And he makes us pertakers of
his fulness by faith. They of Sardis were destitute of true faith, wherefore
every work of theirs must needs be imperfect before God: which allows
nothing but that is of the son and most pure. Therefore the Lord
commands to teach faith diligently, and beat it in, that they may b^ made
perfect in Christ. This is the best medicine for the deadly disease of
Christ's church.

Here follows the duty of the people, The true apostolic repentance
how they may be healed, by the apostolical repentance. Whereof the chief
poincte is: to remember the lords words, in what we have heard and received
the same. We are not commanded to divise new forms of religion and
repentance: but we are sent to the old tradition, not of men, but the which
we have in the Scriptures of Evangelists and Apostles. These, I say, we
ought to remember. For through custom of sinning, we forget Gods word. And
truly the beginning of Peter's repentance was, to have remembered the words of
the Lord. Therefore such as will not be reproved and instructed by gods word,
shall never come to, or attain the true repentance. Furthermore it is
necessary, that we keep and reteyne the words of God, that is, the true
doctrine of Christ, leeste we forget it straight ways, or that we set it in
vain contemplation, and not in effectual work. The doctrine of Christ must
be kept, and performed in work. For in the last place it follows: and
repent. True repentance consists in work: that in mind and body we should
turn away from evil, and turn unto God, and do good, being sorry for our
wicked deeds paste, this is the true Apostolical repentance.

Unto the which repentance now, By threatninges he exhorts to repentance.
after the divine prophetical and apostolical manner, he draws the^ by the
threatenings. Which are in deed to be referred as well to ye ministers, as to
the people, in the congregation. Again the Lord uses parables, which we
read that he used in S. Matthew. 24. Where with the same he exhorts to
watchyng and sobriety. Which place sins it is there expounded at large, I
need not to use many words about it here. To the Lord be praise and thanks
geuyng for evermore.

He allows and commends those that covet to live godly in the Church of
Sardis, exhorting them that they would so hold on and proceed. The.xvi. Sermon.
But thou haste a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments: And they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. He that
ouercometh shall be clothed in white array, and I will not put out his name out
of the book of life: And I will confess his name before my Father, and before
his Aungelles. He that has ears let him hear what the spirit says to the
congregations.

The argument of this part.
The second part of this heavenly epistle is contained in these poinctes, in
the which is praised and commended the innocence, holiness and integrity of
the faithful in the congregation of Sardis, in true religion. He exhorts them
by a promise most large unto perseueraunce. Last he propounds again unto
them most ample rewards: even to the corrupt sort, in case they amend: and
to the faithful, if they continewe as they be.

The complutensia^ book has thus (...): But thou haste a few names in Sardis.
Which is as much as if he had said, they be not al corrupt and dead with
thee, although in deed those be very few. And so Aretas reads it in Greek,
and the common translation in Latin other copies have, which Erasmus
follows, thou haste a few names also at Sardis: that is, even in Sardis have
thou names, Names.
but few. And he put names for notable men. Which manner of speaking is also in
our langage. For we say, there is no man of name, for no excellent or noble
personage, he signifies therefore, that there be in the same Church noble
personages, and that noble in soundenes of faith and holiness of life: but very
few, Few good.
if they should be referred or compared to the number of Hipocrites or dead,
which in deed are a great deal more. Another ought we here at to marvel. For
the Lord says also in the Gospel, that many be called, few chosen: And
that the greater part of this world walks in that broad and wide way of
perdition, Matthew. 20. and 7. The which also S. Peter repeted in the 2. chapter
of his latter epistle. That they are rather to be hissed at, than confuted,
which seek to defend their error, by a multitude. You shall hear very often
at this day. You are but a few in nombre, we are innumerable, and therefore
our matter is the better.

But that same excellent thing is chiefly to be observed, What is commended
the church of Sardis.
that although they were but few good, yet nevertheless the Lord commends
and extolleth those few, doubtless for the example and imitation of al other
churches. The words in deed are short, but the praise most ample and large.
That they had not defiled their garments: which is as much as if he had
said, you have not polluted your souls with strange opinions or spots of
heresy. For you have remained sincere in the true faith: your bodies also,
and the whole conversation of your life, you have not defiled with filthy
lusts, with fleshely pleasures and voluptuousenes. Doubtless this is the
greatest praise and most certain sign of perfect godliness: wherewith I would
wish that mo of us were marked. But the manner of speech here requires also
an exposition. The allegory of apparel in ye scripture.
The allegory of garments is often and much used in holy scripture. The use of
apparel invented of God him self, and showed to our forefathers, has this
chief property, to hide the privy parts of our body, to beautife and set
forth the body, and keep of heat and cold. And therefore Christ him self is
called the garment of Christians, and in the gospel in deed the wedding
garment. Whereupon thapostle advises us to put on the new man, which is made
after God even Christ him self. Roman. 13. Ephesians. 4. Coloss. 3. For Christ
covers not only our privy parts, but all the filthiness also of the soul,
he adorneth and beautifieth us, and drives from us all injury, and all evil.
And we defile this garment, when neither in faith nor in holiness of life we do
answer to our profession. For Christ is our garment, and Christianity,
sincere faith, and holiness of life are our apparel: And even faith and our
conversation is our garmente. For as much therefore as the Sardensians were of a
sincere faith, and incorrupt manners, they are said to have kept their
garments clean and undefiled. The lord also gives now a reward unto virtue.
To walk with christ in where graye.
And they shall walk with me, says he, in white array. These excellent things
verily does he rehearse to reteyne the Sardensians in their duty, to
nourrishe them to greater things and to move other also to sincerity and
integrity. Saints walk with Christ in white array, that is to say, have
fruitio^ of the same glory, wherein we believe Christ to shine. For he desires
his father, that he will grant to the faithful, that where so ever he is,
they may be with him, and see his glory, etc. in the 17. of John. And with S.
Matthew. in the transformatio^ or clarifiyng, the face of Christ appeared bright
like the sun, his apparel and rest of his body as light. So appeared Christ
unto John in the first chapt. of this book, clothed in white array. Now
therefore says he, the godly that have not defiled their garmente, shall
accompany me, having put on light also. Saints be worthy of glory.
He adds an other thing, for they be worthy. This is the greatest praise,
when the Captain says, that the soldiour is worthy of honor and glory. The
greatest shame or ignomie is, when it is said with us, thou art unworthy. The
first kind of speech shows him to be most excellent in all kind of virtue,
which is said to be worthy of eternal light, by the later is signified, that
he which is accounted unworthy of a good and excellent thing, is maruelouse
negligent and ungracious. But here we need not to reason of the merit and
deserte of worthiness. God pronou^ceth his to be worthy of glory, the godly
refer all the goodness that is in them unto grace, and still complain of their
unworthiness. Not to reprove God of liyng, but to praise and commend the
excellent goodness that is in him: acknowledging in deed that he rewards good
works, and dignifieth the worthiness of saints: but they are nothing proud
hereof, but acknowledge all this to come of grace. This appears in the doctrine
of the Gospel, Luke. 17. Matthew. 25. where Saints commended of God, for the
works of mercy, seem the acknowledge nothing thereof.

Howbeit he declares more at large the most ample promesses of God, Great
rewards of virtue.
whereby he may not only reteyne in their duty the Saints and undefiled
Sardensians, but might also reduce al others that go astray at al times into
the way of repentance, integrity, and holiness. And three things he
promises: first in deed, white apparel, that is to say, gloryfiyng, and
light everlasting, and the gloriouse company of Christ, whereof I have spoken
already. Secondly, and I will not, says he, put out his name out of the book
of life. For like as Cities have books, wherein the names of their Citizens are
written: The book of life.
right so is God in the scriptures said (...) (after the manner of men) to
have a book of life, or of his elect. What that book is, and whose name is red
in the same, none of us can tell, sins none has looked therein. We must learn
of the scriptures, who be the citeze^s of the kingdom of God. For that their
names be written in the book of life no man need doubt. And S. John says: so
many as have believed, he has given them power, that they may be made the
children of God. S. Paull says: He that has not the spirit of Christ, he
is none of his. And the spirit cries in the minds of the godly, Abba father.
The same Apostle says: God has predestined us, that he might adopte us for
his children, through Jesus Christ. Moreover: he has chosen us in Christ,
before the fou^dations of the world were laid. Therefore are al beleuers
written in that number celestial. Who so ever therefore believe not, or
persevere not in the faith, either they are not written in the book of life, or
else they be put out again of the book of life. Finally the son acknowledges
the beleuers and such as persevere in the true faith, before his heavenly
father, and his Aungelles. And here he repeteth theuangelicall doctrine out of
the 10. chapt. of S. Matthew. and 8. of S. Mark. And doubteles it is a great
matter in that universal judgment, to be known of the son of God, of the
high judge, to be saluted and frendely spoken to of him, and that to our
great praise. If any Prince would in a great assemble of people know thee,
yea imbrase and commend thee, how happy and fortunate would thou think
thy self? But then shall imbrase thee the very son of God, king of kings,
and lord of lords. Let us think of these things in time, and amend our
manners.

For that all these things apperteyne to us, that last and wounted
acclamation of S. John proves: let him that has ears, hear, etc. Whereof we
have spoken else where. To the Lord be praise and glory.

The Lord commends the virtues, namely the constancy of the congregation of
Philadelphia. etc. The.xvij. Sermon.
ANd write unto the Aungel of the congregation of Philadelphia: this says he
that is holy and true, which has the keye of David, which opens and no man
shuts: And shuts and no man opens. I know thy works. Behold I have
set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou have a
little strength: And haste kept my word, and haste not denied my name.
Behold I shall give some of the congregation of Satan, which call them
Jews, and are not, but do lie: Behold, I will make them, that they shall come
and worship before thy feet.

the church is not blamed, but yet is it not therefore perfect. 1. John. 1. Romans
3.
In all other congregations the Lord at the leest found some fault, in the only
church of Philadelphia he blame^h nothing: not that any man is found in this
flesh so perfect, that he has not need of the grace of God. For David cries
out: enter not Lord, into judgment with thy servant, for no man living shall
be justified in thy sight. But S. John and S. Paull also make all me^ subject
to sin: which thing also S. Austen discourses learnedly against the
Pelagians. Therefore that blames nothing in this congregation, it is not to be
understand, as though it were not defiled with daily faults: but therefore he
imputes nothing, for because the sincerity and integrity of faith covers
and hides what vice so ever there be. For there is no condemnation to them
that are graffed in Christ Jesus. And albeit that other churches have also the
right faith, yet this excels especially, etc. It might be referred chiefly
to the Bishop of the same Church.

In this sixte epistle he commends the sincere faith, and constancy of
faith, and admonissheth to persevere, propounding ample rewards. And it has
much learning and diverse: which shall appear in the treatise thereof.

And the lord herin follows the same order, which we see he has followed in
others. For it is one and the same kind of doctrine with all churches and in all times. First therefore is showed, unto whom the epistle is written or
dedicated: to the pastor and whole congregation of Philadelphia. Philadelphia.
Philadelphia was a city of Lydia, neither very famous, nor yet obscure. We
read how it has be^ often shaken with earthquakes, and repared again. Strabo
mentions thereof in the 12. book of Geographie, and so have other authors
also. Yet it made it self famous by virtues. After is the Lord Christ
signified to be Author of this epistle, who at other times also has told S.
John what he should write.

And to Christ are attributed three things or rather Christ attributes three
things to him self, yt he is holy, true, and has the keye of David: The which
he has borrowed of ye Image of the first Chapt. Christ is holy, Christ holy.
because he is pure and clean from al filthiness, and from al unrighteous,
very God, a co^suming fire, doing no man any wrong, having nothing at all that
may be blamed. For to him ye Seraphin sayng rightly, holy, holy, holy, Lord God
of Sabbath: Esaye. 7. Christ the Saint of Saints.
Christ is also the holy one of the Saints, a sanctification I say that
sanctifies all, that be sanctified. The same loves holiness in saints.
Christ therefore is most truly called. Antichrist the Pope has taken upon him
this title, and so filthy sits on this beast, as if you should call a
privy or a Iakes a Rosier. Spitte upon that vile and filthy beast, which
suffers him self to be called the most holy father, and worship Christ the
holy one of all holy, unless you had rather understand by that holiness not
every holiness, but pope holiness that is to wit, stinking and swimming full of
al abominations. Christ is like wise called true, Christ is true.
because he is eternal and faithful, evermore constaunt and incorrupte. He
can neither disceiue nor be disceiued. The same most constantly keeps his
promesses. All his words be undoubted and true: Albeit that flesh, that can
abide no delay, begin many times to doubt, yet no one poincte or jot of them
falls away. The truth of the Lord indureth for ever. Thou stand upon a
most sure foundation, if thou lean unto Christ, which in the 14. of John
also calls him self the verity.

The keye of David.
Last he adds, which has the keye of David. I spoke of the keye in the
first chapter. He alludeth to the 22. Chapt. of Esaye. Whereby is signified the
divine and almighty power of Christ, by the which he brings us purified into
the kingdom of heaven: which work verily another deuilles, nor any power can
let. The same casts down the unclean into hell, another is there that can
deliver or differ the same. He says therefore aptely and expressly, he has,
not had or shall have, but he has now. For he alone has this power, which he
co^municateth with no man else. The Pope of Rome lies, which says that he
has this power. The only son of God excels in this prerogative. Keys
given to the Apostles.
Thapostles as ministers and preachers, have received the keys of knoweledge
and of vtteraunce, of learning, instruction and introduction, by the which
also in threatening they exclude infidels out of the kingdom of God, bind
them in their sins: almighty God which has the high power ratifiyng the
judgment of the minister, which he pronounced not of him self, but of
Christ's words. But these things agree right well with those that follow of
the opened door, which no man can shut, and so to the whole matter.

For now the Lord proceeds to tell, what he would: And as he has said in
all epistles, he repeteth in this also, that he knows al things of this and
of al other congregations.

And he commends so the perseueraunce in faith in this congregation, Thou
have no power.
that he signifies with all, that the same also did proceed of the grace of
Christ. Thou haste, says he, little power, and as it were no force and
strength, which this world regards, as power, riches, wordly wisdom, lucky
success, plenty of friends, and such other like things. Therefore thou canste
attribute nothing to thy self, nothing to thine own strength, not so much as
this that thou art a church, and that the verity of the gospel is freely
preached with thee. I have set before thee an open door.
For I set open this door. And by my strength I keep open the same, that no man
can shut the same door: to wit the preachinge and grace ones granted, by any
means to prohibit, let, or take away. To open the door, is a common phrase of
speaking, used of thapostle, in the 1. to the Corinth. 16. and the 2. Corinthians.
the 2. He opens the door, which gives an occasion, and prepares the way
to enter in. By the word therefore was opened the door of life. The faithful
might enter in: the infidels could not stop this way. For the hand of
Christ held the door open. And these things in deed do declare, No man ca^
shut ye door
whereof it is that in cities, towns, and villages not greatly furnished with
any force or power, ye course of the gospel proceeds with so lucky success:
And where many go about by layng wait, crafts and policies, threateninges and
persecutions to shut the door, they ca^ not. These things are not done through
our cunning and wisdom, but of the grace of God.

Howbeit if any man list to understand those things and such as follow
herafter peculiarly of the pastor or bishop of the church, I will not be
against it. For where he was humble, and instruct with no worldly wisdom, yet
furnished with God his grace, he opened the way of salvation, which now they
could not shut up, as many as sought to abrogate the preaching of the gospel.
The virtue of Christ kept him.

And now more expressly he preaches or commends the faithful constauncie
in faith of the pastor and congregation: The commendation of perseueraunce in
faith.
Thou have kept, says he, my word, and have not denied my name. When the
Lord opened the door, lighted the candel, and gave heavenly gifts, the
pastor with the congregation received them, and received kept the^, and so
kept denied them not, another trod the^ under foot. This is an excellent
praise. Would God there were many such churches found at this day. Here
may thou learn also, O thou church of Christ, here may you learn all and
singular, what is the duty of pastors, of the church, and of all and singular
godly men and women. Thy merit was none at all, God of his grace shone unto
thee. Thy worthiness was non, thy desert, power nor authority: Christ of his
mercy has revealed him self unto thee. Embrace him therefore that offers
him self to thee, hold fast and never at any time let him go. etc.

The word of Christ is to be kept.
And note that the Lord says, my word, not every man's word, but mine. What
the word of Christ is, it is known to al men. For that which is written in
the Gospel, and first in deed by the Prophets, and after by the Apostles was
set forth in holy writ, is the word of christ. It is not Christ's word that
strives with the same, although it be set forth by Counsels and holy fathers.
Christ does not acknowledge that word: he acknowledges his for his own.
And this must be observed and kept. The word of Christ is observed, what time
it is not corrupted with additions, The word of Christ is kept how.
detractions, and wrastinges, but in case it be kept sincere in his natural
sense. It is not kept, when it is corrupted or depraved with men's inventions,
and perverse interpretations. The word of Christ is kept, when it is
commended not with the mouth alone, but is also expressed with godly works in
the whole life, and beautified with holiness. It is not observed, when with out
repentance men live most filthily. Finally the word of Christ is observed and
kept, when it is not with any lothesomnesse of ours or impatie^ce cast away,
denied and forsaken. And therefore he annereth inco^tinently, and thou have not
denied my name. I have spoken else where largely of confessing and deniyng of
Christ's name. These things verily did the Philadelphia^s, and with these
virtues through faith pleased ye lord. By these also may we commend our
selves to our Savior.

The Lord conuerteth thenemies unto the church.
Furthermore the Lord shows, with how great a reward he would honor that
constauncie of the godly in faith. Ye have now, says he, many enemies by
reason of your pure religion: but in case ye thus hold one, I will cause that
those same enemies shall become your fre^des, and finally fellows of your
religion: In so much that they that have hitherto condemned you for wicked
doers and heretics, shall come unto you with great humility, to axe you
forgeuenes, ready to receive your religion, and to worship him whom they have
blasphemed. And they shall come in most humble wise, and with the greatest
humility that may be. For so said Esaye before that it should so come to
pass in 49. chap. whereunto the Lord alluded at this present.

In the mean season he touches the Jews the singular enemies of the says,
False Jews.
whom he calls the Sinagoge of Satan. For their teacher was none other but
the Devil, as in deed they have no better at this day. He calls them false
Jews and liars. For neither they confessed the Lord, nor glorified god, nor
believed in Christ their Messiah. But they that are Jews in deed, be not such:
as the Apostle S. Paull said in the 2. Chapter to the Romans. The power of God
co^streyned many of them, forsaking their Iewishenesse, to go to the Christen
religion.

Therefore if we covet or go about to reteyne also in our Churches the pure
word of God, How congregatio^s may be kept.
and to receive our enemies humble, we shall not atteyne to these things by
wars or wrongs, by raylyng and approbriouse words, but by constaunte faith.
But if either we profess our faith not purely, or beautify not the same with
virtues, what marvel is it, though enemies abide enemies still, and continewe
to hate us every day more haynously than other, and at length oppress us, and
extinguishe the light of God his word with many? let us learn dear
brethren, by godlynes, constancy and holiness to win our brethren. The Lord
Jesus grant us his grace to perform the same.

He exhorts them to persevere in the true faith propoundyng most ample
rewards. The.xviij. Sermon.
ANd they shall know, that I have loved thee: because thou have kept the
words of my patience: therefore will I keep thee from the hour of temptacion,
which will come upon all the world, to tempte them that dwell upon the earth
behold I come shortly. Hold fast that thou have that noma^ take away thy
crown.

To keep ye word of Christ.
An excellent virtue is commended in the congregation of Philadelphia, that they
have kept the word of Christ, not every word, but the word of Christ, and
have not denied it. And he has begone to rehearse most large rewards,
which both he has given to this church, and is also ready to give to any
other like in the zeal of godly religion. For we are allured by rewards.

Enemies are made friends.
First I will convert, says he, thine enemies, that they may be made thy
friends and brethren, that coming into the congregation, they may worship
Christ, whom they have blasphemed hitherto, yea yt they shall submit them
selves humbly and lowely: As we read of S. Paull, which in the 15. chapt. of
the 1. epistle to the Corinthians says that he is unworthy to be called an
Apostle. etc. And this is a wonderful benefit. For God is glorified by such
as are converted, and the truth is set forth, liyng and superstition are
confounded. Whereof the Saints can not but be exceadingly glad. The faithful
also are delivered out of the Devils claws, and are saved.

The church of God beloved.
Than follows an other benefit of God. Thenemies of God shall know and find,
that the church, and every member of the same be the well beloved children of
God. Thenemies of the church suppose, the faithful to be wicked, gods enemies,
heretics, churchrobbers, hated of god, and unworthy to live. But they shall
understand that nothing is derer to God than the church, as for ye which he
gave his son, which he chose also for his spouse, and has made pertaker of
his kingdom.

Of ye love of god cum virtues.
But of this love of God, whereby he, provoked by no deserts of ours, but of his
only grace and native goodness has joined him self to the church, al virtues
do proceed: That chiefly which immediately follows, yt the church has kept
the word of patience. The same John in his canonical epistle: not that we,
says he, have loved God, but yt he has loved us etc. Therefore where the
observation of the word of patience is annexed as the cause of love, it must
be religiousely expounded, that the favor of god, and al our gifts be verily
of grace, but yet that he of the same grace does as it were requite and
reward us for our pains. Whereof the Saints are not proud, but humbly
acknowledge and preach grace every where and in all things.

Again he commends the perseueraunce of the faithful in the true religion.
Thou have kept, says he, What is ye word of patience.
the word of my patience. The word of patience is the Gospel of eternal
salvation: which is otherwise called of S. Paull the word of the cross, and
that for two considerations. First for because he describes the cross and
patience of Christ whereby we are saved. And again he persuades us also to
bear ye cross, and patiently to suffer with Christ, Matthew. 16.2. Timoth. 2.
Neither must any man look for any perseueraunce of him that is impatient. The
Lord says in the 12. of Luke, in your patience you shall possess your souls.
Therefore has either the pastor or the church of Philadelphia kept the word
of patience, to wit in reteyning in their hearts the patience of Christ
through faith, and in showing patience in words or sayings, and susteyning
much travel in body. Which in deed is the best way to keep churches safe
and sound, and every one of the faithful. Let them keep, I say, the word of
Christ his patience, and the rest commit to the Lord.

For it follows: And I will keep thee again from the hour of temptation,
etc. The hour of temptation.
The hour of temptation is expounded two ways. For either he speaks of
heresies and of heretics, by whose talk, and crafty iuggelynge, leudenes,
and disceiptfulnes is tempted the faith, simplicity, and integrity of the
faytheful. Whereof the Lord treats much in the 13. Chapter of Deuteronomie.
Or else he speaks verily of the persecutions, which the emperors of Rome
have inflicted, emonges whom Traiane a most mighty Prince set forth sore
proclamations against the Christians. Whereof Pliny also made mention in the
10. book of Epistles, the ho^dreth and one. But Christ preserved the church of
Philadelphia, and keeps also at this day the faithful by his word and power
in the perilles of heretics and heresies, and finally of persecutions also:
so that the faithful may stand sure in all controversies and receive nothing
of heretics that is strange from gods word, and also give no place in
persecutions. Christ causes many times that the burden of persecution
presses not so heavily. Therefore let us always be constaunt in gods word,
and permit the defense to our Lord God. He will not neglecte us, etc.

The Lord helps in time.
But for as much as in temptations and afflictions the Lord seems many times
to our flesh to tarry ouerlong, and in manner to neglect his: for we say the
Lord preuenteth, and adds, behold I come shortly. Shortly, I say, that is to
say in time: not to late nor to hastily. The which we say, neither to soon
nor to late, but in dew time and season. If the lord therefore shall seem to be
over slow, despair not: for he will come timely enough, when he shall see it
good. Do not thou prescribe unto him the manner and mean of deliverance, but
abide the Lords leisure. Read what goodly and wholesome things S. Paull has
written concerning this matter in the end of the 10. chapter to the Hebrews,
where a place also out of the 2. Chapt. of Abachuc is alleged.

Hold fast that thou haste.
And now he exhorts in few but most evident words to perseueraunce in
piety, wherein they had excelled hitherto. And he says two things hold
(...) hold fast that thou have. They had the gospel of Christ, and the
word of eternal life, the true faith and godly religion. These things he
commands to hold fast, and to persist in the religion ones received. And
whilst he commanded them to keep that they had, he signifies by the way,
that no new or other doctrine is to be looked for: but that this ones received
does suffice. Let us not think therefore in the government of the church
upon other laws, upon other traditions, than of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
This is sufficient for the church. After reasonynge as it were of the loss,
he says: Therefore must thou watch diligently and hold strongly the gospel,
for this being taken away thou art spoiled of thy crown. The crown is a
token of virtue and victory. We say.

Conquerours and worthy of the Empire, are crowned. The virgin loses her
crown, that is defiled. Therefore heretics, false prophets, and seducers take
away the crown, what time they seduce and corrupt: therefore says the
Lord: Thou haste gotten honor and glory, see that no man take it from thee.
So we read that S. Paull spoke in the 2. to the Coloss. Let no man take from
you the victory. In the 18. of Ezechiel the Lord testifies, that he will not
impute righteousness to the just, in case he forsake and leave his rightousenes
let us pray therefore, that we may evermore persevere in the word of the
Lord.

He proceeds in recityng most great rewards. The.xix. Sermon.
HIm that ouercometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall
go no more out. And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of
the city of my God, new Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my
God, and I will write upon him my new name. Let him that has ears hear,
what the spirit says to the congregations.

Our Lord proceeds in raccomptynge much more ample rewards, which he
would give to them that overcome: And so he tempereth his words, that we may
easily perceive, this promise not only to apperteyne to the congregation of
Philadelphia, but to all the Churches in the whole world, yea and to every of
the faythefull. And as we have oftentimes repeted already (for I am not
asshamed to repete, seeing that the Lord him self so greatly urges the
victory) again we say, that those things are promised not to such as
fight lightly or negligently (for diverse fight, The warfare and victory of
Christians.
and by and by run away) but to those that overcome and persevere to the
end. For our life is a warfare upon earth: which Job also has confessed.
The soldiour has a sure purpose to overcome his enemies. Our enemies are, the
devil, the world, and the flesh. Against these we must ernestly fight: of
none other intent, but that we may overcome. The Apostle in the 6. to the
Ephesians. described the armor of the faithful. In victory the Saints consider
sinceries and integrity, that we lose nothing of the verity known: but let
us reteyne the pure word of God, and sincere faith, and let us keep our bodies
and our souls clean from all pollution, and that to our lives end. He
propounds most ample rewards by promise. The manner of erecti^g pillars.
Whereby he alludeth to the manner of Greeks and Romans, who decreed Images to
such as deserved well of the common welthe in the which also they wrote their
virtues, for whose cause they were set up either in the court or market place
or else where. They seemed by this mean to deliver to their posterity as it
were by hand the glory of their elders, which they made also as it were
everlasting. Pillar in yt scriptures.
Otherwise the use of this vocable Column, or pillar is diverse. Jeremy is
called of God a pillar for his constancy. The Apostles are called of S. Paull
in the 2. to the Galath. chief pillars, for their excellency, and that the
churches leaned upon them, for the preaching of the verity. The church it self
also is called the pillar and base of verity, for as much as it is grounded
upon the sure rock Christ. In the Temple of Salomo^ stood two columns or
pillars, figures of the everlasting kingdom of Christ, ^. Timo. 3.
and of the holy church. In this place a pillar is taken for a man, in glory
and beauty excellent. For he says not that he will erecte a pillar for a
godly man: but I will, says he, make him a pillar, that is to say, I will
beautify him with honors and glory everlasting.

But where shall this pillar be set? where shall the glory of Saints be
famous? The pillar is set in ye Temple.
not in Court, or market place: but in the Temple of my God. And the Temple of
God, is heaven it self, and in our world the holy Church. Gloriouse therefore
shall he be in the church of Saints, as well militaunt, as triumphaunt. Albeit
therefore that the very godly hear evil in this world: yet this world shall
peryshe, Christ shall reign for ever, and the Saints shall reign with him.
Their glory then shall remain for ever and ever. And where he says, of my
God, Aretas expounds and says: This saiynge of my God, takes not away the
divine nature, that is seen in Christ, but establishes, as I may say, the
consubstantialitie. For it declares the union of two natures, which are in
the person of our Lord Jesus, to wit of his deity and humanity, even after
understanding, yet not confusely, to be indissobible. For they answer mutualy
one another, because of the assumptio^ of the humane nature, the divine to the
humane, and likewise the humane to the divine proprieties. etc.

Moreover the perpetuity and stablenes of the glory of the saints and
faithful is signified, where it is added, Stable gl^ry.
and he shall go no more out. For many times pillars are broken and cast down,
and renown ones gotten perishes and fades away. But Christ promises to them
that overcome, that they shall never be cast out of the fellowship of Saints,
neither that the glory of the faithful should be obscured at any time. And
thus far of the pillar it self.

Here follows of the inscription of the pillar, The inscription of ye pillar.
of what sort it shall be. Three things chiefly are written in the Saints, to
wit the name of God, the name also of the city of God, and the new name of
God or of Christ. Which we shall discuss in order. First the name of God is
ascribed to the godly, that is, they them selves are called by the name of God,
and be the children and heirs of God. Which is discoursed at large in the
first of John, and the.viii. to the Romans. Ouercomers be ye children of God.
And what can you devise to be more honorable, than to be, and be called the
son, not of king nor Emperor, but of ye living God? But this same noble
grace the Lord grants to the^ that overcome. In the first of John the.iii.
and.v. Victours be citezens of the city of God.
Chap. Secondly to the ouercomers is inscribed the name of the city of God:
that is to say, the Godly man is written in the number of the citez ns of the
city of God, and is verily a citezen of the city of God, I say even of the
city of God. It was a great matter in times past, to be a citezen of Rome: But
it is far greater to be a citezen of the city of God. The citezens inioye
all privileges and commodities, finally the glory of the city. the church is
described what i^ is.
But this is greater and more than that it can be declared at few words.

But the church, is the city of God: And the city of God, is the church.
Which is here set forth with three epithetes or titles, of the which it is
easy to judge, what the church is, or what we should think thereof. The church
is the city of God. For like as the city, is the fellowship of citezens: Even
so is the church the communion of saints. The Prince of the^ is Christ, the
head of the church. The round world it self was a figure of this church,
and the very setting up of the tents, in the mids whereof was seen the
Tabernacle, a token of the deity present, as it were a cohabiter. etc. For the
Lord is in the mids of the church. As we have red in the xxvi. of Leuit.
And in the.2. to the Corinth. the.6. Secondly the church is called new
Jerusalem. For the old was a figure of the new. This corporal church is
new Jerusalem, that is to say spiritual. Which S. Paul also affirms in ye
iiii. to the Galath. For in the third place is expounded that newnes. It is
not builded of men, but comes down from heaven above. For unless we be borne
from above of spirit and of sede immortal to wit the word of God, we can
not be members of the church. And we are borne by a spiritual regeneration,
the children of Christ and of the church. Whereof the Lord himself discourses
at large in the.iii. of John.

1. Petri. 1. And S. Paul the first to the Corinthians the.iii. and iiii. There
shall be more said of the new Jerusalem in thend of this book. But of these ye
understand, what is the church of Christ, the fellowship of the faithful,
regenerated by the word of God. etc.

The viccours get a new name.
Finally in them that overcome is written a new name, and that in deed ye new
name of Christ: Not only that they should be called Christians of Christ, but
because the name is a brief description of every thing and nature, and a new
name is promised: It follows that we should understand that men shall be
renewed, chiefly by glorifiyng. He promyseth therefore a glorifiyng to the
Godly. Whereof is spoken else where in the.xvii. of S. Math. 1. Cor. xv. Phil.
iii. And the first of John the.iii. These most ample rewards the saints may
verily look for, if they fight that they may overcome.

Hereunto is annexed the wonted acclamation, by the which both this doctrine
is applied and communicated to all churches through out the world. And is
declared that it came not of men as vain, but of the very spirit of God most
true. This spirit the Lord grant us.

The Lord blames sore the church of Laodicea. The.xx. Sermon.
AND unto the Angel of the congregation, which is in Laodices write: This
says Amen the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creatures of
God. I know thy works, that thou art another cold nor hot: I would thou were
cold or hoate. So then because thou art between both, and another cold nor
hoate, I will spew thee out of my mouth: Because thou say: I am rich and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing: And know not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, poor, blind and naked.

The seventh and last Epistle of our Savior Christ, The argument of ye
epistle to ye Laodicea^s
is written by the hand of S. John, to the Bishop of Laodicea. The same is a
great reproach of that people, in nothing commendable: And nevertheless a
faithful admonition or exhortation to repentance. And after his accustomed
manner, he signifies to whom he writes, and from whom the Epistle proceeds.
The Epistle is indicted of Christ to the Bishop of Laodicea, and to the whole
congregation. Therefore some thing is to be said of the Laodiceans, whereby the
rest may the better be understand and considered.

Laodicea the chief city of Caria, after Strabo and Pliny, stands by the
river of Lycus. Antiochus Theos, Laodicea.
builded the city, and named it after his wife. It was the welthiest city of
Asia: Which Vadiane also has noted in his Epitome. It had by making of
woollen clothe a most plentiful gain. Unto whom S. Paul seems also to have
preached the gospel. For he mentions of Laodicea, from whence also some men
think he wrote the first Epistle unto Timothee. Colos. 4
Certainly it appears that the Laodicea^s had received the gospel, even by this
Epistle, but corruptely. For they went about to match the world and the
church together, and to join together Christ and Mammon: And as it is said at
this day.

The sin of the Laodiceans.
Therefore they laid not aside their avarice, and their immoderate traffic (to
use moderatly the trade of marchaundise without disceptfulnes, no religion
does forbid) and exceading great riot and pride, neither seemed they to want
any thing, but to have and seem to have all things, for that they were rich.
Against these me^ the Lord inueigheth grievously, declaring them to be very
miserable, and more than nedy and plain beggars. For as in the church of
Philadelphia he blamed nothing, so in this he commends nothing at all.

Laodicea a figure of many churches at this day.
You shall find at this day many like, to whom this is common and ever in
their mouth: I have learned both to be a gospeller, and to be a soldier, to
drink, to play the whoremonger, and live at pleasure. You shall find like
churches, serving both Christ and Mammon, or marchaundise, Bacchus, Venus, and
God of battle. Both they and al these here are confuted, and are called to
repentance. Which argues, that the mercy of God is greatest, not forsaking
nor rejecting so corrupt churches, and men full of so great filthiness.

Woe be to them that contemn this unmeasurable mercy and goodness of God and
long suffering, and continewe in their mischief.

The description of Christ.
Christ is here again most plentifully described, who he is as in the fourmer
titles. Certes it may be gathered of all that this is the best and most perfect
description of Christ, that there is no need to beg of any other, to wit of
humane matters. He sets forth him self with a new name, and calls him, Ho
amen, that Amen. That same is an Hebrewe word, and most commonly used in the
Evangelists, especially in John, S. Paul in the.ii. to the Corinthians the
first Chapt. Christ the son of God, says he, which by us is preached among
you, by me and by Syluanus and Timothee was not yea and nay, but in him it was
yea. For all the promesses of God are in him yea, and in him are amen to the
praise of God by us. etc. But the Lord expounds him self, why he called him
self that Amen. For I am, says he, that witness, I mean that trusty or
faithful or constant and true. For Christ is given us of the father, that he
should testify of the will of God the father. And his testimony, as he him
self repeteth oftener than once in the Gospel of S. John, is firm, constant,
sure, certain and true, having no falsetie, doubtfulnes, nor inconstancy. And
these things accord right well to this argument, wherein he reproves the
Laodicians of sin, and exhorts them to repentance. It is a grievous matter
for the flesh to hear such a doctrine: but where the certentie, assurednes,
or verity of the teacher is perceived, it will commonly move men's minds if
they be not altogether abject and desperate.

He adds moreover an other thing, The beginning of the creatures of God.
which declares his dignity. For he calls him self the beginning of the
creatures of God. Neither ought the Arrians to seek here any defense for them
selves. For neither is it mete by any one place, much less by a little word,
to subuerte the whole scripture, and to strive with the articles of the creed,
the lively tradition of the Apostles. Our savior Christ is considered after
his deity and after his humanity. After his deity, he has no beginning, but
is rather the beginning (actiuely as it is commonly said, not passiuely of all
things and creatures. Neither is he a creature: For all things ar made by him.
Which thing both the Evangelical and Apostolical scriptures prove John. 1.
Colos. 1. and the Hebr. 1. where thou have places expositours of this same one.
After his humanity he is called the beginning of the creature of God (namely
man, which is called a creature by reason of his excellency, and for that he
is the Lord of creatures, for whom all things were made) as he is called the
first begotten of the dead. For in Christ mankind is repared, that it has
not perished: God looked upon the countenance of his Christ, when he first made
man. For Christ is the beginning, that is to say, the preserver of ye humane
nature: As it has else where been told you at large. Hitherto we have had the
description of Christ, which is called Amen, and the beginning of the creature
of God, by whom verily all things are made, which is very and true God,
witness of the divine will of God. etc.

Now he tells the church what opinion he has of her, and what she is, that
is to say blames her. And as he has beaten in to all the fourmer, that he
knew all their works: so does he to this also. And first he shows, that he
knows this of the church of Laodicea, and especially of the Bishop thereof
that he is neither cold, nor hot. He adds, (...), I would it were better,
if thou were altogether cold, or thoroughly hot: But now thou art lewke
warm, or blood warm. An Allegory taken of men's meat, or of cold, hot, or
warm water, and it is in a manner applied prouerbially. He is cold, that
openly follows the world, Cold.
being wrapped in heathennisshe errors and sins of this world, he boasts
no thing, or will seem to have any thing to do with the true Religion. Hot.
He is hot, whose breast inflameth with the holy ghost, contemns the world,
loves the true Religion exceadingly, and lives an holy life. He is warm or
between both, Warm or between both.
which has neither forsaken the world, his errors, and sins, nor has
fully received Christ, his verity and righteousness, but serves partly the
world, partly Christ: In outward things he shows him self to be a
Christian, in resorting to holy assemblees, and receiving the Sacraments, but
inwardly he is so beseged of the world, that he lives a worldly life, rather
than a Christian. Such a mixture the Lord allows not, Luke. 5
which else where forbids to plowe with an Ox and an Ass, and to make a
garment of linen and woollen: To pour new wine into old bottels, and to
patche an old garment with new cloth.

A mixture and compositio^ of corrupt and whole.
In Religions and rytes that lightness and mixture can be less allowed of God.
For you shall have, that will temper together sundry Religions, and of many
compile some one. Mahomet composed his Religion of the Iewyshe and christian
Religion. Many at this day make an hogepotche of papistrie and the Gospel, or
bake a chuchurnullis as the Germans call a cake of sundry graynes. If a
Papiste see this kind of service, he knows it not for his: And if the
Gospeler see it, he knows it for none of his. For it is a mixture of whole
and corrupt, where the sound part has no more strength, the corrupt for the
most part has the greater. Of such sort are the masses that are used at
this day of many, neither altogether Papisticall, nor yet wholly Evangelical.
For the Lords supper appears not in them: The Popish mass also is cut of
and altered in the same. If we believe that Christ set forth the best rule of
Religion and lyuinge, why follow we not that same only Master? But we set
more by the favor of men, which in no wise we will lose. For we set not so
much by the favor of Christ, as to call that saying of the Apostle to
memory, if I should please men I should not be Christ's servant.

But hear what the Lord says to these mungerelles. Galat. 1
It were better, says he, thou were either cold or hot. It were better thou
were a sinner or an heathen, than an Hipocrite, and a mongerell. For so
might thou be more easily helped, according to that saying of the Lord, If
you were blind, ye should have no sin. John. 9.
Now where ye seem to your selves just and sufficiently taught and furnished
with Godly rites and cultes that please God, you leave no place to further
instruction, but contemning the word of God, and Christ's institution, ye
prefer your mixtures before all the iustifications of God. The Lord also in
the Gospel says unto the Pharyseis: Amen I say unto you, that Publicanes and
common harlottes go before you into the kingdom of God. Math. 12


The other membre is plain enough, that it were better they were hot, namely
with the spirit of God, which thing the Apostle requires in the.xii. Chapt.
to the Romans.

Furthermore he threatens to plage them, if they continue, as they have
bego^ne to be newters: (...). The Lord speweth out ye newters.
I will spewe thee out of my mouth. By the which manner of speaking two things
are signified: Both the lothsomes which God conceaueth of this newtralitie or
warmnes: And the vomiting out, which punishes ye same. warm water provoke a
vomit. Wheru^to he appears to have alluded, as likewise to that old phrase
of speaking, the land has vomyted the Chananites, and the same shall vomit
up you also. Therefore these composers or mongerelles with their temperature and
mixture do so displease God, that they engender in him a lothsomnes, be unto
him an abomination, that finally he shakes them of, the same we understand
of them that join together Christ and Mammon. And the phrase of speech is to
be noted, (...) now therefore, or so forasmuch as, or now seeing it is so, etc.
Moreover the longaminitie, or long suffering of God is here noted, which
plageth not immediately, unless there appear nowher any hope of ame^deme^t.

Unhappy riches.
He expounds more fully the sin of the Laodiceans, and what is the cause of
their tepiditie: Because they love riches, wherein they trust, supposing them
selves to want nothing: They think them selves to be wise, and to se all
things, and to be sufficiently furnished with things spiritual and temporal.
It is less, where they say, we are rich. More that follows, I am increased
with goods: That is to say, I have gotten so much richesse, that I want
nothing.

A great rebuke.
That same he now confuteth, and shows that they are utterly disceiued, and to
be miserable people. For he rebukes them grievously, and says, thou know
not that thou art such, as thou art. That ignorance, is a great evil, and
the beginning of desperate blindness, when a man thinks to have, that he has
not. For such persevere in their error, and admit no counselor. Therefore
says the Lord, thou know not that thou art (...) miserable, wretched,
weried and worn with evils. For they are toyled with many labors, that serve
this world. (...) miserable. Thou see not thine own misery: Others that
se, are full sorry. Thou see not in what case thou art. This kind of speech
signifies a man very wretched and desperate, whose misery others see, but he
him self sees nothing, (...) poor or a beggar. Thou think thy self very
rich, but thou art a stark beggar. Couetouse rich men, are poor: They are
poor also in virtues. The people of Laodicea were blind, as the Phariseis
were called blind in the.ix. of John. Well sighted in wordly matters, in
heavenly blind as betels. Naked, or destitute of good works. Void of thy
wedding garment. They notwithstanding were rychely arrayed with garments of
most five wolle. But before God they appeared naked. Let the gallauntes of this
world, or proud pecockes rather, so well eyed, and gorgeously appareled,
mark these things well. The Lord give them understanding.

The Lord gives wholesome counsel to the Laodiceans, admonishing them to
repent. The.xxj. Sermon.
I Counsel thee to bye of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be
rich: And white raiment, that thou may be clothed, that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear: And annoynte thine eyes with eye salve, that thou
may see. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Be fervent therefore and
repent.

Forasmuch as God wills not the death of a sinner, Wholesome counsel.
but rather that he should convert and live: Therefore after a grievous blaming
of ye church of Laodicea, he gives her holsom counsel, admonishing and
exhorting the same to repentance, and signifies with all what is true
repentance.

The Lord uses the word of counselling, I counsel thee.
not of commanding, to thinte^t to confound the madness of them, which unless
they be violently drawn, think not them selves admonished, allured or called
of the Lord. And whilst they look for such a drawing, they neglect al gods
counsel, and fall from the true salvation. God counsels his elect such
things as are wholesome: The chosen obey good counselles. God touches their
hearts inwardly, and outwardly by preaching of the word, and by sundry
admonitions he pooleth and drives man from evil to good. This counsel of God
is not to be despised, and an other violent vocation to be imagined. God his
word must be heard. To day, says ye Prophet, if ye hear his voice, do not
harden your hearts. When the Lord counsels with his word, and the hearers
harden their minds, they do that through their own fault, and are made
authors of their own destruction. But they that receive Gods counsel,
received it not by the force of free will, but of the grace of God, which
works in us to will and to perform.

Therefore when the Lord counsels wholesome things, the chosen pray that they
may receive the same: And they receive them through grace, obeiyng the
counselles of God.

The some of the wholesome counsel.
And the some of the wholesome counsel is this: Bie of me, says the Lord, gold
tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, may bie apparel, and may get
eye salve to anoint thine eyes. He sets these things as a medicine against
the diseases, which he discovered before, calling the church of the Laodiceans,
poor, naked, and blind. Now therefore he teaches them how they may be rich,
may be clothed, and may receive their eyes or sight again, if they verily get
them selves gold tried, or concoct or purified.

Gold tried
And gold tried in the fire, is gold most purified and clean, having in it
no grossenes or metal, but pure and clean gold. Hereby is shadowed the
word of God, whereof the Prophet sang: The word of the Lord, is a pure word,
silver tried in the fire, seven times pourged in a vessel of earth. Certainly
the word of God is light, coming of the eternal and most pure light, having
no part of humane filthiness or affections, sauouring of none errors, teaching
nothing that is corrupt. Howbeit of it self it shall profit a man nothing,
unless it be received with a true and sincere faith. Therefore do I not
separate faith from the word, and say therefore that the pure and sincere faith
is signified by gold. Whereof S. Peter said, that the faith of our hearts be
pourged. For although there be in us spots and infirmities, yet is faith, by
reason of the subject whereupon he rests, most pure.

The word of promission, and even Christ him self is the object of faith,
which is the very pureness it self. Wherefore the Lord counsels that the
Congregation of Laodicea, should bye gold tried, he counsels that they
should hear Gods word, and believe it in deed. For the Lord uses the word
of byeng, for receiuynge, hearing, and obeying.

How the word of bying is used
For no man shall imagine, that there is bargayning before God, as there is with
men: As though the spiritual gifts of God might be bought for money. This is
repugnaunt to the whole scripture, and specially against the determination of
S. Peter pronounced against Simon Magus. But this our exposition the Prophet
Esaias. Approves in the.55. Chapter. Where amongst other things come, says
he, bye without money, and without price, or exchange. And by and by: I^
hearing hear me, incline your care, etc. Therefore the Romish Chananite has
no hold hereof, I mean the Pope that great merchant, which sells al things
in the church, even those things which he has not, the greatest disceiuer in
the world. Hereunto is added moreover, that like as it is in Esaias plainly
expressed, of whom such graces or gifts are to be bought: So Christ also
here says expressly, I counsel thee to bie of me. Behold he says of me: Not
of the Pope, of Monks, Freers, or priests. For Christ alone has the things,
which we may require. He alone does satisfy, he alone grants those gifts.
And therefore he says in the Gospel of S. John: Let him that has honger or
thirst, come unto me: To me, I say, let him come. John the.iiii. vi. and.vii
And S. Peter says, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of
eternal life. As though he should say: If we will live, we can go to none
other, but unto thee. Thou art the life and fountain of all goodness.

Moreover the use and profit of this pure gold, The use and fruicte of pure
gold.
tried and most purified, I mean, the word of Gods verity and pure faith, is
three sorts. First, that thou may be rich: Secondly, that thou may bye
thee apparel: Thirdly, that thou may bye the eye salve, to heal the
blyndnes of thine eyes. For the word of God and faith in him, is the
foundation of true piety. Without the word and faith nothing is sound.

The first fruicte, is welthe or riches, to wit spiritual. The true riches of
ye faithful.
For the word and faith is not a false imagination, and a vain dream of
things most excellent. For he that believes the word feleth joy in his
heart, and inioyeth spiritual gifts: And possessing Christ, through faith
possesses all goodness. Whereupon also the Apostle in the first chapt. of the
first epistle to the Corinth. said: I give thanks to my God always for you,
for the grace of God that is given you in Christ Jesus because you ar in all
things enriched by him, in every word, and in all knowledge (like as the
testimony of Christ is confirmed in you.) In so much that you are not
destitute in any gift. etc. Let the^ mark well these things, which think
worldly goods to be true rich. These foles shall be judged of the wisdom of
God, as it is manifest in the.12. cha. of S. Luke. And besides this, they yt
are destitute of the light of God his word, and lack faith, ca^ not use
rightly nor well these earthly riches. Therefore heavenly riches, are the true
riches.

The apparel of the faithful.
The second fruict, is the clothing and comely apparel, wherewith we are covered,
that our shameful nakedness should not appear. Before their fall our parents
were naked, but with out any shame or ignominy: After the fall they were
ashamed. Because sin brings shame, and want of al good works: And an evil
conversation, is a most shameful nakedness.

With this were the Laodiceans infected. But Christ, which is learned by the
word of truth, and perceived by true faith, is the white apparel of the
faithful, their righteousness and innocence. He covers al our spots, he
abholisheth our shameful nakedness, decketh us with all kind of virtues, that
we may appear honest and comely before God in holy conversation. For Christ is
the wedding garment. The Apostle counsels us to put on Christ, and that we
be appareled with righteousness, temperaunce, and all goodness. The places be in
the.13. to the Romans. Ephesians. 4. Colos. 3. chapt. Away here with the cowle of
our Lady, under the which gather for the most part wicked and impenitent
persons. The most pure virgin covers not such, Our ladies cowle.
she loves righteousness and repentance.

Finally with this gold is bought an eye salve, which is a medicine for ye
eyes, Sight is restored.
which Physicians are wont to lay to sore and blere eyes, against blindness. The
commandment of the Lord, says David, is bright, giving light to the eyes.
Faith also does infourme rightly the judgment of man, that we may judge holily
of virtues and vices. The want of God his word and of true faith, brings in
blindness.

For all these things the Lord counsels the Laodicians, to seek for Gods
word, and believe it verily. For so it should come to pass, that being enriched
with all spiritual gifts, they might lead a pure conversation in the church,
might possess Christ, and judge rightly of al matters of salvation. And in
these things also consists true repentance: In forgeuenes of sins, and
amendment of life. etc.

But least they should say, we hear these things in vain, The Lord rebukes
and chasteneth whom he loves.
as they which have heard before that we shall be spewed out of the Lords
mouth: yea and are so sharply shaken up with bitter words and sentences, that
we are constreined to despair: He preuenteth that same and says: whom soever I
love, (...) I rebuke and chaste^. The first word signifies to accuse and
reprove openly, which is done with sharper words: The latter is referred to
discipline, whereby children are kept in awe with the Palmer, least they forget
them selves through wantonness. The Lord therefore alluding to ye words of
Solomon in the.iii. Chap. signifies that a sharp rebuke, or severe chastening
is not always a sign that God is angry, but oftener a token that he is pleased
and loves us. Therefore he says, first I rebuked you sharply of love, and so
sought your salvation. Therefore it is now also an wholesome sign if ye preachers
rebuke the church with sharp words: And again it is an unlucky sign, if a
fox tail be stricken over faults intolerable. It is a token of love also, if
a man suffer sundry mishappes. Which thing the Apostle discourses at large in
the.xii. Chapt. to the Hebre.

Upon these things he infers the some of the matter, zeal and repentance.
and says: Where thou see God so earnestly seek thy salvation, I pray thee
continue not always to be thus in a mammering nether hot nor cold. (...), be
zelouse, take unto thee a fervent zeal to follow and apprehend thy salvation.
For now he sets the feruentnes of faith conceived of the word and spirit of
God, against this newtralitie or warmnes. After he adds, and repent, in
sorsaking thine evil conversation, and being of Christ tried gold: That is
purefied and pourged, whereby thou may be rich, be arrayed in white, and may
have a medicine wherewith to annointe thine eyes, that thou may see. To God
be glory.

He draws them also hereby unto repentance. The.xxij. Sermon.
Behold I stand at the door and knock: If any man hear my voice and open
the door, I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me: To
him that ouercometh will I grant to sit with me on my seat even as I
overcame, and have sitten with my father on his seat. Let him that has ears,
hear, what the spirit says to the congregations.

Hereby also the Lord allureth the Laodiceans to repentance, showing that
every time is mete for conversion, and that God is evermore ready to receive
sinners, and provoke them always that they should amend and live. And this
matter he expounds in an allegorical and goodly speech, Allegorical speech.
taken out of the fifth chapt. of the book of Canticles. For he faineth the
Lord to stand at the door and knock, yea and to promise to them that open the
greatest familiarity and joys unspeakable.

First therefore is declared ye benevolence of God toward sinners, and his most
ready will always to receive the same, yea and his infinite study to move men
to repentance, that they might live. For the Lord stands at the door, and
knocks. The word of standing does signify, that God is always prepared,
always watches over our salvation. For he sits not still, nor lies not on
the one side like a sluggarde: He stands busely to his work. And I stand
says he, not I stood, or shall stand: But I stand evermore ready, evermore
loving and gentle. What does he? He knocks, and that in deed at the door,
desiring to be let in. For like as he yt knocks at the door seriously,
coueteth to be let in: so God desires ernestly to be of us received. And God
uses sundry kinds of knocking. For he warns, and exciteth with his word by
the Prophets, again by signs and wonders, and also by sundry chau^ces and
mouings. How the Lord knocks.
These things may be seen in the city of Jerusalem. He sends to them his
Prophets and Apostles. He shows diverse wonders. He brings on the^ sorrowful
chances, that they might admonish the^: Such as are reported, Luke. 13. of the
Galileans, and of those whom the toure of Siloe had overwhelmed. We may se the
like at this day, how the Lord knocks. Therefore he said truly, Jerusalem,
Jerusalem. etc. Math. 23. These ar doubtless ye parts and doings of god which
will not yt a sinner should die, but rather convert and live.

Than must we se, what is required of us, Our part is to hear and to open
verily yt we should hear the knocking and noise of the knocker, and that also
we open and receive such as desire to come in. Here are they confuted, which
speak of man as though he were a block, and image I know not what manner of
drawing, saying: It is neither in yt runner nor in the willer. etc. Certain
altogether abstain from well doing, saying, if I be chosen, it is enough. But
the scripture requires every where hearing and obedience. We know that
thelect are only saved, and that thelect in Christ: In Christ to be they that
believe: That faith is of hearing, hearing by ye word of god. Therefore says ye
Prophet, this day if you hear his voice. etc. This same is recited of the
Apostle. Heb. 4. The Apostle also. 2. Tim. 2. In a great house there be not
only vessels of gold, but of earth also. If any pourge him self. etc. And
therefore ye Lord says, I knock: It shall be thy part, not to despise him that
knocks, but to open unto him. And he recites in deed two things, to hear,
which both in the.8. and.9. of John is required of the children of God, and of
the true sheep: And to open, that is to receive the Lord, or believe, to obey,
and to frame them selves after the will of God, and to do penance.
Notwithstanding we must here beware, that we think not that man has power of
him self to receive the Lord. The Lord illumineth his elect, and by him we can
do al things, without who^ we can do nothing. Other places must be co^ferred
with this as John. 15.2. Corinth. 3. Philip. 2. They therefore that open, do
open by the grace of God. They that open not being wrapped in their sins,
through their own fault open not, and not through any fault of God.

Let us hear moreover what ye Lord promises to the^ that open, yt is to say,
to such as receive Christ with true faith. What we shall get by opening.
The Lord promises to them two things chiefly. First, I will go into him,
says he. The scripture signifies, ye Christ dwells every where through faith
in ye hearts of ye faithful, and with a most strayte knot to be joined unto them.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him.
These things are spoken of the Lord in the.vi. of John. And in the xiiii.
chapt. he says. He that loves me, will keep my word: And my father and I
will come unto him, and will make abode with him. S. Paul says that he lives
not now, but that Christ lives in him. The same affirms that Christ through
faith dwells in the hearts of the faithful. And so ye Lord enters the
hearts of them that let him in. Not the least part of felicity consists in
this conjunction. For to be united with God, is blessedness, which begins
here, and is made perfect in an other life. And therefore in the second place the
Lord says: And I will suppe with him, and he with me. Whereby he notes not
only again a most dear friendship and familiarity (for the table is
consecrate to amity) but rather ye fruition of eternal glory. For by the
supper are signified, the joys celestial, greatest, and unspeakable, which
after their souls the Godly receive immediately after death: But more fully in
the end of times, when the bodies shall arise again. Therefore is it not
applied to a diner, but to a supper, as it is also in the.14. of Luke. The^ if
we receive Christ, we shall have him dwelling with us continually, whilst we live
in this world. And in the world to come we shall have the full fruition of all the joys celestial. These things be certain and true. For otherwise in the
life to come there shall be no riotouse bankettes, such as the Turks do
imagine.

The thron of God is prepared for the penitent.
He annexeth also an other general promise, whereby he exhorts and moves to
the study of godly religion and to repentance. For to him that ouercometh is
promised the kingdom of heaven. And he says to him that ouercometh (whereof I
have spoken in the other epistles) not to him ye flees or to a coward. etc. He
propou^deth also thexa^ple of the co^querour Christ. For we must overcome, as
he has ouercome^. He in deed overcame most perfitly: we after our little
strength, fight, and overcome. And verily the true victory in us, is ye lively
virtue of Christ: that is to say, by him they ouercom, whosoever overcome. And
like as he having overcome death, and vanquished the world and the devil,
ascended into heaven, and sat on the right hand of the father: so he promises
us also ouercomming, that he will give us ye seat of his father: not yt we
sitting on the right hand of God, should judge over al flesh, being made
Christ's: but that being made pertakers of everlasting glory, and delivered
from all judgment, we may appear in glory, when he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead. We read of a like promise made to ye disciples Matthew. 19.
and Luke. 22. And so assuredly shall this glory come unto us, as Christ him
self did verily ascend into Heaven, and sat in the glory celestial.

And here we must note a special thing, that Christ gives here that thing,
which in the 20. of Matthew. he denies that he can give to James and John, that
is to sit in the glory celestial. Therefore this place expounds that. The
divinity of Christ.
For Christ after his deity gives that, which after his humanity he denies
that he ca^ give. This place then proves, that Christ is very God, geuer of
eternal life, etc.

He adds after his manner an acclamation, whereby he applies this epistle to
al congregations, and affirms it to be inspired of the spirit of Christ.
Whereof we have spoken before.

And we have treated hitherto of the second part of this work wherein are
declared the most excellent poinctes of our religion, who and of what sort is
Christ, The sum.
sittyng in the glory of the father, how he is present in his church, and
governs the same as king and priest, by his spirit, by his word and
Sacraments. What also and of what sort is the church of Christ: what is the
true and right doctrine of the church: what opinions are wicked. What is to
be done with erroneouse doctrines and seducers: how the church fallen and
afflicted may be repared: what is true repentance, and what are the duties
of the godly, and many other things of like sort. To God the father be
praise, thanks geuinge, and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The second vision is showed to S. John, wherein he sees God in his Throne
with Elders, whom he describes gallauntly. The.xxiij. Sermon.
AFter this I looked, and behold a door was open in heaven, and the first voice
which I heard was as it were a tro^pet talkyng with me, which said: come up
hither, and I will she we thee things which must be fulfilled herafter. And
immediately I was in the spirit: and behold a seat was set in heaven, and one
sat on the seat. And he that sat, was to look upon like a Jasper stone, and
a Sardine stone: and there was a rainebowe about the seat, in sight like a
Smaragde. And about the seat, were xxiiii. seats. And upon the seats,
xxiiii. Elders sittinge, clothed in white raymente, and had on their heads
crowns of Gold.

The third part of this work reaches from the beginning of the 4. chapter,
unto the beginning of the 12. chapter. And conteyneth a notable vision, most
wholesome, and of much fruicte. The first vision, which we heard expounded in
the 3. chap. exhibiteth a figure of Christ, and of his church, and how the
Lord reigns in the same, how also the church behaueth or ought to demean
her self. In the second vision S. John declares, how by a most just and
most holy government God governs all things by Christ, which chance and
are done to the church in the world and of the world. The argument of the
second vision.
In these are rehearsed the most sorrowful destenies of the church, calamities,
plages, and destructions, famines, persecutions, reuoltinges, heresies,
conflictes, and other euilles most greuouse of the same sort. etc. Who also
and what and how just God is, rightuouse and holy in all his judgments,
here is described: That he is Author of all: That God through the most
witty and excellent government of Christ rules all thing: that the holy
Aungelles also and al creatures do acknoweledge him, and give glory unto God.
For so it teaches us also in all our doings, The End of this vision.
and even in the very greuouse calamities and persecutions, whereof it shall
prophecy moreover, the acknoweledge the providence and good will of God
toward us, and his most just government. This if we shall do with quiet
minds, we shall bear also most heavy burdens patiently: we shall cease with
curiouse questions to inquire, why God permits Antichrist to spring up, to
increase and reign, to oppress the religion and Saints of God? Then shall
cease also the blasphemouse mutinyng of those, which are not affraide to say.
God is in deed the Lord, he is almighty, he does what he will, and as he
will: we are bond servants, and rather worse than bondemen. We are forced to
bear what so ever he will lay upon us, etc. As though God were unjust, and
after a tirannicall fear terrible, and ruled after a carnal lust. It is most
shameful to think thus, much more to speak it. This vision shall declare, that
God by his providence governs althinges, and that the same is just in all his
ways, and holy in all his works.

And first S. John is prepared to receive this vision, A preparation to this
vision.
yea and we also are prepared in him. For when he had seen the door in heaven
to be wide open, he heard withal, come up hither, etc. It is surely a
benefit not to be expressed with tongue, that the Lord opens heaven for us
miserable men mortal, and suffers us to see what is done therein, or what he
him self does there, and what his works or judgments be toward men. Let no
man say herafter, that God does in Heaven what things he list, not passinge
upon us that crepe upon earth, and who also must suffer that we would not.
For now he makes as it were an account of his works and being assured
admits thee as a looker on of the matter.

And here he declares with a godly voice, The mi^de must be lifted up.
what John should do, and how he should behave him self. Christ bids John
ascend into supercelestial places, not in body, but in mind. Therefore must
our mind be lifted up into the contemplation of Heavenly things, and be
pourged as much as may be from earthely affections, that we may behold
heavenly things with an heavenly contemplation. What will we say that the
example of John follows immediately. And incontinently I was in the spirit:
that is, in a spiritual co^templation, or ravished with the spirit into the
faithful consideration of those things which were showed me.

The some of things to be said.
Now also is compiled an argument of things that should be told: I will show
thee what things must be done herafter. For after the Tipe of God, orderyng
or gouernyng al things justly through Christ, immediately are declared the
destenies of the church by seven seals, and seven trompettes, in the which
are every where interlaced most comfortable consolations and full of
efficacitie.

A tipe of God workynge all things justly.
And first of al before the Seals and tro^pettes is set forth a figure or tipe
of God, and his most rightuouse judgment and government in all things: and
that through out the 4. and 5. chapt. wholly, that it might prepare us to the
reading or hearing of those things which shall follow in the 6. 7. and 8.
chapt. And seem to others, and to man's judgment to be greuouse, hard, and
unjust. And the Tipe or vision was after this sort. The some of ye vision,
and general order of ye same.
In heaven it self appeared a seat or throne of Majesty. He that sits
therein, holds in his right hand a book, closed with Seals. By him that sat
stood a lamb, which takes the book, and opens the Seals thereof. And out
of this Throne also proceeds a seuenfolde spirit, wonderfully vtteryng his
virtues. Before the seat appears a glassie Sea, bright, and even like
Crystal. The throne it self rests like a wagon upon four beasts full of
eyes and wings, beneath appering round about, and inuirunnyng or compasing
the throne. A rainebowe like a smaragde goes round about the same. About the
Throne by a circle appear xxiiii. Seats, and so many elders sittyng in them,
crowned, and in white arraye. This is the order of this second vision. In
their place shall be declared what the La^be, what the beasts, what the Elders
and the other parts did. It suffices now to have touched the chiefest
poinctes of the vision, and a shadowyng some of the same. Visions exhibited
many times before.


Secondely we must see, what every thing signifies. For hereof depends a
great part of the whole mystery: as concerning the manner of vision, S. Ihon
brings no new thing of the revelation of Christ. For we read that such
manner of visions were exhibited for the most part to the prophets, as to
Esaye in the 6. chapt. To Ezechiel 1. and 11. chapt. And to Daniel in the 7.
chapt. etc. A Throne.
And a Throne signifies a majesty imperial and administration judicial. And
because the Throne is not in earth, but is seen in heaven: we shall think, that
the providence and administration of gods judgments be celestial, sound,
most holy, and clean void of al corruption. And upon this same Throne is one
sitting, sitting I say, Sitting in ye Throne.
not lyinge or standinge. For God the judge of all is of a quiet mind, neither
is he moved with any affections like men. Here is none affection, injury,
unrighteous in the universal government of al things to be thought upon.
Elihu. in the 34. chapt. of Job, says: Far from God be wickedness, and
iniquity from the Almighty. For the work of man will he render to him, and
according to the ways of every one he will reward them. For verily God will
not condemn in vain, neither will the almighty subuerte judgment, etc. And
Aretas Bishop of Cesaria an old expositour admonissheth, God is presented by
no humane shape.
that of pourpos the shape of man was not attributed to him that sits in the
seat. For albeit that afterward mention be made of a righthande holdyng the
book, yet is here no shape of man exhibited. But he says also simply one
sitting, he gives him no name. The cause is ready: for God by his nature ca^
not be defined, as he that is invisible, and unmeasurable: After the manner of
men in deed humane members are attributed to him, but to be expounded by a
trope. Moreover when the same God appeared to the people of Israel in Sina, they
heard a voice only, but the Israelites saw no shape. As Moses witnesses in
the 4. chapt. of Deuteron. Doubtless that they should not express with an
Image the incomprehensible, and should commit idolatry, the great sin
and wickedness. S. Paul in the 17. of the Acts denies that the deity is like
the forging of men. To the Romans. He ascribes to the greatest folly Idolles
made after the shape of men which should represente God. Whereof we have
spoken else where. In the mean season are rehearsed two preciouse stones,
which by their colors do after a sort shaddowe the nature of our God, and
admonish the godly of greater and more excellent things. A Jasper is a grene
stone like an Emeraude. Grenes signifies the perpetuity of God, and that he
quie^teneth and keeps in life all things. But the Sardine looks with a fine
color like a bright red. For God dwells in light inaccessible: The same is
a consumyng fire, and also charity it self. For the nature of stones read
Pliny, etc.

The rainebowe smaragdine.
But a raynebowe inuironeth the Throne round about, a raynebowe for the most
part is of diverse colors: but here it is of one color and that of a
Smaragde, to wit grene. The raynebowe is a token of a perpetual grace, and
covenant made after the fludde, as is declared in the 9. chapt. of Genes. And
verily the Throne of the high judge might put us wretched men in fear:
Therefore the raynebowe puts us in remembrance of Gods grace, and that God
which by his providence governs all things has bound him self in leage
to man kind, to whom verily he wissheth well. That leage is still grene, and
always of force. The goodness of God toward men is perpetual. For though
heaven should fall, and out of this Throne proceed most greuouse
thonderboltes, and calamities should fall upon us like a storm: yet is God in
leage with us, and loves us derely.

xxiiii. Elders in seats.
About the Throne are seen set.xxiiii. seats, and in them sit xxiiii.
Elders, as Senators of the most mighty kingdom of God, and fathers of the
Hierarchy celestial: This nombre is made of xii. and xii. But xii.
Patriarchs signify the whole people of Israel, and the old church before
Christ. The Christen church was planted and sprange up of the twelve
Apostles, after the incarnation of Christ, whereupon that xii. number
comprehends the whole church of the new people. Therefore is the whole
universality of Saints assembled in heaven, and triumphing with Christ their
king. And therefore be they clothed in white raiment, to wit pourged by
Christ, and pure and clean from all corruption. Crowned also, because they
have ouercomen and now reign in eternal glory, verily kings and priests
through Christ. The description also of their behauour admonissheth, that in
them is nothing wauntinge, but to be truly blessed: and therefore they be
showed sitting, not that they are judges, or judge for Christ, but because
they rest from their labors, and be of most quiet and pure affections,
sitting with the high judge. But what thing do these? They give God no
counsel, what he should do, or by what mean or way he may do this or that,
but they allow his judgments. For they know all his works to be just and
holy. The which shall immediately follow. What shall we do than? shall it be mete
for us to inquire of the judgments of God, or prescribe what he should do or
not do? I think not you have in this universality of saints, al
patriarchs, al judges and kings, al princes, and the whole people of God: you
have emonges these, king Solomon him self, and the most excellent and
wittiest Princes of the world: you have the Apostles, and men Apostolical,
Martirs, and the wise men of the whole universal world. Will thou condemn
their judgments? following therefore their example, busy not thy self to move
curiouse questions: praise the just judgments of God, and know that the Lord
is just in all his ways, and holy in all his works. To whom be glory.

Here is described the procedynge of the holy spirit, and operation, the
almighty knoweledge of God, and how the Throne of God is borne up or
sustained of the four beasts, and what the beasts do. The.xxiiij. Sermon.
ANd out of the Seat proceeded lightenynges and thonderinges and voices, and
there were seven lamps of fire, burning before the seat, which are the
seven spirits of God. And before the seat there was a Sea of glass like unto
Crystal. And in the mids of the seat, and round about the seat, were
four Beasts full of eyes before and behind. And the first beast was like a
Lion, the second beast like a calf, and the third beast had a face like a
man, and the fourth beast was like a fliyng Egle. And the four beasts had
each one of them six wings, and round about without and within, they were
full of eyes. And they had no rest day another night: saying, holy holy holy
is the lord God almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

The mark and end of ye first part of this vision.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, as the faithefull pastor of his church, will utter the
destenies and wonderful calamities that will come upon the church. Therefore to
the intent he might stop the mouths of such as mutiue and be inquisitiue of
the judgments of God, and might persuade al me^ to have patience in these
storms of euilles, he sets forth a treatise before, wherein he shows that
all things are done or permitted to be done of God by his most just
providence, and are governed or ordered by the Lamb, with a judgment most
rightuouse and holy. For who so believes and remembers this, in what chau^ces
so ever he happen, he submits him self humbly and lowly and obediently to
his God, and cries always, the Lord is rightuouse in all his mayes and holy
in all his works. And this is the most true state of the first part of this
vision, which is done in the 4. and 5. chapt. And is more over most elegaunt,
most pleasant, and most full of consolation. Althinges are more lively set
forth and perceived in such fit and heavenly representations, than they can
be understand in bare words.

A recapitulatio^ or brief rehersall.
First is recited a Throne, and that in deed a celestial throne, leeste in the
works, in the providence and judgments of God, we should Imagine any thing
carnal or corrupt. Secondly he that sits on the throne is represented unto
us by two colors, Grene and red. For God is an eternal essence geuyng to al
their greues or being. The same burns in love toward man kind, and wills
well unto man: but to the disobedient and rebels he is a consumyng fire. And
the throne is environed with a raynbow grener than grass, comfortyng us, that
we should not be dismayed at the sight of that Godly throne, but should
remember always, that he which sits in the throne, judge and governor of
al, is most true and keeps his promesses: and to be that same leage friend of
ours.xxiiii. Elders sit round about the throne, which already are
signified what they be, and as it were shadowed: straight way in the end of
the iiii. chapt. and in the fifte shall be declared, what they do, or what they
say. Doubtless all the Saints in heaven are lokers on, of the judgments and
works of God. For the judgments of God be not such, that they should flee
the light and knoweledge of Saints.

Now follows, out of the Throne proceeded lightninges, etc. In the throne is
he that sits and the lamb, that is, the father and the son, and from them
both proceeds the holy ghost. For by interpretation it follows immediately,
which are the seven spirits of God. For the lightenyngs, the signs of the
holy ghost.
thonderings, and other things rehearsed signify, or be tokens of the holy
spirit: which else where is red also to be shadowed by fire, and water, and
wind, and by fiery tounges. But no man will think, that the holy ghost, which
is one in substance and of the simple nature divine, should be plucked into
seven parts. For I told you in the first chapt. how the seven spirits of God
are put for the seuenthfolde, most full, and most perfect spirit of God.

We have in the beginning of this vision the whole mystery of the blessed
Trinity, so much as is nedeful for us to know, The holy Trinity.
and believe, and profess. There is one Seat, in that one seat are contained
the sitter lamb and spirit: therefore there is one divine essence and nature,
and thereof is one power and majesty, one rule, because there is one throne:
briefly there is one god, true, and eternal, for evermore blessed: As Moses
also in the 6. of Deuter. and all the prophets and Apostles have every where
taught. Howbeit in this only and undivided substance is seen a most plain
distinction of persons. For there is he that sits in the throne, and the
lamb, and from both proceeds the holy ghost. This mystery of the Trinity
we profess in the Creed. This appears openly in the incarnation of our lord,
whilst the angel says to the virgin, the holy ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the hiest shall ouershadow thee: And yt which shall be borne of
thee, shall be called ye son of God. Likewise in the baptism of Christ is
heard a voice from heaven upon the Lord: This is my well beloved son. The
holy ghost also appears in ye likeness of a dove. Whereupon the lord commanded
us also to be baptized in the name of the father and of the son and of the
holy ghost. This profession is certain and true, and so set forth by the most
manifest scriptures and lively preaching of ye apostles: like as Tertullian
declares against ye heretic Praxeas. We ought rather believe and cleave unto
these things, than to the monstrouse and blasphemouse Spanish sophistry of
Serve to a man most corrupt.

Of the holy ghost.
But especially here is declared unto us the whole mystery of the holy ghost,
and that in few words, which in ye gospel of John is uttered more at large.
First his procedi^g is noted, which verily in times past me^ affirmed rashly to
be set forth in no part of the scripture. Procedi^g.
S. John here, out of the throne says he, proceeded lightninges, etc. And by
and by: which are the seven spirits of God. And this word (...) in Greek
does signify a proceeding or going out, but S. John her says (...), that is
proceeded or went forth. And therefore that ancient counsel of Constantinople
decreed rightly: (...) that is and (I believe) in the holy ghost the lord, that
quickener, proceeding of the father, etc. But because ye Lord him self in the
gospel speaking of the holy ghost says, he shall glorify me: for he shall take
of mine, and shall show unto you. Al things what so ever the father has, are
mine. Therefore I said, yt he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you:
no man will understand the spirit to proceed of the father only, and not also
of ye son, whereof also was long contention between the Greeks and Latins.
For if he proceed of the father, he proceeds of the son also. For even for
ye same cause at this present he is red to proceed out of the Throne. But in
the Throne is not only he that sits, but the la^be also, of whom in the 5.
chapt. shall be added, that the lamb has seven eyes, which are the seven
spirits of God, sent into the whole world. Albeit therefore yt in the 15. of
John, the holy ghost is said to proceed from the father: yet there is set
before: who^ I (says the son) will send unto you from my father. To be
short, if there be one substance and nature of the father and of the son, I
see not how ye holy ghost should proceed from the father, that he should not
proceed of ye son also. Let us rather leave those scrupulouse disputatio^s to
idle wits: let us believe, yt ye spirit proceeds from both.

Moreover the virtue or effect and operation of the holy ghost, is here also
set forth and declared gallauntly. The effect and operation of the holy ghost.
For first he lighteneth, when he illumineth the obedient, and fears the
rebels with sore threatenings. Secondly he tho^dereth, what time he
inueygheth against this ungracious world, and reproves the same of sins,
thonderinge out the terrible judgments of God. Two Apostles in Mark are
called ye sons of thonder, or thonderers. He utters moreover wholesome
voices of doctrine, exhortation and consolation, by men, for the favor of men.
Finally where the operation of the holy ghost can not sufficiently well be
expressed, yet by the seventh nombre he compriseth and accomplissheth his
fulness, and says, that seven fiery lamps are burning before the Seat,
burning I say, not quenched, or smoking. For the grace of the holy ghost is
bright and full of efficacitie, whereof is spoken also before: and where these
things are found in the Throne, how should any man think, that the
judgments from thence procedyng should be in any part corrupt, defiled or
to be blamed? by the holy ghost al things are preserved, and by his providence
al things are wrought.

Hereunto is added an other thing, a glassie Sea before the seat, in clerenes
and brightness representing Crystal. The glassie Sea.
Herby is signified this frail world, which is subject to God, and as it
were in his sight. And also in other places of holy scripture, by reason of the
unstableness, tossinge and tourmoyling thereof, it bears the figure of this
variable and most inconstant world. And certainly the state of this world is
more brickel than glass. Some what hereof shall follow in the 15. chapt. But
what things so ever are done in the world through a marvelous variety, all the
same shine as in a glass before the Throne, so that God sees them all as it
were in a Crystal: whose eyes or knowledge the leeste things that be can not
escape. For we shall not think, that such things as are done in the world,
are done rasshely, and by a certain fortune to happen or chance besides the
knowledge of God, or to be of God unknown.

A fuller description of the Seat.
After this he retourneth again to the throne, to the intent he might finally
finishe, that which he had begone ones to describe: and might show also, all
the works of God, that are done by his creatures, to be most holy. And ye
roial seats, chayres or Thrones of kings are wont to be borne up and
beautified with beasts, as Salomons seat was with lions: which is to be seen
in the 3. book of Kings the 10. chapt. In other places the most excellent
beasts do draw the triumphaunt chariotes of Princes. After the same manner
therefore by a phrase of men beasts are set to the throne of God. For God in
his prophets is carried upon Cherubin, Cherubin.
that is in his godly chariot. And Ezechiel in the.10. chapt. names openly
Cherubin, beasts, and the whole text proves, that the place must be
understand of god his chariot, drawn by beasts, in the which he him self was
carried out of the city of Jerusalem. There is in poets much mention of the
chariot of the Gods, taken happily by the first writers out of the holy
scriptures. For Satan, the Ape of God, goes about always to diffame the
word of verity. But we, omitting the triflinges of Poets, will consider the
sober description of this carriage, of God or rather of gods throne. Almighty
God sits in this seat. Sittyng in the Scriptures, is government. Here is
signified than ye God sits in all his creatures: God sits upon ^eastes.
that is to say, governs his creatures, and by his most wise providence
works all in all, in vsinge every creature according to his good and just
pleasure after the nature of every one. We shall say than, that by those
beasts are understand all the creatures of God, dispersed through out the
four quarters of the world: that is comprehended in the whole world.

And first is showed in what place of the throne the beasts were: Where in the
throne be the beasts.
to wit in the mids of the Throne, and in the circuit of the same. You will
are, if they be in the throne, how should they be about the Throne? if they be
about the Throne, how be they in the mids of the Throne? The thing must be
so conceived, as I admonisshed also before, that we should understand, that
under the Throne the mids of the beasts do with their hinder parts reach
to the mids of the Throne inwardely, and so as it were to have borne up the
Throne: And with their fore parts, I mean, with their breasts, and heads and
wings to have stand forth, and so to have compassed the Throne, and as it
were environed it round about. For so might they seem to be in the mids of
the same Throne, and round about the same.

After, What manner of beasts they were.
what manner of beasts the same were is described dilligently, in number they
were four. For in times past also the nombre was expressed of Ezechiel: And
the parts of the world are trimly signified by the fourth nombre,
comprehending the universality of things. And some here have forged the four
Monarchies of the world, etc. And every beast had his face, and his body,
six wings, and the same full of eyes within, as also their bodies were full of
eyes. The first represented in shape and fashion a Lion, the second a Calfe,
the third a Man, and the fourth a fliyng Egle. By these appear to be signified
all creatures, visible and invisible, reasonable and unreasonable, and that the
most excellent. For after in the.v. chapter we shall hear, that al creatures
ioynctly together do worship the Lamb, and him that sits on the Throne.
And verily God uses them all, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the air, the
fire, and briefly all living things. And such creatures as he has chosen,
to the intent to work any thing by them, he makes the same to be of
efficacitie, instructing every one after their state and condition, that they
should want no wisdom, reason, strength, power, patience, labor, quickenes
nor swiftenes. The face of man signifies wit and wisdom, as also the eyes
signify a foresighte, watchefulnes, subtilties, and luckenes in doing of
things. The Lions face betokens force and strength, and stoutenes or
magnanimity: As the sight of an ox or a calfe betokens enduring of labor:
The Egle and the six wings swiftnes. As for an example: God chose unto him
the Assirians or Babilonians, which should distroye Niniue. These therefore, as
it is in Nahum, the lord prepared and furnisshed, that they were swifter than
Egles, and the rest as you may read in the 1. and.2. Chapt. of Nahum. And so
be al creatures ministers of the judgments of God, coming out of his
judicial Throne.

What the beasts do.
Than it is touched also, what those beasts do. They go about the Throne,
awaytynge always for God his commandment, that they may apply the same
cherefully, spedely, and stoutely. Neither have they any rest (mark how he
says, have, not shall have, or have had, but have) any rest: that is to wit,
they be in co^tinewall doings of God. But hear may we not understand, that
they be grieved with any painefulnes. And also they honor god with continual
praise. Aretas: it signifies, says he, no laboriouse thing. And they have no
rest, but a continual Tenure, about the singyng of godly praises, etc.

The song of the beasts, and what we must learn thereof.
Finally here is set also the form of the himne and praise of al creatures. In
old time David song also: praise ye him Sun and Moon, etc. The same himne
is set in the 6. of Esaye. And what do all creatures commend in God, whose
service God uses, and whose force and operation they feel? chiefly holiness.
These things do chiefly concern the some of the matter. For they teach God
to be holy, unspotted, just, good, omnipotent, doing althinges, eternal, the
beginning of things, and preserver. For they say, holy lord God omnipotent,
which was, etc. Which words verily we did expound in the first chapt. Who
would not gather thereof, the works and judgments of him to be most holy and
just? who therefore shall hereafter reprove the judgments and works of the
Lord? Just is the Lord in all his ways, and holy in all his works. This
Testimony of all creatures makes us willing, ready, chereful and careless,
that we should willyngly quiet our selves in the judgments of God, and
murmr at him in nothing, while he should do this or that? But wholly submit
our selves unto God, believing all his works to be good, and to be done for the
profit of the godly, and for the most just punishment of the wicked. Holy is
God the father, holy is God the son, and holy is God the holy ghost, holy is
one God in Trinity, blessed for evermore. Holy are al his works, and his
ways undefiled. And we read more rightly three times holy than niene times
after the example of the complutensian book. For the fourmer lection the
prophet Esaye approves. To God almighty be praise and glory.

Here is declared what the Elders did about the Throne, and how they sange unto
God a song of praise. The.xxv. Sermon.
ANd when these beasts gave glory and honor, and thanks to him that sat on
the seat, which lives for ever and ever: The.xxiiii. Elders fell down before
him that sat on the Throne, and worshipped him that lives for ever, and cast
their Crowns before the Throne, saying: thou art worthy lord to receive
glory and honor and power. For thou haste created all things, and for thy
wills sake they are and were created.

This most godly vision well and rightly understand, The fruits of this vision.
and reposed in faithful memory, instructs us rightly in iudgeyng rightly the
works of God, that we should fear God, be patient, and submit our selves
wholly to God, and give all glory unto him. For this is the very fruicte, that
comes unto us, and the end of all things that here are spoken.

And by the way he infers in repetyng what the beasts did: and declares
also what the.xxiiii. elders did. Thexa^ple of the Elders.
Herby we are manifestly taught, what we also owe unto God, and what we shall
judge of his works, and how we should behave our selves toward him herin.

Those beasts, that is to say, the whole nu^bre of creatures, whose ministry
God uses, in the government of things, ascribe three things unto God
sitting, that is to say, ruling and governing al things, to God I say living
for ever, that is to say, eternal, living, and geuynge or inspiringe life
into all things. First in deed glory, (...), which is a majesty, or great
estimation, a reputation, worship, Glory to god dew.
or good opinion: when we think well of God, protesting that there is nothing
better than he, greater, more worthy, more just, more holy and more
excellent. This glory are we always commanded to give him, and to esteem
nothing in this world derer and more preciouse than God. Secondly they give to
him honor (...), Honor dew to God.
and (...) in Greek signifies honor and price, and the dew and bounden duty
that we owe to any. We owe unto God reverence and submission, as to the supreme
good, and the only and true lord of al. S. Paul in the 13. to the Romans
speakinge of obedience dew to the magistrate: to whom ye owe fear, says
he, give fear: And to whom you owe honor, give honor. In the third place
follows benediction, which he called, (...), yt is thankesgeuing, and
praise. For we be commanded to praise all the works of the Lord, and to give
thanks for the same. Job is said to have blessed or thanked God, for the most
greuouse affliction that he sent him. For he said: like as it pleased the
Lord, so has it be^ done: the name of the lord be blessed. Whilst the beasts
do attribute al these things to him that sits on the throne, by their
example they teach us, what we should do verily to give al these and singular
things unto god. Which if we do, al murmuring shall cease, and disputations
co^menced of searchinge and examining the works of God through out curiosity.
With the laud and praise of the beasts is joined the hymn or song of
the.xxiiii. The song of ye.xxiiii. Elders.
Elders. This is the church triumphaunt, the company of al Saints,
Patrtarches, Prophets, Apostles, Martirs, etc. as I declared to you before.
Mortal men have not here an example of some one saint, or wise man: but of
all holy, godly wise and worthy men. They have put of their flesh, and want
affections and errors: They be therefore of incorrupt judgments, so that
there can be no more clear or pure examples ministered to us. Three or four
things are taught us concerning these Elders, which they did or performed,
not to every body, but to him that sits on the throne, and lives for ever
and ever. For so be the titles of God repeted, whereof is spoken before. We
told you also that the seats of the Elders were set round about the
Throne, in which they sat clothed with white raiment, crowned with crowns of
Gold, living with him that lives for ever.

They first arise out of their seats or chaires, The senanatours fall down
before god
and fall down ((...) fall) upon their knees or on their face before god. And
in falling or kneling down, they show a submission or lowlines of mind, that
we might learn with great humility and reverence to submit our souls and
bodies to our God, submitting I say, our selves and all our things to his good
will and pleasure. But if the blessed souls, now purified, and already having
the fruition of the sight of God, fall down before the Lord. What should not a
wretched man do miserable, mortal, and a sinner? Let him be ashamed of
rebellion and slouthfulnes, which sees so great submission in the most noble
and Godly souls of heavenly dwellers.

Than the saints worship, The sai^cts worship.
and worship in deed none other, but him that sits on the seat, and lives
for ever, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, God three and one,
everlasting and almighty. Therefore let us also worship this God, followyng ye
example of all saints. To worship adoration.
We worship God with external adoration, if we uncover our heads, knele and
bow before him. In spirit and truth and with inward worshypping, if we
depend wholly of him, consecrate us whole unto him, and wholly look upon him, as
one the only, soul, incomprehensible, most wise, best, and greatest, most
rightuous and most merciful. And they that thus fall down before the throne
of God, and so worship him, they do not contend with God, about his works, they
do not expostulate with God impatiently, why he does this, and permits that?

Unto all these things is added, The saicts cast of their crowns.
that they pluck of the crowns of their heads, and cast them away before the
throne, at the fete of him that sits in the throne. This is not only a
notable modesty, but also an humble humility wantinge an example. Primasius
an expositour of the Apocalypse, assigning verily unto God, says he,
whatsoever virtue, and whatsoever dignity they have. For to him is attributed
rightly, whatsoever is won or gotten: Of whom, he that ouercometh, is aided.
Thus says he. They testify and signify also, that they would not take upon
them any Godly power, that they would not reign, they would not as the
counselors of God, give counsel to God, or prescribe unto him the least
thing in the world: But to submit unto God all power, all rule, and the
whole government, them selves and all others to be governed. For they have
experience, and see no man in the world universal, in heaven or in earth to
be wyser, mightier, greater, yt none does more faithfully, more dilligently,
more safely and better govern all things. Let us rest therefore, O brethren,
to the judgment of saints, and let us consent herein with them in all
things.

Yea and with express words they testify, why they threw away their
crowns: Not that being unthankful to God, they esteem not highly his gifts:
But for that they plainly acknowledge al glory to be dew to him alone. Therefore
they accord very well with the beasts and all the creatures of God, and
saying an Himne to the high Prince, they confess him to be worthy to receive
glory. etc. And he said to receive not that he had it not before: But for that
it should seem a most unworthy thing, if either they or any other creature,
would challenge unto them those things which apperteine to God alone. To
receive glory.
These things apperteine to no creature. etc. And they commend God highly,
whom they call their Lord and God. Some copies add (...), which art holy. For
they do and agree in all things with the beasts, which cried also, holy holy
holy, Lord God omnipotent. To the same gave they also glory and honor, whereof
before. So also ye elders ascribe to him now the selfsame things. And
especially they attribute to God power (...) and take it from the^ selves. Why
than do the Papists attribute power and operation to the saints in heaven.
Which nevertheless here plainly them selves attribute this to God alone.
Saints give power to God and take it not to them selves.
S. Iho^ and Peter living took it not in good part, that the people seemed to
attribute to them somewhat of godly power. For when they had restored one that
halted before the temple, and the people were in admiration thereof they said,
ye men of Israel, what marvel you at this? or why look ye upon us (...) as
though through our own power or holiness we have brought to pass, that this
man should walk. The God of our fathers has done this. etc. But how much
less shall we now think, that being delivered from al corruption, they would
require any godly power to be given, or divine honor attributed. etc.

They add also or render a reason, why they submit both them selves, and al
theirs unto God, and attribute to the same glory, honor, and power. For thou,
say they, have created al things, God yt creator and preserver of al things.
and by (Dia) thy will, they are, and were created. This glory of God is
wonderful and unmeasurable. How great, say they thou art, and that al power and
glory is dew unto thee appears of the making and creation of the world
universal. No man was with thee at ye creation thereof, no man gave thee counsel
what or how thou should do, no man helped thee thus much. Who than should
approach unto thee to be partaker in power? who should glory before thee God and
maker of al things? Thou alone made al things, alone preseruest al, and alone
gouernest al. Thou willest, and they were made: Thou saidest, and they were
created. It was enough to have said, it was enough to have willed. And in deed
al things at this day have their being through thy will, without any
painefulnes and travel of thine. Thou gouernest al thing in best and most
goodly order. This testifies ye wonderful course of the stars, the plesaunt
change of things, the most sweet and plentiful fruits spring of ye same. Who
tha^ would not gladly submit both him self and al his to thee and to thy
government, who would not commit al his things unto thee? Who would not
acknowledge ye power and glory to be thine? Let us mark these things with
attentive minds, that we may also appear such before God as we sethe saints
in heaven appear. God grant us this.

Of him that sits in throne, and holds ye book in his right hand sealed
with.vii. seals: What that sealed book is. The.xxvj. Sermon.
AND I saw in the right hand of him that sat on ye throne a book written
within and on the back side, sealed with seven seals. And I saw a strong
angel preaching with a loud voice: who is worthy to open the book and lose the
seals thereof? And no man in heaven nor in earth, another under the earth, was
able to open the book, and to ioke thereon. And I wept much because no man was
found worthy to open and read the book, another to look thereon.

He now proceeds to describe more fully him that sits on the Throne: Of
whom he had touched certain and a few things before. In this piece is no small
force of this our matter. For now will he show that, which in this treatise
is principal, that all things which are done in the world through God his
providence are most justly and holily governed by Christ. Which thing all the
saints of God, and creatures acknowledging, for an example to us, that we
should do the like, do praise and celebrate him that lives for ever.

And it shall behoue us to way every word, since that in every one are great
mysteries, and nothing is spoken in vain. And verily that God almighty sits
in a Throne. God sits in a throne
And by sitting is signified not only the power of judging, rulyng and
governing: But also a quiet mind (not troubled with any evil affections,
after the manner of judges of this world) and great equity in all things.
Secondly a book is seen in the right hand of him that sits, of the which
book we must speak more at large.

Here appears an allusion made, as there is in many other places of the
scripture, to the princes of this world, which have books of the laws, of
privileges, of institutes what thing is done, and is to be done, finally of
secrets, of acts, of condemned, and of citezens, of life and of death. For so
is both the book and books assigned to God. Moises says in in the.33. of
Exodus. Put me out of the book of life, etc. In the Psalms is much mention of
these books of God: In the Psalm. 56.69.139. In the seventh of Daniel, books
are opened whereof mention is made also in the.20. of the Apocalipse. We read
in the.3. of Malach. of a book of remembrance before God. Therefore this book
of God contains all the counsels of God, al his works and judgments. For
we shall hear by and by, The book in ye right hand of him that sits
that all things that are done in the world come out of this book, as it were
out of a fountain or well spring.

And three things are chiefly spoken of this book. First, that it lies not in
the Throne, or in the bosom of him that sits, or under the Throne, or that
it hangs before or behind the Throne: But it is in the right hand of God.
Herby is signified the operation or power of God, and the same most just and
most mighty. The book written wtin and without.
For the book is not seen in the left hand. God therefore works, and
contains or ministers all his works and judgments most holily. Secondly
that book is written within and without or on the back side. For in the
providence and judgments of God, all things are contained both good and
evil, lucky and unlucky, sharp, and soft, sweet and sewer, visible and
invisible, privy and aparte, and all things in general.

Finally the book is sealed with seven seals. For it is most strongly closed
and fastened. The book sealed with seven seals
For the judgments and works of God are firm, true, just and such as can not
be withstand. The use of seals among men is diverse, notwithstanding it may
be contrived in two poinctes. The use of seals.
First Seals are set to because of fidelity, truth and righteousness. And a
great deliberation is had in setting to of seals. For they are not put to
unjust matters vayn or false. Therefore seals be tokens of a certentie and
testimonies of a right. It seems an vnworthi thing to speak against sealed
wrytinges. By the seals therefore that are set to the book of God is signified,
that the judgments and works of God are most firm, true, and just what so
ever are done by his providence, and ar ordained by Christ. It shall therefore be
a shame to find fault with the judgments of God, or to speak evil of his
works. Again by seals are secrets kept, that they be not seen of every man,
but of them only to whom they are appointed. The judgments therefore and
works of God are for the most part hid, and not open to all men, saving to
such as the Lord has appointed, namely to the faithful and obedient. Seven
s^^les.
But there be seven seals only, for that in them the fulness of times, and of
things to be done in these times throughout ye world and church, and of the
judgments and mysteries of God are comprehended.

Now therefore the opening of the book, The opening of the book and seals.
and the vnsealyng thereof, is nothing else, but the revealing of God his
judgments and the declaring or uttering of his most secret counselles:
Finally the most holy and just operation, dispensation, and execution of his
will. Nothing in that opening is done against the verity, faith, love, and
justice of God.

Who is worthy to open ye book and seals thereof.
And with many words, and also most dilligently and goodly is treated here of
the openyng of the seals, who verily might be thought worthy to open to the
church, the secret judgments of God, and to execute and minister his holy
works: that is to say, to whom the kingdom is given and government of the
divine providence. For an Angel, and that not of the common sort, but a
strong, and worthy one, with a loud voice cries, to make us all attentive,
and that we should note diligently, who he is that should both open the book,
and unloose, or undo the seals. And he holds long in suspense the hearer,
beholder or reader, before he will show him, to the intent verily to commend
him to us exceadingly. No man, says he, in the whole universal world, neither
emonges the Aungelles and saints in heaven, nor emongs earthly men, and under
the earth, was found, which could either open or unseal the book.

To Christ alone belongs the kingdom and the power of government is taken
from others.
Let us observe, that there is none that can open the book, and open the seals,
besides Christ alone. Why than is the administration of things attributed or
communicated to saints, none can open to us the counselles and judgments of
God, no man can govern those judgments and works of God, that he works in
the world, save only Christ the lord: why than are so great benefits sought
for of Saints, and be imputed to them, if either the sick be restored to
health, or that a mortal man do receive any other gift or benefit* many will
say, I received this in deed of gods benefit, but through the meditation, and
power and merit of this or that saint, unto whom God granted this, that he
should rule over such a disease, and might heal such as call upon the name
of the Saint, or the name of God by the Saint. These are here confuted now
by the words of the Lord and S. John, saying, that no man in heaven or in
earth is found, which could open the book. Yet nevertheless about the
Throne sat the xxiiii. Elders, representinge the Type of all Saints in
glory, not one of al the^ was found, which could open the book. Therefore be
they a great deal madder, which do attribute the government of things in the
church to the Pope a most corrupt and filthy man. Only Christ received al
power in Heaven and in Earth: as we shall incontinently more fully understand.

S. John wepeth, The weping of S. John.
for that he understood a weighty matter to consiste in the openinge of this
godly book: and yet saw he no man at al, which could either open or unseal
it. Neither did he as yet fully understand the matter. And he bare the figure
of them, which understand not the judgments of God, nor know not that al
things are through God his providence holyly governed by Christ. For in them
nothing else remains, but mourning and heaviness. Certainly without Christ and
his opening, whereby he reuealeth to us the divine mysteries and judgments, no
man can rightly judge of the same. For unless we understand, the seals to be
opened by Christ, and that al things are done by his order which loved us,
and gave him self for us: what thing shall be left in us, but sighinge?

But he rehearsed three things, to open, read and look upon. No man living
opens, for that no man is mete for so great a charge, save only the son of
God. No man reads or understands fully the judgments of God, but the
son, and to whom he has revealed, so much as any man has. No man looks
on it, that is to say, can behold the works and judgments of God, but he
shall be offended, except he be indewed with the spirit, and purified with the
same. Therefore we must axe grace of him, that we may understand so much of
Gods judgments as shall suffice, and may judge well of the same.

Aretas Bishop of Cesaria, an expositour of this book: neither any, says he,
of those that lack flesh, nor any of them that are in the flesh, nor yet of
such as are deperted leaving their flesh behind them, has received a perfect
knoweledge of godly matters. And by and by after: another only is there any
which could open it, but also not so much as look upon it: that is to say,
could not look attentively on the judgments of God. and so forth. And the
co^texte of the whole place proves sufficiently, that S. John speaks here of
the judgments verily: but chiefly of the government of things. The Lord Jesus
be glorified for ever. Amen.

Here is lively described the Lamb in the throne of God, receiving the book of
the hand of him that sits and opening it. The.xxvij. Sermon.
AND one of the Elders said unto me, weep not: Behold the Lion, which is of
the tribe of Judah, ye root of David, has obtained to open the book, to lowse
the seven seals thereof. And I beheld, and lo, in the mids of the seat, and
of the four beasts, and in the mids of the Elders, stood a la^be as though
he had been killed, which had seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the
seven spirits of God, sent into all the world, and he came and took the book
out of the right hand of him that sat on the Throne.

By Christ all things are governed.
Forasmuch as John had wept, that no man was worthy so much as to look on the
book of him that sat on the seat, much less to open it: One of the.xxiiii.
Elders comfort him. His name is not expressed, wherefore it seems to be
required both vaynely and curiously. Notwithstanding there be some of the
expositours, which suppose him to be the patriarch Jacob: Verily for that
shortly after his oracle or prophecy is recited. And so the author descends
in a most goodly order unto the description also of the son of God, by whom
the celestial father, as all the scripture every where approves, governs al
things. Hitherto has he described him that sits on the seat, and before
that the holy ghost. Wherefore these are wholesome and most profitable doctrines
for the church, whereby the true faith is confirmed.

The comfort of this elder, and verily the heavenly and most Godly doctrine
tends to this end, that we should understand, that all the complaints,
weping, grudging, and the sundry tourmoylinges of our mind, can not be
quenched, appeased and quieted, unless we see and believe, that to Christ (as
here is most plainly and manifestly set forth) is given of the father al
power in heaven and in earth: and therefore to be constituted like as the only
redemer, so also the head, Prince, and governor of al, which under the seal
of faith and verity, should govern all things that are by God his
providence ordained, and even now dispiseth them, and reuealeth unto us so
much of God his judgments as do suffice us. This if we believe with a faithful
and sincere mind, we shall have quiet consciences in all the works of God, eue^
such as are hard to endure, and seem to some men most unreasonable. For we
know that he by whom all things are governed, is of our nature and kind, yea
eue^ our own brother: and such verily as favors us with all his heart, has
suffered death for us, and loves nothing better in all the world than man:
Moreover which has ouercomen death, son, the Devil and Hell, and has
ouercomen them for us. Who will now than suspecte his government, permission
or operation? Thou haste a brother in the Princes Court, whom thou art
assured to favor thee from the botome of his heart: thou hear say, how he
has given unto him of the Prince the government and judgment of the whole
country, would thou stick or be loathe to submit thy self unto him? nay
rather thou do trust and hope to obtain any thing of thy brother.

Therefore let us remember, The kingdom and power is given to Christ.
how the Scripture not here only, but every where does teach, that Jesus
Christ the Son of God, and in deed of the same substance with us after his
humanity, in diyng for us, to have deserved to have a name given him, which
is above all names, and that althinges should be subject to his government,
what so ever be in the world visible or invisible. For so S. John testifies
in the.1. Chapter. And S. Paul also to the philipp. 2. Coloss. 1. and to the
Hebrews the.1. Chapter. He is said at this present to have ouercomen or
obtained to open the book, and lowse the Seals thereof. Therefore by the
knoweledge of him, and through faith in him, we obtain, that with a ioyefull
mind we may look upon the book, the judgments and all the works of God,
and quietly and patiently to bear the openyng thereof, and government of al
together. etc.

A most gallaunt and full description of Christ.
But to the intent we may judge more rightly of Christ governor of all,
although he has already described him right lively: yet now he proceeds to
paincte him out in his, that is to say, most godly and goodly colors, that
we should not be nothing affrayed of his government, another that we should not
with quiet minds most willingly submit our selves wholly to his government.

First is said, that a Lion of the tribe of Judah has ouercomen: Christ a
lion of the tribe of Judah.
to wit that same Christ of ours: to have ouercomen the Devil, sin, death,
the world, hell, and al power of the adversary. And he overcame in diyng, and
so achieved the high dignity, and was made Lord of all. The Devil is also
called a Lion of S. Peter. Solomon and the Prophets call tirannes Lions. 1.
Peter. 5.
Our Author therefore calls Christ a lion, not of the common sort, but of
the tribe of Judah. For he alludeth to the prophecy of the patriarch Jacob,
which is in the.49. of Genes. he prophecieth there that Schilo shall come, with
plenty and good luck, which like a lion that has taken his pray, nether is
there any manne that can drive him from it, can defend those that be his, whom
he has caught out of the drago^s claws, so that no hostile power dare ones
hiss against him. Christ therefore is declared a victour or co^querour
greatest, Christ is only most invincible.
most mighty, and most invincible. Which belongs to him alone. Yet shall you
find Kings, which are every hour ouercomen of wicked lusts, which will
suffer them selves to be called, invincible. Briefly, this first note in the
description of Christ, shows yt Jesus Christ governor of al, is yt very
same, whom the patriarchs and prophets have prophesied to come into the
world, a prince most invincible.

Secondly Christ is called the rote of David, wherein he appears to have
alluded to that saying of Esaye in the.11. Christ the root of David.
chap. Than shall a budde come forth of the stock of Iesse, and a flour shall
ascend out of the roots thereof. Namely Marie the daughter of David, of whom
that most sacred flower Christ sprang and came, was the stock of Iesse. And of
the very rotes of David, or of the virgin, I mean of the most true humane
nature, Jesus Christ was borne very man into the world. For he took no where
the Aungelles nature, but the sede of Abraham. He is therefore our brother,
Hebr. 2.
of the same substance with us, after his humanity. These things do comfort
us exceadingly, and confute heretics most strongly: which feign that Christ
has not a very humane body. We have more hereof in the.1. of Matthew. and.1.2.3.
of Luke. Christ is in ye mids of ye seat.
After it is expressly spoken of the same our lord, that he is in the mids of
the Throne, in the mids of the.iiii. beasts, and in the mids of
the.xxiiii. Elders: and is therefore exe^pted out of the no^bre of creatures,
out of the number of Aungelles, and out of the number of Saints. For he is
greater than these, to wit of the same substance with the father, in glory and
power equal. For the father is in the mids of the Throne, from thence
proceeds the holy ghost: even there is found also now the lamb Christ, not
only very man, but also very God. Christ is very God.
And is a distinct person. For the blessed Trinity knows not any co^fusio^.
The father is God, the son is God, the holy ghost is God: yet are al three
but one God, the father in his subsistence, the son in his, and the holy
ghost in his, not making three Gods, but three proprieties and persons in one
indivisible and eternal essence. And where as Christ is mentioned to be in the
mids of the beasts, and in the mids of Elders: he is doubtless signified
after the divine nature to be every where, to be the life and preservation of
all creatures, also in the mids of his chosen, and of his Church. Therefore
like as we believe Jesus Christ to be very man, so let us also believe him to be
very God, of the same substance with God the father. Therefore let Seruiet
perish with Arrius and Mahomet, and as many as deny Christ to be the son of
God, coequal with the father in all things. Furthermore he is now also called a
lamb, Christ is a lamb.
not that he is a sheep of nature, but for that by a lamb is prefigured the
innocent redemer of the world, and the only wholesome sacrifice of all
faithful. A lamb is a token of innocence, and from the beginning appointed
for sacrifices. Abel offered up a Lamb, after the law was offered a daily
sacrifice, in the morning a lamb, and at evening a lamb. For christ is the
expiation of them, which were in the beginning of the world, and which in the
end shall be. The Paschall lamb in the.12. of Exodus. Whose blood prohibited
the Aungel distroier from the houses and tents, represented the figure of
Christ, by whose preciouse blood we are reconciled to God. This exposition of
the Paschal lamb S. Peter him self in the.1. Pet. 1. and S. Paull in the.1. to
the Corinth. 5. have brought. Esaye accords with them in the.53. chapter. And
so expounded by the Apostle S. Philip in the 8. of the Acts. Finally S. John
Baptist, which with the fingar stretched out and poinctyng to Christ,
exclamed: behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world. Let us therefore believe, that ye same Jesus Christ, unto whom al power is
given of the father, to be our deliverer, our expiation, reconciliation,
innocence, sanctification, justification and everlasting salvation: as he whom
we shall hear in the xiii. chapt. to have be^ slain from the beginning of the
world, for so much as his only death, and one oblation made from the beginning
of the world, and continually to the worlds end, does sanctify al those that
are sanctified Which the Apostle also affirms in the.10. to the Hebrews.

Howebeit this lamb or savior of the world is said to stand in the mids
of the throne, verily for that now he executes thoffice of a catholic king,
and priest and governor, being always ready and prepared to save. So S.
Stephen also in the.7. of the Acts sees him standing. Or else in other places
we read that Christ sits on the right hand of the father. To the which
this place gain says not, considering that to sit, is both to rest and to
reign.

Moreover this our Lamb appears in the Throne of the divine majesty, The
lamb appears as slain.
as if he were killed: not for that he was not slain in deed, and dead (for
that same is a little after excessed most exactely) but for that he remained
not in death, but the third day rose again from the dead, to the end he
might so declare him self to be the life, and resurrection of the faithful.
Or verily, for that after his humanity he is red to be slain, after his
deity to be immortal, and subject to no reproach. Wherefore in the old law
the one of the goats in the 16. of Leuitic. is slain: but the other is not
killed but by the work of a man herunto appointed is led forth into the
deserte. Nevertheless there is of the expositours, which expound it thus: he is
said as though he were slain, for as much as after S. Chrysostom and S.
Austen he has reserved as yet the seares of the wounds of his death in token
of his victory. etc.

Furthermore this lamb Christ Jesus our lord has.vii. The la^be has seven
horns.
horns, not yt in deed he carries so many horns like a goat of Jude. An
horn, as appears by Daniel, and by the song of Zachary in the 1. of Luke,
signifies power and kingdom. The.vii. nombre is the nombre of fulness. It is
therefore signified that Christ is endued with all kind of power, divine,
humane, imperial, pontifical, royal, briefly most absolute. In the 13. chapt.
we shall hear that the beast has taken to him two horns, as it were of the
lamb, whereof I shall speak in his place. Daniel in the 7. chapt. And rule,
says he, was given him, and honor and kyngedome, that al nations and tounges
might worship him, whose rule is an everlasting rule, which shall not perish
nor decay at any time. Now has he seven eyes also. These he expounds, and
says, The la^be has.vii. eyes.
which are the.vii. spirits of God, sent into the whole world. I showed you
before, that the.vii. spirits are called a seuenfold spirit. Here therefore is
signified the fulness of ye spirit, which the lord powereth out upon al flesh.
Here is signified the universal knowledge of the son, in whose sight are
present, what things so ever are done in heaven and in earth, openly and
privily. For the spirit of Christ, that unmeasurable force, incomprehensible
and most divine, searches and pearseth al things, nothing is hid from his
eyes, which view the whole world.

And such is Christ, as we have heard described hitherto, What is ye governor
of all, and who opens the seals.
whom the Patriarchs have before said should come, a victour and triumphant
co^querour alone verily invincible, very man of our own substance, and also
our very brother, yet very God nevertheless, of the same substance with the
father and the holy ghost, the reconciler, redemer, and the only salvation of
the world: has suffered for us, and the same risen again from the dead, and
ascended into heaven, having al power in heaven and in earth, which sees al
things, co^municateth his spirit unto men, and is the most faithful keeper and
defender of al man kind: This Christ Jesus our lord, came and received, he
conveyed not or stale it away, but took that book of the providence divine, of
the judgments of God, of the universal, government of al things, that he
might open, and lowse the Seals thereof: that is to say, that he might
reveal to us yt are redeemed with his blood the judgments of God, and might
dispose and order al things in heaven and in earth. Therefore sins we know that
the governor of al things, is given to us a redemer, King, Bishop, and our
only salvation, who will not from hence forth willingly submit himself to his
government? And seeing we now understand certainly, how that under the seal
of faith and verity al things are done by Christ, who dare hereafter more
curiousely inquire of his works and judgments, unto whose credit and
government we should now commit althinges, How the son is said to
receive the book at his fathers hand.
in case they were in our power? Notwithstanding we shall observe, that the
son does not so receive these things of the father, that the father is
deprived thereof. For in the.5. chapt. of S. John's Gospel, the Lord says: my
father works unto this time, and I work, etc. Certes the son is called the
word, mouth, and arm of the father, etc. or that after the humanity the
son might seem less than the father. For very godly Aretas, where the
lamb, says he, received the book of the right hand of him that sits on
the Throne, it must be understand on the behalf of his humanity: As also
that he was slain. For concerning his deity, none of all those things that
may worthily be spoken or thought of God, is severally assigned to three
persons, saving the manner of bringyng forth, of him that begets and of him
that is begotten, and of him that proceeds, etc.

This description of Christ is singular, most excellent, very evangelical,
and full of consolation: and therefore is it chiefly to be laid up in the botome
of our hearts. Where we find also that they were disceaued in their judgment,
which were not affrayde to say, that in this book, besides the Apostolical
manner, few things were taught of Christ, and of our redemption. Let us pray
unto the Lord, that he would vouchesafe to illumine our minds. Amen.

Here is described adoration and praise geuyng or an Himne song unto Christ of
the beasts and Elders. The.xxviij. Sermon.
ANd when he had taken the book, the four beasts, and.xxiiii. Elders fell
down before the lamb, having Harpes and golden Vialles full of odours (which
are the prayers of Saints) and they sange a new song, saying: Thou art
worthy to take the book, and to open the Seals thereof: for thou waste killed,
and haste redeemed us by thy blood, out of all kinredes and tongues, and people
and nations, and haste made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, and we shall
reign on the earth.

We have heard, Christ is ye true and only monarche.
that the lamb has received the book of the hand of him that sits in the
Throne, that he might open it, and lowse the seals of the same: that is we
have understand, that Christ is the only and eternal Savior and Lord, unto
whom all power is given in heaven and earth: that he than only and evermore
saves, that he reuealeth to us the mysteries and judgments of God, that he
finally governs and disposes al things in the world. It follows moreover
how all the creatures of God behaved them selves toward this son of God, the
monarche and governor of al things. This thing is set forth with a maruelouse
figurative and plentiful speech in the Tipe of the.iiii. beasts, and xxiiii.
Elders, etc. Certainly that we might of their gestures, words, and works
understand, what it is mete for us to do in the judgments of God.

For this example is verily manifold, and even of six parts, such as you
shall hardely find propounded in any other matter. An example manifold
whereby we learn how to behave our selves toward ye governor of al things.
And in this matter is of very great force. First in deed we have heard in
the.iiii. chapt. that the four beasts cried out before the Throne of him that
sat: holy, holy, holy, lord God omnipotent. Second we understand that
the.xxiiii. Elders fell down, worshipped, cast away their crowns, and sange an
Himne. Now follows the third degree of this example. For as first the
beasts and Elders did these things severally, so now jointly with one accord
the beasts and Elders fall down together before the la^be. Let us therefore
fall down also in all the judgments and works of God, before the lamb
governor of al, and let us worship. For although it be not here added, and
they worshipped: yet are they to be understand for this intent to have fallen
down, that they might worship. For to fall down, is to worship. Which thing
is also perceived by this that follows. The la^be is worshipped.
For they offer prayers to the lamb, that is to wit, singe an Himne, which
is a part of godly worshippinge. Morouer it follows immediately, that every
creature sang an Himne to him that sets in the Throne, and to the la^be,
etc. And verily two things especially and diligently S. John treats in this
example. For first he painteth out gallauntly the behavior of the beasts and
elders. After he annexeth the Himne, praise geuyng, or song. And so much as
apperteyneth their behavior. Before al things they fall down before the lamb:
as even now I said.

Christ is very God to be worshipped with the father in the same glory.
And this place is of efficacitie enough to prove the deity of our Savior
Christ. For these things ought to be conferred with those which are written
upon the same words in the.iiii. chapt. The.xxiiii. Elders fell down before
him that sits in the Throne, and worship him that lives for ever and
ever: And now it is said, that the self same elders have fallen down before
the lamb: whereupon it follows that he that lives for ever and the lamb be
worshipped with like glory, culte, and honor: And that the son is coequall
with the father, to be worshipped for ever. Whereby now is openly perceived the
abominable and detestable error of Arius and Seruetus, Seruetus renewed ye
blasphemy of Arrius.
confuted at this present not only of the beasts, but also of the whole
congregation of Saints in heaven. Idle men reason subtly, and peruerte and
wraste gods word after their wonted giantly boldenes, at their pleasure: we
will rather follow the examples of all saints and creatures in the world,
and will worship the lamb with him that sits in the throne blessed for
evermore.

Again there are obiecte to us the Elders liyng prostrate on the pauement,
holding in their hands harpes and vialles. Harpes and vialles.
An harp in the Psalms and holy history is an instrument of music,
consecrate to praises divine. Of the vialle, of what shape or fashion the cup
was, the writers of vessels treat much: I understand it to be simply a
cup or a bolle, such as we read there were many in the tabernacle and
temple, appoincted both for drink offeringes, and also for sweet odours and
incense. Nevertheless these things in the holy heavenly dwellers be not to be
taken corporally, but spiritually, after a suffiguration. For what the spirit
of God understood, the reuealer of secrettes, S. John him self adds which be
the prayers of Saints. Therefore is signified, that Saints offer prayers to
God: which are much more acceptable to him, Music and incense prayer.
than the sweet melody of Musical instruments is to man, or pleasant savor
of sweet gumes or of incense. Aretas the expositour, in that they have Harpes,
says he, it shows a concord and agreement in geuynge God thanks. And hereof
we learn again, what we should do in the contemplation and understanding of
the judgments and works of God. The lord is to be praised and blessed,
because he is good, and his mercy indureth for ever. But if thanks must be
given to God, if his works and judgments are to be praised, why do certain men
expostulate with God, blamyng, or bringing in suspicion his judgments? let us
learn moreover, that Organes and those corporal incenses do no longer become
the church of God.

Of this place S. Ireney in the 4. book against heresies, The true sacrifice
of Christians.
in the.33. and.34. chapt. shows, that the prayers and thanks geuyng of
Saints be the same oblation which Malachie prophesied to be offered up
through out the whole world. And shortly after Tertullian followed the same
exposition agyynst the Jews, and in the iiii. book against Marcion: whom
other doctors of the Church have followed. But those pleasant sophistical
triflers, I mean the popisshe divines, do as it were triumph in those things,
yet lead they in the mean time a shadowyng and a most vain triumph. For
they apply these things to their sacrifice, wherein they feign them selves
under the some of bread and wine to offer up to God the father the body and
blood of Christ, a propiciatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead. But
Ireney and Tertullian speak not of such a sacrifice, but of the oblation of
prayers, which the massemonging Priest offers not up alone, but the whole
congregation of Christ sanctified in his blood, geuynge thanks in the lords
supper to God the father for their free redemption. These holy fathers never
knew the sale Masses of these Chananites.

Against praying to saints in Heaven.
Of this same place of S. John the self same Papists go about to prove and to
establishe the praying to Saints in heaven. Behold, say they, the Saints
are said to pray openly in heaven. But they need not to pray for them
selves, and therefore as intercessours and Patrones they pray for their
clientes and worshippers in Earth. I answer, that the Saints in deed pray
in heaven, but that you addyng the kind and manner of praying, do expound it
to be intercession, patchyng to a piece of your own, do forge and cou^trefet
the same, and maliciously and falsely do belie it. S. John here expounds him
self, so that he needs not your patchyng. For he adds, and they singe a
new song. Yea and he recites the whole form of this song, leeste any man
should corrupt that which he had said of prayers. And that same form
conteyneth praise and blessing or thanks geuyng, and not intercession, or
invocation. For certain it is even by the doctrine of the Apostle. 1. Timoth.
2. and to the Philipp. 4. that there be two chief kinds of prayer: invocation
and praise or thanks geuyng. But the thing it self plainly proves, that S.
John speaks here of the latter, and not of the first. The shadows of ye law
are expounded.
And where as this place expounds certain Tipes, shadows or mysteries of Gods
law, by the same we may rather confute the intercession of Saints in
Heaven, for their worshippers. For in the law is permitted one only golden
Altar of incense. And the same represented a figure of Christ. For one Christ
is the mediator and intercessour betwixt God and man. It was not laweful for
the people of God, to burn incense, but upon this Altar only. It was not
laweful for any man, to prepare or make for him self an odor of those kind
of gumes, whereof the divine incense consisted, and to smell to it: as appears
in the.30. of Exodus. Why than do not these understand, that prayers belong
to God alone, and that the Saints in Heaven would not smell of such
incense? David in the.141. psalm. says, let my prayer be directed as incense
in thy sight, the listynge up of my hands an evening sacrifice. The Devil
desires to have such manner of incenses to be made unto him: As appears in
the.4. of Matthew. and in S. Austen of the City of God. But our heavenly
Saints, are not Deuilles. Why understand they not that this Altar of
incense stands now in Heaven on the right hand of the father, and there
makes intercession for us: and that for his sake the father is reconciled to
us, and we are accepted of God, and that by him alone we must offer up our
prayers unto God, which are else abominable? Why see they not the heavenly
Saints at this present to attribute al things to the only lamb alone, and to
challenge nothing to them selves? Finally that they make no mention of their
worshippers: but plainly testify, that the only lamb was and is worthy,
which should take the book, etc.

And the praise or thanks giving of the heavenly saints he has called a
new song, What is a new song.
which in the Scriptures is no new thing. For the Saints say, that they
will singe in Earth unto God a new song, Psalm.xxxiii.xcvi.xcviii.cxliiii.
Esaye.xlij. And new songs be called these new balades or verses in meter,
which are made of some new benefit or noble act done. And because the mind
of man is delighted greatly with new benefits, they sing a new song,
which with a ioyefull mind praise GOD, and give him thanks with their
inward affections. Finallye they sing a new song, which with purified
minds and renewed with the Spirit do laud GOD: which thing was chiefly
given to those heavenly Saints. Whereof we learn again how it behooves our
minds to be affected and furnisshed in the prayers and praises of GOD. This
same, says Aretas, I call a new song, by whose benefit we, which being
lighted in all parts of the earth, departing from the antiquity of the law
written, and walking in the newnes of life, are taught by the holy ghost to
singe a giving of thanks.

The himne or praise giving of ye saints in heaven.
To these things now is added the Himne of Saints that we might also have a
form how to praise God. And in the Hymn they singe, that al things are
subject to christ, and al things ordered by his government, that he humbled
him self to the death, and was therefore exalted above all things. Now are
also the virtues or effects and wonderful benefits of his death commended
unto us, that estemyng the governor of his benefits done to us, we may
believe also that his government shall be wholesome for us, and therefore may
submit our selves to him willingly in faith and patience. Which verily is
the chiefest end of those things which here are treated with so great
diligence.

Christ alone is worthy to open the book.
First they commend the Majesty and dignity of Christ, that he alone is
found in the whole universal world, which has rule over al, which is the
only savior of the world, the reuealer also of godly mysteries, and governor
of all. For this is to take and to open the book: which we have now often times
repeted. Secondly they annexe the cause, why this glory should be only of the
lamb or son of God: because, say they, thou waste killed. And they
understand by the less the more, to wit his whole incarnation, and the
whole mystery of our redemption, death, resurrection and ascensio^ into
heaven, and the residewe. He therefore is the true and only mediator of God
and men, he is the only savior, as he that alone was incarnate and crucified
for us: he is the only governor, which by his humility deserved to be
exalted, Philipp. 2. And he is a most fit governor of al things, as of
whom al men may, as of their most faithful savior, and even their brother,
hope well, what things so ever chance unto them through his government, etc.

The virtue and effect of the death of Christ.
In the mean time they commend most highly the virtue or effect of Christ's
death. For this being rightly understand we are more ready to submit our
selves to that governor, whom we know to be our savior, which loves us
derely, and would have al saved. And the chiefest effect of Christ's death is
redemption, Redemption
redeminge includes captivity. We were prisoners and servants of sin, of
death, and very bondeslaues of the devil and hell. And the son of God came and
took flesh, and shed his blood (for so also is the manner of redemyng us
expressed of the elders) and he has washed us from our sins, and being
purified he has raunsomed us from the power of death, hell, sin and Satan,
that now we be of God. Therefore they say expressly, thou have redeemed us to
God. We be therefore of God: the devil has no more power over us: we are the
freemen of Christ, delivered through his blood. 1. Peter. 1. Hebrews. 9. And
for as much as we be now of God, to wit justified freely, by his grace,
through the blood of Christ, as the apostle says also in the 3. chapt. to the
Romans, we ought to serve God verily in the newnes of spirit, not the flesh
and the devil, in the oldenes of the letter and of our flesh. Which the same
Apostle discourses more at large in the 6. to the Romans.

Whom also he has redeemed, they declare by the way, Who are redeemed.
men verily of every tribe, etc. In the which rehearsal he does Imitate Daniel
in the 7. chap. and signifies an universality. For the lord has died for all:
but that al are not made pertakers of this redemption, it is through their own
fault. For the lord excludes no man, but him only which through his own
incredulity, and misbelefe excludes him self.

Of redemption follows an other effect of Christ's death, Righteousness
follows justification and redemption.
for that it makes men justified to God kings and priests. For they that be
justified, work righteousness. I have expounded this place concerning the
priesthood and kingdom of Christians in the first chapter where you may have
it.

The Saints add moreover that they shall reygne upon earth, to wit through
the virtue of Christ: not corporally, How saints reign upon earth
as the Millenaries do imagine, and the Turks followyng the same, imaginyng
corporal things in this world, and joys in Paradise terrestrial. For the
whole scripture promises better things. Neither must the godly be so given to
corporal things, that they should hope for nothing above corporal matters. The
Saints speak here of the last judgment wherein it shall appear to the whole
world, and to all that dwell upon the earth, that the Saints, which some time
seemed to the world to have been wicked, ungodly, peacebreakers, heretics, and
parricides, and for the same cause have been slain, be just, holy kings and
priests of God. So I say they shall reign upon earth. The which thing is
declared more at large in the.iii. and.v. chapt. of the book of wisdom.

Let the Saints, I say, consider these things, when they be oppressed of
the wicked for the verity and righteousness, through ye permissio^ of Christ
governor of al, in this world, let them nevertheless glorify the Lord God,
and praise him without ceasyng. To him be glory for ever.

Here is described the commendation and Hymn said unto Christ of the Angels
and al creatures. etc. The.xxix. Sermon.
ANd I beheld, and heard the voice of many Aungelles about the Throne, and
about the beasts and the elders, and I heard thousand thousands saying with
a loud voice: worthy is the lamb that was killed, to receive power, and
riches and wisdom, and strength and honor, and glory, and blessing. And all
creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and in
the Sea, and all that are in them, heard. I saying: blessing, honor, glory,
and power be unto him, that sits upon the seat, and to the lamb for ever
more. And the.iiii. beasts said, Amen. And the.xxiiii. Elders fell upon their
faces and worshipped him that lives for ever more.

In the fourth place now come the Angels of God also to the Elders and to the
beasts, The Angels also praise Christ.
I mean to the most excellent creatures of God, and together with them praise
with an hymn God and the lamb: doubtless for an example to us, that, as I
ofttimes say and repete, we might understand what thing becomes us also.

Of Angels David in.c.iiii. Psalm. speaking emo^gs other things: which
makes, says he, his Angels spirits, Of Angels.
and his ministers a flame of fire. He testifies therefore that the Angels
were made or created of God. By their substance he calls them spirits, and
by a parable a flame of fire, which is pure, bright, most swifte, pearsyng,
and burning. Therefore after their sort and mean the Aungelicall spirits be
altogether such: whom by their office he calls ministers, Read. 24. sermon
following.
to wit of God and manne. For S. Paull also to the Hebr. brynging this same
place of David, be they not al, says he, ministering spirits, which are sent
forth into ministry, for them which be heirs of Salvation? verily
understanding men. These things teach us to judge rightly of Angels, and that
no man should worship ministers, or any be they never so excellent creatures,
for their godly gifts. Another in deed can the Angels or Saints abide them
selves to be worshipped. Here doubtless they attribute all glory to God and to
the Lamb, to God three and one, that all we should do the like. Here is also
declared the place, wherein the Aungelles were, about the Throne, about the
beasts, and about the Elders. Therefore they guarded al these places round
about as it were a guard. Daniel in times paste saw things not much unlike
these in the.7. chapt. Certainly they stand like ministers and seruitours,
ready to do service. Angels are said also to be about the godly upon earth,
and to attend upon the salvation and ministry of men. In the.34. Psalm.
David sings, he being afflicted called upon the lord, and the Lord heard
him, and from all his troubles he delivered him. The Aungel of the lord
pitcheth his tents about them which fear him (the lord) and he delivers
the^. And not much unlike things you may read in ye.91. Psalm. And thou shall
here note, that those that be afflicted do call upon the lord, and not the
Angels: And that the lord does hear, and deliver, and for the workyng thereof
uses the ministry of Angels, as his ministers. And like as no man that is
well in his wit does reverence, call upon, and worship the son, for that
God by the same gives great benefits to men. So no man honors, calls
upon, and worshippeth Angels for that God uses their ministry in deliueryng
of men.

The nu^bre of Angels.
Now also he puts the no^bre of Angels, but a certain for an uncertain,
thousand thousands for innumerable. He alludeth in the mean time to that
saying of Daniel in the 7. chapt. Thousand Thousands served him, and ten
hondreth thousand assisted him. Of a great and innumerable army we are
woonte to esteem the power of kings. What than shall we think of the power of
our God, which is the God of hoostes, and whom not only innumerable legions
of Angels, but all creatures serve? And what an excellent praise is it,
which is song together of so many blessed spirits?

For after this, the proper duty or office of Aungelles is touched: They
singe praises to God, and commend the la^be of God, and that with a loud
voice. It skilleth not greatly wheter with a low or an high voice thou singest
praises to ye Lord: but for as much as they that cry with a loud voice, are
for the most part sore moved, as overwhelmed with great sorrow, or with great
gladness rejoicing, therefore shall we praise God with a loud voice, in case
with a stout spirit, and with the inward affection of the heart we shall
praise God.

The Himne of the Angels, said in ye praise of Christ.
The aungelical Hymn is now annexed, which accords in all things with the
Himnes of the Beasts and Elders. For they celebrate the lamb, that is to say
the son, which as he is the savior alone, so has he deserved to receive all
power and glory, and to govern al things: as is said before.

And seven things do the Aungelles attribute to the la^be, that is to Jesus
Christ our Lord, on the right hand of the father. First (...), power to wit
godly, almighty, viuificatiue, and conseruatiue. Of this I spoke also before.
Secondly (...) richesse. For he is rich, as the Apostle says, for all that
call upon him. Romans 10. And Primasius: Christ him self, says he, is the
treasure of al good things, etc. For schaddais, the sufficiency of al goods of
the mind and body: And if it be lawful to attribute a profane word unto God,
he is very Saturn, fulfillyng al creatures. And sins the Aungelles do so
commend Christ, who would think, that men should so scrape to themselves, as
though they themselves could fill their own desires? Than they attribute to
Christ wisdom, to wit godly and great. For the son is the wisdom of the
father. Whereof treats Solomon much. By this wisdom ca^ he rule al things by
most agreeable and best government. Who shall say? Thus it should have been
done. The wisdom of God has most goodlily and well made al things from the
beginning, so that our reason can justly blame nothing: what thing shall we
blame than now in the universal government of Christ? They ascribe unto Christ
also strength to execute verily such things as he has most wisely ordained,
finally strength to defend his, and to subdewe the adversaries. For he is
almighty. Such things as follow, honor, glory, and thanks giving, are
declared before, what they be, and of what force: saving that the thing he
called first (...) he calls now (...), blessing, praise, and geuyng of
thanks.

This Hymn said in the praise of Christ, Christ is greater tha^ Angels, and
the lord of Angels.
teaches that Christ is very God, of the same substance and coequal with the
father, greater than Angels, yea the lord of Aungelles, whom the angels
themselves also worship, as S. Paul in the 1. to the Hebr. has declared. Here
than are confuted who so ever prefer Angels to Christ. The heretics are
confuted that are called Aungelical, to wit worshippers of Angels. The
angels themselves do here reprove their error: that not without cause they
are accounted of S. Austen emongs heretics. If richesse, glory and honor be
dew to Christ alone, and that he excels them, wherefore are the same
communicated to creatures? Otherwise we admonish all godly, that they think
highlye of Angels, and acknowledge and marvel at the benefits of God in them:
and that we love the same as brethren, and fellows, and coinheriters of the
same salvation: much less contemn or blame them, Whereof I will speak more at
an other time.

Hitherto has he recited the excellent praises, the Panegyrical verses or
Himnes of the excellent creatures of God, of those Elders in deed especially
and generally of al, The praise and agreement of all creatures, to ye glory of
Christ.
moreover of Aungelles also, said unto Christ our redemer and prince. And yet
not with these contented he adds morouer in the fifth place, the agreement,
and praise, and submission of all the creatures in the world, to the intent that
if happily we be not moved with the excellent example of the excellent creatures,
Elders and Aungelles, now at the last we might be abashed, which see all
creatures of their own accord to do their duty. For manne sins he is Lord
of all, and all thing were for him created, how I pray you shall he offend
more haynousely against God, which has made him Lord over all, than if by
his hardenes, ingratitude, and maliciousnes he not only does not his own
duty: but is rather inferriour to al creatures: as he which alone contendeth
with God, and attributes not to him dew praise. Therefore does this example
greatly excite man, that he should submit him self unto God, and give God
the whole glory: and in no wise strive with God, nor complain of any thing.
But mark I pray you with how diligent a division of things he compriseth
all creatures, excludes none, the Devil only excepteth, what time he
raccompteth the creatures that are in Heaven, which are in Earth, which are
under the Earth, and in the Sea: finally he adds, and all that be therein.
Therefore if all things created do celebrate and worship him that sits in
the Throne and the lamb, and submit themselves unto him: is it not a shame,
yea and a soul shame, that manne alone, Lord of all, should reuolte to the
sworn enemy of God, the Devil, and with him to expostulate with God, to
tau^te and blame and find fault with his judgments and gouernementes to
complain of his works and will?

How al creatures can praise god.
You marvel, I wot well, how al creatures, syns many of them be void of
reason, and insensible can praise God. Howebeit this figure prosopopeia that is
the faynyng of persons is very common with all the prophets, and chiefly with
David, praise ye him Sun and Moon, says he, praise him ye bright stars.
Praise the Lord from the earth ye Dragons and all deep places, fire, hayle,
snow, Ise, etc. And by such manners of speaking the Prophets would encourage
and stire up men to praise God: seeing that creatures which have no life, do
after their manner praise God, see that you after your manner do praise God in
Hymns and spiritual Psalms. And in deed David shows a plain reason, why
he commands bodies that have no life to praise God, let them praise, says
he, the name of the lord, why? because he commanded, and they were created.
As though he should say: they be his creatures, and in that they remain yet,
they have it of him: therefore let them make the name of God gloriouse, as of
their maker and preserver. And he signified also the manner of praising, where
he adds, he has ordained them, that they should endure for ever: he gave
them an ordenaunce, neither is it transgressed. As if he should have said.
Where they neglecte no part of those things, whereunto they are made, but are
ready in their place, order, and time, and do their duty exceadingly well, do
they not preach unto men the wonderful wisdom and power of God? For in an
other Psalm also david says, the heavens show forth the glory of God, and
the firmament declares the works of his hands. etc. Thus I say the
creatures with out life do praise and commend the name of God unto men, what
time they are moved, work wonderfully, and obediently do the thing were unto
they are appoincted.

The Hymn of al creatures, like as that was of the beasts, An Himne said unto
Christ of al creatures.
and Elders and Angels, is here also trimmely described, although briefly. But
where it has nothing, that has not be^ declared before, I will not by often
repetyng and speaking the same things, molest and werie the gentle hearers.
Howbeit that one thing seems chiefly to be observed, that they join him that
sits in the throne, and the lamb together, so acknowledging the son to be
coequall with the father, and they both to be worshipped with like honor, and
with like praises to be celebrated and commended. They attribute peculiarly to
the lamb Empire or kingdom, for that he received the book of the father, as
is declared before: to wit al power, and authority to govern al things.

The four beasts singe to it Amen, A co^s^nt is approved, dissente is
reproved.
either so confirmyng the Hymn of the creatures, or thus declaryng their
consent with them. To the intent we should with one mind pray together and
praise God blessed for evermore. With these are moreover confuted the
dessensions of men. The Lord allows the concord and agreement of men, and
requires utterly, especially in prayers and godly praises. For he commands
in the Gospel to lay down thine oblation, which thou would offer, in
case thou do remember any discord betwixt thee and thy brother, to go unto
him, and to renew amity, and than to return to thine offeringe: which in
the prophets is called an abomination, in case it be offered of minds
possessed with rancour and malice. etc.

Thelders worship again.
Finally the elders fall down again and worship him that lives for ever,
doubtless that by their often worshipping al we in earth might be moved unto
obedience. For if these things be done in heaven of the blessed spirits, what
I pray you is mete for us to do here in earth? And mark, that they are said
to worship him that lives for ever, who nevertheless fell down first also
before the lamb, and before the Throne, out of the which the spirit proceeded,
and whereupon sat he that sits: whereof we gather, that the Father, the
son, and the holy Ghost, are in deed distinct in persons, yet these three
not to be three Gods, but one God living for ever. A medicine against all
heresies.
And verily this notable vision and treatise may be in the stead of a most
effectual remedy against sundry poisons of heresies, especially of the Arrians
and Seruetanes, or rather perdetanes, moreover against diverse and curiouse
disputations and temptations touching the works, judgments and providence of
God. If we be wise, we will obediently submit our selves to the living God
with all the creatures and Saints of God, worshipping him, and with the
Prophet criyng: thou art just Lord in all thy ways, and holy in all thy works.
Thou have created us, al things are thine. Thou gouernest al things in best
order. Thou love man. Thou have given us thy son. Thou by thy son our
redemer gouernest al things uprightly. We worship thee the father, the son
and the holy ghost, one very god. To thee is dew the kingdom, honor, and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Two seals are opened, and the direct course of Gods word is, and a cruel
course of wars against the disobedient. The.xxx. Sermon.
ANd I saw when the lamb opened one of the seals, The.6. chapter.
and I heard one of the four beasts say, as it were the voice of thonder:
come and see. And I saw, and behold a white horse: And he that sat on him
had a bow, and a crown was given unto him: And he went forth conquering, and
to overcome. And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second beast
say: come and see. And there went out an other horse that was red, and power
was given to him that sat there on, to take peace from the earth, and that
they should kill one an other. And there was given unto him a great sword.

Hitherto has thapostle, prepared the auditors to hear with a quiet mind,
the judgments of God and fatal destenies of the church, and patiently to
bear all adversity, and that we should worship him in all things, and give
glory to his name: consequently he expounds in a most goodly order the
judgments of God, and destenies of the Church, showing how the son of God
governs the ordenau^ces of God and his eternal providence. And this is as it
were a Prognostication for all times and Ages unto the worlds end. A
continual prognostecatio^ of al times from the birth of Christ.
For we shall not think that here are rehearsed only the acts of one age or
two, but of al. And first al things are generally described by parts,
afterward particularly, when we come to the openyng of the seventh seal. The
some is, the lord sends forth the preaching of the truth into the world,
which when men refuse and despise, they are distroyed with wars, and other
calamities innumerable.

Attentiuenes here is necessary.
But before al things S. John is excited (and in him all we) to be attentife.
And one, that is to wit the first of the beasts does excite him. One of the
Sabbat is set for the first day in the weke, that same is verily the sunday.
The voice of the beast is like unto thonder. Whereby is signified that here is
treated of great and most weighty matters. For most great and terrible things
follow, which shake the whole world. Therefore let us not play the slepy
sluggardes, let us not be blind and deaf. Doubtless the sloughtfulnes of our
time is such, that we little consider the works of God and what is done in our
time. The storkes, swallows and Turtels, and the rest of living things pass
us, which full well observe their time. Therefore are we here well stired up, that
we should not be slouthful, but should mark what things are declared and
showed us of the Lord.

The first seal is opened.
And when S. John had diligently marked what was don, he sees the lamb, Christ
I mean our redemer, open one seal, that is to say the first: And straight
ways came forth a white horse, on whom he that sat, had a bow bent, and an
Arrowe in it. To him was given a crown, and he went forth conqueryng, that he
might overcome. This is the vision: the exposition whereof is easy. For the
Lord says, that he will declare the destenies of the church.

Horses Horses.
of sundry colors are also brought forth of Zachary in the.1. chapt. And
they signify the variable course and state of the people of Israel. The white
color is consecrated to Innocence, The course of Gods word.
purity, victory, and felicity. Therefore by the white horse is signified the
lucky vtteraunce of Gods word, or prosperous preaching of the Gospel. For upon
the horse sits a horseman, which guides the horse, and has a bow.
Certainly Christ does prosper the course of the preaching of the Gospel. And
the.45. Psalm. does attribute to the same shaftes or Arrows. A bow.
For he strikes his enemies far of, and brings them into his subjection.
Briefly with the word of his mouth he subdued to him self people and nations.
Esaye in the.49. bringing in Christ speaking, says: And he put my mouth as a
sharp sword, the shadow of his hand covered me, and he put me as a piked
Arrow, he hid me in his queuer. Through Christ therefore proceeds the
preaching of the word, he gives strength to the preaching, he shakes his bent
bow. What force so ever the word has, that same is whole dew to the
Horseman.

To the same is given a Crown, A crown.
to wit a kingdom and all power of rulyng. For David propheciyng before
said, the Lord shall send forth the rod of his power out of Sion, to rule
emonges thine enemies. Moreover there is given him a crown, that he may
crown such as serve him faithfully. And it is a phrase of speaking, and he
went forth conqueryng, that he might overcome: for that which is, he that
went forth is a conqueror, and to this end went forth, that he might
overcome. For it signifies that Christ will auaunce the preaching of his word
through out the world, no man being able to resist, and even in dispite
also of Hell gates. For the word of the Lord indureth for ever.

And this place teaches, That the church shall be always and the preachinge of
ye word.
that the Church shall be always in the world, and likewise always the truth
preached, though the enemies bowelles burste. But if we read over the story of
the Church, we shall better understand al things, and shall perceive that
this Prognostication has always ben most certain. Christ was ones through
the ministry of the word showed to the world by the Apostles, and the matter
proceeded most luckely, how much some ever the most mighty of this world
resisted the same. The thing is wonderful, in case those five hondreth years
be considered, which immediately after the incarnation of our Lord are
accoumpted. In them went forth the conqueror that he might overcome: And
overcame in deed, the whole world receyuyng Christ, and worshippyng him. Sins
those years, as before also, certain seeds of errors began to be sown abroad.
The Bisshoppes began to contend for the supremacy, and who should be the
universal head of the Church in earth: They began to reason of the use of
Images in the Church, and brought them into Churches in deed, as also they
called the Bisshoppe of Rome the supreme and general head of the Church in
earth. And mighty Princes, and in a manner the whole state of learned men
conspired in these opinions: but he has vanquished, which went forth, that he
might vanquish. He had in his church innumerable, which bowed not their knees
before this Baal. A thousand years after the incarnation of Christ, the
Bishops began to profanely to pollute the lords supper: and other undefiled
doctrines of faith: but what I pray you did they prevail by so many counsels,
determinations, and endeavors most ernest? he that went forth to overcome, has
ouercome^. That white Horse has stoutely invaded to the salvation of many. For
how great battles in these last five ho^dreth years the godly and learned me^
have sustained against the Popes and Bisshoppes, stories bear witness. At this
day also appears through out the whole world, how luckely yet that white
horse goes forward, which has pearsed even until our time. The Gospel is
believed, neither can that faith be extinguished with any waters or fires.

Thou make exception, that they were heretics which resisted the bishop
and See of Rome in these.500. last years, as Bertrame, John Scot surnamed
Dunse, Berengarius, Arnoldus Brixianus, Waldo Wicleffe, and Husse, Luther, and
Zwinglius, and such other men of the same sort, moreover certain of these were
ouercomen also, and put to death by the Pope. I answer, that as men they might
err in many things: but in those things wherein with the Scripture they
consent against the Sea of Rome, I affirm that they erred not, but said the
truth. Whereupon it is certain that Christ overcame by them. What time
Micheas, Helias, Zacharias, Amos, Ieremias and others preached by the word of
God against Idols and worshippers of Idols, they were also condemned for
seditioufe and heretics: yea and certain of them were taken out of the way:
but was the verity vanquisshed? Antichrist is said that he should have good
fortune, and that he should punish and afflict the strong, and the people of
God: but men being ministers may be oppressed, the ministry never decays.
S. Paull says that he is bounden for the Gospels sake, but the Gospel not to
be bounden. Therefore has he ouercomen hitherto, and shall overcome still,
which went forth that he might conquer. They stumble upon this conqueror as at
the stone of offense, who so ever, and what so ever they be, which seek to
interrupte the plain course of the Gospel.

Moreover what time the second seal should be opened the second beast, The
second seal is opened.
to wit the Ore or Calfe exhorts again S. John to attentiuenes, and that we
should consider what is propounded unto us. And now comes forth the red horse,
whose color is somewhat like fire: there sits also on him a rider, to whom
power is given to disturb peace in earth, and that men should kill one an
other. For there is given him a great sword. The red horse signifies ye state
of wars, Calamity of wars.
full of fire and blood. He that sits on this horse is Mars, or rather the
father of lies, I mean the Devil, which was a murderer from the beginning.
He gathers to him the dregs of men to make civil commotions, for the
wars, destruction, firyng, slaughter, and desolation. You see from whence the
breakyng of peace is, which God hates. And we hear how it is given him:
Mark given, by the just judgment of God to be permitted, that troublyng al
peace, he should take it away, and set men together by the ears, that one
may wound and kill an other. For so we read in the.1. of Job, how Satan had
power given him of God against Job. Unto blouddy soldiers is given a great
sword, great power to hurt, a wonderful force of fighting: As also Nahum
expounds it. Another is it a rare thing in the scriptures for Monarkes,
tirannes, and mighty men of war to be called, a sword. For so Ezechiel
called Nabuchodonosor: and Esaye called Sinacherib king of Assyrians a
whetstone.

And the chiefest rightuousenes is, God is of good thi^^s the deui^l author of
evil.
to give every man his own. Therefore this place does justly ascribe that
which is good unto God, and that which is evil to the Devil. But, thou
say, if God permit, the same that he does not prohibit he does. He
prohibiteth not war, for because justice will not suffer him so to do: but he
commands him by war to punish the wicked, and to try the good: but in
permittyng wars God offends nothing, seeing that for most just causes he
permits the same. For they would not embrace peace offered them by the
preachers of the Gospel, therefore were they worthy to be entangled with
wars. The Jews knew not the day of Christ's visitation, therefore were they
worthily visited of the Romans and distroyed: And this thing is in the world
perpetual, that they that will not obey the Gospel, must obey the Captain
of the wars: they that will not hear christ, must hear Antichrist. Thou
may not contend with God, whic he does this, and permits that. Worship
God rather, as thou have ben taught in the.4. and.5. chapt.

Let us peruse over stories, and see and such wars be not found, wherein men
have slain themselves with mutual wounds, and have killed one an other like
beasts. If you will read Herodiane, Orosius, and other good Historiographers,
you may find that the Roman Emperors have been troubled with most greuouse
wars, for none other cause, than that they refused peace offered to them by
the gospel. For none other cause was Rome it self at the last taken by the
Westgothians, of the Eastgothians burnte and distroyed. The lord had given them
Christen Princes: but they loved more Idols. For Simmachus governor of the
city was so bold to require a restitution of Idolatry. I speak nothing now
of Athila, nothing of the Persian and Affricane wars. And what time there was
a wonderful strife emo^gs the Bisshoppes about the supremacy, the Saracenes
sprang up and became mighty. After the Thousand year began the holy war,
which as it was most bloody, so was it of longest continuance. Never any such
war was made in all the world. Boniface the.8. instituted first the year of
Iubiley, a most wicked manne, who also did exhibit him self to be seen of
the people both Pope and Emperor. But the same year of a thousand and three
hondreth, wherein he did these things, arrose up in Asia the whippe or scourge
of God Ottoman, the original of themperours of Turks which reign at this
day. For so when Solomon builded places of Idolatry, his enemies sprang up,
which wonderfully vexed and afflicted the kingdom of Solomon. What wars are
made now a days, and what be the causes of wars, al wise men do see. We will
not receive the peaceable gospel: It is reason therefore, that the Turkissh
Armies should invade us, that we may both feel Antichrist to be a stout
warrior, and may al abhor and deteste him.

But what other thing remains here, than that being converted to God through
Christ, we may serve the lord in sincere faith, and holy puretie? for except
we convert, the are is laid at the tree root, etc.

Here is opened the.iii. and.iiii. Seal, and is declared what the world shall
suffer of honger and Pestilence. The.xxxi. Sermon.
ANd when he opened the third Seal, I heard the third beast say: come and
see. And I beheld and lo, a black horse: and he that sat on him, had a pair
of Balaunces in his hand. And I heard a voice in the mids of the four
beasts say: A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for
a penny: and oil and wine see thou hurt not.

And when he opened the fourth Seal, I heard the voice of the fourth beast
say: come and see. And I looked, and behold a pale Horse, and his name that
sat on him was Death, and Hell followed after him, and power was given unto
them over the fourth part of the Earth, to kill with sword, and with honger,
and with death of the beasts of the Earth.

Christ exalted above all things, A repetitio^
and Lord of all in heaven and in earth, opens the seals of the book divine,
that is to wit disposes and governs with great righteousness the
ordenaunces and judgments of God: and first in deed he gives a prosperouse
course to the preaching of the gospel, sendyng always faythefull ministers
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God, peace, and concord. But for
as much as evil men do contemn the Euangelical peace, they are certainly
worthy to be molested with cruel wars. Therefore the lamb opens the second
seal, and there rushe out cruel wars, slaughters, seditions and robberies.

Attention.
But before the third Seal is opened, the third beast resemblyng ye
countenance of man, exhorts us to take most diligent head: that when we see
these things come to pass which are here spoken of before, we should
consider from whence they come, and for what causes they are sent, and that
they may be turned away by dew repentance. Certain refer these things
absolutely to chance and fortune, some again to the natural causes, of God,
and the divine operation no respect had at al: Where we know that God uses
natural causes after his good will and pleasure. Let us watch therefore, look and
consider, and know that the rightuouse God works al things for the salvation
of the chosen, and the overthrow of his enemies. That black horse with his
rider, showing a balaunce in his hand, signifies the unfortunate or
sorrowful time of scarsetie, famine and penury of al things. The third
seal is opened.
For it is a worthy and a co^digne punishment, that they that do nothing
esteem ye bread of life, nor have no consideration of the food of souls, but
both reject it themselves, and by their tirannical proclamations bring to
pass that it is not received of others, finally which for the bread of life
do spoil the godly of their goods, and most wickedly waste the same in all
kind of riot, should be driven to bie things necessary at excessive prices:
yea and can not find things necessary, but should pine for honger. We know
that the black color is used in mourning and heuinesse: The black horse.
and that when the flesh and blood are consumed for want of meat, the skin
grows black and evil favored: and therefore this horse is black.

The rider of this horse holds in his hand a balaunce? (...), What zygon is.
with two scales hanging at either end of the beam, which we call a pair of
weightes. Aretas says that a balaunce is a token of right and equity. For
thou have sitten, says David upon thy Throne which iudgest righteousness:
therefore is a balaunce the judgment of the just judgment of God. Aretas has
not alleged these things amiss, howbeit we ought rather to prefer the
exposition of S. John him self. For a voice is heard from the mids of the
beasts, which expounds to us the ballaunce. For it sounds, a measure A
measure.
of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny. And this measured
called Choinix, signifies a diet or daily meat: as Erasmus has in his
proverb, sit not upon thy measure. The same in his annotations upon this
place: Choinix, says he, is a measure of wheat, or other breadcorne, which
is sufficient for one days meat. Budaeus thinks that it wayeth.iiii.
pound, Pollux. iii. The word therefore signifies, that a very little meat
shall cost a great price, and yet not to be gotten for money. Which chau^ceth
in the time of famine. What the Roman penny is worth Budaeus shows: we
understand by it plainly a great price. Therefore two things are signified,
scarsitie or derth of corn, and famine. Dearth reiseth the price beyond
reason. Famine has nothing to bie, though he has never so much monye liyng by
him: but hongreth, waunteth, pineth, and at the last miserably, consumes to
naught: wherein verily dearth and famine do differ. The Germans discern them
by several words calling dearth scarsetie, and famine, honger. Yet are they
for the most part indivisible.

And we read in the old story of the Bible, Darth and famine.
that for the contempt of the preaching of Gods law, and the bringing in of a
strange kind of worshipping God, the Israelites in the times of Helias and
Helisaeus were most greuousely punished with honger and penury. These things
be plentifully declared in the.3. book of Kings the.17. and.18. Chapt. Also in
the.4. of Kings, the.6. and.7. Chapt. Moreover in the time of the Emperor
Claudius, whilst the Apostles preached the Gospel faithfully, and the Jews
and Gentiles stoutely repulsing it, famine most greuousely afflicted the
Roman Empire: which thing S. Luke reherseth in the Acts of the Apostles.11.
chapt. Which things were done in deed before this revelation was to S. John
exhibited. Sins that time the Historiographers recite sundry and innumerable
famines, dearthes and penuries, in diverse countries, sent of God for contempt
of the truth. Nauclerus mentions of a famine in the year of our lord.
D.xxxix. wherein mothers also devoured their own children. What has chanced
in our memory in those wars of Millan and else where, it is no need to
rehearse. They be yet fresshe in memory, and written in the stories of Galeacius
Capella. We felt some part hereof also in the year of our Lord. M.D.XXIX. and
the years followyng. The just Lord punissheth, and more will punisshe the
great ingratitude, and contempt of his Godly word: as he did in the
destruction of Jerusalem, would God it would please the world most blind,
through repentance to convert unto God when he punishes and with free and
willing minds embrace the word of verity: for so should there be more
felicity and less misery.

God forgets not his mercy in punisshyng.
Howebeit for a comfort at the end of this Seal is added, and Oil and Wine
see thou hurt not. He names the kinds most necessary for the use of man,
and means, that God does mercifully reserve some things, that be chiefly
necessary for man's use, especially for the electes sake, that all should not
perish and pine in general. Whereby we understand that the lord forgets
not his mercy, even in the mids of affliction and plagues that he sends.
Thus in times paste mindyng to punish Aegipte and other nations with famine, he
sent before Joseph, by whom he might preserve the house of Jacob, and other
people innumerable. You see herein most clearly, that it is of God, that
sometime the corn is blasted, and the vines and olives perish: and to be of
him, that the corn increases, and wine also. So has he also before protested
in the law, Leuitic. 26. And Deuteron. 28.

the fourth seal is opened.
We are comen now to the fourth Seal, at the opening whereof, and to behold
the operation, we are excited of the Egle, the fourth beast. Of whom we have
spoken before ones or twice. And the pale Horse The pale horse.
comes forth, in Greek (...), which color resembles withered grass and
Herbs. Solomon in the.12. Chapt. of Eccles. calls the color apperyng in
dead bodies, and their countenaunces, Golden licour. All Poets call death
Pale. And the rider in deed is expressly called Death. We understand the
course of the plage and of all diseases, and even of death it self: whom Hell
follows, that is to say a pit or a grave. For Scheol in Hebrewe signifies
a pit or a grave. But if you will needs understand it of the place of them
that be damned, doubtless they be carried headlong into Hell, so many as here with
sickness consumed, die with out faith and repentance. Therefore hell follows
death rightly. But if thou had rather by hell understand, a grave: it
signifies that all shall be full of coarses and sepulchers.

And that in deed plagues and pestile^ces most mortal have sore afflicted the
Roman Empire, Plague and diseases.
Orosius is wittenes in his seventh book in the Acts of L. Aurel. Verus and
Decius Emperors, the most cruel persecutours of our faith. Euagrius in the.29
Chapter, of the.4. Book of the Ecclesiast. story tells of a maruelouse plague
that lasted about.50. years. And all men know with what a pestilence and soden
death Italy was wasted in the time of Maurice Emperor. And Gregory bishop of
Rome. The time would fail me, in case I would recite out of Histories all the
plagues and calamities of all times. What is done at this day, and has been
done in our memory, you your selves know best. There are spronge up new
diseases, whose names to our elders were never known. With these euilles and
calamities God wastes the world, and ever has done to the intent that by
plagues he might call us again to repentance. Thus verily we shall judge
always of calamities. If any judge otherwise, they are not amended, therefore
are they punished here, and after this shall burn in perpetual tourmentes.

To these moreover is added an other thing also, Four scourges against the
incurable.
and power was given them, etc. For when men will not amend with simple
Calamities, the euilles or plagues of God are doubled. The same are raccompted
in the like order and nombre with the Prophets, Jeremy the.15. Chapt. and
Ezechiel in the.14. Chapter. For they be these, Sword, Famine, Death or
Pestilence, and beasts: so are they recited in the Law also. With these as it
were sent in from the iiii. parts of the world, God most rightuouse executes
his judgments.

And let us observe this chiefly, that power is given the^ of God to kill, and
that over the fourth part of the Earth. For we learn, that God alone is he
that quickens, and sleyeth, and that he works the same most justly by his
instruments, finally that al his things are numbered and done in order.
Whereupon he powers out his fury upon the third part of the world. For he
knows, whom he should punish, and whom he should nurrishe tenderly.

A^ misery.
Certainly stories testify, how in desperate matters, when all things are
brought to an extremity of mischief, God has brought in sword, pestilence,
famine, and beasts, which have plaged men. And full aptly here does Aretas
recite the words of his predecessor S. Andrew, Bishop of Cesaria out of the
Eccles. story of Eusebius, in the.9. book.8. chapt. And verily with in the five
ho^dreth last years, Historiographers tell of many such like things, and we
have seen some.

Therefore if we covet to be quitte of so great euilles, let us serve God in
truth, annd make much of his word, which he has sent to heal us. And
reason it is that such as reiecte sou^de doctrine, should be vexed with sundry
diseases of soul and body, etc.

The good are also subject to these evils.
You will say, but these euilles invade also the best that is. So they do in
deed. Why God permits this S. Austen shows at large in the first book of
the city of God. Certainly to the godly al things turn to the best. The
thieves suffered the same death of the cross, that Christ did, and he as they:
but the consideration of them is far diverse. The apostles and innumerable
Martirs dye of the sword, likewise do soldiers in the wars, but with unlike
lot. The Godly are made pertakers of the passion of the son of God. The
ungodly are punisshed for their wickedness, and their sufferyng is without
glory: yea rather this is the beginning, unless they acknowledge him that
strikes them, of everlasting tourmentes, The Lord preserve us from evil.

The fifth Seal is opened, and the persecution of the faithful set before our
eyes, and also the state of Martirs in an other world. The.xxxij. Sermon.
ANd when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the Altar, the souls of
them that were killed for the word of God. And for the testimony which they
had, and they cried with a loud voice saying: how long tariest thou, lord,
which art holy and true, to judge, and to avenge our blood on them that dwell
on the earth? and long white Garments were given unto every one of them: and
it was said unto them, that they should rest for a little season, until the
nombre of their fellows and brethren, and of the^ which should be killed as
they were, were fulfilled.

The fifte Seal being opened of the lamb, he exhibiteth to our eyes, or
rather obiecteth to be seen the continual persecutions of the church: and
shows unto us diligently, what is the state of them which die in
persecutions. Verily the Lord Christ sends forth ministers and preachers for
the salvation of men. And they unthankful, ouerwhelme with all kind of
injuries the faythefull messengers of God, and at length most cruelly slaye
them. Of the which matter sins the talk of men emonges themselves is diverse,
the very son of God at this present does gallauntly instruct his church,
declaryng what the godly shall suffer.

And first in expounding the same, Of the persecution of the church.
we shall speak generally of the persecutions, wherewith as well the ministers,
as all the faithful church also, is diuersely exercised. The lord Christ has
showed us before in the Gospel many things touching the persecutions to come
verily that he might prepare the minds of all the faithful to battle and
patience. The places be in the.10. and.24. of Matthew: In the.12. and.21. of
Luke: in the.14.15. and.16. of John. And also the acts of the Apostles tell of
many things, which the godly suffered in that most holy primitive Church,
should he have been thought to have been well in his wits, if any man than
should have said: he^ of it appears, that thapostolical church, is not the
church, for that it is subject to all the mockeries, injuries and slaughters of
al men? why than do we not acknowledge at this day, that they are fowly
disceaued, which measure the church by the outward peace and tranquillity of
things? Paulus Orosius in the.7. book of histories raccompteth ten greuouse
persecutions, raised against the church from the time of the Apostles until
the emperor Constantine: which time did not fully accomplish the space of.ccc.
years. The first was stired up by Nero, a monstrouse man, whereof also Tacitus
mentions in his Chronicles. This same rid out of the way Peter and Paul, the
most holy? Apostles of Christ. The second destruction of the church brought in
Domitian, which in the same his persecution most grievously afflicted both this
our S. John, and the whole church also: and when he was brought to Rome,
banished him into the I Will of Pathmos. The third raised Traiane, whereof Pliny
governor of Asia makes mention in the 10. book of Epistles. In this was
Ignatius an holy Bishop cast and devoured of wild beasts. And M. Antoninus
verut molested the church with the fourth persecution, and consumed with fire
Polycarpus a bishop most worthy. Septimus Seuerus moved the fifte persecution,
which Eusebius pourseweth in the.6. book of the Ecclesiastical story. Julius
Maximinus killed Pamphilus martyr, and Sextus raged cruelly against the
church. And Decius Traianus began the seventh persecution, and executed very
many that professed Christ. And Licinius Valerian Emperor beheaded S. Cyprian
the good Bishop of Carthage, and was the eight persecutour of the church,
Aurelianus verius began the.ix. persecution, which he but little auaunced, for
God most just took him away immediately. But Diocletian and Maximian shed more
christen blood, tha^ any other of the Roman Emperors. Read I pray you the
beginning of the.8. book of the Eccles. story of Eusebius. Compare those things
with our time, and judge and conjecture what will shortly come to pass, and
what our state will be. Persecutions are again renewed after Constantine,
under Constantius and Julian. But the most terrible and greuouse of all have
boiled up under Antichrist, and have endured now by the space of five hondreth
years and more. What is done at this day, all the world sees. The ground is
wete with the blood of Martirs. Which things S. John foresawe.

And the causes of persecution The causes of persecution.
do arrise partly of the government of Christ, which opens here the fifte
Seal: and partly of men. The Lord sends unto his the Cross and fire, to
quicken such as are slow, and to make those clean that are covered with
ruste, and may fine the corrupt Gold. For so the Scripture defines in
the.11. chapt. of Daniel, and the Apostle.1. Peter. Chapter.4. Christ therefore
not to distroie, but to try, permits very many things to Tirannes against
the Church. The godly men also procure to themselves the heavy hand of the
Lord, whilst in deed they believe rightly in the son of God, and depend
only of him: but nevertheless are entangled with sundry and evil affections,
and commit such acts as not becomes them. This may you see declared at
large in the beginning of the eight book of the Ecclesiastical story of
Eusebius, which I lately alleged. And the Tirannes that persecuted had an
other respect: as Sinacherib and Antiochus, than our Bisshoppes and Princes
have at this day. For these now are moved with the hatred of Religion, and
are pricked forewarde of Satan. They will have in any wise their Idolatrouse
religion mainteyned, and the religion of the Gospel vteerly distroyed. They
can not abide to have their Idolles or other sins reproved: for this cause
are they mad at the faithful and such as frankely speak against and blame
there Idolles and wickedness. And thus does the persecution arrise, boil up and
proceed.

The which when the faithful see increase thus, Mutining in persecution.
and feel themselves sore oppressed, they marvel, how long the lord will wink
at this. Many cry out, the Lord neglects his matters. The Lord seems to
deal unjustly with his servants he seems utterly to forget them. Neither
is there any doubt but that many by murmuryng offend the Lord grievously. Now
therefore are we taught, that we might have hope and patience.

And at this present Heaven is opened to us, and showed us to behold, The sum
of such things as are opened to us in this seal.
where as be the souls of them that are slain in persecutions, and what is
their state is declared: morouer, that God forgets not to be revenged: why
also he differreth the same and how long. These things are spoken to the
consolation of all the faithful, that are now afflicted with persecution. Far
other things are exhibited here unto us, than painters instructed or rather
corrupted of with monks and Freres set forth to us: to wit a great company of
Monks and Nuns covered in Heaven with our ladies coule, as though the
greatest part of them should be saved. S. John shows us never a Friar, but
rather many martirs, whom the Freres at this day make before other men. Hereof
therefore, as of the doctrine of verity we shall learn, what state or degree is
most plentiful in heaven, not that we should think no man but only Martirs to
be saved (for so many as truly believe in Christ, and crucify their flesh
with the concupiscences of the same, shall be associated with holy Martirs, and
rejoice with Christ for ever) but that chiefly the holy Martirs are saved,
whom the mad world supposes to be lost.

Souls separated from the body be immortal.
But al things here must be examined of us most diligently. For this place as
it is most manifest, so is it full of most wholesome doctrines. First S. John
sees, and shows us as it were poynting with his fingar, the souls, and that
of those that were slain, to wit the spiritual and immortal substaunces, which
the body being lost and consumed do remain a live. The body may be killed, the
soul can not be killed. Which our Savior has lively expressed in the.10. of
Matthew. In the 12. of Luke, he says: be not affrayde of them which sleye the
body, and after this have nothing that they can do more, etc. Therefore tira^nes
might well kill the bodies of Martirs, they had no power over their souls. This
place witnesses manifestly, the souls of men not only to be immortal, but
also living or watcheful, not slepyng to remain and live in Heaven. For there
be that think the souls departed from the body to sleep: The cause makes
martyrs, not the punishment.
which thing is most vain.

Now also the cause is showed for the which the Martirs are slain: for the
word of God, and for the testimony that they had: they were not put to death
for their wickedness or evil doings, but for the true religion, whereby they
confessed and preached that word of God, which was in the beginning, and was
made flesh: and the Gospel which they had committed unto them, the testimony
of God and eternal life, which also they ministered and preached. Of the word of
God and testimony of Jesus Christ I have spoken in the first Chapt. For no other
cause at this day are slain innumerable of Bisshoppes, kings and princes. If
they were aduouterers, usurers, blasphemers, and wicked doers, they should be in
some estimation: now where they profess the only son of God, and preach
the Gospel, they are murdered without mercy. Here have we also certainly
defined, who be very Martirs in deed, not they that suffer tourmentes: but they
that are tourmented for gods word. For the cause makes the Martyr.

But where are the souls of them that are slain for the word of God showed
unto us? under the Altar, Where the place is of the souls slain for gods word
the Altar is after in the.8. chapt. set in heaven, before the throne of God.
Therefore the souls of al Saints are in Heaven, before the Throne of God,
which was also signified before in the Tipe of the.xxiiii. Elders. The Lord
has said also, where I am, there shall be also my servant. But the lord is in
heaven: therefore the souls of the faithful, whose bodies have been slain, The
souls under the Altar.
or buried without slaughter, be no where else but in Heaven. Nevertheless it
waunteth not a singular mystery, that they are laid under ye Altar, as under
a shadow, through whose benefit the souls may be well at ease. I told you
before, and here again repete, that the altar signifies Christ. For he is
also the golden altar, intercessour, and propiciation for our sins. For the
propiciation and mediation of Christ we are received into the Joys celestial.
And Christ is our life and salvation. Under him we lie hid, as under a cover
or a shadow. Thomas of Aquine expounding this place of S. John: by the altar,
says he, is signified Christ, in whom and by whom we should offer to the
father, what good so ever we do: and through him is made acceptable, what so
ever is pleasant to God. Under this Altar, namely under christ, be ye
souls, not only in the state of life, (to wit whilst we live here in earth)
but also in the state of our country (to wit in heaven) as under him of whom
they are covered, as under a shadow against all evil. Thus says Thomas. But
I suppose that there is an other thing also signified, that martirs are made
confourmable to the Altar, that is to the passion of Christ, and therefore to
rest now under the Altar Christ. For they that are pertakers with him in
passion, do communicate also with him in glory. The altar and bosom of
Abraham.
For like as the bosom of Abraham, is called a receptacle, and that port and
hauon of Salvation, into the which the souls of the^ are received, which had
the faith of Abraham: so do we understand the altar to be a place of
blessedness in heaven, wherein they rest, which with true faith have acknowledged
Christ the altar, propiciation, sanctification and satisfaction: and have
moreover in suffering offered them selves to God in Christ, through patience,
an acceptable sacrifice to God. Under this Altar was gathered the first martyr
Abel: and after as many as have died for religion, and shall begathered, who so
ever in bearing the cross: through tribulation enter with Christ into glory.

The sai^tes cry under the Altar.
Now is also declared what they do under the Altar. The very martirs I say,
cry, not the beasts, as they have done hitherto: and they cry out with a
loud voice. No man shall Imagine, that the blessed souls in Heaven do
complain, be sorrowful, do accuse and be troubled. These things are feigned
to an other end, to the intent we should gather thereof, that God forgets
not his, that he puts not out al reuengement, that he sees, feleth, and
regards the injuries and deaths of his servants. Where the vengeance
follows not immediately, God is thought of many to sleep, and to have no
respect unto his. We hear therefore, that the holy Martirs cry, and that with
a loud voice. He appears to have alluded to that same in the.4. of Genesis.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me, to wit for vengeance. Crying
sinners.
For the Divines call certain sins criyng, as those which are red in the
Scriptures to cry unto God, as is at this present the shedyng of blood: the
sin of Sodom, in the.9. of Genes. the oppression of widows and orphans, in
the.22. of Exodus, wages for work deteyned, Deuteron. 24. and James the.5. How
long so ever therefore God differreth vengeance be it never so many years, yet
is not the blood of the just forgotten before God. S. Paul in the.12. to the
Hebrews cries out and says, that the blood of Abell speaks. In the.18. of
Luke the Lord says, that the afflicted do cry both day and night for
deliverance. Would God they would wayegh these things, whose feet are swifte
to shede blood. God would not in times paste be merciful to his people, for
that much innocent blood was shed emonges them by the mean of Manasses their
king: as appears in the.4. book of Kings. Therefore dear brethren let us
consider well at this day, what we do, and let us not shede rashly innocent
blood.

Certainly the words are expressed of S. John, Whether ye Saints in heaven
desire ve^gea^ce
which the Martirs cried to the Lord: how long, say they, Lord, which
art holy and true, etc. They put God in remembrance, not as ignorant, or
inconstaunt, but as knowing, and most stedfastely mindful of holiness and
truth. For in as much as the Lord is holy, he hates all profane and
unclean persons, and spares them not. For as much as he is true, he
maynteyneth and defends his chosen, and punnissheth and oppresses his
enemies as he has promised by his word. Sins therefore thou art such, say
they, O God, why do thou not judge, and aue^ge our blood, of them which in
earth, as in their kingdom exercise tyranny, and oppress every good man? All this signifies none other thing, than that God for his own sake, which is
holy and true, will never forget the injuries of his servants. Therefore we
understand these things to be spoken by a figure called Prosopopeia: that is
the fayning of a person: not that the Saints in Heaven do expostulate with
God, but that we by such a figure might understand that God has care of
Martirs, because he is holy and true. S. Austen in the.68. question upon the
new Testamente: Seeing the Lord, says he, has taught us to pray for our
enemies, what is the cause that the souls of those that are slain cry out as
does the blood of Abell, and require that they may be avenged? And he makes
answer: Saints be not impatient, that they should urge that thing to be done
now, which they know shall come to pass in the time prefixed, which neither can
be prevented, nor yet delayed: but by this saying he would show, how God
will avenge the blood of his servants, leest because he seems now so
patient, that wicked war should be thought unpunished, which is made against
the Saints: that both he might drive a fear into them that persecute the
servants of God, and might also exhort the sufferers unto patience. Thus
says he. And this in deed seems the playnest sense of al others, especially
if we consider the things that follow in the lords au^swer, and it was said
unto them that they should rest, etc.

Primasius Bishop of Vtica expoundyng this place of S. John, Saints, not
incensed with carnal understanding.
it is not to be thought, says he, that the Saints are incensed with a
carnal understanding and stoutenes to be avenged, sins we know that through
the abundance of charity the very enemies are of the^ also in this case
beloved: but it is evident that they prayed against the kingedome of sin, and
to have ernestly desired the other things of that kingdom, whereof we say, thy
kingdom come. For it is not lawful, to think that they would covet any
thing against the pleasure of God, sins their desires depend upon his will,
etc. And S. Gregory: what is it, says he, that ye souls make request of
reuengement, but that they desire the last day of judgment, and the
resurrection of bodies slain? Aretas notes here also out of the commentaries
of S. Andrew bishop of Cesaria: moreover the Saints appear hereby to wisshe
for the end of the world. Wherefore they are commanded patiently to abide,
until the accomplishement of their brethren, Hebr. 11.
leest they should be fulfilled with out them, after the holy Apostle.

Ve^geau^ce is desired two ways
Howbeit Thomas of Aquine in the exposition of the Apocalipse shows yt
vengeance is required of god two ways. First in deed with an evil and
malliciouse affection, which the Scripture does utterly repress. Secondely by
a Zeal of righteousness, and after the will of God is judgment required against
them that be incurable. After he annexeth this: therefore do the blessed souls
require vengeance of their enemies, albeit they intend it not chiefly,
because of a Zeal of rightuousenes, and affection of godly love they grudge,
as also does god him self at the wickedness of the persecutours, who impugn
God him self, and seek to hinder his religion, and tourment such as worship
him, wherefore they would have their malice and power at an end. Thus far
he. But where as the Scripture every where agreably witnesses, that the
saints in heaven are free from greues and affections, and to live now a new
life most far from all pain and perturbatio^, and that they have submitted
their wills to the will of God, whom they may follow in all things,
approuyng all his judgments, sayings and doings, yea and reuerencing the
same: I suppose we need not to reason more subtily hereof at this present, but
simply to understand, that by this figurative speech (as criyng is also else
where attributed to the blood of martirs shed) is signified, that the blood of
the oppressed shall never be forgotten of God, and that before him the just
judgment and vengeance is prepared, to be executed in his time against the
enemies and co^temners of God: but chiefly against the persecutours of the
word, and the murderers of Saints. Which thing is more fully declared by
this that follows.

For by the same that follows such au^swer was made to the complaincte of
Martirs, What was answered to ye martirs requiringe vengeance.
that we may understand what is the state and glory of saints in heaven,
which have offered their bodies for the Testament of God: and that God has not
forgotten the blood spilte: but that he will at length requite those blood
sheders when he sees time. But where he has reserved this time to him self,
when he will reward the blood suckers, it is not our part to inquire
curiousely thereof: but rather to be in a readiness, that if he will that we also
should suffer for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, we should run spedely and
cherely through afflictions unto glory doubting nothing, but that we shall be
joined to the blessed Martirs, in heaven, and that the just judge in that day
will render to all the enemies ol God, the Church, and Gods word, after their
demerites. And albeit the time of persecution do seem a world to the flesh:
yet is it here, and else where in the scriptures called short. The state of
souls in heaven is most happy.
But these things must be seen and considered by parts.

First doubtless the state of souls in heaven is in all things most fortunate.
The which is figured by the white garments. For the glory of ye blessed is
signified, that are now in light, and feel nothing of darkness, of this
garmente I have spoken before. And it is said expressly, and white garments
are given to every one of them. For every soul receives his rewards: And the
body also at thend of the world shall receive his own garmente. S. Gregory?
Saints as yet, says he, have the fruition only of the bless of the souls:
but in thend of the world, they shall receive two stoles or garments, for with
the perfect joy of the souls they shall be clothed also with the
incorruption of bodies. Hereof shall be reasoned more dilligently about the end
of the.vii Chapter. where this place shall be declared more at large. After it
was said to the blessed souls ((...)) that they should rest. Therefore they be
altogether in quiet, and feel no perturbation, which in the.xii. Chapter.
shall more plainly be declared. Notwythstanding that it may be referred to
delay and breathinge, as though he should have said. It was signified to the
souls, that they should yet differ and abide. For it follows: yet a little
while. Therefore God signifies, that after a little time he will deliver his,
and punnishe the adversaries.

The time of persecution is short
And the noting of the time seems to be taken of the.2. Chapt. of Abacuk,
which place is also alleged of the Apostle in the.11. to the Hebrew. For yet
a little while, for because he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. And
the just shall live of his faith, etc. In the.26. of Esaye we read these words
(after he has showed the resurrection to come, and the last end of the
world) go therefore my people, and enter into thine inner cha^bers, and shut
thy doors after thee, hide thee a little while, even for a momente, till the
indignation be past. And likewise S. Peter called all this time of affliction
unto the judgment, a short time, that we might take comfort therein.1.
Peter.1. And.2. Peter.3.

To these also is joined an other thing, which more fully accomplissheth the
time, till three fellows and brethren were fulfilled, which should also be
slain for the word of God. Therefore let us no more herafter inquire, when
persecution shall have an end? or why the Lord differreth vengeance, and
how long? For we hear that the number of the elect must be accomplisshed.
But where that time is known to God alone, let not us be curiouse: but let
us think of such things as concern our dewetie, that if the case so
require, we may also die strongly for the Testament of our Lord God, that we
may be associated to our brethren, and our fellows, and have the fruition of
the blessed sight of our redemer. The number shall be accomplisshed in the end
of the world, at the last judgment. Hitherto therefore shall last the
persecution: but than assuredly will the Lord requite it, as also the Prophet
Malachie has wittenessed, in the.3. and.4. chapter.

Hereof we learn also, What we should judge of ye saints i^ heaven
what we should judge of the holy Martirs in Heaven, and blessed souls: the
same that we learn here of Gods word. Brethren and (...), fellow servants
(as also Aungelles, in the.19. and.22. of the Apocalipse) they are expressly
called, not Lords and founders. For although the words must be understand
of us yet living, yet is there a relation. For if we be their brethren and
fellow servants, they be verily our brethren also, and Gods servants with
us, and even fellow servants. Now though we grant that they pray in
Heaven, what I pray you pray they here, but that God would avenge and
punnisshe? and what do they obtain? As we read that Christ said to his
mother, requiryng wine at the marriage, woman what have I to do with thee? my
hour is not yet comen: so likewise are the Martirs here commanded to tarry and
abide the time of God appoincted. The which we believe that the Saints do.
What can we say than of their intercession and praying for sinners unto God?
there is one only mediator given, even the Lord Christ, let us go unto him
in all our necessities, he alone shall suffice al, and in all.

These things are spoken hitherto of the persecutions of al times, so that in
the mean time they have ministered most comfortable consolations to all that
suffer persecution to the end of the world: and have likewise cut of
curiouse questions, and set us save and whole in the will of God, wherein we
only resting, may know that the same is best for us.

It behooves us therefore to gather certain sure sayings, wherewith to comfort
our selves as with the most certain sentences of God pronounced. First, that
God is true and just: and therefore not to neglecte his, but to tender with
fatherly care. And if he cast us into any danger or difficulty, the same
verily shall turn the godly to great profit. If he shall take us away by
tourmentes, that he delivers us from euilles, from miseries, and corruption
of this world, and rendereth for the same euerlastingnes. Secondly it is certain
sins that God is just and true, that he will requite the wicked after their
deserts. Again if he make men fortunate in this world, that the same in
deed apperteyneth to their destruction. Where he is slow to punish, that is
done through Gods long suffering: but that God recompenseth this slownes with
the weightines of the punisshement, in case they be incurable. Where as these
things undoubtedly are most certain, what remains there, but that we
should commit our selves and al ours to the Lord our God? He knows the
time and mean whereby to avenge his, and to plague his enemies. To him be glory
for evermore. Amen.

The sixte seal is opened, and the corruptyng of the sincere doctrine is
exhibited. The.xxxiij. Sermon.
ANd I saw, when he had opened the sixte seal, and behold there was a great
earth quake. And the Sun was as black as a sack cloth made of here: and
the Moon waxed even as blood: and the stars of Heaven fell unto the earth,
even as a fig tree casts from her her figs when she is shaken of a
mighty wind: and Heaven vanished away as a scroll when it is rolled
together.

The sixte seal opened of the lamb, Corrupti^g of ye sound doctrine in the
church.
opens unto us generally, and sets forth to be seen of the eyes of all
men, the corruption of the doctrine in the church, with this mourning and
terrible effect of the same. Another is there any other thing said here in the
sixth seal, as also in the five fourmer seals, than that which was prophesied
before of the same our lord Jesus Christ in the.24. of Matthew. that the Gospel
should be preached through out the world: and how there should come wars,
famines, pestilences, and persecutions most greuouse: and false prophets,
which should disceaue men, whom also they should drown in most greuouse
sorrows.

Nevertheless these things must religiousely be expounded. For it is not to
be thought, Christ is not author of ye corrupt doctrine.
for that the lamb opens the sixte seal, and the Son by and by waxes
black, that Christ is author of the corrupt and evil doctrine. For Christ
it is, that sows in the field good sede, the hostile man sows darnell: As
the Lord him self expounds it Matthew. the.13. For Christ teaches sownde
doctrine by the Apostles and sincere preachers: which when it seems vile to
the world and can not please, of his just judgment he leaves the contemners
to their affections, and as the Apostle S. Paull says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
he sends upon them the efficacitie of illusion, that they may believe lies,
and so may be judged all which had rather believe a lie than the verity. And
the seducing through corrupt doctrine, is a more hurteful evil, than are the
blouddy persecutions. Yea and the seducers and false prophets have done more
hurt to the church, than have cruel tirauntes. Finally men are more
greuousely punished what time they are relinquisshed to be seduced of
disceauers, than when they are objected to be torn in pecs of their
murderers. Therefore is it a most greuouse plague of god, and utterly to be
abhorred, for the simple verity despised, to be delivered to liyng disceauers,
which after the demerites may, with reverence be it spoken, al to be shite,
and be piss thee. For where the gospel is purely preached unto many, these
men say, I understand not what these men teach us out of the Gospel: but
this I can see that the old have all to be rayde us, and these new both to
be piss and beshite us. Therefore shall thou have teachers, which shall
perform to thee in deed the same that thou talkest. Would God we waunted
examples: and did not see certain nations, which have here tofore had the free
and pure preaching of the gospel, and now spoiled of al verity, to sigh under
the pleasure and boldenes of most wicked disceauers, which tread Gods word
under foot, and condemn it for heresy, and stop the mouths of the wretched
people full of man's dunge. This is the punishment of the verity despised.

The deprauatio^ of ye doctrine in ye church.
And this place may not be expounded of one certain age, sins as yet things are
rehearsed in general: but of that whole time, which reaches from the age of
the Apostles unto the last judgment. It contains therefore the corrupt
doctrine of Valentine, Marcion, Manichaeus, Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius,
Eutyches, Donatus, Pelagius, Priscillians, and finally of all Heretics, and
the mingle mangle of Mahomet composed of the same, and chiefly the sophistry
and most corrupt doctrine of Antichrist and of his ministers.

But what time the lamb opened the sixte seal, there was not heard now as
before the voice of the Beasts, Elders, or Martirs, but a terrible earthquake.
An earthquake An Earthquake.
in the Scriptures does signify a wonderful commotion of all things,
troubles tumultes, and great alterations. And verily greater darkness arriseth
of nothing else, than by alteryng of Godly religion, and receyuyng of wicked
doctrine. For so arrise sects, seditions, wars. You may see many examples
hereof in the story of the ancient people, which are read to have been
grievously shaken, so often as they have changed their religion and kind of
doctrine. By this Earthequake therefore is signified that exceadynge great
trouble shall arrise hereof, for that a new and a strange kind of doctrine
should be brought into the world of men amiss incensed.

Authors of tumults and troubles.
Here have you, that you may answer unto them, which impute to the Gospel
and to the Preachers thereof what so ever troubles, seditions, and commotions
be at this day in the world. Helias has ones made answer for us, which
may serve for all times, the place is in the third book of Kings.18.
Chapter. I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, which
haste forsaken God, etc. Hereunto apperteyneth also the story of Jeremy in
the.44. Chapter. Where all the euilles that than vexed the wicked are imputed to
the sinsere doctrine and to the Prophet Jeremy without cause. Learn here
morouer what to answer them, which say: it is like, that God has permitted
his Church so many years to lie and rotte in errors, etc.

And the corrupt doctrine is described by parts, even from the top to the
toe, The sun waxes dark.
and the effect also of the corrupt doctrine is annexed. And first of all
the sun, a planet most bright, not only waxes dark, but black also. And
immediately is added an Image or a parable, (...) like an heery sack which is
wouen or made of heeres or of bristels. The sun lights and gives life to
the world. And through Christ, which is the life of the world, we are
illumined and quickened. He casts abroad from him the bright beams of the
Evangelical verity. And like as Christ is not darkened in him self: so
another the verity of the Gospel, which of nature is with out pollution. By
reason of the black clouds that over ride it, the light of the Sun waxes
black and is impeched: and of the traditions of men, and deprauing of the
scripture arriseth darkness and blackenes in matters of religion. The Gospel
of it self is bright and hole^ome: Christ is light, full redemption, health,
and life most perfect. But when men had rather seek of others doctrine, life,
and salvation, than of Christ and his wholesome Gospel, most thick and gross
darkness arrise in the minds of those men. For there is establisshed an
other doctrine, rightuousenes, intercession, redemption, salvation and life
than that of Christ. They that receive that doctrine, A sack of here.
seem to have put on them a shirte of here which pricketh, burns and vexes
continually. For there is no rest, quietness, security or spiritual pleasure
and repaste of corrupt doctrine, but only tediousenes. Christ pure, and
sincerely received, is to man a joy unspeakable, and a most bright and
ioyefull light.

After is added, that the whole moon, not a part only, the moon is as blood
is become blouddy. For an image is again annexed, as blood. The moon
receives light of ye sun, and is subject to courses, or chaunges, whilst
one while it increases, an other while decreaseth, and signifies the church.
The church set upon the rock, is not unstable: but by reason of the variable
fortune, is subject to most diverse chances. For now the church triumphs,
straight ways being oppressed she mourns: now she increases in nombre, by
and by she is diminished. And the church is lighted of Christ. But whilst the
Sun it self is darkened, the moon can not chose but be most obscure. Blood
Blood.
in the scriptures betokens great wickedness, chiefly Idolatry and false
worshipping of God. The Lord in the.17. of Leuit. says that he will account
strange worshipping for blood. Therefore when faith and knowledge are darkened
in Christ's church, it can not be chosen but that blood shall arrise in the
universal church: that is to wit, the corrupt worshipping of God, which the
Lord estemeth as murder: there must needs innumerable sins and wickedness
spring thereof. For the lively doctrine of Christ being corrupted, al things
must of necessity be most corrupt, and swarm full of superstitions and
iniquities.

To these is added an other thing, which helps these things that are
spoken: stars fall from Heaven Stars fall from Heaven.
unto the earth. Daniel called stars preachers in the.12. chapt. As also S.
Peter.2. Peter.2. Therefore do the preachers of churches reuolte from the
heavenly doctrine of Christ, brought and revealed from heaven, and reducyng men
to Heaven, and keeping them in heavenly conversation: And receive earthly, that
is the doctrine of men. By the which thing it comes to pass that both the
sun is obscured and the moon is made blouddy. Stars shine, preachers
should set forth to the whole world Christ the true light: but this have they
neglected being addicte to their own traditions. To these is also added an
Image, The stars fell upon the earth.
(...), as the fig tree casts of her figs being shaken of a vehement
wind. Here is signified the corruption of preachers, and that a great number
of them. For the fig tree was made, to bring forth sweet fruictes: so was the
ministry of the word ordained for the salvation of men. Howbeit the figs
did ripe, Therefore they remain grene or untimely fruictes. Whereby is signified
that the preachers were not ripe in true knowledge of Christ: and therefore to
be shaken down with every wind of doctrine, that both they have admitted and
set forth earthly things. The plenty of false teachers is signified to come in
that ye untimely figs fall down in great plenty.

Of these things now follows an other, Heaven v^nisheth away.
and Heaven went away, (...), as it were fled out of men's sight and vanisshed
away. Again is added an Image or a similitude (...) like a scrolle folden up
or rolled together. Heaven in the Gospel signifies many times the kingdom of
God. Therefore the kingdom windeth up it self in earth, and the church does
as it were hide her self, not that at the last there should be no church at al
(for the church shall be always unto the worlds end) but for as much as in
the end of the world the church shall lie hid, neither shall it be thought to
be the true church, which is the true church in deed. The letters and
words are not wipte out of the book, but are not seen, yea rather are hid,
when it is rolled up. It is manifest at this day, what S. John meant by this
parable. For all in a manner judge, that new starte up Romish church, to be the
true church, which in very deed is not the church of Christ: and the church
which is the spouse of Christ is judged to be heretical: therefore is the church
wrapped up and as rolled together. The Lord unfold and preserve the same: Ame^.

The effect of corrupt doctrine is expounded, and that the Angels let that
the wind blow not. The.xxxiiij. Sermon.
ANd al mountains and Isles were moved out of their places. And the Kings of
the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and
the mighty men, and every bondeman, and every free man hid themselves in
dens, and in rocks of the hills, and said to the hills and rocks: fall
upon us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the seat, and
from the wrath of the lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come. And who
can endure it?

Chapt. 7.
And after this saw I.iiii. Angels stand on the four corners of the earth,
holding the four winds of the Earth: that the winds should not blow on the
earth, another on the Sea, nor on any tree.

Hills and Isles are moved out of their place.
Now follows the effect of the corrupt doctrine in men. And hills and
Ilondes are moved out of their place: wherein is also a respect had to the
earthquake, as though by the earthquake they were removed from their place. And
mountains and Isles do betoken, realms, nations and people, so steadfast in
faith, that as mountains and Isles be immouable, and are not shaken with the
storms of the Sea, so these might seem to be immutable. Nevertheless at the
alteration and corrupting of doctrine, they are now also removed out of their
place, and quite overthrown. And such as read Histories shall find every
where, that such have been disceiued by crafts of heretics, by the power of
Mahomet, and by the hypocrisy of the pope, whom you would not have thought
should have be^ abused, in so much that whole Cities and Realms have clean
revolted. For seducinge is of efficacitie namely in such as now begin to
slip and slide from the rock of the church.

They hide them in dens.
And they that being shaken, are removed from the sure foundation, get them into
caves and rocks of Hills. For it is impossible, for him that holds not
Christ with a sure faith, to be quiet. For like a raging Sea he is tossed hither
and thither. For where as he has not the sure and certain manner of life,
another commits him self to be only ruled by the Scriptures, that he might
hold the certentie, he is content to be led of every one that he meteth with.
Wherefore we see them, unto whom Christ alone is not all, to seek salvation in
Pilgrimages, in heremitages, in Monkerie, in more severe discipline, in
satisfactions, and I know not in what other follies, or rather blasphemies. And
these in very deed are said to hide themselves in dens and caves of stone.
And think they may lie hid safely in them, make satisfaction for their
sins, and please the Lord.

But in rehersing many kinds of men, Who hide themselves so?
he compriseth al states in the world. For of all sorts of men there have been
found not a few nor of mean state, which have not taken upon them the
heremiticall and monastical life, and have bounden themselves to a strait
kind of living. Here therefore are rekened up kings, (...), great men or
princes, rich men, (...), captains over thousands or chieftaines, (...),
strong or mighty men in this world, bond me^ chiefly, and free men, whom we
call at this day gentlemen. But how many kings and princes and noble
gentlemen are set forth to be seen in the churches of Abbeyes, paincted in
tables and hanged on trees, which have lived some time a monastical life?

But entryng into monasteries, woods, and wilderness, Fall upon us Mountayns.
and taking upon them a kind of straiter life, sundry satisfactions,
pilgrimages, and other like disciplines, have not yet so atteyned to the
quietness of mind: yea they are now more affrayde than they were before, and
are fallen into utter despair. For in these things wherein they sought for
quietness, they have found none: no, besides Christ there is found no quiet
nor rest. That thing which I say here, do they understand right well which
live in these straytenesse under the unhappy Papistrie. And the words which
S. John recites here be of such as are in greatest distress, and even in
desperation, where they cry unto the hills, fall upon us, etc. For so this
word is used also with Osee in the.10. Chapter. and with Luke in the.23.
Chapt. And herby is signified a conscience most afflicted and most intricated,
seeing or perceyuyng no where any comfort or consolation: but couetyng none
other thing than present destruction, to the intent to be delivered from the
present evil and intolerable grieve of mind. Such a thing is that of Turnus
with Virgill in the.10. book of Aeneidos.

Helas what shall I do? what earth will gape so wide
What Sea so deep to swallowe me up, that I no longer bide.
Most mighty winds I you adore, than pity ye my case
Drive ship on rock or sirties sands, that non may find my place.
Causes of desperatio^.
Morouer the causes of this fear, despair and hiding are, the face of him that
sits on the Throne, the wrath of the Lamb, and for that they perceive how
they can not abide to stand before God in the day of wrath and gods
vengeance. Therefore they flee from the face of God, they flee from the Lamb,
that they might eschew the ve^geaunce, if they could escape it. The fear of
God is commended to us in the scriptures, and they which fear not God are
condemned: but the scripture speaks of a fear joined with true faith and
love. For S. John says, love casts out fear. Even so the same Scripture
preaches to us God as just, and shows him to be angry with sin:
nevertheless declares him to be benign and merciful to such as acknowledge
their sins, and axe forgeuenes, that his only begotten son is given of God
to mankind, by whose mediation we may come to the Throne of God, which
otherwise no man may atteyne to. It preaches Christ the son of God to be
the Lamb, that is a propiciation for the sins of the whole world: and that
the same calls al unto him, excludes no man, but promises and offers unto
al, al things of life and salvation. But where as corrupt Preachers, Freres
and popish Priests have forsaken this simple and most pure doctrine, wholesome
and full of consolation, show that God is like to Rhadamantus a judge
inexorable, and set forth Christ rather as one angry than favorable, they do
alienate doubtless the minds of men from God: that now they may say
expressly, who is worthy to come into the sight of God? no man shall be saved
before this God most severe, and his son a judge most rightuouse. They turn
them therefore to sundry means of salvation they chouse them mediators and
intercessours by whose mediation, mean and merits they may redeem to
themselves the favor of the angry deity. But sins that with God the only
mediation and intercession of the son is of force these wretches are
disapointed of their pourpos, and at the length fall into that same
desperation. When they perceive that the monastical life, and their merits,
ca^ not stand before God, they flee from the face of God: and tourmented with
the pricks of their conscience know not what they may do, whither they may
turn them, where is the true salvation. Therefore we judge the^ rightly to be
most blessed, which through Christ acknowledge the father as a father: and
through Christ have access to the father, as fauouryng them and loving them:
acknoweledging verily in the fear of God their sins, but yet with a true
faith hoping for remission of sins, knowing that they are through Christ
reconciled to God the father. The monastical, heremiticall, satisfactoriouse,
and pharisaical faction acknowledges fully this doctrine, therefore are they
tourmented with sorrows that can not be uttered. If speak not here of the
monasteries or Monks of this our time, in whom we see almost no conscience at
al, nor other intent, than to be addicte to Idleness, voluptuousnes, and to
bear rule. In times past were found men full of conscience, entering into celles
and woods, for non other cause, than that they might so be saved. Of such
spoke the Lord in the gospel: when they shall say, says he, Christ is in the
wilderness, go not forth, etc. And I doubt not, but that some simple also at
this day for this intent take upon the^ the monastical life: but they shall
find also, the same that S. John here said they should prove and try by
experience.

Furthermore this place might seem that it should be expounded of the tokens
which go before the last judgment, The place is to be expounded of the last
judgment.
and of the terror of the wicked: of whom the Lord preached in manner to the
same effect in the.21. of Luke. But of the last judgment shall be spoken more
at large, and in his place in the.11. and.19. Chapter. of this book and else
where. And as I do not disco^mende that same exposition, so seem there now to
me the general destenies of the church to be here set together, in the which,
where the corrupt doctrine occupies not the last place, there should nothing
be spoken hereof in general, whereof many things in particular shall be spoken in
the 8. chapter. and others followyng, unless this present place should after
the same sort be expounded, as it is. Furthermore those things that follow
shall better be joined together, which shall have no place in the last
judgment: as the thing it self will prove.

And the things that follow in the 7. Chapt. apperteyne to the exposition of
the sixte seal, or unto the treatise thereof. And three things chiefly it
recites, how the Aungelles let the winds that they should not blow: an
innumerable company to be sealed in the mids of the corrupt doctrine, which
should not perish. And what the state of them is, which are departed out of this
world either by martirdom, or else being either undefiled with ye corruption so
full of enormitie, or delivered and pourged from the same: which are annexed
because of consolation. For this book of Apocalipse is wonderful Euangelical,
most full not only of prophecies, but also of admonitions, exhortations, and
most comfortable consolations.

What wind is in the Scriptures.
First is to be expounded, that which is spoken of the restreinte of the winds
by the Angels, that they should not blow. Wind as also leaue^ in the
scriptures, is used both in good and evil part. For wind is called vain and
false doctrine, and an hope conceived of erroneouse doctrine: As in Osee
the.12. and the.5. and.22. of Jeremy. So is leaven called the Pharisaicall
doctrine, and hypocrisy springyng thereof. S. Paul in the.4. to the Ephesians.
forbids, that we be not carried about with every wind of doctrine. And the
holy ghost is shaddowed by wind in the.3. chapt. of S. John. And in the 2.
chapt. of the Acts. Wind is subtle, it pearseth, is felt, and is not seen:
great is the force thereof, it does refrigerate, it dries, gathers
clouds, which rain and make the earth fertile. Full rightly therefore by
wind is signified the spirit of God, and the sound doctrine, which is of
the spirit of God. Therefore is it one wind, the spirit of God which
inspireth: and there be four winds, that is to wit many by the corners of
Heaven and parts of the earth, that is to wit preachers dispersed through out
the whole world. Therefore the doctrine of the Gospel inspired from all parts
of the world blows, or is preached: so that there be many winds, yet all
procedyng of one. For there is one and the same spirit, which speaks by the
ministers, and gives them sundry graces.1. Corinth. 12. Briefly, by the blaste
of winds we understand the free preaching taken out of the holy Scriptures.

The preaching of gods word is prohibited.
Secondely we must know that there be both good and evil Angels in the
Scriptures. Angels as appeared before, are called ministers. And there be good
and evil ministers: the good inspired of God and the good Angel: and the
evil of the evil Angel. And the enemy of the truth stireth up men in all
places of the world, in the Courts of Kings, in the places of Judgment, in
Schools, in Colleges, in Cities, Towns and Villages, which may let the free
course of Gods word. Therefore the proclamations of Kings and Bisshoppes fly
to and froe, are proclaimed and set up, prohibiting the readyng of the Bible,
the preaching of the Gospel, etc. And to the intent to have some pretense of
their evil doing, they forge that the Bible is corrupt in a thousand places,
and that heresy is learned and taught out of the same. Therefore also they
prohibit and condemn the Bible and the books of the Gospel, of the
unworthiness of the which thing it can not worthily enough be spoken before the
church. They do the same that in times paste Antiochus, Epiphanes, Dioclesian,
and other men of the same sort are red to have done. The expositours of the
Bible in times paste deserved excedyng great praise: another was there any
faithful that said the holy book to be corrupted, for that al translations
agreed not emonges themselves. We live therefore at this day in a time most
corrupt and most unthankful.

And the restrainte of reading holy Scripture, is the foundation of the
corrupt doctrine, and of intanglyng the conscience, and of despair that
follows on the same. And by the Earth he understands men dwelling in Earth:
by the Sea and Isles, men of Islands, and that dwell on the Sea: by trees, men
shadowed every where in the Scripture by trees. For unless the winds blow,
the trees florishe not, neither the earth waxes grene. The Prophet says,
send forth thy spirit, and they shall be created, and thou shall renew the
face of the earth. And except the word of God be preached, the minds of men
wax not grene, another are the fruictes of good works brought forth of men.
And therefore the Aungelles prohibiting wind, are said to hurt: as in deed
there is nothing more pestilent nor perniciouse, than the suppressing of the
free preaching of Gods word. The Lord by his spirit renew all parts of the
world. Amen.

The faithful are sealed to salvation, which they obtain by the grace of God
in Christ Jesus. The.xxxv. Sermon.
ANd I saw an other Angel asce^de from the rising of the son: which had
the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice to the four
Aungelles (to whom power was given to hurt the earth and the Sea) saying:
hurt not the earth, another the Sea, another the trees, till we have sealed the
Servants of our God in their forheades. And I heard the number of them which
were sealed, and there were sealed an.C. and.xliiii. thousand of all the tribes
of the Children of Israel. Of the tribe of Judah were sealed.xii.M. of the
tribe of Ruben were sealed.xii.M. of the tribe of Gad were sealed xii.M. of the
tribe of Asser were sealed.xii.M. of the tribe of Neptali were sealed.xii.M. Of
the tribe of Manasses were sealed.xii.M. of the tribe of Simeon were
sealed.xii.M. of the tribe of Leui were sealed.xii.M. of the tribe of Isachar
were sealed.xii.M. Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed.xii.M. of the tribe of
Joseph were sealed.xii.M. of ye tribe of Benjamin were sealed.xii.M.

After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude (which no man could number)
of all nations and people, and tunges, stood before the seat, and before the
Lamb, clothed with long white garments and Palms in their hands, and cried
with a loud voice saying: Salvation be ascribed to him that sits upon the
seat of our God, and unto the lamb. And all the Angels stood in the compass
of the seat, and of the elders, and of the four beasts, and fell down before
the seat on their faces, and worshipped God, saying: Ame^. Blessing, and
glory, wisdom and thanks, and honor and power, and might, be unto our God
for ever more, Amen.

We have heard, brethren, the sixte seal being opened, A pestilent matter
shadowed by fearful parables.
that the Sun was made black, the Moon blouddy, the Stars to have fallen
from Heaven to the Earth, and the rest that we have rehearsed: by all the
which was signified the corruption of doctrine. A sorrowful and a fearful
matter was shaddowed with most sorrowful and most terrible parables. We heard
how there followed in the world a most great tourmoile of things, and with
many a most greuouse despair: and that the winds also were restreyned, that
they should not blow. But we have experienced, how great a grief it is, yea
and destruction also, to waunte the air or wind, in so much that with out
breathing and cooling, men must needs wither and be quesomed and choked up.
But with so great an evil are they vexed which are destitute of the preaching
of Gods word.

Some man here might say: Whether the whole world do peryshe in errors.
than the whole world perissheth in heresies, in the Alcorane, in Papistrie,
and other corruptions. In what case think you than are our forefathers? do you
think they be al damned? S. John preuenteth these things, and with a vision
al together Evangelical, that is to wit with a consolation most profitable
shows, that God has an innumerable multitude of them, which even in the
mids of those antichristian times or difficulties are made safe: and that of
the mere grace of God, through the intercession of Jesus Christ, of whom alone
is salvation: yt is to say, whom alone they yt are saved may thank for their
salvation.

We have at this present what to answer to men of a contrary faction,
always obiectyng, An argument of ye example and salvation of our elders.
either our Elders are damned altogether, it were wicked to condemn all, they
be saved therefore. But they have not heard of that our new doctrine, but
kept the old, in the old therefore shall we also be saved. To this we make
answer, that our elders were saved, we grant gladly, and believe it also: but
we add, of the free grace of God, as we shall by and by more plainly
understand: and not by popish superstition: neither therefore shall thou by the
same be saved: but thou must also be saved by Christ, if thou will be saved.
But rather seeing at this day through the singular goodness of God, the gospel
is preached, and is preached even to thee, to the which thou show thy self
a rebel, thou declarest thy self to be none of the nu^bre of gods children,
Ia. 8.15
which hear the word of God with joy, and keep it. Neither shalt thou have
any cloak or pretense wherewith to excuse thy sin. If thy forefathers had had
the like opportunity, which thou neglectest, good God, what a space would they
have run before thee? Therefore thou both willing and witting, speak against
God, and wilfully throwest thy self into destruction. Dye therefore through
thine own fault.

By ye grace of god, many ar saved at al times in the most corrupt religion.
Neither does this place only testify, very many to be saved by the grace of
God from corruption, and in the true faith, even than, what time in man's
judgment there appear none or very few to be faithful: and even very few or
none to be saved, by reason of the exceading great corruption of every time? We
have also heard and red in the.3. book of kings the.19. chapt. that Helias
complaining most grievously of the scarsetie of the faithful, understood, that
God had reserved yet seven thousand men, which had not boughed their knees
before Baal. The lord therefore has evermore his chosen, which in the mids
of destruction and perdition by grace through Christ are saved.

Christ is author of salvation.
And the Author of this salvation and preservation is first declared to be an
Angel ascendyng from the risyng of the sun: to wit the Lord Christ that
sun of rightuousenes, rising up in those most thick antichristian darkness,
to those that seek God, and lighting them the darkness driven away. For Christ
is the true light of al times, lighting al, so many as be illumined. He gives
his people also preachers, which by the word may defend Gods people, that
they be not distroyed with that common destruction.

Of ye Seal of ye living God.
For it is diligently expressed, that this Aungel had a seal, and that not a
seal only, but the seal of God, and even of the living God. For Christ which
is the Image of God unseen, that is to say, the printe or express Image of his
substance, in whom we know, as he him self says unto Philip, the father,
has a seal, which is an instrument, wherewith we seal, such things as we will
have sealed, saved, and confirmed, and discerned from that which is counterfeit,
and kept safe against disceipte. But the Lord has no such seal, as we have
in this world: but so by a figure is called ye spirit of god, with whom he
inspireth his faithful, by who^ he gives also a lively faith, by the word of
the living and eternal God. This seal therefore, is the seal of the living
God, the spirit of life, and lively faith: Ephesi. 1
hereof thapostle S. Paul, speaking: we also trust in Christ, after the word of
truth heard, ye gospel of your salvation, wherein after ye believed, ye were
sealed with the holy spirit of promise, etc. These things are not divided. For
faith is not without ye word, nor both these without the holy ghost in the
faithful. For Christ works with me^ by a lawful ministry, by me^,
inspiring certain, that may teach and admonish men, unto who^ he gives his
faith and spirit, sealing their minds. Christ therefore does prohibit the
ministers of Satan, that they in restraining and letting the free preaching of
Gods word, should not proceed to hurt men, before the minds of the chosen be
sealed: that is to say teaches, how soever ye verity is restreined, and the
preaching of the Gospel obscured, yet that the minds of many shall so be
furnisshed with gods word, and with godly inspiration, which may so live, and
be of such efficacitie in them, that seducing can either have no place in the^:
or if it have any at al, can not abide or persevere to the end.

There be also two other places of the scripture, How the ancients in times
past were Sealed.
testifiyng that signets were given to men, wherewith they were sealed, and were
exempte or delivered from the present evil: neither be they repugnau^t to this
our seal of ye living god. In Exodus 12. the posts or door chekes of ye
Israelites were springled with the blood of the la^be. The sign of it self
should have prevailed nothing, unless the virtue of God instituting, and a
co^secrating the sign with his word, had turned away thaungel distroyer:
neither has ye sign waunted faith, being used of the holy me^ of god. For the
godly receives not ye ordenau^ces of god without faith. Therefore the same power
of Christ preserved the Israelites from distructio^, which now keeps ye
faithful from the infectio^ of Antichrist. Ezechiel.9. one seals ye
foreheades of yt faithful, having the tipe of a scribe and priest. Verily
Christ has at al times defended his. And he seals by imprintyng or writing
this mark or letter Tau. That mark signifies, that is to say, the Law, or
direction or Rule. For in whom so ever is engraven ye law of God, the word of
God, and even the rule of faith, in the very heart, he is safe and sure from al
evil. The ancients in old time called the rule of faith and direction, the
very articles of the christen faith, I believe in God, etc. Ye see therefore how
al those signs come in deed all to one poincte. For they be safe and sure from
evil, whom the spirit of God has inspired and illumined with faith by the
word. This much of the seal.

Who be sealed.
Now let us also consider, who they are that be sealed. We read in Ezechiel,
pass through the city of Jerusalem, and mark Tau in the foreheades of me^
mourning and lamenting for all thabominatio^s done in ye mids thereof. And here
it is said, til we seal the seruau^ts of our God. Therefore are ye seruau^ts
of god, and they that are sorry for abominable wickedness, are sealed. The
contemners of God hogs and dogs, are neglected.

It is showed moreover, in what part of the^ they be sealed. In what part of
them they be sealed.
In time paste the blood of the lamb was annoincted on the door posts. In
Ezechiel Tau is marked in their foreheades. Here also is imprinted the seal of
the living God in the forheades of the faithful. And the forehead represents
a tipe of the mind the chiefest and most excellent part in man. The spirit
and faith is put into the minds of the faithful. Nevertheless the mark is
aptly fixed to the forehead, not to the hinder part of the head, back, or
shoulders. For they that be lighted with the word and spirit, and have faith,
do confess the same, and dissemble nothing: and much less are ashamed, but
desire that their glory that is their faith might be known of al men. We call
most notable things, written in our forhead: that is most manifest things,
whereof we be not ashamed.

Examples of such as are sealed with ye seal of the living god.
If we now apply these things to such as were done in old time, and now also at
this day, they will bring a great light to them. There were found good men,
faithful and fearing God, mourning or sorrowing, and servants of God. And
there be found at this day also, in the mids of Mahometrie and Papistrie,
which expressly condemn and have condemned this kind of life, openly
confessing, that the same is not the true way of life, that there is no more
wicked kind of men living, than be their priests, that they would not
commit themselves and their salvation to them, but rather to consecrate
themselves wholly to God his mercy. And others, which have spent a great part
of their life of a good zeal, doubtless, but not according to knowledge, in
those trifles and superstitions, when they are comen to the end of their life,
they despise al together: yea and freely professing the verity, they condemn
al those trifles, and commit themselves wholly to the christian faith,
estemyng nothing more excellent or surer, than the rule of faith, which also
they covet to hear recited to them as a true confession, and die in the same.
Al these has the mercy of God sealed with the seal of the living God, and
delivers from al spotte of Antichrist and satan, from corruption and
destruction, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

But leest we should gather in every age only here one and there one, A great
nu^bre are saved even in the kingdom of Antichrist.
the lord him self now makes here a great account, and first of the Jews
by every tribe he gathers twelve thousand, and after by multiplication, an
hondreth forty and four thousand: and of the gentiles a multitude
innumerable. Wherefore in every time and age innumerable obtain salvation: how
much so ever error, seducyng, and destruction reign and rule in the world.
These things do highly commend God his mercy, and comfort us excedingly. And
where certain gather hereof, that there shall be yet in this world before the
judgment a Saturnical or golden age, wherein these things should be fulfilled,
and that all men should come to the kingdom of God, it alludeth over much to
the gross error of the Millenaries, which is already expulsed out of the
church of God. These things were fulfilled in old time, and are at this
day, and shall be fulfilled likewise, so long as the world shall endure. The
kingdom of Satan and of Antichrist shall continewe always to the last
judgment, and shall still impugn the kingdom of Christ, and seem even to
oppress the same: much less ought they to promise us so great security. When
the son of man shall come, says the son of man him self in the Gospel,
think you shall he find any faith upon earth? And again: it shall be as in the
days of Noe and Loath the words of the gospel are known, as be also those of
the blessed Apostels Peter and Paul, 2. Pet. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.

By ye way is reasoned of ye restoring of Israel.
But such as like not this our exposition or mind, urge briefly, that the
promesses of the prophets for the restoring of Israel are not yet fulfilled:
but that according to the verity of the eternal God, they must be fulfilled.
They suppose therefore, yea and contend also, that thee must a certain or
prefixed time remain, wherein al these things may be accomplished. Hereunto I
answer plainly, that we shall shamefully err with Papias, Iustine, Ireney,
Tertull. and Lactance, and with those that are called Millenaries, unless we
judge here uprightly. I believe therefore yt the same restoring, whereof the
Prophets speak, must be divided into three times: that the first be and so
be called historical, which extends from king Cyrus unto great Pompey, and
the which Ezras, Nehemias, and the Author of the book of the Machabeis
describe and teach to be fulfilled. The second to begin at the coming of
our Savior, and proceed unto Antichrist, and to his distroying, which in deed
the Apostles and Evangelists have most diligently described, and wherein they
testify many things to be accomplisshed: And that the third time should
begin from the gospel restored, and the last judgment, and continewe
foreuermore: which restitution verily seems to be of al other most perfect and
complete, wherein God will give unto man most fully, what things so ever he has
promised by the mouths of the prophets and Apostles. Hereof has S. Peter
most manifestly made mention in the acts the.3. chapt. saying: it behooves
Christ to take heaven, until ye time of restoring of al things, which god has
spoken by ye mouth of al his saints from the time of the prophets. And the
Lord him self in the gospel, speaking of the last judgment, said: lift up
your heads because your redemption draws nere.

Or happily we may on this wise divide this matter perauenture more plainly:
the restoring of Israel, or of al faithful, is verily either corporal, or
spiritual. The corporal may be called historical, and was performed by
Cyrus, Zorobabel, Iehosua, Ezras, Nehemias and the Machabeis: And the
spiritual is fulfilled, or shall be yet accomplisshed by the coming of our
wholesome Messiah our lord Jesus Christ. And the coming of the lord is of two
sorts: the first in deed is in the flesh, in the which we believe many things,
the Apostles bearing witness, to have been fulfilled of Christ: in the latter he
shall come again from Heaven into judgment. In that coming he shall most fully
accomplisshe, such things as we see as yet not performed. And doubtless al our
hope is herunto referred, and comforted by this coming. Those things that are
spoken of the Apostle in the.11. to the Romans of the conversion of the Jews,
are fulfilled partly, and partly are fulfilled daily, and as yet shall be
fulfilled.

Now we return to the plenty of them that shall be saved and are already saved
from the mids of the kingdom of Antichrist, to be declared. Many thousands
of Jews be saved.
S. John divides the universality of man kind into Jews and gentiles. Of
the Jews are raccompted an hondreth and forty and four thousand. And after
our judgment, of a thousand Jews there seems scarsely one or two to be
saved: but where by the testimony of our savior him self, so great a number
is saved: there is left verily, of this number certain, an infinite multitude
of this stifnecked people to be gathered which shall be saved. And they are not
saved by the Law, or by circumcision, or by their damnable obstinacy: but up
the grace of God in Christ their Messiah, the only redemer, revealed to them of
God mercifully, and of them received faithfully. For if the thief on the cross
might be saved, now leauinge his life, what shall let, innumerable Jews to
be saved by the same mean? nevertheless I will here determine no measure.
Neither will I also by this mean make frustrate the ministry of the word
and Sacraments. Howbeit I know the things to be true, that here are spoken:
the measure or manner is known to God, neither is there any thing with him
impossible. And hereunto serves the Apostles doctrine, in the.11. to the
Romans.

You will say: If the end be good, al is good.
this doctrine will make men to neglect their own Salvation: where already now
there are that say, if the end be well, then is all well. As though they
should have said, how soever thou live in this world, drowned in pleasures
and blood, and given to gloutonny, believe only at the last end of thy life,
and thou shall be saved. Doubtless I am not ignorant that there be many
unclean hogs and filthy swine, abusing the word of the verity and
consolation of the Gospel: but shall the abuse of profane men take away the
verity from us? The children of God which know that there is none other
propiciation or satisfaction for sins, but the oblation of Christ, cease not
therefore to renew their life daily by repentance.

The godly abuse not gods mercy to ye liberty of sinnynge.
Thus although the godly doubt nothing, but that innumerable at the last end
of their life are converted and saved of the Lord, yet do they not abuse this
mercy of God to the liberty of the flesh, but are affraied. For there be other
places diverse, which reteyne them in order and duty. For the lord says:
thou art made hole, go and sin no more, leest some worse thing happen to
thee. Item, let us do good whilst we have time: the time will come, when we
can not work. The parable of ten virgins declares unto us the same. Also if
the just shall uneath be saved, where shall the sinner and wicked appear?
moreover tempte not the Lord thy God. And innumerable others of like sort. And
when the Saints shall have all their life time demeaned themselves blameless
in the rightuousenes of God, yet in the last time of their life they trust not
to ye same, but to God his mere mercy through Christ. They remember always
how greuousely he was rebuked in the Gospel, first in deed he, that inuied the
good luck of him that labored with him in the vineyarde, for that he had
received so much wages, coming into the vineyarde about the last hour of the
day, as he had received that had labored al day long, and again the
thriftie son, for that he was sorry that his wastefull and prodigal brother
was received again of his father, and a feeste also made him, and for him that
was always obedient, and took pains continually, no such thing was prepared.

Innumerable people of al parts of ye world are saved.
But the gentiles he contriueth not into any certain number, but says how he
saw a great multitude, which no man could tell: no more tha^ they could the
stars, sand, herbs, or grass how many they were in nu^bre. He signifies
therefore, that in all the world, at al times innumerable are saved by Christ
nevertheless leeste any man should think that it should prevail or hinder
him to salvation, to be borne of this or that nation tribe or tongue: S. John
adds incontinently, of al tribes, people and tongues to be ordained to
salvation indifferently. Therefore this difference hinders salvation nothing:
but are found in Inde, Aethiopia, Barbaria, and in the furthest part of
Libia, in Scythia, Tartaria, and in the uttermost ends of the world, which
are saved by the grace of Christ.

And because it has much doubtfulnes to reason of things to come, S. John here
most expressly speaks of them, The faithful in heaven rejoice.
which are not to be saved, but already have achieved salvation, and are in
Heaven, to the intent we should not doubt of their salvation. And also
shaddoweth the manner of salvation and bless everlasting. This treatise
confuteth those which suppose the souls to sleep, not to have the fruition of
the godhead before the judgment, nor to be as yet in heaven. First he says,
how they stand before the Throne, and in the sight of the lamb. For the
first felicity in the blessed life, is to see God as he is, and to inioye his
glory, to be with Christ in glory. John.17.1. John.3. white stoles are the
garments of triumphant and clean persons. As herafter shall be declared more
at large, and has been noted ones or twice before. It betokens that the
blessed souls are decked with light, etc. And the Palm also is a token of
victory. The palm
Pliny treats much of the Palm in the.4. Chapt. of the.13. book. Al men
write that the Palm was the most ancient badge of a conqueror. And
wherefore this tree chiefly was chosen for this use of men of most antiquity,
Aulus Gellius shows the cause in the.6. Chapt. of the.3. book of Noct. At.
Writing that in a Palm tree there is a certain peculiar thing, which agrees
with the nature of stout and noble men. For if you lay says he, great
weightes upon the wood thereof, the Palm gives not place downewarde, but
rises up against the weight, and bears upward. And for this he alleges
the authority of Aristotel, and Plutarche, unto whom you may add also
Pliny.16. book.24. Chapter.

Unto al these things is annexed an exceeding great noise, whereby not only they
give God thanks, and praise his mercy: To whom they impute their salvation.
but also show and testify most manifestly, whom they may thank for their
salvation. And they say, salvation to him, etc. For so (...) is rather, as
also Erasmus has noted. For they signify that God is not blessed in him self
only, but to have communicated this salvation unto them, and saved them. Of the
Throne or seat of God was spoken before in the.4. chapt. God the father him
self sits on the seat. It is therefore a phrase of speech, which has this
cense: we owe this our salvation and blessedness to our God, which sits in
his Throne.

Again they communicate this salvation to the lamb also, that is to Christ.
For God by his grace through Christ saves the beleuers. And where as Christ
is called the lamb, the whole mystery of the incarnation and redemption is
remembered in the word Lamb, that being in deed reconciled to God by the blood
of the host, John.6. Ephesians. 1. Romans 3.
we be now the heirs of God, and the sons of God. etc. Therefore the
Saints in Heaven, and our fathers already saved, and dwelling in heaven, do
testify, and in testifiyng teach, that they be justified and saved not by
Mahometrie, or Popery, or any other obseruaunces, but by the mere grace of God
in Christ.

Errors ar confuted.
Hereby are confuted two opinions, right hurtefull to the whole world. The
first weneth, that the Papists be saved for their simplicity, and severe
discipline. For because, say they, they know no better things: and the works
that they do, they do them of a good intent, therefore are they saved by the
same. That is most vain and most ungodly. They add, unless we should judge
thus, doubtless there should not one of the Papists be saved. Certainly I say
plainly, that no man is saved by papistrie, no more tha^ by Mahometrie. For it
is called the way of perdition even of S. Peter him self. 2. Pet. 2.
Howebeit I think not therefore, that no man of the nu^bre of Papists is
saved. But I believe that innumerable, as I said before, have at the length
seen the filthiness of papistrie through the illumination of God: and the
papistry forsaken, to have embraced the sincere Gospel, and so by Christ alone
to be saved.

The latter supposes, that every manne in every and what so ever his religion
be, shall be saved. Against these the Saints here cry: how they that are
saved, are saved by the grace of God through Christ. Every man is not saved in
his religion.
Therefore none other religion saves. There is non other name given to men,
wherein they must be saved, but that of Christ Jesus. None other way is open
into heaven, nor any other door: he that affirms any other, is called of the
verity a thief and a murderer. Yea they utterly abolishe Christ, and the
whole scripture, who so ever contend that every man is saved by his own
religion. Neither can I tell, whether any other thing so hurtful can be
Imagined. Therefore let us hold that thing, which all the Saints in heaven
have taught us, that salvation is of God through Christ.

All the Aungelles in Heaven confirm these things, The confirmation of
Aungelles, example and song.
leest any thing should waunte, which belongs to a sure and certain
testimony: and also teach us by their example, what we should do. They sing
together Amen: whereby they also testify, that salvation is of only grace
through Christ. Again they fall down, and worship God. But how much more
ought we men mortal by worshippyng to attribute to him this honor? And by
singing an himne, they exhibit to us a form of serving God, finally of
iudginge rightly of God, that we attribute nothing to any creature to the
reproach of the creator, which belongs to God alone: but ascribe all
things to God wholly. The words of this Hymn are expounded in the.4. and.5.
chapt. that I need not here to tarry about them. They put blessing for
praise, the rest of the words are plain.

And now let us learn, being taught by so many testimonies and examples of
all Saints, forsaking al vain and wicked opinions, to give al glory to God
through Christ: to whom be praise and thanks geuyng. Amen.

Here is expounded who they be that are are clothed in white, from whence is
salvation, and what is the true blessedness. The.xxxvi. Sermon.
ANd one of the elders answered, saying unto me: what are these which are
arrayed in long white garments, and whence came they? And I said unto him,
lord thou wotest. And he said unto me: these are they which came out of
great tribulation, and made their garments large, and made them white in the
blood of the lamb: therefore are they in the presence of the seat of God, and
serve him day and night in his temple, and he that sits in the seat, will
dwell among the^. They shall honger no more, another thirst, another shall the
sun light on them, another any heat: For the lamb which is in the mids of
the seat, shall feed them, and shall lead them to fountaynes of living water:
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

The occasion of this exposition.
S. John saw the souls of Martirs resting under the altar, covered with white
garments. The self same saw an infinite multitude of all nations and people,
saved from the Idolatry of the gentiles, and superstition of Antichrist,
covered also with white garments. Upon this occasion three things shall now be
expounded unto us, what they are which are clothed in white garments? whence
they have that whitenes, pureness, and salvation? Finally what is the state or
felicity of these, or what is the true blessedness?

The weakness of ma^s understanding is helped by an exposition divine.
What time S. John had seen them, he marueled without al doubt, what they were,
nevertheless he is red to have inquired nothing. But of his own accord one
of the.xxiiii. Elders, offers him self to him an expositour, doubtless an
excellent teacher, a Patriarche and prophet, finally a master celestial, to
whom we may justly give credit. Here appears the ignorance of man's wit.
For like as the Eunuche of Aethiopia in the.8. Chapt. of the Acts of Apostles
acknowledges his ignorance, except an interpretour and mete teacher were
given him: so at this present also blessed S. John him self being demanded,
whether he knew them that were appareled in white, confesses his want of
knowledge: yet he ascribes to his teacher the knowledge thereof, by this mean
through a most humble modesty requiring a further declaration. Finally here
appears the unmeasurable goodness of God, which takes in hand to teach us
that are rude and unworthy. We have many examples hereof every where in the
prophets, and in the holy gospel of Christ.

And in the beginning straight ways he declares to S. John, and to all the
faithful in the world, What the^ are, and from whence thee come clothed in white
what these are that are clothed in white: And expounds with all from whence
they came. For with one and the same answer he dispatcheth both two. He
says briefly, that the clothed with white in Heaven be the godly people of
all times and ages, which at the length have escaped ((...)) out of great
tribulation. Tribulation is found to be sundry and diverse. For first it is
tribulation, which comes of laying wait and persecution of Tirauntes. This
apperteineth to Martirs alone. Whereof we have spoken in the.6. chapt. Which
for as much as in this world they were overwhelmed with reproaches unspeakable,
for the word of God, they have in an other world received white garments.
Than is there an other tribulation, which arriseth of the fear of God, and is
a care of obteyning salvation. This is sorry for the vnrightuousenes and
corruption of man. It is sorry for the greuouse abominations of Antichrist. And
these also, albeit they be not made Martirs, yet are they in an other life
clothed with white. Finally they have tribulatio^s and are molested after the
flesh, so many as mortify their flesh with the concupisce^ces thereof. And
because they mourn here, in the world to come they shall receive comfort and
consolation.

Again leeste any man should ascribe life and salvation to martirdom as to our
work, From whence is life and salvation.
and to repentance as to our deserte, the Lord moreover declares by thelder
expressly, from whence that life and salvation proceeds, and how that
whitenes and puretie chances unto us. And they have washed their garments,
says he, and made them white by the blood of the lamb. And here is found a
diverse readyng. And (...), that is, that they have enlarged their garments,
so that he might appear to have alluded to the families of great Princes, which
use, for the setting forth of their renown, to put on most wide and most
sumptuouse garments. But in my opinion the complutensian copy and Aretas seem
to read more rightly and more simply or plainly, and (...), have washed, as
also the old interpretour has translated it. For by this exposition by and by
follows, and have made white. Primasius reads, and have made their garments
white in the blood of the Lamb. And herby is signified, that the salvation and
purification of the faithful is of the blood of Christ, how blood springled
should purify.
and of non other thing. Where verily blood springled whiteth not, but
polluteth. Therefore must we understand these things spiritually, to wit
that the very, natural and humane blood of Christ, shed ones on the Cross,
being sprincled upon us spiritually (as S. Paull to the Hebrew. the.10.
expounds) and received with faith, although it touch us not naturally and
corporally pourgeth us from al sins. And therefore we read in an other
place, that Christ pourgeth us with his blood. For because sanctification is
the only work of God. Therefore where ye saints are said now to have washed,
and whited their garments, by the blood of the lamb. It signifies that they
have received by faith the pourgatio^ prepared by blood. And this doctrine is
catholic and of the right faith, which has so many and so great testimonies
in the holy Scriptures. Finally we perceive how those which are saved from the
kingdom of Antichrist, are saved by the merit of Christ alone, and by none
other thing, as I have also showed you before. Morouer by and by is inferred:
therefore be they in the sight of gods seat. For what cause I pray thee?
because they have washed and whited their garments in the blood of the Lamb:
therefore for the merit of Christ have they entered into Heaven, What is the
state of saints and the true blessedness.
and there are inuironned or clothed with eternal light.

Finally the elder declares most at large, what the state of Saints is, and
what is the true bless of the faithful. And these things are certain tastes,
set here for a consolation. Or else such things as the eye has not seen, or ye
ear heard, that same has God prepared for those that love him. And he
recites many things, of the which he will have us to gather the excellency of
eternal salvation, and what good things we obtain in the same.

First stand the Saints before the Throne of God. In the Throne is the
majesty of god to be worshipped for ever and the blessed Trinity. And the
Saints stand before the seat, not as they are wounte that tarry before the
gates. For as the most intier friends of God, they are always in the sight of
God, and have the fruition of his deity. Whereof the lord speaking in the
Gospel: pray ye, says he, that ye may escape these things, and stand
before the son of man. And also David: the accomplishment of joys is in thy
sight, and pleasauntenes in thy right hand for ever. And there is annexed an
other thing, which may expou^de that standing: they serve God in his Temple
both day and night. That service has pleasure and no painefulnes. And they
serve God in the temple, as God is wont to be served in the Temple. For they
keep holy days, they are glad, rejoice, be merry, praise: and so they offer up
sacrifices, and are refresshed with heavenly repaste. And this joy shall be
everlasting and perpetual: which is signified by day and night. Otherwise in
the bless everlasting there is no might at all, nor any chaungeable course
of time. Hereunto is added, that he that sits in the seat, that is the
divine majesty, (...), will dwell in them: that is to wit, God will be al in all, or he will lean over them, and as it were a tente or tabernacle, will
ouershadowe them, defend and keep them, and give him self whole to be inioyed
of them, as most familiar and frendely to them. Moreover they shall honger no
more, another shall they thirste. For all infirmity and misery is taken away
from the blessed souls, and bodies glorified. They are filled with all good
things without any lothsomnes, with a most ioyeouse fulfillynge. Now the
sun falls not upon them, nor the heat: which phrase of speech
betokens, that they are put to no travel nor pain, but are delivered at ones
from all displeasure, and all paynefulnes, and to be at most pleasant rest.

Again is set in the cause of so great felicity, Christ the lamb, that is
to say Christ mediator and redemer: in the mids of the seat, that is, very
God. For he, as both Ezechiel. in.34. chapt. and the lord also him self in
the.10. of John. Wittenesseth (...) that is to say will feed them, Christ
fedeth and quikneth
like a sheperde, and as a Captain of life will lead them to the fountains
of lively water: that is to wit, will quicken them for ever, and preserve all
his in that felicity. He uses in this treatise words of the prophets most
accustomed, and used every where, that climyng unto higher things, we might
after some sort esteem heavenly gifts. Hereunto he joins as yet a notable
benefit: and the Lord will wipe al tears from their eyes. Which words he
has borrowed of Esaye. For Saints in this world tourmoyled with sundry
evils, have shed most plentiful tears: but in the world to come, the Lord
comfort them, gladdyng them with joy everlasting, another geuyng the^ at any
time any occasion of grefe. Jacob. 16
And therefore he said in the Gospel, verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and
lament, but again the world shall rejoice: and ye shall mourn, but your
mournyng shall be turned into joy. And your heart shall rejoice, and your joy
shall no man take from you. We shall hear the like things unto these also in
21. of the Apocalipse. etc.

Against the co^temners of ye blessed life.
Hereof they perceive, how shamefully they transgress, which have always in
their mouth, if I should contene this life present for religions sake, who shall
tell me, what is yt other other life to come? perauenture if I neglecte this, in
an other world I shall get nothing. For here we have a most manifest testimony,
that as most assured salvation is prepared of God in heaven for the faithful:
so is it also most ample and great: in so much that the Apostle in an other
place says, that the afflictions of this time present are not egall, to ye
glory which shall be revealed to us. The Lord grant us, that we may
acknowledge these things.

Whilst the.vii. Seal is opened, and the Angels with trompettes come forth,
Christ the intercessour of his church offers up before his father the prayers
of his faithful. The.xxxvij. Sermon.
ANd when he had opened the.vii. The.8. chapt.
seal, there was silence in Heaven about the space of half an hour. And I
saw seven Angels standing before God, and to them were given seven
trompettes. And an other Angel came and stood before the Altar, having a
golden censer, and much of odoures was given unto him, that he should offer of
the prayers of al saints upon the golden altar, which was before the seat.
And the smoke of the odoures which came of the prayers of al saints,
ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. And the Aungel took the censer,
and filled it with fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth, and voices
were made, and Thonderinges, and Lightninges, and Earthquake.

I suppose there be no books in the world, of whomsoever, The excellency of ye
books of holy scripture.
or when soever they were written, which may compare with the books of holy
scripture, as concerning the sincere verity, pure simplecitie, and plain
order. Another perauenture that may seem any marvel to any man, knowing that
the same are written in deed of men, but inspired of the holy ghost. There be
edifices most skilfully builded of men, and framed and co^triued in a most
goodly order. But what beaultie will you judge them to have, in case ye compare
them with the creation of the world, and with that most beaultifull order,
which we see daily in all things created, and chaungeable course of times?
the most excellent works of men have nothing in them, yea seem vile, in case
you compare them with the workmanship of God the creator. A recapitulation.
But for the most bright order and most plain treatise this book of the
Apocalipse has emonges others most notable, an excellent and wonderful
praise. S. John promised a some of the matter, signifiyng that he would speak
of those things, which should be done in the church from his time until the
judgment. And the faithful do know to what end they should take those
things, not to the intent their curiosity might be maintained or satisfied: but
that they sufficiently warned before, should not fall, but take heed to
themselves and hold fast the true salvation. And forasmuch as there is much
talk emonges men; why God does thus, or permits that, and why he
prohibiteth not these or those things: S. John has exhibited to us a most
holesom vision, by ye which we may learn not to talk against God, and not to
contend with him but to acknowledge, al his judgments to be rightuouse and
just. Which thing verily both all the Saints in heaven, and also angelical
spirits do acknowledge, and attribute to God al glory. And thus having
prepared the minds of the Auditors, he comes to ye thing it self, and
declares the fatal destenies of the church. Under the.vi. seal he touches
generally the corruption of doctrine, which sins it is more perillouse and more
pestilent than al dangers of man's body, or outward perilles, he reasons yet
more fully thereof: and now particularly under the opening of the.vii. seal
recites, how far the same stretches. For he declares how many, how great,
and what manner of sects, heresies and troubles shall arrise in the church, and
how hurtful they shall be to the church. And this place conteyneth an History
of the corrupt doctrine, of heresies or sects and troubles ever sins the time
of S. John unto the last judgment: It is extended through out the.8.9.10.11.
chapt.

A consolation even eua^gelical.
Nevertheless before the trompettes come forth, for a consolation as it were by
a little digression, is placed a remedy, which the faithful in all ages may use
in that pestiferouse corruption to keep safe their souls, and the integrity
of the same. For many times in this book are brought in most strong
consolatio^s in matters of most difficulty. For all the.10. chap. shall serve
also to this Argument. And the remedy that he shows, is this: that we must
flee unto Christ redemer of of mankind, intercessour and propiciatour. And
that we shall be safe under his defense, that we must offer up to him our
prayers continually. And verily the Lord in the Gospel, reasoninge of the
greatest dangers of the Devil, prepared for the company of Apostles, and
being at hand. Yet adds he by and by, that which might comfort their
sorrowful minds: I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith should not
fail, etc. Behold we are saved in greatest distress, through Christ's
protection, that we should not fainte in faith. Howbeit, as every where the
Evangelical and Apostolical letters do intimate, our continual prayers, which
we offer to God through Christ, must be joined to our trust in Christ. And in
few words the intercession of Christ at the right hand of God, and effect
and manner of the prayer of the faithful are here set forth to behold.

But we shall declare every thing in order. He spoke in general under the.vi.
seal of corrupt doctrine, in the seventh he will declare the same particularly
and most abou^dantly. And whileste the seventh seal was opened, there was
silence in heaven almost half an hour. Of this silence the expositours write
diuersely. But as I think the hearers are excited by this silence to a
diligent and attentive hearing. For silence has an admiration and an
expectation of matters most weighty. Solomon says in the.9. of Ecclesiast.
the words of wise men are heard in silence. When weighty matters should be
proclaimed and set forth, the crier is woonte to proclayme silence. And in deed
they be matters of great importance that follow, which unless we observe
with great attentiuenes, we shall perish in sects and seductions. Those
spiritual wickednesses be more daungerouse than corporal perilles.

And now whilst in silence they look for with an admiraration what should
come, the last seal being opened, behold there appear seven Aungelles
trompetters, of these we shall speak afterward.

Now is placed and set forth a remedy to be taken in so great evils, as I
said. The which, A remedy against all kind of sects tro^peries and
troubles.
to the intent it might be more lively, and may be printed more depely in our
breasts, is set forth to be seen with a most godly vision. Before the seat,
and in the compass almost of the seat, appears a golden Altar. And there
came an Angel and stands at this Altar: the same has in his hand a
golden censer, into this the Saints put their offeringes. He offers the^
before the seat, and the smoke of the odoures ascends up from the hand of
the Aungel before God.

Christ is the golden Altar.
We said in an other place, that the golden Altar of incense, was the Lord
Christ him self, which is both Altar and sacrifice and priest: as S. Paul
witnesses to the Hebre. The same is called an Angel, to wit the same of
whom both Esaye maket mention in the.9. Malach. 3.
Chapt. and also Malachie saying: behold I send mine Aungel, which shall
prepare the way before me, and suddenly the Lord shall come unto his temple,
whom you seek for, and the Aungel of the covenant, who^ you desire: behold he
comes, says the lord of hosts. The fourmer Angel, that is to say
messenger or Ambassador, was John Baptiste, which prepared the way for the
Lord. Mark. 1.
He, to wit the later Aungel, came immediately after the preaching of John,
and made complete that everlasting covenant. The same now appears on the
right hand of God in Heaven.

what christ does at ye righthand of the father.
And two things of him are uttered. First, that he stood before, or in, or
upon the Altar. We may here Imagine nothing corporally: but we must think
that by this manner of speaking is signified the priesthood of Christ. He
appears always in the sight of his father, for us: As S. Paull has taught
the.8. to the Romans, and.9. Chapter to the Hebrews. He pleads therefore the
cause of his church before God, and is advocate for the faithful. The same
morouer stands before the Altar, the same stands in the mids of the
seat. For he is coequall with the father after his deity, after the which he
stands in the seat: and after his humanity, is of the same substance with
us, according to the which dispensation he is red as Bishop and very man to
stand before the Altar. The latter, which is to be observed, is this, that
christ holds in his hand a golden censer. For he has taken our very nature
without sin, that he might make intercession for us, and offer up our prayers
to God the father.

Christ offeceth up our prayers.
And leeste any man should doubt, that he receives our prayers, and offers
them to God, finally that the true office of the Church might also appear,
offering up al things by Christ, there is added, to him are given many
odours. But to what end? that he might give them upon the golden Altar, and
that before the seat, as though you should say, that he might bring them into
the sight of God.

And because of a further declaration, leeste we should not know the true
odours, which please God, and which the faithful offer unto God through
Christ: The true odoures be the prayers of saints.
ones or twice he adds, that those odoures be the prayers of Saints. And he
means by Saints, not those that dwell in heaven, but us in the earth, which
are sanctified with the spirit of our God, with the blood of Christ, baptism,
faith and word. John.13. Philip. 4.
And the prayers be inuocatio^s, and geuyng of thanks. And he says
expressly of al Saints, leest any should fear that he and his prayers
offered by Christ were excluded. If thou believe, thou art holy, and thy prayer
is of God accepted. What the prayers of Saints be, it appears in the Lords
prayer, which we offer up to the father in the name and words of Christ:
hallowed be thy name, thy kyngedome come, and the residewe, which all fight
with those sects and corruptions of true doctrine.

Ireneus alleges this place in the.31. and.32. chapt. of the.4. book. And by
this mean he calls Eucharistia which is giving of thanks, the sacrifice of
Christians. For the mainteyners of papistrie do corrupt that place, and utter
it so, as though it mente that the priest should sacrifice the real body of
Christ for the quick and the dead. But the holy Bishop of Lions knew this
filthy error. Away with them and their sophistry, whither they are worthy.
I have spoke also before, something of the same matter.

And that it might clearly appear unto all men, the smoke of the odours
ascends.
that the prayers of the faithful, offered to God through Christ, are
pleasant and acceptable, there is added: and the smoke of the odoures
ascends, that is to say, the prayers of the faithful were of God accepted:
Therefore let us offer dilligently our prayers unto God through Christ. For he
hears us, and delivers us from evil. And the scripture many times calls
our prayers an acceptable sacrifice to God. The pla^es are in Osee. 14. in
the.50. Psalm. And in many other places. In the.141. the prophet says. Let
my prayer be directed as incense in thy sight, the lifting up of my hands an
euenyng sacrifice. Primasius expoundyng this place, said how Christ is said
to have taken of the prayers of Saints. For because through him the prayers
of al may come swetely unto God. Hebrew. 13
Hereof the Apostle: by him we offer up always a sacrifice of praise unto God,
that is to say, the fruicte of lips confessyng his name.

Against praiyng of Saints.
Herby is confuted the opinion of them, which suppose that the Saints in
heaven be the intercessours of the faithful, which should commend their
prayers unto God, and make the way open to God. For what need have they to
procure to themselves other intercessours or advocates? what lack find they
in Christ? or whom may they prefer or compare with Christ? what shall we say
that eue^ at this, present the odours are offered up by the hand of the
Aungel? The celestial saints were present with the Lord, and were seen
about the seat: but which of them taking the censer, and gathering the
prayers of the faithful, offered them unto God? It turned Ozias or Asarias
the king to displeasure, that he took in hand the censer minding to sacrifice,
and to execute the priests office: the same would be worse for the heavenly
dwellers, nay they should not remain in Heaven, in case they took upon them
the office of the only Bisshoppe. etc.

He fills the censer with fire and sends it into the Earth.
After this we have heard, that Christ filled the censer with fire taken from
the Altar, and sent it down into the Earth. By the which narration he
retourneth again to finish the exposition of the trompettes. This fire, is the
grace of the holy ghost. That is put into the censer, is taken of the Altar,
is sent down into Earth. For Christ took the fulness of the spirit, as S.
John shows in the.^. and.3. chapt. Christ is Altar and censer. Of the Altar
here is taken fire. For the holy ghost, is the spirit of the Father and of
the Son. Whom, says he, I will send you from my father. Him he sent into
earth, under the shape of fiery tounges: he sends him also at this day into
the hearts of the faithful, that he may inflame them. This is the same fire,
which the Lord in the gospel of Luke says, Luke.12.
that he will send into the Earth, and would that it should burn.

Moreover the effect of this fire follows immediately. For there were made
thonderinges, and voices, and lightninges, and Earthquake. By the voices of the
Gospel the wounds of sinners are healed, and the hearts of men lighted by the
illumination of the holy spirit, etc. Of the which things we have spoken
also in the.4. chapt. and.24. Sermon. Of the preaching of the Gospel, as
Haggeus also prophesied it should come to pass, insewed a wonderful commotion
of all nations, etc: Satan also was stired, which raised up his ministers
through out the world against wholesome preaching of the Gospel. For there
sprange up sects, whom the mayneteyners of the verity resisted, fighting
with them. Whereof now he will reason at large. The Lord give grace, that these
things may both be spoken and heard with much fruicte.

Of the seven Aungelles trompetters, and of the trompettes: and of the
first.ii. and.iii. trompet. The.xxxviij. Sermon.
ANd the seven Angels which had the seven trompettes, prepared themselves to
blow. The first Angel blewe: And there was made hayle and fire, which were
mingled with blood and they were cast into the Earth: and the third part of
trees was burnt, and all grene grass was bre^t. And the second Angel blewe,
and as it were a great Mountain burning with fire was cast into the Sea, and
the third part of the Sea turned to blood: and the third part of creatures
which had life died, and the third part of Ships were distroyed. And the
third Angel blewe, and there fell a great star from Heaven, burning as it
were a cresset, and it fell into the third part of the Rivers, and into the
fountains of waters, and the name of the star is called Worm wood, and the
third part of the waters was turned to Worm wood. And many men died of the
waters because they were made bitter.

Our lord Jesus Christ has kindeled in earth a bright and wholesome fire, which
the Apostles and men Apostolical have every foot more and more inflamed. But
contrary wise satan seeks to quench this wholesome fire, and not only to
corrupt and deprave this doctrine of salvation: but also to abolish it and
ouerwhelme it with lies. The meaner and manner hereof is at this present
described, and even painted out gallauntly, to none other end, but that the
faithful being warned and fully taught, might be well ware of that pestilent
infection. For the scope or end of this book is, to preserve the church safe
and sound from corruptions, or at leest to repare the same being corrupted.

The seven Aungelles stand in ye sight of God.
S. John therefore saw seven Angels stand in the sight of God. To stand
signifies to minister, and compriseth the faith and diligence of Ministers.
Servants stand before kings, ready to do service, and to execute al their
commandments. We read in the.1. chapter of Job. The sons of God came, and
stood before the Lord, and Satan came also into the mids of them. The
blessed Aungelles are called the children or sons of God. They come to do
service before God: Satan preaseth in emongs them, forasmuch as he is also the
minister of God, for ye execution of those things, which apperteyne to the
wrath and indignation of God against the wicked. Al elements be Gods
ministers, and finally all the creatures of god. For he is the lord of Sabbath,
the God of hosts, which for the salvation and judgment of men uses well and
rightly all his creatures: every one according to his nature and disposition.
For he uses the ministry of Angels, like Angels: and so the service of
Devils, as Devils in deed. But where as the seventh number is the number of
fulness, containing in it self al times: for there be seven days of creation
and rest, there be seven worlds or ages: certainly seven Aungelles appear
before God, for that they betoken all battles that shall be foughten to the
end of the world.

For to these seven Angels are given seven trompettes, and the Angels already
had the trompettes, and even prepared themselves to blow the on set. The use
of trompets.
Where chiefly the use of trompettes is to be searched for. The same is most
plentifully described of Moses, in the.10. of Nombres. The use of trompettes
was diverse, as it is also at this day. First by the sound of the trompet the
people of Israel were called together, to consult of the common wealth. Again
at the sound of the^ the Senate of princes of the people did assemble.
Moreover they were warned by the trompet, when and who should remove their
tents. Furthermore the trompets blewe unto battle, what time they joined to
fight, as may be seen in the.20. of Deuter. The people moreover were called
together with trompettes on the holy days to public and divine service.
Sound with the trompet in Zion, call the congregation, says Iohel, gather
the people. There was more over a feast of trompettes, and a Iubiley, having
the name of the blowyng and sound of trompets: as appears in the.25. of
Leuit. Finally the preaching of the verity was figured by the sound of
trompettes, neither might any other blow the same but priests. For it forces
much to whom you commit or deliver the signs public.

Of this sundry use of trompettes, none shall agree better to our matter, than
the warlicke. For this world has a shape of war. In it are the camps of
good men, and the camps of evil: the tents of Catholics, and tents of
heretics. The chiefrayne of these is Satan, and of those Christ: the
Captain and Emperor of these is the Devil, of the other the son of God.
And now the Angels sound their trompettes, and blow the onset: not that the
good Angels and God him self is the Author of heresies and of heretics,
whose original is referred to Satan and sin: but sou^ding their trompettes
they give in deed warnyng to all men, and signify that most greuouse wars
shall arrise in the world, and even in the church it self. But diverse men are
diuersely moved and work in war according to their natures. The true
catholics being warned by the trompet, take head to themselves, pray, and
finally taking in hand spiritual weapons, prepare themselves unto battle and
ma^fully fight for Christ, and for maynteinyng and defending the verity.
Heretics, sectaries, and men of corrupt minds, according to their
malice, taking to them also Armor, run sorth and fight against Christ and
the verity, defend lies, and such as be weakelynges they take, spoil, beat
down and distroye. The good shepardes, are the trompets of God and of Christ:
the Devil blows up Archeheretickes and beginners of sects.

Of the good, and of their fight, we shall hear in the.11. and in the chapt.
following. Nevertheless in every conflict we must understand that the saints
sleep not, nor be any where idle, but to do their duty every where. It was
now in deed enough for the lord to show us the heretics and sectaries
sighting, and to declare, how much they may hurt, that we might watch more
dilligently, and beware of all corruption.

The first trompet or fight.
The first Aungel soundyng the first trompet, denounces unto us the first
conflict. All and singular battles have some thing like, and diverse. It is
like, in that all heresies do impugn Christ, and would have the truth of the
Gospel, either extinguisshed, or wrasted out of the true sense. And that same
is singular or diverse, that at an other time, Satan assayling other
doctrines, has spread abroad in the Church sundry heresies. Therefore whilst
the Angel sounds the trompet, that is to say proclaymeth war, he warns
the Saints to watch. Therefore as he is yet blowing, through Gods permission,
according to his just judgment, by the mean and suggestion of Satan, there
was made hayle and fire mixed with blood, the which being so tempered, was
sent or fell upon the Earth. For S. Paul acknowledges spiritual policies in
the heavenly spirits. And the Scripture in a certain place does figure
rightwell, the sound and wholesome doctrine by the heavenly dew and shower
that makes the earth fruictefull: most rightly therefore S. John co^pareth the
false and heretical doctrine to hayle. For that destroys the fruictfull
places of the earth, and marreth utterly the ple^tiful fruicte of the earth.
Wherefore like as else where the perverse doctrine is called darnell, leven,
chafe, etc. so is it here called hail. But this hayle is tempered, and of a
wonderful mixture. For it has fire and blood joined with it. These things
must be expounded after an allegory, not after the letter. Hail is water
congeled with cold. Hayle is corrupt doctrine.
And water they have called the wisdom of the scripture: hail therefore shall
be false wisdom. Yet fire is put unto it. The pretense of ye scriptures and
inspiration of the holy ghost, whereunto is added blood, the evil affection of
man, to wit the vice of Ambition, wrath, contention, hatred and like
affections. Of these is compounded an haylie doctrine, hurtful doubtless and
pestilent. For when false doctrine rules or depraueth the Scriptures, and
wicked affections of teachers are joined with all, a pestilent doctrine
arriseth. Such was from the beginning the doctrine of the Nazareans, or
Mimeorites, and of the Hebionites, co^tending that justification came not by
the only faith of Christ, but by the law. Our men fought sharply, to wit S.
Paul and the other Apostles, against this perniciouse doctrine. And from the
beginning many corrupt with Philosophy, Divinity corrupt by Philosophy.
others blinded with men's traditions, have brought forth most corrupt opinions.
Histories bear witness hereof. And Tertulliane not without cause called
Philosophers the patriarchs of heretics. For S. Paul most diligently
warned, that the godly should be ware of Philosophy. They that have not kept
themselves from it, and have set more by Philosophy, and I know not what
traditions, they in stead of the heavenly dew and sweet showers, have cast
into the church great heavy haylestones.

And have verily hurt the church very much. For the.iii. part of trees was
burnt, and also al grene grass. This nu^bre is intimated in four tro^pets,
and in fix likewise. And it seems to signify, that a great part of men
inconstaunte and unstable are seduced and lofte, giving themselves to be
distroyed of wicked men: again, the best part of the saythful to be saved. The
lord him self knows the number exactely. It is enough for us to know these
things which he has revealed unto us, another to search curiousely any
further.

That men are signified by trees, Trees.
appears by the.9. chapt. where it is said, and they had commandment, that
they should not hurt the grass of the earth, another any tree, saving only men,
which are not etc. After he had said, save only those trees, which were not
marked: but he had rather say, men, that he might as it were with this keye
unlock the mystery. Another is it rare to shadow men in the scriptures by
trees, flowers, and grass: as we may gather of the.1. Psalm, the. 40. of
Esaye, and the.12. chapt. of S. Matthew. But that latter poincte, that al grene
grass was brent, must be favorably expounded. For who can believe that al men
were distroyed by those first heresies? we understand therefore that the minds
of the faithful were diuersely afflicted and tourmoyled with those errors and
troubles: but yet as the Gold tried in the fix, not to be utterly consumed.

The second trompet.
The second Aungel sounds the trompet, signifiyng that new wars are now a
brewyng: and therefore exhorts, that all the godly would defend themselves
with weapons. And there is cast into the Sea not a Mountain, but as it were a
Mountain burning with fire. The sea bears a figure of the world, A burning
mountain.
than the which there is nothing more unstable. It is a thing most frequented
in the prophets, to call this our world, wherein we live, a sea. By mountains
are signified kingdoms, witness Esaye in the.2. chapt. Daniel the 2. And
Zachary in the.4. chapt. And Christ him self in the.7. of Matthew. By removing
of hills or mountains, signifies any hard thing, and by the opinion of
many impossible. Now therefore springs up an heresy and a doctrine in the
church, as it were a burning Mountain, as the which was in deed most
furnished, and as it seemed invincible. We read that such was the heresy of
the Valentinians, Valentinians.
whose sect the holy martyr Ireneus teached to be divided into many. Such was
the fury of the Manicheis Manicheis.
and Montanistes. Montanistes.
They seemed to many to burn with the spirit of God, and to be whole nothing
else but the spirit, and all their oracles to be of the holy ghost. Manichaeus
called him self the Apostle of Jesus Christ. The Montanistes bragged of a new
holy ghost. There was most great plenty of this darnell throughout the
universal church. Another was the success thereof small. For the third part
of the Sea was made blood. The Apostle signifies the wickedness of sects. For
how vile and impudent were the heretics called Gnostici, the valentinians,
and Manicheis, Ireneus, S. Austen, and Epiphanius do testify. And a great
part of the creatures in the Sea perisshed. And he speaks of such as have
souls, not of fishes in deed, but men. Many ships moreover were lost, to
wit Mariners, and Ilonde men, being corrupt with these heresies.

That time those heresies sprange up in deed of those Authors which I named:
but as yet they be not utterly extinct, corrupt men buddyng up in a manner at
every time, and renewyng the old error. Whereupon a bitter strife remains
yet at this day in the church: and we are daily admonished, that we should
beware of those corruptions.

The third Angel blows his trompet, proclaymyng new wars: The third
trompet.
and behold a great Star fell down from heaven, burning like a cresset, and
infecteth the third part of rivers and fountains of waters, A burning
cresset.
that star is called wormwood. I told you in the.1. Chapter that Stars are
called, Preachers, Bisshoppes, and notable men in the church. It signifies
therefore that some notable man should fall away from the true faith into
heresy, wherewith he should infecte a great part of the world, in corrupting
the Scriptures, and sound doctrine of faith. And these things seem to be
fulfilled in Paulus Samosatenus Paul Samosatenus
and Arrius. Arrius.
This creshet burned horribly, and inflamed the whole world without recovery.
That pestilence denied the deity of Christ, and made the whole Gospel to us
most bitter. For if Christ be not very God, how is he a Savior, King,
Bishop, intercessour, mediator, and salvation of the faithful? He quenched the
light, that denied the deity of Christ. Therefore is he called by the name of
wormwood. The prophet Jeremy used the self same allegory, or metaphore, or
allusion, in the.9. and.23. chapt. And Amos in the.6. where he says, that the
Judges have turned judgment into Wormwood.

The Scripture and doctrine which is trimly figured by rivers and fountains,
corrupted of the Arrians was to many the occasion of death. The Scripture and
doctrine of the Gospel, is of it self mortal to no man, but rather lively to
al^ corruption makes it deadly. Poison put in wine, makes the wine deadly:
the wine of it self kills no man, but rather gladdeth and reioseth al men.
Read the Ecclesiastical stories of Eusebius, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, Socrates,
and others, and ye shall perceive how aptely S. John has written all these
things, and how rightly they are al fulfilled. No small part of that bitterness
has flowed unto our time, whilst that old error is often times by the
instigatio^ of the devil renewed. For what that unclean beast Michell
Seruetus Michell Serueto.
a spaniarde vomited against the Son of God, for his impenitent wickedness,
and continual plasphemie burnte at Geneua, the world knows. We must pray
therefore to the Lord, that in such daungerouse conflictes, he would keep us
safe and sound. Amen.

The fourth and fifte trompet is expounded, of the opening of the botomlesse
pit, and of grass hoppers creping out into the Earth. The.xxxix. Sermon.
ANd the fourth Aungel blewe, and the third part of the sun was smitten, and
the third part of the Moon, and the third part of stars, so that the
third part of the^ was darkened. And the day was smitten, that the third part
of it should not shine, and likewise the night. And I beheld, and heard an
Angel fliyng through the mids of Heaven, and saying with a loud voice: woe,
woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the Earth, because of the voices to come of the
trompe of the three Angels, which were yet to blow.

The.9. chapter.
And the fifte Aungel blewe, and I saw a star fall from Heaven unto the
Earth. And to him was given the keye of the botomlesse pit. And he opened
the botomles pit, and there arrose a smoke of the pit, as it were the smoke
of a great furnace. And the Sun and the air were darkened, by the reason of
the smoke of the pit. And there came out of the smoke locustes upon the
earth: and unto the^ was given power as the Scorpions of the Earth have power.
And it was said unto them that they should not hurt the grass of the Earth,
another any grene thing: another any tree, but only those men which have not
the seal in their forheades, and to them was commanded that they should not
kill them, but that they should be vexed five months, and their pain was as
the pain that comes of a Scorpion, when he has stonge a man. And in those
days shall men seek death, and shall not find it: and shall desire to die, and
death shall fly from them.

The fourth trompet declares an hurtful and a long strife, The.iiii. trompe.
which arrose in the church of the doctrine of Pelagius. This Pelagius
taught, that the sin of Adam, hurt him alone, and not mankind, and
therefore that in the same all men die not. That man has free will, so that he
may do good. Another that he should be free, if he need the help of God.
Which if he has it, he may the more easily do good: The doctrine of pelagius.
if he have it not, that he may yet nevertheless work it by his own virtue,
and may deserve everlasting life. Therefore that our victory is not of the
help of God, but of free will: and that remission is not given to the
penitentes after the grace and mercy of God, but after the deserte and workynge
of them which through repentance are worthy of Gods mercy, and the residewe
which Saint Austen reherseth in the hondreth and sixte Epistle to Boniface,
that Pelagius had renounced: which nevertheless in an other place he shows
that the same had taught, and returned to his vomit: As in the register of
heresy, the.88. heresy. The same against two epistles of the Pelagia^s, in
the.2. book. 2 chapter to Boniface. The Manicheis, says he, deny that a good
man had the beginning of evil of free will. Whileste fools eschew one vice
they run into an other.
The Pelagians say also, that an evil man has free will sufficiently to
fulfill a good precept. The catholic doctrine reproves both these, and to
them says, God made man right, etc. And to these says, if the son has
made you free, you ate verily free. And in the.9. chapt. the same Author.
Where we say that the will of man unto evil is free, to do good that it must
be made free by the grace of God, it makes against the Pelagians. And where we
say that the evil, which was not before, is comen of him, it is against the
Manicheis. Moreover in the.8. chapt. Pelagius says, that the thing which good
is, may sooner be accomplisshed, if grace help thereto. By the which addition,
that is in adding, more easily, he signifies verily that he thinks thus,
that although the help of grace wau^t, he can yet, albeit more hardely,
perform that which is good by free will. Again the same in the.47. Epistle
to Valent. Who fall into the error of the Pelagia^s.
That man, says he, falls into the error of the Pelagians, which
supposes the grace of God to be given for any deserte of man, which grace
alone makes manne free, through Jesus Christ our Lord. But again he that
thinks, when the Lord shall come unto judgment, that man is not judged after
his works which might now by reason of his age, use the free choice of will,
is nevertheless in error. He says in a manner the same thing in the.2. book
the.18. chapt. of the merits and remission of sins.

The third part of the sun, of ye Moon and the stars smitten.
With this doctrine of Pelagius was stricken, that is to say, darkened (for so
S. John him self a little after expounds him self, saying in so much that
the third part of them was obscured, etc.) the third part of the sun, to
wit of Christ, which is the true sun of rightuousenes. For the Pelagians
doctrine denied the grace of Christ, and with man's merit trod underfoot the
merit of Christ. Whereby also the third part, that is to wit a great part
of the Moon, namely the church, is red to be smitten and darkened: moreover
the third part of stars, I mean preachers and ministers wounded, has not
taught with such light as became them. For stories witness that this heresy
has sore infected diverse parts of the world, that even Bisshoppes and
learned men have followed this noisome error. At Palestine in the East was
assembled a Sinode of Bisshoppes, which drove Pelagius to recant. They disputed
also at Rome sharply against the Pelagian doctrine: and Counsels were
assembled, which condemned the same. There were Sinodes assembled in Africa,
and after much reasoning sentence was pronounced against Pelagius. For many
were daily taken with this infection. For the doctrine is pleasant, which
waunteth not even at this day his mainteyners and defenders. For it seems
godly, and for the study of virtue nedeful, to affirm free will, and man's
merit: again it appears to be licentiouse to attribute al thing to Gods
grace.

He adds, Another day nor night shone with the third part thereof.
that another the day shone with the third part thereof, another yet the night
with his third part. For like as grace could not be fully perceived by the
doctrine of Pelagius, no more could sin. And S. Austen in the.2. book of
original sin.23.24. chapt. says, that the Christian faith consists
properly in the cause of two men. For by the one we were sold under sin, by
the other redeemed from sin: by the one throwe^ headlong into death, but by
the other delivered unto life, etc. And whilst al these things are spoken,
they are spoken to this end, that we might beware of those Heresies.

And hitherto have we spoken of the four trompes, and greatest conflictes in
the church: there remain three trompettes: which have now a little preface
set before them, whereby the minds of the hearers might be excited.

And S. John says, how he saw an Angel flying through the mids of
heaven, and heard him criyng: woe, woe, Woe to the inhabiters of ye earth.
woe to the inhabiters of the Earth, and that for those things which should
chance unto men than, when the other three trompettes should be blown.
Therefore unto every trompet is Joined an woe. Which we express very well in
dutche by owe, owe, owe. For the Greeks say, and S. John wrote in Greek,
(...). And it signifies verily, yt the times of the fourmer conflictes were
sharp: but yet that such as follow shall be a great deal sharper and
crueller. For I told you in an other place, that this vocable woe, compriseth
the euilles both of this life present, and also of the life to come, as well of
body as of soul. Therefore shall the times of Papistrie, Mahometrie, and of the
last judgment, be most daingerouse.

Some read an Egle for an Angel.
The complutensian copy has an Egle, where we read an Angel fliyng through
the mids of heaven: perauenture because he found it so in Aretas. Yea and
the common translation, commonly called S. Hieromes, has an Egle for an
Angel. And therefore Primasius reads it so likewise, which seems to have
followed the old translation in all things. But the Egle is swifte, and of
most sharp sight, signifiyng the almighty knowledge of God, and expedition
unspeakable in doing of things.

The fifte trompe.
The fifte trompet comprehends a most cruel battle, which the Pope stired
up, in admitting errors into the world, yea rather bringyng in, setting forth,
and defendyng them, by his vngratiouse Locustes that eat up all things. He
lasts to the worlds end. Of whom he will again discourse more plentifully
and more properly in the.13. and 14. chapter. etc.

A star falls from heaven into the Earth.
The Original of this evil is referred to the fall of a star. For a star has
fallen from Heaven to the earth. Stars, as I showed you in the beginning of
this book, about the end of the.1. chapt. represente unto us the state of
Ministers, or Bisshoppes. For as the stars shine in Heaven: so Bisshoppes
illumined with heavenly light, ought to shine in the church as well in doctrine
as honest life. And hitherto they stand in Heaven, so long as they do their
duty: they fall to the Earth, what time forgetting the heavenly conversation
and doctrine, they think upon earthly things, speak and follow honors,
pleasures, and such like corruptions. A little after will he call him an
Angel, whom now he calls a star. Of the church of Rome.
The Church of Rome was notable and pure, commended also ones by the praise of
the Apostle. The same had Bisshoppes, that is to say, ministers of the church,
unto the emperor Constantine, about.32. for the most part very well learned,
most holy (yet men) and most gloriouse martirs of Christ. Again from the
emperor Constantine unto Gregory the great are accounted Bisshoppes or
pastors of the church of Rome, about.32. emonges whom there were not a few
dilligent enough, learned, and godly: but yet emo^ges these were found also,
which blinded with the evil of Ambition, began more to incline to seek
honors, and gloriouse titles, than the doctrine of Christ concerning humility
and simplicity, and the example of Christ, and apostles has permitted. Christ
fled, when the people would have chosen and made him king. He said, that
kings should reign, that Apostles and their successors should serve. If
kings therefore had offered them realms and riches, they should not have
received them. What certain Bishops of Rome practiced with the churches of
Affricke, and how they would have ruled over them, the stories do plainly
declare. Notwithstanding there were found emonges the latter Bishops as
Pelagius and Gregory surnamed great, which greuousely accused the Bishops of
Constantinople, for that they went about to establish ye church of
Constantinople, as chief of al others in the world, and the Bishop thereof
universal. Another was Gregory asshamed to say expressly, that he is the
vauntcurrour of Antichrist, who so ever would covet the name or title of the
universal bishop. But Boniface the.3. of that name moved nothing herwith,
required and obtained of the emperor Phocas no long time after the death of
Gregory, yt the church of Rome might be called and taken for the chief and
head of al churches. Bishops of Rome a starte fallen from heaven
Whereby the Bishopes of Rome plucked out of heaven, and cast to the earth,
utterly began to cleave unto earthly things, to care for earthly things, yea
even to aspire to the empire and chief rule and government. Here have you,
what star fell from heaven to the Earth.

And to this star (he calls him afterward the Aungel of the botomlesse
pit) or Bishop (I name one, I understand all of that state and succession in
that seat) was given the keye of the botomlesse pit. A keye is given to ye
star, or Aungel.
Christ verily keeps the keye of David: as I showed in the.2. chapt. of this
book. The same gave to the Apostles the keys of the kingedome of heaven, power
to open or to shut heaven: that is to wit, the ministry of preaching the
Gospel, whereby is showed and assuredly promised the forgiveness of sins and
eternal life to beleuers: and the reteyning of sins, and certain damnation
is threatened to the unbelievers. No godly man doubts but that these keys
were given also unto Bisshoppes of Rome: again every man knows that the
latter popes would not use the^ lawfully, but corrupting the Evangelical
verity, and infecting the lawefull ministry, have gotten them counterfetted
keys. Therefore is given to them of the Prince of darkness the keye of the
botomles pit, to wit corrupt and counterfeit doctrine, and not the
Apostolical, but apostaticall ministry, whereby as it were from hell set open,
they have brought forth outrageouse errors and superstitions, and ungodliness
of all sorts. The popes keys.
And I suppose it has chanced not with out Gods providence, that Bisshoppes
of Rome are called Clauigers or keye bearers, and wear keys in their Arms.
But you shall not understand them to be the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
but of the botomlesse pit rather: sins he is a teacher of errors and of all
abomination: Author moreover of all wars and dissentions, leadyng them even
unto Hell.

God is a lively fou^tayne.
God is in deed the fountain of perpetual goodness, and of all verity: which
opened in Christ by the Apostles in the preaching of the Gospel, refressheth
with wholesome water all that thirste for eternal salvation. Of this fountain
Esaye makes mention in the.55. chapt. And Jeremy in the.2. chap. The Lord
also in the Gospel after John in the.4. and.7. chapt. and in diverse other
places.

The boto^lesse pit.
Against this lively fountain of euerrunnyng waters, is set the botomlesse
pit, unsearchable I say by reason of the malice of Satan, full of
ungodliness, abomination, and a^^ kind of liyng. From hence blubbereth up into
the world by false teachers and ministers of Antichrist what error and
abomination so ever is in the world. For Satan the father of lies, spreads
abroad in the world by his instruments what darkness so ever there is.

The boto^les pit is opened.
Therefore the star or Aungel of the botomles pit, that is the Pope or Bishop
of Rome opens the bottomless pit with a keye, and by and by ascends up the
smoke of the pit. For I have spoken hitherto of the beginning of evil: now
shall follow of the proceeding and setting forth of the same.

The Pope by his corrupt ministry opens Hell, Smoke out of the botomlesse
pit.
and not Heaven. Out of hell ascends or rises a smoke. Smoke in some places
of the Scripture, is a token of the presence and wrath and vengeance of God:
as where in the time of Esaye a smoke rose in the Temple of Solomon, 3. book of
Kings. 8. chapt. Esaye. 6. In the.19. of Exodus We read, smoke ascended from
the mountain, as out of a furnace. You read in the.18. psalm. Smoke went up
in the wrath of God, fire burnte from before his face. At this present, smoke
seems to signify hurteful and deuillish opinions. Smoke hurts the eyes, and
suffers not clearly to see the truth. So does also perverse doctrine, it
daseleth the eyes, takes away judgment, and blinds with error. And
worthily do they suffer these things of the smoke of God his wrath, and of the
lies of disceaueable men, which have forsaken the light of the Gospel, and
the grace and perspicuitie of Gods verity. Under the name of this smoke
infernal, are contained the opinions, and abominable doctrine, that the Bishop
of Rome, as he is the prelate of the chief church and Sea Apostolic, so to
be pastor universal and Apostolical: and morouer the head of the church
militaunt, the vicar of Christ in earth: whose voice must be heard as well, as
Christ's him self: that he has full power in the church, the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, etc. And the rest of the like sort. That the same
ordeyneth and gives to al churches Bisshops or Pastors, which should govern
al other churches after the prescripte of the church of Rome. etc.

But how great this smoke is, and how effectual, How great smoke and of what
effect.
it is lively expressed: it ascends, says he, as the smoke of a great
fournace. And signifies that the popish opinions, and doctrine are thick, or
gross, manifold, and apparent: where in deed they be nothing but smoke and
vanity puffed up and vain. But it is of such a power, that it darkeneth the
sun and the air. I have told you often times now that Christ is the sun
of rightuousenes. And we call the air the wholesome doctrine, wherewith the
souls of the faithful are refresshed. Therefore by the popish doctrine the
sun and the air, that is Christ and the Gospel are obscured. Christ is the
pastor universal, the high and only Bishop, the head and health of the
faithful, which freely forgeueth sins: the which is preached by the
Gospel. This doctrine waxes vile, what time the Pope is admitted for head of
the church, with the full power of granting indulgences for all sins. Thus
is the sun darkened.

Howebeit the evil proceeds further, and sets up it self in the church a
great deal more effectual. Of the smoke arrise locustes.
For out of the smoke came forth Locustes upon the Earth. For what time through
the false perswation of corrupt doctrine, the eyes of al men were blinded and
looked not rightly upon Christ, and his only gospel, and all men reverenced the
Pope, as the vicar of Christ, the head of the church, and a man Apostolical,
and as it were the mouth of God, and he now made Bisshoppes and priests, and
nurrished, auaunced and establisshed Monks and Freres: an infinite multitude
of the clergy increased most luckely, I mean by a most plentiful increase,
and number that could not be numbered. For he him self immediately in the
words that follow, and with a fuller exposition declares, that he speaks
nothing of those little worms the Locustes. For he says, and it was
commanded them, that they should not hurt the grass or hay of the earth
(and verily the clergy lives not with hay) another any grene thing, nor any
tree, but men only. As though he should say, I speak nothing of
grassehoppers such as in times past distroyed Aegipte: but I speak of
pestilent men, affliccyng men with the poison of doctrine. But a little after
they are so described in every poincte, that no man need to doubt that the
false clergy thereby is signified. What are Locustes.
The which thing Primasius also saw, which in his commentaries upon this book
said: he puts thauthours of evil doctrine. For like as the Locuste hurts
with her mouth, so do they tear with their preachinges: as we read, gready
Wolves not sparyng the flock, etc. Thus says he. There be also other causes
wherefore he likened the false clergy to Locustes. If the locuste be alone, he
seems to be most contemptible: so there is nothing more vile than a solitary
Monk or Friar, priest or sophister: but if they swarm together, they be a
terror to men, neither can they be driven away with any force, they eat and
distroye all. When the prophet Joel would show a great evil to come, he says
that the Locustes will come. In somer they singe, leap, live at ease and
pleasure, to the loss and hinderaunce of husbandmen. The same things may
thou see also in the clergy. An excuse and exception.
I speak nothing here of holy priests, that is lawful ministers of the
church, of good men, honest and learned: I speak nothing of the ancient and
holy Monks, which were burthenouse or greuouse to no man, and were no
preachers, but very lay men, getting their living with their hands, in the
church subject with other faithful to the pastors of the church, etc. I
speak of the unlawful, sluggerds, Idle bealies, deuourers of vitaile, but
chiefly of false teachers.

And doubtless the Popes clergy is most rightly compared to grassehoppers or
catarpillers. The clergy is innumerable.
For both they are innumerable, and they occupy and consume al things. In
times past the ministers of the churches might be numbered. For the nombre was
but small: another were unprofitable or unnecessary persons nurrished of the
church goods. There remains a constitution of the emperor Justinian, where
emongs other things: we ordeyne that there be not at any time in the sacred
great church above.lx. Priests, men Deacons an.C. Subdeacons.lxxxx. and
readers an hondreth and ten, nor above.xxv. singers: that the whole nu^bre of
the clergy of the greater church may consiste in.ccccxxv. persons, and
besides an.C. door kepers, as they term them. Therefore in the most holy
great church of this our noble City of Constantinople, and in those three
churches to the same united (to wit in the church of our Lady, S. Theodore,
and S. Irenes, let there be so great a multitude of ye clergy. This some of
the ministers of this imperial city and most large church establisshed five
hondreth and twenty and five persons. But how many at this day may you find
at Rome, or in an other great City Priests, Monks, Freres and Nuns? They
excede this number four times and more. And to leave out many things that
might here be brought in, Pope Pius Sabellicus shows in the.9. book of
Aeneidos. the.7. Chapter. That the sect of graye freres was so greatly
multiplied through out the world, that than they held and possessed.xl.
provinces, and under every one diverse Cloisters and conuentes (wardens they
call the rulers) and exceded the number of three score thousand men: in so
much that the master of the whole order, whom they call general, has been
heard many times, to offer the pope preparing an Army against the Turks
thirty thousand fighting men of the order of S. Fraunces, which should be well
able to serve in the wars, and yet be no hinderaunce or let to their religion
or service. And now who is it that knows not how many orders there be of
Monks and Freres: you may therefore account other orders after the rate of
the order of S. Frau^ces, and though you attribute to every one but the one
half of that number, to what a some will it amounte? To these if you add the
colleges more and less, through out so many diocese, persons, vicars,
chaplaynes and parish priests, thou will grant that not without cause the
popish clergy is compared to locustes.

Locustes distroye al grene things.
But how they light upon and devour all thing, I need not with many words to
declare. It is como^ly said, when so ever thou seeste any place, fertile and
wholesome, where ever thou ridest or go, thou shall find it full of the
clergy, and possessed with religiouse men.

He reasons also expressly of the power of these Locustes. Of the power of
ye locustes.
He sets them forth by a parable: and power was give them, says he, as the
Scorpions of the earth have. A Scorpion is a flattering and in manner a
domestical worm, which suddenly strikes with his tail, or rather with the
stinge of his tail, and so poisoneth. Therefore with flattering words the
clergy of Antichrist disceyueth and powers in the poison of venemouse
doctrine. So speaks the Apostle also of false teachers in the.16. chapt. to
the Romans. Through fair speech, says he, and flatteryng, they disceiue
the hearts of the simple. Their power therefore is none other, but evil
doctrine, wherewith as it were with the venom of Scorpions they infecte the
simple Christians, but especially those tha^ contemn the doctrine of the
Gospel.

Whom ye Locustes can hurt.
For there follows a declaration, whom these Locustes may hurt. There be
two kinds of men. The one in deed willing and witting will perish, and are
the open and professed enemies of the holy Gospel: whom by the just judgment
of God these Scorpiolocustes distroie with their poison. The other being more
simple, do err rather of ignorance, than of obstinate malice: these sins
they have a seal in their foreheades (whereof is spoken in the.7. chapt. are
not stongen of the Scorpiolocustes. For the power of this evil is limited, and
not out of measure. Therefore was it given to the locustes, that they should not
kill (not those wicked which had rather dye than live) those simple. They hurt
verily, but not as the unfaithful to death. And they vex them five months.
And that tourment is the trouble of the conscience, which they tourment with
threatenings, hypocrisy, and wonderful terrors.

There is added for a comfort, five months. Five months.
The locustes verily come out in the month of April, and live until
September, and when they have lived wholly five months, incontinently they
die. It signifies therefore that such as are consecrate to godliness shall feel
these tourments a little while: another that the disceyuers shall always
prevail: but that there shall be spaces to rest and breath in, wherein the
godly through the truth may be recovered. For the locustes distroye not, and
are seen all the year long. There seems therefore a comparison to be here in
this determinate nu^bre, that the sense should be: like as the locustes live
not longer, than from April to Septembre: so doubtless there is a time prefixed
to those seducers, and false Popish clergy. Even thus has also the Apostle
S. Paul him self comforted the church: which after he had prophesied that the
church should be wonderfully vexed of hipocrites and false teachers,
incontinently he adds: and like as Iamnes and Iambres resisted Moses, 2. Tim.
3.
right so do these resist the truth, men of a mind corrupt, and lewd as
concerning the faith: but they shall prevail no longer. For their madness shall
be manifest to al men, like as that was of the other. And Primasius: they are
meant here, says he, which although they were entangled with false doctrines,
yet having remorse about the end of their life, they receive Gods verity.
Again we see, as I warned you in the.7. chapt. that al did not perish, which
were ones inta^gled with the snares of Antichrist. For at the length through
the mercy of God they escaped, and required the grace of God to be given them
through Christ, forsaking al superstitions, we see moreover, by reading of
histories, how god has at certain times opened the verity by his faithful
ministers, through whose preaching the lewdenes of the Locustes is interrupted,
that men began to smell them out, and to eschew the same: not withstanding
the regenerated, many times have returned, etc. And likewise other ministers
have returned home, etc.

How great is the force of the poison.
And furthermore he declares, how great was or is the force of this evil.
Their tourme^ting, says he, is as the tourment of a Scorpion, when he has
stricken a man. At the first there is no great pain felt, by little and
little it gathers strength, and at the last aketh exceadyngly. If remedy be
had in time, the poison is not deadly: if it be not taken, he dies that is
stongen therewith. To the declaration of this tourme^t, which men feel in their
consciences, apperteyneth this that follows, and in those days men shall seek
death, etc. And it is a like phrase of speech in a manner, as is that same,
mountains fall upon us, and cover us, etc. Whereof I spoke in the. 6. chapt. And
it is the voice of one that is sore afflicted, and brought in a manner to
despair. Doubtless the popish doctrine of merits, of the monastical
perfection, and of other such like doctrines, have driven many headlong into
desperatio^. Hereunto is added, that the times of the locustes were most full
of sorrows: whereof al histories compain. The life was not pleasant, the
Locustes did so set men together by the ears emongs themselves, etc. And to
be brief, they brought men in such case, that they wisshed to die. The Lord
Jesus deliver us from the poison of these Locustes.

The Locustes are described by a maruelouse Hypotiposis, the Popish clergy:
and is showed, of what sort the Antichristian war shall be. The.xl. Sermon.
ANd the similitude of Locustes was like unto Horses prepared to battle, and on
their heads were as it were crowns, like unto gold: and their faces were as
it had been the faces of me^. And they had here, as the here of women. And
their teth were as the teth of Lio^s. And they had habergions, as it were
habergio^s of yro^. And the sound of their wings was as the sound of
chariotes when many horses ru^ne together in battle. And they had tails like
unto Scorpions, and there were stinges in their tails. And their power was to
hurt me^ five months. And they had a king over them, which is the Aungel of
the botomlesse pit, whose name in the Hebrewe tongue is Abadon, but in the
Greek Apollion.

We have spoken already of thoriginal and power of the locustes: To understand
and beware of ye locustes.
nevertheless leest any man should be impeched with any obscurity, so yt he
could not know the locustes: and beware (for this is the end of ye whole
prophecy to understand ye mysteries of Antichrist, and beware) now also he
describes the locustes with a wonderful suffiguration, and their fight against
Christ, and against the doctrine of godliness of al other most perillouse.

And there is no doubt but that the whole Army of the Pope is here described,
The spiritual hooste of ye Pope is described.
especially the spirituality as they term it. For the soldiers of the
Emperor, kings, and all princes serve him, whom they call seculare. But in
the popes tents of the spiritual Army be Cardinals, Patriarchs,
Archebishoppes, Bisshoppes, Abbottes, Prelates, another is there any no^bre of
Priests, and religiouse persons of both sexes. Hereunto appertain many
universities, Doctors, and Masters, great Champions of the Pope: these be
verily those Locustes, of whom the Lord Jesus speaks of here. I know how
displeasantly many will take this my exposition. And I would gladly (God is my
witness) have spared them: but all the blame is in them, which in words and
works bewraye, and declare themselves to be locustes. For except ye thing it
self cry out, that those things are done of them, which by the exposition are
now brought to light: I will not desire that credit should be given to me. I
speak nothing here in the favor of any manne, another for hatred. Let God him
self be judge betwixt us, let the verity it self judge. Certainly al
expositours with one consent understand by locustes false teachers.

But let us see the description of the Apostle S. John by the revelation of
Jesus Christ, which does injury to noma^, which slaundereth no man. Al
things are made plain by parables.
And he shows the Homoiomata, that is to say, the similitudes of locustes,
by the which they may be figured, and as it were set before our eyes, to be
like the things which he brings forth. For unto every part he applies a
parable or similitude, whereby he expresses most aptly the disposition and
manners of the locustes.

Horses prepared to battle.
First he says that locustes are like unto horses prepared to battle. By the
which parable he signifies many things at ones: that the clergy should not
only be ambitiouse and proud (for an horse is an Image of pride) but moreover
rebelliouse and bold, and eue^ cruelly, fierce, and in their incredulity, and
in all their errors most obstinate. Being utterly ignorant of reuersion, that
is of repentance. For S. John seems here to have alluded unto these words of
Jeremy: how chances it that this people is not turned away from so
froward an auersion: They cleave stiffely to disceipt, they refuse to
return. I marked and heard, and they spoke not right: there was none that
was sorry for his evil, and that would say, what have I done? every one of them
did run his course, as it were an horse dislodged into battle, certes with
this kind of men there is none amendment. They think rather all, how they
may allure others into errors with them. He signifies morouer that the
clergy shall be warlike, and the Authors of wars, and shall move wars
against the Saints and true worshippers of God. For they have the secular
power, as they call it, ready. Of long time now there have been in manner no
wars, which have not ben raised by this kind of men. Stories bear witness
hereof. Yea and in this our time cardinals and Bisshoppes have had the leadyng
of Armies, etc. Finally there is signified herby that the clergy shall
continually vex and weary with spiritual war also, the true church of
Christ. Wherefore in the.11. chapter. we shall hear how the beast comes out
of the botomles pit, and makes war with the excellent prophets of God.
They mix therefore and practice as well spiritual as corporal wars. Last of
all is signified, that the popes clergy shall be well fed, fair and wellikyng,
and given to voluptuousenes, lusts and pleasures of the body. For this kind
of people represente not horses that be gaunte or lean, such as go to plowe
and carte: but such as are well kept and fed eue^ to serve upon in the wars.
For behold with me and consider, of what sort the clergy is (for the most
part) and you will say, that they are here set forth in their colors.

Secondly upon their heads, says he, as it were crowns, Crowns.
like unto gold. Rabanus Maurus in the.3. chapt. of the first book of the
institution of Clerks calls the shauinge of the priests crown, a
kingedome, a token verily of the dignity of a king and priest. For Priests
and Monks or Freres boaste themselves to be kings and priests, and yet in
deed are neither of both. For the true faithful before God are kings and
priests.1. Peter.2. But by the ordeyning or shauing of the Pope, they receive
nothing either of kingdom or priesthood. Full well therefore S. John, upon their
heads, says he, as it were crowns like unto gold: for he says not, they
were crowns, but like as they were crowns of gold. They were not crowns in
deed, neither were they dew unto them. And yet notwithstanding in the end of
the world now they have taken upon them diademes, or miters, and crowns of
gold also, and the same most preciouse. Yet have they done this by no right.
In times past Bisshoppes of Rome did were white miters, in token of puretie and
sincerenes, finally of the knowledge of both Testamentes: but none of the
Apostles nor Apostolic men ware them. Therefore they bewraye themselves like a
Ratte with their own vtteraunce, the which I suppose to be done by Gods
providence, that they might be known, and eschewed of Christ's sheep as
crowned wolves.

Their faces were as the faces of men, Faces of men.
not as the faces of Locustes. So likewise in Daniel to Antichrist are
attributed ye eyes of a man. To wit industry and policy. These me^ pretend a
great humanity, they be furnished with fair speech, you would think if
humanity were lofte, it mighty befounde in them: but they feign these
things, to the intent that in creping thus into men's bosoms, they may bring
their matters to pass, and disceiue. In crafts, disceipte, wilines and
practice, as they term it, the Popes Legates, Ambassadors, Priests, and
Religiouse persons, excel all other wisemen of the world. They prease into
al assemblees of all men, they will be made privy to all things, they take
all things for the bringyng of their matters to pass, they semble and
dissemble all things, they can easily supplant and begyle, even such as be
most witty. Moreover they are learned, witty, eloquent, and wonderful
crafty in all things. The thing it self speaks and testifies, that I
write the truth.

Wemens locks or here.
And they had here, like the here of women: by the which similitude he notes
their wantonness, Idleness, whorisshe apparel, and effeminate minds. For they
be commed and piked, and very finely apparelled, delightyng in wemens Jewels,
wearing costely garments, especially in the church, where they ought most of
all to show humility and frugalitie. Which of the Apostles went ever so
decked (or rather disguised) in the Temple or without the temple? The excess
and costelines of apparel of Priests and Monks gives no place to the
costely arraye of the Persian Kings. Again the thing it self speaks. S.
Austen in an homely upon the seventh of the Apocalipse, in the here, says
he, he would understand and show, not only an effeminate or womanly sex, but
also either or both sexes. This says he. Which I leave to be construed and
scanned of others.

The teeth of Lions.
In attributing to them also the tethe of Lions, he signifies their cruelty
against the poor and faithful professors of Christ. They are most cruel in
persecutions, and of blood most thirsty, neither are they moved herin with
any compassion. They destroy also with the sword all things: many devise
sundry tourmentes. They excelle in tyranny Busirides and Phalarides: the thing
it self speaks again. For if Kings, Princes or Magistrates, would spare
the sely wretches, the priests and Freres cry out that it is not lawful:
finally they incense the minds of all Princes and Magistrates against
Gospellers, in prescribyng fourmes of inquisitions and oppressions. Hereto is
added some of them are storers, hourdyng up with insatiable couetousenes, and
religiouse robberies, Kings treasures. Again some other wasters succeed,
which set abroad evil gotten good, and waste it prodigally in riotte,
disyng, whoryng, in practice or wars. Therefore are the teeth of Lions
attributed to them rightely: In like case as Amos is red to have attributed to
the false Prophets. They had also Habergions Habergio^s
(Thoracas) which is a defense for the breast, called a breast plate, or a
vauntgarde. Others expound it, cureties, but they cover all the body,
Habergions do properly cover the breast. And hereby is signified, that their
heart should be obstinate and inflexible. They are stiff necked and strait
lased, another depart one here breadth from their errors, but even forge that
the same Sea can not err: yea and that the Pope can not err. For another can
they abide to be taught and admonisshed, but plainly the Church of Rome, say
they has never erred: therefore there remains none other thing, but that
thou must subscribe to it, or else be condemned for an heretic, and suffer
death. It is signified moreover that these shall be through an other man's
protection most safe. For they have their immunities, they have their
pryuileges, they have the secular power always ready to fight at their
request, they have their fraternities, felloweshippes, leages and affinities.
What should we say that Bisshoppes and Abbottes be the sons, brethren and
Cosins of Princes? who so ever therefore touches them, he has touched the
apple of the Princes eye. For even for the maynteinyng of them and their state,
all men fight as it were for life and lands.

To the Locustes moreover are ascribed wings. Wings Locustes.
For they are exalted above the common state of men, whilst they are taken
and accounted for the most fortunate and most excellent in the world, etc.
Yea and impudently they brag, that herein they are worthier and greater than
the Virgin Mary, for that she bare ones in her womb the Son of God, but they
can call him daily unto the Altar? etc. And whilst they fly, they make such
an noise, as horses do, drawyng warlicke chariottes, Warlicke charettes.
and now ready to invade the ranks of enemies: that is to say, al their
doings are most vehement, most warlicke, to men horrible, and deadly. Herunto
apperteyne the clamorouse disputations of Sorbone and other schools,
excommunications, sentences given at Rome, the popes bulls and wrytinges, the
boastinges of decrees, and they be in obstinacy invincible. All these things
make a noise together, and thonder terribly.

Hereunto is added, that by their decrees and counselles they break a sunder,
or invade. Whereupon Daniel attributes also to Antichristians, prosperity: he
shall do, says he, and shall prosper. And they invade in such sort, as we
have said also before, men will desire to die, supposing that there is no
deliverance.

The stinging tails of Scorpions.
Of the tails of Scorpions, and of five months I have spoken before in the
fourmer Sermon. Their venemouse doctrine is noted, which nevertheless at
certain times shall be reproved, that godly men may beware thereof. And whoseeth
not, yea who feleth not also, how greuouse or hard is this fight or battle,
that is made of such Locustes? Therefore has the lords mouth joined rightly an
woe with ye locustes. Men wisheful rightly to dye, to the end they might be
delivered from so great dangers. Let us way and consider these things at
this day, and let us pray that we may overcome and escape the most
pestilent poison of Antichrist.

A king of Locustes.
For now also is brought forth the king of these locustes, and is pointed as
it were with the fingar of Christ. He sets him out by three titles, that he
may the better be known. The locustes, says he, have over them a king.
This king is not lawefully given them, but they themselves have that king over
them. For who knows not, that by the policy of the spiritual fathers, the
Pope exempted from the jurisdiction of princes, should rule over all the
spirituality? For they acknowledge none other Magistrate, than the pope of
Rome: and rail upon secular princes (for so they call them) and will not obey
them. Al they bind and swear themselves to the sea of Rome, which to have
save and sou^de, they care not, though al other me^ perish. The form of
swearing is known, which is made of Bisshops, Abbottes and doctors to the
Pope. And if kings and princes do but touch with their little fingar one that
is annoincted with the Bisshoppes oil, although he be a church robber, a
murderer, a thief, and paracide, they are holden accursed and they and their
realms excomunicated. Thus I say the locustes have the pope king over them.

The same is called also the Aungel of the botomles pit? The angel of ye
boto^les pit.
and streightwaies in the.11. chapt. he shall be called the beeste which
ascends out of the botomles pit. Christ descended to us from heaven, the
Angel of the Testament and great counsel. Whom who so ever disdaigne to
hear, they hear worthily the angel of the botomles pit, that is to wit
Antichrist sent of Satan him self from hell. For he is the adversary and
enemy of Christ, in whom corporally dwells the Devil: As also thought S.
Hierome, that the Devil should wholly inhabit that great Antichrist.

Therefore also a true name, Abbadon and Apollyon.
and a true title most agreeable is given him. For they lie, which salute, and
call him, most blessed father, most holy Pope, etc. Christ sets forth with
an other style, and gives him other titles. His name, says he, was Abbadon
in Hebrewe, and in Greek Apollyon. He publissheth his name in either tongue,
for none other cause, than for that in either Testament, whereof the one is
written in Hebrew, the other in greek, this title is attributed to him. Abbadon
or Abbaddon, or Apollyon signifies a waster or destroyer. But Daniel in
the.7.8. and.11. The child of perdition
chapt. And Zachar. in the.11. do attribute to Antichrist this virtue and
property. S. Paul calls him the son of perdition, to wit most lost, most
damnable, and the greatest Author of perdition and damnation: which finally
shall be unto many Author of slaughter, by sundry wars. For through false
doctrine he distroyeth souls, and with tyranny by fire and sword he wastes
the land, and those that refuse to obey him, most cruelly. Let the Popes
acts be considered, and the practices of spiritual fathers: let them be
applied to these oracles of God, and than let a comparison and judgment be
made. And this is as it were the keye, openyng to us the sense of this place,
and that it should be expounded of Antichrist, whom S. Paull called the son
of perdition. Habad in Hebrewe signifies, is lost or distroied. And thereof
comes Habbaedon, perdition or destruction. So in Greek Apoleo and Apollyme
signifies to lose and distroy, hereof is Apollyon. The Lord Jesus slaye this
destroyer with the breath of his mouth, and take him away utterly by his
gloriouse coming.

The sixte trompet is expounded, where is created of Saracenes and turkishe
matters. The.xli. Sermon.
ONe woe is paste, and behold two woes come yet after this. And the sixte
Aungel blewe, and I heard a voice from the four corners of the golden Altar,
which is before the eyes of God, saying to the sixth angel, which had the
trompet: lowse the four Angels, which are bound in the great river Euphrates.
And the four Angels were lowsed, which were prepared for an hour, for a day,
for a month, and for a year, for to slaye the the third part of men. And
the nombre of Horsemen of war, were twenty times ten thousand. And I heard
the nombre of the^. And thus I saw the horses in a vision, and them that sat
on them having fiery habbergions of a yalowe and brimstony color, and the
heads of the horses were as the heads of Lions. And out of their mouths
went forth fire, smoke, and brimstone. And of these three was the third part
of me^ killed: that is to say, of fire, smoke, and brimstone, which proceeded
out of the mouths of them. For their power was in their mouths, and in their
tails for their tails were like unto serpents, having heads, and with them
did they hurt.

The sixte co^flicte or fight is of Mahometrie by the Saracenes, Turks and
Tartaria^s, most cruelly foughten and with much woe. And would God it were
foughten. For we perceive daily by the things themselves the mystery of the
prophecy, and see the fulfilling, and even experience it also.

At the sound of the trompe of the sixte Angel S. John hears a voice from
the four corners of the golden Altar, The some of the vision.
that is to say from the mids of the Altar: neither is there any cause, why
we should seek a mystery in the fourth no^bre. And he speaks of that Altar,
which is before the eyes of God. That voice commands, the Angel
trompetter to lowse the four Angels bounden in the great river of Euphrates.
Which thing as soon as it was done, an innumerable army of horsemen marched
forward, and sleyeth and distroyeth the third part of the earth, that is the
third part of men. And those horsemen, and the force or power thereof is most
diligently described.

We learned of late, that the golden Altar The golden Altar.
does signify Christ, sitting on the right hand of the father. He is purer
and more preciouse than gold: he is priest and sacrifice of all the faithful,
standing before the eyes of God, to wit pleasyng God, wherein or in whom his
soul is pleased with all faithful, whose virtue suffiseth all. And such a one
God the father would have him to be preached and believed of all the faithful
in the world. Such a one also the ancient church instituted of the Apostles
believed and taught him: until by the work and instigation of the Devil,
men most corrupt sprange up in the church, whereof these deny the deity of
Christ, those the humanity, others plucked a sonder the person consisting of
God and manne, and others confounded the natures, or proprieties of natures.
The goodness of God suffered this long patiently, many times sendynge faithful
and open defenders of the verity, which might root out those blasphemouse
errors: the which we have red to be done by several Bisshoppes or Preachers
of the church, or by ecclesiastical assemblees, which we call counsels: such as
were the counsels Nicene, Constantinopolitane, Ephesine, and Chalcedonian: In
the which were condemned Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches, and other
monstres of heretics which impugned Christ. Howebeit the incurable peruersenes
of men gettyng the upper hand, there was none end of alteration and
blasphemies. For two great Bishops of no small churches, Peter and Seuerus deny
thaultar Christ to be dead.
Peter patriarche of Antioche, and Seuerus of Constantinople springyng up, in
the reign of the emperor Justinian, impudently and most wickedly affirmed
(as the acts of the.5. counsel of Constantinople do plentifully enough
declare) that the body of Christ was utterly in corruptible, and verily
deified, neither subject to any affections, as ours are. For that the word
was so made flesh, that by and by it began to be one nature, to wit divine,
that Christ was made (...), yt is incorruptible. These things should seem to
proceed out of the most wicked schole of Valentinian, Marcion, and Manicheus.
James Syrus, James Sirus.
surnamed Za^zalus, of whom at this day the Iacobites are named in the east
country, took upon him to defend the doctrine of Seuerus. He taught that
Christ, for that he was incorruptible, neither to have suffered, nor ben
crucified: but that some other was put to torments for Christ, Christ only
standing by inuisibly and loking on. This opinion was mad, by many
testimonies of the Scripture, and finally repulsed and overthrown with the
articles of our faith.

Christ suffered verily.
For we profess in our belefe, suffered under Ponce pilate, was crucified, dead
and buried. The prophets told expressly before that he should suffer and
die, that he has suffered and died the Apostles have witnessed, of whom S.
John beheld the death and passion of Christ on the cross. Another read we
that the Lord was ever so much offended with his disciples, as he was with
Peter going about to diswade the passion as unworthy the son of God. For he
said, go behind Satan: thou fauourest not those things which are of God,
but which are of me^. Therefore should they not have renewed the error and
madness confuted. He seems to reason probably, that God might have redeemed the
world by an other mean, than by the incarnation or passion of the son of
God: to be an unworthy thing, that we should believe the son of God to have been beaten with the hands of the wicked, and moreover slain. But this
probablenes is of unclean flesh, not of God, yea it is of Satan him self.
Yet has this absurd and most wicked opinion found not a few followers. For
the heresy of the Iacobites contained in the Alcorane, is spread abroad far
and nere over all the East country. Whereof it is plain, that the golden
Altar was of them most filthily polluted: and the merit of Christ's passion
denied, the dignity and majesty of the priesthood and sacrifice of Christ
trode^ under foot. There were besides these other most corrupt opinions in the
Weste, etc. Which thing worthily kindled the just wrath of God. For of his
just judgment he permitted Mahomet to make new laws, and to spread abroad
the Iacobisme far and nere through out the world. For they that will not hear
christ worthily hear Antichrist: which thing the Apostle has also in the.1.
chapt. to the Romans, and.2. Thessa. 2. chapt. affirmed. Therefore is heard
from the Altar a voice of him that sat on the right hand, and commanded to
lowse the four Angels bounden in the river of Euphrates, that is to wit to
bring forth into the world distroyers, which may over run a great part of the
world.

For the heresies of the Nestorians, Iacobites, The original of Mahomet and his
religion.
Monotelitanes being of force, Monks and freres now increasyng, and of
Benedicte Abbot of Cassinea. Greatly augmented, moreover idolles or Images
coming up in the church, and taking strength, and the pride and unfaithfulness
of the Bisshoppes approchyng, Mahomet the destroyer of ye world was borne in
Moecha a city of Arabie, of pare^tes very obscure: the same was brought up of
Sergius a vile Monk polluted with all kind of heresies. Ye read a like
thing in.3. book of kings. 11. chapt. of Solomon and his enemies.
Which after he was common to the age of xxv. years, belied him self to be the
prophet of God. And through sedition being driven out of Moecha, where a great
rabble of Jews, Iacobites, Christians, Paganes, and heretics were gathered,
he went into the next cities, and houses, and secretly by the space of ten
years, he so instilled his doctrine into miserable me^, that every where
through out Arabie there was found a great multitude of Mahometes sect. Than
Homar Homar.
a bold fellow, taking to him about.lxx. other men ready to fight, asked
Mahomet what he would have done. He answered: verily my will is, that
executyng the commandments of the law, ye cleave unto it in riches and
poverty, and cleave to gether with mutual and steadfast love: that ye defile
not other men's wives by adultery: that ye absteyne from evil, and prohibit
others: that ye do good your selves, and persuade others: that ye make war in
the name of God, and that by fear and force ye set forth the laws to the
disobedient: for the which things verily I promise you Paradise. At this
talk they gave each other their faith.: Homar with his sword drawn swore,
that he would not suffer that the preaching and law of Mahomet should be kept
any longer secret: thus verily what by preaching and what by the sword
Mahometisme prevailed very much in short space. They brake into Moecha, they
put down other religions, and beheaded such as resisted, and there this new
Solon Mahomet proclaimed a new law in the Temple at Moecha. A great multitude
of servants and unthrifts resorted to that wicked fellow. Who sent
Ambassadors to the people about him, and solicited them to receive his
religion, and persuaded many that wickedness. These things were done under
the emperor Heraclius about the year of our lord.620. The beginning of the
destruction of ye whole world spiritual and corporally
And that wicked and most absurd law of Mahomet yet remains, and is called
the Alcorane, so that it needs no further declaration. Full well therefore
Nicephorus in his history, (...) than, (...), says he, the Saracenes began
the desolation of the whole world. Saracenes were called the followers of
Mahomet. Certes they subdewed Arabie, the Saracenes and Persians, they invaded
also Siria and Aegipte, Chaldey, and Armenia. After arrose the Turks and
Tartarians, receiving the religion of Mahomet, who have subdewed in a manner all
the provinces of the Roman empire in the east and to the South.

By the river of Euphrates Euphrates.
most famous in all Asia flode Babylon, the seat of the Monarchy oriental:
and the most mighty people of the East, the Assirians, Babylonians, Medes and
Persians, which were lords of the world before the Monarchy of Greece and of
Rome, seemed to be as it were drouned, buried and hid, and even bounden in the
same river. For the Macedonians of the west, were governors of the world, and
after them the Romans: and these most mighty nations, which we now named
served them. But after the golden Altar, was as I said, defiled, and
innumerable people in the East and Weste revolted from the true christian
faith, God styred up again the oriental distroyers of the world, which has been long as it were laid a sleep. For the prophets testify, that those
nations were the scourges of the world: the same whippes therefore god again
brought forth by his just judgment. Certes we read in the.10. chap. of
Daniel, that there was an Aungel of Greece, The.4. angels do signify the most
strong nations of the East.
and an Angel of Persia, and that by them the whole people are understand. So
now are raised up the nations of the East, Arabians, Saracenes, Turks and
Tartarians, who for sin might waste the world, and the East might rule
again: as Lactantius out of Sibille prophesied should come to pass, let the
Weste serve.

Let us learn of this treatise, that all euilles, The beginning of
calamities of forsakyng.
and chiefly the desolation and destruction of Realms, do rise of the
reuolting from the true religion to the false. The folishe people at this day
Judge clean contrary, and for the same cause are miserably distroyed. Let us
learn that fierce nations are restreyned and kept back of God, that they
should not hurt: that the same be stired up of him to take just punishment
of the impenitentes. Thus was Sinnacherib, Salmanasar and Nabuchodonozor,
called the servants of God, which executed his judgments. Therefore let us
fear God, and persevere in the true religion.

Morouer the Saracenes, Prepared day and hour.
Turks and Tartarians are most dilligently described. First is commended in
them a wonderful expedition and celeritie, the principal virtue in wars.
They are ever, says he, ready at every momente to execute the judgments of
God. Therefore he reherseth al parts of time, eue^ every hour of the day. And
so there is no security from them: thou can be never in surety. They are by
and by in armure, and come unlooked for, they invade, and speed their matters
most luckely. He adds that through their most cruel and spedy armures the
third part of men in the world should be slain. Verily Asia, Affricke, and
Europe have felt of the most cruel slaughters and distructions of the
Saracenes, Turks, and Tartaria^s, ever sins the time of Mahomet unto our
days, about the space of.ix. hondreth and.xx. years. And also the priests of
Mahomet are very quick and diligent, to allure men into their errors, neither
waunte they lucky success.

The nombre Nombre.
is also noted in a manner infinite, and the no^bre says he, of the army of
horsemen is twenty times ten thousand, (...). And Mirias is the nombre of ten
thousand: so that two myriades of myriades should make twenty times a
thousand Myriades. And so the old translatour has red or translated it: and
Erasmus, twenty times ten thousand. The dutche translation has, many
thousand thousands. Laurence Valla in his annotatio^s vpan the new Testament
does interpret, as has the dutche translation, thousand thousands. But
how so ever it be, certain it is by the conference of other places, that a
certain nombre is put for uncertain, that is to say for exceadynge great: and
to be signified, that the horsemen of the Saracenes, Turks, and Tartarians
should be innumerable. For we read in the.7. of Daniel, thousand thousands
served him, and ten thousand millions stood before him. And he speaks of
Aungelles (whom he signifies to be innumerable) and of their ministry. So
also in the fifte of the Apocalipse, I heard, says he, the voice of many
Aungelles, and thousand thousands sayng with a loud voice, etc. Certe^ly the
stories testify that the Saracenes came out of Spain into France in nombre
four hondreth thousand. Paulus Aemilius in the.2. book of thactes of
Frenchmen, recites that Charles Martell overcame three hondreth three score
and.xv. thousand Saracenes. And Matthias a Michon in the.1. book 8. chapt. of
Sarmatia in Asia. Tamerlanes, says he, had an army of.12. hondreth
thousand. Moreover it is plain, that there were never in any age or memory
greater Armies of horsemen led out of any nation, than of Turks, Saracenes and
Tartarians. S. John adds, that he heard their no^bre, either for that he
would so confirm, that he had said, how their power should be greatest: or
for that he would partly signify, that their victories also were nombred, and
should have an end. That in Daniel is most notable, Mean, Thekel pheres: that
is, has nombred, has wayed, has divided. He has nombred, says he, thy
kingdom, and has brought it to an end.

And at the beginning and also in the times that followed, the matters of
Mahomet increased exceadingly. After Mahomet him self they had in order.xxv.
The power and success of Mahometanes.
Amires (for so they called their kings or princes) which ruled with great
power unto the year eight.C. three score and ten. About this time the.xv.
Amiras called Mahomet, went about to drive out and oppress Imbrael governor
of Babylon, which sent for Muchulet the Turk out of Scythia against Amira^.
And ye Turk dispatched his matters, and drove many of the Saracenes out of
Asia, and the Turks began to reign in the East. And the Saracenes expulsed
out of those parties, came into Affricke: from thence sailing into Sicilie and
other Islands, they possessed Spain also: and over rode other nations nere,
and invaded Italy, spoiling Rome, and consuming with fire many goodly
buildings. Concerning the which matter ye may read Volaterane in the.12. book
of Geograph. in the threfolde Arabie. About the year of our lord.M.CCC. the
Turkishe emperors had their beginning of Ottoman, who possess at this day a
great part of Asia, Affricke and Europe. Hereof has written Baptista Ignatius
in the end of the.2. book of the Roman emperors, and Paulus Iouius. Many of
the Tartarians received the religion of Mahomet, and have most greuousely
plaged the world, whereof Mathias a michon writes in Sarmatia of Asia. And
doubtless the people of Mahomet have been of very great power, and be so still
even at this day.

Now are painted out also the horsemen and horses whereupon they ride, Horsemen,
Horses.
that is to wit the manners and power of the Mahometanes are described. The
Horsemen had on habergions, not of iron, but fiery of yelow and brimstony
color. Therefore fire, Hyacinth and sulphur, were in stead of the breast plate,
their Armure. For the Hyacinth he puts by and by smoke. For Hyacinth in
color resembles smoke next unto fire and flame. And the horses had Lions
heads, and Serpents tails with heads. The horses breathed out of their
mouths fire, smoke, and sulphur. With these plagues, says he, to wit fire,
smoke, and brimstone, the third part of men were slain. They did hurt also
me^ with the Serpe^tine tails. He adds, their power was in their mouth, hurt
in the tail. These appear to be understand and expounded spiritually and
corporally. For ye Mahometanes by their wicked doctrine, which is aptly
compared to fire distroiyng, to smoke blinding, and to stinking sulphur, have
distroyed innumerable. Finally with a lionish or tirannical force they have
co^streyned many people to receive their Alcorane: and moreover what time their
false prophets seem to flatter (for Esaye says, a false prophet is a tail)
they play the serpente, and infecte men with the most corrupt poison of
doctrine. Out of their mouths proceed not only blasphemous laws, but also
maruelouse praises, great boastinges of victories, abominable blasphemies.
Where say they, is your christen faith? our religion of Mahomet ouero^meth al.
Al your things are miserable. Being vaunquished ye serve like bound slaves
every where. The thing it self declares, yt our religion is true, and yours
stark false. And in deed ye Mahometanes reign in a manner every where, in
victories and riches they are fortunate and noble. That thing makes the
Christians affraide, and causes many to reuolte. For what is done emo^gs us,
is to manifest to al me^. The gospellers have ones or twice fought vnluckly.
and abide every hour great persecutions: the papists overcome and rejoice.
There are found therefore many thousands, which say, how the thing it self
speaks, whether religion is better. Doubtless this great felicity holds
many still in error, which would else be gentle and tractable. Therefore it is
no marvel, though turks or mahometanes prevail very much with their mouth, sins
emo^gs christians, victories and the felicity of this world is of so great
force in manner with al men. And yet they excel with their mouth and boastinges,
in the thing it self and in verity. For although the Turks be victoriouse,
yet is their religion most false, most wicked and most absurd.

And corporally, how those things may be expounded, there is no man that sees
not, which knows the Turk^sh histories. The Mahometanes burn with fire and
brimstone, for hardely is there any other nation, which has so wasted the
world with fire, as this. Which way so ever they turn the^, al things burn
with a light fire, all is full of smoke. Their princes are lions, and their
government is like lions, al things tira^nical. They command cruel things,
another comes there any other thing out of their mouth, than that is blouddy.
Therefore have many of them called themselves the wrath of God and the whippe or
scourge of god. And verily this wrath of the lord follows corrupt doctrine
and swaruing from the faith. With these three plagues fire, smoke and brimstone
the third part of the world is slain and distroyed.

Morouer the Serpents tail admonissheth chiefly, The Serpe^tes tail with
heads.
that they do hurt very much. For in case the Mahometanes or Turks have any
where entered in leage with christen Princes, they have not done it without
craft and guile. They that have believed their promesses and flattering words,
and have required and had aid of them, have nurrished a Serpent in their
bosom.

Hereof remain two notable examples. The aid and flatteringes of ye turks are
pernicious
A discord arrising between the emperor of Constantinople and his Princes.
Whilst Marcus lord of Bulgaria joined him self with the princes, or lords
of Greece, the emperor was compelled to require aid of Amurathes the first of
that name the.iii. turkish Emperor after Ottoman. And he aided the emperor
ge^tly. For he sent into Greece.12000. chosen turks, with whom the emperor
being aided, he discomfited and put to flight Marcus him self and the rest of
the rebels. But that same amity was the beginning of the destruction of
thempire of Constantinople, and of all the calamities of Greece. For when
Amurathes understood by the soldiers which returned home, that Greece was
both a most goodly country, and not strong, by reason of the discord and
dissension of Princes: he determined to transporte thither immediately, under
pretense of persecuting the^perours enemies. And so began to possess Greece it
self, which both his sons and nephews with in an.C. years brought wholly into
their subjection. In our time arrose a discord for the realm of Ho^garie
betwixt Ferdinando, which now is Emperor, and John Vayuode Prince of
Hongarie: which being not able in strength to match Ferdinando, was driven to
crave aid of Solomon Emperor of Turks. The Turk was by and by ready with
great faith and diligence placing John in his kingdom: howbeit we see, that
immediately he being extincte, the Turk inioyed the kingdom of Hongarie.
Would God therefore that Christen Princes would not trust the turkish navy and
warfare. For whilst the Mahometane laugheth upon the Christian with a frendely
countenance, he intends to put a Serpent into his bosom, and to distroye
him. And we are also at this day in this sixte, as also in the fifte fight, in
the Papisticall and Mahometicall corruption, wickedness and tira^ny. The lord
Jesus deliver us from al these euilles by his gloriouse coming unto judgment.
Amen, Amen.

What should be done to the reside we of impenitentes, in this mean while
felyng none evil, of the Locustes and Horses. The.xlij. Sermon.
ANd the remnaunte of the men, which were not killed with these plagues,
repented not of the deeds of their hands, that they should not worship
deuilles, and images of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood,
which another can see, another hear, another go. Also they repented not of their
murder, and of their witchcrafte, another of their whoredom, another of their
theft.

The wau^t must be fulfilled in ye reason.
It is spoken abou^dantly, how great calamity shall come unto the world of the
locustes and horses under the fifte and sixte trumpet: and where it is
sufficiently known, that al are not subject to the locustes and horses,
neither to be punnisshed of them, which nevertheless commit things also
worthy of punnishment, some man might marvel, whether these being free and
exempted from these plagues, may safely lead an impenitent life? he preue^teth
and says, and the residewe of men, which also commit shameful things
against God, and yet are not slain with these plagues set forth, may not
think to escape vnpunnished. For even they shall be punnisshed also of God most
just. For the speech is defective, and therefore to be made up, both by the
tenure hereof, and also by the catholic sense of the whole Scripture, which is
that all impenitent persons are punnisshed of God: and that so much more
greuousely, the more carelessely that they have abused gods longanimitie, being
nothing moved with any examples of Gods judgments. Yet says he not this by
express words. It was enough for him to rehearse the wickedness, wherein they
were drowned. For hereof may every man gather, what is dew to such offenders.
Aretas a Greek expositour, expounding this place. This speech says he,
shows an excellency of insensibilitie, that is of the wantonness and
lasciuiousenes of them, which have spent the time granted them of God to
repent in, about vanity, that even for the worthiness of their slougthfulnes
they might receive their reward: yea even before the eyes of the ungodly the
very reward is put in effect: yet these men not only by the sight of these
terrible things, which they had present before their eyes, were made never a
whit better, but also worse, and more and more wrapped in sin, have fulfilled
their course, etc. Thus far he.

Hereof we may gather that it is not sufficient to a godly and blessed life,
that a man be not a papiste, What is requ^red of the very godly.
or a Mahometane: but that of every one of us is required a true faith, which
may make us to walk in all the commandments of God: and that we should
know, that al must be grievously punnisshed of God, so many as transgress the
law of God, of what religion condition, age, state or degree so ever they men
be of. For God most just has no respect of persons. Who so ever have sinned
without a law, says the Apostle, shall perish with out law: and who so ever
have sinned in the law, by the law shall be judged. Certe^ly S. John seems
here now to bring forth both the tables of the law, and thereby to reprove the
sins and wickedness of the ungodly men, of who ^he will also that judgment be
gathered. The first table sets forth the service of God, commanding to
worship one God, not to worship Idolles, etc. The second gives precepts of
living, and teaches the love of our neighbor, forbiddyng murder, adultery,
theft and like mischiefs. S. John brings forth two sins, done against the
first table: and three or four committed against the second. Neither is there
any doubt, but that he compriseth under these all like or not unlike, more or
less offenses against God, and his will. Who so ever therefore thou art, if
thou offend against the divine law, thou shall be punnished. If thou seem in
this world to escape free, and to flitte from hence happy, the same may
chance unto thee, that happened to the rich glutton: whose judgment is
described in the.16. of Luke. Briefly he shall be punnisshed, who so shall
offend God. God knows the manner, whether he shall punnish here and in the
world to come, or in the world to come only: and grant here a voluptuouse life.

They are damned that repent not.
And we must chiefly observe in this treatise, that sinners be not here
condemned. For we are all sinners: so should no man be saved. They are damned
that do not repent, which verily die in their sins, without repentance:
Thapostle denies that Idolaters, aduouterers, thieves, couetouse persons,
extorcioners, etc. shall possess ye kingdom of God, but he adds: but such
were you verily, but you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are
justified by ye name of our lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our god. And in
case thou do doubt whether thou may come again into favor with God, if
thou being ones lighted and justified, do fall again into sin, learn of
the fall and sin of S. Peter, that thou may be restored: and the same that
we read written, how seven times falls the just, and rises again, etc.
Therefore let us learn hereof, how effectual is repentance, and how
pestilent lack of repentance. If thou be, or have ben an idolater, thou
ought not to despair, turn unto the lord, and do penance. If thou fall
again, abide not still in thy wickedness. Whereof I have spoken more in an
other place. But if thou will not return unto God, nor leave the evil
custom of sin, never look for any grace of God. Thou shall perish in thy
sins.

It remains that we declare in few words the fourmes of sins, set forth
here of S. John, under the which as I said before, he has doubtless comprised
like offenses, that of like things the same judgment be had. First he says
as it were generally, The works of men's hands.
neither have they repented from the works of their hands. For albeit that
with this note or mark idolatry is condemned in the prophets, yet do I
extend it unto all other deeds proceeding of the force of me^. For our work is
verily sin: and the good work is of the grace of God and of regeneration.
And this general thing ones setforth, he adds diverse parts kinds, and
fourmes, two against the first table, and four or three against the second.

It is against the first commandment, To worship the devil.
to worship Deuilles. For our very God will have him self alone taken for God,
honored and worshipped. And who is so mad, say thou, that will worship
Deuilles? Verily there be certain people in the East, which are said to worship
Deuilles, for none other end, but that they should not hurt the^. This is a
barbarouse and folisshe people, why do they not rather worship him, which
is only able to restreyne the Devil, that he can not hurt? Howebeit this
wickedness stretches far. For they in deed worship the Devil, which will
seem to worship Gods. For this matter is esteemed not of the opinion, or
intent of the worshipper, but of the law maker. For the gentiles would not
seem, that they sacrificed to Deuilles: but would have taken it most
displeasau^tly, if any should have said that they worshipped the Devil. Thou
art a most vile and most impudent varlet and sclaunderer, they would have
said, which dare so reproach the gods and us. But S. Paul nevertheless,
I say not, says he, that an Idolle, or that is offered unto Idolles is any
thing: but this I say, that the things which the gentiles offer up, 2. Cori.
10.
they offer them to Deuilles, and not to God. For where there is one only God,
and he allows only these sacrifices, which are offered to him, calls
strange Gods devils, and Idolle offeringes sacrificed to the devil: of this
judgment is the thing esteemed, and not of the fond intent of men. King Saul
would have offered to God ye burnte offering of Samuel: but Samuel told him,
that he should commit idolatry, and magic, etc. This is an hard saying, but
yet true. Whereof I have spoken in an other place more at large. The
worshippyng of Images of God and of the Saints is against the precept of the
first table. To worshi^ images.
For all Idolatry is prohibited. S. John here with color defines Idolles, and
taunteth them also, alludyng to the words of the prophet in the Psalm.114.
The Idolles of the gentiles, are silver and gold, the work of men's hands: a
mouth they have and speak not, etc. Therefore it appears of the matter, that
Images have nothing of religion. For they be of earth, of gold, brass, stone,
timbre, etc. Again of the form and shape it appears, that Images are vain.
For the form resembles a most gross shape, and even a leasing. For another
God, nor the Saints were of that shape, which the Idolles represent. And now
there is no virtue in them. They see not, they hear not, etc. Ho^ than do they
represent God or the saints? I have spoken of Idolles else where. They that
think how there is a diversity betwixt the Idolles of Christians and those of
the gentiles, let them show that theyrs are not of wood, or that those other
do see, hear, etc.

Murder.
The sins that follow, are against the second table, which commands, thou
shall do no murder, thou shall commit none adultery, thou shall not steal.
There be many kinds of murders. For they sleye most cruelly, which have no
sword, but a venemouse tongue. Many kill with corrupt doctrine. There be
ma^quellers, and parricides, and murderers, etc. Except these repent, they
shall not enter into the kingdom of God. And they that swell with envy and
malice, are homicides, as S. John said in his canonical Epistle. 1. and.3.
chapt.

Witchcrafte, or poisoning.
(...), Poysun, Witchcrafte or sorcerie, or inchaunting, apperteyneth to
murder. Poisoning, louecuppes, and inchauntmentes, were in the time of S. John
most frequented, through out the Roman Empire: at this day those wicked arts
are renewed. But they shall be punnished of God, so many as apply themselves to
the same.

Fornication.
Fornication has also diverse parts. To the same belong whoredom, inceste,
adultery, and if any other thing be more abominable than these. The gentiles
supposed, that simple fornication, that is to wit, between two single
persons, was no sin. But the Apostle defines the contrary in the 1. to the
Corinth. 6. and.15. of the Acts. This pestilent opinion at this day is
revived in many. But sure it is, that a whoremonger enters not into the
kingdom of God. Ephesians. 5.

Finally is set theft with all his parts. Theft.
Whereof I spoke ones in the exposition of the.x. commandments. The Lord
Jesus preserve us from all defilyng of sins, etc. Amen.

Christ a strong Angel, is set against Antichrist: and is excellently
described, shinyng again in the darkness of the church with consolation.
The.xliij. Sermon.
ANd I saw an other mighty angel come down from Heaven, The.10. chapter.
clothed with a cloud, and the raynebowe upon his head and his face was as the
Sun, and his fete as it were pillars of fire: and he had in his hand a little
book open: and he put his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the
Earth. And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth. And when he had
cried, seven thonders spoke their voices: and when the seven thonders had
spoken their voices, I was about to write. And I heard a voice from heaven
saying unto me: seal up those things, which the seven thonders spoke, and
write them not.

Hitherto have we heard many things of the most daungerouse conflictes against
the christen piety and verity: but nothing has been spoken of the defense and
maynteiners of the true religion: but rather the success and wonderful
felicity of the wicked has been preached, especially in the fifte and sixte
trompet, to wit under Papistrie and Mahometrie. Therefore it might seem to
many, that the verity it self was not only oppressed and lost, but also that
the verity of Gods promesses began to fainte and decaie. A greuouse te^ptatio^
in ye felicity of the Antichristia^s.
For the godly oppressed; iniquity triu^pheth in all places: the verity being
trode^ under foot, liyng reigns every where. Who therefore would not think,
that the things be in manner vain, which are spoken every where of the
rewards of good men, and punnishme^t of evil? doubtless the children of
Israel doubted of the faith of Gods promesses, when the term of their
captivity was extended only to three score and ten years. What marvel is it
than, if the faithful at this day also, seeing the servitude or bondage of
Mahomet, and the tyranny of the Pope or Antichrist has continewed now many
years, begin also to be tempted: as also the Saints were tempted in old
time, witness Asaph, Psalm.73. And verily ye shall have at this day, which will
say, perauenture this world shall be always, shall never have end, papistrie
shall reign for ever, the Mahometanes shall conquer for ever, the godly shall be
miserable for ever, therefore it is better to frame themselves to the world, we
have now looked for thy judgment a long time, yea our fathers.D.CCC. and a
thousand years since had thought the last day of the Lord had been at hand, but
none end appears any where, but all things are daily renewed: therefore shall
the same face of the world be always, ye courses of times dewly retourning.
Who therefore knows, whether a reward be prepared for the godly, or
punnishme^t for the wicked? For there chance far other things unto holy
men, than many look for? They loking for blessing, life and felicity, and
behold they are overwhelmed with the curses of al men, carried to execution,
and seem the most unfortunate of all men. He that cleaves to the papists,
Turks and enemies of the Gospel, goes through luckely enough, etc.

Therefore as every where in this book, joyful things are mixed with sorrowful,
so here also after most greuouse battles of the.v. and.vi. trompet, and most
strong temptations, he joins a most ioyouse gospel for the consolation and
confirmation of the faithful, leest they should any where doubt of the
fidelity of gods promesses, or reuolte from the true religion to the false:
therefore against Antichrist, the black Angel of the botomles pit, is set
the bright or shining Angel of heaven the lord Christ. Here is gallauntly
described: and is said to return unto his: the same swears solemnly, that
there shall be none other time, but that in the.vii. trompet the very mystery
of God should be fulfilled. Moreover the lord Christ commands S. John to
eat ye open book which Christ held in his hand, and to prophecy again. By all the which things to the comfort of al godly is signified, that Christ shall
return into the church, out of the which he seemed by his enemy and vicar to
be cast out, with great glory and power: another the hope and expectation of the
faithful to be vain, how so ever the last day of judgment be differred into
many ages, and the godly feel of great adversity: Finally that punnishment and
reward is prepared of God: and that this shall be given to the godly, and that
inflicted to the wicked. For to the intent we might hereof be most assured,
Christ takes a solemn oath. And says it shall come to pass, that the
catholic and christian verity shall again come into the field, and fight
valeauntly against the Antichristian and Mahometical doctrine. Hereof therefore
shall we learn, not to despeire in the long persecutions of Antichrist and
Mahomet. We shall learn also how to fight against Antichrist, and how he
must be ouercomen not with warlicke, but spiritual weapons. These is not he
able to match. He whetteth one sword on an other. And hitherto in deed in
these two last chapt. has been spoken of the wars of heretics and of the
ungodly, and of Antichrist the head of al evil: hereafter shall follow of the
contrary fight of the godly, and maynteynaunce of Godlynes.

Before these is set a description of Christ most elegaunt, A goodly
description of Christ.
most wholesome, and most full of consolation, declaryng his force in the
ministry, by the ministers of the word, who^ he has clothed with virtue
from above, and by the weak things of this world, overcomes and beats
together the stro^gest things of this world, and the which seemed invincible.
Christ king and Bishop animateth al his faithful with his spirit and word
indifferently, and always and every where works many things by his virtue,
so yt he is now felt of al me^ to be common again, unto who^ he seemed
hitherto to have absented him self some what to long. And I doubt, whether there
be in all the canonical books after the prophecy of Esaye, after the story of
the Gospel, and especially after the gospel of blessed S. John, any other
book which has mo and more goodly descriptions of Christ, than has this book.
They are disceyued and much abused, which suppose a rare gospel to be preached
in this book. But let us see the description of Christ by parts.

Christ a mighty Angel.
We have showed in the.v. and.vi. trompe, that Antichrist the Pope and Mahomet
are strong. Now is set against them a mighty Aungel, the lord Christ him
self: an Angel in deed not in nature or dignity. For he took not the nature
of an Aungel, but the sede of Abraham, and is much greater than Aungelles, but
that is lord of Angels. Which the Apostle shows in the.1. and.2. to the
Hebrews. But it is the angel of great counsel, to wit the ambassador of
God the father unto us, as Esaye and Malachie called him, to teach the will of
the heavenly father, and to work our salvation, and now also appointed, that
from the right hand of the father as king and Bishop, he should keep and
defend his church. This Christ I say given to men, is strong, not weak.
Strong to overcome and break a sonder all the force of this world, of his
enemies, of Antichrist, of the Devil and of hell gates. No man therefore need
to doubt, but that he may be defended by this strong giaunt: no man need to
despeire in any perilles or matters be they never so desperate, sins Christ
almighty lives, which is able to help weary matters. He therefore must be
called upon of us in all dangers: of him we must look for help patiently and
with steadfast faith.

An Aungel came down from heaven.
A star in deed is fallen from Heaven, but in the mean time of Antichrist
crepte out of the bottomless pit, and Christ descended from Heaven. The Lord
comes not from heaven corporally, but unto the last judgment: but
spiritually he is said to return, so often as he has seemed a little, to have
withdrawn and absented him self. For he is never absent, he is ever present
with his, which is every where. And he is said to be absent, when his aid is
not felt, but are tourmoyled with adversities, and as it were broken with
euilles. Christ therefore descends unto us so often as he gives us aid and
counsel standing in need. So in the most daungerouse conflicte of Antichrist
and Mahomet, finally of heretics and of al other adversaries, Christ him
self with his spirit is present with his, helps his, incourageth and
animateth his, and defends his.

Antichrist as it were clothed and wrapped with the smoke of the botomles
pit, is evil favored: Aungel covered wi^ a cloud.
and Christ covered and as it were decked with a cloud, both shows him self
to be God, which can conueye up his above the air and clouds into his
kingdom, and can rain down dew or wholesome shoures to cowle and make
fruictfull his chosen. A cloud many times in the holy history was a token of
God present. A cloud took up Christ as it were girded from the eyes of his
disciples. Clouds with Esaye in the.45. and.60. chapt. drop down grace.
Finally we shall be taken up in the clouds with all the chosen to mete the Lord
in the air. Antichrist is crowned with a crown, which he got to him self by
crafty means, by flattery, threatenings and disceiptes: and keeps the same
by wicked practices, blouddy weapons, An Aungel crowned with the raynebowe.
and all kind of crafty inggelyng and ungodliness. But the rainebowe is on the
head of Christ. For he is king of peace, pacifiyng and reconciling al things
unto God: reco^cilyng also me^ themselves together with the bond of charity.
The raynebowe is a token of the leage and amity of God toward us, as we
mentioned before in the matters of Noe. Of Antichrist is woe, desperation,
anguisshe, and a most afflicted and troubled conscience. Christ is a
consolation, and peace of the conscience, that no man need to say: ye
Mountanes fall upon us, and cover us. For the faithful delivered, cry Abba
father. The same Lord Christ said also in the Gospel: in the world ye have
affliction, but in me peace. And again: come to me all that labor and are
burdened, and I will refresshe you. Therefore the raynebowe sits on no man's
head more rightly, than upon Christ's head. For in the head of this angel
appeared the raynebowe, as though it had be^ his crown or Diadem. And now we
understand, from whence consolation and pacificatio^ is to be looked for in
most greuouse perilles and afflictions of Antichrist. the face of the Angel
was as the sun.


The sun through the smoke of the botomles pit, raised by the Angel thereof
being darkened most filthely, was a great grief to the world. But the face of
this our Angel is clear, and clarifieth, and shines as bright as the sun:
as in times past also he is said to have shone in the.17. of S. Matt. The
brighte face of Christ brings joy and unspeakable gladness to the
beholders, and pacifieth the minds. And the same is seen of us spiritually and
by faith. S. Paul is the best expositour of this place in the.2. to the
Corinth. 3. and.4. chap. Certainly of the full knowledge of Christ, whereby we
believe him to be given us of the father, that by him should be accomplished,
and he himself alone should be to us al thing, and as a most joyful light
arriseth in the minds. For we are lighted of the light, as is declared in the
gospel of S. John. Howesoeuer therefore the terrible darkness of errors and
calamities be over cast in the world of the prince of darkness by ye pope and
Mahomet, and other corrupters of Gods verity, yet the light which is in the
minds of the faithful through faith in Christ, directs, lights,
comfort and preserves.

The fete of the Angel, pillars of fire.
Antichrist has the tails of Scorpions most venemouse: but the fete of the
lord Christ are as pillars of fire. Al things of Christ are firm, right, and
most clean. In an other place also the verity of the lord is figured by
pillars. And god him self is called a consumyng fire, burning up all
uncleanness. Morouer fire pearseth, another can it be easily quenched, when it
begins to catch, and to burn. And who shall let the course of the fire
of the holy ghost: He sets his fete on the Sea and land.
with these is joined an other thing, that the Angel set his right foot upon
the Sea: and the left on the Earth. But to set foot, is to challenge to him
self some possession. For as we say in dutche, for that which is, to fire the
mind to dwell in any place: so we read of the Hebrewe phrase, what so ever
your foot shall tread upon, shall be yours: that is, what so ever ye shall
win, shall be your own right and possession. And Christ seemed as it were to
be cast out of his possession by Antichrist, Mahometanes, and the rest of his
enemies. For we have heard many times that they have won lands and Islands.
But this vision instructs us, that Christ recouereth again, reentreth i^
possession, and brings under his subjection, such places (...) seemed to have been taken and lost both by sea and land, tha^ is in all parts of ye world. For
by the preaching of the gosp^^ many are recovered, which were plucked away
from the true religion: that now I need not rehearse, that Christ has in all
parts of ye world his chosen, which never bowed their knees to Baal. In them
has he a most strong and most purified kingdom, figured by the fiery
pillars. Certes thapostle calls the church a pillar and base of verity.1.
Timoth. 2. And Christ him self also says that his kingdom in the world is
immovable, how so ever it be assailed of Antichriste. The gates of hell shall
not prevail against it, and his church.

And like as Antichrist coueteth to have ye book of the gospel shut, and
closed, obscure and imperfect: The Angel holds in his hand a book open.
so the lord Christ holds the book open in his hand. He opens, and no man
shuts. You understand therefore whereof it comes that Antichrist, although he
be of most great power, can not at this day shut the gospel book, which he
seeks with all his force to do. Of christ and his spirit we have the word
bright and clear. By the grace of Christ we have the bright preaching of the
gospel, contrariwise a dark and an intricate sophistry of Antichrist: of this
book shall follow herafter more ple^ti^ul things. Herunto apperteineth the
worthy invention and godly benefit of Printing, never commended enough. This
opens books, Printing.
and sends them abroad into the world in dispite of all the enemies of Gods
verity, and scatters them abroad in every corner of the world. So that they
which can not hear preachers, to them come godly books not without fruicte.

The sownde of Antichrists wings, The Angel roareth like a lion.
is as the noise of charettes, when many horses run into battle: therefore
Christ also makes a noise, and cries in deed with a loud voice. S. John
adds a parable. He roareth ((...), he loweth, which is as much as if he had
said, he roareth. For Erasmus, perauenture, says he, the Greeks keep not ye
difference betwixt (...) and (...) as the latins do between Rugire and Mugire
that is to roar and to low) as a Lion. We have heard before how Christ is
called a lion of the tribe of Judah. Therefore like as when a lio^ reareth, as
Amos notes in the.3. chap. Al are affrayed of themselves: so when the Lord
Christ cries by his word all the wicked are amassed. Whereby is signified that
the gospel shall be preached against Antichrist constantly and with Authority,
to the terror of Gods enemies. And doubtless although the princes as well
spiritual as temporal, seem to contemn and utterly to despise the preaching
of the Gospel, yet is it certain by many tokens and conjectures, that they
are excedingly fore affrayed, of that preaching which as vile they despise.
For they endeavor with all force of mind, and herunto apply all their
counselles, that they might abolish that same preaching. But in case they
suppose it to be of no force, why are they so affraied thereof? why are they
at so great charges? why can they never be at rest? herunto apperteineth the
common prophecy, which tells, that whilst antichrist reigns, Helias shall
come, which with a sharp, lively, and manly preaching, shall confute the
triflings of Antichrist. Therefore the spirit of Helias, and his ernest
preaching, is that roarynge of the Lion, which roareth out Christ's verity.

The voices of the seven tho^ders.
And as soon as that roaryng was heard, the seven thonders utter also their
voices. By the which voices are signified the sundry graces of the holy ghost,
and chiefly the terrible preaching out of the verity of the canonical
scriptures, as appeared in the.4. chapt. of this book. For with the gospel in
the latter ages shall be expounded again the Scripture of the prophets, which
seems as it were to thonder against Antichrist, against sins and wicked
people. Verily James and John brethren and Apostles of Christ, of the free,
plain, and ernest preaching of the truth are called of the lord Boanerges,
that is the sons of thonder, thonderers, that is to wit excellently sharp
in preaching, and to be feared.

He is forboden to write the voices of tho^ders he is commanded to seal them.
And S. John would by and by have written the voices o^ preaching of the
thonders, but he is forbidden so to do: b^^ is commanded to seal them only.
For sins the holy scripture, through the inspiration of the holy ghost, was
written and (...) forth already by the servants of God the Prophets and
Apostles, what need were it to write and set it forth again. Those things are
sufficient for the godly that are written. Thereof may the preachers take unto
the^ against Antichrist and al sects thonderinges, lightenings, and
thonderboltes. And where he is commanded to seal up the things set forth
already, it alludeth to the last chapt. of Daniel: and that sealyng is
referred as well to the godly as ungodly. Sealed letters are doubtless of most
authority. S. John therefore by his sealyng makes not now the Scriptures
authentical, but in sealyng them declares, that they are authentical enough:
so to the full scriptures no godly man goes about either to add, or diminish.
Thus I say the Scriptures are sealed to the godly, as to the^ that are most
persuaded, that the scriptures are most perfect and Authentical, which may most
fully suffice in the church for true piety against all ungodliness. Where the
wicked will not see this, and seek not for all things of godly religion in the
Scriptures, another care greatly for the scriptures: what marvel is it, though
the Scriptures be sealed to them, that is shut up, which they neither
greatly care for, another understand, nor yet will understand? And on this wise
is Christ set against Antichrist, and recouereth again his church,
discomfiteth and subdeweth Antichrist: to whom be malediction for ever.

The Lord Christ perfourmeth an oath, and confirms his elect, that they
should not doubt of the faith of Gods promesses, etc. The.xliiij. Sermon.
ANd the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lift up
his hand to Heaven, and swore by him that lives for ever more, which created
heaven and the things which therein are, and the sea and the things which are
therein, that there shall be no more time: but in the days of the voice of the
seventh Angel, when he shall begin to blow, even the mystery of God shall be
finisshed, as he preached by his servants the Prophets.

But whilst the wicked triu^phed, and thenemies of God, Antichrist and
Mahomet, overcame with most lucky success, whilst al good men were oppressed,
and disceipte and liyng reigned every where, many men will think that there
shall never be an end, another of these euilles, nor yet of the world. For the
Apostle S. Peter know this, says he, that in the latter days shall come
mockers, which will walk after their own concupiscences, and will say, where
is the promise of his coming? Of whom Malachias also reasons in the.3. and
4. chapt. But to the intent the goodness of God might heal the wou^des of the
godly, and might auaunce them in the verity against liyng and reuolting, and
establisshe them in the same, Christ comes abroad: and swears in the sight
of al men solemnly. Which thing must be expounded by all circumstaunces. For
it is a thing of most weight, most full of comfort, and right wholesome and
necessary for all men.

Christ swears.
There is no doubt, but that he alludeth to the last chapt. of Daniel, wherein
also the Angel of the lord swears, confirming by a solemn oath, that such
things as have hitherto ben told to the Prophet by prophecy, shall be all
fulfilled in their times, therefore this mighty Angel swears now also, yea
even Christ him self, which set his fete on the Sea and Land. For by the
state and behauour of the body he shows stedfastnes, leeste we should doubt
any thing of his faith and verity: which sins he is lord of all, stands
moreover upon fete, not fleshely, but of fiery pillars. Al things therefore of
Christ be certain, sure, and immovable. He that rests on him, stands
surely, he that believes his words, shall not be confounded. And it is no new
thing, that Christ swears. For we read very often in the Scripture that God
has sworn. We read in the Gospel that the same Lord Christ has most often
repeted, verily I say unto you, verily verily I say unto you. Which is an
oath of one swearyng. When Caiaphas adjured the lord in judgment, Christ did
not conceal, and by holding his peace dissembled, but with express words
confessed the verity. Whereof thou may learn, that the Lord when he
forbadde to swear at al, mente not the sacrament of swearyng. Which where the
bussardely Anabaptists will not understand, they styre up wonderful trouble,
worthy to be put to silence with more severity.

But why, or to what end oaths be made or taken, the Apostle (out of the law
in the.22. why oaths are taken.
) has declared at large in the.6. to the Hebrews, to wit, that men
waueryng and doubtful might be confirmed, and certified, and made quiet. Does
any manne doubt, whether thou deal faythefully with him: God commands to
avouch it by a sacrament, to the end al diffidence may be taken away.
Apostle: men says he, swear by him, which is greater, and is to the same an
end of al controversy, in case it be confirmed by a^ oath. In the which
consideration God mindyng more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promission the unchangeable stedfastenes of his counsel, expresses an oath.
Even so at this present where the divine providence did forsee that under the
kingedome of Antichrist the hearts of the faithful should be most greuousely
tempted, and that many by reason of the most prosperouse fortune of Antichrist
and all the wicked, should be hard hearted to believe Gods promesses, and that
many, The stedfastenes and certe^tie of Gods promesses.
which thing also Daniel in the.11. chapt. Prophesied, should reuolte to
Antichrist: it seemed to God good to confirm his promesses by an oath, and that
a solemn oath by his son: to the intent that such as will be wise, may
think, if an honest man and a true should confirm his promise to thee by
an oath, thou would think it an unworthy thing to doubt of his promesses:
how much less shall it be laweful for thee to doubt of yt promesses of the
Son of God, and of all his words by a solemn oath confirmed: believe
therefore the son of God sworn, believe his Gospel most confirmed, although
the sky should fall, and the Earth gape never so wide. God can not lie,
which is the verity, and that the eternal verity: which another disceaueth
nor is disceaued: which is merciful, and loves men so, that he tempereth
him self also after their capacity. For even for us and for our infirmity he
perfourmeth a Sacrament, leest he should seem not to satisfy us in all
things: and that all occasions of incredulity, and reuoltyng to Antichrist,
and to the filthy world might be cut away.

Now come we also to way the manner or form of the oath. Two things are here
recited: the manner of the swearer, the manner or form of Christ his oath.
and the solemn words of the swearer. For he says, how the Angel lifted up
his hand toward heaven: which in deed is the most ancient rite and holy
ceremony of swearers. For we read the same of Abraham in the.14. of Genes.
And in the.12. To lift up hands.
of Daniel is written of an Angel: which liftyng up to heaven his right hand
and his left swore. We verily hold up our right hand. But where we say,
that giving of voices we will hold up both our hands: we signify that we will
utterly be of that sentence, that we hear there propounded. Therefore the
holdyng up of both hands does signify a most perfect fidelity, and most
assured confirmation of the thing sworn. Certainly in the holy scriptures the
lifting up of the hand is oftener than ones put for an oath. Whereof
perauenture we Germans have borrowed, where we say, that is to say, thou
shall confirm me this by an oath. And in matters most seriouse and grave we
are wont to use some outward ceremony, whereby we may make the words and the
thing it self as it were more notable and grave. Whereupon when we pray unto
God, we lift up our hands. And verily an oath is as it were the calling upon
the name of god. Wheruppon it is commonly accustomed, with great fear to
perform oaths. For all men arrise, and put of their cappes, as they were ready
to fall on their knees before the sight of God him self. When bargayne or
contracte is made with words, the right hands are joined together also, in
token of fidelity. Therefore when we take a solemn oath, we lift up our hand
toward heaven, where we believe that the Lord shows him self gloriouse to the
faithful: from whom we feel that al good things come unto us: from whence we
perceive also that vengeance does fall upon the perjured, and contemners of
God. Hitherto therefore Christ applies him self unto us: and after the manner
of men, to the end that men may be made the quieter, he lifts up his
hands unto heaven.

Solemn words to swear by him that lives for evermore.
And the solemn words of the swearer be these: he swear by him that lives for
evermore, which made Heaven, and the things that are therein, etc. So read we
of Abraham in the 14. of Genes. I lift up my hand to the high lord God,
possessour of Heaven and earth. And in the.12. of Daniel. He swear by him that
lives for evermore. Also in ye.4. of Jeremy. And thou shall swear, the Lord
lives. We say so truly as God lives, and again, so God help me. And this is
a true manner of swearing. God the creator, is here most plentifullye and most
properly expressed, and here are all creatures seuerallye expressed. He alone
is the creator, he alone is living for evermore, as he that is life of
himself, and gives life unto all. This creation verily and vivification, is
not communicated to others. As also he alone knows the hearts of me^: that
hereof we may learn to swear by the name of God alone, not to add to him any
creatures, which know not the hearts, neither are life of themselves, but are
less than he: add also less than men, as they that are made for men. Next
after God, there is nothing greater than man. Therefore let not man swear by
any other tha^ by God. For all the gentiles swear by a greater, if thou
swearest by ye saints, or by the Gods, thou shall swear by men, egal verily,
and not greatter. God alone is greatest and best. Therefore must we swear by
the name of God alone, like as the scripture teaches elsewhere, in the.6.
and.10. of Deuter. 23. of Exodus 23. of Iosue. 4. and.5. of Jeremy.45.65. of
Esaias, and else where.

But seeing that is in deed God himself, how swears he, say thou, by him
that lives for evermore: that is by god? he swear doubtless by him self, as in
many other places of the scripture. Or else he swear after the dispensation and
assumptio^ of the humane nature: after the which he said, my father is greater
than I, which notwithstanding in his deity was nevertheless coequall with the
father.

And the same that I now rehearsed, A faithful doctrine of taking oaths.
is the most simple and most true doctrine of oaths and form of swearyng.
And yet there be some which understand that doctrine well enough, but
nevertheless for the favor of men would swear gladly by Saints: and
therefore demand, whether they may not join Saints to god, especially in
this sense, unless I perform this, I will not be accounted in the nombre of
saints? I answer, that they may not: as well for that we have no express
manner of swearing, which obediently to the honor of God we ought simply to
follow: and also for yt they which require and prescribe this form, would
have us to swear by the names of Saints in heaven, and so to acknowledge
that we are helped and punnished by their virtue and power. Which if ye do and
acknowledge, there is no doubt but thou doeste greuousely transgress thy
sincere religion. Certes if thou confess God here before men, he will also
confess thee before his father and his Angels: if thou deny him, he will also
deny the. etc. An oath is as it were thy confession, whereby thou confessest,
whom thou do acknowledge and believe to be thy chief filicitie, the
reue^ger also of evil and rewarder of good. If thou shall therefore join
Saints unto god himself, and match them together and say, so help me God and
his Saints: These so coupled with God, thou shalt grant to be thy Gods,
which can both help and hurt the. Therefore take heed what thou do. Read S.
Austen in the 145. Epistle to Publicola.

What Christ did swear.
Howbeit we must see moreover, what the Angel swear by this custom and solemn
words. For in this one thing consists the whole sum of the matter. The
Angel in the 12. chap. of Daniel ded swear. Because for a time, times, and
half a time, and in the wyndinge up, to scatter the hand of the holy people,
all these things shall be fully done. So this our Angel here swears that
there shall be no more time, but in the days of the voice of the seventh
Angel, when he shall begin to blow his trompe that the mystery of God shall
be fulfilled, but here let no man understand that all time utterly, and that
euerlastin^nes it self should be abolished and that there should be nothing
more after the judgment: but there shall not be alwa^es such a time, as now
is, and such as the wicked inioye in this world, supposing that the courses
of times shall be always, that the world shall continewe always, that they
shall always flourishe in honors and pleasures, oppressyng the Godly. This
shall not be, says he, another shall there be any more such a time that shall
perish and be subject to chaungeable courses. For about the last judgment
shall perisshe, or be renewed, all these things that shall perish, and life
and glory everlasting shall succeed, I mean the time of eternity with all joy
most replenisshed. Therefore says he not simplely, that there shall be no
more time: but adds, in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, that
is to wit, at the last judgment, that the mystery of God should be made
consummate, perfect, and fully complete. What this secret, The mystery of God
what it is.
or mystery of God is the Apostle expounds and says, 1. Corinthians. 15.
Behold I tell you a mystery, we shall not all sleep: and the residewe which
are red there, the mystery of God therefore is nothing else, than that the
end, of all corruptible things is at hand, and the happy and everlasting
world shall succeed: for that Christ shall than come to judgment: that
Antichrist by him shall be abolisshed, that he with the whole body of the wicked
shall be distroyed, the dead raised up again: the wicked to everlasting
perdition, the godly to eternal life: for that death, sin and al corruption
must be taken away from the godly, and be trodden under foot, and al misery
imposed to the wicked, that they may be tourme^ted world without end. And for
as much as many times men doubt thereof, (as I have said now often) Christ
has sworn, that all these things shall assuredly come to pass, and that the
godly shall be consummated with all glory, and that the wicked shall be
consummate with all kind of tourmentes. And this is that great mystery of
God, for the which the very Son of God being incarnate, dead, and raised
again from the dead ascended into Heaven, that he might conuaye us thither to
him, having subdewed Hell, Satan, Antichrist and all ungodliness. Therefore as
in the. 6. chapter was said to the Martirs, that they should rest for a
little season, till the nombre of chosen be fulfilled: so here we hear also,
that the mis^erie of God shall at length be fulfilled, etc. The which is
spoken to this end also that the godly should be of quiet minds, and
patiently abide deliverance. If therefore this consumation be differred, let
us abide patie^tly and constantly, confirmed in Christ, and his Evangelical
verity: as also the Apostle of Christ S. Paul has taught us out of the
Prophets, in the.10. chapt. to the Hebrews.

Moreover for a further declaration is added, The prophets also have showed
this mystery.
as God (...) that is, has euangelized, with a good and a lucky message has
preached, to wit by the seruau^ts his prophets touching the end of the world,
the last judgment, of the everlasting punnishment of Antichrist, and al
wicked, and of the glorifiyng of the godly, etc. Another said he these things
for a declaration only, but for confirmation also. For by the oracles of the
prophets the faithful are comforted, whose oracles sins they have never failed
in any thing: another shall they in the end disceyue, in such things as they
had prophesied concerning the last judgment. And again we see how great is
thautoritie of the ancient scripture, and that the use of it is excellent in
the church evangelical: wherein we see both Christ and his Apostles to confirm
all their sayings with prophetical scriptures, and also to illumine, set forth
and declare, or demonstrate. The testimonies of the prophets concerning the
last judgment, of the reward and punnishme^t of the godly and ungodly, of the
abolishyng of Antichrist, of death, and of al corruption, are in the.110.
Psalm, in the.24.26.27. and.46. also in the.7.11. and.12. of Daniel. in
the.14. of Zachary.3. and.4. of Malachie, and also else where. Thapostle has
cited Osee.1. Corinth. 15.

Therefore let us lift up our heads, brethren, let us watch and pray, for
because our redemption draws nere. Deliver us Christ from al evil. Amen.

S. John deuoureth the book received at the Aungelles hand, and prophecieth
again to the gentiles, nations and Kings. The.xlv. Sermon.
ANd the voice which I heard from Heaven spoke unto me again, and said: go
and take the little book, which is open in the hand of the Angel, which
stands upon the sea, and upon the earth: and I went unto the Angel and said
unto him, give me the little book. And he said unto me, take it, and eat it
up, and it shall make thy bealy bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth as sweet as
honey. And I took the little book out of the hand of the angel, and did eat it
up, and it was in my mouth as sweet as honey: and as soon as I had eaten it my
bealy was bitter. And he said unto me: thou must prophecy again unto the
heithe^, and tongues and people and to many Kings.

This is the.iii. comfort, which in this.x. chap. is contained. The apostolical
doctrine is restored against Antichrist.
For under the person of S. John is showed here, yt thapostolical and
evangelical doctrine must be restored in the last times before the judgment
against Antichrist and Mahomet. And he might briefly have said. The
apostolital doctrine, as it was preached of John, shall flourish again: but he
had rather express the same by a goodly vision, at ye last to add a plain
and brief exposition of the vision. Which is, thou must preach again. etc.

And those things al expositour do expou^de agreably, John preaches again.
first in deed of the person of John, which under the Emperor Nerua,
returned into Asia from exile, by the space of five years, or there about
again preached the gospel. For he lived til the.3. or.4. year of the reign of
the emperor Traiane: Secondly of al preachers, before the last judgment,
indewed with the spirit and doctrine of S. John, and constantly professing
Christ against Antichrist. Primasius expounding this place: the certain
meaning, says he, is directed to S. John, which must yet being delivered
from exile, not only bring this revelation to the knowledge of Christ's church:
but also preach more depely the Gospel to people and nations, to tongues and
many kings: notwithstanding no man doubts but that this voice agrees also
to the whole Church, which never ought to cease from preaching, etc. Thus
says he. The ordinary gloss expounds these words: although this be
understand of the very person of S. John, yet even herein is understand, that
the lord will have his church likewise instructed and taught by other preachers
also. This apperteineth to the consolation of the faithful, which shall live in
the days of Antichrist, and the residewe. Thomas of Aquine also: In S. John
him self, says he, other preachers are understand, whom the lord in the
time of Antichrist will have to preach instauntly to great and small. So much
says Thomas.

Before the judgment comes Enoch against Antichrist.
Aretas Bishop of Cesaria, an expositour of this book, recites of this place
of S. John, that the opinion of the common people was that S. John with Enoch
and Elie should come again into the world before the judgment, to wit
corporally, and ernestly and constantly to preach against Antichrist. The self
same does Aretas repete with a more plentiful exposition, where in the.11.
chapt. He expounds the words of John concerning the two witnesses, etc.
Certes where in the.44. of Ecclesi. it is written, that Enoch was translated
that he might teach the heythen, many have expounded it, as though he should
corporally return, that he might teach the gentiles against Antichrist: where
by the very translation made in times past he teaches rather the gentiles,
that there is an other life prepared for the servants of God, and that the
same is also dew for the bodies, sins that Enoch was translated both in body
and soul: against the opinion of Epicure, and the mad world, supposing none
other life to remain after this, and that the bodies, do putrefie, and never
to rise again. This Enoch seems to come spiritually to that last age, for
that the lord him self prophesied that a like thing should come unto it, as
chanced before the deluge or flud of Noe. For like as many than being
careless contemned the judgments of God, another feared they any peril, or
hoped for any better life: so comes it to pass also in the last age, in the
which Enoch constantly preaches by them, which establissh and maineteyne
eternal life, and the resurrection of bodies against the Epicures. Before the
judgment comes Helias against Antichrist.
Helias in the mount Thabor appeared in glory with our savior Christ unto
three chosen Apostles: neither is it to be thought that about the end of the
world he must be thruste out of the heavenly palace, and again be subject to
corruption, and objected to the cruel hands of Antichristians, which might
tear him in pieces. For like as in ye time of our savior Christ Helias in
virtue and spirit, I mean S. John baptiste went before Christ the Lord: so
also before the judgment Helias shall preach in them again, which endued with
the spirit and virtue of Helias, shall call away the minds of al men from the
worshippyng of creatures, to the adoration of the eternal and only God. Helias
cried out, how long do ye halte one both sides: if the Lord be God, follow
him: if Baal be God, follow him. And now shall the Helianes cry: 3. of Kings
18.
if Christ be the perfection of the faithful, what need is there of man's
inventions and constitutions to work a perfection? If Christ be our
justification, satisfaction, purificatio^, our only mediator and redemer,
wherefore are these things attributed to man's merits? why are saints
accounted intercessours in heaven? why is salvation ascribed to many other
stinking things? Helias cried out: how long halte ye on both sides? As though
he should say, it is not lawful to part your hearts betwixt two Gods, another
is it lawful to atttribute al things of life and of salvation, but unto God
alone. The fellowship of the kingdom is in this case enuiouse in deed. The
Helianes shall cry: if rightuousenes be of the law, Christ died in vain. No
man can serve two masters. Christ shall profit you nothing, which seek
salvation in the traditions of men. Come ye unto Christ: he is the perfection
of the faithful, and in him we are complete. And like as Helias greuousely
accused Achab, Iezabel and the Baalamites: right so shall the Helians most
sharply inueye against kings and Bishops Idolaters and Antichristians. Thus
I say Helias comes again, has commen, and shall come before the judgment.

Another shall S. John prophecy otherwise before the judgment. Before the
judgment John came against antichrist.
He shall not return into the Earth in his body out of Heaven: but the
preachers indewed with the doctrine of S. John, shall renew al his doctrine,
they shall expound such things which he has left unto the church written in
his Gospel, in his Epistles, and in the Apocalipse. This book has a while
layne hid, contemned also of good and learned men: yet preaching the same,
that is contained and set forth in this book. but it shall be brought to light
of others, and be set by: as it is plain that in this our memory is done of
many. And of al these things we do clearly perceive, how Antichrist must be
impugned and slain, not with carnal Armures, but with spiritual: to wit by
sincere doctrine, framed after the example of Enoch, Helie and John, and taken
out of the holy scriptures. Whereof we shall speak more fully in the.11. Briefly
the doctrine of John about the last judgment shall be renewed again, and be
known to the world in despite and against their will. And under the doctrine
of John we understand the whole euangelical and Apostolical doctrine, in the
writing and setting forth whereof S. John also imployde a singular travel
amongs the most excellent.

What they must be, and with what quali^ies furnisshed yt preach against
antichrist.
And in the mean season in the same vision is figured the whole manner of the
faithful and lawefull Preachers to be matched with Antichrist, what they ought
to be, and with what qualities furnisshed. First S. John is called, by a voice
spoken to him from heaven, with a commandment go. Therefore is Gods vocation
chiefly necessary, leest any man should take upon him this office with an evil
affection. Moses was called, the prophets and Apostles were called: some in
deed immediately from God, not of men, another by men: some of God also, but yet
by men and of men. The apostles of Christ were not called of men boasting the
lawful succession, from Caiaphas, Annas and college of priests:
nevertheless had their vocation of Christ, and approved their vocation in
deed, to will by preaching of the verity. Therefore albeit we cannot at this
day refer our vocation to the Pope and Bisshops, braggyng of the lawful
succession: yet for as much as we are able to approve it in very deed, and by
the testimonies of Christ, that our doctrine is Christ's doctrine, and therefore
that our ministry is lawful, we care not a whit for their opprobriouse and
railing words, which cry, that we be not called that we be not ordained by the
Pope.

To ye called is given a sure commandment to take the book of the hand of
the Angel.
But to him that is called is given a sure commandment, to wit that he take
the book: not every book, but the book open, and that of the hand of the
Aungel, and again of the Aungel standing upon the sea and land. That Angel is
Christ the Lord, Lord of the whole Earth, of the Sea and al things contained
therein. He with his hand offers to his ministers a book open, to wit the
holy scripture: and chiefly his sacred and holy gospel, wrapped with no
darkness, another closed, but right manifest to the^ that will see. For albeit
that for thantiquitie of the tongue, for the propriety of speech, for the
figures, and rites, places, things, and stories out of memory some places may
appear somewhat hard: what does this darken or obscure the mystery of faith
and salvation, nevertheless most open and plain? who understands not, what
he should believe, what he should do, and how he should pray, even of the
Articles of ye faith, of the.x. commandments, and the lords prayer? The
some of faith and of doctrine is certain and plain. Esaye. 29, 2. Cor. 4.
This book therefore opened, Christ offers to his ministers. And S. John has
(...), and not (...), a little book, not a book. For if ye compare the holy
bible, especially the gospel book, with other laws, books, and especially the
decrees and decretalles of the Pope, the little book of the holy gospel shall
seem very small. Primasius expoundyng this place: he seems, says he, to
understand the verity of the law and prophets manifested in Christ:
therefore he says not now, as before, that he takes the sealed, but the open
book. For Christ is the end of the law, for righteousness to all that believe,
and so forth. Therefore the lord Christ him self gives unto the sincere
preachers none other preaching, than his own, to wit the Evangelical. For
he is the light and redemer of the world, rightuousenes and life, another is
there salvation in any other. This preaching is not fetched nor taken of
others, than of the hands of the Angel, not of the hands of ye Pope or
Bishops. Christ says, go forth into the whole world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature, teaching them to keep al things which I have commanded you.

Now is also required obedience of the ministers, The obedience of ye ministers.
that they obey the commandment of God: and that they crave and receive,
that which they are commanded to axe and receive. In vain do some look for a
drawyng and working of salvation outwardely, and with out then to be finisshed,
through the only invisible operation of God. If God will have me blessed and
just, say they, let him work in me what he will. Moreover they themselves are
not careful, how they should apply themselves to the grace of God workyng by
grace. Against their ungodliness is it, that we hear now, how S. John applies
him self to the commandments of God, not without grace. For he goes to the
Angel and says, give me the book. For the Lord must be prayed: we must
read diligently, as S. Paul also commands: we must learn, and obey the
commandments of God, The Lord denies nothing to the^ yt are.
and not tarry til God without us do draw us.

And the lord denies nothing to them that are willing, do are and are
dilligent, which in the Gospel says: I will give you a mouth and wisdom,
which al your adversaries shall not be able to gain say. Moreover: my
heavenly father will give his holy spirit, to such as desire of him. Therefore
says the Aungel now: take the book. Nevertheless he puts here an other
commandment: eat it. He alludeth to the.2. and.3. A feruentnes and
diligence of ye ministers is required
chapt. of Ezechiel. Where the prophet is likewise commanded of God to eat a
book offered unto him. For S. John here inuenteth no new thing. S. Ambrose:
to eat a book, says he, is to lay up the understanding of the scriptures in
the secret bowelles or entrailles. He seems by a trope both to intimate an
ernest desire, and beat in a singular diligence. For we devour with a gredy
desire, such things as we have long and much coueted to eat. They are said
also to have devoured books and authors, which they have perfitly learned and
can. We say in dutche, Er hat den Galen, oder Prisciane gar fressen: that is
to say he has learned him perfitly. It is required therefore of the preachers,
that they learn the holy scriptures with a desire, and that they learn and
remember them whole and exactely. Without a desire and seruentenes of mind
thou shall profit little in the study of holy Scriptures: and unless ye learn
the Gospel exactely, unprofitably shall thou preach the same. The ministers
therefore may be asshamed of their ignorance, which are more given to Idleness,
Tauernes, hu^ting, dising, and other worse things, than to the study of holy
Scriptures. They being far unlike the apostle S. John, shall in this warfare
against Antichrist win small renown, unless they do awake out of their
profane sleep, and cherely do their dewty without doubt most holy.

The effect of Gods word sweet and better.
Another is here dissembled so much as the effect of the ministry, and word
preached. It is sweet in the mouth as honey. For David has song also: the
judgments of the lord are to be desired above much Gold and preciouse
stones, and sweter than honey or honey combs. This swetenes is ever felt in the
inward manne, and the faithful lighted with the truth, has always
continual Joy: but yet must we not conceal, what it seems to the flesh,
and what is the effect thereof in the outward manne. It makes verily the
^ealy vitter: which is also a phrase of speech, unto which ours answers,
signifiyng that the same which is propounded unto us, is both payneful and
greuouse. The word of God therefore brings the mortifiyng of the flesh,
trauelles, paynefulnes, the cross, and adversities innumerable, which with a
strong and constaunt patience we must overcome. For the Lord in the Gospel
preached repentance or mortification, and emonges other things made very much
mention of persecutions, wherewith his should be always exercised. Primasius:
when thou shalt have devoured the book, says he, thou shall in deed be
delighted with the swetenes of the word divine, and with hope of salvation
promised, and pleasant tasie of Gods righteousness: but doubtless thou shall
feel a bitterness, when thou shall begin to preach both to the devout and
undevout. For the preaching of Gods judgment ones heard, doubtless through
the bitterness of repentance some being converted to better are changed: and
others again being offended are more hardened, and bear great hatred and
malice toward the preachers. The wiseman says, thou shall rebuke a wise
man, and he will love thee: reprove a fool and he will hate thee therefore, and
so forth.

Another are these things said only, Paynefulnes is felt.
but also are done and felt: for S. John: and when I had devoured it, says
he, my bealy was made bitter. And we feel at this day the most greuouse hatred
of mighty men to wit of spiritual fathers, and temporal Princes. Many
are driven into exile, innumerable are shut up in prisones, an infinite
multitude are slain with sundry kinds of deaths. All these things did the
Prophets prophecy should come to pass, our savior him self in the Gospel
gave us warnyng thereof: the lord here tells us again the same tale. Therefore
let us be strong and counstaunt in the Lord, and fight against Antichrist unto
the end of our life. The Lord will not forsake us, which leeste we should be
vanquished of those adversities, told us of them dilligently before. And thus
must they be instructed which shall war against Antichrist before the last
judgment. Thexposition of the vision.


Last as I said in the beginning of the Sermon, is set a brief exposition of
the vision. For the Angel says unto John, thou must prophecy again to the
Heythen, etc. By this vision, says he, I would declare nothing else, but that
thou must preach again to the world, first by thy self in Asia, after thou
shall return from exile: secondly by faithful ministers eue^ to ye worlds
end, which shall spread abroad this doctrine, now set forth by thee, with
sundry tongues through nations, and therewith shall beat down Antichrist. To
prophecy.
And such as are accustomed to read the scriptures know that to prophecy, is
taken for to preach. For prophecy, is preaching, they were in times past
called prophets, which at this day be preachers, as we may gather of the.1.
Corinth. 11. and.14. chapter. And the doctrine of John is turned into the
Syrian tongue, Ethiopian, Aegiptian, Germane, Spanish, French, English,
Italian, to be short in a manner into al la^gages: in all these preaches S. John
at this day by faithful ministers. The gentiles be they never so barbarouse
and rude hear S. John teaching: and so do the people of many nations. Al these
receive not a little comfort in these most dau^gerouse days of Antichrist,
and have received of them also before this time, which long sins renewed the
apostolical doctrine against Antichrist. The same doctrine is brought at this
day, and was brought in times past also unto kings and Popes though they
kicked and spurned against it. The thing I speak is not doubtful. For we both
hear and see these things even at this day. Histories also report many
things hereof. Land and glory be to God. Some copies in the latin are corrupt,
which have Igitur for Iterum. For S. John said, thou must prophecy (...),
which signifies Iterum again, not Igitur. For he signifies that he being dead
also must preach to many nations in sundry tongues, by faithful ministers
that shall fight against Antichrist. The Lord assiste with his spirit all
godly Preachers of the Evangelical verity and Apostolical doctrine. Amen.

S. John measures the temple, and shows that God has a care of it: and the
quire he excommunicateth. The.xlvi. Sermon.
ANd there was given me a reed like unto a rod, The 11. chapter.
and it was said unto me: rise and mete the Temple of God, and the Altar, and
them that worship therein, and the quire which is within the Temple, cast
out, and mete it not: for it is given unto the gentiles, and the holy city
shall they tread underfoot.xlii. months.

The lord is yet in co^forting, and in describyng the hostile war against
Antichrist: and shows that the church shall not be forsaken in those
Antichristians and turkish difficulties: that the enemies shall never so quietly
inioye althinges, but that the church shall have also her champions or
defenders, which shall most valcauntly resist Christ's adversaries.

And those things are figurative, The some of this sermon.
which are rehearsed in the beginning of the chapt. and seem to be taken out of
the.40. chapt. of Ezechiel. As be those also which are spoken in the.7. chap.
of the faithful sealed, out of the.9. chap. of the same prophet. For he is
commanded to measure the temple, and to cast out the inward quire: whereof he
shows the cause. And he means not the Temple of Jerusalem, The temple.
which lay in ruin, another should be repared, after the prophecy of Daniel
and Christ: but the very church of God, I mean the whole nombre of the chosen.
For S. Paul calls the faithful the Temple of God, lively verily, as also S.
Peter.1. Peter.2. And.1. Corinth. 3. And.2. Corinth. 6. Altar.
We have said now often times, that Christ is the only Altar in the church,
and sacrifice for sin, and Priest and intercessour on the right hand of the
father. The worshippers Worshippers.
be they that worship God through Christ in spirit and verity, and serve
him lawefully or with fear. So many as be such, that is, who so ever cleave
unto Christ the only peace maker of the faithful, and serve god truly by
faith, they be the very Temple of God, and the true church. These has S. John
measured: To mea^^ the temple. etc.
that we should understand how the lord fixes his mind to build up the
church, not to distroye it. For they that will build mete the platte, whereupon
the buildinges should be set: as appears in the 40. of Ezech. Then was also
the temple destroyed of the Chaldeis, as ye church is now wasted by the
Papists and Turks: But the Lord promises by this measuring, that he will
repare the ruins of the church of the merit of Christ, and faithful
worshippers: moreover he signifies, that the faithful in these troubles ar
numbered (before we heard they were sealed) and sure whom no hostile power can
hurt in all these difficulties. For as the Altar Christ is undefiled, and
cannot be polluted or destroyed by any power of the Devil: So are the sheep of
Christ known to God, and perish not: As also the same Lord Jesus Christ
testifies in the.10. of John, and the Apostle in the.2. Timothe. 2. Briefly
the faithful of Christ be in the communion of god and of all his good things,
in the care, buildinge, number, and defense. This is a most assured
consolation. Howbeit where the Lord in the gospel prophesied, that the true
faithful should be excomunicated of the false teachers, and here also foresaw,
what should chance to the ungodly pastors of the false bishops: he says
verily that they apparteine nothing to the buildinge of God, The quire with in
must be cast out.
but to be of God excommunicated, to the intent the godly should not fear
their censure and cursinge. And here is the election of two sorts, whereof the
first is more allowed, that is, (...) the hall or quyre that is within, cast
out; that is to say, declare the^ that be in this quire, to be cast out of
God. Verily the Antichristians will be within the Temple, or inward parts of
the temple, and the chiefest part of the church, in so much that who so ever
acknowledges not the^, and follow them not in all things, and frame him self
conformable to the church of Rome, is judged to be an heretic. The inward
quire in the law was the statio^ of priests, the place wherein they were when
they should do sacrifice. And whilst he says the quire must be cast out, he
signifies figuratively that the Antichristian priests shall be throwe^ out.
For the place is set for the thing contained therein. And where he says, cast
out. This he says, those whom God has shut out, declare thou to be cast
out. For God does excommunicate, man pronounces and executes Gods judgment.
The latter lection is of this sort: and the quire ((...)) which is with out,
cast out. So has the Spanish copy. And how shall you cast out that which was
with out before? Therefore I like, as I said, the former reading. But we reject
not this reading another. For the hall that is with out, signifies the College
or fellowship not communicating with thonly altar Christ, or with the true
church of Christ, such as all this book shows the Popes to be with all their
family. Morouer the Phariseis and priests cast out him yt was borne blind,
What is to cast out.
John the.9. that is to say, did excommunicate him for the confession of
Christ, and the lord says in the.15. of John: If any abide not in me, he is
cast out, as a branch, and whithereth. Therefore whilst S. John is
commanded here to cast out the College of priests, he is verily commanded
to declare. that those priests were excommunicated, which would be and seem the
chief prelates of Christ's church. He is also forboden, to mete this quire.
For because God will not edify but distroye them: another have them no^bred
emonges his. For he has rejected them. Who tha^ will herafter care this much
for the exco^municatio^ of them that are excommunicated? wicked popes have
excommunicated Emperors noble men and godly: and discharging their subjects
of their fidelity have set them in their princes tops. The story of Gregory
the.2. is known against Leo Isauricus: and of Gregory the.7. agayns^ Henry
the.4. And of Innocence also, against Frederick the.2. and of other Bishops
against right good princes. Doubtless the chief stringe of the popish tyranny
has been excommunication, which the Lord here lowseth.

Another does the Lord counceale, The quire is given to the heathen.
why he pronounces the priests, or inward quire excommunicated; for because
it is given to the heathen. Which phrase of speech is as much of force, as if
you should say: for as much as in the quire they play not the priests or
faithful ministers, but the gentiles, which have occupied this place. But the
gentiles are rightly shut out of the fellowshippe of God and the church:
where the lord him self in the gospel said: if he hear not the church let him
be unto thee as an heythen and publicane. Undoubtedly they that be not in the
Temple or church, or else be in the inner quyre, that is to say, which will be
accounted emongs the prelates of the church: and yet hold not of Christ, but
are more comformable to the heythen, than to Christianes: are accounted most
justly excluded emonges the gentiles.

The pope and all papists are heythen.
And now let us see, wherefore he accompteth antichrist the pope with his members
emo^ges the heythen. They that are borne of god, hear the word of god, and
glorify it: they that be not as yet borne of God, but remain gentiles, not
only hear not gods word, but also blaspheme ye same. So these men will not
hear gods word, and seek with all their endeavor, how to fear men away from
the scriptures, which are Gods word. They say that they be obscure, doubtful,
uncertain, and vnperfet. Those that believe and cleave to the same they call
heretics: and the doctrine taken out of the same, heresy. Again they that
have not Christ their head, and as branches grow not to the vine, have no
communion with Christ, and be gentiles. But such is the pope and his
adherentes, persecuting Christ still, and al those that affirm Christ to be the
only head of the church, Christ alone to be our righteousness and life, yt all the faithful are made fully co^plete by Christ. He that thus believes, they
pronounce him an heretic. Moreover the gentiles worship Idolles, call upon
creatures, suppose God to be honored with corruptible things as gold, silver,
and preciouse things, dedicated to the Temple, and set up to beaultifie the
same. But what other thing do they in the church at this day? Thou see
plainly heathen Temples when thou see their churches. The life also of the
gentiles is shameful and filthy: they are given to voluptuousenes, full of
surfeiting, addicte to filthy lust, they stink in whoredom, and excede in
gorgeouse apparel and pamperyng of the body. See what things the Apostle
writes of the life and conversation of the heythen in the.4. and.5. chap. to
the Ephesians. And in the.1. chapt. to the Romans. And in the.1. to the
Corinth. the.5. and.6. chapter. Now what the life of the Pope is and of his
spirituality, the thing it self to openly testifies, that even for this cause
only they might and ought to be accounted emongs the excommunicated, the
Apostle him self pronouncyng the sentence of excommunication, in the place
which we have now cited, the.1. to the Corinth. the.5. We may put herunto
their Epicureisme. For if they set by any religion, if they have any fear of
God in them, why do they selle all things in the church, forgeuenes of
sins, heaven, Christ, the oblation of Christ, matrimony, ministry, briefly
al things? why call they in doubt diverse articles of our belefe? what mean
these doubtful disputations of the immortality of souls, and resurrection of
bodies? why make they a mockery of the life everlasting?

Hereunto is added, that these tread upon, The holy city is trodden under foot.
yea spurn the holy city: for therefore may they justly betaken for
excommunicated. This holy city, is not that earthly Jerusalem, but the church
of God, whereof the holy city was a figure: as S. Paul expounds in the.4.
chapt. to the Galathians. For the earthly Jerusalem, according to the sayings
of the prophets, having played her part, lay in ashes never to be restored.
The lord therefore signifies that the holy church of Christ, should through
the tyranny of Antichrist and Antichristians be trodden under foot. And it
signified more, that he said, to tread To tread.
upon: than if he had said to afflicte and persecute. For treadyng upon is
joined with the greatest despite of him that is trodden on: and hereby is
signified an extreme assayling and wonderful cruelty of the enemies, which
they practice on them they overcome, and have to use at their pleasure. We
read in Daniel of the Romans: The beast had great iron teth, eating and
breakyng small, and the rest treadyng under her fete. For wanton beasts are
woonte to tread with their fete such things as they can not devour, when
they be full. And Solomon in the.27. of the Proverb. A soul that is full,
says he, treads the honey comb. Malachie in the.4. chapt. speaking of the
joy of the godly: ye shall leap, says he, as calves of the heerde, and ye
shall tread upon the wicked, which shall be as duste under the souls of your
fete. Briefly S. John by treading signifies the oppression of the church
joined with great tyranny, and wantonness, and with the excedyng great mockery
and gladness of the wicked. And seems plainly to have alluded to these words
of the godly prophet: O God the heathen are comen into thine inheritance, thy
holy Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones. The dead
bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the
air: and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the land. Their blood
have they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to
bury them: and the rest that follows. in ye.78. Psalm. And a little after in
this chap. shall follow mo things of the persecution of Antichrist. Another shall
these things be obscure, in case you compare them with those, which are done
at this day in the church of rome against the lovers of Christ's gospel.

The rekeni^g of.xlii. months.
Besides here is showed a certain time, in the which the persecution of
Antichrist should be cruel against the church, to wit the space of two and
forty months. In the acco^pte whereof some tourment themselves maruelousely.
I suppose plainly that a certain time was assigned, and that not without
cause, and yet not withstanding an uncertain time to be understand. A certain
time therefore is assigned, that we might understand, that God has appointed
an end of their furies: which as he him self alone does know, so would he
signify to his faithful the same time not in years, but in months only, for
a consolation. For we suffer more easily, that which we perceive shall co^tinewe
but a few months. This sense has also Aretas after a sort touched, writing
thus: we suppose that the time of.xlii. months does express a shortening of
time, about the coming of Antichrist: for the which affliction to be executed
upon the lovers of God, Math. 24.
Christ very God says, that those days should be abbreuiated. And
these.xlii. months, are three years and a half, wherein it shall come to
pass that the faithful, and the very tried, shall be trodden and suffer
persecution. Thus says he.

Three years and a half, ye years of Antichrist.
Doubtless al expositours in a manner being verily taught by this place, have
attributed to the kingdom of Antichrist, and to his most cruel persecutions,
not mo years than three and a half. For so many years make.xlii. months, if
ye put to a year.xii. months. Howbeit the Scripture and the thing it self
speaks, that the kingdom of Antichrist should be a great deal longer.
Whereupon I said, that a certain time is assigned of thapostle, and an
uncertain time understand: that is to say, all that same time, that is rekened
from the fatal years.666. whereof is mentioned in the.13. chapt. of
thapocalipse, until the last judgment. And why I do expound a certain time by
an uncertain, these be the causes. First, for as much as the same nombre of
months is put here in the.13. chapt. And is ascribed to the old Roman
Empire, verily that in their tribulations the Saints might understand, and
comfort themselves, that there is an end appoincted to their tira^ny, which is
known of God: and that the Saints should no more be sorrowful, than if they
should be co^streyned to abide their tyranny a few months only. Otherwise if
ye should account from the first year of Julius Caesar, and bring the course
of time until that year, wherein Odacer at Rome, al emperors of the weste being
taken away, was acknowledged for King, you shall not find only three years and
an half, but about five hondreth and.xvii. years. If you shall bring the
account from Julius to the empire taken away, and given to the pope, you shall
find about.767. years. The later cause: for that Daniel, the Lord Christ,
and the Apostle S. Paul, agreablely do say, that the persecution of
Antichrist should last unto the judgment. But who shall reke^ unto us the years
and days of the last judgment? And therefore must the no^bre certain be
expounded by the uncertain, and must think that al things are nombred and
prefixed in the counsel of god, which never neglects his faithful. To him be
glory for evermore. Amen.

Of the two prophets fightyng manfully against Antichrist, and of their power.
The.xlvij. Sermon.
ANd I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a M. cc.
and.lx. days cloted in sack cloth. These are two olive trees, and two
ca^delstickes sta^dyng before ye God of the Earth. And if any man will hurt
them, fire shall come forth of their mouth, and devour their enemies And if any
man will hurt the^, this wise must he be killed, these have power to shut
heaven, that it reign not in the days of their propheciyng: and have power
over waters to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all manner
plagues as often as they will.

These things apperteyne also to the consolation of the faithful. Prophets
are promised.
For the lord promises that he will send prophets: that is preachers, which
shall mayneteyne and defend the verity of the Gospel, and glory of Christ,
assail Antichrist, and distroye his kingdom, and auaunce the salvation of the
faithful. In the fourmer chapt. 8. and.9. was described the fight of
Antichrist and heretics against God and his Christ, and against his church:
and now at few words is set against the same the contrary fight, and the army
of Christ is munstred.

Two prophets.
And he brings forth two Prophets, that is preachers: not for that there
shall be two only, but for that he will so signify that the power of Christ in
the world should be and seem to worldly men small (as I shall tell you anon) in
the mean time he understands al faithful preachers and pastors of al times,
which offer themselves to resist Antichrist and heretics. There be that
expound these things of Enoch and Helie, which shall come corporally before
the judgment. Howbeit S. Hierome in the epistle to Marcella does refer that
opinion to Jewish fables, signifiyng that these things must de spiritually
expounded of those prophets, as are also the most things of this book. And in
manner al expositours with great concord, do interpret all these things of
these Prophets spiritually, and not corporally after the lettre. I suppose
that for two causes there be two Prophets only here rehearsed.

First, for that he would allude to the old History or prophecy of Zachary,
which is in the.4. chapt. It was thought than also to the people of Israel,
returned from Babylon, that the reparyng of the Temple was impossible, for
that they had many and mighty adversaries, and they were weak and few, and
their governors Zorobabel and Iehosua contemned: but through the mighty hand
of God, and his faithful aid it came to pass, that the power of their
adversaries vanisshed away as vain, and they indespite of hell gates builded
up their Temple right, so the Lord says it shall be in that later age, that
the ministers most conte^ptuous and very few in nombre, shall build up Christ
his temple, and repare it, and shake the most mighty power of Antichrist.
Herunto I suppose belongs that saying of Daniel: and when they shall fall, they
were helped with small aid, etc. Secondely for this cause chiefly he accompteth
only two witnesses, for that it is red written in the Law, in the mouth of two
or three witnesses every word shall stand. It is judged therefore a full
testimony, which shall be confirmed with the agreeable declaration of two.
Where therefore the lord says that he will give two Prophets, it is as much to
say, as that he will give so many ministers as shall suffice, which shall both
build up his church and also pluck down and re^t a sonder the kingdom of
Antichrist. There be of the expositours, which think that by two witnesses are
understand two testame^tes. Howbeit we see that the Lord speaks here of
witnesses, not of the thing testified or to be witnessed, which nevertheless
we separate not from the witnesses.

The Apostles and Apostolical men are called witnesses every where in the
Gospel, and in the.1. Who be witnesses.
chapt. of the Acts of Apostles. Witnesses are ordained in judgment that they
should faithfully utter that which they have seen or heard, that they should
forge nothing of themselves, and to the things that should be testified should
another add or put any thing, nor take away any thing. So likewise are placed
of God in the church of God, the witnesses of God, that is to say ministers:
and of them is required, that they Imagine nothing of their own brain, another
put to nor take away any thing from Gods word, but simply declare to the
church of God the things they have seen in the story of the Gospel and heard
of the prophets and Apostles. Therefore are they false witnesses, another
worthy to be called the witnesses of God and of Christ, which bring not the
Gospel. They be rather the Popes witnesses, whose decrees and decretalles they
bring forth, and bear witness of them to the folish people. Therefore shall
those two prophets be witnesses of Christ, and shall bring witness for Christ
out of the most true Scriptures.

And the beginning of them is here referred to God and to his Christ as the
original of Antichrist is reduced to ye devil him self. The original of
prophets.
I will give, says the lord, to my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy.
Christ sends preachers, and gives to them also that they can preach. The
which is a wonderful comfort. For like as the devil many times sends,
instructs, and helps his false prophets. So Christ leaves not his church
destitute, and gives to this ministers ability of teaching and doing
luckely. For in the Gospel also he promised and said: I will give you a mouth
and wisdom, which they shall not resist, so many as be against you. These
things ought to comfort us, in the greuouse consultatio^s, trayhisones and
assaults of the enemies of the Gospel. Christ will not forsake his ministers,
so they be faithful, and depend upon Christ alone.

The time of ye preaching of the prophets.
Now is also declared the time of the preaching of the gospel against
Antichrist, verily all that time wherein Antichrist shall tread the Temple and
holy city. For a thousand two hondreth and.lx. days make.xlii. months, if
you put to every month.xxx. days. But we heard before that Antichrist should
tread the church.xlii. months. Again therefore is a certain no^bre put for
an uncertain. And here is signified, and that with a mystery is here defined
the time of days, not of months or years. For though the function of the
ministry be never so hard and daungerouse: yet so shall God comfort and
confirm them, that they may appear a few days only, not months or years
to suffer persecution, and to travel in this laboriouse work of the Lord. And
where I have said that those nombred days are put for an uncertainty of time,
this has moved me, that by and by in the.12. chapt. the same nombre of days
shall be assigned: for the which yet he has set before, for a time, and times,
and half a time. Which appears plainly to be taken out of the.7. and.12.
chapt. of Daniel. I know that the same is expounded of many for three years
and a half: that the time, should signify a year: times, two years: and half
a time, half a year. But every manne may perceive that the thing it self is
repugnaunt to that nombre of years, if he be at the leeste any thing seen in
stories. In the.7. of Daniel. the other beasts, says he, gave over their
rule, and spaces of life were granted, for a time, and a time. But who will
expound these things of two years only: sins it is evident, that the
Babilonians, Persians and Macedonians reigned many years? he signifies
therefore that those kingdoms should reign so long, as God would permit
them, and give them power to reign. We say in Dutche where yet we appoint no
time prefixed. In the same chapt. of Daniel is put the same phrase of speech,
that the Saints shall be delivered into the hand of Antichriste, for a time,
times, and half a time. And in the.12. chapt. he says that his Prophecy
shall be fulfilled in a time, times, and half a time. But who shall believe that
within three years and an half all those things should be accomplisshed,
which he declared in the whole work? Why than do they restrain the times of
Antichrist to three years and an half, especially his persecution? why see
they not the destruction of Antichrist, and the peace of Saints, and the day
of judgment, to be the same day? For Daniel says, that the beast should be
cast down hedlong into Hell, when the seats be furnisshed. And Paul says,
whom he shall destroy with his coming, and who shall show unto us the
certain day of judgment? It is known to the father alone. Let them leave
therefore with their supputations to strive with the Gospel. It appears
therefore that the Lord by that kind of speaking as it were by a riddle, to
have diffined no time certain: but rather to have admonisshed the godly of
long sufferyng, of patience and constancy: and to have commanded that we
should not over curiousely search the instau^t of this time, but should rather
permit it to christ him self, in an other place saiynge: It belongs not to
you to know times, and the momentes of times, which the father has reserved
in his own power: but watch, that when the Lord shall come, he may find
you watchyng. Therefore whether so ever the Lord shall differ his judgment
a long, short, or mean time, be you constaunt. So at this present he says,
how the ministers of Christ shall preach all that time, wherein Antichrist shall
persecute. And verily if thou read the stories, thou shall find, that the
most virtuous and best learned men, have in all ages, now for the space of
these seven hundred years and more, constantly resisted the Popes enterprises,
their great abominatio^s, and crafty iuggelinges and seducinges of monks and
Freres. Of the persecutions that they have suffered, I will speak herafter.

The apparel of the prophets.
Furthermore also the apparel of these prophets is showed, that hereof also
may be gathered the manner of doctrine. They shall not be clothed in soft or
preciouse apparel, as velvet, sactin, or damasne, or crimosine ingrayned, but
in sackecloth. And sackecloth, as appears in the Prophets is for a mournyng
garment, and for such as are penitent. Therefore like as S. John was coursely
appareled, Matthew. 3.11.
and preached repentance. So shall these also move unto repentance and
amendment of life, and persuade men to frugalitie, and riot and al
vntemperauncie they shall persecute. Certainly al good and learned men now these
seven hondreth years have required nothing else of the Pope and Clergy, and of
the people but repentance and a reformation: for the which they have had small
thank at their hands. But what the apparel of the Antichristianes is, there
is no man ignorant at this day. Certain of it differs not much from
whorishe. Consequently he declares more fully and more at large, of what sort
they shall be, and also their ministry, what also shall be the effect, and
virtue of their preaching. And the same he sets forth and declares with
sundry figures taken out of the scriptures.

The prophets be olives and candelstickes.
And first he alludeth again to the.4. chapt. of Zacha. These be two olives,
etc. with oil lights are nurrisshed: oil therefore signifies the matter of
preaching or of Sermons. For Candelstickes bearyng lights, are preachers,
showing abroad the light of Christ, and of his gospel through out the world.
And that preaching of light is taken out of the scripture, as also the light of
a ca^del is nurrisshed with oil. Oil is a tipe of the holy of al holy.
Wherefore S. John calls also the holy ghost, vnctio^. Certes the holy
scripture, is the inspiration of the holy ghost. Therefore those preachers
shall preach Christ out of the scriptures. And so preaching the gospel of
Christ through the inspiration of the holy ghost, they are said to stand
before the sight of God of the earth: that is to say, these be in the
protection, in the cure, and providence of that God, by whose providence ar
governed whatsoever are in heaven or in earth. The prophets stand before god.
For he appears to have alluded to these words of Zachary. The eyes of the
Lord, look over the whole earth: And these be the two children of oil, which
stand before the gouernoure of the whole earth. And these things comfort
exceadingly the faithful preachers, which se that god has a care of them, I
mean God the Lord of al.

Again, they be another Olyues, nor candlestickes, showing the light of the
Gospel, so many as of Antichrists part esteem dregs and doung of men, in
the place of the oil of the holy ghost, and power them also into the candle:
another show they any light, but darkness, and opinions of most corrupt men.
Against these S. John reasoning, these things have I written to you, says he,
of these which disceiue you. And the unction which you have received of him,
abides in you, and you have no need that any man should teach you: but like as
the very unction teaches you of al things, so is it true, and no leasinge.

Now are also the weapons of these preachers descrybed, The armure of ye
prophets.
wherewith they may defend their cause, and fight against their enemies. If
any man will hurt them ((...)) fire esseweth out of their mouth, and
deuoureth their ennemies. And this (...) signifies, with a pretensed malice,
and against justice to hurt or to injury: and first he said to hurt. If any
therefore of the champions of Antichrist, shall assail those preachers, and
shall blame their doctrine and ministry, straight ways shall they bring forth
of the holy scriptures Gods word, and so shall repress and overcome their
enemies. For that these things may not be expounded after the letter, that
same chiefly proves, that by and by we shall hear, that those prophets shall
be vaunquisshed, and put to death of Antichrist: to wit corporally. Who than
can not gather hereof, that the victory of preachers is spiritual, that their
adversaries vanquisshed of the verity, may live in deed bodily, but through
the virtue of the verity they may seem to be ghostly slain. Fire goes out
of the Prophets mouths.
And therefore as it were by an interpretation is added: and if any will injury
the^, so must he be slain. So I say, by fire verily which goes out of their
mouth. And who will say, that material and natural fire should come forth of
a man's mouth? And S. Paul also expounding these things, taking the manner of
speaking of Esaye, reasoning of Christ and of Antichrist: whom he shall kill,
says he, with the breath of his mouth. Behold S. Paul calls it the breath
of the mouth, which S. John named fire. We read also in the.xxiii. chapt. of
Jeremy, is not my word as fire, and as a mallet breaking the rock? And
again in the.5. chapt. In as much as you speak this word, behold I will
make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall consume
the^. Of Helias we read in the.4. of Kings.1. chapt. that calling down fire
from heaven he bodily burnte the kings servants. Which example where the
disciples James and John alleged, the lord forbadde them, that he might
admonish them of their function, to wit that they must fight with long
suffering and with the word of the verity. Which thapostle in an other place
commands expressly, to wit in the.2. Timoth. 2. Whereby we are plainly
taught, that Antichrist must not be vanquisshed with corporal weapons by the
ministers, but with spiritual. For he must be slain with the gospel, with that
most sharp sword, and fall down and die in the breasts of men, that he may be
utterly contemned, and known to be Antichrist. And where many co^founde the
ministry of the word and the power of the magistrate, and for the same cause
take the sword out of his hands, commanding that in this case he may not
strike heretics and blasphemers, affirming that they ought not otherwise to be
punnisshed than by the word: let them learn to discern better betwixt
offices, and not to give yt liberty to blasphemers, and to all manner of
seducers, and to such as having ben a thousand times co^uicte of heresy, cease
not to infect innumerable, and bring them into perdition, unless they be
straitely pu^nisshed by ye magistrate. Let every one therefore apply their own
office, and herein follow the rule of verity and equity, and than shall
things be in better order.

They have power to shut heaven.
Furthermore he adds more express things concerning their power and
ministry, even herein alluding also to sundry tipes of the scripture. For
first he says, they have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days
of their propheciyng. And he alluded to the story of Helias which is red in the
3. of Kings the.17. chap. And they must be spiritually applied to this our
business. For like as Helias through, the power of God, did prohibit, that it
should not rain: so shall the preachers of the gospel from the disobedient, or
such as will not hear the word, but had rather be seduced with popish
abominations, shut up heaven it self, that is shall assuredly testify yt it is
shut of God, for as much as through Christ alone, as the only gate yt way is
opened unto heaven, whom they not withstanding do conte^ne: and shall tell the^
also sharply, that the grace of God is denied the^, which is only granted by
Christ. For the prophets are authors, that rain does signify the grace of
god, and fruictful watering sent down from heaven. Therefore all the time of
their prophecy they shall co^sta^tly testify, yt they are through their
greatest deserte, and their own fault deprived of that celestial grace, light
and life, so many as had rather have ye Popes dragges than the true bread from
heaven. And again we understand that they have power given the^ to open heaven
to ye beleuers. Whereof here is now no place to speak. For ye things are more
manifest, which are written in ye gospel concerning ye keys of ye kingdom of
heaven, and herunto chiefly belong, than yt I should now rehearse the^: sins I
have both at other times, and before also in this same book spoken of them at
large.

Secondly he alludeth to the story of Moses, and says, they turn waters
into blood.
that power is given to these prophets to turn waters into blod: which
discordeth nothing with the fourmer member. For the water of godly wisdom, is
a figure of the grace and relief of the spirit. Blood betokens offense and
punnisshment. For that sentence of the law and of thapostle is well known:
your blood be upon your own head. Therefore shall these prophets testify, that
God has verily sent his word of salvation, to save al beleuers, but that this
shall be to the unbelievers through their own fault unto condemnation. For they
that hear the preaching of Gods word, and believe it not, hear it to their
own conde^natio^. And so is the gospel at this day preached to many with out
fruicte: as being corrupted with the popish doctrine, by force will not be wise,
etc.

Finally they have power to strike the Earth with every plague, so often as they
will. But they will not, they strike the Earth with plagues.
except Gods word, by the which they being inspired and instructed are
governed, shall command them. For they will do nothing wilfully, they will not
follow their affections, but the word of God. Howebeit they are said to
strike the earth with plagues, when out of Gods word they threaten, that God
with plagues will punnish the sins of me^. Those plagues are recited in
the.26. and.28. of Deuter. Wherefore in case they threaten to impenitent persons
war, pestilence famine, sickenesses and other calamities, God will send them
to such as are incurable, as the lord says often him self in Jeremy. Again
and on the contrary part they shall in rich with all blessyng those that obey
gods word, what time they shall show forth the Lords blessing.

Thus much has he spoken hitherto concerning the preachers of the Gospel,
which shall fight against Antichrist, in that last age before the judgment, and
shall build up the church, and confirm the beleuers. Thou thy self shall
observe, in what preachers thou shall perceive these marks, and the same shall
thou acknowledge for the lawefull prophets of God. And shall acknowledge with
all, how great a benefit of God it is, to have true and faithful preachers
of Gods word. The lord our God confirm al ministers of his word in the
setting forth of his truth, to the worlds end.

Of the cruel fight of Antichrist against the Prophets of God, whom he
overcomes and sleyeth, and shamefully uses them. The.xlviij. Sermon.
ANd when they have finished their testimony, the beast that came out of the
botomles pit, shall make war against them: and shall overcome them, and
kille them. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Aegipte, where our lord is crucified. And some
of the people, and kinreddes, and tongues, and of nations, shall see their
bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their bodies to be put in
graves. And they that dwell upon the Earth, shall rejoice over them and be
glad, and shall send gifts one to an other: for these two Prophets vexed
the^ that dwell on the earth.

We have heard of the continual preaching of the preachers, which shall
obiecte themselves to Antichrist, and to his army, for christ's verity, and
the church of the faithful, and that all the time that Antichrist shall
exercise tyranny against the church: consequently our lord Jesus Christ will
teach us by thapostle and Evangelist S. John, after what condition the
saints shall fight, and how Antichrist shall incountre with them: which also
apperteyneth to consolation, The persecution of Antichrist.
and a necessary admonition, leest any man should be discouraged with the
felicity of the Antichristians, and calamities of the faithful. He speaks
therefore expressly of the greuouse persecution of antichrist, which has now
continued these many years (I mean all that time, wherein the bishop of Rome
has usurped, and taken upon him authority over al churches) with some small
spaces of respite to breath in of the Lord permitted. This persecution of
Antichrist is more greuouse and longer, than ever was any, either emongs
thauncie^t people of God, or in the primitive church. Certainly for these five
ho^dreth years, who so ever, of what state or condition he were of, began to
speak never so little against the church of Rome, he felt inco^tine^tly
hatred, imprisonement, bannishment, and death. This do stories testify: which
show also, that persecution so much the more increased, as the Bisshoppes
themselves and their champions Monks and freres, were increased in nombre and
power.

And the lord declares most diligently, when, who, of what estate, where,
when, and with how great cruelty Antichrist shall play the tiraunt against the
faithful servants of God. He adds immediately, that all his enterprises
shall be utterly vain: and how great shall be the rewards of constaunte
ministers, and also the calamities of the Antichristians.

The testimony of Prophets must first be finished before the persecution come
on.
And first in deed, he admonishes plainly what time persecution must be moved:
not before the testimony of the prophets shall be finished. I showed you
before, that the testimony is the sincere preaching of the gospel. Aretas
says: what testimony? That he which shall be present, is not Christ, but a
deceauer, and a pestilent seducer, etc. And so great is the goodness of God,
loving his church, that he will not suffer the preachers to be taken away, till
they have finished their preachinge. For the gospel must be openly preached to
all men for salvation, and deliverance from anguish, crafts and disceiptes,
and from the seducers of Antichriste. And they shall finish their ministry
with sundry wrytinges, and continual preachinges. They shall finish I say, when
it shall please God. For some preach and abide safe and sound many years,
being safe and sure from persecutions: And others are immediately apprehended,
cast in prison and slain. Thus are these things done, as seems to god good:
which must ever be credited, what mean so ever he uses, and to auaunce his
glory, and further the health of his church. Here comes to pass also, as we
read often times in the gospel, that the lord was not taken, for as much as his
hour was not comen. Therefore shall a certain hour also be appoincted of God
to the preachers. Before this hour they be safe and sure, though the devil be
never so mad, tirauntes rage, and bloudsuckours and thenemies of faith lay
in wait. We marvel sometimes, how ye preachers of the gospel could preach in
so great a company of wolves so long time, and that directly against wolves.
Why they were not by and by torn in pieces? God de^e^deth his Prophets unto
their hour.
The lord God almighty has kept, which would first have them thoroughly to
finish the testimony of the verity. He let therefore their enemies, and
gave strength to his servants to preach. To him shall we render thanks, that
many good preachers in times paste, and of late days D. Luther, and D.
Zwinglius, and other faithful witnesses of God, could in so wicked a world,
and in so great power of Antichrist, execute their ministry, so many years,
in dispite of Hell gates. Notwitstandyng that the Princes and Magistrates
deserve also to be praised, for the lawefull defense showed them: yet should
this have been none at all, unless the power of God would have had it so.

And what time the faithful in the church shall be sufficiently admonisshed,
so that such as will be wise, Persecution comes on.
and not of a set purpose perish, may all escape the snares of Antichrist,
and live in Christ, immediately shall follow persecution. For so soon as the
Pope shall hear with his dregs, that he is assailed, he will straight way
begin to thonder, and lighten, finally to crave and styre up the secular
power against Heretics. For he shows expressly, who shall be this enemy
of these prophets and preaching, to wit the beast, The beast stired up
persecution.
that is the Bishop of Rome notable by his most cruel, tira^nicall and
beastly power. Of the beast shall be spoken more abundantly in the.13. and.17.
chapt. where we shall hear that she comes out of the earth, out of the
boto^lesse pit, and out of the deep pit of hell. For the original of that
wickedness is referred to non other parente, than the devil the prince of hell, a
lier and murderer. And the thing it self speaks at this day, that al
persecutions and conflictes are moved, stired and inferred of the Pope and of
his blouddy ministers of mischief. Of the same Authors arrose all the
calamities of fourmer times.

And he fights with the ministers and ministry of christ with sophistry,
with crafty and subtle practices, The beast fights with the Prophets.
excommunication, deaths, and terrors. Haymo: Antichrist will put in ure
sundry kinds of tourmentes, says he, and such as he can not overcome, he will
assaye to vanquisshe with doctrine. He will give rewards, and will promise
sweet words, and shall show also false miracles, etc. And seeing it has
pleased ye lord to call that seat the beast, wherefore should we call it the
holy See? if the Pope be that bloubdy beast, why should we salute him most
holy father?

He shows morouer, with what luck, Antichrist overcomes, and how? he
kills.
and with what ^^^tesse antichrist shall sight with the prophets. He shall
overcome, says he, and kill them. The same the lord said plainly in the
Gospel, Matthew. 10. and John. 16. And before also Daniel in the.7. and.11.
chapt. Some things are spoken also before in this book of the holy martirs.
The lord gives this warning in time, leest if we should see the preachers of
the evangelical verity slain, we should doubt of the verity of the
preaching, or esteem the matter of religion after the felicity of this world.
Which nevertheless many do at this day. For most men say: if this were the
preaching of the verity, as it is said to be, the most true God would not
forsake his own cause. But now sins the preachers are oppressed and
distroyed, why should we not gather, that their matter is false, and theirs
true that overcome? But if we might so reason, than the Prophets, Christ, and
the Apostles defended a very evil cause. For all in a manner being oppressed of
their enemies, in the end were slain also. Full good than was the quarrel of
the Jews, Phariseis, and the most wicked enemies of Gods word? Howbeit, thou will say, sins the verity is invincible, how is antichrist said to overcome?
He shall not overcome doubtless, by sure testimonies, by holy Scriptures, or
strong reasons: but by force, imprisonment, sword, and fire. For therefore by
interpretation immediately follows: and he will kill them. Therefore by killyng
he shall seem a conqueror. For if in a combat Aeneas shall overcome and sleye
Turnus, Aeneas shall be called a victour. And hitherto in deed Antichrist
overcomes: and although the Martirs be slain, yet do they before God
receive the reward of victours: because their cause is just, and the verity
ouercometh in them. The enemies overcome with the multitude, pomp, authority,
power, favor, richesse and other like things: we in the goodness, and
excellency of the cause, and finally by better testimonies of the Prophets
and Apostles.

The cruelty of Antichrist.
We have now the manner of the fight and victory. He shall fight and overcome by
carnal weapons, and shall be subdewed with spiritual armure. Hereunto is
added, what cruelty he will use against the Prophets. The which he expresses
in two sentences: and their bodies shall lie in the streets of the city: and
they shall not suffer their bodies to be put in the graves.

Their ^oarses lie in ye streets
The first sentence betokens an extreme cruelty, joined with an utter
contempt. For all filthy things are cast out into the street, yea the Dunge
of all streets is trodden under fete. Antichrist therefore shall handle the
Prophets most shamefully, in so much that all will believe that they have
power over them, and shall as it were spurn them with their feet, and take
them for outcastes and wicked persons, which being taken out of the way, al
things shall be safe. Certes the manner is in some cities, to cast into the
streets the bodies of them that are executed, to the intent that al me^ might
tread on them, and drive carts over them, for the terror of others: and to
signify that those men executed were most detestable, and put to death for no
small crimes. And herunto apperteyneth that Antichrist by secular power,
hangs up some ministers of the church openly in Cities upon the gallouse,
and fasteneth others with chains to a post, and so burns the^ with a slow
fire, and at last kills them, and they are so terribly tied to the pale in
chains, that he may hoyste them up, and let the^ down into the fire again,
and so singe them and lift them up again to the terror of all that look on.
What will ye say that he judges them unworthy of the last honor? The dead
coarses are not buried
burial is the last honor that is done unto man: but he will not suffer the
bodies of the faithful to be buried. Thus perauenture he expounds, that he
said before, and their bodies shall lie in the streets. At this day not only
sepulture is denied to such as suffer for the gospel, but also they dig up
and burn the bones of the dead, This did watson by Bucer at Cambr.
which living would not receive the Popish sacraments. For in case any man
depart, and has whispered the priest in the ear, confessyng to him al his
sins, and has not axed absolution of him, nor received his God of bread, or
suffered him self to be regenerated with extreme unction: although he departed
in the true says, yet for as much as he has not used those Popish
ceremonies, and humbled him self to the Pope, the party shall not come in
christen burial, but is buried on the dunge hill with dogs. The thing it
self speaks at this day. Morouer these Antichrists will seek by this mean to
abolisshe al memory of the godly. For Monumentes are made to reteyne the
honest memory of the dead. But the rightuouse shall be in eternal memory.
etc. And they in deed think that they do like good catholics: but the lord
Jesus expounds their work, and says it is extreme cruelty. Than what
shall you think of them, which blinded with the hatred of ye true religion,
like wolves and Ravens fly upon the bodies of the dead Martirs, and poole them
a pieces, and handle them most shamefully?

But cruel and blouddy is that cruelty, it shall continewe by the space of
three days and an half, Three days and an half.
the which all the expositours understand for a short time, certain in deed,
but yet uncertain: as I told you before of the months and years. Therefore
I suppose this shortenesse of time to be brought for a consolation. We say
also, for the Lord gives to the afflicted spaces to breath in: and shorteneth
the sorrowful days, to the end we might be able to abide it. If therefore our
patience be tempted in a greuouse cruel persecution of Antichrist, let us
think, that our Lord God has in a rekenyng all the days of our calamity:
and that he has shortened the same, for the consolation of the weak.

The place is told where the prophets must be slain.
And the very place, where this cruelty must be wrought against the prophets,
he expresses plainly, and as it were poincteth it with the fingar. To wit
the great city. And it is the city of God, and is also the city of the
devil: it is the city of Abel an innocent, it is also the city of Cain the
parricide: it is the catholic city of saints, it is also the Sinagoge of
Antichrist. These cities are open through out ye whole world, and are enclosed
with no strayte walls: thou might call this city, the lordeshippe, dominion,
kingdom or empire, or fellowship of the wicked. Where so ever therefore
Antichrist or Pope of Rome has jurisdiction, and even in the Romisshe church
it self, through out al nations and people, these things which we have
heard shall be done against Martirs. For setting forth that city with more
plain tokens: their bodies, says he, shall lie in the streets of the great
City. And by an exposition he adds: which is called spiritually Sodom and
Aegipte. Moreover: where also our Lord was crucified. And again: and they
shall see of people, and kinreddes, and tongues and nations, therefore by this
he understood not any strayte, nor yet any large city enclosed with walls:
but that city stretches through out the world wherein dwell nations, kinreddes,
people, etc. Sodom and Aegipte are far a sonder, another can they be joined
together with any walls. Again our Lord was crucified in the city of
Jerusalem, which is also called of the Prophets Sodom and Gomorrha: but he
is crucified daily in his members through out the world. And there is one and
the same city and society of all the wicked in the world, as there is one
body of the godly. Let us know therefore how that city wherein the bodies of
the prophets lie in the streets, is the city of Cain, and the Romish church
scattered over the world. The same is called Aegipte and Sodom, but
spiritually. Spiritually.
Where we see this vocable (...) spiritually, to be used in a sense far from
the lettre, for otherwise there is no spirit at all, either in Sodom, or in
Aegypte: for they be altogether flesh. Therefore insense of a parable, and by a
comparison, this city is called Sodom and Aegypte. Sodom and Aegipte.
What Sodom was, appears of the.19. chapt. of Genes. and.16. of Ezechiel. Her
sins went up to heaven. But what manner one is at this day, and a long time
has been the church of Rome, all men know, except it be they that will not
know. And the Apostle in the.1. to the Romans has expounded. And Aegipte
robbed the children of God of their liberty, oppressed them with vile bondage,
and prohibited them from the true worshippyng of God. So likewise the Romish
church has spoiled the church of Christ, of the liberty gotten by Christ:
has wrapped her in filthy servitude, that she might serve in the dirte of
men's tradicions. It prohibiteth moreover by all force and power, that she shall
not in retournyng to the gospel, serve God truly. And verily our lord Jesus
Christ was crucified on Mount Caluarie, at the city of Jerusalem: Where our
Lord was crucified.
and also the articles of our faith expounding the same, say, that he suffered
under Po^ce Pilate. He was the Roman governor, it is manifest therefore, that
Christ suffered under the Roman Empire. Under the same Empire, and under the
judgment thereof, were executed the Apostles and ancient Martirs. Under the
Empire of new Rome fall yt prophets also at this day by sword and fire. Also
people, kinreddes, tongues and nations obey this Empire, now called the
church, so that preachers in all places, the beast so willing and
commaundyng, are aprehended, and slain with cruel deaths, people kinreddes
and nations lokyng on.

To the augementation and most aptely expressyng the cruelty, that thing
apperteyneth chiefly, The wicked rejoice at the calamities of ye godly.
that these earthly men (possessyng in these lands a church all together
carnal) shall rejoice and be glad over the calamities and miserable deaths of
Prophets. The same did also the Lord him self prophecy before in the.16. of
John. Verily verily I say unto you, you shall weep and lament, but the world
shall rejoice, etc. Yea they shall send gifts, says he, and letters of
rejoicing. That this was done in the counsel of Constaunce, what time John
Husse, Bankettes were made for ye fall of England.
and Hierome of Prage were burnt Histories make mention. We have heard very
lately, how after England was fallen again to the Romish religion, what
joy and gladness, what bankettes and triumphs the Papists made in all places.
So often as the ministers, or other faithful are burnt, the self same keep
solemn chere and pleasant bankettyng, singyng. Te deum Laudamus. And letters
of rejoicing fly to and froe in some other places with sollemne procession
they rejoice at the misery of the faithful, but the Lord sees these
things, which told long sins that the same things should now come to pass.

They are glad they are lighted of their burden.
And the cause of this excedyng gladness is non other, than that those prophets
vexed them that dwell upon earth. For they that love the earth, and covet
earthly things, are sore offended with the free preaching of the verity,
which they hate more than dog and snake. For they desire either to atcheue
honors, riches, and pleasures, or if they have them to keep still the same: but
they are sore affrayed leeste through preaching the same should be shrewedly
shaken or wholly taken from them. Therefore they desire nothing more than to be
rid and delivered of their clamours, and immediately to have them taken out
of the way. For so think they that they shall be safe, and inioye their
pleasures at will. With like affection and Counsel in the feast of Herod, was
coueted another kingedom, nor great some of Gold, but the head of John
Baptiste. The Popes had rather at this day have the heads of certain ministers
of the church, than so many thousand crowns. Yea moreover the ministers of
churches are called plagues, disturbers, sediciouse, and iniuriouse against
God, and his saints, and against al men. Therefore they wisshe with all their
hearts to be eased of this burden. The Lord Jesus forgive them this sin.

The enterprises of Antichrist in wedyng out the preachers to be vain: how
great shall be the rewards of Preachers, and of the punnisshement of the
wicked. The.xlix. Sermon.
ANd after three days and an half the spirit of life from God: entered into
them. And they stood upon their fete: and great fear came upon them that saw
them. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them: come up
hither. And they ascended up into heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw
them. And the same hour was there a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of
the city fell, and in the Earthquake were slain names of me^ seven thousand,
and the remnau^t were feared, and gave glory to God of Heaven.

Hitherto has he spoken of the wicked joys and gladness of Antichrist and the
ungodly men of the last age, The joys of the wicked not to be long.
conceived of the slaughter of ye holy prophets of god. They will think, how
they shall reign for ever in those their errors, superstitions and pleasures:
and suppose by their murtherynge to have put to silence the preaching of the
gospel to them most displeasaunt. But consequently the Lord shows, that their
hope is most vain, their attemptes to be frustrate, and their joys short:
yea and quickly to be turned into mourning and misery. For first he
declares, that the prophecy or preaching shall be repared of God by new
prophets, and that to the greatest grief and terror of the Antichristians,
which looked for no such thing. After he shows how great rewards are
prepared and given to the preachers oppressed in this world, and entreated with
great vilanie. Finally he signifies that the wicked shall not live in
continual pleasure, but that God will disturb their joys, bringyng misery
upon them even in this world. Which although he begin at the last in this
world to punnishe, in an other world will more abundantly augmente their
tourmentes everlasting. And all these things shall need no great exposition,
so that we mark dilligently, what things have been done a few ages past, and
what be done also at this day. And al these things apperteyne to the
consolation and comfort of Saints.

The prophecy shall be often restored, which seemed extinguisshed.
First that the free preaching of Gods word against Antichrist shall be restored,
which seemed to him self to have ouercomen and oppressed all prophecy, he
declares by these words: and after three days and an half, the spirit of
life from God entered into them. He signifies by that nombre of days, as I
told you before, a very short time as though he should say: they shall not
long in joy their false and blouddy pleasures. For God shall reyse up other
Prophets in the place of those that are dead. And he speaks as though God
should reyse up the self same prophets, which Antichrist had slain, and
that he would obiecte them again to the wicked in their own bodies. Howbeit
they shall be reised again in their bodies at the last day: but now shall
other preachers succeed in the place of those that rest, unto whom God shall
give that spirit of his, which he had given to the others that are dead.
Therefore he calls this the spirit of life, for as much as those which were
slain for the same doctrine, seem as it were to have lived again. Verily for
lickenes of doctrine, John Baptiste, Helias, and the prophet Jeremy seemed to
have been revived in Christ, as is red in the.14. and.16. of Matthew. And here is
expressly said, that the same spirit did not proceed of the Devil, or of
men (as it is said at this day of many) but of God. For he with his spirit
(which is one) inspireth his ministers, and directs the same by his word,
that the latter wholly answer to the fourmer in doctrine, and severe rebukyng
of sins, etc. For the lively effect of that spirit follows, and they
stood upon their fete: that is to say, they lived again. Their doctrine seemed
overthrown and trodden under foot, but Gods word stands again upon his
fete, and runs most swiftely. We say in Dutche of such as be restored, to
expound the effect that same also appertains, that the Antichristians seeing
other preachers succeed in the room of the^ that were slain: being stricken
with fear, know not whether to turn them. By the way therefore is
signified, that the course of the word shall be fortunate, and the which
these men can not stop by any means, how so ever they rage and murder.
All these things shall be better understand by the Histories of later times,
and of such things as are done yet at this day. And to the intent, that
omittyng the eldeste things, I may touch those of latter time: the
Bisshoppes of Rome had thought they had won the field in the counsel of
Constaunce, when they had burned John Husse and Hierome of Prage: but within a
short time after many godly and well learned men sprange up in Boheme and in
other cuntries, in whom those slain appeared to have taken again the spirit
of life. In Italy Laurence Valla taught to his great praise, and also
Hieronimus Sauanorela, etc. In Germany taught many godly men, as in France
also in England, and other nations. Thirty years paste through the grace of
God was brought a light into the world by Mirandula, Reuchline, Erasmus,
Luther, Zwinglius, Oecola^padius, Melanchthon, and innumerable others, in whom
the spirit of life uttering it self after every man's talente, set forth the
Scriptures, detected the Romisshe wickedness, and rebuked the vices of all
states, but especially of the clergy. The Romish are affrayde of this spirit,
and fill the ears of the emperor and kings with complainctes and accusations,
and cry out that we should all with our books be distroyed and burned.
Howebeit the power of God nevertheless makes the prophets to stand on their
fete, and their preaching to run a pase: how so ever these rage in their
fury, and persecute gods verity preached through out the whole world. To God
be the praise and glory.

In this co^solatio^ are mixed also rewards prepared for the faithful
ministers, Great rewards prepared for ye godly ministers.
who^ the Antichristians slaiyng do first excommunicate, that they may send
them as it were bounden, and might as it were addicte the^ to Devils, of the^
to be tourmented with everlasting punnishmentes. And hitherto have all
preachers be^ thought, which have spoken against the church of Rome, and have
suffered therefore at the Popes hand, to have perisshed both body and soul:
their bodies I say, consumed with fire, and their souls throwe^ down into
hell. For they were condemned as heretics, and enemies of God and the church,
and even as the plagues of mankind, and so taken out of this life. But
contrariwise the Lord here pronounces, and declares everlasting rewards to
be for them prepared. For their souls delivered from their bodies, are
straight way taken up into heaven: and their bodies raised at the last
judgment, ascend into heaven also, that there they may rejoice with Christ
for evermore. But to the intent that this godly promise of the everlasting and
inestimable reward, might be of more authority and credit with all men, the
Lord propounds it not simplely, but most gallau^tly decked and ^^rnisshed,
for he sets before, that a voice was sent to the prophets, and that from
heaven: morouer, great, or loud. For great is the consent of Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles with the very son of god, in most assured doctrine:
whereupon we believe undoubtedly, that those which suffer for the confession of
Christ, are saved both body and soul. And that doctrine was brought from
heaven, that there is no place left for doubtfulnes. There be testimonies in
the scriptures both manifest, and many, as in.26. of Esaye.12. of Daniel.10.
and.16. of Matthew.14. of John, and diverse others. What should we say that at
this present is brought an express testimony hereof? for a voice sounds from
Heaven over the afflicted with the tyranny of Antichrist: Come up hither.
come up hither. That is as much to say, as, I see the lewdenes and cruelty of
the Antichristians to be such, that there is no place left you in earth. They
tourmoyle and persecute you as plagues, and unworthy to live on the earth:
come ye therefore hither to me, into the heavenly palace, whither I my self
came also after the cross and opprobriouse death. We read in the Gospel that
the judge shall say to the godly, come the blessed of my father, etc.

They went up into heaven in a cloud.
Furthermore leeste any man should think these words to be vain, the lord
adioyneth by S. John, and they ascended into heaven: not for that the
resurrection is made already, but for the undoubted certentie of the thing, he
speaks of the thing to come, as if it were paste: of the which sort are
found many like phrases every where in the Prophets. Helias in times past
ascended into heaven both soul and body, as we read in the.4. book of Kings
the.2. chapt. by the same miracle he showed than also, what reward the Lord
has prepared for the faithful preachers of Gods word, another is there any
other thing here now repeted. He adds, how they went up in a cloud. For a
cloud took up Christ our head from the eyes of the disciples: and we shall be
also taken up in a cloud to mete the Lord in the air, as the scripture
recites in the.1. of the Acts, and the.1. to the Thessalonians the.4. chap.
Albeit therefore that preachers, and those which believe the preachers be
excommunicated of Antichrist, and through open and shameful punisshmentes
should seem to be sent to the Devil: yet Christ receives them delivered from
al evils, unto him, into the palace of Heaven.

Unto this he adds an other thing also: and their enemies saw them. Their
enemies saw them.
They saw I say, with an horrible fear, for whilst they shall see them, whom
they have condemned for gods enemies, as the true and honorable friends of God
to be in glory: thereof they shall gather, that they themselves shall be deputed
into the fellowship of Deuilles. Read hereof a plentiful co^mentary in the.3.
and.5. chapt. of the book of wisdom. Albeit therefore that the preachers of
the Gospel in this present world be judged and seem and appear before the
world as damned: yet in that same day, wherein all men shall be assembled, so
many as ever have been, be now, or shall be, unto al it shall be manifest, yt
these be the most dear fre^des of God, and that their cause is best. And
herewith will the lord have them comforted which are persecuted, condemned,
despised, and spurned for the preaching of Gods word. By these things he
prepares and establissheth the minds of the faithful, that they be not
discouraged with the rebukes, reuilinges and oppressions of Antichrist and his
limbs.

Finally the Lord adds also certain things of the miseries of the
Antichristians, The calamities of the Antichristians.
wherewith the rightuouse Lord begins to punnish them, and to interrupte
their wicked joys, that at the last in an other world he may put ye same to
tourme^tes, that never shall have end. In that same hour, says he, the same
time doubtless wherein they shall afflicte the prophets, shall be made a great
Earthquake, and the tenth part of the city shall fall. And the tenth part we
understand to be great, yet so, that the more part shall remain in error. As
S. Peter prophesied should come to pass, in the.2. of Peter the.2. And the
Lord him self also in the.7. of Matthew. And he seems to recite two euilles,
which ha^ge over them, calamities, and reuoltinges. For S. John him self
seems to add an exposition, and to say: and there were slain in the
Earthquake the names of seven thousand men. And the residewe were affrayed,
and gave glory to God of Heaven.

Therefore I suppose by the Earthquake to be signified excedyng great
alterations, Seven. M. men slain with ye earthquake.
commotions, seditions, wars, slaughters and distructions. And he said the
names of men after the Hebrewe phrase, for a nombre of men. And he put, 7000. a
nombre certain, for an uncertain: as where it is said to Helias, I have
left me seven thousand men, which have not boughed their knees to Baal. For
if it signifies a great multitude. Likewise he signifies here also, that no
small nombre of Antichristians shall be dispatched out of the way by slaughter
and sundry or all kinds of calamities. Again he signifies that the tenth
part of the world, that is to say the adherentes and favorers of the
Romisshe church shall reuolte not a few of them from the same church, being
feared with the preaching of God his word, and with plagues inflicted to the
enemies of God his word, and so they shall forsake the Romisshe church, that
they shall give all glory to the God of Heaven.

The tenth part of the city falls.
Hitherto being abused with the Romish trifles, and sophistical opinions, they
have not given all glory wholly to the true God, creator of heaven end earth,
and the inhabiter and geuer of heaven, whilst they have attributed more unto
creatures. men's inventions, and to errors, than to the verity: and
communicated the glory, which they owe to God alone, unto saints also, and to
the works of their hands: but now being instructed with the preaching of the
gospel, they will depend of God alone, and will ascribe al glory unto him
through Christ.

Now if ye confer herwith histories not old (for whereunto should I moleste
you with a long rehersall) but lately made, and that with in these hondreth
years, thou shall give a wonderful light herunto. When the preachers of Boheme
were burnt at Constau^ce, a great co^motion of the people insewed immediately,
the Bohemers mouyng mortal war against the Romans. Aeneas Siluius him
self wrote of that war, wherein many thousands of men were slain, and
many places distroyed and laid waste. Moreover innumerable men, forsake ye sea
of Rome. In our memory where through the instigation of Rome a greuouse
persecution was stired up against the faithful, and certain thousands of
faithful slain, besides the expectation of al men, Rome taken.
Rome was taken in the year of our Lord.1527. and so defaced and spoiled, that
the same calamity might be compared with those old and greatest that ever
were. Another yet do the princes cease to war emonges themselves, and to
weaken themselves with mutual destruction, which never cease in a manner to
shede the blood of the faithful. But we are glad and rejoice, that a wonderful
nombre at this day do reuolte from that Romish see, and gives to God through
Christ all glory. To him be glory and rule for ever and ever. Amen.

The seventh Angel blows the trompe, and the elders singe a song of praise.
The.l. Sermon.
THe second woe is past, The.12. chapter.
and behold the.iii. woe will come anon. And the seventh Angel blewe, and
there were made great voices in heaven saying: The kyngedomes of this world
are made our lords and his christ's, and he shall reign for evermore. And the
four and twenty Elders which sit before God on their seats, fell upon their
faces, and worshipped God saying: we give thanks to thee Lord God almighty:
which art and waste, and art to come: for thou haste received thy great
power, and have reigned.

By the seven trompes Angelical not only the destenies of the church are
showed, but all the godly are also excited to watch, and to keep spiritual
war.

And to the three last trompettes, as most dau^gerouse, are joined three woes,
three woes.
signifiyng, as I said in the end of the 8. chapt. that al kind of troubles
and most greuouse afflictions shall chance in these times, whereby men shall be
brought in greatest distress. And the first in deed he has severed from the
second and third, by these words: one woe is past, and lo two woes are yet to
come after this. Which manner of speech does not break of the matters, but
frames ye speech in order. For the popish woe cease not, when the Turkisshe
woe comes on, but afflicts the churches to gether. That manner of speaking is
given therefore to the order: so now he discerns the third woe from the
second: signifiyng in deed that Mahometes law shall endure to the last
judgment: and yet in the mean time denies not, but that Papistrie shall
co^tinewe so long also, whereof he has hitherto in the.11. chapt. discoursed
many things, having finisshed the matters of Mahomet in the.9. chapt. Therefore
the sense of the Apostles words seems to be this: you have heard of the
first and second woe, hear furthermore also of the third and last woe.

And we must mark (which thing makes chiefly for the consolation of the
godly) that the Apostle says expressly, that the first and second woe are
paste. For so he signifies, that these two greatest tirannes shall have an
end, and that God has even prescribed them certain limits and bounds, which
they can not pass. Let us therefore rejoice, that God has a care over us,
which will not neglecte, another will permit the wicked to do more than
apperteyneth.

The third woe cleaves to the wicked, and will come anon.
The third woe shall stick, not in the godly, but in the wicked what time being
oppressed with the last judgment, they shall go besides their expectation
with their head the Devil, to everlasting tourmentes. No tongue be it never so
eloquent, can utter those unspeakable pains of this third woe. Wherefore
Daniel says also in the.12. chapt. And the time shall be herd, such as has
not ben since the beginning of people. But when this woe shall be, is not
expressed, nor determined, as another ye day of judgment: which is known to
the father alone, and therefore must not be searched of us over curiously. That
same is sufficient for us, that it shall come shortly. For the Lord says in
the gospel, that he will for the electes sake shortten those hard times. And
again, when these things begin to be done, look up and lift up your heads,
for your redemption approaches nere. But these things begin not now to be
done, but are already accomplysshed. Wherefore it cannot be chosen, but that our
redemption is at hand. Away than with thought and care, wherewith many tourment
themselves, that God delayeth over long, that he gives over much to the
wicked, that the godly are vexed to sore, and in manner forsaken, much more
neglected. For the verity says: And behold the third woe shall come anon,
to wit in time. For in the tenth chapt. he affirmed by a solemn oath, that he
will come unto judgment. Now as concerning the very moment and opportunity of
time, give glory to God, and acknowledge him in the courses of times, and in
all things and creatures, to use an opportunity most exquisite. Where
therefore thou confessest in thy creed, I believe that the Lord shall come from
the right hand of the father, to judge the quick and the dead: confess also
that he will come in time most dew: And like as from the beginning of the
world, he has never forsaken or neglected those that served him, so will he no
more neglecte them in the end of the world.

For it follows, The.vii. Angel blows ye vii. tro^pe.
that may expound the things that go before. And the seventh Angel blewe.
For he declares that the judge is now at hand, he raises from the dead, the
godly and ungodly: the godly unto joy, the wicked to pain everlasting. These
shall be new battelles, but to the wicked unfortunate, and altogether miserable.
Of the trompet of this Angel, you read in the gospel of S. Matthew. in
the.24. chapt. and in S. Paul in the.4. chapt. of the first to the Thessa. He
should adioyne now, the whole manner and discourse of that last judgment: but
he will differ it to the.19. and.20. chapt. In the mean time will he recite
as he has promised, the furies of Satan against the church, and how he
will use those notable instruments the old and new Roman Empire, to
commit murder, and in manner to distroye the church: wherein not
withstandyng the wicked shall in this world also be put to most greuouse
punnishmentes. Now omitting, or rather reserving these things to their own
place, he celebrateth the gratulatio^s, reioycinges and praises of Saints.

The reioycyng of the wicked is insolent and intolerable.
The pride and arrogancy of the wicked, and chiefly of the Antichristians has
seemed hitherto in the world intolerable: they have oppressed the godly,
bragged of their victories and have boasted of their own felicity with full
chekes: and as we shall hear in the.18. chapt. of this book, that beast has
said: I sit as Queen, and am no widow, and shall never see any sorrow. For
voices are heard from Rome: al Empires are ours. It is known what manner of
things Augustinus Steuchus an Italian and chief champion of the Popes holiness
has set forth in this cause against Laur^^ce Valla, about the donation of
Constantine. And daily are heard the brags and reioycings of the papists, of
the everlasting co^tinuau^ce of the Sea of Rome, of her victories, and
oppression of the preaching of the Gospel, and that the same has her power
stretched through out the world, etc. But in that day (what time verily our
lord Jesus Christ, shall abolish al power, rule, and authority and shall have
made al his enemies his footstool according to the scripture in the.110.
Psalm. And in the.1. to the Corinth. the.15.) There shall be heard again the
voices of the glad and ioyeful, singing true and eternal triumphing songs
in heaven. For Angels and saints shall sing together: wherefore the voices
shall be greater and more durable, tha^ the voices of Christ's enemies, which
last but a small season.

The song of the Elders.
Now also he rehearses the song or triumphaunt dittie, and reioycyng: the
kingdoms of this world are made our lords, and his Christ's, and he shall
reign for ever more, Ame^. He shows two things, that all kingedomes are
made the fathers and the sons: and that he shall reign for evermore. Al
kingdoms were before also our lord Jesus Christ's: but the same appeared not so
plainly to al men, what time the bishop of Rome also usurped the same to him
self, and oppressed the^ which did only celebrate the name of Christ. But in
that it shall truly appear, and that to all flesh, that al kingdoms were
ever, and yet remain of one and the eternal God. Christ therefore ouercometh,
the verity ouercometh, ye gospel ouercometh, the church ouercometh: they that
are vanquished, shall be led to hell, Mahomet with his, and the Bishop of Rome
with his. There is added, yt Christ shall reign for ever more. Antichrist in
deed has reigned, and the wicked have rejoiced in this world, but a very
short time: but now shall the godly reign with christ for ever more. Another
does he now divide the kingdom of the father and the son, but shows it to
be common, where he says that the kingdoms are made: that is to say. it is
openly declared, that al kingedomes are of God the father and the son, and
that he shall reign with his elect for evermore. So you may see that the place
of S. Paul may not be expounded after the lettre, which is written in the.1.
to the Corinth. the.15. chapt. of that the son^^ must be subjected, and shall
deliver the kingdom to his father. For he shall deliver the kingdom, to wit
the church: that is to say, shall bring, and present it to the father, and in
his members shall be subject to the father, with whom not withstanding he him
self shall reign for ever. Thaffirmatiue vocable is annexed, Amen. Leeste any
man should doubt one whitte of these celestial mysteries. Howbeit he does more
plainly expound afterward, what those voices are that were spoken in Heaven,
whilst he annexeth the narration of the.xxiiii. Elders, and of such things
wherewith they praised God.

And here the most goodly and beautiful order of this book seems to me
worthy to be observed. In ye beginning of this vision he brought in the same
elders, teaching us by their example and himnes, what we should do: the same
therefore he brings again also in the end of this vision, that we might be
instructed again by their words and doings, not only concerning ye last
judgment, of what sort it shall be, most rightouse doubtless, as al his
judgments are (which ye whole vision approves) but yt also we should
understand, what becomes us, and what we should do: verily that we should
worship god, and submit our selves whole unto him: and believe steadfastly yt
both ye judgment shall assuredly come, and yt also it shall be most just.

A geuynge of thanks
The himne or prayer, which they offer up unto God, is a kind of praise. For it
is a thankesgeuyng or rejoicing for victory. For in such sort they give God
thanks, that nevertheless they celebrate god highly, and rejoice to themselves
and to al godly for their salvation. For they give god thanks for their
salvation. And commend his justice and verity, which he shows in this his
judgment, rewarding the good with good things, and the evil with evil.
Therefore like as they rise out of their chayres and fall down before almighty
God: even so aught we also both now and ever to do. Whereof is spoken more in
the.4. chap. Here we should learn humility, and that God alone is to be
worshipped, and that to him alone al prayers or inuocatio^s, or giving of
thanks must be offered: the which thing is clean repugnau^t to the popish
doctrine.

We se now ye very thankesgeuing, than the which no better can be found. They
give thanks unto God. Let us therefore thank him also. And also commend and
exalte him, whylest they call him the Lord, and God almighty: and also they
celebrate his majesty, where they say: which art, and which waste, and which
art to come. They allude to the words of God, spoken in oulde time to Moses
in the.3. of Exodus. By the diversity of times, the eternity of God is
fygured. But of this kind of speech I have spoken more in the first chapt.

Christ in judgment receives power and kingdom.
And now they declare, wherefore they give thanks: for thou haste received thy
great power, and have reigned. God verily never laid aside his power, that he
needs to receive it again: but what time he shows not the same, and
permittith very much to the ungodly, that they by their power can infringe, and
preuayl against gods word, he seems to have laid it away. Therefore now that
he oppresses the wicked, and as a judge auau^ceth the godly, maintayneth the
verity, and destroys lying, he is truly said to have received his great
power. Likewise now is he said to reign, not because he reigned not before,
but forasmoch as the lord has reigned in the mids of his ennemies, so that
some time it was doubtful and uncertain, whether Christ reigned or
Antichriste: yea that he has had the upper hand, and Christ has been
oppressed: now yt Christ has broken all the power of his adversaries, he is
said most truly to reign. And very well Erasmus admonissheth in his annotations
upon the new Testament, that the translatour had turned more aptely,
Ebacilensas, if he had said, thou have obtained a kingdom. For the latin men
say, Regnauit, He has reigned, which has left reignyng: as they have
lived, which live no more. But with the Greeks it is otherwise at the leeste
wise in these words. To our judge most just, most mighty, and most
rightuouse, be praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The thanks geuyng of the Elders is expounded, the Temple is opened in heaven,
the arcke appears, and there were made lightenynges, etc. The.li. Sermon.
ANd the heythen were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead
that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy
servants the Prophets and Saints, and to them that fear thy name, small
and great: and should distroye them which distroye the Earth. And the Temple
of God was opened in Heaven. and there was seen in his temple the Arche of his
Testament: and there followed lightnings, and voices, and thonderinges, and
earthquake, and a great hayle.

I showed you, Of the last judgment.
how the Elders did so give thanks unto God for their salvation, that withal
they extolled Gods rightuousenes, and excellent verity, which he shows in
his judgment most rightuouse, wherein he rewards the godly with just
rewards, and plageth the wicked with deserved punnishmentes. And under this
figure of speech they teach us, that both the judgment shall assuredly come,
and that the same in all things shall be most holy and just. Would God they
would dilligently consider these things with themselves which judge them to
talk of tryfles, that make mention of that horrible and most dreadful day of
judgment. For we look for things more terrible, than any tongue beit never so
eloquent is able to express.

The time of wrath is come.
He rehearses the wrath or tyranny of infidelles, against the faithful
cruelly and continually executed, and so verily, that God seemed to many to be a
block, and another could nor would be angry. But the judgment ones made, the
elders extol Gods verity, and say the wrath is come. Doubtless the holy
Prophets of God have always threatened punishments, testifieng that God is
angry, both with the sinners and with sins: but where the wrath of god
appeared not immediately, the Prophets appeared to fear men with vain
terrors, and as it were, make them affrayde of their shadows, but now, say
the elders, the verity has appeared, and the wrath of God is come. And the
wrath of God, shows it self in the just vengeance of God.

The time of the dead is come.
Moreover they extol in that also the verity and justice of God, for that the
time of the dead is commen, that they be judged. Hitherto whylest the world
flourished, they seemed to tell fables, and grandames tales, which spoke of the
resurrection of the dead, and the life to come. For the resurrection of the
dead was contemned of Philosophers, and men of this world. But the elders
rejoice also, that the same time is come, and that the dead are revived, that
is, that the bodies of the dead are risen again, and cummen to judgment.
Whereof the Apostle speaking: we must all says he, appear openly before the
judgment seat of God, that every one may receive such things as are done by
the body according as it has done, whether it be good or evil.2. Corrinthi.
the.5. chapter.

God in the judgment well require the hyre
Furthermore they most highly commend Gods justice and verity, when also they
declare exactely, how God by his just judgment, rendresh to every one that is
his. He declares therefore what he rewards, and whom he rewards. First he
pays wages or hyre. For reward is promised of God unto good works. For in
the.13. of Jeremy the Lord says: refrain thy voice from weping, for there is
a reward for thy work. And the Lord says also in the gospel, be glad and
rejoice, for your reward is great in heaven. And again: the son of man
shall come in the glory of his father with his Angels, and than shall he
render to every one after his doings. So the Apostle said, that every one
must rise in his own body, that every one may receive such things as are
done by the body, whether it be good or evil. Whylest this world florisheth,
and the wicked rejoice in their voluptuousnes, and the godly are afflicted, and
afflicte themselves with continual mortifieng, the flessh judges, that these
lose both labor and cost: but ye other to be very happy. Which thing is also
declared in the third and fourth chapt. of Malachie. But at the last judgment
it shall finally appear, that the godly have not labored in vain, another
that the wicked have contemned God unpunished, and dispysed godliness. For God
rewards every one, after ye quality of his work: the which he calls
wages. Nevertheless, the godly abuse not in the mean time this saying,
acknowledgeing it, to be of fre mercy, that they have believed, and wroughte
with good faith: and that good work of theirs therefore, to be accepted of God,
because they be in Christ. Whereof I have written in the.3. book the.10. chapt.
Of the grace of God justifying, showing that of reward, desert cannot be proved.

Secondly they declare, to whom he gives reward, To whom reward is given.
I say to two sorts of men: to good I mean, and evil. Again he raccompteth
many kinds of good men. First he calls these the seruau^ts of god, as they
that be subject to the empire of god alone, and obey him in all things. By and
by he names the^ prophets, techers of churches. Of whose state mo things ar
spoken in the.11. chap. These some to be more unfortunate than any others in
this world, and ar accounted of many as great offe^ders, which being taken out
of yt way, all clearenes should seem to come again. Therefore be they justly
raccompted in the rigister of them, which receive a reward of ye lord, to wit
in recompense of their travel. Now into this account come also ye saints.
that is to sai, al godly which being sanctified through faith with the spirit and
blood of god, have lived an holy life, keeping themselves from al worldly
pollutio^. Moreover in ye godly reward and no^bre of holy saints are reckened
such as fear ye name of the lord: that is, they that be very holy and
religiouse in deed. Finally leeste any man should think any of the faithful
excluded, he adds, to small and great: that is to say, unto men of al ages,
state, and sex, etc.

The lord distroyeth the^ which distroyed the Earth.
After he comes to the evil, and adds: and should distroy them that
distroyed the earth. These things seem borrowed of the prophets, with whom is
much mention of the distroyers of the earth, whom the lord should distroye at
the length. And under the name of distroyers S. John understands first
Tirauntes, Kings, and Princes, that be persecutours of the church. Also men
of war and soldiers, which by unjust wars distroye all things with
sword and fire. Secondely he understands unjust judges, moreover
oppressors of the poor, which afflicte widows, and the fatherles: more over
which in usury, theft, disceiptefulnes, extorsion, and evil means are
hurteful to all men, and by their insatiable couetousenes bread a darth of al
things. Finally, which by whoredom and aduoutrie defile and break holy
matrimony. Last heretics distroye the earth, and such as infecte men with
corrupt doctrine, that dwell upon the Earth: into the which number come also
seditiouse persons and traitors, and other wicked men.

Perdition is not to abolish.
These shall the Lord distroye with everlasting perdition, whereby they cease not
to be, that perish: but become much more miserable, whilst they are vexed
with tourme^tes that never shall have end. Unthrifts and prodigal persons
are said to be lost, yet in perisshyng thus they cease not to be: but proceed
daily to be more miserable, which is perdition it self.

God opens Heaven to his that they look up to him.
Furthermore S. John doubts this doctrine of the re^arde of the godly: and
that which before he treated under the form of a thankeful praise and a
ioyouse triumphyng, he propounds now consequently the same as it were to be
seen with the eyes by a vision celestial. And gallauntly he ends this vision
with the opening of the Temple, which he began with the opening of Heaven. For
the loving lord opens to his servants heaven it self to be seen of the
eyes of our mind, to the end we should no where doubt of the glory prepared
for us in Heaven: another should say, who has seen those celestial things
that are promised us? For like as the blessed fathers, the Prophets and
Apostles have had very many visions of this sort, effectual, true, and
godly: So may every one of us with the eyes of our mind through true faith
look into Heaven it self. I know well that the worldely men pass nothing
upon such visions, as of whom the Lord in the Gospel has said: the world can
not receive ye spirit of truth, for that he sees him not, another knows
him. Let not us care for their contempt.

Let us see therefore, The temple of god open in heaven.
what is prepared for the servants of God in an other world. First S. John
saw heaven open: now, in heaven it self he sees also the very temple of god,
open to wit to all the godly. By the Temple of God, he understands the
secrets of God, the inward and privy parts of Heaven, whereinto he will
receive to the fruition of him self al beleuers. But in that divine temple of
heaven was seen the Arche of his Testamente. Arcke in ye Temple.
For God made a conuenaunte or leage with the faithful, that he would be their
God, their fulness, and a most ple^tiful Sea of al goodness, a most aboundaunt,
and most sufficient plenty of all things. The confirmation, testimony, and
declaration whereof is the Arc of co^uenaunte, the very son of God, in whom
dwells all fulness of deity, and in whom we be made perfect. For he is the
Arc, in whom are laid up al celestial treasours, full of grace and verity.
This Arc of good things, and of eternal felicity, appears in heaven. For
the son of God is in the throne of God. The liberal and bountiful father
celestial will power out this Arc upon his children, granting to them through
Christ his only son all heavenly gifts, that we might be partakers of al
Christ's benefits, even to the deity, wherein he excels his brethren.
Hereby it appears, how Moses prepared the Arc, after the example of the same
which he saw in Heaven: and the figure whereof was the Arc of the
conuenaunt, etc. Otherwise we shall hear in the.21. chapt. of this book, that
there is no temple in heaven, etc.

These most beautiful things to be seen, and most pleasant to be heard,
the son of God has set forth to be seen and heard of us. Consequently he
adds, that punnishementes are prepared for the wicked: and expounds the
same also diuersely, and propou^deth the same to be seen. Hitherto were made in
the world lighteninges, And lightninges were made
voices, and thonderinges, etc. The holy ghost shining to the world, and
drawing through the doctrine of the verity, moving, and fearing: but the mad
world would not understand, no nor so much as hear the manner and way of
salvation: therefore the divine justice requires, that they should be talked
with all in an other langage, and therefore by the just judgment of God are
made now lightenings, etc. And by this heap of words he signifies, the
horrible punnishement, that God will take of the wicked. And he appears to
have alluded to the burning of Sodom, also to the words of the godly Prophet,
it shall raygne upon sinners snares, of fire, brimestone, and spirit of
tempeste, in the.11. Psalm. Therefore is this vision concluded, as the story of
S. Matthewes Gospel: and these shall go into everlasting punnishement, and
the just into life everlasting.

We have in these eight last chapters, the third part of this book, and an
notable abridgement of the Ecclesiastical story, from the time of S. John
unto the worlds end: wherewith we are instructed in the true faith, and are
admonisshed of all perilles and traysons, whereby the true faith is assailed,
to the intent that being watcheful we may beware of all corruption and crafty
seducing, and may be made safe. To God be praise and glory.

The description of the church and of the red Dragon, fighting against the
Church. The.lij. Sermon.
ANd there appeared a great toke^ in Heaven a woman clothed with the sun, and
the Moon under her fete, and upon her head a crown of.xii. stars. And she
was with child, and cried travailing in birth, and payned ready to be
delivered. And there appeared an other token in heaven, and behold a great red
Dragon, having seven heads, and.x. horns, and seven crowns upon his heads:
and his tail drew the third part of stars of heaven and cast them to the
Earth. And the dragon stood before the woman, which was ready to be delivered:
for to devour her child as soon as it were borne. And she brought forth a
ma^childe, which should rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her son
was taken up unto God, and to his seat. And the woman fled into wilderness,
where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a
thousand two hondreth and.lx. days.

The fourth part of this book exhibiteth to us the third vision, which others
that divide the second into two, The order and disposition of things of this
book.
make the fourth. The lord has often times and much made mention in the
second vision of the persecution and fight of the faithful with Antichrist,
and wicked enemies of God, especially in the.6.9. and.11. chapters. He
proceeds therefore now in the third vision, and that abundantly to
discourse of the same conflicte, and to set forth the thing it self as it
were to be seen with the eyes, The argument of ye 12.13.14. chapt.
in the three chapt. next followyng the.12.13.14. He repeteth all things more
depely, and describes lively and dilligently the parts of this conflicte, and
after also the fight it self. Therefore after the church ones described, which
abides the brunte of this war, he describes also the Dragon that moves the
war: he declares how busily he watches, and again leeste any man should
be discouraged, he adds, how vnluckely not withstanding he fights, Christ
verily ouercoming him, finally god impeching and defeating his enterprises, and
yelding him vanquished to the faithful. Now he decribeth the chief
instruments, which Satan uses in assaultyng and persecutyng the church, to
wit the old and new Roman Empire, and herein filthy Papistrie, wherein
Antichrist is also lively painted. By and by not withstanding he annexeth to
these unlucky things, for the consolation and comfort of the godly, that the
lamb stands nevertheless on Mount Sion a conqueror, having his church
with him, how so ever this world rages and be never so mad and cruel,
that the gospel is preached in dispite of Antichrist: and al men warned to
beware of Antichrist: where also he begins to reason of the judgment of God
against the wicked, that he might prepare him away to those things which he
will speak in the.5. part, touching the pains or punnisshmentes of the
Antichristians, which treatise he begins in the.15. Hitherto therefore he
treats of the fight or conflicte of the church and of the wicked, namely of
Antichrist, all the which the father of all murder and of al iniquity the
Devil inspireth.

These things are taken out of the.iij. chapt. of Genes.
Therefore like as this whole book is taken out of the scriptures, and
expounds excedingly well the old scriptures: so these things also which
are by and by in the beginning rehearsed, seem to be taken out of the.3. chapt.
of Gene. Where the lord says: I will put emnetie betwixt thee (meaning the
Serpente) and the woman, betwixt thy sede, and her sede: her seade shall break
thy head, and thou shall bite his heel. For you shall read in the end also
of this chapt. And the Dragon was angry with the woman, and went his way that
he might make war with the residewe of her sede.

And he describes above al things the parts of this conflicte, A toke^
appeared in Heaven.
her which was assailed by war, and the which moved the war, to wit the
church and the Dragon. And he says, how a token of these things appeared in
heaven. For he would not only say or write, but also set them forth to be seen
of the eyes, and in manner to paincte, to the intent all things more plainly
might be seen. And where he says those tokens were great, he admonishes,
that they were and be things of most weight, and matters of greatest
importance.

The woman the church.
First he describes the church of God of all times under the tipe or figure of
the woman. Another is it a strange or rare thing, sins at the first beginninges
of things the woman began to represent the tipe of Christ's spowse the
church, as is to be seen in the.2. of Genes. And so has the Apostle expounded
the tipe in the.5. chapt. to the Ephesians. That I need not now to recite, that
Esaye has oftener than ones under the tipe of a woman figured the church of
God: rejoice thou barren, says he, which bring forth no children, etc.
Finally that S. Paul to the Galath. 4. chapt. has set forth Sara a figure of
the church: which Solomon also in his canticles discoursed at length in
describyng of his spowse. The church than is that woman coupled with Christ
her spowse in true faith and continual love. After he applies certain things
severally to the Virgin Marie, unto whom not withstanding the things that go
before, and follow after do not altogether agree: which thing both
Methodius and Primasius do show, and other expositours also with great
accord.

This woman is clothed with the sun. The woman is clothed with the sun.
The scripture calls Christ the sun of rightuousenes, and light of life.
S. Paul commands the church to put on Christ. He therefore is the light,
the life and rightuousenes of the church: by Christ is covered the nakedness
of the church: Christ is the ornament and beaultie of the church, through him
it shines in the world.

The Moon is subject to alterations, is variable, the moon under her fete.
and receives sundry colors: she increases, and decreaseth: and although it
shine, yet appears it always full of spots, and borrows her light of the
Sun. Therefore all courses and alterations of times, and what so ever is
mutable and corruptible in this world, al affections also and infirmities, the
church treads under her fete: all the light that she has, she has it of
Christ, the light of her rightuousenes increases and decreaseth: finally she
gathers always some spots of the nature of flesh, which she can not leave
but by death. Therefore she shines in deed, howebeit the church feleth some
obscurenes: as the Lord has said also, every branch bearyng fruicte he
pourgeth, that he may bring forth more fruicte. And he that is washed, is al
clean, and needs no more but to wasshe his fete.

Furthermore a crown is the honor of the head, A crown of twelve stars.
and sign of a kingedome. Christ is the beauty, comelines and king of ye
church. In this crown are no precious stones, but stars. For in Christ are,
and beaultifie and lighten the church, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and the
twelve Apostles, which have light of the crown, and power out the same into
the church. Hereby therefore is signified the doctrine of the ministers, as in
the first chapt. of this book. Another is the shinyng ministry the smallest
portion emo^ges the most excellent things of the church.

A woman with child nere her travel.
Moreover that woman has in her bealy: which in a certain phrase of speech is
as much to say, as that woman was with child: and had not only a great bealy
(as we say) but after the manner of women trauelyng cried out, and labouryng
was full of pain that she might be delivered. Which properly apperteyneth not
to the virgin Marie, but to the church. For the primitive church of that
first promise of the blessed sede, conceived in her mind an hope most
assured, that at the length the son of God should be borne of a virgin, to
wit the sede promised, which should break the Serpents head. Therefore did
the church with an ernest desire, and with most feruente prayers covet and
wisshe, that Christ might ones be engendered, in and by the excellent member of
the same the holy virgin. Moreover Christ is begotten in his faithful, when
through his virtue they be regenerated. For S. Paul: my little Children says
he, whom I travel for again, till Christ be shaped in us. The Church
therefore trauayleth, and brings forth after two sorts: bodily, whilst she
ernestely coueteth with out pain that christ might be borne of the virgin:
and ghostly by faith and regeneration, whilst she desires to be made
conformable to Christ in her members. This therefore is the nature and
disposition of this woman, that with a gready desire embracing the incarnation
of Christ and redemption, she would feign have it known to many: and that
many times she wissheth to be regenerated and reformed after the Image of
Christ.

The description of ye church.
This is verily a goodly description of the church. Herunto compare them, which
at this day set forth themselves with the title and pretense of the church:
and judge, how well they agree with this description. But this true church of
Christ is brought in danger and battle.

Let us hear now in the second place, the description of the devil under the
shape of a Dragon.
and as it were on the contrary part, what manner one is the adversary or
ennemie of the church: to wit that oulde serpent, which was a liar and a
murderer from the beginning, the only author of all evil, of all
mischief, of all errors, of all iniquity, murder and disquietnesse, and
most ungracious Devil: whom afterward he calls Satan, seducer of the
world, and decketh him with other tytles, mete for such a majesty.

This is the Dragon, and that the great Dragon, The great Dragon.
to wit of great power through out the world in his members. And a Dragon,
for because in oulde time he took upon him the shape of a serpente, and
disceaued our parents. Of Dragons Pliny and other authors write many
things. The Scripture in some places, Esaias. 27.
calls the Devil a wrythen Serpent. For he is wonderful subtyl, and can
turn himself in to fouldes infinite, that he may disceaue, and keep the
disceaued in error.

He is red. For he is full of fire, Red.
and blood of saints and of innocents. A right blood hounde, the parent and
patron of al persecutours and bloody soldiers. In him stick yet the spots
of the blood of Abell. He smells yet, of the shedding of the blood of the
Prophets, and Apostles.

The same has seven heads: Seven heads, and ten horns.
upon every one of these is seen a crown royal. He has also ten horns. For
the Devil is called the Prince of this world: and has in very deed ben
governor of the wicked rulers of al ages, and ring leader of all horns and
blouddy realms. He was therefore the head of Ninus, the King and and prince of
Pharao, chief captain of Balthazer King of Babylon, of Cambyses also the
Persian, of Antiochus the Macedonian, of Julius Caeser the Roman, and likewise
of all other tyrauntes.

The Prophet Esaie called a false prophet, tail, Tail.
by reason of his soothing and flatterring words, for that with his mealy
mouth and sweet words, he crepeth in favor with great men. Therefore with
flattering and deceaueable words, and lyeng promesses, wherewith (as in times
past) he promises his worshippers godly things, he persuades to al
wickedness, stars, that is to say, preachers and notable men: whom taken from
heavenly things, he casts unto earthly things, that having forgoten
celestial matters and their holy office and duty, they may cleave now unto
earthly things, being wrapped in the earthly foldes of the Deuilles tail. And
thus in deed he shall corrupt not a few. For he puts the third part of
stars, for a great nombre of notable men, whose ministry he uses against
the church. Hereof there be many and that notable examples of al times in all
histories.

The Dragons enterprise against the church.
And after he has described this foul and filthy beast, and sworn enemy of
al saints from the beginning of the world: straight ways also he utters
his atte^ptes, treasons and bitter poison against the church, and how he
began to move war. This dragon, says he, stood before the woman, which
was ready to be delivered: and he stood watchyng, dilligent, attentife, and
awayting busily, at al times: and he observed, and took that occasion of
hurtyng the church, another has he omitted any opportunity. But the end of all
his enterprises was, to devour the son, borne of ye spouse of God. He has
always even from the beginning of the world gone about to intercepte the
glory of Christ: and if any faithful being of the church regenerated
spiritually be made confourmable to Christ, he attempteth also to bring them
into errors and distroye the^. Wherefore S. Peter not without cause said,
that the Devil goes about like an hongry Lion, sekyng whom he may devour.

Christ was incarnate, and given to the church.
He shows now by the way, that Christ, as he was promised, is exhibited to
the church, another that the dragon could do any thing against him. Whereupon he
will have us utterly to conclude, that he shall have no power over us another, if
we abide in Christ. For now he skippeth from the universal church to the
singular and most excellent membre thereof the virgin Mary, and knitteth up in
few words the mystery of the incarnation: that excellent woman, whereof is
spoken in the.3. of Genes. the daughter of that Matrone, I mean the church,
the holy Virgin, brought forth a man child, that is to say her first begoten,
king and priest: as S. Luke testifies in the.2. chapt. By and by he declares,
what and of how great power he is, and why he called him a man child. He it
is, of whom (David) prophesied in the.2. Psalm. That he should rule al nations
with a rod or scepter, not of wood or leed that is pliable, but of iron to
wit strong and durable, namely the word of God: but such as will not obey
Gods word, with an iron staff, that is with power, which no man is able to
resist, he will beat down far and nere. But for this so mighty a prince
Satan laid an Ambusshe, that old Dragon, which stired up against the chief
of the Jews and gentiles: but he found in him nothing at al, as the lord him
self said in the.14. of John: no more shall he at the last find any thing
in the faithful of Christ: moreover whilst the Dragon attempted great things
against Christ by thelders of the Jews, being risen from the dead, the Lord
was taken up, as it were out of the throat or hotest assaults of the Dragon,
unto his heavenly father, and sat on the right hand of God the father, the
old Serpents attemptes made frustrate. And thither also will he receive unto
him his faithful, though the Serpents guts should burst. For through hope
we sit together with our head in the places supercelestial. Ephesians. the.2. And
this is the chief and greatest hope of the church in this conflicte. For thus
he gathers: the Dragon most strongely and fiercely inuadeth not only the
ancient church, but even the very head of the church, and redemer Christ:
howebeit with his fury outrageouse he could nothing prevail: therefore he
shall no more prevail against his members.

Now he retourneth again to the church, and says: the church flees into
wilderness.
after the dragon could bring nothing to pass against the son of God, he
went and made war against the church, and the church fled into wilderness.
Certainly Iewrie in the prophets is compared to a place most frequented: the
gentiles are called a deserte or wilderness. Therefore after Christ's ascension,
the Apostles departing out of Iewrie, repared to the gentiles: yea and the
Jews inspired of the red dragon, cast out the church out of their limits:
which was constreined, as appears in the Acts of Apostles, to flee unto the
gentiles. And where the Lord has prepared a place for his church, and the
church was greatly augmented emongs the gentiles, certainly it was through his
grace (and by no merit of man) which prepared the place, which calls,
directs and keeps his sheep, the same has disposed, and yet does dispose
for this church ministers or pastors, which may feed it, as the ravens did
Helias, all the time that shall be, unto the worlds end. For as for the no^bre
of those days I discoursed before. And by this exposition is signified that
the dragon shall fight stoutely against the church, so that she shall be
compelled to flee: but how much so ever he shall rage against the church, the
lord God shall yet prepare a place in earth, wherein she may dwell safe: and
will ever send pastors to feed. He shows moreover, that the flight shall
not always be reprochable. The Lord save and keep us. Amen.

The description of the conflicte of Christ and the Church with the Dragon:
the dragon is overcome, the heavenly dwellers sing praises. The.liij. Sermon.
ANd there was a great battle in heaven, Michaell and his Angels fought with the
dragon, and the dragon fought and his Angels, and prevailed not, another was
their place found any more in heaven. And the dragon that old serpent called
the devil and Sathanas, was cast out. Which deceived all the world. And he was
cast into the Earth, and his Angels were cast out with him also. And I heard a
loud voice, which said in Heaven: now is salvation and strength and the
kingdom become our Gods, and the power is Christ's: for he is cast down,
which accused them before God day and night. And they overcame him by the
blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not
their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell
therein. Woe unto the inhabiters of the earth, and the sea: for the devil is
comen down unto you, which has great wrath, because he knows, that he has
but a short time.

Thapostle has spoken of the parts of the notable fight and worthy battle:
he has spoken also of atte^ptes and pourpos of the dragon, which verily
applies al his counsels to this intent, that he may devour al godliness, that
is, might distroy it utterly: he has showed how he began to move war against
the church, which fled into ye wilderness: and now as it were leaving the woman
in the wilderness, he seems to bring forth other soldiers, which give battle
to the dragon, and most valeauntly do impugn and also disco^fit him and al his
power. S. John therefore describes the singular fight of one most excellent, to
wit Michaell, which overcame the Dragon: and describes the general fight
annexed with yt particular. For he adds, yt all the Angels of Michael fought
against the dragon.

And first is heaven showed to be the place of the fight or co^flicte. For in
heaven, says he, was fought a great battle. The place of conflict.
And it is evident, yt Satan was at the beginning of al things cast out of
heaven into the earth, and therefore that he moves no war in heaven, nor
reiseth any tumulte there. For heaven is a place of rest and joy, not of
debate and contention. Therefore this must be attributed to the vision. For the
lord has in heaven by signs represented this battle to be seen, which in
deed is fought in earth in the mids of the church.

But here is set forth an image of a notable fight, whereby is showed what has been, and what is yet done in earth. I said even now, that this co^bat was in
deed particular, but to have a general fight annexed. For Michael fights
which is as captain of this war: and Michaelles Angels fight also: Who
fight.
which must be well discerned, although that Michaell and his Angels make but
one part only. On the other side fights the dragon, as emperor of this
war, and his angels fight also. And these verily make non other parts, tha^
we have heard before in the beginning of this chapt. That the party of this
fight were ye church and the devil. Nevertheless leest the victory should be
attributed to the church, and not rather to Christ, the woman must now be
omitted, and Michael brought in fighting. Whereupon there is in these things
some difficulty: but it shall be easy enough for him, that will mark every
thing in order.

Who is yt Michaell captain of the war against the Dragon.
First we must see, what that Michael is, and there is in deed no doubt, but
that the Angel Michell appeared in the vision, with an Army of Angels fighting.
And that on the contrary part against the^ fought the Dragon with an host of
devils. But for as much as we heard in the beginning, yt these were tokens,
they must needs signify and betoken other things. I suppose here therefore to
be signified, Christ the head of his church, king and protector, with his
me^bres, Apostles, Martirs and faithful. Another is it a rare thing, that Christ
should be figured to us by Angels: but is even most accustomed, that Angels
are called the ambassadors of God, and the faithful servants of Jesus
Christ. Christ therefore head of the church and the faithful members of Christ,
fight against the Dragon, yet after a diverse sort. For christ overcame him
alone in the co^bat with out help of any creature, whilst in temptations he
discomfited him at the last, and also by diyng on the cross, and rising again
from the dead, How christ has fought with the dragon.
he al to brake his head. This is the only, true and singular victory: whereby
afterward are obtained the victories of Christ's me^bres, gotten of that
general fight, wherein Christ fights not now only hand to hand with the
Devil, but all the members of Christ at all times under Christ their Captain
fight against the Devil, and in the virtue or victory of Christ, fight and
overcome: as we shall hear by and by in the song of praise.

Why Michael is Christ.
But for great and sundry causes we affirm Christ to be figured and signified
to us under the tipe of Michaell. We know by the scriptures as many of us as be
learned, yt Michael, as also Gabriel, be the names of good Angels of god.
Michael signifies, who as God? And who I pray you is such, as God, but in
whom thexpresse Image of the fathers substance, and which is the Image
invisible, and word of the father from the beginning, I mean the very son
of God Jesus Christ? Michael in the.10. and.12. chapt. of Daniel, is president,
protector and Patron of the Jewish nation. And it is plain, that the people
of Israel had from the beginning non other tutour and patron, but Messiah him
self, the blessed sede. This appears in the.7. of Esaye, were we read, that
the lord spared the people of Judah, and the princelicke City for Christ. In an
other place he says most openly, I will defend that city for my self, and
for my servant David. And David is called Christ, in the.34. of Ezechiel.
Christ is therefore in very deed governor of his people, which nevertheless
in defendyng and deliueryng his, uses the ministry of Angels: who also
attribute nothing to themselves, but all glory to God alone. Morouer that
excellent victory, ca^ not with out offense of godliness be ascribed to Michael
the archangel. For so omitting our Messiah Christ, we should commend Angels
being made and worthy to be called Angelical, rather than Christians. In the
law was written, the sede of the woman shall break the serpents head. But the
lord never took the nature of an Angel, but the sede of Abraham, and by sin
has condemned sin. There shall follow anon in the song. Now is salvation
and power, etc. And there is added: for the Devil is cast out. And this
salvation has Christ alone accomplisshed, wherefore it is necessary, that
Christ the conqueror of Satan be signified by Michael.

And the Dragon fought hand to hand against the lord, The dragon and his
Angels fight.
not only matched with him in the deserte, but also never ceased to tempte and
assail him, so long as he lived here on earth: he stired up also against him
the Phariseis and Princes of the people, kings and the Roman governor, and
so at the last brake the lords heel. This was the greatest fight of the
Dragon. The same Dragon inspireth now kings and Princes, wicked Priests and
cruel men, his Angels which may war upon the church. And all these verily
do persecute and vex the church in the power of the red Dragon. Stories
declare ye same to be done before Christ's time: the same testify, and
experience proves, the like to be done from the ascension of Christ into
Heaven, unto this present day, and unto the worlds end.

Now is also declared with what luck they fought with what luck they sought.
on either side: to wit most luckely concerning Christ, most vnluckely as
touching the Devil or red Dragon. And in this fight, as also in the song
immediately following, is contained the whole fruicte of this disputation. For
hereof al godly may learn that Satan our enemy is unarmed: and that Christ in
this conflict is on our side, as our Emperor and captain at all times, by
whom all the godly may easily in all conflictes overcome. Therefore this
matter of battle and victory is set by and by after the beginning of the most
dau^gerouse battle with Antichriste, and Antichristians, which are the brood
or tails, and scales of the serpent, and champions of the Dragon, for a
comfort and consolation. And the natural order is here altered, which treats
nothing of the success of the battle, til he has set forth all the conflicte
before. But this battle shall be continewed hereafter in the rest of the 12.
and all the.13. chapter.

Christ over comes, and christianes overcome also.
He declares at three words, first the victory of Christ, secondly of al
christians. The first is (...), they prevailed not, they had no strength.
Doubtless the force of the devil is great if God permit, and clearly
greatest, in consideration of the just judgment of God, as also appears in
Job, that he is able to slake and break the strongest things. But the Lord
says in the gospel. Ihon.14 Math. 16
The Prince of this world came, and against me he has nothing. Again in the
gospel: The gates of Hell shall not prevail againg her, the rock I mean, and
secondly against the church. Although therefore the Devil make an horrible
uproar, and cruelly rage against Christ and his church, yet is he without
force. For the virtue of Christ preuayleth.

The second part is, another was their place any more found in heaven, which
manner of speech signifies no other thing, than that the reprobate Angel is
put from al dignity, glory and power: moreover that he has no more any place
in the church, or emonges the elect of God: not that the devil should not
return, or should not tempte, or renew war, but because he has no place
parmanent. Herunto apperteyneth that the Lord so often repeateth in the Gospel,
and now the Prince of this world is cast out, in the.12.14. and.16. chapters
of Saint Ihon. Moreover, by other places of the Scripture it is manifest,
that the Devil is shut out of heaven. And it shall be easy for us to shut
him out, which being cast out by the son of God, has no place in us,
unless we our selves give place to him. Which we should not do, the Lord
admonishes us dilligently, that we should watch. The story is known in
the.12. of Matthew. of the Devil, pourposing to return, and therefore took unto
him seven worse spirits. But wherefore do thou hear him, why do thou
obey him, whom thou see shut out of Heaven? Notwithstanding that herby is
signified also, that the Devil was so fully vanquished of Christ, that he was
also driven to forsake the place of the battle.

For the third membre, Satan cast down to ye earth.
as it were expoundyng the second adds: and he was cast to the Earth. For
they that are thrown to the ground, are judged to be overcome. Therefore a
full victory and perfect conqueste is signified. Howbeit he was ones most
valeauntly thrown to the Earth. Of our lord Jesus Christ, in the mystery of
our redemption, and in the virtue of the same is daily cast to the Earth, of
the faithful. And like as the Devil has no place permanent in heaven nor in
the chosen: so verily does he inhabit all earthly, that is to say men
sauouring the earth, and contemnyng heavenly things. Yea and we hear that his
Angels are cast out with him. For the Lord in the gospel of S. John the.16.
chapt. says: In the world you have affliction: but be of good there, I have
overcome the world. And S. John in his Canonical epistle: you are of God
little children, says he, 1. John.4. 2. John.5.
and you have overcome them: for he is greater that is in you, tha^ he is that
is in the world. And this is the victory that overcame the world, even your
faith.

And by the way he expounds, The nature of the devil is figured by certain
words.
what we should understand by the dragon, of who^ he has spoken hitherto, to
wit the old enemy of man kind. He sets him forth with his titles,
attributinge to him four names, that hereby also we may understand his nature
the better, and may beware of that wicked murderer. First he calls him the
old Serpent. For at the beginning by the Serpent he infected with the poison
of death and sin our first Parents, and by the^ the whole universal world:
as is to be seen in the.3. of Genes. and the.5. to the Romans. Therefore I
said in the beginning of this chapt. that he is called a Dragon. After he
calls him the Devil, that is to say a sclaunderer, or a false accuser. For
by and by it follows, which may expou^de this word, for the accuser of our
brethren is cast out, etc. A goodly example of this thing is declared in
the.1. and.2. chapt. of Job. (...) signifies to accuse or blame, and (...) is
an accusation, and (...) a crime or complaincte.

Thirdly he calls him Sathanas, in the Hebrewe word, to wit an adversary,
for that he is in all things against god, and obiecteth him self and resists
men in holy matters, if happily he might hinder or corrupt them. Last he is
called (...) seducer, disceauer, or he that suppla^teth and betrayeth the whole
world. For this the Lord attributes to him in the.8. of John, for that he has been a lier from the beginning, and is the father, that is the fountain and
original of al liyng, disceipte, of errors and seducyng, and of al evil. For
all errors and heresies, al deceiptes, and all leasinges, finally all kind of
evils, have flowed out of this most filthy welspring And who is he that hears
these things, which will not abhor that vile beast? they must needs be stark
mad, that seek by all means to be in favor with that wicked spirit.

He should now here consequently annexe the residewe of this fight, to wit
how the Dragon persecuteth and assaulteth the woman, and she again by fliyng
resists, and ouercometh through Christ. But he suspendeth the same narration
yet a little while, A song of victory.
and places now a song of victory, and triu^phe of saints in heaven, of the
Angels and blessed souls. The some whereof is, that Christ has ouercomen,
and that the faithful do overcome in Christ: and therefore must heavens
themselves, and all that dwell therein, rejoice and singe. And I repete that these
things are interlased in the dangerous Antichristian and Romish sight, for a
consolation, leest the saints should in those great dangers by reason of
their natural infirmity be discouraged: but calling upon the name of Christ,
should fight manfully, when they understand under whose banner they fight, and
with whom they fight: verily with one ouercomen under Christ's sta^dart. And
when we hear that the Dragons force is broken, we shall think that the furies
of either beast, as well the ten horned as the two horned, are weakened in the
faith of christ. This gives also no small courage in this conflicte, that we
see that the Dragon has no power over them that are sprinkled and purified
with the blood of Christ, but over earthly and worldly men. And this triumph
is heavenly. For voices are heard out of heaven, singyng a merry note, to the
intent that the rejoicing of the blessed spirits might have more authority,
grace, and efficacitie emonges the pore afflicted.

They al with one voice singe merely, that salvation and power is now made
perfect, for by the Lords death and resurrection, Perfect salvation by Christ.
God has wrought power, and made perfect the salvation promised to the fathers,
to wit whilst he trod down the serpents head, abolisshed sin and death,
and restored life. Thus is the kingedome of God in this world establisshed in
the elect, whilst even by the power of Christ the Prince of this world is
cast out and overcome. For the cause follows, wherefore we must so rejoice,
and what virtue and power of Christ has showed it self, or how salvation is
made perfect: because, says he, through Christ, the Devil is cast down, that
is to say overcome and va^quisshed, that he can no more accuse mankind before
the judgment seat of God. Hereunto belongs that S. Paul wrote. Romans 8.
Who shall accuse the elect of God? It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? It is Christ, which died, yea which rose again, which is also on
the right hand of God which makes intercession for us.

Moreover the heavenly dwellers do not only preach the victory of Christ, but
of all the faithful, Christ has made also ye faithful victours.
which they obtain against Satan in the faith of Jesus Christ: that it may
hereof at the leest appear, what we should understand before by Michael, and by
his Angels. And he beats in dilligently, that Christians overcome not
Satan by their own merits, force, or strength, but by the merit and grace
of Christ. And they says he, to wit the Angels of Michael, overcame the
Dragon by the blood of the Lamb. For in as much as the faithful are purified by
the blood of Christ, Satan has nothing against them: but sins they have the
spirit and faith of Christ, they overcome the Devil also. So in times paste
the distroyer had no power over those houses, which were marked with the blood
of the Lamb: Exodus 12. And he adds an other thing, for the which the
faithful overcame: for the word of the testimony of Christ, which is the
gospel. Which because it is invincible and eternal, they overcome all things
of this world, who so ever abide in the lively and eternal word of the
verity. And even in the gospel most true the lord himself has promised
that he will not forsake his, and will fight for the^. Therefore must the faithful
needs overcome. To these things is added more the effect of Christ's
purifiyng. They loved not their life more than Christ: and therefore have they
given it for Christ unto death, and so have ouercomen. For many are vanquisshed
by this one thing, that they will not hasarde their life for Christ.

For these great benefits of God they exhort now heavens themselves, and all
the inhabiters of Heaven, that is to say they exhort one an other, to singe a
ioyeful song. And that which the heavenly saints say they do here, they
teach the saints in Earth to do also, and instruct, of what manner and sort
they ought to be, which shall overcome Satan in battle, to wit purified by
the blood of Christ, cleaving to the testimony of Jesus Christ, and contemners
of their own life, to whom it seems not greuouse to dye for Christ's sake.

In whom the Deu^ll has place.
Finally about the songs end they declare, in whom the Devil shall reign
and take place: to wit in earthly and fleshely men: who verily mock at
godly things, and only set by these worldly things, and such as shall
perisshe: for the getting and keeping whereof, they will not stick to do any
thing be it never so hard, where for Christ's cause they will abide to do or
suffer nothing. Unto these they denounce an horrible woe, to wit the curse of
this present and of the life to come.

But in whom the Devil possesses his kingdom, in the same also he utters
his malice against the elect, and that his great malice. For he rages most
cruelly against the godly, and against godliness. He rages also most extremely
against those his worshippers, whom he polluteth with all kind of filthiness,
and with all shame and reproach defiles.

Again I suppose that same to apperteyne to the comfort of the godly, that is
spoken of a short time. For Satan in deed through Antichrist shall most
cruelly rage against the church, but those days shall be shortened for the
electes sake. By the way is noted also the wicked nature of satan, which
knowing that the last judgment is at hand, wherein he must be thrown headlong
into hell, thinks to requite and recompense the shortness of time with the
cruelty of his wrath and deuelish fury.

And hitherto of the victory of Christ and his Saints: now follow with
less terror, yet horrible things of the war, which the dragon most
gredely and fiercely moves against the Matrone of God. The lord Jesus bring
him in subjection under our fete. Amen. Amen.

The Dragon persecuteth the woman: she is defended and preserved of the Lord.
The Dragon stands on the sand, etc. The.liiij. Sermon.
ANd when the dragon saw that he was cast to the Earth, he persecuted the
woman, which brought forth the man child. And to the woman were given two
wings of a great Egle, that she might fly into ye wilderness, into her place
where she is nurrished for a time, two times and half a time, from the presence
of the serpent. And the dragon cast out of his mouth water, after the woman, as
it had be^ a river, that he might cause her to be caught of the floude. And the
earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth and swalowed up the
river, which the Dragon cast out of his mouth. And ye dragon was wroth with the
woman, and went and made war with the re^naunt of her sede, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, and he stood on
the Sea sand.

The persecution of ye Dragon.
That which before he had begone, to speak of the persecution of the Dragon,
and flight of the church, and had differred it a little, to declare the
victory of Christ: now he resumeth and finnisheth, and descrybeth the fight
lively, and most expressly and constauntly annexeth many times the help of
God, which is given to the church through the grace of God.

When Satan therefore, saw himself ouercommen by Christ, and quite cast out,
he began to rage against the church redeemed with the blood of Gods son, and
vexed her with greuouse persecution. For immediately after Christ's assention,
a great persecution was styred up against the Apostles and Apostolical church.
For the Apostles put in prisonnes were grievously rebuked with words, and also
scourged with rods and whypped. Stephen was stoned, James beheaded with the
sword, Acts. 26.
finally by the means of Paul (which than played Saul) innumerable were
cast in prison, and put to cruel tourmentes.

On the contrary part he recites the present aid of God, which he utters by
a fyguratiue kind of speech, Gods deliverance.
after the nature of the vision for the more efficacitie. For he says, how to
the woman, I mean the church, were given two wings of a great Egle, by the
help whereof she fled into the wilderness, where she hid her self for a time,
safe from the Dragons sight. And here is signified, that a large power is
granted to the church of fleyng, and escaping the furies of Christ's enemies,
and of setting forth the gospel emonges the gentyles.

The Egles wings.
Whereof you may read in the.11. chapt. of the Acts of the Apostles. And not
without cause he me^tioneth of the Egles wings, and that of a great Egle. For
Moses in Deuter. makes mention under this figure, of the defense and aid of
God almyghtie: like as the Egle, says he, flies over her young, and stretches
abroad her wings, and carries them on her shulders, so the Lord has also
kept and auaunced the.

A place for the church in desert.
Furthermore he says, there is a place given to the church in wyldernes, to
wit provided of Christ, which turns to to him whom he will, and prepares
for himself a spouse. And he nourysheth the church emonges the gentyles with
his Evangelical word, as he nourished in oulde time his people in the deserte
with Manna. And the time of the church he prescrybeth not. For he uses again
a kind of speech as it were a riddle, borrowed out of Daniel: which God usurps
when he will have the time to us unknown: which since we know that good and
just things consiste in him, we should not curiously inquyre after. Whereof I
have spoken before. Doubtless it is plain that the church emonges the gentyles,
shall continue and remain to the last judgment. But the day of judgment can
no man diffyne.

Again he declares, He vomiteth a floude after ye woman.
with what furyes the Devil inflamed, shall make a new and a continual war
against the church. When he saw the church emonges the gentyles to be daily
increased and established, he vomited after the woman water: and that we might
know the figure, he adds, as it were a river. For he signifies, that the
Devil has powered a sea of euylles into the church, sects I mean,
discentions, tumultes, seditions, persecutions, wherewith the whole world has
ouerflowed. Verily he raised up every where al magistrates and priests against
the Apostles, and Apostolical doctrine. Read the Acts of the Apostles
the.13.14.15. and the chapt. following. Another is it a rare thing in the
Psalms, by waters, floods, and rivers, to understand all kind of afflictions.
And to this end he raised up those great euylles, and powered them on the godly,
(...), that he might cause the church to be carried away with the floude: that
is, that he might take away the godly, and the doctrine of piety. And this
is the continual endeuoyre of Satan, herunto he applies all his
consultations and doings. So in thempyre of Nero and Domitian, he studied to
wash away the church by the blood of Saints, but yet in vain. For therefore
I suppose it is said, he vomited a floude of euyls after the woman, not upon
the woman.

For God never failed his afflicted church: In so much (which a man may
maruayle at) that the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the floude
powered out of the serpents mouth. This earth drank up in oulde time, and
covered the blood of Abell. And here is signified, that the godly abiding
persecution, have help, from whence they look not for: as David in times past
is red to be delivered by the help of the Palestines, thinking nothing les than
to deliver David out of the hands of King Saul: but yet whyleste they go
about an other thing, they bring to pass that, which seemed good to the Lord,
which can turn the evil counselles of evil men to the profit of the godly.
And doubtless we see many times in the Acts of the Apostles, that the earth
has swallowed up a floude of euylles: that is to say, that earthly and worldly
men, doing in the mean time an other thing, have procured peace to the church.
So does that Town clarke or recorder of Ephesus, pacify the multitude of the
Ephesians, which were all on a roar and worse than mad. Lysias the head
Captain, takes away Paul out of the blouddy hands of the Jews: so does the
Centurian defend Paul, that he should not be slain of the soldiers in the
shipwreake. The civil wars begone immediately after the death of Nero,
gave peace unto the church until the Empire of Domitian. But the oulde Serpent
that can never rest, attempteth new wars. For now being wood mad with
the church, he goes to make war, against the remnaunt of the woman's seed,
which verily is to be borne until the judgment, of the church by the word.
And so makes way to the Romayne persecutions, which followed incontinentely
after the time of Saint Ihon, in the Empire of Rome, and the Antichristiane
persecutions raised after the Empire subverted. Whereof shall be spoken in
the.13. chapt. etc.

the church begets. Galath. 4.
Nevertheless hereof it appears chiefly, what Saint Ihon understands by
the woman, the same verily which engenders the seed of God. The church is
called both the Mother and daughter. The daughter, because she is engendered by
the word preached in the church: The mother, for that by the word, she
brings soorth spiritual children to Christ. For the seed of God, and the
seed of the woman, be all those which keep the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ. They keep the commandments of God,
which make much of Gods law, and frame all parts of their life according to
the same. They keep not Gods commandments, which set nothing by the law
or word of God, another frame their life after the same. Of this matter is
spoken at large in the fourtenth. The testimony of Jesus Christ is nothing else,
but the gospel of Jesus Christ, preaching unto us the free remission of sins.
They have this, which possess it by faith.

And where he says, The dragon stands on ye sea sand.
that the Dragon stood on the Sea sand, it is a preparation to things that
follow: for by and by he says, how the beast the principal instrument of
the dragon, came out of the Sea by the deuilles means. And it has a
consolation, that the dragon is said to stand on the sand, and not on the
rock. For it signifies that the furies of Satan shall not long endure
against the church, and that the kingedome of the Devil shall be rumouse, and
fall to decay, whose foundations are laid upon the sand.

He exhibiteth a noble instrumente of the Dragon to be seen, the old Roman
Empire, which describes what manner a one it is, etc. The.lv. Sermon.
ANd I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads, The.13. chapter.
and ten horns: and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his head, the names
of blasphemy. And the beast which I saw was like a Cat of the Mountane, and
his fete were as the fete of a bear, and his mouth as a lion. And the dragon
gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority: and I saw one of his
heads as it were wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wo^dered at the beast, and they worshipped the Dragon, which gave
power to the beast. Instruments by ye which the devil has wrought and
works.


S. John proceeds to describe by ye revelation of Jesus christ, the notable
instruments of the devil, whereby he has afflicted the church of Christ with
continual and most greuouse persecution. And he speaks of the old and the
new Roman Empire. S. John could not without excedyng great danger utter,
much less describe those things, a man not furnished with any man's help, and
thereto bannished, and driven into exile. For ye Roman Empire was taken for
godly, invincible, most sacred and everlasting. Nevertheless the Apostle both
speaks and writes hereof in such sort, that it seems that he can not
eschew the title of a seditious person, and offend against the holy majesty
both of the emperor and Empire. But what I pray thee would thou do, God
commanding thee so to speak and write?

The vnpatientnes and boldenes of ye world against the crewth. Math. 21.
The world also rages at this day, when they hear realms and policies
chastised by Gods word for sin and wickedness committed: and lordely enough
some Princes set forth proclamations, commaundyng that no such thing be heard
any more. But the Lord says in the gospel: if these hold their peace,
stones shall speak: signifiyng utterly, that the truth must be preached,
another that it can be oppressed or quenched with any decrees, threatenynges,
force of Arms, or punnishmentes. Therefore if they should at this day keep
silence, unto whom the office of preaching is committed, the lord will stire up
other preachers, which though all the world say nay, will bear witness to the
truth. Therefore I would counsel princes, that they vex not themselves in
vain with those their sundry atte^ptes against Gods truth. For they shall not
prevail. The verity shall vanquish. For he that then furnisshed John, against
the Roman Empire, that time most florisshyng and puissaunt, the self same also
at this day reuealyng his truth to the world now broken and waxen old, will
overcome doubtless. Woe to those stifnecked natures, which love to seduce. Let al
preachers learn, by the example of the Apostle S. John, to utter freely such
things as they have received in commandment, and to fear no man. He is
greater which is in us (as the same S. John said in the.1. John. 4.) than he
that is in the world.

The beast, is ye Romans Empire.
And the beast he calls the Roman Empire of great authority, and as it were
godly, notwithout most weighty considerations. For the lord keeps still the
phrase of the scripture, imitatyng Daniel, which in the.7. chapt. attributes
the name of beast to the Roman Empire. And S. Hierome, expoundynge the
Prophecy of Daniel, by the beast understands the Roman Empire: and
supposes that therefore it is not called a Lion, nor a Bear nor Libarde, but a
beast: that what cruelty some ever ye can Imagine in beasts, by the same
ye may understand the Romans doubtless in manners they have showed themselves
beasts. Mithridates the most renoumed king of Pontus, speaking of the
Romans in the.xxxviii. book of Iustine: As they themselves report, says
he, that their founders were nurrisshed by suckyng of a Wolf: so have all that
people Wolves minds, never satisfised with blood, of rule and Riches Hongry
and empty. And now how filthy beasts many Roman Princes have been, their
own writers testify, chiefly Suetonius, and others that have written of the
Emperors lives. And that the people of Rome were also of beastely manners,
the.1. chapt. of the Epistle to the Roma. proves.

You will say, I know well, The good and godly are excepted.
sins S. John comprehends under this Image the whole body of the Roman
Empire, shall we call Conustant, Constantine, Theodosius and other godly
Emperors beasts? I say how the Scriptures use this manner of speaking, and
by beasts in deed understand Empires, all though they call not all those
that dwell in those Empires beasts with out any difference: therefore we
understand them exempted in all Empires, that live a life to God acceptable:
and know assuredly, that another Daniel, nor S. Ihon would have defiled with
words such innocent men, and al praise worthy. Yea in all this treatise of
the Empire and of Antichrist, we except always such men as are innocent and
excelle in virtue. Whereof we shall happily speak more hereafter.

And first he shows the beginning of this Empire. The original of the Empire.
A beast comes out of the Sea, on the sand whereof stands the Dragon: and
in the.17. chapt. it is said, how the beast came out of the botomlesse
pit. Therefore the beginnynge hereof is referred to Satan. Notwithstanding
we must here take dilligent head, that we take away nothing from the lord
our God, the which he chalengeth to him self. The Scripture in sundry places,
but chiefly by two most excellent witnesses, by Daniel in the.3. chapt. and S.
Paul in the.13. chapt. to the Romans, has set forth, that kyngedomes and
Empires are of the Lord, and that he sets up and deposes kings. There is
no power, says thapostle, Now the Romans Empire is of God and of the dragon.
but of God. And hitherto in deed thapostles command to obey Princes and
magistrates. How is it than that we hear, that the Roman Empire came out of
the boto^les pit, sins the Apostle speaks of the same? doubtless the Roman
Empire is not absolutely of the Devil. For God is the author of Monarchies,
and preserves realms and policies, giving thereunto certain faithful
servants. But satan medleth with men's matters, and corrupts both kings,
and kingdoms: and so long they be of the Devil. The Christianes in all
politic matters obeyed Emperors, but co^maundyng Idolatry they obeyed them
not. 3. Kings. 11
Certain it is, that God did institute the kingdom of Israel or of ten
tribes by the prophet Ahiab: yet nevertheless the lord cries out in an other
prophet, Amos. 8.
they have reigned in deed, but not by me. For the lord would have had those
kings to have framed al things after his word, and to reign in the fear of
God: and where they did not so, but followyng the instigation of Satan ordered
al things after their own lust, they are rightly said to reign, not of
God, but of ye devil. Therefore have the godly obeyed kings: but they obeyed
them not co^maundyng wicked things, although they took them for their kings,
God had instituted the order of priests: not withstandyng Christ calls the
doings of the same priests the works of darkness. And S. Peter says: we
must rather obey God than men. So verily the Roman Empire, which was of God,
came also out of the Sea (as Daniel says also) out of the troublesome world,
and even out of Hell, being made great through slaughter, murder, sedition and
treason. For the people of Rome with the most part of Emperors regarded the
Devil and the world, and not God.

The Romans Empire of seven heads
And what the empire of Rome is at this day, he figureth now also, it has
seven heads, and ten horns, and every horn had his crown, signifiyng
verily, that by horns are signified kingedomes. Another do we here bring in
any new or far fetched exposition. In the.17. chapt. the Angel expounds
him self, and says, that by seven heads are signified seven mountains or
hills, and even kings also. In Rome are accounted many hills, but there be
seven notable. For there is mount Palatine, Capitoline, Auentine, Coelius,
Esquiline, Viminalle, and Quirinalle: Propertius expou^ding the same in one
verse (which I have expressed in two) says: Septem vrbs alta ingis toto quae
praefidet orb.

A city set alofte on seven hills
Whose people rule the world at their own wills.
And therefore is called of ye Greeks, (...), of seven hills. And verily the
city is taken for the whole Empire. So have there ben also many kings and
Emperors, which are comprised in the seventh no^bre: but yet is it certain,
that the seventh nombre of kings also is exactely found in the history. For
at the beginning when Rome was first builded, there reigned seven kings in
order, Romulus, Numa, Tullus Hostilius, Aucus Martius, Tarquinius Priscus,
Seruius Tullius, Tarquius Superbus: who expulsed by reason that Lucrese was
ravished of the kings son, they were ruled by confulles, by ten men, and by
Dictatours, unto the time of Julius Caesar, who first usurped to him self
again a kings crown: after whom reigned Antony and Octauian, called
Augustus, Tiberius, Caius, Claudius and Nero, again seven. In Nero thempire
receives a plage: From thence again are accounted seven, Ottho, Galba,
Vitellius, Vespasiane, Titus, Domitian, Nerua. From him was the Empire deuolued
to Vlpius Traiane, a Spaniarde. Therefore the Roman Empire could not by
plainer marks be expressed. To this Empire also Daniel attributed ten horns,
as well for that it was collected of many kingedomes, as also that it was
disparsed again into many. Whereof shall be spoken in the.17. chapt. And it is a
common thing to the Scriptures, by horns to signify kingedomes and power.

And to this kingdom the lord Jesus ascribes open wickedness, ye he calls it
blasphemouse. For he adds: The Roman Empire blasphemouse.
and upon his heads the name of blasphemy, that is to say, what plasphemie
so ever may at any time be any where divised, all that same shall be found
manifest in this Empire, and chiefly in the heads. For if ye behold the
hills of Rome, chiefly the Mount Capitoline, ye shall find it called of
Cicero, the mansion place of the Gods, verily for that it contained in a manner
the Images of all the Gods. For on those hills were seen the Temples of
Jupiter after all his properties, etc. The Temples of Saturn, Juno, Minerua,
of Mars the revenger, of Hercules, Ianus, Venus, Apollo: also the Temples of
Fortune, Health, Victory, concord, and such other. But if ye look upon the
Princes themselves, Caius would have his Images set up in Temples, and the
people to swear by his name. Nero blasphemed the name of Christ, and by
sheddyng of innocent blood sought to abolissh the Gospel. Domitian commanded
him self to be called God and the Lord. And others also have required godly
honors, men swimming in blasphemies, and stinking, in all wickedness.

the power of the Roman Empire of monarchies oppressed.
Furthermore by an Image compacte of sundry beasts he shows, how the Roman
Empire increased, and obtained such power, and what be the manners thereof. In
the 7. chapt. of Daniel. By the eatte of the Mountain is signified the
monarchy of Greece or Macedome, by the Bear the Persian, and by the Lion the
monarchy of the Chaldeis or Babilonians. And it is plain, that the Romans
ouercomyng those nations, and putting down and subdewyng to themselves those
monarchies, came unto the supreme top of gouernemente. For they subdewed to
themselves the east parts chiefly by Lucullus, Pompey, and Crassus, Macedonie
and all Greece, by Paulus Aemilius: a good part of Affricke by Scipio and
Marius: Aegipte by Octauius Augustus: and so forth. And like as they were in
religion ungodly: so in other manners not unlike most wild beasts. For as the
Libarde or Panther is spotted and of sundry colors: so are the Romans, a
collection of many nations, borne to make sedition and slaughter. The bear
does only go upon his fete, The Romans are beasts.
but with the same also strikes, and catches his pray: so the Romans did
nothing else, but strike, fight, and take spoils. And as the force of a Lion is
emonges four foted beasts most excellent, and the Lions mouth insatiable and
stinking: so was the Roman Empire most strong, couetouse, never contented,
and the very matter and corruption of mischief.

And S. Ihon declares in deed more expressly, The Dragon gives to the To.
his power and seat.
that the Romans have of the Devil all that wickedness, cruelty, and
mischief: the Dragon says he, gave unto that beast, his power, and that
great: he gave also his seat. Which is asmoch in effect, as if he had said:
the Devil reigned whole in the Romans, and the Romans wrought by the
Devil, all that they did. For the Devil is the original of murders and lies.
Of the deuyls seat I have spoken in the second chapter of this book.
Howebeit we must know, that all power is of God: but he by his just judgment
does permit many things to the Devil over the children of misbeleif. For S.
Paul in the.2. to the Thessa. the.2. chap. When he had spoken of the most
mighty workyng of Satan, by tokens and king wonders, wherewyth they should
be deceived, that would not receive the truth, he adds immedately: therefore
God shall send them strong illusions, that they may believe lies, and be judged
all that believed not the verity, etc. For (as I have often admoneshed) we must
take good head, that we mix not the works of God and the Devil together.
Good works are of God, evil are of the Devil. Now leest any man should
maruayle, why God permits so much to the Romans and the devil their head,
and does not infringe their force for the elect sake, S. Ihon interlaceth an
heavy chance of the people of Rome, and of the whole Empire, which chanced
to them, immediately after the first persecution moved against the church of
Christ, and after the most shyning Apostles executed, verily to revenge that
innocent blood. For he sees one of those heads, as it were wounded to death.
For Nero which first of the Emperors, stirred up the first persecution against
the church, with his own hand sticked himself. And he was the last Emperor of
that family. And left the Empire so afflicted, that it was like enough to have
fallen to decaie. Certain provinces revolted. Galba, Ottho, and Vitellius,
fought emonges themselves, and made civil wars. This Vitellius moreover,
drove Sabinus, Vaspasians brother, suspecting none evil, with others, into the
Capitol house, and setting the temple on fire, distroyed both Temple and men
together, and made all one heap. Another does Orosius conceal, why these
things happened, saying: by and by Rome solfed, by the murder of princes, and
civil wars, for the injuries done to the Christen religion.

The deadly wound is healed.
Notwithstanding the Apostle adds, that the wound made was healed again. For
Sextus Aurelius victour Vespasian, says he, refresshed in a short time (see
what is the deadly wound) the weary world that long waunted blood, this
says he. Here have you, that he said, the deadly wound was healed again.
For other writers discoursing the same more at large, set forth: how Vespasian
retournyng to Rome, accounted nothing more noble or better, than to establisshe
and beautify the common wealth that was sore afflicted and decayed, to bring in
order and frame the provinces and cities that were disordered by tumultes and
seditiouse vprores, to reform the warlicke discipline over licentiouse, and to
punnisshe offenders. He repared with new buyldinges the city defaced with
old firinges and ruins: he builded again the Capitol house that was burnte:
and erected the Theater in the mids of the city, the most ancient Monumente
of the Empire, etc.

The folishnes and vn^odlines of ye world
Moreover he touches now sore the folishenes and wickedness of the world. And
there was an admiration in the whole earth, etc. For the world follows the
present felicity, and estemeth al things after their good or evil fortune.
For that religion, say they, is most noble, stable and true, which is famous
in victories, and shines with the ornaments of this world. Therefore for the
majesty of the Roman Empire, which they had in greatest admiration, the most
part of men received the Romish religion, and defended the same as sincere. But
S. John declaring the enormitie of this sin, says: and they worshipped the
dragon, etc. he says not, they worshipped Gods, They worshipped the Devil.
or wood and stones: but they worshipped the Devil. Idolaters will say, that
they worship and honor Gods, and are not ignorant, that Images are made of
matter corruptible? and that the worship that they do unto them redoundeth, not
to those dead signs, but to them, whereof they be signs. Thus verily will all
Idolaters say: unto whom if you say, you worship wood and stones, they will
answer quickly, that they have great injury done them. For they be not so
folisshe (they will say) to worship that thing, which they made with their
own hands, etc. But the Apostle which knew well enough those civil
expositions, and wily shifts of Idolaters, speaking frankely against them,
respected not that, which they alleged for themselves: but that same rather,
which God judges, and the verity of the thing pronounces, and says: and
they worshipped the Devil or the Dragon. So Paul in the.1. to the Corinth.
the.10. chapt. The things, says he, that the heythen offer up, they offer
the^, not to God, but to Deuilles. But this did the gentiles deny. But God in
this case passes not upon the judgments, and intentes, and denialles of men,
but pronounces after his own judgment. In the.17. of Leuit. He says: if ye
offer unto me oblations otherwise, than I have prescribed, ye shall defile your
selves with blood. Let now the massemo^gyng priests cry out till they be
hoarse again, we offer to the Lord God, not to strange Gods: yet shall the
Lords sentence stand most true for ever, that they transgress with
unlawful worshipping, no less than if they committed parricidie. As also
Esaye bears witness in.66. chapt. The lord god allows the sincere obedience,
which we show unto his laws, he cares nothing for our inventions and good
intentes. Thus at this present he shows at few words, as the thing is in
deed, that all idolaters worship the Devil. If we would at this day esteem
these things rightly, we should not so contend as it were for life and lands,
about maineteyning of Images in the church. The Lord Jesus light our hearts
and minds to see his truth.

The beast is worshipped, and he blasphemeth the name of God, and the Saints
of God, and finally makes war with the Saints. The.lvj. Sermon.
ANd they worshipped the beast, sayyng: who is like unto the beast? who is
able to war with him? And there was given to him a mouth to speak great
things, and blasphemies: and power was given unto him, to do.xlii. Months.
And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against god, to blaspheme his name, and
his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him to
make war with the saints and to overcome the^.

The beast is worshipped, and how.
He said, that the world worshipped the dragon: now he adds, that the same
worshippeth the beast. Howbeit seeing the beast is the empire, some man might
marvel, how the empire might be worshipped? But we at few words say, how they
worship the empire, which receive the decrees, rites and superstitiouse
ordenaunces of thempire, and of them depend whole. And there were not a few
at that time, who in favor of the Roman Empire denied the faith of christ,
and reuoltyng from the church, joined themselves in religion and sacrifices to
the felloweship of the Empire. They in very deed worshipped the beast.
Moreover that thing which is only dew unto one God, the same did the Romans
attribute to their empire. But who so ever ascribes unto any thing divine
properties, does verily deifie and worship the same. And ye properties of
god be these, to have no match or pere, that he alone is greatest and best,
immortal, eternal, most mighty, most invincible. For so say the Prophets:
who is like unto thee, O God, in heaven and in earth? who is as thou? who can
resist God? But the Romans did attribute all these things to their Emperors,
and to their empire, sayng, as S. John also recites: who is like unto Rome?
who is able to war with it? they called their Emperors Gods, best,
greatest, most puissaunt, and most invincible. Thempire it self they called
eternal. Ye may see these things yet in most ancient authors and coins. So
many therefore as were not asshamed to attribute these things to the Roman
Princes and kingdom, are said rightly to have worshipped the beast. And what
other thing I pray you is done at this day, whilst for the favor of
Emperors, Kings, Popes, and their realms, the verity is denied, or wrasted
after the affections of men? These worship the beast also.

Now is given also the beast a mouth speakinge great things, and
blasphemies. A mouth speaking great things.
Of blasphemies we shall speak more anon. But for as much as the Roman Empire
obtained greatest victories, and held most gallaunt and solemn triumphs, it
seems to have occasion given to boaste proudely of the victories, and to
challenge those things to themselves, which were in deed wrought through the
power of God. And doubtless there do yet remain the greatest and most
licentiouse bragges of the Romans, that they are conquerours and lords of the
world. But such pride was grievously punnisshed in Nabuchodonozor the King.
Whereof you may see in the.4. chapt. of Daniel. S. Peter affirms that God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. God hates the arrogant,
and takes away their names from the Earth.

And where some man might demand. How long shall Rome be thus prowde^
But what end shall there be of injuries, pride, finally of intolerable
arroga^tie, and blasphemies? S. John preuenteth and says: and power was given
him to do, that is to work violence, xlii. months: that is to say, so long
time, as it seems good to the Lord: which nevertheless, although he would
have the time to be to us unknown, yet is known to him, so that the godly
may promise themselves, that this evil shall endure but a few months, of
this nombre have I reasoned in the 11. chapt. and.xlvi. Sermon. And have showed
in the former places that those nombres were equivalent, to wit the thousand
two ho^dreth and three score days, the.xlii. months, the time, two times,
and half a time. God therefore admonisshyng us as it were by a riddle, will not
have us curiousely to inquire after times, which he has kept in his own power,
it is sufficient to us that he has assigned all things in their lust
limittes.

Now follows a ple^tiful treatise of Romish blasphemies. Of ye blasphemies of
old Rome,
First he says by a trope, he has opened his mouth: whereby he has signified
his boldenes, and liberty, yea lice^tiousenes of speaking. For we say he
would not ones open his mouth: when we signify, any man that will not speak
fra^kely. But the Romans, and companions of the Romish superstition blaspheme
God three manner of ways. For first they blaspheme the holy name of God in
this, that they do prefer their false Gods and their superstitions to the true
God, to the true and most holy religion. For where they ded admit in the city
of Rome the Gods of al nations, and their religions, the religion of the only
God of Israel they utterly refused: for that they understood how he would be
worshipped alone, and by non other rite, than that which he himself had
prescribed. But they had rather reteyne wickedly those their many gods, and
their religion although most absurd, than to commit themselves into the
tuition of one, and to reseaue a moderate and simple religion. Author. Aurel.
August. I raccoumpte not now the blasphemouse words of them, uttered against
the true God, about that time chiefly, when Vespasian and Titus triumphed,
after the Iewysh war finished, both of the City distroyed, and the people of
God overcome. There were carried about in the triumph the holy vessels of the
Temple, and even the God of the Jews as vanquished and bounden, was seen led
into the Capitol house, to make his supplication to their great God Jupiter,
as it pleased them. Whereupon we understand that the name of God was no whit
less outrageously blasphemed, at that time, than it was in old time of the
Palestines or Philistians, what time they set the Arcke in the temple of their
God Dagon: likewise of Rapsake, and Synnacherib, moreover of Balthazar King of
Babylon in the.5. chapter of Daniel. But the offenders are found out at the
last.

Secondely the Romans blasphemed the Tabernacle of God. That same oulde
Tabernacle of the people of Israel, was not only the office, or place of
religion and worshyppyng, but also a token of Gods presence. For God is now
present in the mids of his Church, a figure of whom, the Tabernacle of
witness represented. But the Romans called the Christen church wicked,
foolysh, seditiouse, whorysh, and detestable: which they also most greuouselie
ded persecute, and sought to destroy by all means: hereunto also they bent
their whole power.

Finally they blasphemed also the heavenly dwellers, Gods Saints overwhelmed
with reproaches.
the happy and blessed souls of Saints, Propheies and Apostles, whom they
called wicked, seducers, peace breakers, blasphemers, heretics and sinful
persons. For at this time, whilst S. John wrote these things, diverse
Apostles, under the Roman Empire, had now ben executed and slain, as plagues
of the world, yea their memorial and doctrine condemned. But hereof you
perceive, how displeasauntly God takes it, if any man rail upon godly
preachers, and holy ministers of churches. For the Lord takes the reproach
spoken as it were against him self. There remain yet at this day certain
blasphemies of this sort with Cornel. Tacitus in the.21. book of Augustallus,
written against Moses and the people of God.

Morouer God permits the beast, that he should war upon the Saints, and
overcome them. The beast makes war with ye saints.
For the Roman Empire unto the time of Constantine the great stired up ten
most greuouse persecutions against the church. Whereof you may read Eusebius
bishop of Cesaria, and Orosius in the history which he wrote to S. Austen. And
this place chiefly apperteyneth to the instruction and comfort of the church?
For the Lord also in the Gospel prophecieth of the destenies of the church, to
the consolation and information of the godly, as appears in the.15. and.16.
chapt. of S. John. And how the Saints be overcome I declared in the.11.
chapt. The Lord Jesus preserve his church. Amen.

Of the power of the Roman Empire, and who worship the beast: and of the
destruction of Rome, and the Roman Empire. The.lvij. Sermon.
ANd power was given him over all kinrede, tongue, and nation: and all that dwell
upon the Earth worshypte him: whose names are not written in the Book of life
of the lamb, which was killed from the beginning of the world. If any man
have an ear, let him hear. He that leads into captivity, shall go into
captivity: he that kills with a sword, must be killed with the sword. Here
is the patience, and the faith of Saints.

Of the power of ye Romans Empire.
The Apostle by the revelation of Christ speaks also of the power and
majesty of the Roman Empire. The Roman Empire was in deed of greatest power
in the time of Octauius Augustus, also in the time of Domitian his empire, and
in the reign of Traiane, also under Hadrian, Aureliane, Diocletian, and
Constantine. The greater part of the world inhabited obeyed thereunto, as al
Europe in a manner, Asia and Afric: as both latin and Greek histories do
testify. Howbeit hereof the lord warns us, that we should not curiousely
search the counselles of God, being inquisitiue, why God gave so great power
to the Romans, whom he knew would abuse the same to the oppression of
Christ's Church? for where he says, that the power was given to Rome, he
stilleth and appeaseth all murmuringes. For Empires be of God. But he is most
wise, rightuouse, and holy. Where therefore he made the kingdoms of the world
subject to Rome, he did it wisely, justly, and holily. In that the Romans
corrupt Gods ordenaunce, and commit themselves to be governed of the Devil,
it comes of evil.

Let our disputations here cease, for the wise man says also, that wicked men
and hipochrites reign for the sins of the people. And that he reherseth
kinreddes, tongues, and nations, he does after the imitation of the Prophet
Daniel, which by such a phrase of speech is wont to signify a most large and
puissaunt Empire.

But what apperteyneth this to us, or what profit (say thou) comes to us
herby, that the Roman Empire is so far extended through out the world? This
verily, we see how this prophecy has hitte every thing rightly that went
before: therefore is there left no place to doubt of the things that
follow. Let us consider moreover that most puissaunt kingdoms, which seem to
men invincible, may of God be disolued without any difficulty: let us
therefore learn to fear God, and to walk in his commandments, and to
despise these earthly things.

Now also he declares more expressly, who shall worship the beast: Who
worship the beast.
for he said, that men in the world should be taken with admiration of the
beast, and shall worship the beast: he now declares the same, and so places
the word of worshipping, that he may understand it as well of those that are
present as also to come. For he speaks not only of men of his time, but of
al, which ravished with the admiration of thempire, and majesty thereof, shall
either deny or contemn the faith of Christ. And he says, that al shall
worship the beast that dwell upon Earth: and leeste any man should refer it
absolutely unto al, as though non of the true worshippers of God should be
any, he annexeth, whose names are not written in the book of life of the la^be,
to wit the reprobates, not ye chosen: the unbelievers. I say, which contemn the
word of the gospel, disdaigne to hear it, and be rebels to Christ. Aretas
the expositour. they dwell upon the earth, says he, which are moved with no
care of heavenly things, nor of the glory that there is: or give themselves to
earthly habitation, and apply themselves to a beastly life according to the
same. Thomas of Aquine brings also a testimony out of the.17. of Jeremy.
They that depart from me, shall be written in the Earth. For they have
forsaken the vein of lively waters, even the lord him self. Of the book of
life I have spoken in the.3. and.5. chapt. and will speak of the same in
the.19. and 20. chapt. of the Apocalipse.

Hereunto he annexeth a notable thing after the manner of Apostles, which are
always wont, so often as they have occasion to celebrate and intimate Christ,
and the mystery of his redemption. S. John therefore says, how the lamb
has been killed and offered up from the beginning of the world. And it is with
out controversy, The lamb slain from the beginning of the world.
that by the lamb is understand Christ.

It is therefore demanded, how he was slain from the beginning of the world.
Many here tourmente themselves at the length they expound, that Christ was
slain in Abel, and in all saints, by perticipation not by passion. Certainly
we may not expound this place after the lettre. For Christ could not be
slain, before he was borne. Moreover the Apostle affirms, that Christ sins
the beginning of the world, has not ben slain oftener than ones. Read what
he says in the.9. chapt. to the Hebrew. And yet can not the most and true
word of God be contrary or repugnaunt to it self. Therefore say we after the
common rule of expoundyng the Scriptures, that the signs have the names of the
things signified. For the Lamb was called a passover or passing by, whereof it
was a sign. Circumcision was called the leage or conuenaunt it self,
sacrifices are named sins. So verily from the beginning of the world
sacrifices were slain, which were simbolles or signs of Christ to be
incarnated and offered up ones for the clensyng of sins. We understand
therefore by this testimony of Christ, that all the sacrifices of the ancient
fathers, were sacraments of Christ, and that the redemption of Christ has
from the beginning of the world ben of efficacitie to all the faithful.
Therefore this place is notable and worthy to be observed. Hitherto
apperteyneth the Apostles testimony in the.1. to the Corinth. the.10. That al
our forefathers have eaten of the same spiritual meat with us, and dronken of
the same drink, and that they drank of the rock followyng them, which was
Christ.

Of the destruction of ye Roman Empire.
And hitherto has he spoken of the majesty of the Roman Empire, blasphemies
and sins. Now follows of ye destruction of so great an Empire, and
punnishme^ts of sins. Whereof notwithstanding shall be spoken again in the.17.
chapt.

And with an Acclamatio^, most commonly used in ye gospel, and as it were
peculiar to Christ, he stireth up al his auditors, and cries out, he that
has an ear to hear let him hear. Verily it was to men a wonder, and seemed
incredible, that so great a Majesty could fall: but yet it falls. The
faithful marueled also what should be the end of blasphemies, slaughters,
injuries, abominations. Moreover the doctrine that follows, is notable,
excellent, and worthy to be kept in memory. Therefore he stireth up all men
to attentiuenes, and than he says: whosoever shall lead into captivity,
shall go into captivity: whosoever strikes with the sword, etc. For in such
sort he declares the destruction of Rome and the Roman empire, that he
confirms with all the justice of gods judgment. And also with a maruelouse
brevity of gods sentence, given or pronounced against Rome, he suppeth of
that unmeasurable power. And this is both by the law of God, by the law of
nature, and by the law of al nations received as a thing most just, that every
man should look to have the same done to him, that he does to an other. For to
this be longs the sentence rehearsed of Noe in the.9. of Genesis He that shedeth
blood, his blood shall be shed. The same is repeted in the.33. of Esaias. Woe to the
that spoilest, shall not thou be spoiled? A testimony whereof is Niniue with ye
Prophet Nahum, and Babylon with all the prophets. Therefore has the Lord taught
in the gospel, whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you the same
unto them also. With what mesure you meat unto others, with the same shall
others meat unto you again. Whosoever stryketh with the sword, with the sword
shall perish. Therefore it is most reasonable, that sins Rome has spoiled the
whole world, and iniuried al nations, and made cruel war upon al men: it should
be again of al nations invaded, spoiled, torn, and trodden under foot. Let us
mark this judgment of God, and let us fear god, and do good unto men. For
here is sentence given against al men that do injury to their neighbors, but
especialli those which invade innoce^ts with unjust wars, and which they be
hired to make etc.

And here must we repeat some thing out of Hystories, The destruction of Rome
and ye Roman Empire.
whereby the verity of this prophecy may be better known and understand.
When the most excellent Prince Constantine had received the government of
thempire, as it were abhorring Rome, he builded Constantinople, and made it the
seat or mansion of thempire. And from that time the Majesty of Rome began to
fall unto ruin. Under the emperor Gratiane, a Prince most witty, the
Barbarians were a great terror to the Romans, whereupon Gratiane made a leage
with them. Stilico father in law to Honorius, a Vandall borne, deminished the
wages of the Gothians, and other leage fellows of the people of Rome: for the
which cause they took Armor: yet being pacified again, they were stirred up
afterward through the malice of Stilico and of Duke Saul, and under the
co^duite of Athalaricus their King, they have them to Rome, lay seige to it,
and besiege it by the space of two years, at the length took and spoiled it.
Which seige and spoil S. Hierome in his Epistle bewayleth much. Orosius
writes much and christianly hereof in the.29. chapter of the.7. book of
Histories. It is reported that Rome was taken the first day of Apryll, in the
year.412. Yet the Gothians immediately leauyng the City, remove into other
places there by: nevertheless, being again inflamed with fury they return,
and under their captain Athaulphus, they plagued and spoiled Rome, worse then
they ded before. The King had determined, extinguyshing the name of Romans,
to have called the City Gothia, if he had not ben dissuaded of Galla Placidia,
daughter to Honorius. A few years after, Rome was taken again of
Genserychus, King of Vandalles: and that which was inryched and replinished,
with the robberies of al nations, was by fourtene days together emptied
clean. After came Odacer with the Germans: and putting down the name of
Emperor, reigned over the city himself as king, by the space of.15. years.
Whom Theodorichus of Verona expulsed and slew. And there reigned with his East
Goths about.50. years. Than was it recovered of Bellisarius, for Justinian
Emperor of Greece, but to the utter destruction of Rome. For Totilas King of
Gothia discomfyted both the Greek and Romayne Army at Placence: after he
beseiged Rome, scaled, took, sacked, overthrew and set it on fire. The city
burned thirtene days. Another was there any man in it, by the space of forty
days. Read the.4. book of Sabellicus the.8. Aeneade. Perauenture I shall
discourse more at large of the destruction of Rome, in the.17. chap. Wherefore
within the space of.136. years, Rome came seven times into strangers hands,
and was sacked most cruelly, and fell on the edge of the sword, and was led
into captivity: Council how ye godly shall demean themselves in so great
evils
which has long stricken with the swoorde, and led away all nations prisoners.
This was the just judgment of God.

And S. Ihon annexeth a doctrine, how the godly should behave themselves in so
great troubles and adversities. Here, that is to wit, whilst the Romans
reign and rage, also in those blouddy and cruel alterations, and destruction
of the Roman Empire, the Saints shall need to have patience, or
perseueraunce and faith. These two virtues shall keep the faithful, that they
perish not also. Of patience the lord speaks in S. Luke the.21. chapt. In
your patience shall you possess your souls. Of faith speaks blessed John:
and this is the victory, that ouercometh the world, even your faith. Impatience
and incredulity has led away many into the deniyng of the faith, to idolatry
and to al ungodliness. So learn we also, how to arm our selves in our days
against all ungodliness. The lord deliver us from evil. Amen.

Of an other beast, which comes up out of the Earth: that is to say, of
Antichrist. The.lviij. Sermon.
ANd I beheld an other bea^^ c^^^^^ up out of the Earth and he had two horns
like a lamb: and he spoke as did the Dragon.

The Apostle S. Paul plainly testifies, What is the end of this prophecy.
Romans 15.
such things as are written to be written for our learning, that through the
patience and consolation of the scriptures we may have hope: wherefore we must
also apply thereunto these things present. For Christ the lord of all, when he
foresawe how greatly satan should by his chosen members the old and new
Roman Empire, afflicte the church, would have us dilligently admonished of
every thing, to the intent that al afflicted persons should hereof learn
patience, and conceive comfort and hope, and not be discouraged with the heavy
burden of euilles. Like as he has therefore diligently described the old
Roman Empire, and showed as it were p^yntyng with the fingar what mischief it
should work to the church, and admonisshed al to have faith and patience:
right so will he from hence forth describe popery or Antichristianisme, in ye
which description he sets forth before our eyes, what so ever the saints
shall suffer: that being warned before, they may abide more manfully
persecution, and less yield to mischauntes.

The second beast comes not forth till the first be taken away.
And in goodly order begins he to set forth Antichrist after the Roman
Empire torn and taken away. For Daniel says, that a little and small horn
should arrise up emonges the ten horns, and three of those horns to poole
down, pluck of, and cast away, and so to atteyne unto great power. For he
signifies, that the Roman Empire being divided, and brought now unto decaie
Antichrist shall arrise, which should procure to himself a new, and
countrefet Empire. And S. Paul says also, that Christ shall not come unto
judgment, till Antichrist have gone before: and that he shall not come another,
unless this be first taken away, which hinders and lets, that he can
not come. The which S. Hierome and other holy expositours do understand of
the Roman Empire, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which must be plucked up, and taken away, and that then shall Antichrist
arrise. But the Majesty of the Empire was distroyed about the year of our
Lord.480. when Odacer invaded Rome. For from that time by the space of.300.
years and more, there was no Emperor of the Weste after Augustulus. And besides
this under the Emperor Justinian, Rome was burnt and laid waste of Totila.
Sins the which time the Bisshoppes of Rome have begone to look a lofte, and
to think upon a new kingedome.

The second beast of ye Earth.
And therefore the Lord says, that this beast arriseth of the very earth.
The kyngedome of our lord Jesus Christ comes from heaven, and brings to
heaven. Papistrie comes another of Christ, nor of his doctrine, but comes out
of the Earth: that is to wit, of evil means, Ambition, avarice, treason and
cruelty. What ministers of the church Christ ordained, is easily perceived by
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. That he forbadde them government, supremacy,
superiorite and maioritie (as they term it) appears of the.18. and.20. chapt.
of S. Matthew. and.22. of Luk^. Therefore do the Acts of Apostles, and the
doctrine of Peter testify, that Peter was a Minister, and not Lord of the
Apostles, much less Prince of the city or Empire of Rome. For they lie
loud, that say, how Rome and Italy are the Patrimony of S. Peter, given him
of the Lord. At the first the Apostles, and Apostolical men, ministers of
churches, governed the churches equallye, neither ded one take upon him more
pre-eminence than an other. Which thing I am able to prove, by many testimonies
of ancient writers, if need required. About the counsel of Nice, and a little
before that time, when churches were greatly multiplied, were ordained, and
custumably received Metropolitanes, instituted in deed by a laudable (but yet
man's) ordinance: that is to wit, in a certain province or head city was
ordained a Bishop or Pastor, which should have as it were, the^ ouersighte of
the rest, and should serve for the calling of Synodes or assemblees. Yet was
it than dilligently provided, that he should not be called Primate: leeste any
manne should think himself preferred before others in power, but in order.
Another was the Bishop of Rome at that time, exalted above all others: but there
were diverse Metropolitanes, whereof the bishop Rome was one. The Niceyue
counsel confyrmed that same custom, and would have it ratified. Socrates in
his ecclesiastical History the.5. book the.8. chapt. recites many
Metropolitan churches in Asia. S. Hierome to Euagrius, and in an epistle to
Titus says plainly, that in oulde time churches were governed by the common
counsel of priests or elders, and that time Bishops and priests were all
one: After by the custom of the church, not of the verity of the Lords
ordinance (I rehearce Saint Hieromes words) Bishops were preferred before
priests, yet must they govern churches together.

And of that same custom, How the Bishop of rome came to his supremacy.
yea rather of the abuse of the custom, Antichrist had his beginning. For
Boniface Bishop of Rome began first to take upon him dominion over the
churches of Affricke. But he was immediatelye repressed by the sixte Affricane
counsel, where at Saint Austen is red also to have been: After that, began
also the Bishop of Constantinople to challenge to himself the Supremacy, for
this cause chiefelie, that Constantinople was than the courtelyke Palace, and
chief City of the Empire. How beit here certain Bishops ded resist him:
emonges whom was Leo, Bishop of old Rome. There remain certain Epistles of
his to the Emperor of Constantinople, to the Bishops of the East, and to
others. So was this trouble for that time also appeased. But straight way an
other Bishop of Constantinople blinded with Ambition, required a fresh, to have
the supremacy given him. Whom Pelagius and Gregory Bishops of Rome
wythstood: And this later so impugned the supremacy of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, that he sticked not to call him the vauntcurrour of Antichrist,
which would usurp the title of general bishop. There remain not a few
epistles written of this matter, in his register.

Nevertheless a few years after, when the Bishops of Rome were sore
affrayde, leeste that dignity should be given to the bishops of
Constantinople, Boniface the.3. obtained of the emperor Phocas a parricide, that
he which was bishop of old Rome, might be taken for the universal bishop, and
Rome for the head of al churches: which constitution set up the Pope in
Authority, Apostolical.
that he was now, taken of the most part of the west Bishops for
Apostolical, and many matters brought before him to determine: whereby he got
the favor of many Princes, chiefly of France, by whose aid he drove out of
Italy both the Emperor of Greece, and kings of Lumbardie, and brought Rome,
and the best and most flourishing parts of Italy under his own subjection.
Thus I say out of the earth comes up the second beast.

Beast.
Furthermore, Christ callth the Romish papistrie beast, for that in Avarice,
Covetousness, Tyranny, Cruelty, and even in beastliness, he differs
nothing from the old beast, of whom I have spoken before.

Hitherto of the original of Antichrist or Pope, and of the new Empire:
furthermore S. Ihon proceeds to descrybe that second beast lyuelie, that we
should al know and eschew the same: and first he reasons of the power of
Antichriste.

The beast had two horns.
That other beast, says he, had two horns: and he adds, like a lamb. For
of them is spoken in the fifte chapter of this book. And the Lord signifies
the priesthod and kingdom, which the Popes usurp to themselves, affyrmynge
that power is given them in Heaven and in Earth, in spiritual matters and
temporal. For therefore they give in their Arms two Keys, that is to say two
horns: They boaste that they have two swoordes. Of the which blasphemies, he
that will be fullye instructed, let him read the words of the beasts of
Boniface.8. in the sixte Decret. of maiorit. and obedience. One holy: again
Clement.5. second book of oaths: finally Gregory.9. or rather the first book
of Innocent the.3.33. tit. de mayor. and obedient. All Histories make mention
that Boniface the.8. ded in the year of our Lord.1300. institute the first
Iubeley, and in the same openly before the people to have showed in the way of
ostentation the Pontifical and Imperial majesty, whylest on the one day he
appeared in the apparel of a Bishop, on the other having put on purple robes
showed himself to the people like an Emperor. They carried before him two
swords. And he himself cried, lo here are two swords: as though he should
poincte with his fingar to the whole world, that he and certain of his
predecessors and all his successors, were that two horned beast. What shall
we say that all bishops by him consecrated, wear upon their heads miters or
two horned caps. Unless therefore we be blynder than was Tyresias, we see with
our eyes, who is that great Antichriste.

And here we must observe, that he says not, Like a lambe^.
that those ar the horns of a lamb. For Christ keeps still both the priesthod
and kingdom with the faithful in the church: another does he resign the same
to any other, he has appointed no Vycar. For he executes continually at the
right hand of the Father, the offices both of King and Bishop, and this all
faithful feel with joy. He says therefore, like a lambs. For the Pope will
make all men believe, that he has received of Christ Priesthod, and Empire,
that he is Christ's Vycar: where he is nothing less. He bragth every where,
that he is the great shepparde, and has received the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven: And that of the very lamb of God, in the Apostle Saint Peter: and
therefore that all Bishops are subject to him, finally, al Kings, Princes,
and people.

He proceeds to show moreover, He spoke as the Dragon.
what the talk of Antichriste is, what is his doctrine, and what is his
speech. He spoke, says he, as ded the Dragon. The Dragon is the Devil, as
before is playnelie showed. Therefore he ascribes to Antichryste or Popery,
Diabolical doctrine, or a deuyllysh mouth or toungue. We must see therefore,
how the devil speaks: that we may so understand rightly, how Antichriste
speaks. In Paradise he so tempereth his talk, that he calls in doubt the
certentie and verity of Gods word, and by that occasion places his own
word, in stead of the word of God. Is it so, says the Devil, has God
forbidden you, Genesis.3.
under peril of your life, that ye should not eat of the fruicte of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil? yea rather if ye eat thereof, ye shall be made
like unto God. And after the same sort Antichriste in his Popery brings the
verity of the Scripture in doubt, which by all means possible he disfameth
as imperfect, maimed, obscure, and doubtefull. And by and by upon that
occasion, he brings in his traditions, and decrees, wherewith he may patch
up that, which he contendeth to want in the Scriptures. But in his traditions
he affirms things contrary to Gods word and so disceaueth men. And all men
know, that have any skill of popysh matters, that the first and chief
principle and foundation of Papistrie is, that the Scriptures are imperfect
and obscure, and therefore to have need of traditions. Moreover the Dragon
speaks openly against the laws of God: and so does the Pope manifestelye.
God will be worshypped alone: the Pope adds to him Saints. God forbyddeth
Idolles and Idolatry: the pope commands them plainly. God will have his
name to be sanctified, and his name to be sworn by only: the Pope by
dispensing with oaths, polluteth the name of the Lord, and commands us to
swear by the names of Gods. God commands us to keep holy the Sabbath day:
The Pope brings this in contempt, sets forth his own holy days, and
makes double feasts. God commands us to honor our parents: This does the
Pope abbrogate, and commands to make more of Abbotes and Abbesses. God
commands, thou shall not kill, thou shall not commit aduoutrie, or steal:
The Pope grants most ample indulgences and pardons to his soldiers for
rash wars, made at his will and pleasure: spoyleth with his sacrileges al
churches: and he with his maiden priests fylleth all the world with
aduoutries, whoredoms, to speak in the mean time of nothing else more
filthy. And where God forbids lies, and false witness: the Pope, and his
whole doctrine (which he sets forth besides the Scripture) is sowed of lies:
and not only he dispenses with false witnesses, but permits also to break
safe conduites and public faith given, and if he hate the Prince, absolueth
the subjects from the oath of their fidelity and obedience: gives liberty
to al co^cupiscences, and makes laws, which nurrisshe the desires of the
flesh. And which shall be the Dragons mouth, if this be not it? Math. 4.
The Dragon moreover is red to have spoken and said to the Lord: all these
things will I give thee (for he showed him the kingedomes of the world) if
thou will fall down and worship me. What other thing speaks the Pope?
does he not inriche his obedient children with the Riches of this world,
especially such as will fall down and kiss his fete? I suppose the Devil
would never be so shameless, as to offer to the Lord his foot to kiss: but
that beast in the sight of God and his Aungelles, and of all the world, dare
put out his foot, marked (not with out a great mockery) with the sign of the
Cross, and profer it to be kissed of all the children of God. I can not bring
forth the horrible and innumerable blasphemies out of the decrees and
decretalles. For I am ashamed of such ungodliness. Who therefore will not
acknowledge that Satan him self does in this beast reign and rage? God
shortly confound the same. Amen. Amen.

Again of the power of Antichrist, and how the fourmer beast is worshipped.
The.lix. Sermon.
ANd he did all that the first beast could do in his presence. And he
causes the earth, and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast
whose deadly wound was healed.

The second beast executes the power of the first.
Again he reasons of the power of the second beast, or Antichrist and of
popery. He does or executes, says he, the power of the fourmer beast:
that is to say, exercises the same authority, that the old Roman Empire
exercised. Where he adds, in his presence: Aretas expounds, in followyng
immediately after, and even in imitatyng the same. But what power and
authority they exercised, I declared before in his place, about the beginning
of this chapt. Therefore as the Roman Emperors supposed all kyngedomes and
provinces to be theirs, and to appertain unto them: so do the Bishops of Rome
make their boaste that all realms are theirs. I give nothing here to affection
or hatred. There came forth lately a book printed at Lio^s, of Augustinus
Steuchus keeper of the Popes library, in the which he recites out of the
register of one Gregory (I suppose the.7.) all the kingdoms of Europe, Spain,
England, France, Denmark, Hongary. etc. The propriety whereof apperteyneth
to that seat of Rome, the use unto the Princes, Clientes of the same see. Full
often have the Popes assayed to bring into subjection to them and to their Sea
the kingdoms of the East also, and that under pretense of the holy war, and
recoueryng the Lords sepulcher. And like as the old Romans vexed with
continual war the nations that did not acknoweledge or obey the old Roman
Egles: so the Sea of Rome in our time, and in the memory of our forefathers
has put to business and trouble, those kingedomes, and nations and people, that
went about to reuolte, and would not acknoweldge those double keys, that is
to say two horns. For who knows not with what cruel wars he vexed in
times past the land of Boheme? who knows not what Germany and England has
suffered in fourmer years? So verily the second beast exercises gallauntly
the Tyranny of the old beast. The old beast set forth proclamations
concerning religion, and paiyng of tributes and customs, and so impouerished
in a manner all realms, their richesse being brought to Rome. And what other
thing does that seat at this day? what has it done now, to reken the
leest, these five hondreth years? who therefore does not see, that the second
beast exercises most abou^dantly the power of the first beast? A certain man
made verses in Latin tauntyng the couetousenes, and disceiptes of Rome: and
where Rome does magnify her self to be head of the world, which in Latin is
Caput, thus says he: If Caput come of Capio, which signifies to take
Than may Rome well be called so, which does nothing forsake.
If you decline Capio Capis, and to the grounds come
Her nets are large and can not miss, to catch both al and some.


He adds hereto an other thing, Who worship ye first beast.
that this second beast does procure, that they that dwell upon Earth should
worship the first beast. Which doubtless we see fulfilled in the Popisshe
kyngedome two ways. For first the Papists have procured, such authority and
reverence to the Roman Empire, which they call both sacred and holy, that as
many as live at this day, when they hear but the name of the Roman Empire
spoken of, do Imagine a certain divine thing, and brought unto them from
Heaven. I grant, that there have been many right noble Princes, godly, and al
praise worthy, in that same Empire: as was Constaunt, Constantine with some of
his sons, Gratiane, Valentinian, Theodose, and diverse others. I grant,
that under these and such other like the Empire was holy, and was in deed
thempire of Christ. For Christ was acknowledged with a true faith: and yet we
see, how the lord Jesus has nevertheless, as Daniel has done also, called
that Empire a beast, doubtless figuratively and for the tirannes. Therefore we
must wisely and justly attribute to every one that is his, and not without
respect to embrace and reverence that blouddy Empire for sacred and holy. And
we have also declared before, in what sort kingedomes are of God, and how
far their works are to be allowed that are in kingedomes. And hereof shall
be spoken a little after yet more plentifully.

Secondly the second beast causes men to worship the first, herein chiefly,
Popery has reduced gentilisme.
that Papistrie has brought again the heythennish manner, the names only
changed. For I told you before, that the first beast was worshipped, in
this that sely men received the Romans religion, and worshipped Idolles. The
heythen did verily confess the high God almighty. but they joined to him many
Gods, unto whom they submitted elements, diseases, Arts, countries, cities,
the members and parts of man, and such other like things. Aeolus was God of
the winds, and Neptune of the Sea, Pluto ruled in Earth, Mars was God of
war, Minerua and Apollo of arts, Aesculapius over diseases, Hercules and
many more. Venus was lady of Love, and the Goddess Juno of marriage. Another was
there any membre in the body, that had not his God: so had all Countries and
Cities their saving gods, and every house their domestical Gods. To them
afterward they framed Idolles, that is tokens and memorialles, which might
bring those heavenly gods into the memory of the Earthly dwellers. They
builded for the^ chapelles and churches, they instituted priests, holy days,
rites and Ceremonies. These things are found in the books of the gentiles, and
in our histories, and also in their writings, which have confuted the heythen
Idolaters. But in the popish kingdom at this day, the names being only
changed, who can deny, that the same culte, the same religion, nay very
superstition is not renewed? of these things I have treated at large in my
book De origin erroris. The Papists teach, that the Saints in heaven
reign with God, and that to them are subject sickenesses, arts, limbs or
members, cities and althinges, and must therefore be called upon and
worshipped. Saints are expressed and represented by Images, to these Images
are erected Aultars and churches: briefly, it is done to them, that was done to
the Gods and Idolles of the Heythen. Who therefore understands not now,
that Antichrist has procured, that the first beast might be worshipped, that
is to wit, might be of force again, and that the old Idolatry and
superstitiouse worshippyng might be renewed and frequented? Who worship ye
first beast under the second.


And as we have red it to be said before, and they worshipped him all that
dwell in Earth, whose names are not written in the book of life of the La^be:
so says he also here plainly, and he causes the Earth, and the inhabiters
of the Earth, that is they that seek and regard only earthly things, to
worship the first beast. For all be not polluted with popish Idolatry. For
hereunto apperteyneth the noble history of Leo the third Emperor, and
Gregory the second, and of other Popes, through whose wickedness Idolatry was
again brought into the church: which I wrote of long sins in my work De
origin erroris.

Another with out a mystery is this hereunto annexed, Whose deadly wound is
healed.
whose deadly plague was healed. For he seems to compare together the first
and second beast, and to show the lickenes of the same. And I told you,
how many men at the first were kept still in the Romans errors and
Idolatry, for that the Gods, by Vespasians means, were said to have
preserved the commonwealth, which else with civil wars was as it were
brought to ruin. Finally we read in stories, that the Empire of Rome has
many times received deadly wounds: but yet by and by, through the wisdom and
valeauntnes of some noble men, the Gods (as they speak) so willing, have been
healed again. In that no^bre are rekened Lucius Septimius Seuerus, Valerius
Aurelianus, C. Aurel. Val. Diocletian, etc. By whose lucky success, triumphs,
and victories to the Empire restored, many have been moved to say, who sees
not, that Rome shall be eternal, and that the Roman religion is to the Gods
most acceptable, and that the Emperors also and public weal is endued with
a certain deity, and is to be honored? after the same sort the kyngedome of
the Pope or Antichrist having tried most diverse chances, has very often
escaped out of desperate dangers. Force and policy has afflicted it, and
also the religion of Henry the.3. Emperor, and of his son Henry the.4.
Fridericke the first and second vexed the popes. There were also other mighty
Princes, which inflicted mortal wounds to the Sea of Rome.

Agane there were Bishops of Rome which with singular crafts have cured
their wounds again: The wou^des of Antichriste healed.
of the which sort was Gregory the.7. Vrbane ye.2. Paschalis the.2. Calixtus
the.2. Alexander the.3. Innocentius the.3. Honorius the.3. Gregory the.9.
Clement the.4. and.5. Boniface the.8. John the.22. and diverse others. But was
not that feate in greatest peril in times paste, when three Popes were created
at ones: whereof one was resident at Rome, the second went to Auignon in
France, and the third lived in Spain? But all these three put down by the
power, diligence, authority and policy of the Emperor Sigismunde, and the
counsel of Constau^ce, that deadly wound was fair healed in Martin the.5. And
this felicity, and restoryng the Popish kingedome, persuades many
effectually, that popery is of God, and the popish religion to be most certain
and true: as that which has so often ben of mighty princes assailed, might in
deed be shaken, but never yet overthrown. The acclamation of all the Romish
is known: the ship of S. Peter is tossed in deed with storms, but can never
be drouned. But Daniel him self also has prophesied that this should so come to
pass, saying: and he shall prosper, and shall do what he will, and shall kill
the strong and holy people, at his pleasure, and guyle shall be directed in his
hand. Which things they do not mark, which are at this day so much
offended with the felicity of that chair of pestilence, and the beast
thereof. Therefore like as the days of mourning, and soden destruction came upon
old Rome, and utterly destroyed both the city and Empire: even so shall we
hear in the.17. and.18. chapt. That Babylon shall have her fatal destenies.
The Lord Jesus confirm us in the faith of Jesus Christ, and deliver us from
the guiles, lucky success, and felicity of that Romish Antichrist. Amen.

Of the signs of Antichrist, and Image of the beast of him raised. The.lx.
Sermon.
ANd he did great wonders, so that he made fire come down from heaven into the
earth in the sight of men, and deceived them that dwelt on the earth by the
means of those signs which he had power to do in the sight of the beast,
saying to them that dwelte on the Earth: that they should make an Image unto
the beast, which had the wound of a sword, and did live. And he had power
to give a sprite unto the image of the beast, and that the image of the beast
should speak. And should cause that as many as would not worship the Image
of the beast should be killed.

He proceeds most dilligently to describe Antichrist and his kingdom, which
so greatly impugneth ye faith of Christ, and afflicts his church, to the
intent he might be known and eschewed of al men.

He says now he shall do great wonders, Of true miracles.
by the which he understands miracles. Whereof some be true, and some false.
I call those true miracles, which are done in deed, and are not by any crafty
iuggelyng countrefeted, and the which allure me^ to the verity, and set forth
the verity. Of the which sort out of doubt were the miracles of the
Prophets and Apostles, holy Martirs, and chiefly of Moses and Christ. These
do good unto men, hurt not, nor emptye pore men's purses: yea more they
glorify God, and make the treweth to be believed, in drawyng men only unto God
as to the fountain of all goodness. So John testifies of the lords first
miracle done in Cana of Galiley, and says: This is the first token that
Jesus did at Cana in Galiley, and showed his glory, and his disciples believed
on him. This token was true, and suspected of no iuggelyng, it was a benefit
bestowed upon pore folks newely married, by the same God was glorified. His
disciples moved herewith, and the sprite of God workyng also inwardely, believed
on Christ. So do all true miracles testify Christ to be helthful and
beneficial, and therefore alone to be called upon, and worshipped. So do John
and Peter interpret the signs or miracle that their themselves wrought in
the.3. of the Acts of Apostles. And of such miracles we have great plenty in
the Evangelical, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical story: another have al
those any other end, tha^ that we must believe in the son of God, as which
alone gives life and al good things.

And false signs I call those that are done through deuelishe craft or
inchauntement, Of fals^ signs or miracles.
or by the crafty iuggelyng and subtle sleight of wicked men: as be those of
witches and inchaunters: such as the wise men of Pharao were, and Simon Magus:
and those whereof mention is made in the.13. of Deu^ter. Finally such were the
miracles of the Freres, brent at Bernes in Swisserlande: and greatly it is to
be feared leest such have been the most part of the miracles of al Mounkes and
Eremites. Likewise those are called false also, which although they be done in
deed, yet bear they witness to a lie against the truth, confirmyng the Pope
to be head of the church, that images are to be worshipped, that we must pray
unto Saints, and go a pilgrimage for religion yea rather for superstitions
sake, that we must worship a new God liynge hid under form of Bread and
Wine, that God must be honored with vows and Monkish conversation, and if
there be any other thing of like sort. With such disceauable signs are
filled at this day all Temples, churches and chapelles. These have persuaded
much even wise men, and do also at this day. Which thing the Lord prophesied
should come to pass, saiynge: there shall arrise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, that even, if it were
possible, the elect should be brought into error. And S. Paul also: the
coming of Antichriste, says he, shall be after the workyng of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and liyng wonders, and the rest, which is red in the.2. to
the Thessal. 2. And we know that many Bisshoppes of Rome have wrought signs:
but that same is not so excellent, but that the Bisshoppe of Rome has
confirmed what miracles so ever have been wrought in all Christendom, and
augemented the same with his bulls and indulgences. Doubtless all had a
contrary end to the miracles of Christ, and yet have, for they do not profit
men, but empty their purses, put men to sundry charges, and lead them away
from the faith of Christ, to the faith of Antichrist, confirming his religion,
superstition and doctrine. Another does he place these his miracles emongs the
last of his arguments, what time the simplicity of the gospel is impugned.
But if we be wise, we will beware of them, as of a most present pestilence.

He makes fire to come down etc heaven.
And emonges his miracles the lord by S. John reherseth that above all things,
he causes fire to come down to the Earth, and that in the presence of me^.
And he seems to have alluded to the story of Helias, whereof we read in the.4.
book of Kings the.1. chapt. and whereof we mentioned in the.11. chapt. We
read that it was no small miracle in the Acts of the Apostles, that all the
laiyng on of thapostles hands, the holy ghost was given. Simon Magus also did
covet the same grace: but he was sore rejected of S. Peter the Apostle: as we
read in the.8. chapt. of the Acts of Apostles. And here is to be observed (as
also S. Austen has admonished in ye.15. book de trinit. the.26. chapt.) yt
thapostles gave not the holy ghost: for it is God alone that gives the holy
ghost: therefore at the prayers of thapostles, and at the imposition of hands,
the holy ghost was given from heaven. Wherefore S. John Baptiste said how he
baptized with water, but yt Christ should baptize with fire and with holy ghost.
And by fire is figured ye holy ghost. The Pope gives grace.
But Antichrist the Pope shall make his boaste that he having power given him
from heaven, grants the grace of the holy ghost. Doubtless in the time of
co^secrating, he says, that he gives the holy ghost. So likewise in
auricular co^fessions, and absolutions, they brag yt they give full
absolutio^ of sins which in deed is a great miracle. They lay their hands
upon the sinner that confesses, and say: how they absolve him from the pain
and crime, and that by the power received of that most holy See of Rome.
Primasius expounding this place: It is no marvel, says he, though that
beast, which fainedly usurps to him self the name of the Lamb killed and
yet living, do fraudulently challenge to him self also this gift of the holy
ghost colourably by Imitatio^, and feign a donation to his ministers: as we
remember that Simon Magus coueted, but could not obtain. Hitherto he.

There is an other fire also, The Pope casts a tho^derbolt at his enemies.
which Antichrist calls down from heaven, and casts and throws at his
enemies, to be revenged on them: to wit the darte and thonderbolte of cursing,
this was terrible to kings, princes, and people. And these have so much feared
the thonderbolte of excommunication, yt they have done and granted many
things, which otherwise no man should have got of the^. The story is known of
the emperor Henry the.4. For Platina in ye life of Gregory ye.7. shows, that
this Emperor was excommunicated by the Pope. After he adds these things of
the emperor: he came spedely to Canosse (where the bishop was with Mathilda) and
by and by laiyng a side his royal robes, went bare foted to the gates of the
city, and humbly required to be let in. His entering denied he took in good
part, notwithstanding that the winter was sharp, and al was frosen hard.
Remaynyng three days in the suburbs of the Town, and continually craving
perdon, at the length at request of Mathilda and the Earl of Sauoye, and the
Abbot of Clunies he is absolved. Fridericke Barbarouse that he might be
reconciled to the Pope, laid his neck under his fete to be trodden on, full
manifest are the injuries done of this beast, to other kings also and
people. I will yet tell of one. The Venetians besieged Farrare, which pays
tribute to the Church of Rome, for the which cause they were excommunicated
by Clement the.5. Therefore Fraunces Dandalus, which was after created Duke,
went into France, where that time the Bishop was, to are perdon for that
offense. Long it was or ever he was admitted to come in the Popes sight. At the
last he was led with an yro^ chain about his neck to the Bisshoppes table,
like a Dog, and there feign to lie under the table emongs the dogs so long,
til the wrath of Clement (without all clemency) being over paste, he put out
that ignominy from his country. And was therefore always after called dog
of his own countrieme^: for yt he had layne like a dog at the Popes table
for to get absolution. This is written in Sabellicus in the end of the.9.
Aeneid. the.7. book. The Pope in excommunicatinge uses tapers or candelles of
wax burning, which he throws down to the ground from on high: that even
thereby we might perceive, that it is he that calls down the fearful fire
from Heaven upon men in earth. And these things does the beast in the
presence of men, to wit with great confidence and boldenes: finally to make me^
affrayde, and to keep them in awe. For after the same kind of speaking S.
Paul commands also, to rebuke a great man offendyng before all men, that
others may be affrayed. 1. Timoth. 5.

He disceaueth by signs.
Howbeit the Lord adds the use and effect of Antichrists wonders, to the end
the church might judge rightly of them: and he deceaueth, says he, the
dwellers on the Earth by reason of the miracles, etc. He shall seduce by these
signs or miracles, to wit by that grace of the spirit, which he faineth that
he gives, and with those his excommunications wherewith he would seem to cast
men down into hell, that dwell upon Earth, that is to say more given to
earthly than to heavenly things. And he shall lead them from the faith of
Christ, unto his tromperies. Therefore must we judge of the tokens and doctrine
of Antichrist, for that they seduce men. Leave maruelyng therefore, how it
has chanced, that the Pope has allured to his side so many men of wisdom
and learning. You have heard already, by what means this is done. Therefore
be not you always fools, learn, take heed, and believe Christ and his
Gospel, and cleave thereunto.

Again he says, The beast does miracles in ye sight of the beast.
that power is given to the beast (verily by the just judgment of God, that
according to thapostles saying, they may be judged, which had rather believe
lies, than the verity) that he should work those miracles in the sight of
the beast. What is it to work miracles in the sight of the beast, but to do
them in the presence of all men, boldly and with out fear, even to fear and
disceaue the very beast? Here therefore now we hear of two beasts. The beast
that does the wonders: and that later beast in whose sight that other fourmer
beast does those signs. In the.19. chapt.
Yea it shall follow hereafter, that both the beast, and the false Prophet,
which does these miracles before the beast, by the which he also deceived
the beast, shall be cast both into fire everlasting. Who therefore is the
former and the two horned beast, but the Pope? the very same is the false
prophet also. And who is the beast, in whose sight the Pope works wonders,
but the Image of the beast, and therefore a beast also, in as much as thempire
is raised of the beast, and governed by the spirit of the beast.

For it follows, that the beast sets up an Image of the beast, The beast
sets up an Image of ye beast.
and that of the same beast which had the wound of a sword, and lives:
that is to wit, of that old Roman Empire. Now therefore is erected a new
Roman Empire, which nevertheless is not called plainly a beast, but the
Image of the beast: that is to say, an Empire in deed, but the which comes
not so nere to the old, by as far, as an Image differs from the true
example. For the old Roman Empire is as it were an example, whereof thempire
set up by the Romish Antichrist, is only an Image, representation, shaddowe and
as it were a dream, having nevertheless some sumilitude of the same.

How the Image of the beast was set up
I told before, and showed out of stories, how the old Roman Empire was
torn and rent in pieces, and taken quite away. In times paste the one
Emperor governed in the East at Constantinople, the other in the Weste at
Rome or at Rauenna. But from Augustulus by the space of three hondreth years and
more, there was no Emperor of the Weste. And such lands as were the
Emperors, were now possessed of others, and the Empire was utterly lost.
Therefore about the year of our lord eight hondreth, what time Charles the
great, King of France came to Rome, upon Christemas day, Leo the.3. of that
name, Bisshoppe of Rome, setting the Crown upon Charles head made him
Emperor, all the people saying with a loud voice, to Charles the Emperor
crowned of God, be long life and victory. These things are red in all stories,
especially in the.4. book of Auentinus his Cronicles of Bourbonois.

The beast says to ye inhabiters of ye Earth that they should make an Image
to ye beast.
Again when this Empire seemed to waver and to slide, and therefore like
shortly to fall, the Bisshoppe of Rome instituted seven Princes Electours.
Some refer this ordenaunce to Gregory the.5. which was Pope when Otth^ was
Emperor. And some to Gregory the.10. which called Rafe of Abspurge to the
Empire. Whereof shall be more said anon. But the Lord by S. John says
expressly, how the beast said to the inhabiters of the Earth, that they
should make an Image of the beast. For the Popes have by speaking, and not by
fightyng (as appears in the stories of Bisshoppes of Rome, especially of Leo
the.3.) erected a new Empire. For by preaching, perswadyng, and practysing,
they brought the Empire to King Charles. Certainly Platina in the life of Leo
the.3. The Bishop, says he, minding to gratify by some mean king Charles,
which had deserved right well of the church, in the church of S. Peter, after
solemn service done, by the voices and prayers of the people of Rome, with a
loud voice declares Charles Emperor, and crowns him. etc.

But now we must see more dilligentlie, What is properly ye Image of the
beast.
wherefore the newly erected empire is called of the Pope, the Image of the
oulde beast. And here in deed, might many things be alleged: but I shall
recyte of many things only a few. Above all things, it is called the Image,
both for that it is named the Empire it self, and would be taken for the oulde
Empire, where it is in deed a name without the thing, and a vain title,
without that aunciente power, majesty, and glory. For unless the Emperor
have the Kingdom of his own by inheritance, what Kingdom shall he have by
the name of Emperor? shall he have Rome? shall he have Italy, the oulde seat of
the Empire? shall he have France Spain, Hongarie, Germany? For although
Germany be now taken for the seat of the Empire, yet has she her own
Princes, her own free Cities, and the which inioye their Privileges, although
they be called Imperial. Theodorycke of Niem, a Germayne, and a familiar
friend of certain Popes, which wrote also the lives of certain Bishops of
Rome, which were last before the counsel of Constaunce, in the third book
the.xliii. chapt. of his Stories. Of what magnifice^ce, says he, the Roman
Empire is, at the leestwyse openly seen in Germany. For you shall have there
an Archbishop or a Bishop, which has of yearly revenues twyse so much more,
The poverty and barenes of the Romayne Empire.
as the King of Romans receives in all his dominions. And again, a
temporal Prince, that has more lands than has the Emperor. And so forth.

Moreover in the old Empire, there was some mighty monarke, which used full
Authority, and was honored of all men as a God in Earth. As Caius, Domitian,
Dioclesian, and others. His Image represents the Pope, Bishop, and King,
and as it were a certain God terristrial, the greatest Monarke, with fullness
of power. Furthermore Rome, or the oulde beast, had a most honorable Senate.
So has the Byshppe of Rome also, a Princelyke Senate of proud purpled
Cardynalles. For they be in manner all Princes. The book of the Romayne
gouernementes recites the Vicar, or Lieutenaunte of the Diocese of Asia (a
Diocese in Greek (...) is a disposition, administration, dispe^sation,
gouernemente, or jurisdiction) the Vycar of the Diocese of Thracia, and of
Pontus. So was there a noble man president of the gouernementes in Italy. He
had many Diocesses under. And no fewer had the Lieutenaunt of France. And
like as the Count of Strasbourgh, the Captain general of the soldiers at
Spires, and the General of the soldiers at Woormes, ded acknowledge the Duke
of Mentz a Proconsull: So at this day, the Bishops of those Cities are
subjects to the Archebyshoppe of Mentz. The Bishops therefore seem by the
Popes ordinance, to succeed in the place of the Romayne gouernementes.
Certeinelie you shall see the most part of these Bishops called not only
most reverend fathers in Christ, but also most Noble and mighty Dukes and
Princes of the Empire. And this is also manifest, that the Emperor of the
oulde beast had his legions, the Roman Egles or enseignes, and most expert
and puissaunt Captains of war. But the high Bishop and king of Rome has in
that Imagerie Empire obedient children, kings and Princes in Europe not to be
despised: Tharmies and power of ye Popes sword.
whom he may command if need require, to stretch forth the secular power.
For so thundreth Boniface the.8. in the first book de Mayor. and Obedient:
doubtless says he, whosoever denies the temporal sword to be in the power
of Peter, he understands a miss the word of the Lord, saying: put up thy
swoorde into thy sheath (how subtiilie and how aptelie). Therefore are both
swords in the power of the church, to wit both the spiritual and material
sword: but this must in deed be exercised for the church, the other of the
church. The spiritual by the priest, the material by the hand of kings and
soldiers, but at the will and patience of the high priest. etc. The oulde
beast had his laws written, and published daily in a manner new. Decretals
The Popes therefore after the imitation of the imperial laws, have written
decretalles, and many times make new laws. Yea, moreover they say how the
voice and precepts or co^maundeme^ts of the pope are as well to be received and
taken, as the words of our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God, and Apostle S.
Peter. They add moreover these things also: that we must stand to the popes
determination. That where the pope is, there is the general counsel. Where
the Pope is, there is our common country. He is compelled or reproved of no
man, although he be called an heretic. He has all laws in his breast, or in
the scroll of his breaste: he may interpret or expound all things. The same
does ratify no sentence: and it is in him alone, to take away one man's right,
and give it to an other. He may take away privileges, and at his will and
pleasure not only to change bishops, but also to depose the emperor
himself, and to declare no sentence of the emperor. All the world is the Popes
diocese: and the pope is the ordinary of al, having fulness of power as well in
spiritual matters as te^porall. For he is Lord of Lords, and has the right
of the King of Kings over all subjects. For he has no pere: and is all
things, and above all, and it is necessary to salvation, to be under the
bishop of Rome. For there is one consistory or judgment seat of God and of the
Pope. These things have I taken out of their own books, to wit of their
Decretalles and gloses. There is a book of Antony Russell of Aretine, of ye
power of the Pope and the emperor, where in you may read innumerable things of
the same sort. But of these things which I have noted hitherto, I suppose it
be made plain enough, how the Pope which is here also called the false
prophet, has set up the Image of the beast.

Hereunto Ihon adds an other thing: And he had power to give a spirit to the
Image of the beast.
that the empire thus establyshed, and all things set in order, the beast
or false prophet does move all that weighte, and puts life into the Image,
so that it can speak: to wit the same, that the false prophet has given it
to speak. For except the pope do confyrme the election of the King of
Romans, he shall not be thought worthy of the name of Emperor.22. quest.5.
de forma, in the gloss the emperor swears to the pope, as the Client to his
Lord. The same maiste thou read in the first book the.9. title. de iure
iurando, in Clementinis. Moreover who sees not, how as well the Emperor as
other Princes, are environed with a company of Bishops, which inspyre them,
what they should speak, or do, and how they should behave themselves in
all things. For this cause are sent also the Legates, that are called Legati a
latere. And it is not unknown, that in all Princes counselles for the most
part the spiritual have the chief rule. They be for the most part,
Chancelours, Secretaries, Ambassadors, and what not? And their Pope and King
says openly, how he ought to judge al men, but to be judged of no man. Yea,
and his creatures also usurp the same unto themselves. If there be any
assemblee, there the Bishop of Rome commonly rules by his spirit, and
governs the chiefeste matters, especially matters of religion. For unless
the decrees please the fathers, they threaten that theye will abrogate, such
things as the States have decreed. But if there be called a counsel general
or national, it is wholly ruled by the popes spirit. This speaks and
determines as it pleases the Pope. For unless it decree after the Popes
pleasure, he will go about to abolysh all to gether. For we heard of late,
that the Synod or counsel is there, where the Pope is. And Innocentius the.9
in the.3. The Pope is above ye counsel: but the counsel of Basil reasons
the contrary.
quest. The judge, says he, shall be judged another of the emperor, another of
ye whole Clergy, another of kings, nor of the people. And the gloss upon the
same place notes, the counsel cannot judge the Pope, etc. Wherefore if the
whole world should give sentence in any matter against the Pope, it appears
that we ought to stand to the Popes sentence against them al. Yea the same
glosier in an other place: The Pope if he will, says he, may dispense
against the Counsel. For he is more than the Counsel. Most trewely
therefore said the Lord at this present, how the beast had power, to give a
spirit to the beast, and that the Image of the beast should speak. For
whosoever show not themselves obedient, and willinge instruments unto this
beast in all his affairs, are accoumpted for dead and rotten members, and
therefore to be cut of from this vital body. Yea for sooth.

Empyres at of God, the corruptions of empyres of evil.
Howbeit in the mean time, leest I should blame any man praise worthy, or seem
over much to taunt them that have deserved none evil, or should be said not
to acknowledge the goodness of God workyng in Empyres, but rather to find
fault with the same, and to confound and put to gether all things both good
and evil, without any choice or respect, certain things are here by a long,
yet necessary digression, to be admonished, and better declared. I admonish
therefore and repete, that the Lord our God is the author of Empires, and
ordeyneth the same for the wealth of men: but that the Devil joins him
self with the good ordinances of God, and according to his evil nature
corrupts those good ordinances of God, by mouyng men's affections diversely,
and appliyng them to evil matters. Whereupon in gouernementes very many things
arrise which are to be mislyked of the Godly: as are tyranny, alteration of
the state, and such other like. Nevertheless, albeit God hates all wickedness
another can allow any evil, we see, that he of his infinite goodness uses the
evil gouernementes of men unto the good or profit of his. For God loves his
church excedingly: and seeks to relieve and comfort al man kind by Empires,
although not altogether, or in all things commendable.

I will not therefore deny, Government not to be discommended, and good princes
under ye Image of the beast.
that sins the Empire of the weste was renewed. that is to say, sins the Image
of the beast was set up, these seven hondreth years, they have many times
governed so, that it has easily appeared yt god has wrought the health of his
people in the gouernementes. Daniel figured by beasts the four Monarchies of
the world, which nevertheless supposed not that al their Princes were beasts,
another condemned he al Princes, neither thought that there has been or should
be no good thing in them, although the most part were most corrupted. There
were found in the old Roman beast (to speak nothing in the mean time of
the Princes of Assiria, Bavilon, Medes, Persia, or Macedonie) which have set
forth profitable laws, set in the books of Justinian. There have been
found under that most cruel old beast, which have auaunced the true
religion of Christ, and defended most ernestely the church of God, such as
before we said was Constaunce, Constantine, Theodose, and diverse others:
which come all under the nombre of the Empire, but not of the beast, but in
as much as the beast signifies the Empire. So may there be found Princes
under the Image of the beast not a few, which have both set forth wholesome
laws, and have imployde great benefits upon mankind: as have done Charles,
Lewis and Lotharie of Saxon and others. Notwithstanding that they themselves in
many things cannot be allowed of the godly. There are found emonges the later
kings of the new Empire, which in power and majesty were not much unlike
the old, in virtues not much behind them, but in certain things egall. There
are found which have assayed to pourge thempire from Popish corruptions, and
to bring the Popes under Little: but with no great or good success. For what
the Otthones, Henrickes, Lodouickes, Friderickes, briefly many French Princes,
Saxones, Sweuians, Bauarians, and of Austrich have been, many notable
testimonies of histories do report: which testify that certain Kings both of
France and of other realms also, have not bowghed their knees to this Baal:
or if they have done at any time, yet have they repented, and have showed some
token at the leeste wise, whereby the wise might perceive, that they set not
much by that beast.

Holy men are excused and excepted.
Here therefore are to be excused al holy and excellent men, which have lived in
the whole course of time, wherein the Image of the beast erected has reigned.
And I mean Emperors, Kings, Princes, Bishops, States, Cities, and people of
the empire and other realms, which lived, but yet were not under the unhappy
image of the beast: for because they offered not themselves to the sprete of
the beast to be thereof moved and governed: another have spoken expressly, that
thing which the beast gave to speak: but rather have spoken against the
beast, and have much mislyked his doyngs. Therefore as I have not comprised in
the old Monarchies, and namely in the old Roman beast, the godly princes
and good government, another have condemned them of beastialitie, (if I may so
term it) so now another in bayting the Image of the beast, do I confound the
good and godly princes and people, and their government not evil with the
corrupt doings of Antichrist. For ever I except moderate and profitable
empires, honest men and godly, how so ever they live under the Image of the
beast, yet not after the inspiration of the beast or false prophet.

A prophecy is to be expounded after ye consideration of things and times.
Hereunto I adioyne this also, that thempire was not suddenly establisshed after
the will and pleasure of the Bishop, but by diverse spaces of times, sundry
atte^ptes, and traysons innumerable: therefore at the length it was deuolued to
an extremity of corruption, and as I may say, bestialitie. Whereby it appears
that the prophecy of S. John, is to be applied to the things themselves, and
to the times, after the state, malliciousenes and corruption of every thing and
time. That same is most certain, and by common consent of all
historiographers plainly testified, that in Charles the great, through the
means of Pope Leo the third, thempire in the weste decayed was renewed: and
that thus the image of the beast, that is to wit, of the Roman Empire, was
erected. And albeit that at this time thempire decayed in the weste was
restored by the Pope: yet is it evident, that the Popes in the beginning of
this Empire by certain donatio^s and gifts much in riched, did not as yet use
so great power, as they usurped to themselves afterward, when they had
overthrown and deposed certain Emperors. For all though the donatio^ seem to be
made by king Pipine, and the pope is red than to have received the beginning of
his kingdom: yet that he was subject to Emperors and kings with the City of
Rome also, this same emo^ges other things proves, that in the French
Cronicles of the Acts of king Charles in ye year of our lord eight ho^dreth
and one, thus it is found written: afterward having set in order the matters
of the city and Bishop of Rome, and of al Italy (therefore did Italy than
also obey the Emperor) not only public, but also (mark) ecclesiastical and
private (for all the winter the emperor did nothing else) departing from Rome
with his son Philip he came to Spolet. The same author in the Acts of the
year eight ho^dreth and 16. Stephen, says he, elected in the place of Leo
the.3. takes as great iourneyes as he could to come to the Emperor, sendyng
in the mean time two Ambassadors which might treat with the emperor
(Ludouicus pius) for his consecration. So likewise in thactes of the year eight
hondreth and.17. is showed how Paschalis being chosen sent an Ambassade to
Lewis the Emperor. In thactes of the year.823. the same Bishop stood at the
examination and judgment of the emperor. You may find in thactes of the next
year that the emperor Lotharie establisshed the matters of Italy and Rome. Yet
does the same author again make mention of the donation of King Pipine,
which gave to S. Peter Rauenna, and Pentapolis and all the gouernemente. Yet
does he make no mention of the donation other of Charlemaygne, or of Ludouicus
pius. The.43. distinct. makes mention thereof. I Lewis. etc. in the gloss is
written thus. There Lewis gives Rome and diverse other things to S. Peter and
to Paschale the Pope. All historiographers in manner make mention of the
donation of the Kings of France. An Abridgement of all gathers out of the
library Dolaterane in the third book of Geographie, in the acts of Pipine and
Charles. Whereby ye may easily conjecture, what manner of Canon is set forth in
the.96. distinct. in these words. Constantine the Emperor has given and
granted to the Apostolical See the Crown and all the Imperial dignity is
the City of Rome and in Italy, and in the weste parts. Which by and by after
he discourses with a long exposition out of the life of S. Siluerster,
written (as they say) by Gelasius, in the chapt. followynge. But Antony
Bishop of Florence denies in his History, that this donation does remain
in any old books. Cusanus and Laurence Valla have impugned the same: another
has Ottho Bisshoppe of Frisyng in the.3. chapt. of the.4. book of his story,
nor Marsilius Pataninus in the defense of peace, nor Raphael Volaterane allowed
the same, nor many mo that I could rehearse. Moreover in the Cronicles of
Kings of France, set before the story of Paulus Aemilius of the acts of
Kings of France in the year. 755. thus you may read: Pipine again entered
into Italy, and Aistulphus subdued, he gave gifts to Maximus Bishop of Rome,
also the Dukedom of Rauenna of very great lands, leeste any man should
unthankfully and unjustly take away this larges from the French Kings,
ascribyng to the emperor Constantine, which Pipine gave to the church of Rome,
against the will of the Greek Emperor affirming the same possessions to be the
right of the Empire. From thence Pipine first received and brought into France
the Ecclesiastical rites of the Romans and ceremonies of songs. Thempire
conveyed from the Frenchmen to the Germenes.
etc.

Howebeit the government of thempire Charles posterity was not very stable
and permanent. For from the first year of Charles, wherein he was created
Emperor, unto the seventh year of Conrade, which was Nephewe to Lewis the.3.
by his Brother, the last of the house of Charles are accounted about an
hondreth and.19. years. For Charlemaigne reigned Emperor.14. years, Lewis.26.
Lotharius.15. Lewis the second.21. Charles two years, Caluus surnamed the
second Charles..3. Crassus..12. Arnulphe.12. Lewis the.3.10. Conrade.7.
Conrade liyng on his death bed nominateth King, Henry Duke of Saron surnamed
Falconer. And thus was the Empire translated to the Germans. This Henry called
the first, came never in Italy, never was consecrate or crowned of the Pope.
His Son Ottho, the first of that name, sent for in Italy, is red to have
gone thither with a great Army, being received at Rome, and saluted of the
people Emperor and Auguste. Ottho Frisinge in the.6. book of Histories the.17.
chapt. affirms out of the decrees, that Pope Leo the.8. of that name did
consecrate this Ottho the first King of Germans. For his father Henry refused
it, Albert Krantz in the.10. and.11. chapt. of the fourth book of Saxon
matters, affirms that Pope Leo made a surrender of all such things as the
Popes had received of the kings of France, and the author defends this
surrender made to be true. Howebeit the keeper of the Library testifies, that
Ottho confirmed the donatian of the kings of France, Pipine, Charles, and his
sons. There remains morouer in the decrees a copy of the oath, the.43.
distinct. whereby king Ottho binds him self to the Pope, that he shall
intermeddle with nothing that concerns the Pope and the Romans: secondely
that he shall restore all the lands of S. Peter that shall come into his hands.
Which thing let the reader judge what they are.

Shortly after this time, about the year of our lord.996. Electours
They say how by the decree of Pope Gregory the.5. and by the consent of Ottho
the.3. Emperor, the seven princes Electours were assigned, unto who^ the
defense of the church (as says Wimpelingius) and the Roman Empire was
committed. In the which thing all Historiographers and writers do agree, and
that of the Italianes Blondus, Platina, Sabellicus, Volaterane, Egn^tius and
others: of Germans, Albertus, Nauclerus, Carrion, Functius, and certain others:
diverse have made no mention of this ordinance. Wherefore Auentinus in the.5.
book of Cronicles Folio.510.707. says that he knows (I can not tell how
certe^ly) that after the death of Fridericke the.2. the Electours were
instituted, and confirmed of Gregory the.10. But how so ever that matter
stands, certain it is that there has been many among the seven princes
electours both fervent and earneste in true religion, and excellent in all
kind of virtues, and especially the seculars as they term them, who has
much misliked the tyranny and impiety of the Popes of Rome, in so much that
they have stoutely oftentimes withstand them. Our age doubtless is much bound
to this order or state, that a good part of the preaching of the holy gospel
is reformed, the which both they with other princes of Germany most worthy of
praise do (by Gods inspiration) valiau^tly against the furies of Antichrist
defend and mantayne. The Lord increase in them, and in other godly Princes
through the whole world his gifts, and mercifully keep and preserve the^. But
to return to the prosis and order of the History, certain it is, that
immediately after Gregory the.5. the Devil invaded the sea of Rome. Another
could Platina dissemble this thing, a writer of Popes lives known to all men,
See what he says of Popes in the life of Syluester.3.
which has very favorably spared his lords and masters, and many times has
covered their abominable acts: yet writing of the successor of Gregory the.5.
Siluester the.2. says he, before called Gilberte, a Monk of Florey,
forsakyng his monastery, followed the Devil, unto whom he gave him self whole.
And by and by he adds: Gilbert moved with Ambition, and a deuelish desire to
rule, through briberie got first the Archbisshopricke of Reyns, after of
Rauenna, and after with greater suite, the Devil furtheryng him, he obtained
to be pope: yet under this condition, that after his death he should be the
Deuilles wholly. etc. He that would know the full story, and abridgement taken
out of Antoninus, The Sea of Rome utterly corrupted.
Nauclerus and others, let him read the.9. book of Funccius Cronicles, under
the year.998. Beno a Cardinal supposes at this time to be fulfilled those
thousand years, after the which, the Devil breakyng lowse, began again to
rage in the world. Whereof shall follow certain things in the.20. chapt. of
this book. Notwithstanding I shall not refuse to gather here certain things
out of this Benone Cardinal, and briefly to recite them here for the
declaration of our matter.

Therefore Beno in the life, and acts of Hildebrande, The malice of the Popes
vexyng the emperors
called Gregory the.7. one Gerbertus which had infected the city with
sorcerie, (says he) after the thousand years fulfilled coming up out of the
boto^lesse pit of Gods permission, was Pope 4. years, and chaungyng his name,
was called Siluester the 2. And after Gilberte the year.25. (I suppose it
should be red.32. And how they reigned these years Stories testify, and that
very evil Theophilactus his scholar achieved the seat violently, called
Benedict the.9. He had a dear friend and privy to all his doings one
Gratiane, Archeprieste of S. John port latin. Unto whom Hildebrande a Monk
of Cluney, forsakyng his abbeye, did familiarely cleave, and became a familiar
friend of his. But Benedict fearyng him self, sold his seat to Gratiane
Master of Hildebrande, receiuyng of him five hundred thousand pou^des, which
promoted to the office was called Gregory the.6. Nevertheless they had shortly
a third Pope, Sabinus, and he was called Siluester the.3. The Emperor therefore
Henry the.2. a godly man, valeaunt, wise and stout, going to Rome, to pourge
the church (for as yet the Bisshoppes used not full authority) compelled
Benedicte or Theophilacte the Magician to flee, cast Gregory in prison, and
sent a way Siluester to his old Bisshoprike: And he holdyng a Counsel,
placed the Bishop of Bamberge, whom he called Clement, in the seat, of whom
also he received the crown. And he brought Gregory with his disciple
Hildebrande with him into Germany. In the mean time Benedict retournyng to
Rome from flight, vexes Clement, and with much inchauntynge infecteth the
City: and by letters received from Hildebrande out of Germany, he learneth
what is done in the Emperors court. Gregory dies there in prison, and left
Hildebrande his heir both of his false packyng and of his money. Clement dies
also. Whom Damasus the.2. succedeth immediately, but straight ways poisoned:
by reason of the tumulte that was in the city, the Emperor sends Bruno
(Bisshoppe of Tully, commen of the noble house of the Earls of Holst) a worthy
man. Here Beno annexeth: in whose train through the over much sufferau^ce of
the Emperor. Hildebrande was permitted to return: by this permission to
subuerte both the Bisshoprycke and Empire under pretense of religion. And this
Beno herein was a true prophet, which says thus also in the story of
Hildebrande: and telling Bruno many things, by the way crepte into his favor:
and as soon as he came to Rome, obtained of him, that he was made one of the
kepers of S. Peter's Altar. And in a short time he filled his coffers. And he
also reconciled his old Lord and master Benedicte, fayning repentance
disceiptfully to Leo the.9. (for so Bruno being made Pope was called) and
through the counsel of Benedicte, otherwise called Theophilacte, he armed Leo
against the Normannes, and betrayed him unto them. The Germans therefore
slain by treason, scarsely the Pope all desolate escaped. This says Beno.
And certain it is that this Monk Hildebrande, Gregory the.7.
from that time forewarde aspired to get the seat: and in the mean time
whilst it was governed of others, he incensed and ruled the Popes, as Leo
the.9. Victour the.2. Stephen the.9. Benedicte the.10. Nicolas the.2. and
Alexander the.2. But they smell of Hildebrandes style, that are set forth in
the name of Leo, Nicolas and Alexander. But at the length he him self clome up
into the chair, in the which he so used him self, that no man unless he
were stark blind but might see, that his deuelish government, has requited
most abou^dantly Henry the.4. the son of Henry the third, his fathers
cariyng of him into Germany. And he began openly, and impudently to take upon
him the power of the emperor. Another can it be told at few words, in what
detestable wise this beast did afflicte both the Emperor and empire, all the
while he was Pope, for the space of.12. whole years. An Abridgement of that
story has John Functius compiled in the.10. book, under the year of our
Lord.1074.

Diverse opinions of Gregory the.7.
I know that Platina, and many Italian writers yea and some Germans also do
highly commend the religion and virtues of this Gregory the.7. by the which
thing the Popish tyranny, under the pretense of religion is wonderfully
augmented and confirmed, and many blinded. Yet is it comen to pass again
through the grace of God, that men of grave authority, religion and virtues,
have fair and well plucked of the visure from this beast. Therefore have
Synodes and Counselles not to be contemned condemned this Gregory: and first in
deed the Counsel of Mentz, wherein were 19. famous Byshopes. Than was
assembled at Brixia a Synod of.30. Bisshoppes, and of the most part of the
nobles of Germany and of Italy. There was also a Counsel assembled at Wormz,
where King Henry being present, all the Germane Bishops (except they of
Saxony) deposed the Pope from his function. The Epistles and fragmentes of
these Cou^selles are found in the Cronicles of Verspergens.-chiefly. He is
accused by these openly of all wickedness and ungodliness, of Hypocrisy and
cruelty. We have rehearsed a little before, what Cardinal Benno, a writer of
his time, has committed to wrytinge. There remain also testimonies of
Sigisbert, an old writer, concerning this Pope. Who so will may read the.5.
book of Auentinus, from the.162. and so forth: And also the preface of the.6.
book. The same Author in the.7. book reportynge the words of Eberharde
Bisshoppe of Salisburge, had in the Counsel of Regenspurge. Hildebrande,
says he, 170. years sins under pretense of religion, laid first the
foundation of Antitichristes kingedome. This wicked war he him self first
began, which by his successors is continewed hitherto. First they have
excluded the Emperor from the Popes election, and referred the same to the
people and priests of Rome. After, they also mocked, and thruste out, they go
about now also to bring us in subjection and bondage, to the intent they might
reign alone. And the things that follow. But ye thing it self declares, that
there have not lived many Popes more bold and impudent than this, which have
auaunced more highly the majesty of the seat. He excommunicated the emperor
Henry the.4. and deprived him of the dignity imperial: moreover he stired up
his subjects against him, and absolved the rebels and traitors from their
oath of fidelity: and he him self like a Monarke, gave the Crown of the
Empire unto others at his pleasure. The power therefore and Treasoure of the
Empire has be so worn and wasted what with civil, and what with foreyne
wars, that these many years now the kings of Almaigne have neither ben able
to recover their force, nor yet to resist the most arrogaunt tyranny of Popes:
And thus at the last the Pope is become a Monarch, and Emperors, Kings and
and Princes are made their Clientes and wards.

When Gregory the.7. was dead there succeeded.4. Monks of Hildebrandes sect
and faction, of his manners and kankred nature, as it were heirs and sons
that go nothing out of kind, Victor the.3. Vrbane the.2. Paschal the.2. And
Gelasius the.2. Anno. 1119
Paschalis caused the son Henry the.5. (oh wicked and detestable parricidie)
to war against the father, that miserable Henry the.4. And shortly also,
Gelasius the.2. and Callistus the.2. do excommunicate also Henry the.5. And
cease not to vex this prince also, till they had wrong out of his hands the
gift or election of Bisshopperickes. The gift of Bishoprikes taken from
themperours.
And that to the great and inestimable profit of the Sea of Rome: and to the
unrecoverable loss of Germany, etc. These things are described more at large
of Vrspergens. in the Cronicle of the year.1122.

In the times followyng, the audacitie, and power of Popes increasing hourly,
the Germane kings have resisted them stoutely enough, but yet with small
success. Where in the mean season we must remember the words of the Lord,
uttered by Daniel, saying: and there shall arrise a King of a shameless face,
and understanding propositions, and his strength shall be fortfied, but not in
his own force: and it can not be believed how he will distroye al things, and
he shall prosper, and do. etc.

the tira^ny of Popes against emperors. Anno. 1178
I will touch therefore in few words, what things in the times followyng Popes
have attempted against kings, and boldly done for the establisshyng of their
Empire and Monarchy. Pope Alexander the.3. did excommunicate Fridericke the.1.
called Barbarousse, and trod him under his fete. And where the good Prince
said, how he shows this obedience to S. Peter: the beast exclamed, setting
him self also before Peter, and said, both to me and to Peter, and stamped on
him: Pope Innocentius the.3. could not abide, much less allow Philippe the
son of Fridericke, Anno. 1189
created Emperor: but commanded the electours, to chouse an other, I mean
Ottho Duke of Saxon, whom notwithstanding shortly after he excommunicated
also. That proud beast said, that he would take from Philippe the emperial
crown, or lose his Apostolic Miter. Unto this Innocent are ascribed those
most proud words, which are red in the decretal of Gregory the.9. de Elect.
in the.6. title.34. chapt. on this wise: that the princes have right and
authority to chouse a king, and afterward to auau^ce him to be Emperor, we
acknowledge, as we ought, as to whom of right and ancient custom it is
known to appertain: especially sins that such right and authority came unto
them from the Apostolical Seat: which translated the Roman Empire from the
Greeks to the Germans in the person of great Charles. See how they usurp
all power to themselves.
Howbeit the Princes must know again, that the right and authority to examine
the person chosen king, and to be promoted to the empire, belongs unto us,
which do annoincte, consecrate and crown him, etc. The same in the first book
the.33. Titl. de mayor. and obedient. Writing to the Emperor Constantine. So
much diversity, says he, as there is betwixt the sun and the Moon, so
great a difference is there between Popes and Kings, in Gods name.

But the Emperor Fridericke the.2. Fridericke the.2. well langaged.
Nephewe to Barbarousse, an excellent prince, many Popes did excommunicate:
Honorius the.3. Gregory the.9. and Innocentius the.4. And in deed Gregory
the.9. whilst Fridericke that excellent Prince made war in Syria for
religion with the Soldane, invaded and kept the provinces of Fridericke. An.
1227. 1228. 1247.
There were most cruel wars and discordes betwixt the Popes and this
Fridericke. The same Innocentius the.4. excommunicateth Conrade the.4. of that
name, and Son of Fridericke the.2. and stireth up the Prince of Thuringe
against him. And when the Emperor Conrade was dead, the Pope obtained the good
wills of the Neapolitanes, to yield themselves to the Sea of Rome. Conrade had
left a Son and heir Conradine, and Manfrede his bastard brother, which
would be called king of Sicilie. Wherefore Pope Vrbane the fourth (some have
Clement the.4.) against Manfrede sent for Charles, brother to king Lewis the
French king, Earl of Province and of Saunte, to come with an Army into
Italy, Anno. 1263
and called him King of both Sicilies. Who overcome and slew Manfred at
Beneuent, and received the kingdoms of Sicilie of the Pope to do him homage.
But Conradinus Duke of Swauelande, accompanied with Fridericke Duke of Austrich
leads out of Germany a right well furnished Army into Italy against Charles
for the recoueryng of his old and fatherly kingdom. But vanquisshed of
Charles at the lake Fucine, he was taken with duke Fridericke. Anno. 1266
There were slain, as it is said.12. thousand. The occasion of so great an
evil were the Popes, chiefly Clement the.4. which being demanded of Charles
the worthy Prince, what he should do with his prisoners, answered so, that
the French men understood that they must suffer. Therefore he put them both to
the sword. In whom the house and posterity of the most noble Dukes of
Austriche and Swauelande is said to have failed. Paulus Aemilius discourses
this gere more at large in the.7. book of French Acts, and Auentinus in
the.7. book. But yet might not the Ire and fury of those most holy fathers
be so pacified, conceived hereof, that the most noble Dukes of Swauelande had
for gods glory and the common welthes sake, most godly and most constantly
resisted the Romish Bisshoppes, Wolves I would have said.

Thempire made desolate.
But these Parricidies and blouddy wars displeased all good me^ every where,
and chiefly the wise and godly Princes, so that they understood how they must
eschew that Empire and flee from it as from the plage: as the which was not
only but a shaddowe, but moreover would utterly consume his yearly revenues
and treasour, which should receive the office. For now was it known through
out the world, what the most valeaunt and excellent Princes of Germany had
now about.119. years, from Henry the.4. to the Sons of Fridericke the.2.
suffered of the bold ambition, and incredible malice of the Popes: and that
many of them had lost both their lives with their ancient kingdoms, and
their ^ibertie most excellent of all.

And here was thempire with out any Emperor for certain years: which I am wont
to call a desolation of the kingdom or Empire. For the Popes with their
invincible and intolerable pride and tyranny had so weakened the force of the
Emperors, that the empire seemed subverted and destroyed: another could there
any be easily found, which ded set by it, or thought it worthy to be
desired. At the last at the commandment of Gregory the.10. which held a
Counsel at Lions, was chosen Count Rodulph of Abspurg: which although he
forsook not the thing offered, yet being often requested to come to Rome, is
said to have answered: the waywarde steps of fete do fear me sore, meaning
by this dixaine, that he trusted not the Popes, which by their crafts had
destroyed both many Prences of Germany, and also innumerable people coming to
Rome. And this Rafe is red to have been crowned King in the year of our
Lord.1273. the.200. year after Gregory the.7. And so long time lasted the
fight of Popes and Emperors. A little while after, whyleste Alberte the son
of Rafe was chosen Emperor, and the election was referred to Boniface the.8.
of that name, he stoutely rejected the same, and showed by and by in word and
deed, that he was both Pope and Emperor, which by right had both swords.
Which I expounded in the.58. sermon, and the same does Albert Krantz declare
excedingly well in the.8. book.36. chapter of Saxon matters. In the place of King
Albert, was substituted Henry Prince of Lucemburge. But what authority over
him and thempire chale^ged Clement the.5 pope, he that list, may know of the
Cleme^tines. For there is a long treatise thereof in the.2. book.9. tit. I could
also rehearce many other like things of pope Ihon the.22. and of others, if I
ded not think it superfluouse.

For of these things which I have rehearsed hitherto, The propriety of
kingdoms is the popes, but the use of Kings and Princes.
it appears sufficiently, that the popes themselves by a mischeuouse boldness,
have taken to themselves thempire, do boast themselves for monarkes, do abuse
the service and ministry of kings, as their wards and clie^tes: yet to
pretend the name of sons, to the intent they may have them the more obedient.
For so in times past wrote Gregory the.7. to Geusas king of Hongary: which
place read in the.17. chap. of this book, the sermon.75. yet understand we in
the mean time yt the gretest part of Princes and Nobles have not known ye
same beast, but have rather impugned him, and therefore not to come in ye nombre
of the beast, but in as much as they lived under the Empire, yet estraunged
far from the beast.

By this I would have them answered, which will exclame and say: who can
take it in good part to have the holy Empire called the Image of the beast,
and so many noble Kings and Princes, Cities and people praise worthy? But I
another ought nor will change the manner of speakinge which the scripture
uses. They be the Lords words all, which Daniell in oulde time, and now
Ibon, have revealed to us: but I may except and excuse, such as are excused
by the testimony of scripture. The way is ready and brief: whosoever will be
free from the beast, let him take heed that he be not inspired with the Popes
spirit: and that he speak not and do, that the Pope commands against
godlynes. Let him rather be ruled with the spirit of Christ: and so shall it
come to pass, that dwelling in the mids of Babylon, he shall not live after
the iniquities of Babylon, but in the Kingdom of Christ.

They that shall not worship ye beast shall be slain
It follows: and the beast shall cause, that whosoever shall not worship the
Image of the beast, shall be slain. And it is all one offense, to worship that
oulde beast, and to worship the Image of the new beast. Of the worshipping
of him, I have spoken a little before. Therefore do they worship the Image of
the beast, which admit the decrees, and those ordinances of the seat and
Empire, speaking the inspiration of the beast: which allow the Romish
religion, which fall to the kyssing of the fee^e, and show themselves in all
things obedient children of the seat, and are faithful to the popish Empire.
Now if any will not be such a one, and would be content with Christianity,
would abhor Rome the seat of the beast, and detest the Image of ye beast, he
like a church robber and traitor, is judged unworthy of life. There is a
Canon in the.5. book of Decret. the.7. tit of heret. Wherein without any
circumstaunce of words, Lucius the third of that name, determyneth playnelye,
that heretykes are strycken with an everlasting curse, whosoever believe and
teach otherwise of the Sacraments, than the church of Rome believes and
teaches. He commands moreover, that such being depryued of all dignity,
shall be committed to the judgment of the secular powers, to be punished with
dew correction. But if the temporal maiestrate will not punish, and so defend
the church, that than he shall be also deprived of al honor, etc. But why do I
tarry in rehearsyng these things? All men at this day know and see, what
things are done daily. They are condemned, exiled, excomunicated, shut up in
prisons, vexed with sondrie tourments, at the length also cruelly slain,
whosoever shall refuse to worship both the beast and his Image. The Lord
Jesus, the true King and Bishop of his church succor us, and restrain the
cruelty of the ungracious beast. Amen.

Of the mark and number of the name of the beast. The.lxj. Sermon.
ANd he made all both small and great, rych and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hands, or in their foreheads. And that no man
might by or sell, save he that has the mark, or the name of the beast,
either the number of his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that has wit, count
the number of the beast. For it is the nu^bre of a man, and his nu^bre is six
hondreth threscore and six.

He annexeth the rest, whereby Antichrist may be known, and shunned. And verily
he may chiefly be known of these things that follow.

And he speaks of the subjects of Antichriste, The subjects of Antichriste.
and of this new King, and Bishop. He will procure to himself, says he,
an infinite multitude of al kind of men, of al states and degrees. For his
Kingdom shall be ample and large. Therefore does the Lord resite here, certain
kynds and states of men: And under the same understands, whatsoever is of the
same state in the whole world. The Romish Antichrist brought under his
subjection small and great, rich and poor: free, to wit nobles, and bond. For
we see that Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls and Baronnes, Realms,
Countries, Cities, Patriarchs, Archbishops and Bishops, Prelates, Doctors,
Clarks, and Lay men obey him: also men of greatest power, riches and wisdom,
together with ye poor people. There is none such a kingdom, and so diversely
co^pacte in the world, no not emonges the Mahometistes. And al these verily
willingly are subject to the seat: yea they have persuaded with themselves,
that they cannot well live, that they cannot be saved, unless they be subject
to the Sea of Rome.

The mark of Antichr.
And like as Princes discern their subjects and servants by culloures and
cognisaunces, and the common people also their cattle by several brands and
marks, whereby they may be known whose they are, or whom they serve. For every
man has his colors: he white and black, he red and blewe, an other white
and red, some black and yelow, which they give their soldiers and servants
to wear, and they profess thereby to be retained to him or him. And as they
mark their horses with their brand, and set their marks upon household vessel:
So shall Antichriste doubtless have also his (...) to wit, his mark, whereby he
may both bind wen to him, and so bounden shall mark, that they may be
discerned from others, and by this mean may wear the badge, and as it were
the colors of their Lord and Master. And he will give his mark on the
right hand, or on their foreheades.

The mark in the right hand or foreheades.
Aretas and Primasius, finally all expositours agreablie, do expound it the
confession of the mouth, and study and operation of a good work. We have
heard verily, how Christ in the seventh chapt. ded imprinte on the
foreheades of his servant faith, by effectual charity. And in very deed the
sign of Gods children, is faith, and love that comes of the same faith. So do
the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles testify. Nevertheless, Christ
has also the external mark of his servants, those wholesome Sacraments of
the church, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Howebeit if any be baptized at this day, and be partaker of the Lords supper,
call upon God the father with the Lords prayer, and utter his faith by a
sincere confession of thapostels Creed: morouer confess those to be good
works, which are done in faith after the rule of the ten commandments, and
besides this do shine in good works: shall he be taken for a true catholic
and right christen man? In old fime doubtless al men would have embraced him
for a Brother. But what should he be at this day in the Popes kingdom: Thou
shall seem by all these things to have confessed nothing at al of the true
faith, except thou plainly profess yt thou beleuest after the faith and
tradition of the church of Rome: and that thou do acknowledge those for good
works which the church of Rome has approved. Unless thou believe and
profess on this wise, in vain shall thou confess all the fourmer matters. No
though thou say moreover that thou beleuest the law, the prophets, the
gospel, and Apostles. They will like thee a great deal better, if thou say
thou art an obedient child of the Apostolical See and church of Rome: than
if thou should say, that thou art the child of God, a christen manne,
that thou put thy whole trust in the son of God, which is the only
salvation and rightuousenes. Yea ye shall find the^, which will by and by at
these words cry out, that they smell of heresy, and a mind infected with
poison. I feign nothing, experience it self will witness, that I say truth.
And thus does the Pope mark his men both in the forehead and righthande. Thus
are the Romish whelps discerned from other faithful, as it were by marks.

Besides this there is an other thing. Al papist^s do plainly testify, that
unless a man be marked in the forehead with Chresme by the Bishops hand, he
is no christian: how so ever he be baptized, and believe in Christ Jesus.
Whereof it follows, that they attribute more to their confirmation and
annoincting of the Bishop, than to the christen faith. Read the book called
Summa angelica in the title of confirmation. This therefore is a sealyng of the
Popisshe religion: the Christen marks of Christ are sufficient. The Pope also
by an other way imprinteth his mark in the righthande of me^, by he^ting of
vows, and perfourming of oaths, as they term it. For they that make a vow in
entryng into any religion as they call it, as it were by a stipulation made, do
bind themselves to the Pope and See of Rome. Furthermore Antichrist the Pope
by oaths also to be performed by the holdyng up of the right hand does bind
and bring in danger to him, Emperors, Kings, Archbisshoppes, Princes,
Bishops, Doctors, Universities, and all states. They promise that they will
attempt nothing against the church of Rome, nor against the high Bishop
thereof, nor yet against the privileges and statutes of the Sea. There remain
the manner of oaths in the decrees and decretalles. I touch these things
briefly. They see more, that shut not their eyes. And al men behold, how the
Pope has set his mark on the righthand and forehead of men.

He forbids that no man be nor selle.
There follows again of the fierce cruelty, and blouddy tyranny, which
Antichrist practices against the Christians, that is to say against them
which will not receive the mark of the beast: that is, which will not
prostitute themselves to the lust of the Pope, and the seat of pestilence.
Antichrist, says the lord, by his power shall bring to pass, that none
may by or selle, save he that has the mark of the beast, etc. And these
come all to one effect, the mark of the beast, the name of the beast, and
the nombre of the name of the beast. For he has the mark of the beast, which
acknowledges the seat, and professes the faith of Rome: and even to whom the
christen faith is not enough. He has the name of the beast, who so ever he be
that will be named an obedient child of the holy See of Rome, and
acknowledges the Pope to be head of the universal church. He has the nombre
of the name of the beast, which has a society with the beast, which
society that nombre bewrays or shows. Therefore except thou acknowledge
the Pope to be supreme head of the church in Earth, with the fulness of power:
unless thou professest to follow the faith of the holy church of Rome, and to
deteste all things what so ever that See has condemned, thou art forbidden
fire and water. That same has the lord called to prohibit, that thou may
another bie nor selle. We say in dutche, signifiyng one that is bannished out
of al men's company. He understands therefore excommunication, that horrible
thonderbolte of the Pope, wherewith are stricken all those, that have set more
by Christ, than by the Pope, or the which have lothed the Popes decrees in
comparison of the Gospel. Let him read, that list the sixte decretall of
Boniface the.8. in the.5. book the.2. titl. de hereticis. Also Clement the.5.
book.3. Title. de hereticis. But he that will know exactely a compendiouse
treatise of tyranny, and a glass of butcherie, let him read the Bulle of
Martin the.5. which is subject to the Sessions of the Counsel of Constaunce,
and is written to Bishops and inquisitours of heretical prauitie. Emonges
other things, there is one, which gives a wonderful light to this place
which we now expound: where it commandment, that they do not permit them
that despise the communion of the church of Rome, to keep or dwell in any
house or lodging, to make any bargaynes, or occupy any traffic or trade of
Merchandise, or to have any comfort of humanity with the faithful of Christ.
Read thou the rest, leaf.134. Herunto may be added, that in Popish
churches is the greateste biyng and selling of all. But unless his crown be
shaven, and his hands imbrewed with oil, that is, except he has received in
the foreheade or head and in the righthande the mark indelible (for so they
term it, that can not be put out) he has no merchandise left him in the
house, nor so much as a little corner. But Christ whipped these merchants, or
buyers and sellers ones or twice out of the temple: Antichrist has brought them
in again. And this is verily a wonder, they show more favor at this day to
Jews, Turks, and heathen, than to Christians. For unto the only gospellers is
no place permitted: verily for that they ascribe al to Christ, preach Christ
only, leave nothing to the Pope, but rather accuse him most constantly, and
bitterly.

But what shall we say to them, Counsel for the seduced.
whose hands and foreheades have been defiled with the mark? I bid them to
wash themselves with ye blood of Christ, forsake Antichriste, and turn unto
Christ, in relinquisshyng their errors and repenting them. In case thou haste
bounden thy self to Antichriste by an oath, do not perform that rash and
wicked oath, by ungodly speaking against the gospel. Do penance, make thy
purgation, return unto Christ, and thou shall be saved.

Here is wisdom.
Now leest any man here should chatter, that we may be Christians, and
abundantly instructed in heavenly wisdom, although we do hear or speak
nothing of the pope and popish matters, that those disputations are
unprofitable, yea odiouse, and to apperteyne to the stiring up of troubles, and
therefore to be hurteful and foolish: that same our Lord preuenteth, and
says expressly, here is wisdom in the knowledge and right judgment of
these things consists the true, heavenly and godly wisdom. Unless we be
wise in this thing, we shall be fools, and not wise. The Lord therefore exciteth
the hearers to the study of inquyringe after Antichriste, and to beware of him
when he is found. For in the 14. chapt. we shall hear, that they shall drink
of the Wine of Gods wrath, as many as have received the mark of the beast,
and worshipped his Image. Wherefore they shall drink at the same table with
Christ of the cup of life and of the grace of God, so many as have despised
Popery. And who shall deny it to be the true wisdom, by the which we may
come from the wrath of God, to the grace felloweshippe and participation of the
same: Moreover the lord adioyneth, that men indewed with understanding, not
witles, and full of hurtful follye, should reckon the name of the beast: that is
to say, should be dilligently occupied in this matter, that those things
should be dilligently searched for, which worldely men affirm to be
curiousely sought and inquired after, We are commanded diligently to seek
after Antichrist.
not only without any profit, but with loss also, Moreover the Lord
commands to account the nombre of the name of the beast. He adds that
the same is not hard to do. For this nombre to be the nombre of a man, to
wit which a dillige^t man may easily by faith and industry attain to. For
so does Aretas expound it also, saying, that nombre is common and known to
men. Let them leave than to trouble our godly studies, which blame our sermons
made against the Pope, and laugh at our diligence such as it is in expoundyng
popish abominations, finally which suppose we spend our time in vain in the
account of times. They do hear here, except they will hear nothing, that we
have received commandment of the lord, so to do: moreover that the lord
testifies, that wisdom is herein.

And here I give warnyng that the manner of speaking is to be observed, The
no^bre of ye name of ye beast.
that we weary not in vain both our selves and our auditors through the
inquisition of a certain name in the nombres. For that it is said to be the
nombre of his name, as though he would a certain name should be gathered and
composed of these charactes (...): as for the most part is gathered of these
three lettres or charactes (...), this name Christ. Another wau^t they, which
think how by these three charactes no other thing is signified, than the name
of christ: which the lord him self in the.24. of Matthew. prophesied, that
Antichriste should use. Certes he calls him self Christ's vicar. I know
rightwell, that the proper names of great men, have been sealed by prophecies
and signified before: as Josias, Cyrus, Jesus. But here thou can gather no
such thing, but forceably and as it were against the here. I understand
therefore by the nombre of the name of Antichrist or beast, the very acco^pte,
whereby we come unto his name. And a name is a brief definition or description
of any thing, whereby, it is known of what sort and manner it is. Which thing
in this our cause, the no^bre supplieth, which brings us unto those times,
which give him his name, whereof he takes his name, yt is which times reveal
unto us Antichrist spoken of before in the prophets, and show us who and what
he is, or who^ we should take for Antichrist, even him verily, which having
brought low three kings, he him self starteth up of naught, and to the
destruction of the true religion begins to reign.

And now he shows us expressly this nombre nominall as I may call it, The
no^bre of.666. years is expounded.
and vocalle which may lead us unto Antichriste, that we may know who it
is, and when we know him, we may beware of him, and commands us to nombre
the years six hondreth sixty and six. For so many importe these Greek
letters (...). In expoundyng of the which nombre the expositours have varied
wonderfully. I like best the exposition of the blessed Martyr S. Ireney, which
perauenture an hondreth years after the setting forth of the Apocalipse, wrote
his book against heresies, and saw some, which heard S. John preach, with S.
Ireney makes also Andreas the good bishop of Cesaria, which with Aretas
speaks thus: the perfect rekening, and just account of the no^bre, as
likewise other things which are written of the same Antichriste, the
opportunity of time shall open, Time shall reveal antichrist.
and very experience, to such as will watch dilligently. For if it were
necessary, as some of the Doctors suppose, that this name should be manifestly
known: he that saw him, would doubtless have revealed. But the divine grace
allowed it not, that the name of this pestiferous beast should in this godly
book be rehearsed. Thus far Andreas.

The exposition of Ireneus.
After the same sort also the holy Martyr of Christ Ireneus before Andreas
left written in the.5. book against Heresies. For about the end of the
book: it is surer, says he, and with out danger to abide and tarry for the
fulfillyng of the prophecy, than to suspecte and guess at every name: where as
many names may be found having the foresaid nombre, whereby notwithstanding
the question is not answered. Yet by and by he says: the name (...)
contains the no^bre of.666. And very like it is to be true. For this vocable
has a very kingdom. For they be latins, that now reign. This says he.
Antichriste shall be a latin, as also Sibilla prophesied
And doubtless this good doctor erred not one whit, endued with the holy
spirit of God. For we see that the church of Rome is called the latin church,
and the Pope the high Bishop of the latin church. We see al service in
churches said in the latin tongue. In Courts and al judgments of Bisshoppes
the latin tongue only used. Moreover no man shall serve in this church,
except he be a latiniste. What will you say that these latinistes call the
Hebrewe, that is to wit, the holy tongue, by an opprobriouse name Jewish, the
Greece Church and tongue heretical? The Bibles in Greek and Hebrewe be of them
suspected. For they will have the latin Bibles only to be authentical, and to
be red of all men as authentical. But these things are better known, than
that I need to admonisshe and recite them here with many words. Nevertheless
this holy man Ireneus does not wholly affirm this his conjecture as most
certain, which notwithstanding he said yet was most probable and like to be
true. For he adds: notwithstanding we will not be in hazard herein (for he
recited also the name (...), the royal or tirannicall name of Nimrod) another
will we affirmatively pronounce, that he shall have this name: knowing, that in
case it were requisite that his name should be manifestly preached at this
present time, it should doubtless have been uttered by him, which had seen also
the revelation. But this nombre of the name has he showed, that we might
beware of him when he comes, knowing who he is. And he concealed his name: for
that is not worthy to be preached of the holy ghost and so forth.

Nevertheless the same before this shows us away, A place of Daniel in ye.7.
chapt. lights this place.
how to account those.666. years. For thus he says: knowing the sure nombre,
which is showed us of the Scripture, that is to say, of.666. let the godly
abide or look for, first the division of the kingdom into ten, afterward the
same reigning and beginning to refourme their matters, and to augment their
kingedome, he that comes upon the sudden, challenge to him self a kingdom,
and shall put the foresaid kings in fear, having a name containing the
foresaid nombre, to know him verily for the abomination of desolation. This
again says he.

But who sees not, that the holy Martyr sends us to the prophecy of Daniel,
which in the.7. chapt. says, how the Roman Empire shall be divided into
many kingedomes: and how in the mids of those kings should rise up a little
horn, which should overthrow and abase three horns: and that the same
should begin to reign prowdely, tirannically, and wickedly, against both
God and men, but chiefly to the faithful intolerable?

Let us see than, how and when these things are fulfilled. The Roman Empire
falls
Where the Roman Empire had godly Emperors, another yet would wicked Rome bow
her styffe neck unto Christ, but always most obstinately aspired to her old
and wonted Idolatry, which it coueted to have restored: and finally when the
fatal time was at hand, wherein the lord most rightuouse thought to requite
blouddy Rome, he armed against her the Gothians, Vandales and Germans, which
subdued and distroied the lady of the whole world, and distroyed the whole
Empire of the which matter seek more in the.57. Sermon, and in the sermons
followyng. Many horns or kings arrise.


And it is evident by Histories, that the Roman Empire, the Gothians beginning
to invade it, did slide, provinces reuolting in every place, and was severed in
many kingdom. For to speak nothing of Asia and Affricke, the Persians wasting
that, and this the Vandalles, al Greece followed the Emperor of Constantinople,
and likewise other nations nere. The Westegothes possessed all Spain, and the
French me^ of Franconie subdued Gaulles and Germany and the nations adioynyng
to the same. The Eastegothes and Lumbardes, obtained Italy. Thus verily mere
establisshed many kingdoms and in stead of Rome reigned many kings. Howebeit
whilst these kings considered, how they might best in large their
kingedomes, and put down and expulse others, full craftily the Bisshoppe of
Rome played his part also. For he obtained the supremacy over all Bisshoppes.
And so got him great authority with Kings and realms, yea and linked
himself in league and amity with Kings and Princes. Whereupon quickly and
suddenly, or as the Martyr of Christ prophesied, upon the sudden, he starte up,
and at last usurped a kingedome, to wit of Rome. For by his judgments
falsely taken for Apostolical, he put down king Childericke, of the lignage
of Merouinges, the lawefull king of France: and auaunced Pipine, than Captain
of the French guard, to the crown. And so he ouerthrewe or plucked down one
horn: and bound unto him a most mighty King, by whose power afterward he
was a terror to the kings of Greece and Lumbardy.

Of thexarchate of Italy.
For about the year of our lord.269. the Emperor of Constantinople, expulsing
the Eastegothes, did institute a new government in Italy. But sins this kind
of rule and gouernemente is not known to all men, I will briefly recite what
and how great it was by the words of Nauclerus the Historiographer, ex
generat..20. Than began, says he, the City of Rome and Italy to have a
new manner of gouernemente, by the which they lost more the dignity, glory,
and fear over all the world, than of all the calamities, which these.160.
years have afflicted them, and at the last had left Rome to be inhabited of
wild beasts. For Longinus brought in a new name of dignity, thexarchate of
Italy: that is the high Magistrate. Which keeping still at Rauenna, went never
to the City of Rome. And in the government of Italy, and of Cities he kept
first this order, that the president should not govern the province or
region, but every City had their Magistrate to govern them, whom he called
Dukes. Wherefore making Rome egall with other Cities and Towns, in this thing
only he honored the same, that he called the Magistrate place in Rome,
president. But they that did succeed him, were called Dukes, as they were
afterward many years, so that it was called the Dukedom of Rome, as the
Dukedom of Narnia and Spolet. Another after Narset and Basil had it any more
either Consulles, or Senate lawefully assembled: but by a Duke of Greece, whom
the high Magistrate sent from Rauenna, the common wealth of Rome was governed a
long time. Thus much he.

I suppose any manne may hereby without any difficulty perceive, the
Prophecies to be fully accomplisshed, Rome utterly cast down.
and the Roman Empire to have fallen into ashes. For she that had been the
most mighty Lady of the world, is seen now to be made a vile gouernemente,
never a deal more excellent, than that of Spolet and Narnia. etc. And here is
to be known, that this Exarchate in Italy, was the third Lordeshippe
instituted sins Augustulus was slain, in whom the Histories say, that the
Empire of the weste was finisshed and ended. For first when Augustulus was
slain, the Germans under their king Odacer possessed Rome. Afterward the
Eastegothes by the conduicte of their Duke Theodoricke of Verona, Odacer
expulsed and slain, reigned at Rome and in Italy. Last of all the Eastegothes
by the Lumbardes expulsed and slain, this Exarchate was instituted. And
Lumbardes being called into Italy of the Greeks, against the Goths, would no
more go out again, for that they saw the land fertile and Rich, pleasant
and aboundyng with sundry pleasures. The Lumbardes.
Warynge therefore of great power in Italy, they subdewed to themselves many
Cities and people of Italy, establisshyng now the fourth domion, which they
called the kingdom of Lu^bardes. They had most puissaunt kings. Howbeit that
exarchate of Rauenna, although they laid dilligent awayte for it, and went
about to invade it. yet could they never extinguish it: till the Bishop of
Rome put to his helping hand, pretending the sincerity of religion.

The mainteyning of Idolatrye makes of the Bishop of Rome a king.
Historiographers account sixtene Exarches in order, which reigned about an
hondreth and four score years. The 15. of the^ was called Paulus. Nauclere in
the.25. generat. Leo the.3. says he, Emperor of Constantinople commanded,
that they that were subject to the Roman Empire, should pluck down al their
Images, break them, and burn the^. Contrariwise the Pope, (some will have him
Gregory the.2. some the.3.) wrote to the whole world, that they should not
obey these so wicked commandments of the Emperor. Platina says more in
the life of Gregory the.3. Gregory by consent of the clergy of Rome depriueth
Leo the.3. Emperor of Constantinople both of the Empire, and also of the
communion of the faithful, for that he had plucked down Images. Nauclerus
says moreover: But so great authority at that time had the Popes decrees,
that first they of Rauenna, and after the people and soldiers of Venise, made
an open rebellion against the Emperor and thexarche in Italy. And the treason
increased daily. For Marinus Spatarius, Duke of Rome, and his son Adriane,
passing through Cha^pania, were slain of the Romans. In whose stead they
created Duke of Rome one Peter. They of Rauenna also, whilst some held with
the Emperor, and some with the Pope, in a tumulte made, slew Paul thexarche
and his son. Thus writes Nauclere.

The french me^ are sent for into Italy by ye Pope.
In these co^motions the Lumbardes, supposyng the occasion so long wisshed for
to be now offered, through the conduite of Luitprande their king, invade the
lands of thempire, and besege also Rome it self. But Pope Gregory the
firebra^de of all the sturres in Italy, the soldiour and practicionar of the
same, and like no priest nor preacher, sends for Charles Martell king Pinines
father with his French cha^pions into Italy against the Lumbardes. Howbeit this
Charles persuades the king of Lumbardes frendely to depart from the City.
But yet not long after Aistulphus king of Lumbardes spoileth again the lands
of Rauena, renews the Italian war, and wins Rauenna it self, and
demands tribute of the city of Rome. But Stephen the.2. Pope, which aspired
to the government of Rauenna, and wisshed the Lumbardes distroyed, of king
Pipine of France, unto who^ not long sins pope Zachary by his wrongeful
judgment (as many suppose) had given the kingdom, required aid, and
deliverance, as it were offering him the kingdom. Therefore are the Frenchmen
in armure, couetyng also to win Italy. Whilst king Pipine entered into Italy,
he met with the Ambassadors of the Emperor of Constantinople, which
required, that he would restore Rauenna and thexarchate and lands thereof, to
the Empire, whose of right it was, and not the Pope or Romans. Pipine
answered, how he warred for S. Peter and ye pope: and to go about, that the
Lumbardes should not vex the church. And that he would take from them
thexarchate, and other rules of Italy, and deliver them to the pope, which he
performed in deed. For he overcame king Aistulphe, took from him the
government of Rauenna, and delivered it to the Bishop of Rome.

Herein may all men see, The kings overthrown, the Pope him self is made a
king
unless it be those which will see nothing, how this contemptuouse Bishop,
and very small horn, has at one pusshe overthrown two horns. For he has put
the emperor of Constantinople from the government of Italy: and has put down
the King of Lumbardy and caused his people to be driven out of Italy. For a
few years after, the Pope, by the force of Charlemaigne, put down Desiderius
the last king of Lumbardy, and distroied withal the whole people of the
Lu^bardes. And thus starte up the Pope, and became as it were king of old
Rome, and of the chief part of Italy. And now ar the beginnings of the
kingdom laid, but as yet he reigned not with full authority, as is declared
before. Eberardus therefore Bisshoppe of Salisburge, whose words I recited in
the preface of this book, extends these things further. But I suppose this
our exposition to accord with ye prophet, with the things and times. And the
pope gave to king Pipine for so great a donatio^, a title, as Platina shows
in the life of Stephen the.2. that al kings of France should be called most
Christen. Afterward was the Image of the Empire bestowed upon Charles: whereof
is spoken before.

And leest the Pope should seem to have received nothing, whilst king Pipine
gave him therarchate, the stories report thus: The Pope made a most mighty
king.
thexarchate was divided into two regiones, in Pentapolis and Aemilia.
Pentapolis had five cities, Rauenna, Cesena, Class, Forum liuij, and Forum
popilij. In Aemilia were, Bononie, Rhezo, Parma, Placence, and all the lands
that lie from the borders of the Placentines and Ticinians unto Adria, and from
Adria to Arimine, etc. But he that list may read the Donation of Ludouicus
pius, in Volateranes Geographie, where he nombreth the kings of France. We
say nothing yet of this that afterward he usurped to him self power over kings
and realms, finally over all churches and souls, so that we must confess,
that a more maruelouse prince never lived.

Thou have here a brief and compe^diouse story, declaring how the Pope having
humbled and overthrown three kings, he him self began to be made a king. But
let us now apply herunto the no^bre of the name of the beast, The popes power
augme^ted both in spiritualties and in temporallies.
to the end it may so be known to the whole world, yt there is no other
Antichrist to be looked for, than the bishop of Rome, that is come^: which in
deed laid the foundation of his kingdom under the emperor Phocas, did build it
under the kings of France: and enlarged the same under themperours Henrickes
and Friderickes, finally has establisshed it under themperours followyng:
reigns in our time, and has done certain ages already paste, etc.

The supputation of.666. years must be rekened from the time, wherein S. John
saw the revelation. Ireneus says: It was seen no long time sins, but in a
manner in our days, about the end of the reign of Domitian. And Eusebius in his
chronicles says, that it was in the year of our lord.97. Therefore there
remain yet three years to accomplish an hondreth years from the birth of our
lord. Add therefore to an ho^dreth years, The fatal year of our lord.763.
these years of the no^bre of the name of the beast.666. and substracte those
three years of the first hondreth, and thou shall have the year of our
Lord.763. which was the.13. year, or there aboutes of king Pipines reign, and
the.7. of Pope Paul. Notwithstanding that there be writers of stories and
times, which attribute to Paull but one year, etc.

Now must we not look only what thing happened in the very instaunt of the
year.763. but what chanced in the next years fourmer and following. Whereof I
will recite a few things out of the writers of stories and times.

Nauclerus in the.16. generat. In the year of our Lord. Wonders and Monsters.
750 says he, under Pope Zachary, and under the emperor Constantine the.5,
began the.26. generation, in ye which was made an alteration of the Kingdom of
France, an abolyshment of the Kings of Lumbardie, and a translation of the
Roman Empire from the Greeks. These so great alterations, the wonders did
happly pourtend, which happened at this time. In Mesopotamia the Earth roue a
sunder by the space of two miles, and a Mule was said to have spoken with a
man's voice. Ashes fell down from heaven. There were wonderful Earthquakes.
Crosses appeared upon men's garments. These things wrote Nauclerus. The like are
red in the story of Eutropius, in ye.22. book, under ye year of Constantine
ye.6. moreover in the Historical glass of Vincent, and in Fasciculo temporu^.

In the year of our Lord.751. Pipine is made King
through the counsel of Zachary the Pope, Pipine the master of the Kings
household, oppressing his lord Hilderych king of France, began to reign, and
reigns.18. years. This writes Aemilius in the.2. book of kings of France.
And in the year.755, Pipine enters into Italy with an Army, vanquisheth the
King of Lumbardes, and gives the whole gouernemente of Rauenna to S. Peter,
The exarchate is given to the Pope.
against the will of the Emperor of Constantinople. Vespergensis in chronicis.
You see, how in stead of ye Emperor, the Pope begins after a sort, to
reign at Rome and in Italy, the horns be shaken of, according to the
prophecy. Matthew Palmer in his chron. under the year.756: the Roman Empire,
says he, reuolting a pace in the East, The begynninges and preludies of the
Empire translated.
and the Emperor persecuting the Christians, (Idolaters he should have termed
them) Pope Stephen gave to the kings of France the Imperial titles and
dignities, and confirmed Pipine, and the successors of his stock only for
their kings, al others utterly excluded, and in the name of the people of Rome,
called him Patricium. Hitherto Palmer.

Ihon Functius in his Chron. In the year of our Lord.756 the rites and
ceremonies of the church of Rome, The Romish religion obtruted.
were carried into France and first received. In the year of our Lord.757.
Paul is made Pope, and immediately follows that fatal year of our
Lord.763. as the middle poinct betwixt the year 750. and.770. or.773. Wherein
these things have all together chanced, which both give the name to
Antichrist, and whereof, as every thing else is known by his name, so has he
also his name and is known.

In the year of our Lord.768. Stephen the.3. held a counsel at Rome in the
church Laterane of the bishops of France and of Italy: Idolatry is confirmed.
and decreed, that none should be ordained bishop of Rome, but a Cardinal. He
condemned moreover ye Greek counsel of the Emperor Constantine against
Images, which he commanded both to be had and worshipped. These things writes
Antoninus in Chron. tit. 14. Cap. 1. and.5.

After this, that great Charles, the son of Pipine, sent for into Italy by
pope Adriane, Charles co^fyrmeth al things.
takes Desiderius King of Lumbardes, and puts down the Kingdom of
Lumbardes. This was done in the year of our Lord.773. and also the two
hondreth and fourth year, after that the Lumbardes were arrived in Italy. And
he confirmed and augmented the donatio^ of Pipine his father. As many
Historiographers make relation. Ihon Functius in Cron. adds, that through out
the whole Realm of France, Even so was the mass obtruted to ye Germans.
at the commandment of Charles, the Ceremonies of the Romish church were
instituted. We have now than the name of Antichrist, of the nombre.666. We
know who he is, and whom we should beware of.

I can not here omit, but at few words must note the supputation of
Sibilla, concerning the original of Antichrist to my judgment, very agreeable
to the fourmer accoumpte. For the.8. books of Sibelles oracles, taken out of
the library of the honorable common wealth of Auspurg, were set forth by the
most godly and learned man, D. Xistus Betuleius, in the year of our
Lord.1545. and that in Greek. And this Sibilla Erythreae, or whatsoever she
were, prophesies in the.8 book, that Rome shall fall, and be burnt with fire.
The words of Sibelle in Greek are to this effect.

The plague of God upon the ones shall fall
Proud Rome, unto the ground thou shalt be cast
Unto thy foes made first captive and thrall
And than with flaming fire be burnt at last.
And this thing was accomplished, at what time Totilas King of Goths fyred
the City, as we have rehearsed before. And shortelie after in the same Oracles
are these annexed. When Emperors that have the world oppreste
With bondage great from the east unto the weste
The number have fulfilled of fiftene
A King shall come in white hatte to be seen
Which unto Ponti his name shall nere annex
(As he that shall be called Pontifex)
To worldelie pleasures given shall he live
And with his wicked foot rewards will give.
and the residue which are read there.

She byddeth accoumpte from the burninge of Rome fiftene Kings. After whom
shall come a new King, whom she describes. And it is manifest that Rome was
taken, spoiled and burnt, under the Emperor Justinian. After ar accoumpted
from Iustine the younger, to the Emperor Theodosius, 15. After Theodose,
succedeth Leo the.3. whose name was Isauricus, she calls those kings
delicatos that is, given to pleasures. Because the most part of them were not
very valiant, but under Leo.3. Italy reuolteth from the emperor: And shortly
also the government called the Exarchate, was given to the pope of King
Pipine, against the Emperors mind. We se therefore that the supputations do
agree. For we have also brought to king Pipine the years.666. And so a new
king arises, whom Sibille names (...) notable by reason of his white hat or
myter. For so she notes the Bishop (which in oulde time did wear on their
heads white miters) yt should be a king. She gives him a name also. For she
says how he has a name nere unto Ponti. For add to the word Ponti, fex,
and you have Pontifex. She annexeth certain notes or marks also: yt he shall
regard earthly things, and not heavenly: and that he shall also provide ((...))
and give rewards, with his ungracious foot. And that is rightly spoken, sins
that after Domitian and Dioclesian, none of all the Kings, save the Pope, has
offered his foot to be kissed: whereby fools think, they receive great
rewards. But omitting these things, let us return into the way.

The blessed marter Ireneus speaking of this King, in the same.5. book. In the
beast coming, says he, there is made a recapitulation of all iniquity, and
of all deceipte, to the end that al Apostatical power concurring and concluded
in him, Antichriste is the sink of al vngodlyn^sse and wickedness
might be thrown into a fournace of fire. And that he has spoken this thing
by the spirit of prophecy, all men will confess, that have red the lives of
the Bishops of Rome: but especially of Siluester the.2. Benedictus the.9.
Gregory the.6. Gregory the.7. Vrbanus the.2. Paschalis the.2. Alexander the.3.
Innocentius the.3. Gregory the.9, Boniface the.8. Clement the.5 Ihon ye.22. to
speak nothing of diverse others. What in our days have done, Iulies,
Cleme^tes, Leos, and Paul's. Spain, France, England, Ho^garie, and Germany,
and other Realms speak, which have been set together by the ears, and
entangled emongs themselves with most cruel wars. The blood of martirs shed
speaks, which cries unto ye Lord. What remains therefore, but yt we should
take heed to our selves, and beware of this man of sin, and cleave to our
redemer Christ our Lord, beseching him, that he would come shorty, and deliver
us from all evil. Amen, Amen.

Christ stands upon Mounth Sion, having his church: and is deserbed by
notes, which and what shall be the sheep of Christ. The.lxij. Sermon.
The.14. Chapter.
ANd I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him 144000.
having his fathers name written in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from
heaven, as the sound of many waters, and as the voise of a great thonder. And
the voice that I heard, was as the harpers, yt play upon their harps. And they
soung as it were a new song before the seat, and before the four beasts, and
the elders, and no man could learn that song, but the hondreth and.xliiii.
thousand which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not
defiled with women, for they are virgins. These follow the Lamb, whither so
ever he goes. These were redeemed from men, being the first fruictes unto God,
and to the Lamb, and in their mouths was found no gyle. For they are without
spotte before the trone of God.

Like as he has hitherto mixed ioyefull things with sorrowful, A
consolation, and preaching of ye gospel
and annexed a consolation to most hard and cruel chances: so now he
adioyneth also to the tirannie of the Roman Empire an exposition having both
a consolation and an exhortation most grave and weighty. Undoubtedly by the
description of the Romish tyranny, and reign of Antichrist it might have
seemed, that the Church and the preaching of the Gospel had been utterly lost,
and that ungodliness should have triumphed for ever: he declares therefore by a
most excellent vision, how Christ shall reign notwithstanding in his chosen,
and shall overcome, and shall have his church continually, and that right
famous. He describes what the elect shall be. He adds that the preaching of
the Gospel can not be so oppressed, but that it shall rather be preached with
great Constancy through out all the world. And that Rome also shall fall, and
all the ungodly be pu^nished. He exhorts therefore most ernestly, that we have
not to do with Antichrist, leeste also we be made pertakers of his damnation,
And to the intent there might waunt nothing that co^cerned a full comfort, he
adds, that thing which may chiefly confirm the minds of all the godly
even in the greatest dangers, how they that die in Christ do flitte straight
ways from the corporal death unto lyse everlasting. Which finisshed, he
tourneth to the description of the punnishement to be taken assuredly of the
Antichristians. Wherefore if the Books of the Gospel and new Testament be to
be esteemed for the manifold description of Christ, and of salvation by him
obtained for the faythefull, if they are to be esteemed of the comfort, and
preaching of the gospel: this is doubtless a book most gospel like, as that
which by a continual tenor to perillouse things annexeth consolation.

The La^be stands on mount Sion.
S. John therefore sees the Lamb standing upon Mou^te Sion. Christ therefore
slepeth not, he is not ignorant of the perilles and conflictes of his church:
but he stands as prepared to aid and succor his. He stands as a king
invincible, whom another the Dragon, nor the old nor the new beast has
overthrown. For I have told you oftener than ones, especially in the.5.
chapt. that by the Lamb is understand Christ. For he is the lamb and price
of our redemption until the judgment: but than laiyng a part the office of
an intercessour, he shall be a most severe, and also a most holy judge. And
Christ stands, not in the sand, as did the Dragon: but on a Mount, and that
upon mount Sion. Mount Sion was a figure of Christ's kingdom, as appears
plainly in the.2. Psalm, and the.2. of Esaye. And the kingedome of Christ,
is the church, as well triumphante, as militaunt: therefore in the felloweship
of Saints stands Christ, the joy and glory of them that are in heaven, and
the life and helper of them, which fight as yet in Earth. Let us believe
therefore, that in the Antichristiane persecutions Christ will never fail his
faithful: as he is red never to have failed the old Saints under the old
Roman Empire afflicted. For this consolation serves chiefly for us, which are
vexed of Antichrist: and served for them also, which suffered martyrdom under
the old Roman Empire. Another is there any doubt, but that they confirmed
themselves herewith in the greatest persecutions.

With the lamb are. 144000.
But that same is most full of consolation, that the lamb is not alone, but
has with him an hondreth and four and forty thousand: that is to say a
most ample church. How so ever therefore the beast rages and sleyeth the
confessors of Christ, yet shall there be always a church, that shall never be
plucked up even in the Earth. He sets a nombre certain for uncertain, and yet
certain and determinate: for that the nombre of them that shall be saved shall
seem small in comparison of them, which shall worship the beasts, and
perisshe. Howebeit we understand that the nombre of them shall nevertheless be
greatest, which shall be the body of the Church, under their head Christ, even
than also, what time the Pope with all the limbs of Antichrist shall have
powered out all their fury. Of this nombre of the elect I have spoken in the
7. chapt. where the self same nombre is set.

And as the Antichristians bear the mark of Antichrist in the righthande and
foreheades: so verily the sheep of Christ, They have the name of ye father in
their foreheads.
and which shall be the church, the spouse of christ, under their head Christ,
shall have their mark also in their foreheades, to wit the name of the father
of the Lamb. For Eius is to be referred to the Lamb. And he speaks not of
an external mark, which should be printed on their foreheades, but of the
mark of their minds. The same is faith, the sign of all Gods children. And
the faith in the Father and the Son, which are not without the holy ghost.
And how should thou believe, that almighty God is thy father, unless thou
understand the same to be obtained of the son? This faith therefore is here
understand to be a christen, not a Jewish or Turkishe faith, which yet
confesses God to be the father. But sins they have not the son, as said S.
John in his Epistle, they another have the father. Therefore the true members of
the church of Christ, the true sheep, do believe that they have a merciful
father through the son, by whom they know that the father being pacified,
has given all things of life and of salvation in his son. They that seek
not for salvation and all goodness in the only mediator the son of God, have
not doubtless the right mark of the children of God in their foreheades. At
this day all will be christians, but neglectyng Christ, they depe^de wholly of
Saints. Therefore their faith is not the true mark of the children of God.
No they another know the father nor the son. And therefore they persecute
those that cleave wholly to the father by the son. And seeing Christ is with
his church, what needs the church a vicar? Certe^ly it can not be the true
church, which has a vicar of Christ, for than it waunteth Christ whom the
true church can not waunte.

It was not enough for the Apostle to have said, that the church was united
with Christ: unless he had added moreover with many words, how he has seen
the church affected, and how she demeaned her self, than verily, when the
beasts did afflicte her: that even we may learn thereof, what is the hope of
Saints in greatest dangers, and of what sort it behooves us to be in
persecutions and temptations.

He hears the voice of many waters.
First he hears a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters. Waters in
the Scriptures many times do signify people. We understand therefore herby,
that the church shall be populouse, and speaking: to thinte^t to dissemble
nothing, but freely to profess Christ. And therefore he hears also the sound
of a great thonder. For the church gets from heaven power to preach and
show forth the Gospel gravely, though the worlds bowelles burste. And verily
of the fra^ke and constaunt preaching of the gospel John and James are called
with Mark the sons of tho^der. And concerning the preaching of the gospel
shall follow more afterward. He hears moreover a melodiouse harmony of
men singyng to their harpes, and singing as it were a new song. The which is
chiefly referred to the saints in heaven, singing eternal praises to God:
seco^dely to ye saints living here yet in earth, which also offer unto God
continually praises and thanks geuyng. Therefore how so ever their hearts be
made sorrowful in perilles and adversities, yet their spirit rejoices in the
Lord. For no man could learn that same song, save thelecte. For like as none
of the heavenly dwellers can express or understand the excellency of the
joys of the life to come, and the praises of God, except he dwell emonges the
heavenly inhabiters, and be pertakers of the most godly life: so except any
man living yet here in Earth be regenerated, he another sees how great is the
felicity of the faithful, another ca^ he justly esteem, the praises which they
offer unto God. Touching the new song I have spoken in the.5. chapt. And
certainly to wordly men the things seem as they were new, which the faithful
bring forth of Gods word.

The true marks of ye faithful.
Now does S. John describe also what manner ones the sheep of Christ shall be,
which shall continewe in the church of Christ, dispising the furies of the
beasts. Unto whom also the mark of his fathers name in their forcheades is
expounded. They are redeemed from the Earth.
We shall perceive moreover, what be the true marks of the faithful. First
they are redeemed from the earth. Doubtless al we bearing the earthly Image of
the earthly man, were sold under sin, for the which cause we are also
subject to maledictio^. But the lord has bought us with the price of
redemption, paid upon the cross, so that now we are shapen new after the
Image of the heavenly man, to with being adopted for the children of God. Of
the which redemption the Apostle has spoken in the.1. Corinth. the.7. and to
the Roma. the.3. and in other places. S. Peter also.1. Pet. 1. And for as much
as the faithful know themselves to be bought and adopted by Christ to the
heavenly inheritance, they are addicte to serve their redemer only, and
inseperablely cleave to him.

Morouer they are virgins, They are virgins.
not defiled with women in expou^ding the which things thauncientes torment
themselves, leeste any thing here should seem to redounde to the derogation of
holy matrimony, whereby doubtless, witness thapostle in the.1. Corinth. 7. and.13.
to the Hebr. no man is defiled. I am here asshamed to bring forth the trifles
of the Papists. For who ca^ hear the vncleanest of al me^ reasoning any thing
of cleanes? They will hereby mainteyne and color that single life of theirs:
but al men see nevertheless, except they be blinder than betelles, what
filthiness has been committed and is committed daily, under the pretense of this
ungracious, and most unclean singlenes. But the Lord speaks nothing at this
present of corporal marriage, but rather spiritual. For it is manifest, that
thapostles as the brideleaders of our savior, have brought the church to our
Savior a chaste virgin, which has not had to do with any strange or foreine
woman: that is to say, which is not defiled with the participation of evil
doctrine. Read Solomon reasonyng of that woman gravely in the.4. chapt. of the
Proverb. Read moreover thapostle in the.2. to the Corint. 11. excedingly well
teaching, that the faithful are an undefiled virgin the spouse of Christ. The
faithful therefore which lived under the tyranny of the beasts, received no
strange doctrine of Idolles, and of other profane cultes, another do at this
day admit the popish infectio^, but keep their maydenly minds for their
husband Christ, being despowsed unto him by faith most sincere.

These follow the la^b, whether so ever he goes. They follow ye la^be whither
so ever he goes.
That is to say, they care for no man but Christ, they desire no man but
Christ: in him they repose al their aid, al their comfort, al their joy, al
salvation, to him alone have always respect, in him they know themselves to
be complete: which one and alone is to them al things. Moreover whither so
ever Christ calls the faithful by doctrine and example, if it be to very
death and most cruel butcherie, they follow willingly and cherely. Whereby
it comes to pass, that in the world to come, they ca^ never be severed from
him. For where so ever Christ is, there is also Christ's minister: as he him
self has witnessed in the.12. and.14. chapt. of John.

They are also redeemed from men, Redeemed from men.
delivered verily through the grace of Christ, that they should not follow this
corrupt and unclean world, by all kind of pollution. For Christ by his
spirit and word calls his out of this world, that although in body we are
co^uersaunte in the world, yet should we with all our mind abhor the world,
and the things that are therein. Furthermore for this intent has he chosen,
and redeemed his from the bondage of men or of the world, First fruices to god.
that they should be first fruictes to God the father and to his son. Which
place the most godly and excellent learned man D. Fraunces Lamberte expounding
in his commentaries upon the Apocalipse: it is manifest, says he, by the.23.
of Leuit. the.15. of Numeri. and.18. of Deuter. what first fruictes be, and
that they were gathered for the Lord, and went to the high priest. But Christ
is that high priest, unto whom the spiritual first fruictes apperteyne, to
wit the godly, and sanctified to God. These things are confirmed of the
Apostle, which said, that Christ gave him self for us, to the end he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and might purify us to him self an especial
people, a follower of good works. Therefore do the true faithful singularly
apply them to godlynes, and that they may be the first fruictes, and a most
excellent present of the lord, sins they know themselves to be redeemed for this
end, that all the rest of the time of their life, they might serve God.

In their mouth no gyle.
In their mouth is found no gile. He says not, no concupiscence, or evil
motion to be found in the hearts of the faithful: but denies that there is
any gile in their mouth. For albeit that the faithful be troubled and vexed
with the affections of the flesh, yet so love they the truth, that to their
knoweledge they will disceaue no man. And chiefly do dissemble nothing, that
apperteyneth to the confession of the truth and verity, nor use any gile in
the doctrine of the Gospel.

They be morouer with out spotte before the trone of god, They be without
spotte.
not by their own virtue, but by ye sanctification of Christ: which S. Paul
also affirms in the.5. chapt. to the Ephesi. And he has spoken it aptly,
before the trone. For S. Austen said, that our sanctification should at last
be made perfect in the world to come.

These I say be the true marks of the true faithful, and of the true church
of Christ. Let every man search here the secret corners of his heart, and
consider dillige^tly in his mind, whether he be marked with these signs: and
let him busily pray unto God, that if he feel them, the lord would confirm
them: if he feel them not, that the Lord would printe them depely in their
minds.

The Aungel preaches the eternal gospel of Christ. The.lxiij. Sermon.
ANd I saw an Angel fliyng in the mids of heaven, having an everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that sit and dwell on the earth, and to all
nations, kinredes and tunges and people, saying with a loud voice: fear God,
and give honor to him, for the hour of his Judgment is come: and worship
him that made heaven and earth, and the Sea and the fountains of water.

Antichrist desires nothing so much to be oppressed, as the preaching of the
Gospel. For even therefore has he instituted the inquisitours of heretical
prauitie for h^ dare call the Gospel heresy. Therefore he burns the Gospel
books, and preachers of the gospel, and every where restreyneth the readyng of
the gospel, and Euangelical books. Wherefore the simple suppose, that it can
not be but that gospel with all his adherentes should perish utterly. Now
therefore in the lords consolation is brought in a vision of an Angel (for he
is still in the vision) fliyng in the mids of heaven, having the everlasting
gospel, and preaching to the world. Whereby is signified, that the gospel shall
be preached unto men, in despite of all the enemies thereof. And he gathers a
brief some of such things as by the gospel are preached to the world. Those
same appertain also to the comfort of the church, which under the old
beast suffered persecutions for the Gospel. We will briefly consider every
thing.

The angel is a figure of the preachers.
First it is evident even by the fourmer things, that by thangel is signified
the ministers of the word, and the very ministry of the gospel. Certes ye
scripture calls preachers Angels. For so is S. John Baptiste named of the
prophet Malachie. Whereof is spoken before. And the ministers by this honorable
title are admonished, of puretie, and of most sincere faith. For Angels be gods
ministers: who^ they only regard, love, and honor: whose commandments they
execute most faithfully, sincerely, and dillige^tly. Such it besemeth preachers
to be in their kind and office. And like as Angels cannot be hurt through the
treasons and injuries of men: so God defends his ministers, until the hour
appointed. So is Peter delivered out of prison, in the.12. of thactes. So is
Paul in Shippewreake, etc. And he says an other Angel, for that he has
brought in already sundry visio^s of diverse Angels. Notwithstanding that,
other, seems to be put for the first. For he annexeth to this yet two angels
more. The first whereof he calls an other, the later the third.

He flies through ye mids of Heaven.
And this Angel flies in the mids of heaven. By this thing is signified the
lucky course and procedyng of the preaching of the gospel. It is also written
in the prophets, his word runs swiftely. Psalm.19. David compares the
runnyng of the preaching of the gospel, to the course of the sun, ioyefull
as a giaunt he runs his way: i^ the uttermost part of heavens he arriseth,
and runs again to the same, neither can any man stop him, nor hide him
self from the heat thereof. The sun shines in all places. Therefore shall
the preaching be free. For as we ca^ another pluck back nor hinder, the
things that are above us in thayre and sky: so shall we another pluck down,
nor hinder him that flies in the mids of heaven. The words and writings
fly, they fly far and wide where. Another can the verity be oppressed. God
has given to the world Printyng, whereby the gospel is preached and runs
far, wide, and most swiftely.

And this Angel has the everlasting gospel. The gospel everlasting.
Wherein is the greatest comfort. For it signifies, that the verity shall be
in the world invincible. And for many causes is the Gospel called everlasting.
First, because the verity is immortal, which can not be bounden, how so ever
the ministers are fettered and slain.2. Timoth. 2. secondely the gospel is
eternal, for because it was showed to our first fathers, prophesied in the
law and prophets, fulfilled of Christ, declared by thapostles, and by the
grace of God brought unto us. Yea and before al times was predestined. Read
the.1. to the Ephesians. For eue^ for this cause is it called everlasting, for
as much as it apperteineth to us and to our posterity unto the worlds end,
and not only to our elders. And because it is everlasting, they lie which at
this day call it a new doctrine or learning. Papistrie is new, which has
his original, what time every thing was ordained. etc. Moreover the Apostle
says: if I or an Angel from heaven shall preach any other gospel, or besides
the same that ye have received, let him be accursed.

And we hear expressly, that the Aungel had not only the Gospel, but that he
had preached the gospel. The angel preaches.
Many in deed have the gospel, but dumme, and written in books. The gospel must
be showed forth and pronounced. He declares also unto whom the gospel must be
uttered and preached: to the inhabiters of the earth: for it must be cried out
to such as are drowned in earthly matters, and they must be raised out of
their sleep. And after his manner and imitation of blessed Daniel in the.7.
chapt. He rekeneth up nations, kinredes, tunges, and people: and thus
signifies that the gospel shall be preached ^^^ough out the whole world.
Which thing the lord said also should come to pass in the.24. of Matthew. and
than that the end should come. And we see at this day, that the gospel has
in a manner thondered through out the whole world. And here I give warning
leeste any disceaue him self. Thapostle in the.1. Timoth. 3. and.1. Coloss. yt
the gospel was preached through out the whole world in his time. Howbeit al
men had not than received it, but a few. Do not therefore Imagine with thy
self, that the Gospel is not preached, unless al receive it. There shall no
more be made one sheperde and one shepefolde.
They are abused, that promise to themselves before the judgment a concord of
all nations, for that it is written, that there should be ons one sheperde, and
one shepefolde. For the same was acco^plisshed, whilst of the Iewisshe
Synagoge and dispersion of the gentiles, the lord prepared to him self one
church, whereof Christ is head, and pastor, and Antichrist shall at the length
by his last coming be abolished. Therefore shall he always resist Christ.

He preaches with a loud voice.
Furthermore where he sees and hears this Angel preach the gospel with a
loud voice, he means that the preachers shall with great constancy and
frankenes, also with shrylle voices and most ernestenes preach the gospel
against Antichrist. And we see at this day, that the more cruelly the faithful
are grieved and oppressed, the more fervently and louder they cry, and that
also they be called clamorouse criers.

What the Angel preaches.
Moreover he compriseth in a brief some, what things are to be set forth in
the preaching of the gospel, chiefly in the last times. First he says: fear
God. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: therefore not to fear God,
is the beginning of foolishenes, The fear of God.
and of al errors. The fear of God, has nothing common with the fear of the
world. The godly man is not affrayed of God, as a gilty servant fears his
master, and that more punnisshment, than his master, who^ he hates rather.
For the fear of God has the reverence and love of God. It attributes to God
the supreme Majesty, imbraceth faith, and has a faithful care, whereby it
awayteth upon God, worshippeth, prayseth, and professes the same. Doubtless
because we more fear men, than God, we fear more the Pope, and the malice
and hatred of him and his, therefore do we not execute justice uprightly, nor
profess the truth frankely, another yet set forth the gospel. But the lord in
the Gospel says: fear ye not them, which may kill the body and have no
power over the soul: rather fear ye him, which condemns both body and soul
to hell fire. Certes the fear of God is not only the beginning, but also the
bond of al virtue. Hereafter we shall hear that the fearful shall be cast
into hell, with the beast and with the false prophet. Therefore let God be our
fear, like as Esaye teaches in the.8. cha. Let us fear God for our sins
committed. Here few are affraide: but many are affraide to speak the truth,
to mainteyne godliness, and to rebuke wickedness.

Secondely the preaching of the Gospel comprehends the honor of God. For he
says: and give him honor. the honor of God.
And thou do not separate the son from the father. For he in the.5. of
John says thus: the father has given al judgment to the son, that al
should honor the son, as they honor the father. He that honors not the
son, honors not the father, which sent him. And in very deed the father
ca^ not be honored, but by ye son. For we honor him, when we believe him to
be true, and receive Christ the son of God, as the only righteousness and
perfection of al faithful. By faith therefore chiefly we honor God, than
reuere^cyng him only by faithful obedience, and walking in his commandments.
S. John in his Canonic. he that believes not the son, says he, makes God a
liar (see how ye may highly dishonor God) which believes not the testimony
which God has testified of his son. And this is the testimony, that God has
given to us eternal life: and this life is in his son. He that has the
son, has life: he that has not the son, has not life. We are therefore,
forbidden, else where, than in Christ alone, to seek life and al goodness. But
the papists honor the Pope, and his co^stitutions, his Saints also, and
honor not God alone. They in grave in their cups, Soli deo gloria: to God
alone be glory: but yet in the mean season they persecute the^, which will
not ascribe the glory dew to God alone unto their folish trifles. But the
Gospel will cry out, that to God alone al glory is dew.

Hereunto is added a spur, The judgment of the son of God.
which may prick them to fear and glorify God: for the hour of his
judgment is come. The Gospel therefore in the latter days shall beat into men
the last judgment. This has a wonderful effect to obtain of men amendment
of life. And it is pourposely said, it is come: and not, the hour of his
judgment shall come. For so is the certentie of his judgment expressed, and we
are warned, to look for that same day every moment. The Apostle used the same
argument in the.17. chapt. of the Acts to them of Athens, and to the Corinth.
the.2. Epist. 5. chapt. Let us remember, O brethren, that strayte judgment:
let us amend our faith and manners, and al things that agree not with the
gospel. For certainly we shall die, certainly we shall be judged. But then, when
we shall promise our selves peace, shall come sudden destruction. Watch.

To worship God.
Finally the Gospel teaches to worship God alone. Than do not the faithful
worship Idolles, to whom so ever they be erected. They worship not the Pope
overwhelmed with wickedness: much less do they kiss, and by kissinge
worship his ungracious and stinkyng fete. They worship not the God Mauzim
of the wafer makers, Daniel. 11.
the God in the box, which is worshipped in palaces and churches as shut up
in the pixe. They worship not Saints: but God alone. Therefore lift up
your hearts unto heaven and worship. We have here in Earth wonderful works,
which may move us to worship this God alone. He is maker of heaven and
Earth, and of the Sea. Who is greater? who is mightier? Therefore worship
him, the true God? Matthew. 4. He annexeth here fountaynes of water, for that
the miracle and benefit of waters is great. For if we consider the original
spring, substance, pleasauntenes and commodity of fountaynes we shall be
compelled to wonder. God be praised.

An other Angel preaches, that Babylon shall fall: and an other diswadeth all
men from the felloweshippe of the religion of the beast. The.lxiiij. Sermon.
ANd there followed an other Aungel, saying: she is fallen, she is fallen even
Babylon that great City: for she made all nations drink of the wine of her
whoredom. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice: if
any man worship the beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand, ye same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
which is powered in ye cup of his wrath. And he shall be punished in fire and
brimstone, before the holy Angels and before the Lamb: and the smoke of their
tourmente ascends up evermore. And they have no rest day nor night, which
worship the beast and his Image, and whosoever received the prynte of his name.
Here is the patience of Saints. Here ar they that keep the commandments, and
the faith of Jesus.

For the comfort of the faithful flock of Christ, The Romysh Church shall fall.
is brought forth an other Angel, a type of all godly preachers, which
preaches with great constancy, that the kingdom of Antichrist shall fall,
how soever it promises to it self euerlastingnesse. And hereof the Saints
gather, that persecutions shall with all be finisshed, with all other
abominations through out the world. For where for the continual persecutions
of the wicked, all the Saints cannot but be maruelouselye sad: They must
needs verily hereof receive no small joy and comfort, that they here, how
they shall not endure always.

and here it is said that Babylon shall fall. And in deed it were foloyshnes,
Babylon.
to expound these things of the old Babylon in Asia, which was fallen long
sins, scarcely any token thereof being lest: Rome.
we must therefore understand it of an other, which is in her flowers, and
even by a figurative speech, we must understand it of Rome. Antonomasia.
For there is a great Cozinnage as it were, betwixt both Babylon was the
first Monarchy, Rome is the last. Babylon sore afflicted the people of God,
So does Rome greuouselye vex the church of God. Babylon burdened Israel
with a greueouse captivity: So Rome vexes the church, with more than a long
captivity. Babylon overcame the people of God, and burning the City of
Jerusalem, and destroieng the temple, led away Israel captive: so Rome also
having rased the city of Jerusalem, and subuerting the temple, triumphed of
Israel. Babylon planted Idolatry, superstition, and all abomination,
auaunced, maintained, and set forth the same unto al men: but at the length
when she would have thought leest of it, the people of God being sodeynely
delivered, she was utterly subverted. So is Rome also, the mother and nurse,
and reuyuer of all abominations in the church of the last time, wherein she
shall perish at the last, all those that believe truly in Christ being
delivered. And especially it is called great. For how great and mighty the
church of Rome is, all we see and by experience know at this day. Another am I
the first that understand by Babylon, Rome. For many expositours reading the
first Epistle of Saint Peter, in the end of the epistle, do understand by
Babylon, Rome, Certes Oecumenius says: And here he calls Babylon Rome, for
the excellency and brightness of the Empire: the which Rome obtained a long
time sins. But this the more ancient writers expound more playnelie, as
Turtullian in his book against the Jews, which says: so Babylon with saint
Ihon bears the figure of the City of Rome, therefore also great, and proud
in her kingdom, and a murderer of the saints. The same words in a manner, he
repeteth in the third book against Marcion. And no less plainly Saint
Hierome calls Rome Babylon: and that same Babylon whereof S. Ihon speaks in
the Apocalipse. Read the epistle of Paula and Eustochium written to Marcella,
by the help of saint Hierome. Read himself in the.11. question to Algasia.
Again in the preface to the book of Didymus of the holy ghost, to Pauliniane.
Also in the end of ye.2. book against Iouinian. The same in the life of S.
Mark: Peter, says he, in ye first epistle, under ye name of Babylon, does
figuratively signify Rome. But S. Ihon will expound himself in the.17.
chapter. And we understand that the City of Rome shall fall chiefly, with all
her ungodliness: And with the same also, the Romish superstition and
abomination, through out the world. And the Angel in deed, says she is
fallen, which is yet to fall: And that by the prophetical manner of speaking,
Anadiplosis.
wherein that which shall assuredly come to pass is uttered, as though it were
now done. To signify the certentie thereof, that reduplication or iterating of
the word also apperteineth, she is fallen, she is fallen. she is fallen, she
is fallen.
This is also repeated in the.18. chap. where it shall be showed how it is taken
out of the Prophets, etc. Notwithstanding both a desire and Joy also, might
seem here to be signified. For such things as we have long, and with a desire
looked for, we receive them now cumming and say, thou art come, thou art come
at the last long looked for, and now make me glad. For the saints with a
great desire, look and long for the destruction, of that most wicked, most
vile, and most troublesome kingdom of Antichriste.

The cause is showed also of the destruction of the commonwelth and church of
Rome: Why the Romyshe Church should fall
for that she has caused all nations to drink, and has made them dronken
with wine of wrath of her fornication. And verelye the effect of wine in men
is greateste. Therefore doctrine is compared to it in the Prophets. Therefore
Rome with her unclean and corrupt opinions, has made all people dronken. And
it is called the wine of the wrath. For look with whom God is angry, he
suffers them to err in the way of the Romish church. For in asmoch as God
has revealed the sincere doctrine of life, by his only son, and most
chosen Apostles: and men receive not the same: God is justly offended with
them, and gives them over into a reprobate mind, that they may follow
shameful errors: As Saint Paul also prophisied should come to pass in
the.2. to the These. 2. chapt. This wine is called moreover, the wine of her
fornication, whereby she her self having first played the harlot, is become
now also the Maistres of fornication, and as it were bawd to al others. This
manner of speaking is right well known, even out of the Prophets. Rome ded
not persiste in the doctrine of the Gospel, and of the Apostles, but invented
a new, and that contarry to the Gospel, of the vycar of Christ in earth, The
deuilysh doctrine of Rome.
of the power of keys, of indulgences and pardons, of justification of works
and merits, of satisfactio^s and co^fessions, of worshipping of Images, and
prayeng to saints, of celebrating masses, and worshipping of the sacrament of
ye altar, as they term it, of monkery and vows, and such other innumerable.
This doctrine as Apostolical, ancient, and chresten, she drinks of to all
people: and so plucketh them from Christ, withdraws them from the Gospel,
seduceth them from the oulde christianity, and destroys innumerable souls.
Therefore God powers out to her also of the cup of his wrath, and brings
her also to destruction for ever.

He disswadeth all from the fellowship of the Romysshe church.
And upon this occasion he disswadeth all men from the fellowship of the Romish
church or papistrie, that we have nothing to do with the Romish religion,
unless we will be part takers also of the everlasting pu^nishme^t. He
reasons therefore of the loss and punnishments, and descrybeth greuouse and
horrible pains, if happlie men might so be feared from that ungodliness. The
Angel therefore cries, and that with a loud voice. Wherefore let al
ecclesiastical preachers learn, that they must earnestly, and tirribblie cry
out in this case, that all flee the communion of the Romish or popish church.
I know doubtless what the common people believe and say, that all shall be saved
at the last day, what religion so ever they be of: and namely if any remain
an open papist. But we can another condemn nor absolve any man, set them in
Heaven, or cast them to Hell. God lives a rightouse judge. He alone knows,
who shall be saved or damned. We ought therefore of right, to credit his
judgments. But where as he pronou^ceth openly, that the favorers of the
Romish church shall be damned, who am I to say the contrary: or what men will
pronounce otherwise? Let us hear therefore the sentence of the just judge, and
let us believe the word of the son of God, and let us beware of the popysh
religion.

What it is to worship the beast and his Image, and what it is to receive the
mark in the forehead and on the right hand, I have sufficiently declared
before in the.13. chapt. Brieflye they worship, and receive the mark of the
beast, which do participate with the Popish church or religion: finally which
obey the wicked decrees of the Empire, and persevere in the obedience of the Sea
without repentance. Aretas expounding this place: to worship the beast, says
he, and to receive his seal, is, to esteem Antichrist to be God, and in word
and wo^ke, to set forth such things as he coueteth.

And here in an horrible wise, and with prophetical words, The description of
eternal damnation.
is described everlasting damnation, prepared for them, who forsaking Christ
the savior, cleave unto Antichrist ye distroier. Like as they have dronke^ of
the corrupt doctrine infused of the Pope: so again shall they drink, that the
just lord shall power out of ye cup of wrath. And the wine that is powered in
the cup of Gods wrath, is the strayte, exquisite, and most greuouse
judgment of God, wherein being angry, he inflicteth to the Antichristians
horrible and unspeakable punnishement. A like manner of speech is red in
Jeremy the.25. chapt. And like as pure wine, not delayed, is of most
efficacitie, and pearseth: so the judgment of God, wherein he will proceed
against the Antichristians, shall be most greuouse, such as no tongue be it
never so eloquent can express.

And for a further declaration shortly after follows, what they must drink
of: verily fire and brimstone. Perauenture the Lord alluded to these words of
David in the.11. Psalm. Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares fire brimstone
storm and tempeste, this reward shall they have to drink. He seems moreover
to have alluded to the burning of Sodom, and to the.30. chapt. of Esaye, in
the end whereof is showed, that hell shall be wide enough to receive all the
ungodly, and that matter shall never waunte to nurrishe the fire never to be
quenched. He expresses moreover a greuouse pain, where he says, that they
shall be tourmented: and that in the sight of the lamb, and holy Angels,
that so they may receive condign punnishement for ever of their contempt,
whereby they have despised the lamb, and messages of Angels. Likewise in
the.13. of Luke the Lord says: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teth,
when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and all the prophets in the
kingedome of God, and you to be shut out, etc.

And that same apperteyneth also unto evidence, Hipotiposis.
and to stire up a terror in the minds of all men, where he adds by a
figurative speech: and the smoke of their tourme^t ascends up evermore.
Therefore shall the burning and punnisshement of the ungodly be everlasting, and
never to be finished world without end. And we seem here at this description,
as it were before our eyes to see the flames of eternal damnation carried up on
high: and cast up with them great heaps of smoke, to roll up, and disperse
them far and wide. I remember here that of Virgill.

The wastefull fire began crepe and crack a pace
Til to the top through help of wind it came
Out burst the blase, brake down and did deface
The sky flies full of sparks of smoke and flame.
Everlasting punnisshment.
And that no kind of terror might waunte, most aptely and most abundantly he
expresses the perpetuity of everlasting punnishment, saying: another have they
rest day nor night. So says the Lord in the.9. of Mark. Their fire is
never quenched, and their worm shall never die. They err therefore, which
promise to the damned after many worlds deliverance from their tourmentes.

And not in vain he repeteth, that which he had said before, how they that
worship the beast shall suffer these things. And therefore he repeteth it,
lest, as it happened, we should esteem it as a light matter. They shall be
damneth, says the verity, which receive the Popish culte and religion, and
persevere in the same. Epiphonema.
To all this is annexed an acclamation, or double sentence, notable and
wholesome. For in as much as the wisdom of God did foresee, what adversity
remained for the godly in this world, which they might surely look for at
Antichrists hand, which professed the truth, therefore for a comfort and
consolation he adds: here is the patience of Saints, which is as much as if
he had said: and here shall patience take place, whereby the Saints may
overcome al euilles. Here had we need to have a stout courage, and a sure and
co^staunt mind. In the.12. of Luke the Lord likewise requires patience in
persecutions. Here therefore is counsel given, how the saints should behave
themselves, to wit that they should suffer patiently those euilles, that
Antichrist shall work against them. And there follows an other sentence,
which lights this: here are they that keep the commandments of God, and
faith of Jesus. They shall overcome through patience in so great euilles and
dangers, which keep the commandments of God, the foundation whereof is the
faith of Jesus Christ: which verily put al their trust in christ, hear the
word of the gospel, and keep the commandments of God, not of men. The like
unto these are red in the.24. of Matthew. and the.10. to the Hebrew. Aretas: in
this same time of Antichrist, says he, the patience of Saints is showed.
Tha^ is the speech figured, as it were by a question moved. And who be they
whom he calls patient? After, as though he should answer: they that keep
the commandments of God, and faith of Jesus. For they when perilles approach
will set more by God, than by death and temporal euilles. This says he. I
pray God these things be as faithfully performed of us, as they are easily
understand. The Lord grant us his spirit.

The faithful assuredly and straight way flitte from the corporal death unto
life everlasting. The.lxv. Sermon.
ANd I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me: write, blessed are the dead
which hereafter die in the Lord. Yea the sprite says, that they rest from
their labors. But their works follow them.

Albeit he has oftener tha^ ones spoken of the state of souls in an other
world, Of the certain salvation of ye faithful.
and of ye felicity of the faithful which are killed for religions sake: yet
was it here chiefly requisite to treat of the same matter. For I said, how
many must be killed of the beast. Now leeste they for fear of death should
chouse rather to worship the beast, than to be slain: leest happly having
lost this life, there were no other life to be looked for in the world to come,
most dilligently, and most certainly he treats of the state of souls, and of
the felicity and bless of souls, which as soon as they die, they atchieue,
assuredly and streightwaye flitting out of this world into life everlasting.
But they that know these things, and have conceived them by a true faith, how
they shall undoubtedly slitte from the corporal death into the blessed life, it
can not be chosen but that they shall more boldly contemn the life present.

Most certain tables of salvation are to us exhibited.
And this wholesome doctrine is comprised in three poincts. For first he shows
the certentie thereof: secondly he declares what it is: last he sets forth
and lights the same by circu^staunces. At the first verily he seems to
allude to the manner, accustomably received of al nations, that such things as
they wuld have thought to be certain, and undoubted, they would also commit to
writing to leave them unto posterity. But the certentie and verity or
Authority of the thing is esteemed of thauthours, which first have dispatched
any matters emonges themselves, and after have caused the same to be put in
writing. At this present therefore is God showed to be author. For S. John
says: and I heard a voice from heaven. And by and by adds: ye the spirit
says. Therefore there is no doubt, but that the son of God him self has
spoken and revealed these things. Our lord Jesus Christ.
For him he saw at the beginning of this revelation: after he sees diverse
kinds of Aungelles, but he sees not Christ speaking to him. But he hears
now his voice from Heaven, he hears the spirit speaking, by whom the lord
said, whilst he was yet co^uersaunt in earth with his disciples, that he
would treat and speak al things in the church. Let us believe therefore that
the words which are here recited, by christ's doing, to be a celestial oracle
certain and true, whereof we ought not to doubt. And S. John thapostle and
Evangelist is commanded to write the sayings of Christ from the heavenly
seat. Which thing he does: and so at Christ's commandment sends them unto
al posterie, unto us also and to our offspring even to the worlds end. But if
tables written by the chau^celours or secretaries of kings and Princes, being
notable men, deserve credit: we may much more justly and rightly believe this
writing, which the son of God inditeth from heaven: and that beloved disciple
of Christ, the apostle and Evangelist S. John writes. Thou had ones a
confidence in the Popes bulls (they may well be called bulls, sins they be
more vain than bulls or blabbers in the water) sent from the Sea of Rome,
wherein thou as one assured did put full trust to have remission of sins
and blessed life. And shall thou not now be accounted mad and out of thy
wit, in case thou will not believe this heavenly writing. That other was
indicted by the spirit of Antichrist, by the Pope the man of sin, and child
of perdition: and written of some disceauer infected with Simony and sacrilege,
which in life and manners was filthiness it self. But in John is nothing but
cleanes, puretie, and integrity: and the very son of God which prescribes
these things to S. John, is the very verity and life, This writing is freely
given.
the light of the world and lord of heaven and Earth, of life and death. See
than how safely thou may lain to this heavenly writing, which here is
offered and given thee freely. Thou nedest not to disburce for the same one
farthing. The Pope instituted in the church biyng and selling and deuelish
bargayning about perdo^s and other things, which were plain disceiptes and
illusions, plain mocheries, and open blasphemies, and therefore accursed for
ever: as S. Peter also pronou^ceth in the.8. of the Acts. God him self
diswadeth al men from such tromperies, and bargains wicked and vain, in
the.55. chapt. of Esaye, where he promises again, that he will give to the
godly al plenty of al good things.

And now let us hear, what the writ is, Blessed at the dead which die in
the lord.
and what S. John is commanded from heaven to put in writing. It is a short
sentence, as also in many places, the wisdom of God co^prehe^deth in few
words the true some of blessedness: so providing for our infirmity, that we
need not to complain that the doctrine were over long, which we with our
slender understanding are not able to attain to. The Lord therefore
pronounces, them to be blessed, which die in the Lord, then we must see what
he understands by blessedness, and who they be that die in the lord,
blessedness is that high felicity, which chances to the faithful in an other
world, in the which we shall see God him self as he is, and have the fruition
of him unto a ioyefull, and never lothsomefulnes. We shall live in the same
with all the Saints for ever, and shall have ioynes that can not be expressed
with tunges of men. Of the which shall follow more afterward. They shall
rest from their labors. And more plentifully in the.21. chapt. And they dye
in the Lord, which by faith greffed in Christ, layne to him alone, depend
wholly upon him, only regard him and desire nothing else but him alone. For
they are said to live in Christ, in whom Christ lives by faith, they that
live in Christ do frame their whole life after the will of Christ. And they die
in the lord chiefly and before all, which for the confession of the lords
faith, suffer death, and offer themselves to tourmentes. And not they alone,
but those also, which although they die of the sword of the persecutours, yet
die, when the Lord calls them in the true christen faith. For these are
also blessed, as the Lord in S. John, verily verily I say unto you, if any man
keep my word, he shall not see death for ever. Howebeit they die not in the
lord, which either deny god, that they might not be slain: or trust to their
own merits, and intercessions of Saints, or to other men's works be they
monks, freres, or massemonging priests, and so depart out of this life,
thinking that they shall be helped by other men's works. To be brief, the
verity of the lord pronou^ceth them al blessed and fortunate which depart out
of this world in true faith.

Finally the Lord him self adioyneth a notable declaration of this his brief
sentence. For he set forth the circumstau^ce of the time, When and how
salvation comes to ye dead.
and the manner of the blessedness. For it is wont to be demanded, what time
salvation and felicity happens to the dead? whether incontinently, or after
a time? that is whether our souls flitte by and by and immediately after the
death of the body to the blessed seats? or whether they be intercepted for a
certain time, so that they might be pourged in purgatory, before they enter
into heaven? or whether they be holden with a sleep, and look for the
resurrection of the bodies, to the intent they might than awake, and together
with their bodies enter into heaven: unto all the which things the celestial
oracle aunsweryng, forth with, says he, that is by and by comes unto souls
that same felicity. In the latin copies this place is poincted thus, blessed
are the dead which dye in the lord. Forthwith now says the spirit, that
they may rest from their labors. In like manner reads the Spanish or
Complute^sian copy. But Aretas and the Greek copies, and also the exampler of
Paris is thus poincted, that (...) should be the end of the sentence, as
Erasmus notes. After follows, (...), which is ye, verily, certe^ly says
the spirit. The sense is therefore, that ye faithful being dead shall straight
ways and immediately atchieue salvation. For (...) (which word S. John uses)
signifies, from the very instaunt, from that hour immediately, inco^tine^tly.
This suffers no space betwixt, but expresses that, which we are wont to
note by the dutch phrase, being admonisshed therefore by a divine oracle, and
confirmed by a writ brought from heaven, let us al be assured that the souls
of al faithful do flitte from the bodily death into life everlasting. These
things are confirmed and made plain also by other places of Scriptures
innumerable: I will chouse out only a certain few, and those also the
testimonies of our savior, which is the light of the world, and the word of
life. In the.3. chapter. of S. John he says expressly, that the faithful
are so delivered from death by his cross, as in times paste by the sight of
the brazen Serpent the Israelites were delivered from the deadly sting of
venemouse poison. And plain it is, that they were delivered incontinently and
most fully. In the.5. of John the same says, he has passed from death to
life. Let this place be waied dilligently, and it shall appear the same alone to
satisfy in this matter. In the.6. of John he says openly, and I will reyse
him in the last day. But he reyseth not the bodies only at the last
judgment, but in every man's last day, that is in the death of every one, he
preserves the souls, that they should not perish, or be tormented, etc. We
have in the gospel examples most clear: to wit of Lazarus the beggar, which
was by and by after his death carried up of thaungelles into the bosom of
Abraham: and of the thief, which heard of the lord, this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise: and of Stephen saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit: but
especially of our Savior, saying on the cross, father into thy hands I
commend my spirit, etc.

By these are quite overthrown, what things so ever the monkisshe and
Antichristiane doctrine has builded of purgatory, of tre^talles, and of the
miserable state of souls in an other world. Whereof they made a most
shameful gain. They are also confuted which believe, that souls be mortal,
moreover that souls sleep in another world. Where they ca^ not so much as
here in this infirmity sleep. Therefore you will say it is madness to think,
that souls sleep being quitte of the burden of the body.

But concerning the manner of the blessedness of Saints, they rest from their
labors. Blessedness rest from al labors.
Salvation therefore, is a most ioyeful tranquillity. Away go at ones
diseases, sickenesses, griefs, affections, sorrow, famine, thirste, cold,
briefly all things that vex or trouble men. Rest and tranquillity, joy and
bless come in place. And sins the dead rest from their labors, who can
believe that they be vexed with torments? but leeste any man should never so
little doubt hereof, he annereth a confirmation, (...), ye, or certainly,
verily says the spirit, the dead shall be quiet from al their griefs. Let no
man therefore doubt.

Their works follow them.
And he adds an other thing, that the works of saints follow the^: that is
to say, after that the saints be departed hence, than are they rewarded in
another world, if they have done any thing well, if they have suffered hard
things. For there is a reward prepared for virtues. The which the saints do
hope for and receive without boasting of their own deserte, and not in
conte^pte of the merit of Christ. For they acknoweledge, that God in his
saints crowns his own gifts. And this is spoken of the reward of works
for the consolation of them, which suffer many things in this world. So said
the lord in the Gospel: your reward is plentiful in heaven. And the Apostle
affirms every where, that rewards are prepared for them, that are crucified
here with Christ. And here let us mark dilligently, that these things are
spoken also of the spirit of Christ under the religion of an oath. For the
world dispiseth religiouse persons, and such as suffer for religion, and
obiecteth, that they lose their labor and cost. Co^trarywise the spirit by
an oath avouches, that reward is prepared for virtue.

Follow them.
Let us mark also this, that is said, their works and not other men's, also,
follow them, and are not by others sent after them. Let no man therefore
disceaue him self, let no man think, that after his death there should be
sent to him into purgatory by soul priests a fardell of other men's merits.
Those are not good works, which are done by priests and freres besides and
against Gods word, but prouocations of Gods wrath. And be they not in the
gospel shut out of the kingdom of God, which run to others, to bye them
oil. The Scripture in an other place. Let us do good, whilst we have time,
the time will come that no man can work. Let us watch therefore, and of faith do
good works in deed.

The Judgment of the Lord is described under the paraboles of harvest and
vintage. The.lxvi. Sermon.
ANd I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sittyng,
like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his
hand a sharp sickle. And an other Angel came out of the Temple, criyng with
a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud. Thruste in the sickle and reap,
for the corn of the Earth is ripe. And he that sat on the cloud thruste in
his sickle on the Earth, and the Earth was reaped. And an other Angel came
out of the Temple, which is in Heaven, having also a sharp sickle. And an
other Angel came out from the Altar, which had power over fire, and cried
with a loud voice unto him that had the sharp sickle, and said: thruste in
thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the Earth, for her grapes are
ripe. And the Angel thruste in his sickle on the earth, and cut down the
grapes of the vineyarde of the Earth, and cast them into the great wine fat
of the wrath of God: and the wine fat was trodden without the city. And the
blood came out of the fat, eue^ unto the horse bridelles, by the space of a
thousand and six hondreth furlonges.

The vengeance of god against ye Antichristians.
Now goes he to ye description of gods judgment, especially against the
Antichristians, and against all the ungodly. This part might be joined with the
matter followyng, and chapters followyng, as that which is of the same
argument. And it apperteyneth to the consolation and confirmation of the
faithful, persecuted of Antichrist. There be that think, how there shall never
be any judgment. How so ever therefore they oppress their neighbors, they
think never to feel any displeasure of that matter. Moreover the faithful are
tempted also, whilst they see the wicked flourish, and themselves to wither
daily. Therefore they think also that the lord carries ouerlong. Ye more they
expostulate with the lord, and say: wha^ shall there be an end of injuries?
if Christ will come to judgment, why does he differ it so long, and to so
great molestyng of his? The lord therefore shows now, that the judgment
shall certainly be: and shall be than, what time all things shall be ripe: to
wit when the iniquities of the Amorrheans shall be complete, and the measure
of iniquity filled. When wicked men therefore are waxed ripe, the Lord will
come to judge. In the mean time we must abide in constancy and patience. As
husband men tarry for harvest and vintage. If any through impatiencie reuolte,
he is not allowed of the Lord: as the Apostle alleges out of the Prophet in
the.10. chapt. to the Hebrews. And as we may have a desire and a longyng
after harvest and vintage, so may we not expostulate with God, because he
tarieth longer tha^ our wish is: likewise we ought not to contend with the
same, why he comes so late unto judgment. And like as harvest and vintage
are certainly looked for, and come, so without all doubt God will punnish the
wicked, and save the godly. And these are verily as it were tastes of all that
follow plentifully and are more expressly declared: and are annexed to the
fourmer matters, for that they apperteyne to the consolation of the godly.

And to the intent al things might be more manifest, by parables brought in,
be sets forth al things to be seen before our eyes. And he uses in deed
two parables borrowed out of the Prophets and doctrine of the Gospel. For the
prophets full often do figure the judgment of God by harvest and vintage. Certes
in the.3. of Joel the lord says: I will sit in the vale of Iosaphat to
judge al nations. Thruste in the sickle, for harvest is ripe, etc. And it is
also most known, what is red touching the same matter in the story of the
Gospel. We must therefore write out these things more inwardely into our
hearts, and fear God, and abide his redemption in patience.

First is treated the parable of harvest, than the parable of vintage: Harvest.
both two show that the Lord will be judge and that in his most dew time,
against all those, which either think there shall be no judgment, or
expostulate with the Lord that he comes so slowely and late, etc. And first
in deed is described the owner of the harvest, the Lord him self and judge
Jesus Christ. He is said to be like unto the son of man: not for that he
is not now the very son of man, and for that he shall not come unto judgment
in the very humane nature, which he has ones taken of us, and never put it of
(for he is verily the son of man, The description of ye Judge Jesus christ.
and remains on the right hand of the father: and shall verily come in the
humane nature to judge the quick and the dead) but he seems to have alluded
to Daniel, and to have expressed his phrase of speech, saying: I looked in the
mightly vision, and lo, there came one in the clouds as it were the son of man, etc. Where we read also the description of the judgment against the
beast. And therefore he has here made mention also of a cloud: and I saw a
white cloud, and one sitting on the cloud, etc. Moreover the Aungelles in the
acts say, so he shall come, as ye have seen him go up into heaven. And they
saw him taken up, and a cloud to receive him, and conueye him out of their
sight. Therefore shall he come again in a cloud unto judgment. We read
oftentimes in the Psalms, that God sits on a white cloud. By the way
therefore is signified the deity of the judge. Therefore is this judge very
God and very manne, the Savior of the faithful, the revenger and judge of the
infideles. We are sent therefore by S. John to the.7. chapt. of Daniel.

A golden crown on his head.
Then he wears a Golden crown on his head: not that there is any corruptible
gold in Heaven, but for corruptible men so he speaks, that they may
understand their judge to be the high king: and may gather thereof, that no
man is able to resist the power of this king. For otherwise our Lord has no
need of any corruptible gold. A sharp sickle.
Finally our lord here has a sickle, and that right sharp. Whereby is
signified his judgment excedyng strayte, and destruction of the wicked. In
the.3. of Matthew. The judgment of the Lord is compared to a fan, of blessed
John. He adds, that the axe is laid at the root of the tree: whereby he
signified that certain judgment was at hand or rather destruction.

Corn ripe to ye sickle.
Now follows an exposition of the proceeding of the judgment, and he
perseuereth in the parable. For he speaks as if a servant retournyng home
out of the feldes, did show unto his Master which looked for the hour of
harvest, that the Corn was now ripe (the hardenes of the grain is a token of
rypenes) and that it is time to be reaped. For else it is no need to admonish
him yt knows al thing of any thing, that he reme^breth not: much less of the
hour of judgment which none of thaungels knows, but the father alone.
Therefore we ascribe this wholly to the parable: and we understand that a certain
hour of judgment is appoincted, which when it shall come, the godly with out
delay shall be delivered, and the ungodly condemned. An other Angel, says
he, came forth. For before we heard how diverse came forth. This cries with a
loud voice, as one that will tell of a matter most great and certain, and to
be declared in the church with excedyng great out cries, to the comfort of the
faithful, which ought nothing to doubt of the judgment, and to the terror of
ye wicked, which seem to conte^ne the same. And this criyng angel comes out of
the temple. For we heard before, that S. John saw a temple in heaven. And
where the crier of the judgment comes out of the temple, it signifies, that
no unrighteous of ye judge is here to be imagined. For the temple is
consecrated to holiness and rightuousenes, and is called the house of God.
Justly therefore he judges, and in just time he judges, and justly
executes al things. Thangel bids ye judge do that thing, which he of
himself was about to do. Thrust in the sickle, says he, and reap. Two
causes are alleged. First, for the hour is come, that thou should reap.
Therefore a certain hour of judgment is appointed, which when it comes, the
judgment shall be most certainly. And it is commen for thee, says he, for all
iudgime^t is given to the son. Than, for the corn of the earth is ripe. As
though he should say: the iniquity of earthly men is grown up to the highest,
therefore is it reason that it should be cut down. And God alone knows, when
the iniquity of the Earth is fulfilled, etc. A most quick judgment.
But when it shall come thereunto, there shall need no great preparation,
deciding or pondering of causes. At one word he finisheth the judgment, and
the execution of the same, and as it were swalloweth up and deuoureth the whole
earth in a moment, saying: herewith he thrust in his sickle, which sat upon
the cloud, on ye earth, and the earth was reaped. The rest of the things which
seem to belong here unto, take out of the.13. chapt. of Math. And that which he
has said hitherto, he repeteth, and beats in by an other parable. For by
this he shadoweth ye same, which the other parable did commend. That plenty
makes for the playner evidence, and beats in most dilligently the certentie
and verity of the judgment, leest herin we should doubt anything, and waver
with the unfaithful world. The parable is taken of vintage. The same is used
very often of the prophets, speaking of the destruction of any nation. And the
Lord also in the gospel compares his people to a vine. And the Angel holds
in his hand a sharp sickle. He represents a figure of Christ, which has al
power of judgment alone. A sharp sickle, is the straight judgment, as was
spoken of the sickle before. This Angel comes out of the temple also, to
wit a judge most rightuouse. Unto him cries an other Angel, which had
power over fire, which comes out from the Altar. For before we heard, that
there is an altar in the temple, and that under this Altar do rest the souls
of the blessed Martirs. Here therefore is fygured, Vengeance upon the ungodly.
that God does now remember the bludshed of his servants, which for the
profession of the only Altar (that is Christ the priest and only sacrifice)
were slain, and now to proceed to take vengeance, The angel having power
over fire.
hitherto long delayed. Therefore this Angel is said to have power over fire.
Fire many times in the Psalms fignifieth Gods vengeance. This Angel
therefore is here, as it were Master of execution, and captain of vengeance.
For Angels in Daniell also, as Gods ministers, ar said to have rule over
things: not that we should worship and honor these ministers, but the Lord
that works by them. The sun and moon are the lights of the world: but
therefore no wiseman will worship them. Here is signified plainly, that
vengeance is certainly prepared for them which shed innocent blud on the
earth, and that this vengeance shall chiefly be executed in the end of this
world. Albeit that he punnysh nevertheless greuousely before the end also
here in earth, namely parricides: in so much that the Psalmograph says, men
of blood shall not live half their time. etc.

And as in the parable of harueste, harueste was finished with a short
sentence: So is here also vintage ended at few words. For so soon as the
ungodly shall see Christ in the clouds, with the printes of his wounds, and
his Saints with him, whom they have contemned, hated, persecuted and slain:
they will gather straight ways, that they by their just desert must be allotted
with Deuylles, whom they have followed and served. Therefore shall there need no
long discussing of the matter. Every man's conscience shall accuse him, and the
sins of every man shall be manifest to al creatures: The ungodly shall stand
before the judge with great confusion, in utter contempt, in pain and fear,
and sorrows not to be expressed, and shall go straight ways into pains and
tourmentes that shall never have end. See the.3. and.5. chapt. of the book of
wisdom
Hereof I say, it behooves often times to make mention, hereof it becomes many
times to warn all men, that they may beware in time, and take heed to
themselves.

How beit S. Ihon himself at few words fygureth the everlasting damnation
and vengeance, which God executes upon his enemies. A wine fat without the
City.
And he fameth a wine press or a winefat, that he may so tarry in the allegory,
and that made without the city. And by exposition he calls it, the great
wynefat of Gods wrath. For the same is hell, or the place of pu^nishment and
condemnation. Into this wynefat, shall be gathered the clusters of the Earth,
or grapes of the earth, I mean the earthly, and ungodly men. And the city of
God, is heaven it self, the seat of the blessed, which shall afterward be
descrybed most aboundauntly in the.21. chapter. But that wine press is set
without the City. For in an other place of the Gospel the Lord says also,
that the wicked must be cast out, into the uttermost darkness, where is
weping and gnashing of teth.

But this wynefat is rightly called the wynefat of Gods ire. For the wrath of
God is executed therein: and they with whom God is angry for their sins, are
shut up therein, that there they may according to their demerits, be tormented
and vexed for ever, and without end. And he calls it great, for that the
place is wide enough to receive all the ungodly. As also Esaye has admonished
in the end of the.xxx. chapter. Others read of the great wrath of God.

There is added, that out of the fat or wine press there runs no wine,
but blud, and that in most plenty. Which he shadoweth by a maruelouse and
horrible Hypperbole. The blood flowed far and broad, by the space of a thousand
and six hundredth furlongs. Again it was very deep. For it came up to the
brydles of the horses, of them I mean, which went and wrastled in the blood,
to wit in their own blood. By the which Hyperbolical speech is signified, that
the multitude of the ungodly shall be greatest, and that God will most
aboundauntly revenge that unmeasurable blud, which the wicked have spilte in
earth. They were delighted whilst they lived in earth, with wars, slaughter,
persecutions and martirdomes: Therefore will God most just, power unto them in
an other world blud enough, Thou have thursted for blood, dri^ke blud
in so much that being drowned in their own blud up to the chin, they may seem
to bath them in their own blood. And here we must remember, the horses
prepared to battle of who^ we spoke in the.9. chap. shall be drowned in
everlasting torments. Thus, thus at ye last will the lord avenge himself upon
his enemies. Let us call upon him, and abide patiently and valeauntly. The
Lord grant us his grace.

The Angels of seven plagues are brought forth. Moreover the triumph and praise
of Christ's holy Maritrs is described. The.lxvij. Sermon.
The.15. Chapter.
AND I saw an other sign in heaven great and wonderful. Seven Angels, having
ye seven last plagues. For in them is fulfilled the wrath of God. And I saw
as it were a glassye sea mingled with fire, and them that had gotten victory of
the beast, and of his Image, and of his mark, and of the nombre of his name,
stand on the glassy Sea, having the harpes of God: and they sung the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the lamb, saying: great and
maruelouse are thy works Lord God almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou
King of Sainctee. Who shall not fear (O Lord) and glorify thy name? For thou
only art holy, for all gentiles shall come and worship before the, for thy
judgments are made manifest.

The argument of the fifte part.
Upon occasion of harueste and vintage expounded in the last part of the
fourmer vision, is annexed the fifte part of this godly work, which
represe^teth unto us the fourth vision of this work, which some make the
fifte. The same is of the judgments of God, it has two parts: wherefore it
might also be divided into mo visio^s, but we had rather use fewer. For first
he discourses most largely of the pains or tourments prepared of God, and to
be executed upon Antichrist his members, and all the ungodly: here is treated
of the judgment of the whore of Babylon, of the destinies and ruin of Rome,
and the church of Rome, of the reioicing and song of saints, of the coming of
the judge unto judgment, of the pain and everlasting destruction of all
wicked. And these are entreated in the.15.16.17.18.19. and.20. chap. Than also
he reasons most excelle^tly of the reward of saints, and of the everlasting
filicitie, through out ye whole.21. chap. and a good part of ye.22. every where
is set open hell it self, and heaven it self: And is given us in manner to look
in this flesh mortal, even into very hell it self and into the very palace of
Heaven. Another shall you find any where in all the Scriptures with a continual
treatise so plenteouse a disputation of the judgments of God, of the
torments of the wicked, and of the felicity and joys of the godly, as in
this present.

And full necessary is this treatise especially in this our last and
ungracious world, A most ple^tiful and dilligent treatise of the judgments of
God.
wherein men neglectyng the spirit of God, are become like brute beasts
altogether carnal, regard the flesh, and wholly depend thereof. Happy are all the victoriouse, welthie, honorable and gloriouse Antichristians: miserable are
the pore and despised true christians, and subject to the injuries and
persecutions of al men. Therefore do the carnal men esteem al things of the
present fortune, and cry it out that their religion and conversation pleases
God, and the Christians to displease. The godly are here also grievously
tempted, as they were also in times past, read Psalm. 73. and the.1. chapt. of
Abacucke. The ungodly promise themselves, that they shall reign for ever: at
the length also they conte^ne the judgments of God, another think they that
ever it will come to pass that they shall be punnisshed. The talk of
punnishementes to be divised of melancholicke persons, and to be uttered of
malice: and therefore they say and think them not to be regarded: but to be
merry in this world. Therefore it behooved the place of Gods judgments to be
most largely and dilligently decided, and to be set as it were before the eyes
of the hearers: to the end al might rightly understand, what should be
assuredly the end of good and evil. But the punnishme^tes of the ungodly are
diverse, to wit of this life present, and to come. And the punnishmentes of
this present life are almost innumerable: and the tourmentes of the life to
come are eternal and unspeakable: and as there is no comparison betwixt the
paincted and true fire: so is there none betwixt the punnishementes of this
present life and that to come. But in case men would ernestly believe, that
unspeakable joys and everlasting torments are prepared of God for good and
evil: doubtless al would sin less and serve God more dilligently. But let us
see now, what is the treatise of S. John concerning the same.

The original of the doctrine of the judgments of God.
First he shows the original of al things that follow, not to be earthly, but
heavenly. For he sees an other token in heaven. He says an other, for that
in the.12. chapt. we heard that mention was made of an other certain sign. And
he calls that a sign or token, which signifies an other thing, and
therefore not to be considered of it self: but in as much as it brings into
knoweledge an other certain thing, and that much greater tha^ it shows at the
first sight. He calls this sign, that is to wit, that same vision, great
and maruelouse. For the judgments of God are greatest, and most wonderful.
Whilst they are executed, the ungodly marvel, which had thought such things
should never have comen to pass: the godly also marvel at the great power of
God, his most just righteousness, and his ripenes and faythfulnes in
delivering and saving his people. Than he declares, what sign was showed him
in Heaven, and by that celestial vision: he saw seven Angels, having in seven
cups, plages. That is, he perseyued God prepared and furnisshed with power
divine, wherewith he both might and would send plages and condign
punnishementes, as well upon Antichrist him self, as upon his members, and all
the ungodly men in Earth, for their wickedness committed against God. Seven
angels and seven plages.
And as we have many times warned you in this book, the seventh nombre, is the
no^bre of fulness. Wherefore God has ministers enough and enough, by whose
service he may plague and distroye the ungodly. And therefore seven plagues,
are all manner of plagues. Temporal plagues are abundantly recited in the 26.
of Leuit. and.28. of Deuter. Rich is the Lord, and in everlasting plagues of
most diverse kinds also. For the Scripture in certain places reherseth a
gnawyng worm, a fire unquenchable, weping and gnasshing of teth, outward
darkness and many other of like sort. But these seven plagues he calls the
last: and immediately shows the reason, for in them is the wrath of God
fulfilled. For on those last and most corrupt ages the Lord will power out
his plague, and that the plagues of his just wrath, and shall power them out
most fully to the end, and shall execute his full wrath against the ungodly,
for evermore.

Yet now he suspendeth a while that narration begone of the Angels masters
of the plagues: The joys and triu^phes of ye godly.
and places or sends before the great joys of the blessed Martirs,
triumphs, song of praise reioycynge and thanks geuynge. And this Joy is
interlased here in the treatise of punnishementes, for the consolation of the
faithful, that they should know themselves delivered from punnishmentes. And
if it fortune, whilst the wicked are punnisshed, that any displeasure touch
the^ also (as it can not be chosen, but the wicked being plaged, some
disco^moditie must also arrise unto the faithful) that they may understand
yet, that the dangers of the disco^modities, must with the excellent
abou^daunce of joys be recompensed. For hereby is signified, how the godly
rejoice, whilst the lord executes his justice. To be also the chaungeable
course of things, that those that have ones wept in the world, should now be
glad and ioyefull, according to the saying of our savior in the.16. of John.
Morouer it behooved by the testimony of all Saints to be declared to the
Saints that dwell in Earth, that the judgments of God be rightouse and
true: which thing understand, questions and sundry mutininges against God do
cease.

First he sees them which overcame Antichrist, and have had nothing to do
with him: as we say in dutch, for this I suppose be signified by that
plentiful rehearsal of certain members (the declaration whereof is setforth
before) in heaven, not in some dortour, or no where, as some men gather. He
saw I say, in heaven the blessed souls stand upon a glassy See, A glassy
See mixed with fire.
mixed with fire. And in an other place I have told you, that the Sea figureth
the world, by reason of the rage and unstableness thereof. Certainly Daniel so
takes in the.7. chapt. And it is called glassy because of the frailetie and
bricklenes. For worldely things shine, but they are soon broken. Whereupon it
is said that wordely things are as brickel as glass: which whilst they
shine, break. And not with out cause is fire mixed with worldely things. For
the Saints, whilst they be conuersaunt in Earth, feel always in a manner the
fire of affliction. Whereof spoke S. Peter. 1. Pet. 4. And they stand upon a
glassy See mingled with fire. For co^querours tread upon the world, and upon
all the tourmentes and mockeries of the world, as triu^phyng over all worldely
things. The Prophet in the.66. Psalm. brings in the Saints singyng a
ioyeful song unto God, and emonges other things saying, thou have brought us
into snares, thou have laid tribulations upon our back, thou haste set men in
our necks. We have passed through fire and water, and thou have brought us out
into a place of relief. Therefore do there follow alterations in an other
world. Wherefore Aretas expou^dyng this place: the glassy See, says he, seems
to intimace nothing else, than by the Sea verily the multitude, and by the
glass the brightness, by fire the puretie of them, which are worthy that
blessed life. And certainly the same words in diverse respects may signify
diverse things, and make the sense agreeable.

Hitherto we have heard, that the saints are in heaven, where they triumph
over the world vanquisshed: but now we shall hear more clearly, what they do
in heaven, and how they singe unto the lord a song of thanks and praises,
which fully agrees with the Psalm. 66. The harps of God.
And he attributes to the blessed martirs harpes, as he did to the Elders.
These he calls of God, as you would say divine and celestial, mete to set
forth the praises of God. For a celestial Iubeley is signified whereof is
spoken in the.5. chapt. He adds moreover, to express the music: and they
singe. And declares also the manner of their singyng, The song of Moses and
the la^be.
the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb: Therefore
this song of the Saints, is reioycyng ditty, triumphaunt and of thanks
geuyng. For like as in times paste Marie with the company of virgins
Israeliticall, at the appoinctement of Moses sange a song, when the Israelites
were delivered out of the bondage of Aegypte, and Pharao was drowned in the red
Sea with his whole army: whereof you may read more in the 14. and.15. chapt.
of Exodus So the blessed souls in Heaven praise God, which has delivered them
from Satan, Antichrist, and the world. And the song of the La^be is the
christian thanks giving, by the which the virtue of Christ and his
redemption, is praised of the Saints. For like as the old fathers after the
eating of the Paschalle lamb made a iubiley, and gave God thanks. So the
blessed Saints now infraunchised with the full liberty of the children of
God, give thanks unto Christ their deliverer.

Finally recites the order and form of their song. King of Saints.
God is highly commended herein, which is called the Lord, God, almighty,
King of Saints, as for whom the Saints war, by whom also they be
governed, and which defends, mayneteyneth and keeps the Saints. And he is
called holy, in whom is no spotte, no iniquity. And before all things they
praise his works, which they call great and maruelouse. These are manifest
in Heaven and in Earth. They declare the power, wisdom, and justice of God.
Therefore they infer by and by: that the ways, that is the considerations of
God, which he follows in governing and doing of things, be true and just.
For he disceaueth not, he does no man wrong. Therefore God is just in
punnishing the Antichristia^s, and deliueryng his. For although he seem to
neglecte his, yet keeps he faith to the godly: as a king that never
neglects his.

Now they allege, what it becomes all men in the Earth to do also: it is
reoson that al men fear thee, and glorify thee in all things, another to
accuse and murmr at thy judgments. There is added an other reason for he
alone is holy, without sin, and with out spotte. None of all the creatures
has this. Although many gentiles now contemn God, yet shall they ones come
and worship: shall know their own filthiness, and the holiness and rightuousenes
of God. For the justice, and judgment of God, which are not yet revealed, and
therefore are contemned, shall be ones revealed, that all the godly of al
nations may attribute glory to the rightuouse God. These things verily prepare
also the reader and hearer to the treatise now followynge concerning the
judgments of God, and pu^nishmentes of the ungodly. The lord open the eyes of
our minds, that we may see these things with fruicte plentiful.

The seven Angels are described, coming forth to execute the seven plagues.
The.lxviij. Sermon.
ANd after that I looked, and behold, the Temple of the Tabernacle of testimony
was open in Heaven, and the seven Angels came out of the Temple, which had
the seven plagues, clothed on pure and bright linen, and having their breasts
gyrded with golden girdels. And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven
Aungelles, seven golden vialles full of the wrath of God, which lives for
evermore. And the temple was full of smoke, for the glory of God, and for his
power: and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven plagues of
the seven Angels were fulfilled.

The fruictes of the treatise of Gods judgments.
He retourneth now to the description of the judgments of God, from the which
he had made a little digressio^. This treatise has much fruicte. For the
judgments of God, be the punnishmentes or pains of the wicked, the
testimonies of Gods rightuousenes and verity. Again the godly are herwith
confirmed in their hope. For they see that one Jot does not fall from the
words and threateninges of God, although he be of long suffering, winketh at
them long, and even seems to favor and to spare the ungodly. The godly
therefore perceive that their hope is not vain. They learn also to fear God,
and to pray continually, leeste being dronken with the pleasures and
felicities of this world, they reuolte from God to ungodliness. Finally the
wicked are feared with pains, are provoked to repetaunce which whilst they
refuse, they feel undoubtedly plagues, as Pharao felt.

The description of ye seven Aungelles.
But before the Angels power out the cups of plages received, they are most
gallau^tly and dilligently described. And is showed, from whence they came out:
that is what is the original of the judgments of God. They come out of the
temple set open, and that out of the temple of the Tabernacle of witness, which
is in heaven. For Moses saw a temple on the mount, and that also in heaven,
after the similitude whereof he was commanded of God to make the tabernacle of
witness. Therefore was the tabernacle of witness facioned and builte after the
shape exhibited and seen in heaven, which the blessed Apostle to the Hebrews
calls (...) to wit the very example or patron. For it was said to Moses, see
that thou make every thing according to the Patron, which was showed thee on
the Mount. Which thing Moses did accordingly. But such things as came forth
of the Tabernacle of witness made in earth, seemed to the Israelites just and
holy. Hereof were ared the oracles and aunswers of God, which it was not
lawefull to speak against. Therefore when we hear now that the very
judgments of God against the wicked world, Thangels come forth of ye temple.
pains and punnishmentes come out of the true temple it self, the patron I
mean and that celestial, who should herafter doubt that all the judgments of
God, wherewith he plageth the ungodly, be sacred and holy? And whilst ye
ungodly are plaged, that we must think nothing else, but that a sentence as it
were an oracle is comen or pronounced from heaven, which it is unlawful to
gain say? to conclude, the divine judgments do proceed out of the very
tr^ne of God, wherefore they can not but be most holy. Otherwise we shall hear
in the.21. chapt. that there is no temple in heaven. These be therefore Tipes
and figures, not matters true and permanent: but after they have signified
this, for the which they were instituted, passing and fadyng away.

Hereunto also apperteyneth the apparel of Angels, Aungelles clothed in
brighte white line^.
that hereof ^oe may also esteem the judgments of God. They are said to be
clothed in pure lynen, or clean and white, or bright ((...)) whereby is
signified, that the judgments of God, are unspotted and bright. For we have
heard that these things which S. John saw were signs. Therefore we may not
Imagine carnal things in heavenly matters, but spiritually to expound, such
things as in the sign seem to be as it were corporal. The garment in this
world is changed with the state of things. For they use white garments in
victories and triumphs, black at burialles and mourninges, red in battle.
Here is signified therefore that the judgments of God are most pure, and that
God ouercometh and triumphs over the ungodly. At the resurrection and
ascension of our lord Angels appeared in white garments, and shyning bright,
to signify the glory of Christ: Now is the very breast girded with a girdel,
and that in deed with a golden girdell. Gold is a token of pureness. In the
breast is the seat of affections. The girdell byndeth, moreover prepares for
the journey. Therefore it betokens, that the judgments of God are prepared,
and in a readiness: the same to waunt affections, that is to say, not to be
pronounced or done of envy or malice, love or favor, but to be just,
moderate and upright.

One of the beasts gives vials.
And one of the beasts gave unto the seven Angels reuengers and punnishers
seven bolles, and the same full of gods wrath. Now although God needs not ye
help of creatures, another receives any thing of them, as wau^ting any thing:
yet sins he made not his creatures in vain, and does things in order, al
creatures doubtless (for I said in the.4. chapt. how by the beasts the
universality of creatures is signified) bestow their labor against the
wicked, and what so ever they have of God (and they have al things) at his will
and commandment, they imploye willyngly and franckely to execute the
judgments of God. Thus fire falling from heaven upon Sodom and the cities
about it, did minister the plage or cup of Gods wrath to the Aungel revenger.
So the water overwhelmed Pharao and his host. So the Earth opening swallowed
up the company of Chore, Dathan and Abyron. etc. Thus the Armies of the
gentiles imploye themselves to take punnishement of the ungodly. The walls of
Jericho fall, the hayle distroyeth the Chananites. Thus God without any
difficulty punnisheth his enemies, seeing al creatures are ready to aid and
assiste. And the vial or cup is of gold. For again is signified the
justice and equity of Gods judgments. And where God is called a reue^ger
living for ever: his eternity and majesty is signified, which never the
transitory things of this world, and humane infirmities shall overcome. In
the sight of the living God, all the wicked shall fall, and perish everlastingly.

After this the Apostle sees, The temple full of smoke.
the temple filled with smoke for the majesty of God, and for his power. That
smoke is a sign of Gods presence, it appears by many places of the Scripture,
but chiefly in the.8. chap. of the.3. book of Kings. Than is it also a token
of Gods wrath. For Aretas: smoke, says he, is a toke^ of Gods wrath:
according as it is said, smoke ascended in his wrath. And another is smoke with
out fire, nor fire without smoke, etc. Morouer smoke hurts the eyes, and
makes them blind. So in Esaye the.6. The temple of God, which Esaye sees, is
filled with smoke. And at this present not only apeareth the presence of god,
and of his wrath to be signified: but also to be figured, that the judgments
of God be unsearchable, so that the things which he him self reuealeth not to
us, we can not atteyne to. For his majesty is infinite, and his power passes
al things. Primasiu, Bisshoppe of Vtica in Affricke expoundyng this place:
Think, says he, that same to be signified by smoke, that all men can not
penetrate the secrettes of Gods judgments, and that the eyes and minds of
mortal men shall at the contemplation of the plagues inflicted dasel, gropyng
in darkness: which now he determines to utter, and unto the final end of
the same, he affirms, the smoke to abide still in the temple. Thus says he.

Now follows that seems to expound the same: No man could enter into the
temple.
and no man could enter into the Temple, etc. But certain it is by the
verity of the evangelical and Apostolical doctrine, that the souls passing
out of the body before the end and last judgment, go right into the blessed
seats, and have there the fruition of the joys promised of god so true.
Therefore is an other thing signified, to wit that before the end of all things
the saincces can not clearly see all the judgments of God. For here we see by a
glass, there face to face, and shall know God him self, and the verity and
manner of his judgments. Primasius, another could any man enter into the
temple: that is could penetrate ye secret, til the seven plages of the seven
Angels were finished. Wherefore the Psalmographer: This, says he, is labor
before me, til I may enter into the sanctuary of God, and may understand the
conclusion of matters, etc. Here is signified therefore, that Saints before
the judgment shall not know the secret mysteries of Gods judgments. Let it
than suffice us, that he him self has vouchsafed to open to us: for the rest
let us believe, that the lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all his
works. To him be glory.

The three fourmer Aungelles power out their vialles upon the Antichristians,
and all the ungodly. The.lxix. Sermon.
The.16. chapter.
ANd I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels: go
your ways, power out your vialles of wrath upon the Earth. And the first went,
and powered out his vialle on the earth, and there fell a noisome sore botche
upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them that worshipped
his Image. And the second Angel shed out his vialle on the Sea, and it
turned as it were into the blood of a dead man: and every living thing died in
the Sea. And the third Angel shed out his vialle upon the rivers and
fountains of waters, and they turned to blood, and I heard an angel of
waters saying: lord which art and waste, thou art rightuouse and holy,
because thou haste given such judgments: for they shed the blood of Saints,
and Prophets, and therefore have thou given the^ blood to drink: for they are
worthy. And I heard an other Angel out of the Altar saying: even so lord
God almighty, true and rightuouse are thy judgments.

After he has spoken in general of the rightuouse judgments of God, he
proceeds now particularly by the seventh nombre, and declares at large the
plagues of God, The plagues of Egypt.
which in this world also he inflicteth to the wicked, but chiefly the
Antichristians. This place answers to the same, or at leest has many
things like to it, which in Moses book of Exodus from the.7. chapt. to the.12.
For in all those whole chapters are described the ten plagues of God, wherewith
for sin he plaged king Pharao and the whole realm of Egypt. These plagues
are comprised in goodly verses of D. Musculus our worshipful Godfather.

The water tourneth into blood,
The frogs defile all that is good.
The duste brought forth the scrallyng lise,
Than came the fly a new divise.
The pestilence, botches, and hayle, A huytaine.

Locustes and darkness did assail.
At last was slain and quite forlorn,
All that in Aegypte first was borne.
These plagues are expounded also in the.150. Psalm. In the.15. chapt. of
Exodus the Lord says: if thou will hear diligently the voice of thy God, The
cure of plages.
and wilt do that is right in his sight, and wilt keep all his statutes, I
will send upon thee no disease, which I sent upon the Egyptians, for I am
the Lord, healyng thee. We learn therefore of the treatise of the plagues of
God, to fear God, and to walk in his commandments. Another is it repugnaunt
to this sentence of God, that we read, how Job, and other holy men, and
walknng in the commandments of God, were vexed with greuouse diseases. For
these are private and are not chiefly inflicted for sin, but for the exercise
of faith, and increase of virtues.

Men for the most part ascribe the causes of plagues to the stars, and to
other matters: The true cause of plagues.
and therefore do not turn to the Lord strikyng them, in amendment of life
most evil, but we are taught by the treatise of Moses, which we alleged out
of Exodus and by this present disputation of S. John, that God himself
punnisheth the sins and wickedness of men, although he use the service of
men and elements, unto whom as to the next causes men impute the evils
received, which they suffer justly of God for their sins. A voice out of
the Temple.
For the which cause at this present is heard a voice, not out of the air,
or from the Earth, but from the Temple of the Lord true, just and holy,
commaundyng the Angels to come out, and power their vialles upon the heads
of men. The wicked therefore are plagued of God him self. But a vialle is no
other thing, (I spoke of the word in the.5. chapt.) but the just judgment of
God, or vengeance of men deserved. Angels power out their vialles, so often
as men are punnisshed with plages through means of God appoincted. And that
voice which is heard from the temple, is great. For no man can resist God,
nor infringe his decree. When he commands, al creatures do obey.

The first Angel shedeth his vialle.
But whilst this first Angel, executour of gods judgment, powers out his
plague upon men, there fell (...) a noisome sore botch upon men. This plage
answers to the sixte plage of Aegipt. And that botche signifies a canker, a
fistula, and swelling sores or boyles, but chiefly the pockes of Jude, which
others call the disease of Naples, some the French pockes, the pockes first.
and some the Spanish: verily for that in the war of Naples (which was made
by the French men and Spanyardes in the year of our Lord. 1494.) they came up
first in the camp of whores, which infected the Army. Which Mainardus the
Physician discourses at large. But how so ever diverse and venemouse sores
do infecte many greuousely, yet do the French pockes chiefly corrupt the
Abbayes of Monks and Nu^nes, and colleges of priests, above others. For they
geuyng themselves to most filthy fornication, do abhor and deteste in
others holy matrimony, and therefore receive thereof, the reward of their
iniquity. Therefore is it said here expressly, that the Antichristia^s should
be with this disease vexed, or rather pu^nished. Ye shall find some, whose
face is eaten with this disease. All whoremongers and aduouterers for the most
part are troubled with this plage. Job also the excellent servant of God was
covered with sores and boyles, but by the singular counsel of God, as I
touched also before. Therefore it is no marvel, though some time very good men
free from the uncleanness of whoredom, be also infected with this disease.

The second Angel shedeth his vial on the Sea: pestilence. ^
and therefore the blood of living things, became all to gether such as is in
dead men, to wit corrupt, and turned into matter. Whereupon all that lived
in the sea died. The Sea is evermore stirring, and variable: full rightly
therefore by this the world is signified, or inconstant men in the world:
these for their sins, are infected with the Pestilence, and dye in great
plenty. In the words is ye figure Synekdoche, where every living soul is said
to dye. This second plague answers to the fifte of Aegipt. Under this plague
we comprise all kind of Pestilences and plagues. Ezechias also was taken with
the plague: as many Godly men also die of the Pestilence, but by the singular
counsel of God.

The third Angel shed his vial on the ryuers and fountaynes of waters, which
were by and by, turned into blood. Blood. 3.
This answers to the first plague of Aegipte. The Aegiptians had drowned in
Nilus, the new borne bodies of infants, and had oppressed the innocent
Israelites: Therefore were they worthy to drink of Nilus. For water, blood.

Water otherwise in the Scripture signifies doctrine, as in Ezechiell and
Zachary. Therefore do the ryuers and fountaynes of waters, signify
ecclesiastical preachers and Princes, whom God has given to the people for a
defense and relief. Certenlie Saint Peter calls false prophets wells
waunting water. 2. Peter. 2. In the.17. chapter we shall hear, that by waters
are understand people. This therefore is the plague of God, the Princes of the
people, and preachers of peace, are become the authors and ringleaders of
rebellion and of wars: In the which they fall and kill one an other, which
shede the blood of Saints. And albeit that in wars the godly are also
plaged, yet knows the Lord how to requyte their pains, and to ease their
sorrows. Saint Austen decydeth this matter at large, in the first book of
Christen doctrine. But if we look upon the variable History of Italy,
France, Germanye, and Hungarye, and of other Realms, that glory to be called
Christians: we shall find them to have been the blasing firebrandes of wars,
which ought of duty to have been the Princes of peace. Wars stirred up by
Popes
And like as the Lord says in the Gospel, there must not a Prophet die any
where else, than at Jerusalem: So must there no war be moeued, but by Popes of
Rome, Bishops and Prelates. I will only resyte a few. Pope Gregorye the.2.
through sedition, expulsed the emperor Leo Isauricus out of Italy. Pope Stephen
brought in Pipine King of France, into Italy against the Lumbardes. The same
ded Charlemaigne at the motion of Pope Leo the.3. drive clean out of Italy,
having slain many of them with the sword. Pope Gregory the.7. a most wicked
man, stirred Peter King of Hungary, to war with the Emperor Henry the.4.
entangled all Italy and Germany with wars, and drove Henry to fight many
fields, and battles, that were not light. Vrbane the.2. of that name, tourmoyled
with war both East and West and all other parts of the world, which he
called holy, taken in hand for the recovering of Jerusalem. This war was
long, cruel, great and blouddy, such as in all worlds you can not find the
like. What Alexander the third, wrought against Frederick Barbarousse, and
how he raised up all Italy against him, the Stories do tell. And whylest
Frederick the second warred in the holy land, Gregory the nynth takes from
him Naples. Here the Abbot of Vrspurge sumeth, that so great a wickedness
should be committed of a Pope. There arrose by the Popes means and motions,
great factions in Italy, of the Guelphians and Gibilines. Clement the fourth,
brought in the french Army, by the conducte of king Charles, into the kingdom
of Naples: and put Conrade Duke of Swalande from his inheritance, and caused
him and Frederick Duke of Austryce to be slain to gether, with manny
thousands of the Germans. Pope Ihon the two and twenty, armed Frederick
Duke of Austrich, and Leopolde, against the Emperor Jews the fourth, of the
house of Bauier. Boniface the eight, commanded king Albert Duke of Austrich,
to bear Hostyle banners against Philip the French King. As Martin the fifte
stired up a greuouse war against the Bohemers. Eugenius the fourth, betrayed
the Conqueror Ladislaus king of Poll and Hungary, to Amurathes ye great Turk,
to be vanquished and slain through treason, sending his Legate Iuliane
Caesarinus Cardinal about the practice, which perished also in that unlucky
overthrow. Where comes to mind that saying in Virgill: Tolumnius himself
the southsayer is slain. Pope Sixtus the.4. sent to the most puissaunt nation
of Swisses, a red scarf or band, with a bull hanging at it, wherein he
grau^teth most large indulge^ces to such as will fight for the church of Rome.
Iulye the second through much and great bludshed of the Swisses, began to
expulse the french king out of Italy: which at length Leo the.10. brought to
pass, receiving the Emperor Charles the.5. whose son rules yet in Italy
Clement the seventh began to oppress him again, but death disapointed his
enterprises. Paul the third, joined the force of Italy with Charles the
fifte, and warred on the Germans for obedience denied to the Sea of Rome, and
the Gospel received. In the which war was taken Philippe the Lantzgraue of
Hasse, and Ihon Frederick Duke of Saxon, Prince Electour. Great vilianie and
cruelty, was wrought by the soldiers in Germany. Pope Iulye the third,
began to dalie with the frenchmen: and stiring up the war of Parma and
Mirandula, brought the frenchmen to Senes. There arrose a most greuouse war
by sea and land, both in France, and Italy and also in Germany, which
indureth at this day: The Princes and people tear a sonder one an other, they
drink their blood most aboundauntly, which nevertheless in the mean
season, persecute Christ's church most greuousely. The Lord send peace.

And now where the godly might marvel, God is righteouse in his judgments.
why God so suffers the world to be shaken and tourmoyled with mutual
wars: the Angels prevent the marueling and complainte, and show not only
the cause, but also praise the justice of God in these judgments. And he
brings in two Angels, as mete and sufficient witnesses of this business:
Angels gouernoures of things.
The one he makes ruler of waters, the other speaking out of the altar. He
seems here in to follow Daniell, which also in the tenth chapter, says that
Angels as governors, were set to rule over Provinces. Not that God does not
work and govern al things in waters and in all elements and Regions: but for
that he uses the travel of Angels, as his ministers. But where the Papists
gather hereof, that Saints rule over elements, diseases, limbs, cities, and
every part in man, it is folish and superstitious, and smelling of Idolatry.
For the manner of Angels and of blessed souls is clean diverse, moreover,
the Scripture attributes unto them far other things, than it does to these.
Thou shall read nothing of the blessed souls, as having any thing to do with
men here in Earth, in the whole Scripture. But in sundry places of the
Scriptures, you shall read that Angels are set to be men's kepers, and to
serve them with diverse ministeries. Again, ye read not, that ye godly have
for this cause given any godly honor to the Angels: no, we shall hear in
this book how Saint Ihon would have worshipped an Angel, but was
prohibited of the Angel ones or twyse. Chap. 19. and.21.
Moreover, here the Angel renders a reason, why the water is turned into
blood, and commends here in Gods justice. For turning his talk unto God:
thou art inste, says he, O Lord which art, and which wast. etc. He
pronounces him righteouse, as he that will do no man any wrong, and therefore
calls him also holy. In the mean time he signifies his euerlastingnes, and
that he gives being unto all things, where he says: which art, and which
waste, etc. Of this phrase of speech is spoken in the first chapter. And the
true righteousness gives to every one his. Therefore the Angel says:
Therefore Lord thou art righteouse, and declareste thy righteousness to the
world, in that thou have given them blood to drink, which have shed the
blood of the Prophets: that is, of preachers, for preaching of the truth. And
not their blood only, but have shed also the blood of thy holy faithful I
mean, whom for the true professing of the faith they have vexed, and at last
slain. Therefore are they worthy, that they themselves should again drink the
blood of them and theirs: that is, should fall by mutual wars, tumultes,
and slaughters, verily before recited.

The Angel speaks out of the ault^r.
These things are confirmed by an other Angel which speaks from thaulter,
and not without cause from the altar. For we heard before in the.6. chap. that
under the altar the souls of them that are killed cry out and say, how long
is it that thou auengest not our blood on them, etc. Therefore now is the talk
uttered out of the Altar to the end we should understand, that God
forgets not the blood of his saints, but reue^geth it in just and dew
season. Now here in also commended as it were by the way the omnipote^cie of
God, that the ungodly may understand, how in the time of affliction and
vengeance, there shall be no power able to resist the almighty. To him alone
be glory. Amen.

The.iiii. and.v. Angels shed their vialles. The.lxx. Sermon.
ANd the fourth Angel powered out his vialle on the Sun, and power was given
to him to vex men with heat of fire. And the men raged in great heat, and
spoke evil of the name of God, which had power over those plagues, and they
repented not to give him glory. And the fifte Angel powered out his vial upon
the seat of the beast, and his kingedome waxed dark, and they gnewe their
tungues for sorrow, and blasphemed the God of heaven for sorrow and pain of
their sores, and repented not of their deeds.

The godly esteem not their afflictions sent by the just judgment of God, as
the punnishme^tes of sinners, The afflictions of ye godly and ungodly.
but as exercises of the faith, how so ever they acknowledge themselves to be
justly afflicted for their sins committed: yet here they commend
nevertheless the grace of God, conuertyng the punnishementes of sinners into
the exercises of faith. To the ungodly punnisshementes are plagues, which
another they can suffer patiently, nor glorify God, but rather blaspheme him,
and suppose that they suffer unworthily. Therefore are the plages of god to the^
most greuouse, where nevertheless much more cruel things are for the^
prepared, to wit, that they should suffer in an other world everlasting
damnation. Therefore the plagues of this world infli^^ed to the ungodly, are
as it were certain preparatiues and preambles of more greuouse tourmentes.

Drought ye iiii. plage.
The fourth Angel pours out his vial on the sun, and to the same was given
power to plague men with heat or fire. This plage do many expound
allegorically, understanding by the sun Christ exhilaratyng the consciences
of the faithful: and the fame to be darkened in the minds of men chosing
rather the darkness of Antichriste, than the light of Christ: and therefore do
the consciences erryng, and seduced with error, burn with sundry lusts and
desperations, whereby they be driven at the length to sundry blasphemies. Which
exposition as I do not utterly reiecte, so (after my judgment) the sense shall
be more plain, if we understand the fourth plague to be an heat and great
drought, a barrennes of the Earth, and scarsetie of Corn, finally an
intolerable thirst afflictyng both men and beasts, and last bredyng and
inge^dring hoate diseases. For so we have red in the threatenings of the law:
I will give an heaven of brass and an earth of iron. In the time of Helias for
contemnyng and reiectyng the word of ye lord, God plaged Israel with a sore
drought, as you may see in the.3. book of Kings, the.17. and.18. chap.
Jeremy also describes the like drought and heat in the.14. chapt. Again the
lord defended Israel with a pillar of a cloud by the day, and a pillar of
fire by night. Moreover we have heard heretofore in the Apocalipse: the sun
shall not fall upon them, another any heat. And justly is this world plaged
with burning heat, as the which offends grievously, burns with sundry
lusts, and also by wicked proclamations prohibiteth the coulyng and refressyng
of Gods word.

Theffecte of this plague is great.
For the effect of this plage follows. And me^ says he, burned with great
heat. At ye first, says he, being inflamed with a exceeding great heat, they
were even ragyng mad. For we read in stories yt me^ being afflicted with
over much heat, have felt greuouse displeasures and torments both of body
and mind. Than he adds, that follows of the fourmer membre: the
impatie^cie of the heat provoked them to blaspheme God, and even him that had
power over these plagues: to wit, for that having full power so to do, he
will not deliver them so vexed with burning heat. Co^trarywise the children of
Israel in their tents being stongen with serpents, inflamyng the whole body
with the stinge, Nume. 22.
did repent another did they blaspheme God. But coming unto Moses, they said
we have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee. Pray
the lord, that he will take away from us these serpents. They blaspheme
therefore the name of the lord, so many as through vnpatientnes do murmr
against the judgments of God, another will acknowledge themselves to be rightly
and justly pu^nished craving perdon, finally is added, another did they repent
that they might give glory to God, etc. For the lord plageth us, to the end
that being afflicted we should repent, and give God the glory, confessing, as
I said before, that we be punnished justly, How the godly and ungodly behave
them selves in afflictions.
and ought with weeping and waylyng to turn to the lord strikyng us. But these
like Pharao another acknoweledge their sin, another pray unto God, nor yet are
amended, but many times overcome themselves in malliciousenes. Hereof we learn
the diversity betwixt the godly and ungodly, and how both use themselves in
afflictions. For they give glory unto God, and amend their life: these give
not God the glory, but become worse than themselves. To give God the glory, is
to give place unto God, not to resist, but to acknoweledge their sin, and
Gods rightuousenes: and not this only, but also the mercy of God and clemency
toward the penitent, and the same to require humbly. The darkness of the
romish see the.v. plague.


The fifte Angel powers his cup upon the seat of the beast. That a seat
or trone is used for a kingdom, is more manifest than that it need to be
proved by testimonies, sins that S. John himself does by and by for a seat
place a kingdom. And also in times paste the masters, or rather ministers of
churches taught sitting, and had their stoles and chaires in holy assemblees.
That saying in the gospel is known: In the chair of Moses sit the scribes
and Phariseis, etc. It is known that in ancient time there were seats of
Patriarchs, Jerusalem, Antioche, Rome, Alexandria, Constantinople and others:
and that the same are called Apostolical seats, forasmuch as the Apostles
have taught there. And so is the Apostolical seat used for the Apostolical
doctrine it self. That seat erected and established at Rome by the Apostles
and Apostolic men, the beast that is the Pope has subverted, and in the
place thereof erected the seat of pestilence, which he dare nevertheless call
the seat of Christ, Thapostolicall seat of Christ and S. Peter.
and the seat of S. Peter. Christ has no more any seat in Earth, save that
he dwells in the hearts of the faithful church. Otherwise the true seat of
Christ, is the right hand of the father. The true seat of Peter, is heaven it
self. Rome is no longer his seat: for the Apostolical doctrine and
Patriarchall chair is destroyed and trodden under foot: and in stead thereof is
an earthly Empire or kingedome set up by the Pope. Yea more he pourseweth the
Apostolical seats by force of arms. Now therefore God having compassion upon
his, pours out his wrath and plague on the sea of Rome, illuminyng men with
the light of the Gospel, to the end they might know and see the wickedness and
abomination of the Romisshe See. The which is a wonderful benefit to them
that be lighted, and a great grief and tormente to the Romish sort. For
theffecte of the plage follows: and his kingdom was made dark. This plague
answers to the.9. of Aegipte. For like as thick darkness plaged the
Egyptians, bright light rejoiced the Israelites, so were the Papists
tourme^ted with shameful errors than shall it grieve them also to have their
errors detected, and their glory obscured: the faithful shall rejoice in the
light of Christ. For now begins, and already has begone the majesty of
the seat, and of him that sits therein, to be obscured. That which was ones
called an holy seat: is now of the godly and learned called, wicked Rome, the
whore of Babylon, the mother of al fornications, the den of thieves, Sodom,
Aegipte, the red harlot by reason of the pourple senate of Cardinals, which
wear red and purple. It is commonly said and truly, the nerer Rome, the
further from Christ. They call and that most rightly, the Cardinals,
bishops, and spiritual fathers, the family and limbs of Antichrist, men
disceaued and disceauers, with Symony and filthy lust most corrupt. Therefore
the kingdom of the beast (so he expounds the seat) was made dark. There is
added furthermore, how the worshippers of the seat of the beast have and do
behave themselves. First for pain and sorrow, indignation, wrath and envy,
they gnawe or bite their tunges: which is the gesture of angry me^, and that
impotently angry, I mean that burn infuriouse rage. The fury of the papists
against the gospellers.
It is a phrase of speech, signifiyng how they will rage with great fury
against the truth opened, which they would have utterly hid and oppressed.
Again they blaspheme the Lord of heaven, and maker of al, both for that he
afflicts them with botches, and sundry plagues, and also for that he casts
a darkness upon their kingdom. For even therefore the Romish, call the preachers
of the gospel disceauers and heretics: and the very doctrine of the gospel,
heresy. But this reproach redoundeth to him which is author of the same
doctrine. Finally they do not repent them of their doings, of their Simony, of
their crafty iuggelyng, sacrileges, idolatry, and al ungodliness. And the
apostle says, how evil men, and disceauers will wax worse and worse,
disceauing and being disceaued. Therefore is it no marvel, though you see the
papists at this day, with a stiffenecke to proceed obstinately in their
errors. But the greatest plague is to be forsaken of God, and stubbernely to
mayneteyne their errors and ungodliness, and therein to persevere. The Lord
deliver us from evil. Amen.

The sixte Angel shedeth his vialle. The.lxxj. Sermon.
ANd the sixte Angel powers out his vialle, upon the great river of
Euphrates, and the water dried up, that the way of these kings of the East
should be prepared. And I saw three unclean spretes, like frogs come out
of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the
mouth of the false prophet. For they are the spretes of the deuiles workyng
miracles, to go out to the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to
gather them to the battle of the great day of God almighty. Behold I come
as a thief. Happy is he that watches, and keeps his garments, leeste he be
found naked, and men see his filthiness. And he gathered them together in a
place called in the hebrewe tunge Armageddon.

The sixte Angel powers out his vial on the great river of Euphrates: ^he
drying up of Euphrates y^ sixte plage.
the end of this sheding is, that the way might be opened for the kings of the
East, that is, that Babylon might be taken. This plague chiefly apperteyneth
to Rome and the Romish church. The speech has an allegory, or a secret
comparison, and allusion unto old Babylon. We read in the.5. chapt. of
Daniel, that Babylon was taken the same night, wherein Balthazar king thereof
had prepared a sumptuouse banquet, and looked for nothing less than for
destruction. Herodotus and Xenophon report, how the kings of the East
Darius Priscus, who is also called Medus, and Cyrus of Persia besieged the
city round about: but where there was no hope to win it, Cyrus let out
Euphrates by ditches, so that the Army might wade over the river: and so was
the city laid open, and taken, on the same side, where it was fensed with the
river. Euphrates therefore fortified Babylon, and brought unto it many other
commodities and pleasures. Here therefore are signified, by Euphrates,
richesse, munition, pleasures, commodities, tributes and customs, which the
romisshe churches call sacred or of the holy church. These commodities and
pleasures, I say, are dimished of the kings of the East, of true
christians, whom the scripture calls the Kings and Priests, and derived and
put to an other use. Wherefore the power of the Roman church begins to
decay, to the intent that at the length it may be taken and abolisshed of the
Lord Christ him self. Doubtless the true Christians understand, How
Euphrates is dried up.
believe and profess, that Christ alone is the Savior, another that there is
salvation in any other. And that this is given freely: that they be mad, and
commit Simonye and sacrilege, which in this case practice and make
merchandise. Read the.55. chap. of Esaye, and the 8. of the Acts, finally
the.1. and.2. chapt. of S. Paul to the Coloss. Wherein most dilligently is
declared, illumined, and set forth that by Christ alone we are absolved, and in
him alone have al fulness. And what time the common people do hear this, to
wit that by those romish trifles, fayres of pardons, and other crafty
iuggelinges they are disceaued, and robbed of their substance, they shut by
and by and make fast their chestes, their purses, their cellars and garners.
And so dries up the river of wealth and pleasure, it dries up also, when the
godly deny to give other customs, as tenthes, palles, first fruictes, and
such other like things. So I say is the way prepared for the kings of the
East, so begins Rome the second Babylon to be taken and come to naught.

It follows furthermore, How Antichrist behaueth him for the preseruyng of
euphrates.
how Antichrist will fight against the faithful and godly laboring to dry up
Euphrates, for the mayneteynaunce and increase of his kingdom: and where he
might briefly have said, he shall send forth ambassadors unto al kings and
princes, to stire them up against the gospellers, for the defense of the
privileges, rightes and revenues of the Sea of Rome: he had rather most
dilligently describe those Ambassadors, and show their destruction. It
forces very much to have known the Popes legates. For they are maruelouse
pestilent to the church of God: for we have not only experience of it at this
day, but also by the reading of all stories, that great euilles, The
description of ye popes ambassadors called legate a latere.
and all calamities in a manner have been brought into the church, and are also
at this day, through the instigations of those legates. I touched a little
before, what mischief Cardinal Julian Cesarine the legate of Pope Eugenius
wrought in Germany, Boheme, Pole and Hungary. What is done in our time, and
has been done in our fathers memory, it were to long to rehearse. If our
elders had by the doctrine of Jesus Christ revealed to ye church by S. John
understand and known the nature of the Popes legates, they might easily have
eschewed, wherewith they have indiscreetly entangled themselves, and suffered
great loss and hinderaunce. I speak nothing here of Ambassadors and
ambassades of kings and common welthes uncorrupted.

First he shows dilligently the original of legates, to the intent we might
understand, Thoriginal of legates.
that they be led with a wicked sprete, and that their vocation is not godly,
but deuillish. He shows a threfolde original, where in very deed they may
al be reduced to one deuelish unity. He saw (says Primasius expounding this
place) one spirit, and for the nombre of the parts of one body, he says
three, that all the nombre of the wicked might be uttered to be led with one
deuelishe sprete. Therefore the first den that the legates break out of he
calls the dragons mouth. Of the dragon is spoken in the.12. chap. another is
there any that understands not, that it signifies ye devil him self. They
come forth therefore from the devil. For all ye affairs of their ambassade
consists in lies, crafts, practices, finally in corruptyng the verity and
sincerenes of the gospel: and also in factions, and dissentions, in slaughter
and blood. And the devil was from the beginning a liar and murderer, as the
lord him self says in the.8. of John. And hitherto they be of the Dragons
mouth. The self same arrise also out of the mouth of the beast. For they
come furnisshed with the Popes authority, legates laterall with full power. Of
the beast I have spoken in the.13. chapt. finally they come out of the mouth
of the false prophet. The true prophet and pastor, high and only of the
church universal, is Christ the son of God. Antichrist, is that false
prophet, and chief seducer of the whole world: as is said in the.13. cha.
Therefore come the legates, sent from the Pope, which has put into their
mouths words, or instructions or co^missions that they should speak those
things which are of false prophecy. Three unclean sprites.
Howbeit he expoundyng himself more plainly, declares of what sort the
legates shall be: to wit three unclean spretes. An unclean sprete is every
where in the scripture called the devil or Satan, verily of naturr and
effect. For as the spirit of God is called holy, so this co^trarywise
unclean. For he him self is of nature, or rather of his own corruption, and
reuoltyng from God impure, and author to me^ of all impuretie and uncleanness.
He signifies therefore, that those legates shall be men of a deuelish uncleanness.
And in deed if you lay hereunto the life, manners, and conversation of those
legates laterall, and of their families, you shall find in manner nothing else,
but extreme uncleanness, filthiness and beastelynes, monstrouse lust, whoredom
and aduoutrie, and detestable fornications, wonderful surfettyng, blouddy
crafts and counselles. Therefore the thing it self speaks: and the things
that the legates do every where, are a commentary of this place. And where
there be three unclean spretes rekened, some do expound it of divines,
laweyers and religiouse as monks and freres, of the which three sorts for the
most part ar chosen the Popes ambassadors. I understand simplely by the
third nombre, that those legates shall be most furnished with all hostile
authority, and that they shall all agree well emonges themselves, and all help
one an other: that what so ever one seems to lack, an other may supply.
Solomon in Ecclesiastica, a threfolde rope or line, says he, will not lightly
break.

But now that no man should find any lack of light, They be like frogs.
by a parable brought in, he sets as it were before our eyes what manner ones
these legates shall be, verily frogs of the marrishe or fenne, and criers
importune and tediouse, foul and filthy. And he says not that they be
frogs in deed, but like frogs. For like as frogs by their importune
criyng are most tediouse and troublesome, and the fennie are also filthy: so
do those legates love earthly things and filthynes: and by their
complainetes, accusations, prouocations, wrytinges and disputations altogether
froggelyke and fenlyke, be hateful both to God and men. They are nothing
asshamed: if they be interrupted a little, by and by they return to their
old song, Aristophanes in ranis.
(...). For there is no other tune with them, but (...). Primasius reasons
very much of Frogs. Emonges other things: it is mete for those false
Prophets like frogs criynge in the night, to make a damnable noise by
barkynge of errors. For frogs both by reason of the place, sight, and
troublesome noise are so hateful, as the Devil with his is known to be
abominable to the truth, and with just fire to be rightely condemned, etc.
Thus says he. And like as the Frogs of Aegypte raised out of the duste, by
the Deuelisshe art of the Magiciens cried out against Gods verity, calling
again by Moses and Aaron the people of GOD to the true liberty and
worshippyng of God: right so do the Popes legates moleste with talk the
preaching of the gospel, the free deliverance, the christian liberty, and
true service of God. And like as the frogs doubble and reiterate even to
make one weary to hear, that same their (...): even so these fennish beasts of
Rome, have evermore in their mouth, the most holy See, the most holy father, ye
holy church of Rome. The holy church of Rome erreth not, the holy church of
Rome must be obeyed. He that will not obey her, is an heretic and a
schismatike. These things full many times and often, and to al men, and in
all and singular causes will they reiterate, and repete that their one and the
same song (...).

The sprite of Devils.
The Lord annexeth by S. John, and so yet more clearly declares: for they be
spretes of Deuilles workyng miracles, etc. (...) (which is here used in Greek
for devil) has his name of sundry knoweledge, and skilfulnes of things: and
seems to be in a manner indifferent, although it be commonly put for the
Devil. Nevertheless for a difference they are called Eudaimones, and
Cacodaimones, as it were good and evil workers. For the Greeks say that (...)
is called of (...) that is knowing or skillful. For (...) is called an expert
Artificer. The Lord therefore signifies, that the Popes legates shall be
spretes of Deuilles, that is to say, spiritual fathers (but indewed with the
spirit of Satan) wise men or skillful, crafty workers to bring their matters
to pass. And therefore he annexeth, workyng wonders. Whereby he seems to
allude to the Magiciens of Aegipt, who also wrought miracles, and deteyned king
Pharao in lies against the verity. S. Paul moreover in the.2. to Timoth.
the.3. chapt. compares the wise men and ministers of Antichrist to the
Magicie^s of Aegipt. And right well known it is, that the legates do every
where boaste of miracles, which have be^ done in their church and religion, and
so keep still the hearts of kings and princes in popish errors. Of miracles
speaks S. Paul in the.2. to the These. 2. And I have said some thing hereof
in the.13. chapt.

Here is showed moreover the end of all the treatise and counselles of the
Popes legates: that they might go forth to the kings of the whole earth, to
assemble them to battle. The legates are in all kings courts.
etc. They shall crepe into the courts of al kings and princes. Ye shall have
doubtless in all kings courts in a manner the Popes legates. And what do they?
They inuironne kings and princes. They see that no faithful manne be admitted
to the kings speech, they learn to know all the kings counsel, which they
write and signify to Rome: and if they mislyke any thing, that they may
infringe and subuerte the same: and that they always beat in that song of
theires, to wit (...), that is verily obedience, which all men owe to the
holy Sea: finally that they arm kings and princes to defend the church of
Rome, and distroye heresies. This I say is the battle of that same day of the
great God almighty, that is to say, which shall be parted by the coming of
the son of God unto judgment, and the which shall endure to the coming of
Christ unto judgment, which shall than avenge the blood of his, from the hands
of that ugly beast. And he calls the day of judgment, the day of the
great God: as does also S. Paul in the.2. to Tit. And the day of God
almighty: as he that shall than show his omnipotency, and even his power
divine, which seems now to the ungodly by reason of his long sufferaunce to
sleep. This necessary and most profitable description S. John has set in
here, by the reuealyng of Jesus Christ, to the end that we should watch and
beware of them.

Hereafter follows a faithful admonition and exhortation to watchyng, An
exhortation to watchyng.
leeste we fall a sleep and perish with the Antichristians in the cares and
pleasures of this world. And he says how that day of the lord will come
suddenly, and when we shall leest look for it. For the lord here repeteth that
thing, which he said also in the Gospel: behold I come like a thief. These
things are red in the.24. of Matthew. and are repeted of the Apostle in the.1.
to the These. the.5. chapter. And verily that same soden coming of the Lord
exciteth the minds of us all, and provoke to watch, leeste we should at
unawares be oppressed. He adioyneth also immediately a profit prepared for them
that watch. Happy, says he, is that man that watches. He adds morouer,
how the godly should demean themselves in watchyng. Keep thy garm^ntes that
thou go not naked.
How they must keep their garments, that they be not defiled: and take heed
moreover that they walk not naked, leeste their filthiness be espied. Touching
garments I have spoken most largely in an other place of this book. He keeps
his garments, that keeps his life and conversation unspotted of worldely
filthiness. He walks not naked, which puts on Christ. But his shame is
seen, that sins impudently. But chiefly is their shame seen, whose
whoredoms, aduoutries and fleshly lusts are known, and open to the eyes of
al men. And here is the state of them to be lamented that are called
spiritual, and rather in deed to be detested than to be described. Blessed are
they whose sins are covered, and happy are they that have learned to be
ashamed. Unhappy are as many as ca^ not blushe, but set such a face of the
matter, that they glory in their sins and wickedness.

The destruction of ye frogs.
After this he touches at few words the destruction both of the legates and
also of them that are deceived of the legates, and such as fight against God
and true religion, for the mayneteyning of the Romisshe majesty. The legates
in deed do assemble men of their faction unto battle against the Godly: but
the lord has gathered the same into a place which is called in Hebrewe
(...), which some interpret the destruction of the River, and some the army
of desolation. But how so ever that is, the sense seems easy: they are in
deed assembled of the legates, that they might withstand, or prohibit the
destruction of the River, and ruin of Rome. But the Lord shall also assemble
the self same, that in the very same place and work they may be destroyed of
the Lord. Which finally at the last judgment we believe shall be
accomplisshed. To the Lord Christ our redemer and revenger be praise and glory.
Amen.

The seventh Angel powers out his vialle. The.lxxij. Sermon.
ANd the seventh Angel powers out his Vial into the Air. And there came a
great voice out of Heaven from the seat, saying: it is done. And there followed
voices, thonderinges, and lightnings, and there was a great Earthquake, such
as was not, since men were upon the Earth, so mighty an Earthquake and so
great. And the great City was divided into three parts. And the cities of
nations fell. And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto
her the cup of wine of fearcenes of his wrath. And every I Will fled away, and
Mountains were not found. And there fell a great hail, as it had been
talentes, out of Heaven upon the men, and the men blasphemed God because of the
hayle, for it is great, and the plague of it was sore.

The seventh and last cup poured out into the air, The last judgment of God
fygured by ye seventh Angel.
signifies the parturbation and alteration of all elements: and the horrible,
but yet just judgment of God, and fynallye the end of all things, and
pains everlasting. The things be enclosed with fyguratyue speeches, taken for
the most part out of the Prophets, and by a privy comparison brought out
of the holy story. Which is done for this consideration, that all things
might be more full of Majesty, and that every man should more dilligentelie,
search for the sense of an excellent matter, which found ones, he might keep
and retain in perfect memory.

And what time the Air is moved, Sore tempests.
sundry and horrible tempests arryse in the air. And the Lord Jesus in the
gospel after Matthew testifies, that about the last coming of Christ, the
powers of heaven shall be moved. And as soon as the cup was powered out into
the air, and a great tempest arrysen, a voice sounded (...), it is done. By
the which voice is signified, An end is at hand.
how all things are at an end, even of the whole world, much more of wicked
papistrie. And this voice is heard out of the very temple of heaven, and trone
of God, leest we should doubt any thing of the verity and certentis of the
sentence given, and again of the virtue and power of him that does pronounce
it. Therefore are they shamefullye disceaued, so many as affirm the world to
be everlasting, and that they shall reign always upon earth, and enjoy the
pleasures thereof. A voice from heaven, out of the most holy temple of God, and
even out of the most sincere trone of the Almighty, speaks, that it is
done. For he speaks of the time to come as though it were paste, that we
might as certainly know that all worldly and popish things should have an
end, as we undoubtedly know the things to be done, which are already past.
Let us therefore watch, and put no confidence in the things of this world,
which are most deceiptful. All things shall fall to decay, and come to naught,
men only, and the blessed spirits, remaining through the grace of God, the
unhappy also remaining perpetually, appointed to perpetual punnishment by the
justice of God.

A figure of Gods judgment
And like as the holy Prophets ded by fygures set forth the judgment of God
to be seen of men's eyes, so now here the Lord Jesus by Saint Ihon in a
figurative speech, shaddoweth the terror of that horrible judgment. For he
says how there shall be thonderinges, voices, lightninges, and tho^derbolts,
and an earthquake, so terrible, that the world has never at any time felt the
like. For Saint Peter also in the end of his latter epistle, recites
terrible things of the last day, and burning of all worldly things. But the
quaking and terror of men's minds, shall be yet a great deal more terrible
than al these.

The godly are exempted from cruel terrors.
The Lord in S. Mat. gospel. Than shall wayle says he, all the kinreds of ye
earth. For the ungodly, whose co^scie^ces are wicked and corrupt, shall feel
those terrors and tourme^ts unspeakable. The godly like as according to ye
saie^g of our savior, they com not into judgment: so although yt they also by
reason of the infirmity of the flesh, be some what astonished at the sudden
alteration of things, and the terrible tearing and crashing of all elements,
yet forasmoch as they have known before, that the same should come to pass,
and believe the Savior saying, your redemption draws nere, they gather up
their spirits, and comfort themselves in Christ, and rejoice in him, coming
to judge or condemn the ungodly, but to save the godly. And herein is alluded
to sundry stories of the holy scriptures, but chieflly to ye burning of Sodom,
to the drowning of Pharao in the red sea, and ruin of Jericho, etc. Those were
verelie but several destructions, and yet terrible above measure: therefore what
think we that last destruction will be, which shall be general?

Than shall that great City be cut a sunder, The great city shall be divided in
to.3. parts.
the universality of men in the great church, divided into three parts: that
is to say, in the end shall there three kinds of men be found in the Church.
There be true Christians, which attribute to Christ his true glory, that is,
all things of true salvation, and cleave to him alone by sincere faith. There
be Papists, which after the lettre ascribe unto Christ many things, but not
as became them: for they ascribe those things to Antichriste, which belong to
Christ alone: and in communicating with him, such things as be not to be
communicated, they deny Christ. For if the Pope be head of the church
universal, if he be king and priest, etc. Wherefore is Christ preached to have
those things alone? There be moreover Newters, which will not seem to deny
Christ, and yet attribute not a little to Antichriste, whom yet nevertheless
in many things they contemn and despise utterly. These have no certain
religion, but established and conceived at their pleasure, as it likes or
pleases them, to believe this or that. There is a great number of these men at
this day, deryding and mockyng whatsoever is not tuned after their most light,
and wanton Lucianicall wits. You may find also in the gospel, a field sown
with sondrie seed, to bring forth most diverse fruictes, yea even cockle and
darnell, which at length in the end of the world shall be gathered. etc. Math.
13.

Moreover the Cities of the Gentiles (says he) shall fall, The cities of the
Heathen fall.
by the which I vnderstan^d the Jewish, Turkish, and strange religions,
plucked into sundry sects or heresies. But every one of these have their
societies, rytes, and laws, which they commend to be the best, and such as
shall endure for ever: but they shall fall also. The only religion or faith of
Christ shall prevail and overcome. Aretas expounding this place after the same
sort: The Cities of the heathen, says he, falling down, be diverse opinions
of faith about religion, etc. They (I say) are fallen all.

Great Babylon came into (...) remembrance of God.
But especially it was mete and requisite, he affirms and shows diligently,
that the City and church of Rome should be destroyed, and committed to
perpetual tourments. I declared sufficiently before, that Babylon is Rome,
which in very deed is great, not in Italy only, but through out all
France, Spain, Germany, and other Realms: the city and church of Rome has
seemed to many, that it should be everlasting and triumphaunte for ever.
Herein the Epicures cry, that God cares not for these inferior things: but
that every man lives here, either happily or v^happelie, according as he has
discreetly and wittelie framed his life: that knows not of our pleasures and
displeasures, and our conversation. But contrariwise Saint Ihon affirms,
that the Lord hat remembered Babylon: and so to have remembered her, that he
has determined to commit her to tourmentes. The which he utters by a
prophetical phrase of speech, that he might give unto her, the cup of wine of
indignation, or fearcenesse of his wrath: that is to say, that he might pu^nish
her accordingly, as the great indignation and wrath of God requires.
Therefore she shall have no small punnishmente: for the wrath of God is not
light, but most greueouse and hot. For he requires and recompenceth the
slackenesse of punnishment, with the extremity of pain and tourmente. The
like things you may read in the.3. of Malachie: how God has books written.
Touching the cup also, of the wine of Gods fury, to spoken of before out of
the Prophets.

^l Isles flee.
Now also emonges other things by a figurative speech he shows, that the
ungodly have no refuge, nor way to escape. Otherwise would the richer so^te,
in dangers hyde themselves far of in Islands, that they might be out of
gunshot: many flee into the Mountains, that they may there lurk safely. But
now he says, how the very Islands flee, and therefore that fleyng they can
not be overtaken. He adds that the Mountains, that is to say, no places of
refuge or lurking can be found. Therefore there remains nothing but that al
ungodly in general being taken should be put to torments.

Furthermore he adds, that hayle as bygge as talentes should be cast down
from heaven upon wicked men: and that such as has not ben remembered to have
fallen in no memory of me^. Hayle like talentes.
And he seems to have alluded to the story of the Chananites, which is in
the.10. cha. of Joshua. To be short here is signified that the greuouse and
inevitable judgment of God pronounced against al ungodly, shall at the general
judgment tormente the wicked with such an extremity, that no eloquence of
men, no sense nor understanding ca^ attain unto: for it is always more
greuouse. Primasius expounding this place, says: he sets the wrath of
reue^geme^t, in hail. Whereof we read: the wrath of the Lord falls down
like hayle. Another does he without cause mention of a talente weight. For with
equity will he inflicte judgment, etc.

Here is showed the obstinate and incurable mutining and impatiencie of the
wicked, The wicked blaspheme god in their torments.
whereby they are incensed against Gods judgments, vomiting out blasphemies
against the Judge him self and his judgment. I have handled these things
more briefly, for that we have heard in a manner the same before about the
end of the.11. chapt. To the Lord be praise and glory.

The Judgment or punnishement of the pourple whore is described: and also the
sin, and ungodliness of the same. The.lxxiij. Sermon.
ANd there came one of the seven Aungelles, which had the seven vialles,
The.17. chapt.
and talks with me, saying unto me: come, I will show thee the judgment of
the great whore, that sits upon many waters, with whom the kings of the
earth have committed whoredom, and the inhabiters of the earth are dronken
with the wine of her fornication. And he carried me away into the wilderness
in the sprete. And I saw a woman sittyng upon a rose colored beast, full of
names of blasphemy, which had seven heads, and ten horns.

He has hitherto discoursed in general of the just judgments of God:
albeit that in the mean time he has touched some particular matters
concerning Babylon or Rome, rather than reasoned. And now consequently
severally, and evidently he handles the destruction or end of the beast, and
of his Image, of old Rome and new, I mean both thempire and papistrie: which
he seems to poinct as it were with the fingar. In the.13.14. and.16. chapt. he
signified somewhat hereof, now he pourseweth every thing with a notable
plenty and evidence. And the same that I said in the beginning of this place,
I repete here again: that hereby are affirmed, how the justice of God is
showed to be the end of good and evil, The profit of this place concerning
the destruction of Rome.
that the godly are confirmed, and the judgment to come establisshed, as we
confess expressly in the apostles creed. The some of al is this: tholde and
new Rome, the Empire and Popish kingdom, which is the kingdom of Antichrist
shall perish for sins, and great enormities. For he joins together the
beast, and the Image of the beast, the beast and one sittyng on the beast, a
proud strompet, so that they can not be separated. Therefore must the place
be expounded of both Empires. That S. John speaks of Rome.


And lest any man should think me to be led with an evil affection, for
understanding these things of Rome, I will show by the testimony both of god
and man, that the same exposition is old, and not new, true, and not
affectated. For straight way the Angel him self, as we shall hear, expounds
these things of Rome. Aretas also an old expositour of this book: diverse
expositours, says he, understand by the whore old Rome. And the same by and
by: whilst he says the mother of whoredom, whether so ever you will, other
old Rome or new, or the time of the coming of Antichriste (behold the time
of Antichriste he says) you can not err from the truth, for that both
cities (Rome and Constantinople) has occupied thempire, and every of them has been satiated with the blood of holy martirs, etc. Hitherto he. And what the
most ancient writer Tertullian, and S. Hierome has spoken oftener than ones
of Babylon and the purple whore, I have heretofore reported in the.14. chapt.
The order of this chapt.


And in this order he proceeds. First he shows the author of this
revelation, after he gathers the some of the revelation or vision. For again
he treats by visions, to the end al things might be more lively and
evident. And in deed some make this seventh chapt. unto the.21. chapt. the
sixte vision. As I admonished in the beginning of this work. Than notes he
the place and manner of the vision. Finally he propounds the vision it self,
and immediately adioyneth the exposition thereof. And in the process of this
matter he uses a judicial kind of pleadyng, and that after a prophetical
manner. For the Prophets most often, and in the beginning set forth the sins
and wickednesses of the people before the eyes of al men: and tha^ they annexe
unto it the judgment, pain or punnishement. For so does S. John also at this
present.

First, thauthour of this horrible vision, who shows this vision.
is the lord Christ himself: but he uses the ministry of an Angel, and
that of one, which coming out of the temple of the divine majesty, was
appoincted with six others to power out plagues and vialles. This is the head
minister. And it was semely that the judgment of Babylon should be uttered by
an Angel that had the rule over torments. The lord Jesus himself will take
punnishment of the beast, for whom this triumph is reserved. And we
understand that such things as are set forth and treated here, have proceeded
from the high Bishop him self Jesus Christ: and the manners of speaking to be
Angelical, heavenly, and godly. Who shall than blame us, if we, using the
words of Angels and of Christ himself, shall say that the Bishop of Rome
and all Popery to be that purple, and great and most common harlot. It appears
also to many that seem godly, that moderation is neglected, when these things
are repeted of the preachers, Free mouths against Rome.
which are plainly set forth to us by the express words of Angels and of
Christ. It seems that they would shut and stop the mouth of Christ him
self. Howbeit they attempt that in vain. For if the preachers hold their
peace, the stones will cry. For it behooves, that like as the glory of Christ,
so the shame of Antichrist should be known to the whole world. But they
offend most greuousely which in the sermons made against Antichrist, require
I know not what modesty. As though he ought to be spared, which spares no
good man. As though that doctrine were not modeste, which is taken and received
of the mouth and words of Christ. After in the.18. chapter. We shall hear the
lord command: render unto her: as she has rendered unto you, etc.

The some of ye vision,
Secondly he compriseth in few words the some of all, and shows whereunto we
should refer al things. Come says the Angel to S. John, and I will show
thee (...) the judgment, condemnation and punnishement of the great whore.
And where he says, of the great whore, he does intimate what the crime is or
cause of punnishement, fornication, infidelity, or ungodliness. This vision
also apperteineth hereunto, that we might understand, how Rome should be
punnished or destroyed, that is to say the Roman Empire, or the kingedome of
the Pope or of Antichrist: and wherefore or how it deserves to be destroyed.
Rome is a whore.
She is a whore, and a great and an erraunt whore. And who knows not, that a
marriage is contracted between God and all and singular faithful? that God is
the brydegrome, and the church his spouse? she is bounden than and coupled to
her husband alone in faith and troth. If she break this faith, and love
others, give her to them, call upon, and honor them, she is a whore. Whereof I
have spoken many times both in this book and else where.

And a most common thing is it in the Scriptures, to call reuolting,
unfaithfulness, impiety, superstition and Idolatry, fornication or whoredom.
If any man desire testimonies hereof, he shall find in the.8. of Judges, 1. of
Esaye, 2. and 3. of Jeremy. the.16. of Ezechias, in the.1.2. and.3. of Osee,
and other places. Rome therefore was a great strompet, and is also at this
day a most stynkyng harlot: For whic, she is full of Idolatry, worshippyng
of creatures, and abominable superstitions. Another is she herself only
polluted with all filthiness, but compels morouer the whole world to serve,
and that to serve in Idolatry and superstitions. What will you say that
through the wonderful providence of God it came to pass, that a woman fayning
herself a man, did clyme up to the Sea of Rome, was created Bisshoppe, and
called John the.8. which was one Gylberta, a great whore, borne at Mentz. For
thus would God declare, that the Bishop of Rome sits a whore upon the
beast. And herein I follow the constant consent of al Historiographers.
Nevertheless I am not ignorant, that there be some which have thought; how
this John was intruded into the seat up an harlot, and for that cause was
called an harlot.

Furthermore old Rome had power to do these things, She s^teth upon many
wat^rs.
for she sat upon many waters that is, had dominion and rule over many people,
and sundry nations. Ye al^o the kings of the Earth have committed whoredom
with her, wh^ lest they have submitted themselves to the Romans, bonden
themselves in leage, The princes ^^mi^te whoredom
and received of them superstitions and Idolatry. For the children of Israel
were also said to have committed whoredom with the Aegiptians, for that they
had joined amity with them, and were become fellows in profane religions.
And so new Rome the Popes kingdom stretches far and wide, and the Kings
and Princes of the Earth commit whoredom with her. Therefore does the word
of the Lord call it filthye whoredom, which the Romisshe name an holy bond
and obedience. There is added, and they that dwell upon Earth are made dronke^.
For he signifies, that being infected with errors, yea rather asotted, and
clean out of their wits, they have been mad in Idolatry, and yet rage in
their superstitions, like dro^kardes, and can not for fury receive the
preaching of the gospel. Touching this wine of fornication and whoredom, and
of that dronkennes I have spoken in the.14. chap. And it is aptly spoken, that
dwellers upon Earth are made dronke^, not so much for that men dwelling upon
Earth are made dronken, as for that earthly me^ and choked with earthly
desires, shall become faithful worshippers of the Romish See.

Thirdely, he expounds the manner of the vision The manner of the vision.
thus: I was carried away in sprete. Wherefore with his body remaining in
Patmos, in spirit he saw a woman sittyng on a beast, and distroyed with fire.
Such be many visio^s and sightes in the prophets. And he notes also the
place, wherein he saw the beast, not in heaven, another in the temple or
tabernacle, or in a fruictful place, The beast in the wilderness.
but in the wilderness. Esaye calls the gentiles and heythenes, wilderness.
And verily tholde Romans and new with their superstitions have had no place
in the church, but are without the church: God forbid tha^, that we should
acknowledge the church of Rome to be head of al faithful churches. And at this
day many of them which are called most holy and most reverent, differ nothing
from the gentiles, their titles and hypocrisy only excepted. Whereof is spoken
before in the.11. chapt.

Fourthly and last he exhibiteth this vision or tipe of old and new Rome,
and the ruin and destruction of them both, and with all describes most
dilligently the wickedness of either of them. And first must the beast be
considered, after the woman sittyng on the beast. The beast represents the
figure of old Rome: the woman of the new and of Popery. And the woman
sits upon the beast. For the image of the beast has succeeded, and has
placed her seat in old Rome. For Daniel also affirms, that Antichrist shall
pitche his seat or palace betwixt two Seas, The beast is rose colored.
to wit the Hadriatical Sea called commonly the goulfe of Venise, and the
Tyrrhene or Tuscane Sea. And the beast is rose colored, it is of a red and
bright color like Crimosine. For Rome has been most cruel and blouddy, and
swimmyng altogether in the blood of al me^, but especially of Christians. How
much blood shed Marius, Sylla, Pompey, Julius and others, after histories
Pliny has reported. Rome has with sword and fire distroyed the whole world.
The ten persecutions of Christians before the Empire of Constantine are most
commonly known.

How the beast was full of the names of blasphemy, I showed in the.13.
chapt. Rome abounded with chapelles and Idolles. Daily it blasphemed God,
Christ, the gospel, and rent the church a sonder. Of the.7. heads and ten
horns, is spoken also in the.13. chapt. And certain things shall follow in
this same chapter plain enough. And thus much hitherto of the old beast:
here follows of the woman sittyng upon the beast.

The same matter is yet still treated of, and the vision is expounded.
The.lxxiiij. Sermon.
ANd the woman was arrayed in purple and rose color, and decked with gold,
preciouse stone, and pearls: and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of
abominations, and filthiness of her whoredom. And in her forehead was a name
written, a mystery: great Babylon the mother of whoredom and abominations of
the Earth. And I saw the woman dronken with the blood of Saints, and with
the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. And when I saw her, I maruailed with a
great wonder. And the Angel said unto me: wherefore maruailest thou? I will
show thee, the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that bears her,
which has seven heads and ten horns. The beast that thou see, was, and is
not, and shall ascend out of the botomlesse pit, and shall go into perdition,
and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the
book of life from the beginning of the world) when they behold the beast
that was, and is not. And here is a mind, that has wisdom.

He describes excedingly well and lively, and sets forth to be seen of the
eyes of all men, that same woman before named the great whore. About the end of
the chapter he expounds himself, and says: and the woman, which thou
saw is the great city: The woman is ye great city, lady of kings.
great verily, as she that bears rule over the kings of the Earth. He
means therefore the very city of Rome, and even the popish and Romish
church, and the pope himself with all his creatures and chapplaynes, which make
a great and strong city, rulyng over al kings and princes of the Earth. For
who knows not, that Rome and the prelates of the church, do rule even above
magistrates and princes? consider what is done in the courts of kings and
princes, and by whose advise and counselles the princes of the Earth are
chiefly governed. And in calling papistrie a woman, he alludeth to the.5.
and.7. chapt. of the Proverbs of Solomon, who also likeneth crafty and
disceiptful philosophy, and worldly wisdom to a fair woman full of sundry
crafts and giles.

The apparel of the woman.
And now also he painteth out gallauntly and evidently the apparel or clothing
and very whorish behavior of this woman. She is furnisshed with no good
qualities inwardely, whereby she may commend her self to the world and to her
lovers: therefore she excels in outward deckyng of herself, where she is
inwardely full of all abominations: for all the world like unto ye Phariseis
and hipocrites, whom the lord says are without, li^e shinyng tumbes of
marble, but within replenisshed with all corruption and filthiness, and even
stinkyng. And hereby is signified chiefly that the church of Rome and kingdom
of Antichrist sets forth it self altogether with worldly furniture, to wit
with gold, silver, preciouse stones and al costely arraye. These things are
found in the old people, being under the discipline of the law: they are
found also emo^ges the gentiles, which suppose not god to be rightly honored,
but with the preciouse things of this world. But we know that the leuitical
priesthood is abrogated with all the outward array and that now ye church
decketh her self with virtues, hates and abhors outward garnisshing.
Lactantius confuteth at large the external deckyng in religion or godly
worshippyng, in his book of Institut. de vero cultu. etc. Moreover all old
writers show, that God is not worshipped of the christians with gold and
silver: but with faith, charity and righteousness. What will ye say that Daniel in
ye.11. chap. shows that Antichrist shall worship God with gold, silver and
precious things? which thing he co^de^neth and rejects.

And does it not appear here plainly, The Pope paincted forth is showed to
the world.
that the lord Jesus himself has setforth to us the Pope or Antichrist painted
as it were in a table. For he appears altogether such, and in such like
apparel he shows him self to be seen of all men, as the whore of Babilo^ is
decked with at this present. And he chalengeth to him self this apparel by a
certain right. For the Papists bring forth a false fained donation of
Constantine, emonges other things pronouncyng thus, in the Distinct. 96. The
donatio^ of Constantine fained.
We give and dimise to blessed Siluester and to all his successors the palace
laterane of our Empire: moreover the Diadem, to wit the royal crown of our
head (which the Pope calls a kingdom, and has made it triple) and also our
purple robe and coat of Crimosine, and all our imperial array. etc. I can not
here omit, but must needs write out a few things of Platina, the Popes
secretary, de vitis pontif. For describyng the life of Clement the.5. at the
Popes coronation, says he, were present Philippe king of France, and Charles
his brother, John Duke of Britain, which overwhelmed with the falling of a
wall, dies (see the divine and just judgment of God) with many others,
whilst the pomp of the Coronation, as the manner is, was led through the
city. King Philippe also by the same ruin was sore hurt and lamed: the Pope
stricken of his horse, lost a Rubie out of his myter that cost six thousand
Ducates. This he.

This whore moreover drynketh to all nations of the cup of Circes, which the
lord calls of Gold. She drinks to the^ carouse.
And it signifies doctrine. For to give drink is to teach, Ezechiel.34.
Gold betokens sincerenes and pureness of doctrine. Doubtless under pretense of
sincerenes and verity divine, Rome has easily persuaded all people, to
receive the doctrine of the Romish Sea. For the Pope has both named him self
Apostolical, and the church of Rome also Apostolical. And in the Canones has
left written: right so are all the laws of the Sea Apostolic to be taken,
as though they were confirmed by the godly mouth of S. Peter him self.
Distinct. 19. Read the.20.21.22. Distinct. Therefore the more simple sort of
the world have supposed, that they receive the very word and laws of God,
what time they received the decrees and doctrine of the church of Rome. But our
lord Jesus Christ does here declare unto us, what has been, and what is even
at this day their doctrine, and says: full of abominations, and uncleanness of
her filthy lust. And the scripture calls abomination, Idolatry, Deuter. 7.
chapt. Moreover the false worshippyng of God, superstition, and such other
things like. The uncleanness of whoredom in the Prophets is nothing else, but
perverse doctrine, and perverse religion, not attributing al good things to God
alone by his son, but rather dividing the heart, and appliyng them both unto
creatures, and to wicked worshippynges. But such is the doctrine and religion
of the Romish See. Therefore is her great sin here recited, that she has
with her evil and venemouse doctrine seduced and infected al nations, and even
now also reteyneth them in superstition and Idolatry. A like place is in
the.16. chapt. of Ezechiel. And I suppose that our lord Jesus Christ used here
now words very filthy, to the intent he might pluck away from the Romish
decrees and Canons their authority and viserne, and that their filthiness
might appear unto al men, and be known, and eschewed.

Furthermore leeste any should be ignorant, what the same woman were, A name
written in ye forehead, which may open the mystery or understanding.
which is here setforth to be seen, and that all might flee that great witch
Circes, he writes her own name in her very forehead, that al men might read
it, and that she might by no means be unknown. For he calls a mystery the
understanding or signification of a secret, for by a trope is Rome called
Babylon. Whereof I have spoken before. And after the true signification of the
word Babel sounds confusion. And Rome has brought an exceeding great
confusion into the church. For like as the primative church of Rome set forth
the gospel in the weste country: so the first simplicity and pureness ones
extinguished, the later Bisshoppes, regardyng more ambition and couetousenes,
than humility, liberality, and godliness, have brought into the whole world al
manner of Idolatry and superstition. Certainly she is called of the Lord
expressly the mother of the whoredoms and abominations of the earth. For we
may thank the church of Rome, for all the corrupt doctrine and ungodliness
that is in the church. She is ye original of idolles, Mass, and other
abominations. Therefore is she most worthy, to be punnisshed with most
greuouse tourmentes. And this verily is the most worthy title of the Romish
church. Others call her Apostolical, divine, chief, and of all most holy:
The Lord Christ calls her Babylon, and that great, a most common harlot,
and even the mother of the abominations, and whoredoms of the whole world,
fightyng against God and his annoyncted. Therefore let all the holy and
obedient children of God the father flee from her. I will not here make
rehearsal, how she is also the mother of al abominatio^s and whoredoms, even
after the flesh. For whilst the church of Rome has prohibited lawful marriages
and of God permitted to ecclesiastical persons, it has opened the gates to
fornications, adulteries, whoredoms, and lusts abominable. There need no
words, the thing it self speaks.

Unto these he annexeth a crime of al other most greuouse: Dronken which the
blood of Saints.
dronkennes, tyranny, and parricidie. And here also he uses an amplification.
For he says how that great Circes the most venemouse witch and Sorcerer,
is not sprinkled, or imbrewed, or wette, but dronke^ with the blood of saints,
I mean of holy martirs, which have borne witness to Jesus Christ, by preaching
of the gospel, and ascribyng al things of salvation to Christ alone. But
how many thousands, nay millions of Martirs through the instigation and
means of the Bishop and church of Rome, have been executed with most extreme
and horrible punnisshmentes, with in these six or five hondreth years,
histories make mention. What has been done, and what plenty of man's blood has
benne shed even within these.30. years, which our memory does attain to, my
heart grudgeth to recite. Great is this crime also, for the which Babylon is
plagued of God by just and most greuouse tourmentes. And full aptely is here
mention made of Martirs, that is of the witnesses of Jesus. For they that
confess the Euangelical doctrine of Christ, to be the true and absolute
doctrine, that christ is the only head of the church, the only priest and
Bishop, mediator and facrifice: and shall not join with all, in the mean
time that the doctrine of the church of Rome is also most perfect, to be had
in like reverence with the doctrine of the gospel, that the Pope is head of
the church militaunt, and in earth the true vicar of Christ, and pastor
general, and that the Sametes in heaven pray for us, and that the mass is a
true and real sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead: they are
condemned for heretics and Schismatikes, with sword and fire to be rooted out
of the Earth.

And hitherto reaches the mystery of the vision, by horrible sightes set
before our eyes, wherein is lively described both the old Roman Empire, and
chiefly the Popery of Rome with their sins and crimes heynouse and full of
enormitie. Hereafter shall follow an exposition of the vision, to the which
at the last shall be annexed the punnishement to be taken of Antichriste, and
the whole Antichristiane City. But in case ye shall apply all these things
which are spoken of the woman to old Rome, I will not be against it. For
there was also a religion at Rome, which consisted in gold and preciouse
things. Old Rome had a cup of false wisdom, wherewith she made dronken and
infected al nations. She was therefore the mother of abominations and
whoredoms, as of whom the provinces learned superstitions, etc. Howebeit
these things peculiarly, do concern the Pope. Notwithstanding that old Rome
also was dronken with the blood of Saints, etc.

S. John maruayleth at the sight of the ^east.
S. John maruaileth excedingly, when he saw the woman. For Daniel also maruailed
till his heart almost failed him, when he saw that Romish beast, as appears
in the.7. chapt. of Daniel. All godly in a manner maruayle also at this day,
when they see so great things granted or permitted of God to the church of
Rome against the pure sincerenes. For the prelates of the church are fortunate,
victoriouse, puissaunt, and in savor with all princes: and bring to pass what
so ever they imagine or list. Happy is he that is not in them offended. Read
the.73. Psalm. How good is God to Israel, to them that be right in heart,
^h^xposition of the v^sion.
etc.

The Angel, as chief minister, utters the mystery to S. John and the
whole Church: that is to say, opens the secret and true meaning of the
vision by parts most dilligently. And he speaks in deed of the whole body
of the beast, notwithstanding that the beast has certain things peculier,
and likewise the whore: yet the Angel himself, says: I will show thee the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that bears her. Nevertheless this
same is also a dark speaking, where in the beginning of the exposition he
says: the beast which thou saweste, was, and is not. The Roman Empire was
yet whylest Domitian ruled: but it was no more such, as it had been before. For
from the first Monarch Julius, it was as it were by inheritance in the house
of Caesar's, until Nero. For in him the beast received a deadly wound: but
it was healed, and diverse Emperors reigned not of any one family. The Empire
therefore had been in the power of one house before, but after Nero it was not
so. Again the Romans possessed the Empire after Nero. From Nerua, which is
the.7. after Nero, the Empire was deuolted to Traiane, under whom it was
puissaunt and strong. Therefore it was and it was not. Whereof S. Ihon himself
will speak a little after. Moreover the Stories testify, that the Empire of
Rome was extinguisshed, and in his place sprang up an other, which is also
called the Roman Empire: whereof you may say most truly it was, and is not.
For that oulde Roman Empire, was the most ample and noblest Empire in the
world: but this new, now erected of the Pope, is none such, but rather an
Image of the beast (as I said in the.13. chapt.) a shadow and a dream.
Therefore we doubt nothing but that in this vision is exhibited to us a type,
both of the oulde and new Empire, but chieflye of Popery.

And now he shows none other original of the beast, The original of the
beast.
but hellyshe and deuelysh. For he says, how he shall come up out of the
bottomless pit. Whereof is spoken before. All Empyres verily, as witnesses
Daniell in the.2. chapter, be of God. But in case the governors be corrupted,
the beginning or original is referred to the Devil, not of the Empire in deed,
but of the corruption. Here is added moreover, what end that unhappy Empire is
like to have at the last: and goes into perdition. For it is cut up by the
roots in earth, and addicte in an other world to pain everlasting.

Who be ye woorshippers of the beast.
But like as he showed in the thirtene chapt. who should wonder at, that is,
should honor and worship the beast: so here he repeteth the same, not the
chosen children of God, but earthly men, and reprobates, whose names are not
written in the book of life. Whereof we have spoken before. He annexeth an
acclamation: and here (aduerbiallie) is a mind, that has wisdom. The Lord
exciteth all the hearers to the dilligent consideration of these things, leeste
being disceaued we perish. They be fools that marvel at the beasts felicity,
victories, po^pes, majesty, riches, and pleasures, and submit themselves to
him. They be verily wise, that understand the Empire to be taken away, and
now that under the shaddowe of an Empire, lurketh Antichriste the Child of
perdition, and man of sin, to be eschewed of all the godly. For these are
converted to Christ. In whom they know that they have all things of life and
salvation, and to live in him. To him be praise and glory.

The godly vision is yet more plainly declared. The.lxxv. Sermon.
THE seven heads, are seven mountains, on which the woman sits: they are
also seven Kings. Five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not come. When
he comes he must continue a space. And the beast that was, and is not, is
even the eight, and is one of the seven, and shall go into destruction. And
the.x. horns which thou saw, ar.x. kings, which have not yet received the
Kingdom, but shall receive power as kings at one hour with the beast. These
have one mind, and shall give their power and strength to ye beast. These shall
fight with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome them. For he is Lord of all
Lords, and King of al Kings: and they that are on his side, ar called chosen,
and faithful.

The Angel expounder of mysteries, proceeds to declare to saint Ihon the
mystery of the beast exhibited, and of her judgment, and that by parts. And
at this present utters three things: what is signified by seven heads: Why
he said of the beast, he was and is not: and what the ten horns do betoken.

He expounds seven heads two ways, first by seven mountains, upon which the
woman sits, 7. Heads ar.7. hills
whom in the end of the chapter he calls the great City: to wit great
Rome, which all surname Septicolle, as standing upon seven mountains. Moreover
the beast has seven heads, because be had many times seven Kings. Whereof I
spoke also in the 13. chapt. At this present he rekeneth so the seven Kings,
that there is no doubt, but that it is Rome whereof he speaks. Which I
suppose be the Lords chief intent in these matters. For he could not speak
more expresselie, unless he should have expressed the name of Rome also: but
the name of Babylon we heard expressed before. Five, says he, are fallen, to
wit syns the deadly wound was given, in the death of Nero, in the space
of.14. pears. For immediately after Nero, began Galba to reygne: who being
slain, Otto reigned: which after he had killed himself, Vitellius succedeth,
which was also killed of the Flauianes. For after him, Flauius Vespasiane was
Emperor: after whom Titus, the best Prince of all. And these five fell with
in.xiiii. years. He adds, and one of those is, that is to wit, reigns
now, verily the sixth in order, Domitiane, the son of Vespasiane, and brother
to Titus a most ungracious man, which persecuted the faithful, and had
condemned S. Ihon into exile. An other, says S. Ihon, is not yet common:
namely Cocceius Nerua. For after he came to the Empire, and lived most
virtuously, and most righteouslye ordered the Empire, he tarried not long. For
when he had reigned one year, three months, and nine days, he died. And thus
much hitherto of the seven Kings, and of the seven heads of the beast. These
things so certain appertain, not so much to the exposition of this place, as
to the consolation of the faithful: which here may clearly perceive how Empires
consist in the hand and providence of God almighty, which knows his, and
has a care of ye godly, although they may seem, by reason of their greuouse
persicutions, and cruel tourmentes, to be of God neglected.

The beast was, and is not.
Consequently he expounds, wherefore he said of the beast he was, and is not:
verily for the eight king of Romans, Vlpius Traiane. For he is the eight from
the Empire wounded in Nero: Traiane was of the seven, that is to say, was
adopted of Nerua the seventh Emperor. And hitherto the Roman Empire was
governed, first in deed of Caesar's, after of the noblest Citizens of Rome. But
of this Traiane, which succeeded Nerua, the writers of Histories say, yt he was
the first stranger that ruled the Empire. For he was a Spanyarde. The Empire
therefore was or has been in the hands of the Romans, now it is so no more.
For a Spanyard succedeth, so that the Empire now seems, that it might be
called Romish Spanish. And for as much as Traiane persecuted Christ and his
members, he also went into perdition. And let no man think that this was the
only and sole cawse, wherefore S. Ihon said, how for Traiane it was said: he
was, and is not. For he has pronounced expressly, and he is the eight: as
though he should signify, that there be other causes also, for the which it
was said, that the Roman Empire was, and now is not, whereof is spoken
before.

Ten horns, are ten Kings.
Hereafter follows also the exposition of the ten horns. And the same horns
are here resited, which are spoken of in the seventh of Daniel, and in the.13.
of the Apocalipse. Another is there any cause, why ye should superstitiously
stick to the tenth number. For in the.14. of Number. the Lord says, how he
has been now tempted ten times of the Israelites: for many times. Here is
signified therefore, how the Roman Empire shall be dispersed into many
Kingdoms. For whether you say kings, or kingdoms, the matter is all one.
Doubtelesse the Roman Empire beginning to fall to decay, there sprang up kings
in the East and Weste, which invaded ye Roman Empire, Persians, Goths,
Vandalles, Lumbardes, and I wot not what others: at the last in Spain,
France, Hongarie, I speak not of Affricke and Asia, were found diverse
kings, and the Roman monarchy ceased. Of these kings the Angel warns us
for diverse causes. These, says he, have not yet received the kingdom. For
whilst S. John wrote the Apocalipse, Domitiane ruled, and the Roman Empire
was yet mighty and strong, and so remained stille certain ages. When therefore
did they receive their kyngedome? They receive, says he, power as kings at
one hour with the beast, namely the second. For these things can not be
understand of the first and old Roman Empire. And Primasius, expou^ding this
place, admonishes, The kings receyne power with the beast.
that an hour here is taken for a time present. Therefore at the same time, the
beast, that new Empire grows up and increases, and the kings receive might
and power. For the decay of the old Empire, was the strength of kings, and
of the new Popish Empire. And in deed the emperor Phocas commanded the church
of Rome, and the Bishop thereof to be head of churches. Which gave a certain
beginning to the Popes dominion, as also in the.13. chapter. I have recited:
which he obtained at the length more fully under king Pipine, and other Princes
of France and Germany, but Nauclerus speaking of the Empire of Phocas in
the.21. Generation. The enemies, says he, of the Roman Empire, by the
slougthfulnes and cowardice of Emperors, made stronger, had taken away in the
Weste country with the Islands Germany, France, Spain, Hungary, Slauonie,
and a good part of Italy, and thereto a great part of Affricke: and in the
East parts, Cacannus of Thracia, King of Hunnes invaded the Iberians,
Armenians, Arabians, Dardanes, and the middle parts of Macedonie and Greece.
And the Persians in a manner possessed all Assiria, the Sarracens destroyed
Egypt, fie for shame, our strength has so failed us through riot,
couetousenes, and voluptuousenes, that the Roman Empire stood than only in
name. Hitherto he. The same things have we discoursed more at large in the 13.
chapter of this work. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
And verily Daniel shows how emonges those ten horns, one other little
horn should grow up, which should strike of three, and take their place, and
reign wantonly, crwelly, and wickedly. Wherefore the Popes Empire, and those
sundry kingdoms grew up in a manner about one and the same time.

The kings have one mind.
He shows moreover, what manner of kingdoms those shall be, and how they shall
demean themselves toward that latter beast, namely toward the church of
Rome: they, says he, have al (...), one opinion: they believe al one thing,
and be of the same religion. He speaks chiefly of the western kings. For
they al receive the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, and honor them, as most
obedient children of the most sacred and holy church of Rome. They shall deliver
to the beast (...), their power, (...) their authority, or kyngedome. For
they submit themselves to the Sea of Rome. If the church of Rome have need of
an Army or force of arms, the kings send their power gladly to him: which
the most noble kingdom of Boheme felt about an hondreth years sins, though it
were to no great commodity, and beautiful triumphs of the inuaders. Yea
morouer they acknowledge themselves to owe homage and feaultie to the most
holy and supreme Bishop in all the world. Hereunto chiesly apperteyneth that
which Augustine. Stewchus in his book against Laurence valla, concerning the
donation of Constantine, in the.94. Section, has written on this wise: Gregory
the.7. unto Geusa king of Hungary: we suppose it is not unknown to thee,
says he, that the kingdom of Hungary, like as other most noble realms
also, ought to be in the state of his own liberty, another that it ought to be
subject to any king of an other realm, save to the holy and universal mother
church of Rome, which has her subjects, not as servants, but as children.
Hereunto adds Steuchus: thou hear with what government the church rules,
that she may interteyne her subjects, not as servants, but as children. She
puts not kings out of their possession, but permits them to reign as
her sons: who reignyng, she reigns her self also. Nevertheless she will
be known for Queen and Lady. Queen and Lady.
Thou hear how all the most noble realms be subject to the Apostolical
See. Even there he shows that the most noble kingdoms of Spain, France,
England, Denmark, Russelande, Croatie, Dalmatia, Arragonie, Sardinia,
Portugalle, Bohemia, Sweuia, and Norwaye, be subject and tributaries to the
church of Rome. In the Section.97. He adds moreover: although the kings
reigned, and continued in possession: yet are they wont to acknowledge her as
Queen, and true Lady and gyuer of their kingdoms. And in the Sect. 105. The
old monumentes of all Popes are full of high authority, A mouth verily
speaking great things.
whereby they have with their Empires governed the whole world, having the
rule and order of al lands, which power and authority that impudente praiser
of the Romish See is not asshamed to call omnipotent or almighty.

And doubtless we see at this day, great Ambassades sent to Rome by the
western kings newely elected and crowned, to the intent to kiss the Popes
fete or too of Antichrist, and to offer dew obedience, as they call it.
Therefore did he call them before not kings absolutely, but as kings. For
they acknowledge a superior, and be even as it were servants or wards of
the servant of servants. Of whom he has made proper verses: The vulgar
people brought from far end of the world,
The servant of servants O Rome is now thy Lord.


Hereunto the Apostle adds a thing yet more greuouse. The fight with the
lamb.
These Kings, I mean the confederates of the Pope, and obedient children of
the Church of Rome, indewed with the spirit of the beast, shall fight with
the Lamb. Whereby is signified the tyranny, which kings, and princes, and
certain other states of the Roman Empire do practice, and long have practiced
against Christ and his gospel. Concerning the lamb we have already spoken
enough before. John Baptist, poinctyng with his fingar to Christ, says:
behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Therefore
shall the Romish princes fight, not against Christ himself, for they will be
christians, but against the Lamb, that is, the sanctification, justification
and satisfaction of Christ. For if any man say at this day, that the son of
God is most holy, by whom alone sins are forgeuen, and we are sanctified:
and say not also, that the Bishop of Rome is most holy also, which purges
by pardons granted, but shall say rather, that perdons are plain
disceiptfulnes, and the Pope most unclean of all: he shall doubtless another be
taken for right catholic, another shall he be spared for confessyng the lamb
of God. If any man shall confess that justification is only in the son of God
alone, and that men are justified by faith only, and not also by our works and
merits, he shall be carried to death or to prison, another shall the confession of
the lamb of God prevail him any thing. If any man shall say, that he is fully
purged through the only oblation of Christ on the cross, as of a lamb
without spotte, and sacrificed from the beginning, neither that he needs any
popish Masses, whereby the shauelynges boaste that they make a daily offering
for the sins of the quick and dead, which in deed is both false, and
blasphemouse, he is straight ways hurried to prison, and from thence drawn to
the stake and burnt. We can not deny but that this is true, seeing there be at
this day innumerable examples of Romish kings and princes in this behalf.
We shall not need therefore to fetch our exposition far of, how these
kings, which wholly depe^de of the Pope shall fight with the lamb. I speak
here nothing of others, which cleave whole unto Christ.

And therefore for a comfort is consequently annexed, and the Lamb shall over
come them. The la^be shall overcome the^.
For albeit that Popish kings and Princes seem to overcome the Saints, whom
they burn, murder, and distroye, yet Christ lives for ever, the redemption
of Christ florissheth. As most godly that good poet has song: Christ
lives yet, and shall do still,
His truth eke shall remain,
Whilst all that does this world fulfill.
Shall perish and be vain.


Kings perish, kingdoms perish or be changed: but the truth is never
changed, Christ perishes never. He adioyneth a most strong reason: for he is
Lord of Lords, and king of kings. Therefore shall they be made a footstool for
the fete of the Lamb, as many as shall strive against him. You see again,
why S. John said before: they receive power as kings. For all kings are
under Christ, which excels all lords in the world. For to him is given
power in Heaven and in earth. Let us therefore be of bold courage. For the lord
is Emperor, and our king almighty, immortal, and invincible. He will come
shortly in the clouds of thayre, to judge the quick and the dead, etc.

Moreover victory is promised assuredly to us that be servants of Christ.
Called, chosen, faithful.
And they that be with him or on his side called, chosen and faithful. We be
chosen in Christ before the foundations of the world were laid, that we should
believe in him, and be saved, the first, to the Ephesians. Hereunto we be called by
the preaching of the gospel. Read the.2. to the These. the.2. chapt. And we
ought to give thanks unto God for ever, etc, Let us hold fast these things,
and be in the troubles of this world constant, and without fear. To God be
glory.

Again this vision is more fully declared, and the punnishment of the beast is
showed. The.lxxvj. Sermon.
ANd he said unto me: the waters which thou saw, where the whore sits,
are people and folk, and nations, and tunges. And the te^ horns, which thou
saw upon the beast, are they which shall hate ye whore, and shall make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For
God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to do with one consent,
for to give her kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God be fulfilled.
And the woman which thou saw, is that great city, which reigns over the
kings of the Earth.

The Angel sent of the lord Christ, utters to John and the whole world the
mystery of the beast revealed: but especially her judgment or punnishement,
for her heynouse crimes. Which he will pursewe also in the chapt. followyng.

And now he expounds the signification of waters, over the which the whore
rules, to wit the Romish power. Waters signify, Waters upon waters the
whore sits.
kingdoms dispersed through out ye world. Which he expounds after his manner,
altogether prophetical, as was also noted before, by three vocables. For in
namyng people, folk, nations and tunges, he comprehends as it were
innumerable nations, distinct with sundry langages and manners. But where
nothing is more mouable or inconstant than waters, and when they be ones
stired up more furiouse and outrageouse: the common folk or people are rightly
compared to waters, which are also for their unstableness called mouable or
inconstant, and for their rage both furiouse and mad.

Co^motio^s
Therefore not without cause al wise men have greuousely condemned seditions,
which we are wont to call tumultes or vprores: as by the which are assembled
many naughty natures, and occasion is given them to break out at their lust,
and to hurt. But seeing that so many nations were subject to the Roman
Empire, and have erred nevertheless in the true faith, what shall it prevail
hereafter to reken up many and sundry kingdoms, which should consent in any
religion: as though the sincerenes and verity of religion should depend upon
a multitude of men agreyng in the same.

The judgment of God against Rome.
Now follows the judgment of God against blouddy Rome, which is the chiefest
thing in this vision: the some of al is, Rome shall be rent in pieces, and burnt
with fire: as we heard also in the.13. chapt. like as she has done to others,
so shall be done unto her. And these things are to be expounded first of old
Rome, and after of new: and in the same must the words be first considered,
than a conference of stories must be had, out of the which the truth of the
prophecy may appear.

Ten horns, signify kings, which have risen of the tearyng a sonder of the
Roman Empire, The hatred of ten horns against the whore.
such as were the kings of Westgothes, Eastgothes, of Germaynes, Frenchmen,
Lumbardes, Hunnes, Vandalles, etc. These nations served ones the Romans, and
took their wages, they favored them, and to their own loss brought their
matters to pass: no otherwise than as an erneste lover serves some one
harlot, from whom he can by no means be withdrawn, as whom he loves most
fervently, but at last perceiving her untrue dealyng, he begins to hate
the same most deadly. So these nations and others, began so to persecute the
name of Romans, that they would have no monume^tes or footsteps of them any
where to abide or remain. All the provinces of the Romans were filled full of
Roman posies, Images, pillars, tittles and writings: but in the same,
especially in Germany, and the borders thereof, how many I pray you, of so
great plenty remain? The cities, wherein the Romans had their garnisons, ar
utterly destroyed, that scarsely there appear any footsteps thereof at this
day.

And like as an honest man having a whore to his wife, a shameless strompet,
does not only hate, but also forsakes the same, troubles her, and tourneth
her naked, having plucked from her al her wifely apparel and ornaments:
Ezech. 16, Osee. 2.
(for so God in his prophets threateneth to do unto his people for their
unfaithfulness:) so nations revolted from the Roman Empire, distroyed and
impouerished the same, spoiling the riches thereof, which the Romans had
heaped together by the robbery of al nations: They shall eat her flesh.
they spoiled every where also the Roman provinces. And where it is said that
those kings shall devour the flesh of the beast, it is to be understand of
the manner of speaking. For so are we wont to say, what time we signify
extreme cruelty and malice without mercy: therefore like as Rome has been
most cruel toward all nations, even so shall al nations most cruelly tear
her, and finally shall burn her with fire.

Now let us compare with these things the history, A story of ye destruction
and burning of Rome.
and see how they were fulfilled in tholde Rome, and may be yet fulfilled in
the new. And first we will speak of old Rome, and after of new. And verily
old Rome grew many years, and practiced robberies through out the whole
world, and distroyed the Saints of the most highest: wherefore it was worthy,
that the punnishment thereof should extend and endure many years, and so as it
were by degrees to descend to the last burning and destruction thereof. There
be gathered the years of her punnishmentes about.136. in the which she being
impenitent, was vexed and tourmoyled with continual calamities, slaughters, and
vexatio^s. And hereof I compiled an abridgement in the.57. Sermon of this work
the. 13. chapt. And here I will repete a few things, and will rehearse certain
other things more plainly and at large. As the Lord in punnishyng the
Ninevites and Hierosolomitanes, declared his long sufferyng and cleme^cie, and
also his straight justice: right so in procedyng slowely, to distroye Rome, he
left them mercifully space to repent in, which seeing they refused to do, he
wasted and destroyed them terriblely as impenitent. He gave therefore to Rome
excellent good Princes, Constaunce, Constantine, Iouiane, Valentinian,
Gratiane, Theodose, etc. By whose dilligent labor, and godliness he disclosed
the furies and ragyng idolatry of the Heythen, and also restored and
established the true religion. But as in the time of Josias the old kankred
error and abominable idolatry could not be rooted out of their hearts, but
that the greater part had rather have still the abominatians of the
Amorrheans: so the Romans both in the city and in the provinces aspired
gredely to the restitution of tholde idolatry. Therefore like as he tamed at
the length with greuouse wars the invincible ungodliness of the Jews, and
destroyed the city of Jerusalem, so by the war of Goths and Vandales, and
invasions of Barbarous nations (so the stories term them) he destroyed proud
and wicked Rome, with her provinces, The Goths burn Rome.
and finally consumed the city with the sword and fire of the Goths. The
very name of the enemy cried out, that the vengeance was not executed by men,
but of God himself. For the Germane vocable of Goths, does signify the
people of God, or Gods people. For God in high dutch is called Got: thereof
comes the gotthes, Die gotther, the people of God. Therefore God, and not man
did chasten, tourmoyle and at last distroye Rome. Which thing S. John at this
present speaks most expressly.

Alaricke a westgotth.
First in thempire of Honorius and Arcadius, the westgothes, (by ye conduit of
Alaricke) besiege the city, assault it, take it, spoil it. S. Hierome to
Principia does greatly lament this chance of Rome, in the Epitaph of
Marcella: but Orosius as I also rehearsed in the.57. sermon, does, in my
judgment, more rightly commend the just judgment of God in Rome afflicted.
It is plain, that Rome was than for the grenousenes of her sins, chastised
with mercy, but where the Romans would not acknowledge the hand of the
striker, it came to pass, that Alaricke being dead, the victorious army having
now Adolphe to their captain, returned out of Lucania, and spoiled the riches
of Rome much more gredely now than they did before.

From the which time was granted again to Rome a space of repentance,
about.42. years. Atth^la king of Hunnes.
In the mean time by distructio^s and overthrows given by the Hunnes in their
provinces, and that great and wonderful, they are admonished to be wise. What
will they say that Athila him self with his Hunnes inuadeth now Italy it
self, and now hangs over the neck of Rome? There chanced than a thing,
which had been able to have turned the Romans to the service of the true God,
in case there had remained in the^ one spark of thankfulness. For the minister
of the church of Rome, Bisshoppe Leo (the ambitiouse pride of Popes was not yet
known) a preacher of the Christian faith, and a steward of Christ's
mysteries, making supplication to Athila, obteyneth peace for Rome, and by a
manifest oration tourneth away the blouddy enemy from the necks of the
Romans. This was an exceeding great benefit, which God by his servant would
show to the Romans, in case they would yet cease to hate the religion of
Christ, and to sclaunder Christ, as though he poured out euilles into the
world, and that there came no good nor quietness of the preaching of the
gospel. For even now (not to speak of others innumerable) he has imploide
upon come a benefit inestimable, and that by the preacher of the gospel. This
was done in the year of our Lord.454.

Howebeit whilst the Romans proceeded after their accustomed manner, Ge^serich.
a Vandal.
and now also Valentinian a Prince not evil was murdered, and by a tumulte
many unworthy things were done, another did there any token of thankefulnes
toward Christ appear, or sign of true conversion: through the means of one
woman Eudoxia the wife of Valentinian, which her self also suffered many
unworthy things in that Tumulte, it was brought to pass, that Genserichus
king of Vandalles, sailed out of Affricke with three hondreth thousand to
Rome, and took it, and by the space of fouretene whole days, he gathered up
the treasures brought thither out of al parts in a manner of the world
inhabited. Than could the intercession of Leo do nothing, save that the
Vandalles absteyned from killyng and burning: which was also a benefit of God
not to be contemned. The first king of Westgothes, which brake into Rome was
called Alrich, others call him Atalarich: but this king of Vandalles is named
Genserych, and so Rome an whore is made desolate and naked, spoiled I say,
which being enriched with the spoils of all nations was hitherto proud.
Howbeit it was not now altogether defaced and brent: the which was no small
benefit, which Christ again showed to Rome for an amendment.

And yet moreover are granted about twenty years, in the which nevertheless,
as in ye ten tribes of Israel before the destruction of Samaria, 4. book of
kings.
were practiced continual murders, whilst te^ princes reign at Rome: yet so
for all that, that there was never one of these which was not of an other
either slain, murdered or expulsed. Augustulus emo^ges these was the last.
For as Augustulus succeding Julius gave the beginning to ye Roman monarchy,
so Augustulus ended the same.

Odacer a Germane.
For the Roman legions being extinguished, and the name imperial by the
Germans, Odacer, (which took his name of destroiyng of lands, Oedacher, and
was called as it were a distroyer, wanne Rome, and in it reigned king
about.15. years. Yet is he expulsed again, and slain (at the iustigation of
Zenon Emperor of Constantinople) by Theodoricke Prince of the Eastegothes.
Theodoricke an Eastgoth.
And the Eastegotthes reign at Rome about fifty years, til the Emperor
Justinian sent Bellisarius into Italy with a greek army, to recover the same:
whom the Eastgothes, being aided with a power of Germans, sent unto them by
Theodoper king of France, valeauntly resisted. They warred in Italy by the
space of.18. years continually, with fortune variable.

Totila Balduffe or balduill
At the last Totila Baldeuille overcome. He took and burnt the city of Rome,
and yet not suddenly. For he gave a time to deliberate. But where he could not
so prevail, he distroyed Rome, and as S. John has prophesied burnte her with
fire. Al stories make mention of this destruction. John Auentine in the.3. book
of Cronicles, of the same matter has written this Totilas besegeth Rome, and
takes it, the.16. kale^des of January (17. of Decembre) in the year of the
christen salvation 548. Totila gave all the goods to the soldiers, but he
commanded by proclamation, that their bodies should be free. From thence he
sent ambassadors with his pleasure to new Rome (Co^sta^tinople) unto
Justinian. He required of the emperor Italy, and the leage as it had be^ under
the emperor Anastase, and Theodoricke king. Which if he might not obtain,
Totila threatened, that he would raze the city, which he could not keep, and
abolish ye Roman name. Justinian answered how Bellisarius was in Italy, unto
whom he had committed Italia^ matters. Totila therefore, where the emperor would
not grant his requests, determined to raze the city of Rome. The greatest
part of the walls in most places he made even with the ground, and sets
the Capitolle house on fire. He commands al Citizens with their wives and
children to depart out of the city. The commons of Rome were dispersed in the
towns of Campania. The Senators and nobility Totila kept with him for
pledges. Than was fire put into every house. Thus Rome being fired in all
places, Totila left it vacant.13. days the fire brent clear. The city of
Rome was.40. days in that solitarines, yt there was neither man nor woman in
the same. The city overthrown he removed his camp toward Lutania and
Calabria. Bellisarius came to the city left vacant, and sooner than a man
would have thought, fortifieth a part of the city with ditch, wall, rampare,
and turretes of wood. For all could not be restored. Totilas was with him, but
repulsed, departed to Tibur. Bellisarius is sent for into Greece by the emperor,
Totila besegeth Rome and takes it. So in one year Rome the head of the world,
the lady of al nations, was taken thryse, thus writes Auentinus. Leonarde
Aretine writing of the Italian war against the Gotthes, in the end of the 2.
book. After this, says he, Totila departing from Rome with his whole army,
left it utterly desolate and vacant, etc. Who will say now, that S. John
has not in few words comprehended the destruction of old Rome, which the
stories afterward have plentifully described: and finally how after the same
manner as it was prophesied, it has followed the prophecy, after.451. years.
And that so evidently to have propounded in few words, that you would think
presently to behold Rome both falling and burning.

New Rome also shall fall with her empire
And like as in the story of the gospel the lord intermireth a prophecy of the
destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the world, that every man might, of
this that he sees the city of Jerusalem, right so as the lord had
prophesied, to have perished, another that one stone has remained upon an
other, gather by like troth and certentie that this world shall fall: So may
we of this that we see tholde city of Rome fallen, and so great an Empire,
which was thought should have lasted for ever, brought to naught, gather also
that new Rome with her shaddowe or image of thempire, shall as sure as day
fall, and be brought to naught. And first in deed the Saracenes and Turks,
which ruled, and yet reign in the provinces subject to the Roman Empire, as
in Asia, Greece, Aegypte, Affricke, Slauonie, and base Hungary, and therefore be
rightly accounted emonges the ten horns, do hate worse than dog or snake
both Popery it self, and Rome, and all that Imagerie Empire. Yea and stories
also testify, that they have often times made invasions, and spoiled Rome it
self. What is done at this day, experience it self teaches. But whether the
Turk, or the christen Princes themselves, converted to Christ by the Gospel,
shall spoil this new Rome, destroy it utterly and burn it with fire, the
Lord knows, who seems here to intimate some such thing hereof. This is
certain, that Christ alone with his hand shall bring down Antichrist, and
abolish him with his coming. Certain it is, that the Earth, and all the works
that be therein shall be bre^t. For thus is thapostolical doctrine: and that al
these things shall be in the end of the world. Read Paul.2. to the These.
the.2. And Peter the.2. Epistle the.3. chap. Morouer there arrise in sundry
kingdoms of the world learned men, which ones being bounden to the Sea of
Rome, have defended her and her stinking idolle: but after converted to Christ,
begin to hate both Rome, and the Romish church, which also they assail, and
burn with the fire of Gods word. Therefore all the glory, dignity and wealth of
the Pope and popery has perished and perishes daily in the godly. All that be
godly wise hate Rome and romish wares. Al cry out, that this Sodom is worthy
to be burnt with fire falling from heaven. Another is there any doubt, but that
a greuouse vengeance is prepared against her.

And briefly is showed a reason, God has put into ye hearts of kings. etc.
wherefore the Kings should rage so cruelly against the beast, and why these
things are done in such sort and manner, as we have heard. For God says he,
has given into the hearts of the^, (...) that is: that they should work his
will, and should do with one mind and consent. For where some refer (...)
his, to the beast, that seems to far of, and strange. It is referred rather
to the next, to God I mean, which put into the hearts of the kings to do
his will, I say of God. For it is the mind and will of God, that the beast
should perish, that punnishment be taken of her, for shedyng of innocent
blood. The same God will procure that kings shall not be at discord, but at
concord, that being of one mind and accord, they may execute Gods judgment.
So we read in the Prophets, that God put in to the hearts of kings,
Salmanaser, Sinnacherib, Nabuchodonoser, Cyrus and others, that they should do
as they are red to have done, to wit in pu^nishing the wicked, and defending
the godly. And there is also mention made in Histories, how Alaricke King of
the west Goths was in deed dissuaded by a servant of God, that he should not
make such haste to distroy Rome: but that he answered. There is one that
continually troubles me and says, go, distroy Rome. And he that put that
mind and will in to the heart of Alarich, Adolphe, Genserych, Odacer,
Theodoricke and Totila: The same if he will, and when he will, and in to what
Princes he will, shall put, that they also shall do their dewtie against this
new City and church of Rome.

The angel anexeth, how God moreover has put into the hearts of kings, yt they
should give their kingdom to the beast, til ye words of God be fulfilled. The
which the interpretours expound and say, how God has permitted, that they
should conceive this counsel in their mynds, to deliver ye kingdom to the
beast. But I suppose it to be more plain, if we symplye confess God to be
author of no sin, and that men sin as compelled by no fatal necessity,
but through their own fault and vice. Therefore God would, as by his word
also he has expressed and taught, that kings should deliver their Kingdoms
to Christ, the high King: which where it pleased them not, but had rather for
sundry causes of ye flesh and the world, deliver their kingdoms to the Pope,
and submit themselves to the Sea (as they call it) Apostolical, God of his
just judgment has forsaken them, and given them over (as S. Paul wrote the
Romans) into a reprobate mind, to do those things which God allows not.
And so are the words of God prophesied by the Prophets and Apostles, on this
wise fulfilled. Doubtless they be the words of God and not of men, which are
red of this matter in Daniell, and in all this book of revelation.

The woman is the great city.
Finally the Angel expounds, what is signified by the woman sitting on the
beast: to wit that great city of Rome, the head and Lady maistresse of the
world, and the Romish church, Popery, and power, stretching out her self and
her Kingdom, over the Kings of the Earth. Of whom already has been spoken
enough. To God be glory.

He shows that Rome shall assuredly fall: and adds the causes of her fall.
The.lxxvij. Sermon.
The.18. chapter.
AND after that, I saw an Angel come down from Heaven having great power,
and the Earth was lightened with his brightness: and he cried mightelye with a
strong voice, saying: she is fallen, she is fallen, even great Babylon, and is
become the habitation of Deuilles, and the hold of all unclean spirits, and
a cage of unclean and hateful birds: for all nations have dronken of the wine
of the wrath of her whoredom. And the kings of the earth have committed
fornication with her, and her merchants are waxed rych of the abundance of
her pleasures.

He pourseweth through out all the.18. chap. the destruction of old and new
Rome, also of Heithennes and Antichristianisme, and that with a maruelouse
plenty and evidence of speech, even so that ye would think, that you saw al
thing presently. And he uses also a most godly order. The some of the.18.
chapter.
For first the Angel declares the destruction of Rome with most apt words.
Secondly counsel is given to the godly, how to behave themselves in so great
dangers. Than is added the manner of the desolation, that like as Rome has
gredely and cruelly spoiled and destroyed other nations, even so it shall
chance unto her also. After this a lamentation is made, wherein the Princes
and marchau^ts do mourn for the ruin of Rome: where they also resyte the
richesse and pleasures of Rome. Finally, the Apostles and Prophets rejoice at
the most just judgment of God. Again the Angel of the Lord, cast a millstone
into the bottom of the sea: that so the most certain, unrecoverable, and
most weighty destruction of Rome might be signified. Whereunto again are
anexed the causes of so great euilles, and the same finished with the praise
and gratulation of all the heavenly dwellers.

And most luckely does he imitate the holy Prophets of God, whereof two in a
manner after the same forte, S. Ihon imitateth ye prophets.
do describe the destruction of old Babylon. Esaye in the.13.14. and.21. chap.
And Jeremy in the.50. and.51. And Ezechiell the overthrow of Tirus, in
the.26.27. and.28. chapt. For as the lot and end of all the ungodly is like, so
does the canonical Scripture in painting out their destruction, right well
agree with it self. The Apostles moreover, The majesty of the holy tung.
although they spoke and wrote to the gentyles in greek, yet altered they
nothing of their natural phrase of speaking, and even constrained strange
tungues to serve the holy, and not the Hebrew to serve unto heathen langages.
For speaking greek, they observed the natural phrase of the Hebrew speech, as
first, divine, and holy. And where they could speak all langages, yet ded
they never speak and write any foreyne langage so, but that in the same the
Hebrew phrase might be perceived. The curiosity of the readers in the
translations of ye Bible.
Let some therefore beware at this day, that they be not to deintie cared, and
follow the puretie of the latin speech so, that in expressing the same, they
fall not in the mean while from the simplicity of the holy tongue, and lose
not a few mysteries. They that be not froward, had rather frame themselves to
the holy langage, and learn the phrases thereof, than to subdue the same
against the hear to strange tongues, and compel it to serve our delicate
ears. Moreover we have already admonished oftentimes, what is the end and use
of this treatise, concerning the judgments, or pu^nishments of God. For the
verity and justice of God is confirmed, the afflicted receive comfort, and the
wicked, and all Gods enemies are made affrayde, etc.

The ungodly deride the oracles of god
But when S. Ihon published these things, and prophesied of the destruction of
Babylon, which al men at that time (by reason of the late subversion of
Jerusalem and most greuouse captivity of the Jews, which had lately chanced
under Vespasian) ded clearly understand to signify Rome: For right so had
Babylon in times past, vexed the holy City, and nation, as now had Vespasian
the Roman. The godly in deed believed the^ to be true, and that they should
undoubtedly come to pass: The ungodly as dotages laughed them to scorn. The
same had their elders done. For when the Prophets also prophesied the
subversion of Niniue, Babylon, and most mighty Monarchies, they seemed to them
to be mad. Notwithstanding even as they had said, so came it to pass.
Therefore the faithful believe the Oracles of God, how long so ever they be
differred, which are prophesied to come: how impossible so ever they appear
unto the world. For to God speaking and willing, nothing is hard.

The Author of this oracle.
And going about to show the subversion of Rome, he prepares his hearers, and
wins credit to the prophecy, whileste before all things he shows the
author of the Oracle or prophecy, the very Angel of God. And verily he
commends highly the same Angel to us, to the end we should doubt nothing, of
the verity of those things which he speaks. For he says, how he came
from Heaven. Whereupon we gather, those things that he brings to be divine and
celestial, the same is said to have great power: lest verily we should think
those things to be impossible, which he says shall come to pass. For if the
Angel Gods minister be of so great power: what may we think the Lord to be,
which sent the Angel? One Angel before the walls of Jerusalem killed an
hondreth fourscore and five thousand men of war. One Angel in a night
slew all the first borne of Aegipt. Therefore seeing the most mighty Angel
prophecieth the destruction of old and new Rome, we need not to doubt, but
that it shall utterly perisshe. Moreover the Earth was lightened with the
glory, that is to say with the brightenes or light of this Angel. For this
prophecy is another dark, another will it be hid, but chiefly, and most
clearly preachrd through out the world.

Wherefore the same Angel cries with all his force, We must preach freely
and clearly against Antichrist.
and that with a great voice. For it behooves these oracles of God, wherein is
treated of the glory of God, and salvation of souls, be preached with loud
voices, how so ever the world prohibiteth and persecuteth the same. And let
them observe those things which think that men may be restreyned by
proclamations, fire and sword, that they shall not with voice most clear
preach against Antichrist. The fools are disceaued. They houe fought and
contended herin these six hondreth years and more, another could any man though
he raged never so fiercely, bring this preaching a sleep. It breaks out many
times, and pearseth far even at this day also through out the whole world:
therefore the glory of this Angel is yet, and ever shall be shinyng and bright,
and his voice and preaching most strong, though the Popes guts burste.

Now follows the prophecy of thaungel, She is fallen, she is fallen Babylon.
the some whereof is: Rome shall perish, neither shall any step of her be
left. This utters he prophetically, as he did also in the.14. chapt. She is
fallen, she is fallen great Babylon. She is fallen, he said, for shall fall:
puttyng the time paste, for the certentie of the thing, for the time to come:
whereunto the doubling also apperteineth. Likewise spoke the Prophets.
Macrobius marueleth at the wonderful brevity of Vergill. And emonges other
things in the first chapt. of the.5. book of Saturnalles, will thou hear
Virgill, says he, speaking with so much brevity, that brevity it self
can be no more straitely hampered and drawn together? And feldes where Troy
was behold how in very few words he has supped offe a mighty great
City: And has left no ruin at all. Hitherto Macrobius. These things shall
we more trewly and more rightly apply unto our Prophets most eloquent in
their tunge, and chiefly to S. John. For what could be thought more brief,
than that which he said, she is fallen, she is fallen great Babylon? For S.
John both expressed the greatness and majesty of the city, and swallowed it up
whole, no ruin at al left, for he signified that both old and new Rome,
although it seem stout, invincible, and eternal, yet shall it fall: and so
fall, that nothing thereof shall be left. Which shortly after he sets
before our eyes more expressly by a certain Chria, whilst the Angel taking up
a millstone, and casting it into the bottom of the Sea, adds: thus or with
such a violence shall Babylon that great city be overthrown, and shall be
found no more. Therefore was there never any thing, is, or shall be in the
world so mighty or vnpregnable, which the invincible power of God can not
bring to naught, when he will, and when the fatal hour is come. Old Rome is
lost, and that mighty monarchy decayed: there is fallen also the
superstition and Idolatry of the heythen, that has reigned many years: new
Rome shall perish also with her Imaginary Empire: the kingedome also of the
Pope or Antichrist which has long a sotted and plagued the world shall
fall, and fade with smoke.

Morouer by a figurative speech taken out of the prophets, And it is made ye
habitatio^ of deuilles.
he shows the manner of the destruction by conseque^ces: and is become the
habitation of Deuilles, etc. For so hereby he signifies that it shall be
destroyed, that the place which was before much frequented of men, shall be now
the habitation of wild beasts and deuelles, delighting in wilderness, as our
lord also testifies in the.12. of Matthew. And he alluded to the words of the
Prophets. Esaye in the.13. chapt. And Babylon the beaultie of realms shall be
overthrown, as the Lord subverted Sodom and Gomorrha: it shall not be
inhabited, but beasts shall there take there rest, and the satires or heerry
shall there leap. The same things are repeted also in the.50. of Jeremy. And
in the.51. he says: and babilo^ shall be in heaps, and an habitation for
Dragons, a wonder and a hissing, that no man may dwell there. Not much unlike
things are red in the.26. of Ezech. of the subversion of Tyru^. And that old
Rome was destroyed, I showed before: and for the space of forty days and
more, inhabited of no man. And that we see it inhabited again, it lets
nothing the verity of Christ's prophecy. For Fraunces Petrarche an Italian,
and emonges the best learned Italians not hindermoste, in a certain epistle to a
friend, expou^ding these words of the Apostle S. John, emonges other things,
says, thou art verily become such already, for how much better is a wicked
man, and of desperate doings, than a devil? verily thou art become the
habitation, or rather kingdom of Deuelles: which by their crafts, albeit in
ma^s shape, reign in thee, etc. Petrarche lived and wrote these things about
two hondreth years sin^. And in an other certain epistle, speaking of old and
new Babylon: she was, says he, worste of al others, and at that time most
filthy: and this now is no City, but an house of finds and spretes, and to
be short, the sink of all sin and shame, and that hell of the living,
signified long before by the mouth of David, than it was founded or known.
And the self same again: what so ever thou haste red of Babylon in Assiria or
Aegipte, what so ever thou hastered of the four Labyrinthes or Mazes, finally
what so ever thou haste red of the way to hell, of the dark words there and
laques of fire and brimstone, compared to this hell, it is a fable: here is
that proud and terrible Nimroth: here is Semiramis with her quiver: here is
unmerciful Minos: here is Rhadamante: here is Cerberus deuouryng al things:
here is Pasiphae put to the bulle, amo^grelle kind, as Virgill says, a young
of double shape, Minotaurus by name a monstrouse monyme^t of unlawful lust,
Finally here may thou see what so ever is confused, what so ever is black,
what so ever is or may be feigned horrible and hugly. etc. These things has he,
and many other more like these written in other epistles. But what think you
would he write now, if he saw the court of Rome at this day? which is
doubtless many ways more corrupt, than it was than. Briefly S. John signifies
after the sentence of Christ king and judge, that Rome both old and new,
together with ge^tilisme and Antichristianisme shall perish utterly, and never
be restored again.

The causes before ones or twice rehearsed, he repeteth and beats in again,
The causes of the ruin of ye city and empire.
ungodliness, idolatry and seducing of al people and nations, whom they have
co^mpelled by tourmentes to receive impiety. Where cruelty, tira^ny, and
blood also has place. I spoke of ye wine of whoredom before in the.14. cha.
and elsewhere, so that it needs not to repete the same again with tediousenes.
And herunto is added an other new cause, and the merchants of the Earth (...)
of the power or ple^tie of her pleasures, were made rich. And he said, of the
power of pleasure: for, of unmeasurable, mighty and insatiable lust were made
rich. For where as Rome abounded with spoils, which it had gredely taken of
al nations, and brought to Rome, they were given to al kind of riot and
wa^tones. Therefore the masters of voluptuousnes, and diuisers of delicate
pleasures, and merchants of most preciouse wares reparyng thither, found
evermore the^ that would bie, intertayne, and set by the^, and were so made
rich of the voluptuouse and riotouse life of the Romans. Therefore the
Apostle notes an incredible study of most sumptuouse riot, in meat, drink,
apparel, buildyng, in pampering and cherisshyng of the body. The Romish also
of our time stricken with the same rage both in Italy and without, spe^de
excedyng much richesse in living riotousely. This is seen chiefly in those
spiritual fathers, Bisshoppes and Abbottes, and in the whole Romish clergy.
But God never suffered riot and tyranny long vnpunnished in any nation.
Therefore is Babylon fallen also, therefore shall the church of Rome fall too.
Therefore let private men also love temperancie, and to absteyne from riot and
pride. To the lord be glory.

Counsel is given to the godly, which are commanded to go out of Babylon.
Enemies are stired up against Babylon, and they are commanded not to spare
her. The.lxxviij. Sermon.
ANd I heard an other voice from Heaven saying: come away from her my people,
ye ye be not partakers of her sins, leest ye receive of her plages. For her
sins ar gone up to heaven, and the lord has remembered her wickedness. Reward
her even as she rewarded you, and give her double according to her works. And
pour in double to her in the same cup, which she filled unto you. And as much
as she glorified her self and lived wantonly, so much power ye in for her of
pu^nishment, and sorrow for she says in her heart: I sit being a queen, and
am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plages come at one day,
death and sorrow, and honger, and she shall be burnt with fire: for strong is
the lord God which shall judge her.

The second place of this chapt. is the faithful counsel of the lord, given to
the godly, The counsel of God for ye faithful, how they should use themselves.
how they should demean themselves in the felicity and destruction of the
city. Rome has in deed of long time ben lady of the world, the richesse and
pleasures of the whole world have be^ seen at Rome. If any at Rome or in the
provinces, showed himself tractable and obedient to the Romans, and loved much
the Romish religion, and made him conformable to the corrupt manners of ye
Romans, he was much made of, and might come as it were by degrees to high
promotio^ and dignity, to the greatest richesse, and most chosen pleasures. If
any man would resist the Romish religion, and would not assente to the Romans:
he was vexed with persecution, he was spoiled and driven into exile, or cast in
prison, or led to execution. Therefore were the godly grievously tempted, and
knew not whither to turn them. As we see the like done at this day in new
Rome, and popish kingdom through out the world. Wherefore God, which will not
that man should perish, but be saved, gives here the best counsel of true
felicity and salvation: which so many as obey, are blessed.

And straight ways from the beginning he shows the author of this counsel,
to the end he might get it authority, and that we might boldly receive it. I
heard, says he, an other voice from heaven, from God therefore out of heaven
proceeds this counsel: which they that follow, obey God: they that obey it
not, contemn and despise the counsel of God. And what is this counsel? Flee
from Babylon, is ye counsel of God.
brief, plain, possible, honest, and wholesome, doubtless: come away, says
the Lord, from her, to wit Babylon, Rome both old and new, my people: that
is to say, you that will be called the people of God, and be written in the
nombre of the citizens of God. This same is his counsel, and none other. The
same counsel God by his prophets gave to his ancient people, when they were
in the captivity of Babylon. For thus says Esaye in the.48. and 52. chap.
depart, depart, come ye away from thence, touch no unclean thing. Come
away from her, be ye made clean, which bear the vessels of the Lord. And
Jeremy in the.51. chapt. flee from the mids of Babylon, and let every manne
save his soul, that ye be not roted out in her wickedness. For the time of Gods
vengeance is at hand, he will reward her. The lord therefore counsels to
flee, and that so our souls should be saved. For else unless we flee, we shall
perish. Howbeit the Prophets taught not the Israelites to flee out of Babylon
bodily, by motion localle, as they term it. For Jeremy in the.29. chapt.
exhorts the people captive to dwell in Babylon, and to make their provision
there, til the time of delivery come. What flight is counseled.
For than must they come out of Babylon. In the mean season he would have them
depart not by bodily motion, but by unlikeness of manners. For albeit they shall
dwell in the mids of the superstitiouse, ungodly, and Idolaters: yet would not
the lord have them made like unto the^. That fleyng therefore in this, that
they should absteyne and refrain themselves from ungodliness, idolatry,
sins, to wit, blood, usury, pride, lechery, and other like vices: but to
persevere in true godliness and innucencie.

In like manner now, whiter so eu^r the godly should have fled under the old
Roman Empire, they should every where have fallen again into the hands of
the Romans: like as we also at this day, 1. Cor^n. 5.
although we change our place, yet have we popery either nere, or iminente.
Therefore the Apostle says well: we must get us out of the world, if we
will not be conuersaunt with sinners. This therefore is the true and godly
flight, if remaynyng in this world bodily, in mind and manners we depart
furthermost out of the world, so that we abstain from al idolatry, and
profane worshippyng, if we allow it not, if it pleases us not: if we another
assent, nor frame our selves to the manners of the ungodly: if we shall not
betraye our religion, either for men, or for worldely gain. So therefore the
Christians which lived under the Roman Empire, fled Rome so, that they utterly
absteyned from worshippyng of idolles, and the corrupt manners of the gentiles,
althoug they lived emongs the heythen. For that the ancient churches in Asia
were such, we have heard in the.2. and.3. chapt. of this book. Albeit
therefore that we also dwell under the Popish kingdom, and in thempire, that
persecuteth the gospel: yet must we flee papistrie, that is to say popish
churches: none of ye godly ought for worshipping or obedience sake to enter in,
none to acknowledge, allow or use any Popish rites or ceremonies: but from
their vices and corruptions to flee so far as is possible. For so the
Apostolical scripture teaches us in the.12. to the Roman. 2. Corinthians. 6. in
the.5. to the Ephesians. and.1. Pet. 4. And S. John at this present as it were
expoundyng him self: be not ye, says he, pertakers of her sins, (...),
communicate not with her sins. And sins be not only those which are done
against the second, but also that are committed, and that much more against
the first table: of the which sort are idolatry, impiety, the abuse of Gods
holy name, strange worshipping, against the.2. and.4. precepte of the first
table. Those were than, and so are at this day taken for very good works,
where they be abominations. Partakyng is chiefly in the communion of sacred
things, again if they be given to the same dissolute riot with filthy men.
If therefore we beware of those things, we flee out of Babylon, and follow the
good counsel of God.

But herein we offend at this day commonly, How men offend at this day
against this counsel of God.
which are called gospellers. For many think it to be sufficient, in case
they observe I wot not what religion in their heart privily: and openly do
communicate with them, which may either help or hurt. Ye shall have them,
that will crowch and kncle before idolles, which will hear Mass and popish
service. There be some that know many abominatio^s of the popish priesthood,
but yet nevertheless make their sons priests. Because that promotions, and
that clerkly life, that is to say the welthie and pleasant life likes them
well. There be some that intrude their children through the bond of wedlock
into the mids of Papistrie: another do these regard any thing else, but
richesse, and worldly honors and frendeshippes. Against al these the prophets
with the Apostles, and at this present Christ the son of God from the
righthande of the father, thondereth and cries out a loud, come away from
her my people, and be not partaker with her sins. These words do not admit
any witty or civil reasoning, nor carnal or crafty qualifiyng. For it
follows, leeste ye receive of her plagues. For if ye like Rome, if ye like
the Romish religion, if Romish prelacie please you, richesse and promotio^s, if
the Romish corruption content you, let the judgment, pain and damnation dew
to Antichristianisme content you also.

We have moreover at this present, what answer we may make to the Romanistes,
What thou may answer to ye crime of reuolting.
obiecting and laiyng to our charge reuoltyng or apostasy, and for the same
cause also the crime of Schism. Ye have fallen, say they, from the holy
church of Rome, and by that same forsakyng declare openly, that ye are
sectaries and Schismatikes. Whereunto we answer, that we put a distinction in
the church of Rome. For we acknowledge a certain old church of Rome, notable,
and Apostolical. Of the which wrote S. Paul: your faith is showed in the
whole world. From the same who so ever departs, without doubt shall be both a
Schismatike, and also perish for ever. There is again an other church of
Rome, new, and clean contrary to the old, no longer now Apostolical, but
Papisticall rather, wherein be not the ministers of the word and Sacraments,
but either princes, nothing unlike the gentiles: or merchants, of whom the
Sacraments, the remission of sins, heaven it self, and all things in the
church are to be sold for a little money. They teach a doctrine swaruing quite
from the doctrine of the gospel. These are openly, not infected, but swimmyng
and stinkyng of most shameful vices even of the filthiness of whoredom: to
speak nothing now of Christen bloudshedyng. Another is there seen in them any
repentance. With these to persevere, with these to communicate, is to perish
everlastingly. Therefore from these men's company the lord commands us here to
depart, yea and to flee from. Therefore, that we have done, we have done at the
lords commandment, which openly here commands us to come away, depart,
and flee from the purple whore, and from this Babylon. There be also other
notable places commaundyng this departing: which who so list to know and
consider, let the^ read Deuter. 13. Jeremy the.23. the words also of the
lord in the gospel of Luke the.6. chapt. the.7.23. and.24. of Matthew. Read both
the Epistles of S. Paul to Timoth. especially the.6. chapt. of the.1. and
the.3. and.4. chapt. of the.2. In the.16. to the Romans he says: I beseke
you brethren, mark them which cause division, and give occasions of evil,
contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. For they that
are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bealy: and through
flatteryng words. etc.

And rendering the cause, why we should flee from Babilo^, Why Babylon is to
be avoided
he utters the profit, and disprofit. Leeste ye receive of her plages. For
who so ever matcheth him self with the ungodly, idolaters, filthy and
unclean persons, receives the same reward with them: and the reward of
this life present, a curse, a reprobate mind, and sundry calamities, recited
in the 16. chapt. and elsewhere, and after this life, everlasting tourmentes.
Therefore he treats of no light matter, when he threateth of flyeng from
Babylon, or of avoiding the Romish religion. Many believe these things: for
that they consider not, how great is the abomination of ye church of Rome
before God: and therefore hear these things as it were a fable, and persevere
in the same kind of life, wherein they are and have lived hitherto. But he lies
not, that says, how they that provide not for themselves to flee out of
Babylon, shall shortly perish with Babylon, and with the whole fellowship of
the wicked. Woe be to them.

Howbeit for as much as ye wicked in this world ar commonly fortunate (whereof
many gather, That God reme^breth wickedness
yt God knows not our matters, or at leest if he know the^, not to care
greatly for the^) there is added of thapostle, or oracle brought from heaven:
for her sins are common up to heaven, and the lord has remembered her
wickedness. God verily never forgets iniquities. For all things are evermore
present before him. Yet seems he not to remember, when he punnisheth not. For
so men suppose: but when he pu^nisheth and visits sinners, he seems utterly
to have had consideration of our matters, and to have remembered wickedness and
wicked men. Therefore God is rightuouse, and mindeful of evil, and of good
also: and when he sees time will recompense all men's works, and chiefly the
evil. In the mean time he signifies also, that the sins of old and new
Rome are great and full of enormitie. For in the.19. of Genes. the sins of
Sodom are said to have ascended up to Heaven, and as it were to have exclamed
against the doers of them, and required vengeance. So we read in the.51. of
Jeremy that the sins of Babylon ascended up to the clouds. For S. John in a
manner every where uses the places of Scripture, to the intent he might get
his book more authority, although otherwise inspired of ye holy ghost And in
deed the old Satirical poets as Horace, Iuuenall, and others wrote sore
against the sins and vices of old Rome. There remain also at this day many
sharp writings against Rome, and the Cardinals and Prelates of the Romish
church, and Pasquillis innumerable ( Pasquille at this day is a Satirical
writer one in stead of many) that as well at this day as in times paste the
sins of Rome cry up unto heaven it self.

Reward her, as she has rewarded you.
He proceeds after this to raccompte again the plagues, and most certain
destruction of Rome, which is the third place of this chapt. where also is
excedingly well described the most horrible and cruel manner of destruction and
subversion thereof. For God is brought in calling on and exhorting the
soldiers, and the co^missaries and executours of his judgment unto
vengeance: and that they should punnishe her most extremely, and spare her
not, but reward her most abundantly, and mete unto her by the same measure,
wherewith Rome has measured to others. For here takes place that same of the
Lord, and common saying with all nations: with the same measure wherewith you
mete, others shall mete unto you again, and there shall be given good measure,
pressed, shaken, and runnyng over. Therefore seeing that Rome has robbed the
whole world, and seduced the whole world, rightly and by the just wrath of
God was she spoiled, and utterly subverted. The which things did the Gotthes
with great faith and diligence: so that we can not doubt also, but that new
Rome, and that See Apostaticall, must of her enemies, whom the Lord has
prepared, and of the Aungelles gatheryng the tares, be plucked all to pieces.
And what shall become of her in an other world, we may gather hereof, that he
beats in so often, that her euilles shall be doubled without mercy, her pain
also, mourning, and greuouse torments. These things doubtless are greuouse and
horrible. Would God they might be perceived of faithful minds. And again
this place is written out as it were word for word of the.50. chap. of
Jeremy: where you read to this effect: be avenged on Babylon, and as she
did, do ye unto her. Spoil and destroy says the Lord, and accomplish all
that I have commanded thee. Destroy her, that nothing remain. Entrench
round about, that no man escape. Reward her after her work: and according
to al things that she has done, do ye unto her. For she has been proud
against the Lord, and against the holy one of Israel. Thus said the lord in
Jeremy. Thou see therefore where the lord has borrowed his own at this
present. Thou see what every city, or common wealth, or man may promise
himself, if being enriched by the loss of others, he live voluptuousely and
proudly in this world. For God is the same always, and his judgments are
egall against al ungodly.

And he has meddled withal the causes of subversion, The vain glory pride and
security of Rome.
cruelty, couetousenes, extorsions, slaughters, burninges, wherewith Rome has
made desolate the whole world. But he proceeds more expressly to recite other
causes: to wit pride, glorying and boastyng, security, riot, pleasures and
voluptuousenes. For it follows: as much as she has glorified her self, and
lived wantonly, etc. And again: for in her heart she says, I sit a Queen,
etc. He has borrowed these things also out of the.47. of Esaye. Where Babylon
glories thus also and with so many words. Rome in times past gloried, her
self to be Lady of the world, and that she should be everlasting. For they
sta^ped in Silver coins, of Rome eternal. They had thought that the
kingedomes should never have been plucked from her. She thought therefore that
she should never have been a widdowe. And I doubt not but the Germans borrowed
of the Romans that Germane word Romen, by the which they mean to boaste or
brag stoutely: which seems to have been peculiar and proper to the Romans.
She was careless or insecuritie. She had not thought to have be^ subverted. She
said, I shall see no mournyng, I will have no mournyng chere, I will always
singe, Gaudeamus. The Romanistes at this day also full bravely make their
boaste, that no Emperors, no Kings, no people, no heretics and Schismatikes
(for so they term the enemies of the Romisshe wickedness, men godly and
learned) have yet luckely assailed Rome. That the enemies of the church of
Rome have always ben oppressed, that she has always triumphed over her
enemies, these seven or eight hondreth years and more. That the ship of S.
Peter may be sore tourmoyled, tossed, and overwhelmed with Waves and billows,
but can not be drowned: and therefore that the Sea of Rome shall be perpetual
queen and lady of al realms and churches. etc.

Rome shall perish upon a sudden.
But hear now the judgment of God: for as much as she is proud, vain
gloriouse, careless and wicked, in one day shall come her plagues. Aretas
notes, that by one day is signified a sudden destruction: and that she
should than perish, when she would have thought lest. And her plagues he
recites in order, death, mournyng, famine and fire. And stories testify, that
these things were by the Gotthes fulfilled accordingly in old Rome: whereof I
have spoken before. Therefore we doubt nothing at al, but that new Rome also
shall by men, and by Gods Aungelles be torn a sonder and pluckte up by the
rotes. And leest any manne should think this impossible (for great is the
power and majesty of either Rome, in so much that he that should have said
in S. John his time, Rome shall fall, should have seemed to have spoken a
thing as much impossible, as if he had said, the sky shall fall) he
annexeth incontinently: for strong is the Lord God that shall judge her.
Therefore let us not doubt of the fall of Papistrie. For the Lord is
true, just, and almighty. To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A doleful song or mourning, and lamentation of Rome, which the Princes and
Marchaunts make for her. The.lxxix. Sermon.
AND the Kings of the earth shall be weep her, and wayle over her, which have
committed fornication, and lived wantonly with her, when they shall se the smoke
of her burning, and shall stand a far of, for fear of her pu^nishme^t,
saying: alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city: for at one
hour is thy judgment come. And the merchants of the Earth shall weep and
wayle in themselves, because no man will by their ware any more, the ware of
gold, and silver, and of preciouse stone, of pearl, and silk, and purple,
and skarlet, and al thynen wood, and all manner vessels of Iuory: and all
manner vessels of most preciouse wood, and of brass, and of Iron, and Synamon,
and odours, and oyntmentes, and frankensence, and wine, and oil, and fine
flower, and wheat, and cattle, and sheep, and horses, and charets, and bodies
and souls of men. And the Apples that thy soul lusted after, are departed
from the. And al things which were deinty, and had in price, are departed from
thee, and thou shall find them no more. The Merchants of these things, which
were waxed rich by her, shall stand a far of for fear of the punnishment of
her, weping, and waylinge, and saying: alas, alas, that great City, that was
clothed in silk and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and preciouse
stone, and pearls: for at one hour so great riches is come to naught. And
every ship governor, and all theye that occupy ships, and shipmen which
work in in the sea, stood a far of and cried, when they saw the smoke of her
burning, and said: what city is like unto this great city? And they cast
duste on their heads, and cried weeping, and wayling, and said: Alas, alas, the
great City, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the Sea, by the
reason of her wares: for at one hour is she made desolate.

A lamentation and wayling over Rome.
In the fourth place of this chapter, follows the weping or waylinge, or
lamentation of Rome, brent and destroyed. The coppie is plentiful and
maruaylouse, by an evident Hipotiposis, settinge all things before our eyes.
And our Lord God has always a familier manner, that what time he will
euidentelye show before, and fix in the hearts of all men the overthrow or
destruction of a nation, Kingdom, or City, he will command his Prophets to
sing an elegy, or lamentable song. And in such kind of lamentations is showed
not only the subversion, but also the causes of destruction, and manner of
desolation are rehearsed: the end also or use is declared, leest others be made
like unto that nation, and become partakers of the destruction. We have
manifest examples in the wrytinges of the Prophets, especially the
lamentations of Ieremye, and the which agree better to this place the doleful
dittie of Tyrus song of Ezechiell, in the.27. and.28. chapters. And verily it
appears that S. Ihon has borrowed many things from thence.

Another is there any matter here, to busy our selves much about. The some of
all is this. Rome shall fall, and perish utterly, that there should be
nothing left, either of the Empire, or of that See, much less of the riches
and pleasures. The which was partlye fulfilled in oulde Rome, and partlye shall
be fulfilled in the new at the day of judgment.

Howbeit another Christ himself, Kings and marcha^tes mourn.
nor the Apostle is brought in, bewayling the subversion of Babylon: but wicked
perso^nes are induced, which are first to be considered. For they be Kings
and Princes of the Earth, merchants, or governors of ships or mariners,
which have all committed whoredom with this strumpet, and by her company have
been made rich. And verily old Rome was furnished with the amities of Kings:
and again the presidentes sent of them to govern Provinces, seemed every one
to be Kings and Princes. And for as much as the riches of Rome were great, and
all states were wonderfully set a riot, the merchants there, got exceading
much gaigne. Moreover there was sailing to Rome out of the East, South, and
Weste, I mean out of Syria, and Aegipte or Affricke, and out of Spain it
self, and vttermoste parts of the world. But what time Rome being destroyed
lay ruinouse, and the Empire was rent in pieces, they could not but lamente,
whose lucre and pleasure was lost.

New Rome has also, besides those temporal, The marchaunts of new Rome
even peculier merchants and Princes of her own. For the prelates of the
church be Princes. And in the church of Rome, all the Saints of God know,
how to occupy the traffic of marchaundyse. For what holy thing is not to be
boughte in that seat? Marchau^dise is practiced in forgeuenes of sins, in
pardons and satisfacto^s, in ecclesiastical benefices, in worshipping of Images
and Saints, in masses, in burialles, in saying diriges for the dead, and
almost in all spiritual matters. Hereof comes an unmeasurable gaigne, and
the greateste occasion of pleasures. Other merchants bye their ware very
dear: the Romish Cananites, pay not one denier or farthinge for their wares,
but sell the same for an unreasonable price. Another suppose I that ever there
was any marchaundise like unto this in all the world, nor yet a more gaynefull
lucre of a thing of naught. Erasmus has also touched these things, in the
proverb to ask tribute of a dead man. And where as before the day of
judgment, the Lord Christ shall destroy Antichrist with the spirit of his
mouth, and that gaigne begins to be minished, we see how every where
emonges these spiritual marchaunts, complaints and grudgynges arryse. Than
what manner of lamentation and wayling think ye that will be, where the same
Lord by his coming, shall utterly abolish the same Antichrist, and they must go
in to fire everlasting? Again we must somewhat also consider the mourning.
To mourn of it self, is no sin. For the best and holiest men have lamented
their dead, and their calamities, and destruction of cities and realms. For
Abraham mourned. The lame^tations also of Ieremye remain, over the city of
Jerusalem. The faithful mourned with a great mourninge for Stephen in the
Acts. Howebeit in the lamentation they kept a mean, and referred all thing
to the glory of God, and salvation of fowls. The ungodly and worldly men do
not mourn after this sort. They never remember the sines of men, for the
which the righteouse Lord punnisheth the world, another do they refer the
euylles of them and theirs to the glory, verity, and justice of God, or
ame^dment of manners: therefore are they not sorry that God is offended, nor
require forgeuenes of sins: but it greueth them that occasion of sinninge is
taken from them, that their pleasures and lucre is past. And now wayle
Princes, marchau^ts and mariners, not for the favor of God lost, not of true
compassion, or love of their neighbor, but for love of themselves, for the
loss of earthly things, for the destruction of goodly, ancient, strong and
preciouse things: but chiefly for their lucre lost, and pleasures taken away.
The Apostle makes mention of either grefe in the second to the Corrinthians
the.7. chapter. And surely this sorrow and mourning is nothing else, but a
description and a shaddowing of a most certain and greateste destruction, and
that of men ungodly. And full well and pourposely does he set forth the wayling
both in the behavior of the mourners, and also by their words. To their
gesture apperteyneth, that they weep, wayle, cry out, and cast dust on their
heads. To their words are referred these things, woe, woe, alas, alas that
great city. etc. The which is repeted of the merchants and sailors.

Moreover are touched here also the causes of destruction, The riot,
voluptuousnes and pleasures of Rome.
the riot and voluptuousnes, wherein Rome flowed. And likewise are rehearsed the
wealth, riches, majesty, pride, and pleasures of either Rome. And here by the
way are warned, what all worldely men may look for, in case they addicte
themselves to the pleasures and voluptuousenes of this world: which was at
Rome, and is unmeasurable. Another have we red in any stories, that nations have
long continued, which have been given or vanquisshed of worldly pleasures. To
build, to eat, to drink, to be clothed, and to have servants men and
women, is lawefull: but a measure must be kept in these as in all other
things: the benefits of God must be acknowledged, and those may not be more
set by than virtue: but at Rome, and in the world, passing over godliness and
mean, these things are only regarded, desired, and beloved. In buildinges and
householde stuff al things were sumptuouse, and unmeasurable. They are of
gold which might have been well of earth or tin: of silver, where wood or
iron might have served. And when wood was chosen, it was not every wood, by
(...) thynen, yt is to say, most excellenste was chosen. Thynen appears to be
named of Thyia, a tree, to the which Theophraste attributes great honor,
reporting yt the famous bildinges of old temples were made thereof, and a
certain immortality of matter incorrupt enduring on houses against all wethers,
etc. Pliny has this in ye.13. book, the.16. cha. In service also they use
men, like beasts: another have they any beasts for their own use, but most
chose^. They have horses and mules exceeding fine. They have their horselitters,
Cochees, and charettes right notable: al things glister with gold, preciouse
stones, and purple: and al things are wrought and divised for pride and
sumptuousnes. What shall we say that the wholt bands of their men go al in
silks and velvet, wearing their masters colors? The lord himself of al,
sitting on the shulders of his Belphouiers, is borne on high, and is carried on
men's bodies as the most noble charette. In the meat and drink of these men
all things are most delicate, exquisite, and variable. Their drink is
costely, strange and immoderate. The apparel of their body is also
ouersumptuouse. Their garments glister with gold, and are stiff with pearl.
Their common garment is of Crimosin satin. They use also oincteme^tes and
apples of desire: which may both be understand of the fruictes of trees, and
also of Pomanders conteinyng musche and smellyng sweet, and of odoriferouse
savors.

The End of pleasures.
Finally in all things is to be considered, what the end or windyng up is of
riot, pride, and voluptuousenes, and how unstable is the favor and frendeship
of men. Here all things perish ones, nothing remains safe. And they perish
verily in one hour, that have been provided for many years. They flee from us
in danger, which have received great gain at our hands. Yea they stand a
far of, and out of danger, and lamente the dollefull chance: no man comes
nere to help or deliver us. Every man is afraid of his own skin. Let us
learn therefore to trust in God, to despise pleasures, to put no confidence in
flesh and frendeshippe of men. For whilst thou art fortunate, thou shall have
many friends: if the world begin to froune on thee, they will al forsake thee,
in whom thou put thy trust, and leave thee in the breres. And this is the
chief end of all these things as I showed at the first: Rome shall fall, and
be made desolate for ever. The lord our God restrain al evil. Amen.

The reioycyng of Saints for the overthrow of Babylon, the drownyng of the
fame, and the causes of drowning or destruction are rehearsed. The.lxxx. Sermon.
Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and prophets: for God has
given your judgment on her. And a mighty Angel took up a great Millstone,
and cast it into the sea, saying: with such violence shall that great city
Babylon be cast, and shall be found no more. And the voice of harpes and
musicia^s, and of pipers and trompettes shall be heard no more in thee: and no
crafts man, of what so ever craft he be, shall be found no more in thee: and
the sound of a Mill shall be heard no more in thee: and the light of a
ca^del shall shine no more in thee, and the voice of the bridegroom and of the
bryde shall be heard no more in thee: for thy merchants were princes of the
Earth, and with thine in chauntementes were deceived all nations: and in her
was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the saints, and of all that
were slain upon the Earth.

In the fifte place of this chapter the Angel of the Lord exhorts, all the
saints of Heaven to rejoice, The reioycynge of Saints for the destruction
of Rome.
and that for the overthrow of Babylon. And this reioycyng of Saints is set
against the wayling of the wicked. For as they lamente for the causes of
pleasures taken from them: so the Saints rejoice over ungodliness oppressed,
and the glory of God revenged. We are verily forboden in the Proverbs of
Salomo^, and in the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, that we should not be
glad of the calamities of our enemies, another that we should say evil or do
evil to our enemies. Which thing is perpetual, and commanded to all men,
never to be altered by any dispensation: but we must observe in the mean time,
that men do rejoice diverse ways. Men are glad many times of the
destruction of their enemies, and that of hatred and malice: which is not done
without sin. Others are glad again of the calamities, and plages of the
ungodly, yet bearyng no malice toward them, which are in this misery: unto
whom they would doubtless have wished a better state, if they might have been
persuaded to have turned but they rejoice rather over justice revenged, and
the godly delivered from the tyranny of the wicked. Whereof we read that the
prophet said in the.58. Psalm. The rightuouse shall rejoice, when he shall see
vengeance, he shall wasshe his fete in the blood of the ungodly (to wit he
shall pourge his affections and evil manners, That the Saints rejoice at ye
destruction of the wicked.
what time he shall see the blood of the ungodly spilte: which he believes to
be done for a docume^t, lest we should follow our evil affections, and that
our blood should be shed also of the most just God by his ministers) and a man
will say: verily there is a reward for the rightuous, verily god judges the
earth. Therefore are the rightuouse glad, and rejoice when they see vengeance.
And it is not said, that they covet, or wish for vengeance. Vengeance is
mine, says the lord, I will reward. When the lord therefore rewards they
are glad for the deliverance, and for ye verity established and confirmed:
and rejoice not of an hatred they hear toward the oppressors, whom they have
wished lost and destroyed. The godly wisshe evermore the wicked to be
converted, and to return into favor with God. But when they see them moved
with no repentance, but obstinately to proceed, and fall into their own
destruction, and that God does intercepte them, for the salvation of the
faithful, and deliverance of the godly: the godly rejoice at this
deliverance, and praise the justice of God. Notwithstanding that they had
always rather, if it might have been, that the lost had otherwise led their
life: but now sins it can be no otherwise, through their own obstinate
malice, they speak not against the judgments of God, but rather commend
the same. These things verily do the saints in Earth. And the Saints in
heaven sins they be purified now from all affections, their rejoicing is
altogether most pure, so that it were superfluouse to reason curiousely thereof.
But where the heavenly rejoice at the destruction of the wicked, we may easily
judge how much they err, which trust to the help or prayers of Saints:
where nevertheless they alter nothing at all of their wicked life. It shall be
easy also to discuss their doubt and carefulnes, which fear leest they
should be sorry also, seeing their brethren, sisters, friends and kinsfolks
condemned. For the Saints do plainly consent to the will of God, and extolle
the judgments of God, and rejoice thereat, and can be sorry no more.

And he bids heaven rejoice, Rejoice thou heaven.
as many times in the Psalm. we read the like phrase: unless you had rather by
Heaven, understand heavenly dwellers, such as we believe thapostles and
prophets to be. For at the same time when S. John wrote these things, all
thapostles in a manner were slain. And here is to be known, that the Romish
beast had devoured, that is to say, afflicted and slain, not only the son
of God, our lord Jesus Christ: but also John the Baptist, all the Apostles of
God, and all the martirs of Christ. By the prophets we understand, not only
those old, but all the faithful preachers of the gospel. For we have heard
oftener than ones before, that the faithful preachers of the word be called
prophets. He annexeth more over a reason why they ought to rejoice: for God
has given your judgment of her. For in the.6. chapt. the souls of Martirs
cry under the Altar: how long Lord auengest thou not our blood on them that
be on Earth? now therefore they praise Gods justice, which as he than
promised that he would avenge, so has he now avenged in deed.

And by this place we learn, Saints do not pu^nishe the wicked.
that all judgment is given to the son, and that no Saint in heaven can
judge or pu^nish an evil man on Earth. For it is most false, that Saints are
said to punnisshe their enemies: S. Anthony with the holy fire, Valentine with
the falling sickness, and other with other diseases, God alone, as in the.16.
chapt. is declared at large, punnissheth, and sends and takes away sickness.
And most certain it is, as well by this, as also by many other places of this
book, that God slepeth not, but will when he sees time, revenge and punnish
most certainly. The martirs when they should die, had committed all their
judgment to the Lord their God. He judges now the judgment of Saints of
Rome: that is after his just judgment takes punnishment of Rome, for that
she had with wro^gfull judgment oppressed the Saints.

In the sixte place of this chapter he retourneth to the description of the
subversion of Babylon. And it is a most clear, and eue^ a certain eyely and
evident demonstration by a similitude. For taking up a great stone, in
quantity like a Millstone, he casts the same into the Sea, and making a
declaration of his so doing, Babilo^ is drouned in the Sea.
says, thus sodaynely, and with such a violence, ((...)) shall Babylon be cast
down, etc. This place is taken out of the end of the.51. chapt. of Jeremy,
where you read in a manner the like things word for word. And here is now
brought in a strong Angel, leest we should think that the force of Rome were
happly stronger than that it could be broken. But it shall be broken of a strong
Angel. And the things that be suddenly drowned appear no more. Here is
signified therefore, that with a sudden destruction Rome shall fall, that
there shall no token thereof be left, and that it shall fall without any
difficulty, it shall be made to plumpe, and never more be seen. And the Lord
in the gospel affirms, that the crime or sclaunder must be punnished with a
Millstone hanged about the neck: yea and that same not to be punnishment
grievous enough, although emonges the Syrians it was accounted for vile and
shameful, sins the crime deserves to be punnished with a much more greuouse
or crueller pain. Wherefore Primasius supposed, that here by the way is
signied, how Babylon, for offenses given to the world, should be drowned in
the Sea, as it were with a millstone tied fast to her neck. Doubtless if ever
any city, if ever any kingedome were hateful by reason of greatest offenses,
and given to the Christians innumerable sclaunders: Rome and the Roman Empire,
and even the Popishenes of the church has hurt most by sclau^der, and yet
hurts. Wherefore it is no doubt, but that it has be^ plaged most grievously,
and shall be yet more punnished of the Lord.

Again by prophetical and figurative speeches he signifies a notable
desolation, and that the same place should never after be inhabited for ever.
Such like manners of speeches shall ye find in the.24. of Esaye, and.26. of
Ezech. and in diverse other places. Al pleasure, says he, shall perish,
especially which was wont to be taken of Music. All crafts shall be laid
down. Briefly there shall be no more any habitation for men.

The causes of her desolatio^.
In the seventh and last place are set forth again the causes of this
subversion, and that more notable three. The first: Thy merchants were
princes of the Earth. For they that have occupied merchandise in the church of
Rome, and yet do, are in a manner princes. Of whom I have spoken before. Here is
noted therefore their pride, avarice, and sumptuousenes. Aretas: he calls them
merchants, says he, which tourmoyle and trouble the whole world, as it
were certain fayres, etc. The second: for with thine inchauntementes all
nations have been seduced. There is no doubt, but that inchauntyng, and magic
reign in Babylon, and that there is found plenty of fortune readers,
necromanciers, and inchaunters: yet here appears chiefly to be signified,
seducing, Idolatry, and impiety, or error of doctrine. Such an inchaunter
was Iezabel, as appears in the.4. book of Kings the.9. chapt. which
practiced inchauntementes in very deed, and bewitched men with corrupt
religion. And even so has Rome seduced the whole world, and yet seduceth. For
the which cause she deserves most greuouse punnishment. The last cause of
subversion: for in thee is found the blood. Blood shed can not be whipte away
nor cleansed from them, that shede innocent blood. The sheding of blood.
And although it be not straight way required: yet will there come a time when
it shall be required of God, and than is it found. And he makes mention of
three sorts of blood. First of the blood of Prophets, of them I mean, which
have preached the Gospel, and have been the fathers of the faithful. Secondely
of Saints to wit holy martirs. Finally of al men that have been slain in
earth to wit dwelling here and there through out the world: whom we
understand to have been dispatched and taken out of the way, by the wars,
seditions, and tyranny of Rome. So we read also in the first oration of
Jeremy, that God straitely requires the blood of his servants spilte.
Doubtless all shedyng of blood is greuouse (the same excepted which is justly
done of the magistrate) yet is one more heynouse than another. For he that
kills a preacher of the gospel, more greuousely sins, than he that
dispatcheth a private person: and he which for religion sake slays a man,
and makes a martyr, sins more heynousely, than he that kills a man in the
war. Therefore all the blood shed of Rome after any sort, shall be required of
Rome, and is required. Thus the lord spoke also of the city of Jerusalem,
Matthew. 23. The lord Jesus have mercy on us, and look upon us with theyes of his
mercy. Amen.

The reioycinges and Himnes of saints are recited for Rome destroyed, and all
ungodliness taken away. The.lxxxj. Sermon.
Chapt. 19.
AND after that, I heard the voice of much people in Heaven, saying:
Alleluya. Salvation and glory, and honor, and power be ascribed to the Lord
our God. For true and rightuouse are his judgments, because he has judged
the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has
avenged the blood of his servants of her hand. And again they said,
Alleluya. And the smoke of her ascended for ever more. And the.xxiiii. Elders,
and the four beasts fell down, and worshipped God that sat on the seat,
saying. Ame^: Alleluya. And a voice came out of the seat, saying: Praise our
lord God al ye that are his servants, and ye that fear him both small and
great. And I heard the voice of much people, even as the voice of many waters,
and as the voice of great tho^deringes, saying: Alleluya. For our lord God
omnipotent reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor unto him: for
the marriage of the Lamb is come.

God never forsakes his servants.
For as much as the Apostle in this book most plentifully has described the
oppression of Saints, and the cruel mischeuouse, and proud assaults of the
persecutours of the Gospel, whereby they both mock God, and tourment his
saints, whereupon evermore at all times the complainctes even of the godly
men are red to have risen, as though God through his long sufferyng and great
patience, should seem to neglecte the oppressed: he discourses also most at
large now, the reioycinges and praises of Saints, whereby they extolle the
verity and justice of God, never neglectyng his, and most greuousely
punnishing the ungodly persecutours. Howebeit they rejoice here chiefly, and
praise God for the taking away of Antichriste, and all ungodliness with him.
Which verily is the first place of this chapter. The second confirms al
Saints, leeste they should doubt any thing of the salvation of the
faithful, which he shows to be most certain. The third place recites the
sin of blessed John: and the faithful doctrine of the holy Aungel, that we
should worship no creatures, be they never so holy. In the last place is
described the judge, or revenger Jesus Christ, coming to judgment: there is
moreover described the perdition or punnishement of al ungodly, which the just
and holy lord takes of them. Which place verily bego^ne in the.11. chapt. of
this book, and suspe^ded hitherto, repeted somewhat in the.14. is now at the
last finisshed.

And verily the Iubiley of Saints is diverse, plentiful, and manifold, over
the lost and condemned enemies of the godly. First he hears a voice, and
that a great, of much people in heaven. He shows therefore in general, that
all heavenly, (the Aungelles not excepted) sing praises to God in heaven.
Which we understand shall be at the last judgment, all ungodly trodden under
foot. And before these things be done they are rehearsed and described, that
hereby the godly may in dangers and tourme^tes comfort themselves, and may
abide steadfast in the true says: beleuynge that they also, though now
oppressed, shall singe praises of thanks to God.

And verily he has here compiled the whole Himne, said in the praise of God
the revenger. He places formoste, Alleluya: Alleluya.
after he annexeth the praises, Salvation and glory. etc. And Alleluya
signifies, praise ye the Lord. He uses a most common, and of all men best
known in the primitive church. For certain Psalms have this title, Halleluyah.
For the chau^ter so exhorted and stired up the people, to praise God. So after
the same manner now also, the saints as it were co^prising the argument of
their song, say, Alleluia. And these vocables have more grace in ours and
strange langages, than translated. So have remained in the church, Osanna,
Amen, Saela, Maranatha, and diverse others. Whereof also writes S. Hierome to
Marcella and Damasus.

The himne of saints.
Now follows the himne: salvation and glory, and honor, etc. And those
things they praise in God, and ascribe unto him wholly. Whereof I spoke in
expoundhng the.4. and.5. chapt. of this book. Moreover they praise God, of that
which in this cause is principal: for his judgments are just and true.
Which saying seems worthy to be printed most depely in the hearts of al men,
as the which in temptations may not a little erecte them. And wherefore the
judgments of God be just and true, he adds, because he has judged the
great whore: that is to say, taken worthy and condign punnishment of the
great whore. Hitherto the Lord has seemed to many over slow, and to much
favorable to Rome, and the Romish church: but than shall they see that God is
most just. Of the whore is spoken before.

Yet does he repete here again her most heynouse and greatest sins. First
corruption through whoredom and inchauntement. Whereby is signified seducyng
by corrupt and wicked doctrine. The later, the shedyng of the blood of holy
Martirs. Whereof we have already spoken many times. Therefore God punnissheth
the corruption of doctrine, and cruelty of the Romish church practiced
against the saints of God.

The praises of god to god are acceptable.
And like as in the beginning they sange Alleluia, so in the end also they
repete the same. By this repetition declaring, that the praises which also we
power out to God in Earth, be to God most acceptable. And by and by is added a
sentence, which might seem to be put to either of S. John, or of the divine
heavenly dwellers themselves. Whereby is signified, that the burning of the
ungodly shall be perpetual, and shall never have end, as likewise Esaye has
said in the.30. and.46. chap. And the lord himself in the.25. of Matthew. and.9.
chapt. of Mark. The smoke ^ose by.
For when he says smoke he understands that there is fire there underneath.
Let us ernestly think of these things, so often as the pleasures and
commodities of Antichrist do flatter us. For this perpetual fire is prepared
for all ungodly, especially Antichristia^s. And tha^ severally he brings in
praisyng God the.xxiiii. Elders, and four beasts, by the which the
universality of creatures is understand. Touching the which thing see what is
said in the.4. and.5. chapt. of this book. And first not only they knele, but
also fall down, to the end we should understand, what we ought to do in earth.
And they worship God that sits in the throne, another Aungelles, nor
spirits, nor yet any creatures. Furthermore with two words he shaddoweth
their himne. For they singe, Amen, and Alleluya. For they confirm God to be
just, and his judgments to be rightuouse, and that justly he pu^nisheth the
whore. And therefore that he is to be praised.

Now comes also a voice out of the trone, A voice comes out of ye throne
to wit from God him self, but by the ministry of an Angel. For it
follows: singe praise to our God. Behold he says, our God. Therefore he
accompteth himself here in the nombre of them, which have God common with men.
Therefore he was an Angel, which recited those things of God. Therefore that
the saints do now, they are commanded to do. For in the mids of the
praises, this voice is heard from God by the Angel. And he commands to
praise, and that the true and only God. He shows moreover, who should praise
him: all the saints, that is al ye fear God, whether they be great or small.
By this commandment therefore is signified, that God is delighted with the
praises of holy men, and likes them. Whereof we now that dwell in Earth,
learn to praise the lord without ceasyng, and with a sincere heart. We learn
that no man is excepted, of what so ever degree or age, sex or condition he be
of.

Again an other Himne is annexed, The divine praises are greatest.
as it were an example of obedience. For God by the Angel commands the
saints to praise. Now therefore they obey God, and offer to him praises. And
how great these praises were, he shows by a double comparison, and by a
maruelouse brevity, and evident manner. For he says, how the voices of the
singers were shrille, as the gusshing and noise of many waters: also like the
clappyng or crackyng of great thonders. If such brevity and perspicuitie
were found in Homere or Virgill, it should have many maruailers thereof,
which would extolle and commend the elegancie. But no man marueleth, no man
sets forth or commends the holy Scriptures and elegancie and efficacitie
of the same, wauntyng example. And again is annexed an Hymn, the beginning
whereof, as of the fourmer, is also Alleluya. And like as in the fourmer himne
the Saints have celebrated, that God does justly punnishe the wicked: so in
this they preach that God reigns, and shall seem even freely to save the
Saints. They command therefore to praise the Lord. The reason, for because
sins he is omnipotent, he reigns. He has verily raygned evermore: but sins
so many things have been permitted by him to the ungodly, many have thought
that the ungodly, and chiefly Antichrist has reigned: but now sins he has
oppressed him, and avenged his glory and his servants, it is made manifest
to all men, that God alone reigns for evermore. They allege also an other
cause, why God should be praised, ye rather why the godly should be glad and
rejoice: for the marriage of the Lamb is come. For as much as that time is now
come, wherein the lamb him self will bring in the children of God, his well be
loved spowse, those I mean whom by his bloodshed he has redeemed, to joys
everlasting. Of the marriage shall be spoken a little after at large. Praise and
glory be to our redemer Christ Jesus the Lord. Amen.

Of the marriage of the Lamb, and of the making ready of the Lambs wife.
The.lxxxij. Sermon.
AND his wife made her self ready. And to her was granted, that she should be
arrayed with pure and goodly silk. For the silk is the rightuousenes of
Saints.

The saints celebrate the Lord with praises, reioycinges and Himnes. There be
causes innumerable: yet two notable above others. The first, for ye Lord has
judged the whore, and avenged the blood of Saints. The second, for the
marriage of the lamb is come. They rejoice therefore at the justice of God,
whereby he has punnished the ungodly: and at his mercy or grace, by the which
he gives to the godly a blessed life. But here must we speak of the marriage.

There is very much mention made in the holy Scriptures both of the oulde and
new testamente, Matrimony and marriage.
of matrimony and marriage. The which may not be expounded after the letter,
but by an allegory: leest with the Turks and mahometistes, we fall in shameful
and mo^strouse absurdities. For spiritual things are figured by corporal
matters. Of the spiritual this is the some: God the father the lover of
mankind, will save men by his son. This thing is declared by a parable of
wedlock and marriage. And in matrimony there is a contract or making sure,
there is coupling or handfaste making of either party, and finally marriage.

In the contracte not only the young man and the maid ar affiau^ced, The
contract or making sure.
but also the whole manner of the marriage to com is appoincted, and an order
taken. For the lawyers say, that affiauncyng is a promise of the marriage to
come. This contracte was made at the beginning of the world, where God
promises that he will deliver mankind by his son, and receive him into
glory. Hereunto appertain all the promises of Christ, of the remission of
sins, and everlasting life. Moreover the duties of the spouse are
prescrybed. She promeseth to be obedient, and other things, etc. Christ the
son of God the father, brydegrome, affiau^ceth to himself all the chosen
through his free grace: he promises them his righteousness, all heavenly gifts
and eternal life. He takes upon him moreover all the infirmities of the bride,
and pourgeth her filthiness. And the bryde is affiau^ced to him by faith, as it
is with Osee, and byndeth her self wholly to him: after whose will and law
she frames her self wholly. For she is the body of a lively head. As S. Paul
says in the.5. to ye Ephe. The bride leaders be the, prophets, patriarchs,
Apostles. So Ihon Bapt. in ye.3. of Ihon, calls himself the friend of ye
brydegrome. He adds, to be the spouse of Christ. S. Paul. 2. Cor. 11 I have
married you to one man a chaste Virgin, etc. Hereunto the.16. chapter of
Ezechiell seems to appertain.

And the ioyninge together of either party, is made after they be affiaunced,
with certain ceremonies: to wit by taking each other by the hands, and certain
words spoken, there is given a token or a ring, etc. But immediately after the
beginning, was a league or bond made betwixt God and men, which is often times
red of, not without ceremonies, certain words and sacrifices repared, as by
Abraham, Moses and others. God byndeth himself to men, and men to him, and
that notwithout Sacraments. Hereunto belong all those things, that God
would be in league with man, and have men bounden to him, and all his things
communicated to us. And this marriage, of all others is most straightly joined
and made, whyleste the son of God has united our flesh into one and the
same person with him, and has commanded the Apostles to preach unto all, that
he will have a communion with the faithful. Of the which communion are red many
things every where in the scriptures. And he has given a pledge of faith and
perpetual amity, A pledge.
not a ring of gold, but rather the sacraments: yea even the holy ghost, as S.
Paul says in the.2. to the Cor. 1. and to the Ephesi. the first.

And the marriage Marriage.
shall be solemnized in the resurrection of the dead. The souls verily pass
from the death corporal, into life everlasting: but yet the full restitution,
and salvation of man is not made perfect, except the body come also. Therefore
at the resurrection comes the marriage of the lamb, that is, of Christ our
redemer. Than are we carried to mete Christ in the air, than he brings in his
wife into the bed chamber of eternal glory and bless, than shall be holden
that feast and deintie supper, than shall the bryde enjoy for ever the love of
the brydegrome. This shall be verily the marriage of the lamb. And the marriage
shall be the merier, for that the whore being cast out and condemned, the wife
and honest matrone shall have the full and perfect joy alone. At this joy, and
at this marriage, the holy inhabiters of heaven do rejoice.

The preparation of ye bryde to ye ^ariage.
Moreover the Saints resite here also a certain preparation of the Bryde, that
by the way the godly may understand, what thing best becomes them, and
whereunto they should apply themselves in the last age. Let us prepare our
selves to mete the Bridegroom. For we look for the judge every hour. And we
prepare our selves not in one howr or day, but all our life time. And how we
should be prepared, the Lord himself shows by the parable of ten Virgins.
Let us deck our selves with true faith against Antichriste in the later
days. Math. 25 Luke. 21.
Let us beautify our selves with the works of charity, the works also of
righteousness, chastity, and temperauncie: Let us not be corrupted and defiled
with dro^kennes, blood, and cares of this world.

Furthermore leest any should ascrybe this preparation to his own merit,
strength and virtue, The bryds array.
and that we should see also, that the same preparation does chiefly consiste
in prouyding of the garment, S. Ihon adds incontinently, and to her was
granted, that she should array or apparel her self. If it be given, than is
it not by our force or means prepared, 1. Corinthians. 4. chapter. If it be given,
than is it not bought by popish traffic. Read the.8. to the Acts. And he
expresses also the kind of garment, of clean or pure silk, and shyning or
brighte. For we read also in the gospel of the wedding garment. The Apostle
full often exhorts us, that we should put upon us the Lord Jesus. These things
be in alligorie. But he by and by expounding now this kind of garment,
says: that silk is the righteousness of saints. Iustifications or
righteousness.
Saints he calls the faithful. But where there is one only justification
of faith through Christ, S. Ihon speaks iustifications in the plural
nombre. For they that be freely through Christ justified by faith only, do
incontinently sundry and many works of righteousness. For he that is just as
the same Ihon says, 1. Ihon. 3
the same works righteousness. Therefore be there iustifications, to wit the
righteousness of faith justifying, and the righteousenes of works justifying:
that is to say, declaring us to be justified by faith alone. For we are
purified by the blood of Christ freely, the which we receive by faith: and be
fully justified, witness Paul in the.3. to the Romans. Again they that be
righteouse, do sundry works of righteousenes, and commend themselves unto God.
So do they not appear naked, but clothed with there wedding garment, as we
touched also in the third chapter of this book

A pure and bright garment.
And full aptely is the garment of the bryde called pure or clean, not for her
self, whom we know to be always hindered and weakened by the flesh, but
for the spirit sanctifieng, and blood of the son of God: as Saint Paul
testifies Ephesians the fifte, and first of Ihon the first. The garment is
said moreover to be shyning and bright, and that for the glorifieng of
Saints to come. Whereof is made mention in the.12. of Daniell, and.13.
chapter of Matthew. For of righteousness follows glory. For whom he has
justified, Roma. 8
the same has he also glorified. Unto him be praise honor and glory.

Of the certe^tie of the salvation of Saints, and what bless or Salvation
is. The.lxxxiij. Sermon.
AND he said unto me: write, blessed are they which are called unto the lambs
supper. And he said unto me: these are the true sayenges of God.

Of the certe^tie of the salvation of ye faithful.
The second place of this chapter is, of the certentie of the salvation of the
faithful: where is signified in the mean season, what and of what manner, is
the bless of the faithful. For there is said enough already of the marriage of
the lamb, and that is to say, of the glory and bless of the chosen: but many
things are suggested to man in this life, which bring salvation in doubt, and
go about as it were to make it uncertain, and therefore waueryng minds are
here now confyrmed. This doctrine is profitable for afflicted and troubled
consciences, and overthrows and beats down the doctrine of sophisters,
affirming that man is never assured of his salvation, for that in an other
place the wise man says: man knows not, whether he be worthy of love or
hatred. Where he has spoken that upon an other occasion, and to an other end,
as I have declared in my book of the grace of God, etc.

Ihon is commanded to write.
At this present therefore is showed, that the salvation of the faithful is most
certain. For first the Angel comaundeth the Evangelist to write. This is
taken of the manner of men, which put in writing their Testamentes,
conuenauntes, and bargains, and than seal the same, for the cause of credit
and for a perpetual memorial of the thing. And they that have such kind of
writings, are of a quiet mind, and think themselves safe and assured,
against al crafts, and subtle practices. And therefore to the intent that the
mind of man might be quieted in the matter of salvation, he causes as it were
an instrument to be written, whereby al ye godly might be assured of certain
salvation. The same manner of writing our lord in other places follows in
weighty matters. As we may see in the.8. and.30. chapt. of Esaye, and in
the.2. of Abacuke. Wherefore it is less to be marueled, why the Apostle S.
Pvule so often alleged that same out of Abacuke: yt rightuouse shall live by
faith. For this only testimony of God, as that which is cited out of the godly
instrument, might be in stead of all.

And where God commanded openly Moses and Jeremy to write (whereof we may
doubtless judge, The authority of holy Scripture.
and certainly gather that other Prophets also, Apostles and Eua^gelistes,
wrote not without commandment) we see, of what authority the books of tholde
and new Testament be with all the godly. For they be divine, autenticall, they
be the instrument and testament of God, the books of God himself, which are
rightly believed, without any other help or confirmation. We believe the
testamentes and sealed writings of me^: how much more ought we believe the
books of the Scripture canonical?

Again is manifestly declared to S. John, what he should write: The called are
blessed.
blessed are they which are called to the marriage of the Lamb. Therefore it is
evident, that now it is confirmed both by the divine oracle and lawefull
instrument, that those which are called to the Lambs supper be and shall be
blessed. This same was pronounced by oracle divine, and written Autentically.
What place than of doubtefulnes is left? undoubtedly blessed are the
faithful, greffed in Christ. For they be now called, unto whom the gospel
is preached, by the which they are called to the participatio^ of the gifts of
God, but chiefly to eternal life through Christ: and they which not only hear
the ver^^e of the gospel, but that also receive it, and believe it with their
har^e. For many be called, and few chosen. For ye gospel is preached to many,
and the grace of God is offered in christ, but they receive it not. But such as
through the grace of God do receive it with true faith, are blessed. For they
are not only called to the Marriage, but also come unto the marriage, and inioye
that weddyng supper. These things seem to be taken out of the doctrine of our
savior which he taught in the.14. of Luke, of them that were bidden to the
marriage. Read that same place.

What that bless is.
Nevertheless by the way is declared, what that blessedness of the faithful
is: nothing else verily, than the fruition of the supper of the lambs marriage.
A supper is made when the day draws toward an end. So is full salvation
given to the godly about the end of the world, at the resurrection of the
dead: as in the fourmer sermon is expounded. And verily all those things be
altogether allegorical, which represente unto us a certain signification of
eternal life and glory. Otherwise we have learned of the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, which the ear has not heard, nor the eye has seen,
nor have entered into the heart of man, the same has God himself prepared for
them that love him.

These sayings of God be true.
Finally is annexed again a most weighty assertion, or confirmation hereof.
For he hears it uttered by an oracle from heaven, (...). These words or
sayings of God be true. They be verily true, and be of God. Or else, they be
true, for they be of God. Erasmus has translated: these words of God are
true. And so has the vulgar translation: these sayenges of God are true. By a
double reason therefore are these things confirmed, which are here
propounded: both for that they be true, and because they be of God. Although
they come both to one poincte. For sins they be of God, which is verity,
they can not but be true. Therefore let us believe these things, and leave no
place unto doubtefulnes.

The scripture is gods word
Here is cut of the occasion of subtle reasonyng, that the scriptures and
preachynges set forth of men out of the scriptures, are not the word of God:
for that they be written on Paper with Ink, and pronounced with man's voice,
and with a sound passing away: where the word of God is another humane, nor
corruptible, nor passing away. For the celestial oracle does here pronounce
manifestly, that the sayings were written into the book of S. John, and
pronounced of the Angel, and to be true, and to be gods word. So Paul
affirms also in the.1. These. 2. chapt. that the word that he preached of
him, was the very word of God. Likewise S. Peter, in the.1. Peter. 1. Therefore
let curiouse men leave bringyng forth of these Paradoxes, and cease from their
disputing, that the word of God written, and preached, is not the word of God.
Than is not verily the word of God, what time such things are written or
spoken agree not with the holy Scripture of God. The minds of the faithful
are rather to be allured to this poincte, that they believe, and clean unto al
words of the scripture declared in their right sense, as the most certain
words of God. For else, to what thing shall we trust? what thing after this
shall we have undoubted and certain. To God be glory.

The fact of S. John is declared, which would have worshipped the Angel,
and of the Angel prohibityng. The.lxxxiiij. Sermon.
AND I fell at his fete, to worship him. And he said to me: see thou do it
not. For I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, and of the^ that
have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. For the testimony of Jesus, is the
sprete of Prophecy.

Here is added the third place of this chapter, to wit the doing of the
Apostle S. John, and the Aungel of God. S. John would have worshipped the
Angel: Thexcel^^cie of Aungelles.
but he is prohibited of the Angel, which bids him worship God. And before
all this act and enterprise of John seems chiefly to be considered. Angels
are surely right noble creatures, and of great power, by whom the lord
executes greatest affairs. They take upon them for the most part the shape
of men, and very often appear unto men, serve, keep, and do good unto the^,
accordyngly as God uses their ministry. Hebrew. 1.
For the Apostle speaking of Angels (as I told you in the.29. Sermon) be
they not al, says he, ministering spretes, which are sent forth to serve for
their sakes which shall be made heirs of salvation? And these things does
the Scripture make plain by sundry examples. Genes. 18.19.
Three appeared to Abraham in man's likeness, which were Aungelles, instructyng
him, two delivered Loath him self out of the hands of the Sodomites, and
brought him out of the fire: Genes. 32.
whole armies of Aungelles inuironne Jacob, defendyng him against the force and
violence o^ his brother Esawe. Exodus 34.
The Lord sent his Angel before Moses and the children of Israel, to lead
them through the wilderness into the land of promission. 4. kings. 6 4. kings.
19.
Fiery charettes compassed about Helizeus. An Angel levied the siege of
Jerusalem, slayeng an hondreth four score and five thousand of the
Assiryans. Daniel has Angels familiar with him. Likewise the fathers and
other Prophets. An Angel delivers Joseph out of all care: Math. 1.2.
the same delivers the wise men from the treason of Herod: by and by he
commands to conueye away Christ into Aegipt: Matthew. 4.28.
Angels minister to Christ, in white garments they testified that the Lord
was risen, and ascended into heaven. Acts. 1.5.10. and.12.
The same bring the Apostles out of prison, one of them delivers Peter out of
Herodes prison. An Angel is sent to Cornelius an Italian captain. Angels
many times talk with Paul. Oftentimes they imploye great benefits upon men.
They declare themselves through God to be of great power. And whileste men
observe those things, Why Iounwold have worshipped the Angel.
they would worship Aungelles: as even at this present, where the Apostle S.
John understand that Christ him self by his Angel did open to him so great
mysteries for the profit of churches, whilst he maruayled at his brightness and
godly gifts, he would by and by have worshipped this his Angel the bringer of
mysteries: not that he intended or pourposed to reuolte from God, and covered
in stead of God to worship an Angel for another is it lawefull ones to
Imagine such a wickedness of so great an Apostle. He would therefore have
worshipped and honored the Angel with Dulia as they term it, (and as Thomas
of Aquine expounds it) not with Latria: that is to say, to worship and
honor God, as God: but the Angel somewhat less, as an excellent messager of
God. Howebeit herein he offended, to the end that al men should understand
that they sin, how many so ever do worship and honor Aungelles or
excellent creatures with godly worship. As all the worshippers of Saints
do at this day in Papistrie. Another have they any other shifte to color
their error but that same distinction, that God is worshipped and honored
with worship latrical, and Saints and Angels with worship dulical, and the
virgin Mary with honor hiperdulical, and I wot not what things else, which I
am both ashamed and loath to rehearse.

And it appears that S. John here was entangled with the same error: S. John
erreth.
whom otherwise we must needs confess to have sinned by Apostasy, and would
have worshipped the Angel for God, or with God. Which are both two wicked, and
unworthy such a man. But in ease he worshipped God, and would nevertheless
have worshipped the Angel also, what thing else did he, than offend in the
worship dulicall. And verily God has permitted so worthy a man to err, as
he did also Peter and Thomas; to the intent he might heal ou^ infirmities:
that is to wit, that by their errors we might learn to believe more rightly,
and to honor God more purely. For this present place teaches openly, and
other like examples of errors, that all the sayings and doings of Saints
are not to be allowed without any differente.

For now here follows the fact of an Angel most excellent, that is to say,
a godly confutatio^ of the error. That no^ A^^gell^s (...) Sa^ should be
worshipped.
First he says not lightly, do not as thou haste pourposed: but greuousely
condemning his fact, he says with a certain vehemency, see thou do it
not. We have a like phrase of speech here in Swicerlande, what time
(signifiynge in any wise to be ware) we say, Long vnd thu das nitte. Look thou
do it not. Wherefore we have learned by the testimony of the angel, that
now another Angels nor saints are to be worshipped. For seeing the Lord himself
says of Saints, they shall be as the Angels of God: I see not why they
should not match the Saints with Angels. And we have verily learned that
they may be worshipped another with culte latrical nor dulical. And to worship,
is with a mind to honor, to fall at the fete, to bow down and knele. As I
have said else where.

After thangel shows reasons, why he ought not to worship: for I am thy
fellow servant. He says not servant, but fellow servant: to wit of the
same office with thee, under the same lord and master. For Angels serve God
after their manner: and so do men serve God after their manner: yet are all
servants, and that the servants of one master. And it is against reason
that one servant should honor and worship and other of his fellows, being of
the same state and creation. It is therefore an unworthy matter, that the
faithful should worship the Apostles, Prophets, or Martirs: much less does
it become them to honor their dead bones. And leeste any man should say, how
thangel in deed in respect of the most excellent Apostle S. John, confesses
himself to be his fellow servant: but that there is an other consideration to
be had of other men, which come not nere the dignity of blessed John: and
therefore sins we be much inferior, we may worship Angels and Apostles our
superiors: The brethren of John, and Christ.
he preuenteth and says, and of thy brethren. And who be the brethren of
the Apostle S. John? the Angel him self answers, and says, which have
the testimony of Jesus. The testimony of Jesus, is the gospel, and the very
faith fixed on the gospel, comprehendyng with a faithful mind Jesus.
Wherefore al ye faithful of Christ, be John's brethren: therefore is the Angel
their fellow servant also. And therefore none of the faithful ought to
worship any Angel or Apostle: the lord him self also in the.12. of Matthew.
calls all that obey his word or preaching, Christian fraternity.
brethren. And here is dilligentely to be noted, that by faith we are made the
brethren of Christ, of Angels and Apostles. This should the Monks and Freres
have beaten in and set forth, and not the fraternity of our Lady, and
fraternities of Saints: unless they had been the Apostles of that great and
abominable Antichrist.

The testimony of Jesus Christ.
Moreover the Angel him self expoundyng again his own words, shows what
is the testimony of Jesus Christ. For the testimony of Jesus, is the sprete of
Prophecy. And the sprete signifies revelation or understanding: and
prophecy the prophetical and Apostolical doctrine. And therefore ye sense is:
the testimony of Jesus Christ is no other thing, but the reuealyng of the
doctrine of prophets and Apostles in the mind of the godly through the holy
ghost and faith. And therefore the Apostles in the gospel are called witnesses:
and the gospel, a testimony. And to testify, is to preach. Of the which
exposition such an argument may be gathered: the cause of thy worshippyng,
John, is doubtless that excellent revelation and prophecy, unto thee by me
revealed. But if I should therefore seem worthy to be worshipped, for that
there is in me an excellent sprete of Prophecy: by the like reason shall thou
worship al thy brethren, in whom is the same sprete of prophecy, to wit
the testimony of Jesus, the true faith. But where thou see, and thy self art
compelled to grant, the same to be very absurd, I perceive it to be absurd
if thou should worship an Angel.

The last and stro^gest reason, Worship God.
why he would not be worshipped, is this: worship God. It is taken out of the
authority and Law of God perpetual and immutable, revealed in the.6. of
Deuter. and repeted of our savior Christ in the.4. of Matthew. if we would obey
the law of God, al culte and worshipping and invocation of Saints had been
long sins bannished and exiled out of the church.

Furthermore there be other places also, Angels are not to be worshypped nor
called upon.
which commend the ministeries and virtues of Angels, teaching nevertheless
to honor and call upon God himself. Read the goodly Psalms.34. and.91. And
if any man list to have also the consent of the fathers, let him read S.
Austen saying, that Angels must another be worshipped nor called upon, another
ought there sacrifice to be made unto them, nor churches erected. The chief
places be, of the true religion the.55. chap. against Maximine an Arriane
Bishop, first book, leaf.77. De ciuit. dei.8. book last chapt. 10. chapt.
16.19.20. To God be the glory.

The description of Christ the Judge coming to the last judgment.
The.lxxxv. Sermon.
AND I saw heaven open and behold a white horse, and he that sat upon him,
was called faithful and true, and in rightuousenes did he judge, and make
battle. His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns:
and he had a name written, that no man knew but him self. And he was clothed
with a vesture dipte in blood, and his name is called, the word of God. And
the warriers which were in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed with
white and pure silk. And out of his mouth went a sharp sword, that with it
he should smite the heythen. And he shall rule the^ with a rod of iron, and he
trod the winefatte of the fearecenesse, and the wrath of almighty God. And
has on his vesture, and on his thighe a name written: king of kings, and
Lord of Lords.

Hitherto we have heard many things of the sundry pu^nishementes of the
ungodly: Of the last judgment.
and because it is manifest, that God takes punnishment of the mischeuous and
wicked at sundry times, and diuersely, but most fully and most severely in that
same last judgment, and from thence forth evermore, and S. John has ones,
twice, thryse begone to treat of the last judgment, as in the end of
the.11. and.14. chapt. And yet has ever differred, suspended and reserved to
an other place: at the last thinkyng it time, to set before al men's eyes a
description chiefly necessary, at the length he takes it in hand, and now
finissheth it up as a matter of all other greateste. He annexeth therefore to a
plentiful treatise of the tourmentes of the ungodly, a most full and evident
description of the judge most rightuous and greatest, and of that last
judgment, and most strait of all others, wherein most fully and severely
the pains shall be executed upon al Antichristians, and ungodly for evermore.
This place (which is the fourth of this chapt.) and this treatise stretches
unto the.21. chapter. The elocution is great, smellyng of the prophetical
majesty, and Apostolical perspicuitie, and efficacitie. You shall find not a
few of this sort in the prophets, especially in the.24.25.26. and.27. chapt.
of Esaye.

And verily this doctrine is very profitable and necessary to be learned and
understand most dilligently of all and singular faithful, A profitable and
necessary doctrine of the last day of judgment.
as the which with much diligence and most plentiful abondaunce was set
forth to this end of the Prophets and Apostles, but chiefly of the Lord
Jesus Christ him self, both in the Gospel, and also in this most godly
revelation. For unless thou be kept in thy duty for fear of the judgment,
and Judge to come, it is no marvel though thou runneste mad and perisshe
with this folishe and wicked world. In the treatise of the last judgment is
seen the end of al men, life and death, felicity and misery, pain or
tourment, and unspeakable and heavenly reward. He that remembers these
things well, abhors wickedness, and walks in holy fear before God.

And we have learned of the doctrine of the Gospel, That day is known to no
man.
that the same day of the restoryng of all, and oppression of the ungodly, and
also of all ungodliness, is known to no mortal man, but to the father alone:
and therefore to inquire of the hour and momente thereof to be most folishely
done much more wickedly. Notwithstanding the good Lord has showed and
signified tokens, which when we shall see to be fulfilled and accomplished, we
might lift up our heads, knowing that our redemption draws nere. Behold
your redemption, says he, not your tourment. For he speaks of the godly,
lokyng for their redemption from heaven, at the return of our savior and
redemer our lord Christ: which shall also inflicte to his enemies reue^gement,
as S. Paul says in the.2. These. the.1. Therefore let us not here be
curiouse, which search for things unsearchable: but rather let us watch and
pray, after the wholesome precepte of our savior judge, and revenger, let us
have our loins gyrded, and let lights burn in our hands, let us look for
him steadfast in faith, and and sou^de in holy hope. Let us rather take heed,
that the care of this world possess not our hearts, and beware of dro^kennesse
and surfettyng, and that we be not of the nombre or conversation of them,
which in the days of Noe and Loath, regarded worldely things only, despised
heavenly, and laughed them to skorne that gave them good counsel, till the
wrath of God was kindled, and fell upon them, when they leest looked for it. We
see al tokens that are said should come before the day of our Lord, to be
fulfilled. Let us watch therefore: and these things on this wise considered,
let us see and hear with great and dilligent attentiuenes, what manner of judge
of al shall come, and what that judgment shall be of the godly most wished for,
to the ungodly horrible and with tre^bling to be feared.

Heaven open.
First S. John in the vision sees heaven open. For by a vision, to the end all
things might be more evident, he not only tells so great a matter, but
sets it also before yt eyes to behold: and that he says, he says of the
revelation of Jesus Christ: leest any should obiecte and say, art not thou a
mad fellow to talk thus of matters unknown? For what is he that knows,
who or what that judge shall be? or else what that judgment shall be? Therefore
he tells these things from the judge Christ himself, and by an heavenly
revelation. For other places of the Scripture show, that the Lord shall come in
glory and Majesty: therefore with a great and most shining brightness of light,
with fire and excedyng great clerenes. For so it is said in the.24. and.25. of
S. Matthew. in the.7. of Daniel. And the.2. These. 1. chapt. Therefore by the
openyng of heaven is signifsed, that the whole world shall be lightened with
glory and brightness, and that the same day shall be most shining and clear.
Others understand, that the judgment can not be fully perceived, but of the
celestial revelation. Which as I confess to be most true, so think I hear
some greater matter to be signified.

The judge comes forth from judgment.
Than follows the description of the judge, as of a noble and stout warrior,
consisting of many parts. The godly understand hereby, that the kepar,
watcheman, and revenger of the church slepeth not, whom the wicked belie, not
to perceive, what wrong they do to the godly, another to care for the
superstitiouse Christians, as they term the^. They see moreover that they
err, if they think Christ at any time over favorable, and to wink over long
at the calamities of his servants. For now he comes forth a judge and
revenger. There be many excellent descriptions of Christ in this book, as in
any other: but this is most elegaunt and lively, which I have according to my
small talent, expounded by parts. Thou shall ever think of greater things,
til it shall be given to behold them presently with our eyes.

Our judge comes on horseback, and that on a white horse: He rides on a
white horse.
not that he needs the help of corruptible horses in heaven, but thus he
speaks after the manner of men, that we might imagine greater things.
Co^querours ride on white horses. Here is signified therefore, that our judge
shall be a co^querour and a triumpher. Others suppose by the white horse to be
signified his most pure humanity. I understand rather the white cloud. For
the same took him up from the eyes of his disciples, what time he ascended into
heaven of mount Oliuet. In the same he shall come again to judge. And like as
Kings are carried on horses and charettes: so the Psalmiste ascribes to God
clouds as horses and charette.

2. Our judge is (...) faitful and true. Faithful, Faithful (...) true.
to his faithful. True in all his promesses toward the godly and ungodly. They
are disceaued, and shall see themselves to be disceaued at the judgment, so
many as have contemned the promesses and threatening^s of God as vain, and
esteming things after the success of this world, judge the wicked to be happy
and fortunate, and the godly to be wretched and miserable. Hereof has the
Prophet Malachie reasoned in the.3. and.4. chapt. And seeing the judge is
faithful and true, he judges and fights in righteousness, to wit, geuyng
every man his own, rewards to the good, and punni^hmentes to the evil. This
king does not judge and fight, as the kings of this world are wont, followyng
vanity, and corrupt affections. And Christ is said to fight, when he
rewards the ungodly after their demerites, thapostle: we must al, says he,
be manifest before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive
such things as he has done by his body, according to that he has wrought be
it good or evil.2. Corinth. 5.

His eyes like a flame of fire.
3. The eyes of the Judge are like a flame of fire. For as no man can escape,
or hide him from the judge or judgment: as he searches the secrets of all,
another can there be any thing hid from his sight: so are his eyes terrible
and fearful against the ungodly. Psalm. 16. Romans 2.
The godly again are by the sight of the lord fulfilled with all pleasure,
joy and gladness. Flaming and fiery eyes are attributed also to Christ in the
first vision: where you may see more. And the Scripture every where
testifies, that the judge knows al things, eue^ the secrettes of hearts.
Thou do folishly therefore, which think thou have won the field, and to
have sinned vnpunnisshed, when thou haste escaped the knowledge and judgment
of man. There remains an other judgment, wherein all the doings of the wicked
shall to their utter shame and confusion be revealed before all the world. The
sins of the godly are covered, by him through whose benefit they be
justified, Romans 4.
and absolved from pain and crime also.

4. Our Judge has very many crowns upon his head: for he alone governs al
realms and nations. As also Daniel has signified in the.7. chapt. He alone
might trewely be called Affricanus, Europeus, and Asiaticus, Parthicus,
Persicus, Germanicus, Gotthicus, and others. Which our kings have full fondely
challenged to themselves, affectatyng so the Monarchy, where Christ alone is
the true Monarke for ever. This judge and mighty Prince shall strike of the
triple crown from the head of the Bishop of Rome. More, there shall be none
so mighty a king in the whole world, that shall be able to resist him, and
make war against him.

A name unknown.
5. Our judge has a name written, which no man knows save he himself. This
shall be more plainly opened anon. Christ has a name unspeakable, for he is
the true God, eternal, incomprehensible and Almighty. This name knows no man
but him self. For first the Majesty of God is greater, than that it may be
comprehended of any creature: again the name of God is agreeable to no man, but
to him alone: for the name of God, in this signification, may not be
communicated. For he is very god, and besides him none: which thing Esaye
repeteth often. He is the Savior, King, Monarch, and Judge: which things al
belong properly to him alone, and are not common to others. Moreover the Lord
himself says in the gospel: no man has known the son but the father:
another has any man known the father, save the son, and to whom the son
has pleased to reveal. Besides this, we se here vnperfitly: and the glory of
the divine majesty is so great, as even now I said, that man's capacity is
unable to conceive such a glory. No man therefore save God alone knows his
name.

6. The vesture of our Judge was sprinkled with blood. A blouddie garment.
Whereby is signified victory, and slaughter of his enemies: which shall anon
be added about the end of the chap. And he took this note of our judge out of
the.63. chap. of Esaias. He alludeth to co^querours returning from battle,
whose garments, and armours, are imbrewed with the blud of the slain. And
betokens the just severity of the Judge, and great slaughter of the
enemies.

7. The name of the judge is now expressed: The name of ye judge, the word of
God.
which is utterly unknown to the ungodly. And the Judge is called the word of
God. For the son is the word and speech of God, the express mark of the
divine substance: in whom the father himself is expressed: and of whom as
of the word the true messager of the heart, we understand the will and mind of
the father. These holy words of the gospel are known: In the beginning was
the word, 1. Ihon. Hebre.
and the word was with God, etc. Therefore Christ the word was made flesh,
the Lord God and Judge of all.

8. To ye Judge is added an Army, not of Angels only, The Army of ye Judge is
white.
with whom he often repeted in the gospel that he would come unto judgment: but
of all the faithful, or saints, which at no time, no not here ar sequestered
from their head. For first at ye sou^de of the trumpe blowe^ up the Archangell
the Saints arryse, and the living also with the dead are changed, and are
taken up to mete Christ in the Air. Here, here in the clouds and bryghte
Air, appear with Christ the happy and blessed victours. By and by the
ungodly rise also, and those that lived at that day, are changed with them
that rise again, to pain and confusion. But they se the Saints with Christ
in heaven, and in glory, and feel incontinently unspeakable tourmentes. They
come to pass doubtless, and are fulfilled which things are described it
the.3. and.5. chapt. of Wisdom. Saint Ihon therefore says, that this Army
is in Heaven, not in Earth. He says how they follow Christ. For the same
said the Apostle also, in the first to the Thessalonians, the.4. Moreover he
adds that they were clothed, and appeared not naked: and expresses the kind
of garment. They were clothed (says he) in silk, white and clean. For
saints in Christ obtain righteousenesse and glory, are made clean and are
glorified. Sanctifieng and glorifieng.
And this sense has Saint Ihon himself a little before opened to us, saying:
silk is the iustifications of Saints.

9. Out of the Judges mouth proceeds a two edged and sharp sword (...), A
sword out of the judges mouth.
which cutteth on either side. It is not sharp on one side, and blunte on an
other, it cutteth on both sides indifferently. Whereby is signified a just
sentence pronounced of Gods mouth against the wicked. For against them the
sentence of God is a sword, pearsing even to their hearts. Wherefore it is
also called sharpt. The judgment of our judge is streighte and severe, but
yet just and righteouse. What that sword is, in the gospel is declared:
verily that heavy and immutable sentence, get you hence in to fire everlasting.
Math. 25. Whereupon it follows in the words of the Evangelist: that with the
same he may stryke the heathen, to wit that he may damn, and put to
perpetual tourmentes all unbelievers.

He shall rule them with an Iron rod.
10. And he shall rule them with a rod of Iron. By the same kind of speech in
a manner he says the same, that he said before. For they that would not
receive or acknoweledge with repentance the staff of instruction and
discipline postorall, shall find in judgment and feel the Iron scepter,
wherewith he shall break them all to shyuers, like potters vessel. Another
shall any power resist or prevail against him. And this manner of speaking is
taken out of the Psalm.110. For Saint Ihon uses gladly the words of
Scripture to the end to make his book more commendable, or more pleasant and
acceptable.

11. He treads the wynefatte of the wine of wrath. etc. Again he says the
same, that he ded before: He needs ye winefa^.
but by an other parable now uttered, and the same taken out of the
scriptures, to wit out of the.63. chapter of Esaye. The effect or some is,
he will power out his wrath upon the ungodly, and punnyshe them most
extremely, with his almighty hand, whereunto all things give place, giving
their heads a blow. See what is said here of in the.14. chapter of this book.

12. Again is showed the name of this judge, King of kings, and Lord of
Lords.
and in the name is majesty and power of all others greatest. He has the name
written on his garment, and on his thigh. By these is declared the true
humanity of Christ, after the which he is exalted, as the Apostle says in
the second to the Philippians. And to him is given a name which is above al
names. Here he is called King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, very God, Lord,
monarke, and judge of all men. For so do the other Apostles speak also in
the.2. and.17. of the Acts. And there might seem in this name of the Judge, as
it were a cawse to be showed, wherefore he is here appoincted Judge over all.
Because he is King and Lord of all. To whom be glory for ever. Amen.

The description of the judgment, wherein punnishment is taken of
Antichristians and ungodly. The.lxxxvi. Sermon.
AND I saw an Angel stand in the Sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the fowls that fly by the mids under the heaven: come and gather
your selves together unto the supper of ye great God, that you may eat the
flesh of Kings, and of high captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the
flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all free men,
and bond men, both of small and great. And I saw the beast and the Kings of
the Earth, and their warriors gathered together, to wage battle against him
that sat on ye horse, and against his soldiers. And the beast was taken, and
with him that false prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he
deceived them, that received the beasts mark, and them yt worshypped his
Image. These both were cast quick in to a pond of fire burning with
brimstone: and the remnau^t were slain with the sword of him that sat on the
horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth, and all the fowls were filled
with their flesh.

The description of the Judgment, and pu^nyshme^t of ye wicked
Immediately after the description of the Judge, and a certain lively picture, a
description no less evident follows of the judgment: that is to say, how
Christ having vanquisshed his enemies, commits them to perpetual
tourme^ts. And the Apostle uses a prepheticall phrase and eloquence. For by a
fyguratiue speech, al fowls are called to the slaughter and feast, that they
might be filled with the flesh of the slain. And first an allusion is made
of such as sley wares and prepare a feast, whereunto they may call their
friends, and make them chere. Again an allusion is made, to the murder and
slaughter of enemies, whereof wild beasts and ravening fowls are filled.
Another is there any thing hereby signified, but Christ shall overthrow all the
ungodly, and take punishmente of the same. Before was set forth a supper for
the godly, wherewith they are refresshed and fulfilled. Now is prepared a
feast of the solemn slaughter, whereby the ungodly receive no commodity,
another are they satisfied, but rather are slain and devoured, that is to say
perish. For no man will imagine, that the wicked shall be overthrown at ones,
and after weried of wild beasts, and gnawen of fowls, and so all punnishment
to make an end to gether. For so should their pain seem to be none at all.
But by temporal parables, eternal things are fygured. These are taken out of
the Prophets, namely out of the.66. chapter of Esaye, and the.39. of Ezech.
where are red in a manner ye same words what time he covers and wrappeth the
ungodly with calamities, I mean wars, and destructions, and with other
torments as it were kills them: but chiefly, when at the last judgment he
commits them to pains everlasting.

And this slaughter is declared of the Angel, An Angel sta^dyng in the sun.
standing in the sun, and criyng with a loud voice. Whereby is signified,
that the day of judgment shall be solemnly proclaimed with tro^pettes, and
shall be a notable day. That no man can be ignorant herein, but that al things
hereof shall be heard of al me^. And therefore he cries with a loud and an
audible voice. And he calls to gether, as it is in Ezechiel, the birds and
fowls to devour kings, and men of al states, age, and sex: that is to say,
that all these must be called together, to suffer eternal punnishement and
destruction. Therefore he recites dilligently kings, chief captains, strong
men, and of all sorts, to wit the persecutours of Christ, Antichristians,
ungodly, co^temners, and impenitent persons.

Here is showed the cause of the damnation and destruction of the ungodly,
whilst their enterprise, endeavor, The cause of damnation, resisting of the
truth.
and attempt is showed. They are now assembled to fight a battle against
Christ, and his elect, that is against the church, who? the beast, the
Kings of the Earth, and their Armies, Captains and Soldiers, fightyng both
spiritually and corporally. And here needs no long commentary. Read the
stories of the church for the space of these five hondreth years. And see what
is done at this day of Popes, Bisshoppes, and Princes, and of their
cou^sellers and ministers. Parliamentes are called, in them are blouddy decrees
and laws made against the gospellers. And a greuouse persecution attempted
against the Gospel and church. The spiritual fathers cluster together, they
consulte, and cry out, that there must a counsull be called. Wherefore I
pray you? to the intent that new doctrine (as they call it) of the Gospel,
may be cut up, rooted out, and plucked up by the roots. And therefore they
stand always ready to fight, are many times assembled against God and his
annoincted, to fight with the lord Christ, and with his chosen. Now a days if
at any time peace be concluded, and the most blouddy wars of Princes taken
up, other in the composition of peace, or immediately after, consultations are
had, how to oppress the godly. But there is no other kind of sin more
heynouse, than to impugn the verity of the Gospel. And therefore is this the
chiefeste cause of the condemnation of the wicked at the same day. It is
accounted at this day emonges the chiefest virtues of Princes, if a Prince
will give no place to the preaching of the gospel, but the same shut out, will
defend and maineteine the church of Rome, with those doctrines, rites, and
ceremonies falsely called old. Such are called right and good catholics,
most christen, and defenders of the faith.

The beast is taken.
But now is their damnation, and the manner thereof annexed. And the beast is
taken. And he speaks of these notorious offenders (...), as it were taken
with the manner, and taken in deed beyond their expectation. For in the mids
of their enterprise are they intercepted, whilst they be yet in great hope,
and think verily to bring many things to pass against Christ and his church,
then in the self heat and wickedness of impugninges and persecution they
shall be comprehended. Whereupon also this is manifest, that persecution and
impugning of the verity shall persevere to the worlds end. But who shall be
taken? the beast and the false prophet, which wrought miracles. Touching these
things, see what is said about the end of the.13. chapt. The cause of
eternal damnation is again here placed. For he has seduced the world by his
inchauntementes and crafty iuggelynges, by his decrees and commandments.
Whereof I have spoken before oftener than ones, as also in the.17. chapt. etc.
The fellowship also of his condemnation is adjoined: so many as have received
the mark of the beast, and have worshipped the beast. Whereof we will now
repete nothing. These things are declared in the.13. chapt. And albeit nothing
can or ought to be proved by the pictures: yet is it nevertheless certain,
that Paynters have borrowed hereof those their old payntinges of the last
judgment.

For we see the old pictures of the last judgment, painted an hondreth years
sins and more, to represent and exhibit to us a great rabble of Priests,
Monks, and Freres, and al manner of spiritual fathers: but chiefly the
ghostes of kings and Popes, which are hurried to hell, and burn in the
botome thereof with fire everlasting. Whereupon it is said, that there go mo
priests tha^ plowme^ to the deuel, etc.

Furthermore the damnation it self, and manner of torment, A lake of fire
burning with brimstone.
or the torment it self shall be fire. For S. John says: these two are cast
quick into a ponde, burning with brymstone (...) into a lake or standing water
as be in fenne countries, for such is the description of hell, and of
thextreme punnishme^t, as is also described with Esaye in the.30. cha. Tophet
was long sins prepared, the same is also prepared for the king, which he
has made both wide and deep, the inward parlour thereof is fire, great store
of wood, which the blaste of the lord, or stream of sulphur sets on fire.
Not much unlike things are red in the.66. chapt. and in the gospel of Jesus
Christ. Mark the.9. Matthew..25. and in other places in manner infinite. And the
plague of Sodom is known to all men, Genes. 19. The laughynges therefore of
the ungodly sknorners despised, the godly had rather believe these things, than
to prove them. For here is hell set open as it were for us to look into it.
Let us fear.

And two here are singularly named. These two are cast into ye ponde.
For sins they have been authors of all euilles, of right they must be chief
in pains or torments. For the wise man also has said, terriblely, and
suddenly will he appear unto you, for it shall be a most hard judgment to the^
that bear rule: Sapie^t. ^.
and the mighty shall suffer mighty torments. For the Scripture also shows
in an other place, that there be degrees of punnishement, after the quality of
the crime. And let us not think here that the head is punnished with out the
members. For the whole body of Antichrist shall be condemned to torments. Al
ungodly shall be punnished, as hereafter shall be more plainly, and in the end
of the.20. chapt. declared.

But that same is also especially to be noted, They are cast into the po^^^
quick.
that it is said how they shall be cast quick into hell. For so is
signified the resurrection of the dead. Here is signified, that in the
judgment the world yet remaining shall be taken in the flesh, not as yet dead
but living: which S. Paul expresses lively.1. Thessal. 4. And we pronounce
openly in the creed, saying: from thence he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead: not only the just and unjust, but the dead, to wit remaynyng in
the flesh, and living. Antichrist therefore shall live at the daye^ judgment,
and shall not be extinguished before. The persecution of Antichrist shall endure,
with all ungodliness, even to the last day. And like as Chore, Dathan, and
Abyron, and the rest of the conspiratours, were taken in the very crime of
rebellion, and swallowed up quick with their tabernacles, and all their
things of the Earth openyng: so at the day of judgment Hell gapyng wide
shall receive and swallowe up all the ungodly, but chiefly the Antichristians.
The which many now believe not, but in that day shall so find it with
unspeakable pains, and horror incredible, and al we shall see it with these
our eyes. Every one puts trust in his own sect, and hops to obtain
salvation in his superstition. But the things that we here at this present,
are told us of the judge him self Christ, as most certain and undoubted, and
after a sort are set forth to behold.

And the re^uaunt are slain with ye sword.
And what shall be done at that judgment with the residewe of the ungodly, and
impenitent? shall the Antichristians only be damned for Antichristianisme? S.
John adds: and the remnaunt are slain with the sword, etc. For in the 25.
of Matthew. is pronounced by the mouth of the judge: go into fire everlasting,
prepared for the devil and his Angels. For I was ho^grie, and ye gave me no
meat, and so forth. For if they be to be damned by the just judgment of God,
which when they might have done good to men, have not done it: what I pray
thee shall come of them, which not only have showed no liberality to the nedy:
but have moreover spoiled such as had honestly and were liberal, of their
goods: and they afterward have spent the same in living riottousely: and so
have brought them that were of honest substance into extreme misery: and by
this mean have robbed the pore also, which were wont to be helped through
their liberality, of their help and succor? here are also comprehended,
heretics, Jews, Gentiles, Mahometistes, and all other like.

And all fowls are filled.
At the end is repeted, that all fowls are filled with the flesh of the damned.
The which we understand to be repeted by a figurative speech: and yet not to
be expounded after the lettre, but by that manner of speaking to be signified,
that all ungodly and impenitent persons shall be punnisshed most abundantly.
Primasius expoundyng this place: we ought not, says he, to understand it so
carnally, that we should believe the Saints (for by birds, he expounds
Saints) to be satiated with the flesh of the wicked: but the equity of Gods
judgment being to the Saints revealed, by the which redemyng the full number
of the chosen, the residewe he has decreed to be damned, they are said to be
filled with this knoweledge of rightuousenes, which in this life a man may
honger or thirste fore, but not perfitly comprehend. And Esaye also speaking
of the ungodly: and they shall be, says he, for the fulness of sight unto al
flesh, here I suppose to be set the foresaid fulness of souls. And by and by:
and the fowls may be taken in the evil part, for the Angels that
transgressed, which after they have brought their followers to destruction,
their evil desire accomplisshed, they are said to be filled with the flesh of
the condemned, taking satietie of their damnation, unto whom they were
Authors of errors. Thus much Primasius. But for my part, as I do not
mislyke these things, which are doubtless spoken truly, so think I that the
same are not to be sifted so nere, which spoken figuratively, and after the
prophetical imitatio^, seem to intimate no other thing, but (as I said a
little before) that all the ungodly should be distroyed, by the great power of
God, and extreme torments. Therefore let us fear God, to whom alone be glory.

Of the bright verity of the gospel, which by the ministry of the Apostles
was spread abroad through out the whole world, and by a thousand years.
The.lxxxvij. Sermon.
AND I saw an Angel come down from heaven, The.20. chapter.
having the keye of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And
he took the Dragon that old Serpent (which is the devil and Sathanas) and he
bound him a thousand years: and cast him into the bottomless pit. And he
bound him, and set a seal on him, that he should deceive the people no more,
till the thousand years were fulfilled. And after that must he belowsed for a
little season.

The greatest force of religion consists in ye knowledge of the last
judgment.
Seeing the greatest poinctes of religion and true godliness, consiste in the true
knoweledge, and understanding of the last judgment, as I often admonish: to
our great commodity S. John discourses with so much diligence the treatise
of the last judgment. And after his accustomed manner, to the intent all
things that he propounds may have the more perspicuitie, he not only
declares the matter in words, but sets them forth by visions as things
present to be seen with the eyes: and that to the faithful. For to the
unfaithful, al these things, although most godly and divine, seem stark
trifles and fables. But the wisdom of God shall laugh at them also, when she
sees her time: as she threateneth in the Proverbs of Solomon. And also
soluteth certain questions, which are wont about this matter to be moved.

What shall become of them, that he another Christians, nor Antichristians?
And he said, how the beast with the false prophet and all his adherentes
should be cast, at the last day into hell: but where the first part is
another Antichristiane, nor yet Christian, but rather of their own sense and
arbitrament, to be a rule and law to themselves: such as be verily the
Nestoria^s, Iacobites, Georgians, etc. Or those that be heythen yet or
gentiles, moreover Jews and Turks: some man might marvel, and demand,
what shall be done with them, or what shall come of them? S. John makes
answer: and the remnaunte were slain with the sword of him that sat on the
horse, etc. Again where a godly man might maruaylle, how they should be
condemned, which borne emongs the Turks, heretics, Jews and gentiles, never
heard the Christian verity? S. John preuenteth this imagination, and by the
beginning of the.20. chapt. shows, with what a Majesty, perspicuitie, and
evidence the verity of Christ's gospel was notified to the world: with what a
majesty ye verity of Christ was set forth to the world.
how also al force and power was taken away from the devil, and that by the
space of a thousand years: wherein the preaching of the gospel thondered
continually: so that they be utterly inexcusable, so many as have not received
the gospel of Christ. For the preaching of the gospel was not obscure, but
most clear and manifest, nor short and contracted, but published by the space
of a thousand years, it was not received of a few little ones, but of al
people and nations under the sun. Therefore is it a gross ignorance of the
Turks, Heretics, Jews and gentiles. For although in times paste the verity
seemed to have been notably known, now it is not so: yet certain it is, that
the majesty of the gospel has been so great in the world, that there is now
also mention with all men thereof: and by their own malice they hide their
eyes, which understand nothing of Christ. Therefore is that saying of the
Apostle even now of force also: if our gospel be hid, in those that
perisshe is it hid, unto whom the God of this world has blinded the minds
of them, which believe not, that the light of the gospel should not shine unto
them etc. 2. Corinthians. the.4. They that are condemned are justly condemned.
chap. Whereupon we now gather, that none of them which are damned in the
world, are damned with out deseruyng. Which thing the Apostle also S. Paul
has touched in the Epistle to the Romans in the.1. and.2. chapt. Here
therefore is a profitable and necessary place treated, of the famous
preaching of the gospel through out the world, the course thereof induryng a
thousand years.

And this treatise proceeds in this order. First is thangell described, after
his work or effect is declared. And last is the sealyng of the time.
Touching the description of the Angel, first in deed he is named an Angel, The
angel signifies ye order or state apostolical.
and comes forth abroad: howebeit the whole state Apostolical is hereby
understand, in the which shines excedingly S. Paul the doctor of gentiles
another is it marvel, that the order of Apostles is signified by an Angel.
For an Angel signifies a messager, ambassador, or an Apostle. And therefore
the prophet Malachie called John Baptist the vauntcurrour of our lord, an
Angel: behold I send my Angel before thee, etc. And ministers of the church
are oftener tha^ ones in this book called Angels. But in case the worthiness
and nobility of the name please the ministers, let the Angelical puretie, and
excellent faith please them also. An ambassador does and says nothing, save
that which he has received in commission, of him that sent him: so also let
the ministers set forth nothing, save that which he has received of the Lord,
in the Scriptures.

The angel came down from heaven.
Secondly this excellent Angel is said to come down from heaven, not that
the bodies of Apostles came from heaven, but for as much as their vocation and
office was given them from heaven. For the son of God, which came down from
heaven, chose the Apostles, and sent them forth into the world. Which thing is
declared in the.10. of Matthew. and.20. of John. Mark.16. and Luke.24. And S.
Paul says to the Galathians, that he was called, and ordained an Apostle
another by men, nor of men: but of God through Christ. Whereupon it appears,
how great is the authority of Apostles. For they be not they which speak,
but the spirit of Christ and of the father, which speaks in them. Therefore
he that dispiseth their doctrine, despises God the father and the son. They
lie moreover, that say, how the gospel is a new doctrine forged of witty
men. Read the.1. chapter of the fourmer and later epistle of S. Peter.

Thangell holds in his hand the keye and chain.
After this the Angel is said to hold in his hand those two excellent
instruments, the keye and chain. Let us see, what is mente by the same.
Doubtless by these two instruments S. John understands nothing else, but the
free, true, holy, and lively preaching of the gospel: by the which it came to
pass, that both hell was locked from the faithful, and the devil was holden
and kept fast bounden in chains, that he could not hurt the godly so much
as he would, and seduce whom he list. For so hereafter S. John will expound
him self.

And the keys Keys.
of bindyng and lowsing the apostles received of the Lord, in the.16. of Matthew.
and.20. chapt. of John. They open by the preaching of the gospel the botomlesse
pit, and hell it self to the ungodly, when they show unto them their
damnation in hell, for their ungodliness. They shut up hell from the godly,
whilst by the preaching of the gospel they open heaven, and bring the
faithful to the joys celestial. I have spoken of the keys at large in an
other place. A chain is the sign of captivity. Chain.
By the preaching of Gods word the Devil is taken and bound. Whereof it
comes to pass, that the common painters have painted the Devil bounden with
chains to certain notable preachers.

By things that follow this keye, He takes the dragon.
and signification of the chain is better declared, whilst the effect of the
Apostolical preaching is expounded. For he adds: and he took the Dragon,
etc. And he repeteth the names of our enemy out of the.12. chapt. where every
thing is expounded. Where you may also look for the same. And the Angel did
bind Satan, which is the end and use of the chain, verily that he should
not be stir him, and invade and distroye the faithful. Moreover there
follows an other thing yet more vehement: and he sent him into the
bottomless pit: to wit he cast him headlonge into the botome of hell, that
he should not murder the faithful. There follows an other thing yet more
greuouse: and he shut him up, that he should not come out again. This is the
end and use of the keye. Furthermore he set a seal upon him. But letters,
prisones, graves are wont to be sealed, and that for trust and credit, leest
any manne should undo them, but that they might remain shut, sealed and
safe. And all these things signify a full and most perfect victory, which we
have obtained through Christ, by the word of the gospel preached unto us, and
communicated through faith. For eue^ for us he overcame, ouerthrewe, bound,
locked up, and sealed the enemy, that we might be safe and sure from him.
Finally it follows, which may declare al and singular parts hereof: That he
should no more disceaue the people.
to the end he should deceive the people no more, to wit by such means as
he did seduce them before the victory of Christ, and before the gospel
preached through out the world. For they were all things full of ungodliness
and errors. Temples of Gods or Idolles were every where, Idolles were
worshipped, the same gave oracles, Aultars smoked with the blood of men and
beasts. All wickedness reigned. Art magic, witchcrafte, parricidies,
whoredoms, were practiced without punnisshemente. No man can easily express,
not in a long oration, how shamefully Satan had disceaued the world, how
assuredly be reigned, and with what intricatenes he has bounde^ unto him
mankind like a bondeslaue. Let him look, who so list, upon Greece. Italy, and
Asia: and in the same, Corinthe of Greece, Rome of Italy, and Ephesus the head
city of Asia. He shall find abominations abominable, and will say, that the
devil has raygned in them wholly, and had daily with new giles bewitched the
sely wretches. But after that Paul alone (I will speak nothing now of the
other Apostles) came to Corinth, Ephesus and Rome, and there had preached
Christ: who can not see, how truly S. John here saw the Devil bounden and
fast shut up? I am the briefer in this matter most plentiful, for that I
think I have done enough, if I show only some fotesteppes, wherein going ye
may come to a much more ample consideration of these things. Hereunto
appertain those divine words of S. Paul, which are red in the 26. of the
Acts, spoken before king Agrippa, and the princes of Syria and Festus
proconsull there. For this intent have I appeared unto thee (says the lord to
S. Paul) that I might ordeyne thee a minister and a witness both of such
things as thou have seen, and also of such wherein I shall appear unto thee
after this, delivering thee from the people and nations, whereunto I now send
thee, that thou may open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgeuenes
of sins: etc. In the.1. chapt. of the Epistle to the Colossians, as also in
diverse other places, S. Paul shows, that Christ has overcome Satan, and
that the same Christ has redeemed us, and brought us out of the kingdom of
darkness into the kingdom and light of the son of God. Christ has bounden
Satan.
Therefore where the Apostles and ministers are here said to bind and shute up
Satan, it is by the way of their ministry to be understand. Every man also
may judge of the things that have been treated hitherto, whether he have
profited in the doctrine of the gospel, which he has a long time heard in
the temple. For in case thou thy self be as yet bounden still with the chain of
the Devil, thou haste not yet heard the gospel, as apperteyneth: but if thou
felest that the Devil is bound with the chain, and that thou rulest the
Devil, and the Devil not thee, the matter goes well. Cry unto God: Lord
confirm this, and increase, that thou haste wrought in us, etc.

And concerning the time of this most shining truth of the gospel, A thousand
years.
it is said how it shall endure in the world a thousand years. For he says
expressly: he bound him for a thousand years. And again: that he should no
more deceive the people, til the thousand years were fulfilled. I know that
the opinions of thexpositours, touching these thousand years, be diverse. I
know, how the heresy of the Chiliastes or Millenaries by Papias Author
hereof, as Eusebius recites in the.3. book of the Ecclesi. history, was taken
hereof. I will not here stand about to confute the opinion of others, which
also would be ouerlong and tediouse, and not of so great profit. I will only
utter my own to be wayed of the godly readers, than will I leave it free for
every man to follow that thing, which he shall think most agreeable to the
treweth, and profitable for the godly. And I understand plainly and simplely,
that S. John speaks of a thousand years, which ran on by continual
course from the time of Christ, until the last corrupting of the Euangelical
preaching and church of Christ.

Another am I very scrupulouse in searchyng out the term of the supputation of
these thousand years. The beginning of the acco^pte of a thousa^de years.
Simplely I appoyncte the beginning of the rekening in the open preaching of
the Gospel, and what time the word began now to be received, and was now
received of the Gentiles. I suppose therefore that there may be three terms
or times appoyncted, which nevertheless shall come all to one rekenyng,
differyng little or nothing emonges themselves or having small diversity,
not passing half a year more or less. Ye may therefore, if ye please,
begin the supputation of the thousand years from the.xxxiiii. year of
Christ's birth, wherein Christ also ascended into heaven, and Paul being
called to the ministry, and drawing the gentiles into the felloweshippe of
Gods people by the preaching of God his word, began to restrain Satan. And
thou shall come to the year of our Lord.1034. and to the Bishoprycke of pope
Benedicte the.9. which after he clome by unlawful means into the chair of
Saint Peter, as they call it, practysed art magic, and was joined in
leage with the devil: of whom he was carried away also, what time he had sold
his bisshoprike before the Pope Gregory the.6. Read the story of Cardinal
Benon, whereof is mentioned before in the.13. chap. and let read other
stories. Certain it is, that the Devil at those days did occupy the
Apostolical seat, as they term it. Read the stories from Syluester the.2.
and so forth. Thou will say than, that about that time the Devil brake lowse
again, and seduced the people, especially by Popes. Or begin the supputation
of the thousand years from that time, wherein Paul being bound for the
Gospel at Rome, testified that the gospel was preached through out the
world. That was about the year of our Lord.60. from thence accomptyng a
thousand years, thou shalt come to the year of our Lord 1060. when Nicholas
the second was Pope, under whom it is written that the verity was diuersely
tempted and corrupted, and that Gregory the seventh did than also by his
crafts and enterprises trouble the whole world. Or begin the supputation
from the destruction of Jerusalem, what time the Jews cast of, the Gentiles
in great nombre entered and were received into the place of the Jews rejected,
which was the year of our Lord.73. and thou shall atteyne to the year of our
Lord.1073. even to Pope Gregory the seventh: in the which time not a few
Historiographers write that the Devil him self raygned. Doubtless never manne
hurt godliness, or more stoutely auaunced impiety, than did this Gregory,
otherwise called Hildebrande. Of him I have spoken before in the.13. chapt.
Where also I admonisshed you, that Cardinal Benon did account those thousand
years from the birth of the Lord, and concluded in Syluester the second. It is
evident therefore, that the gospel has had a notable place in the world, another
has been quenched for the space of a thousand years: that is to say, from the
time of thapostles, until the year of our lord was rekened 1073. or there
about. What was done at that time and after, we shall hear when we shall come
to that saying. And when the thousand years shall be fulfilled, etc.

Some man will say, I cannot see that the preaching of the Gospel has
continued in the world so long time, to wit a thousand years, For it
appears by Histories, that the doctrine of merits, satisfactions, and
justification of works, ded inco^tinently after the Apostles time, lay their
first soundations. We know that the intercessions of Saints, and the
worshipping of relicques, were defended of Saint Hierome, which departed out
of this world the year of our Lords incarnation.422. We know that the Bishop
of Rome ded immediately after the death of Gregory the first, take upon him to
be head and catholic Pastor of the church universal. We know that about
the same time, to wit about the year of our Lords incarnation.630. Mahomet
seduced a great part of the world. We know that shortly after, arrose that
detestable contention about the having of Images in the churches of Christians.
We have heard that S. Ihon has assigned to Antichriste years.666. Finally, it
is manifest that the Devil has by murder, parricidie, and all kind of
mischief reigned in the children of misbelefe. Wherefore thou sayeste, I see not
how the Devil has been bounden a thousand years: and locked in chains.
How the devil has been bounden a thousand years.
I answer that the things which are alleged hitherto, are true: yet
nevertheless to be true, and so to remain always, which S. Ihon by the
revelation of Jesus Christ has affirmed, that the Devil should be shut up
for a thousand years, and remain bounden, till a thousand years were at an
end. And the same we declare on this wise. The Lord said in the Gospel. Now
is the judgment of the world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast
out. And where as it is not lawful to doubt of the verity of Christ's words,
yet nevertheless is he not red to be so cast out, but that he has been of
great force in the world, and has been called of the Apostles themselves,
the Prince of this world. How than is he said to be cast out, and to tempte
the godly, to reign, and to be cast out of his Kingdom?

He is cast out of the church, and of the faithful, How Satan is cast out,
and yet vexes the faithful.
not that he comes not again, and tempts, for always he returns, and
seeks to pluck back the redeemed (but for that he possesses no more the full
empire. For Christ now lives, and raineth in the church and Saints. These,
as S. Austen says, he assayleth from without) he is cast out of his ancient
possession, but he labors to recover his old habitatio^. And thus was
Satan bound, and shut up for a thousand years, as he that possessed not
the faithful of Christ through out the world, nor ruled them at his
pleasure, and after his malice, although he has tempted and vexed them. So
was the holy ghost denied to be given, not that he was not in the world and in
the Prophets: but because he was never so plentifully powered out upon all
flesh, as after the glorifienge of our Lord Christ. In the same sense we
say, that death and sin are taken away from the faithful, and trodden under
foot. As S. Paul therefore, which in the first chapt. to the Colloss. said,
that we are translated out of the kingdom of darkness, in to the kingdom of
light: says nevertheless to the Corinthians, that the God of this world,
has blinded the minds of the unfaithful: so S. Ihon at this present says,
how the Devil is bound and sealed, by the space of a thousand years, and
the very same says afterward, the rest of the dead revived not, til the
thousand years should be fulfilled: that is to say, in all those thousand
years believed not, which set more by the beast, than they ded by Christ. And
they verily through their own fault, and instigation of the Devil believed
not, and perished. Therefore ded Satan exercise his force in them. Which to the
faithful in deed is bounden, and tied fast, but to the unfaithful free and
over familier. Likewise Hell is shut to the godly, to the wicked open.
Wherefore also we confess in the creed, life everlasting, and not death or
damnation everlasting. For the faithful have no Hell, or there is no Hell
prepared for them: but for the ungodly. For Christ has broken Hell, but for
his faithful: to the unfaithful all things of hell are yet most strong,
and these have Hell.

The power of the Devil by Christ broken.
Again the Devil is said to be bounden, shut up, and sealed: for since the
redemption of Christ, his power has not been so great in the world, as it was
before. Wherefore S. Ihon expounds himself, and says: that he should
deceive the people no more. What is this more? but that he shall not so seduce
them from hence forth, as he has done hitherto. Therefore al be it in the
mean while he shall deceive some, yet in those thousand years he has not
reigned so fully, safely and at large, as he ded before, and as it is permitted
him after those thousand years to rage. Therefore these things ar spoken by a
comparison, and not absolutely. And the thing it self, or experience teaches,
that they are not to be understand absolutely, and after the bare lettre.
Although therefore that Satan has in these thousand years also, blown his
poison upon many, and has troubled the world, yet this is nothing, in
comparison of those things, that have followed after the thousand years even
until this day, and shall follow hereafter unto the worlds end. In oulde time
also he reigned fully emongs the Gentiles through Idolatry. But a thousand
years fell down their temples and Idolles, with all other instruments of
ungodliness.

We read truly, Certain articles of religion assailed.
how there were in the Apostles time that affirmed, that men are justified by
the law and works. Whereupon sprange up the doctrine of satisfaction and
merits. But the same doctrine was confuted by the Apostle Saint Paul, above
other Apostles. Saint Austen also, and after him Bid, most constantly have
defended the doctrine of grace, and redemption by Christ. The same continued
safe by the space of a thousand whoale years. But afterward, Freres getting
the upper hand, the doctrine of satisfaction and man's merits ded prevail:
whereupon was utterly obscured the doctrine of Jesus Christ, conserning the
free remission of sins, and imputing of righteousness. There grew up an
opinion with certain of Saints, making intercession or prayeng in heaven for
their worshyppers. The relicques began to be worshipped over soon.
Nevertheless such as were illumined claue fast to the only intercessour
Christ, and honored not relicques. But after those thousand fatal years, many
attributed more to Saints, than to the very holy one of Saints. We see what
is done at this day. The writings of Monks and Freres testify, how much the
worshipping of creatures has increased within these.iiii. hondreth years, or
there aboutes. Who will deny that exceeding many have been deceived of Heretics?
But who can gather thereby that the Gospel has been utterly lost, and that
Satan has reigned fullye?

The Bishop of Rome has ascended in to the top of Mount Zion, and will be
called the head and Pastor general of the whole catholic church. Howbeit
the East most constantly resisted, and so ded other parts of the world also.
At the length after a thousand years, he made his boaste most impudently,
that the fullness of power was given him, which he got by hoke and croke, and
after usurped the same. Mahomet seduced many, yet nevertheless the
Patriarchall churches persisted, and the East honored Christ, likewise South
and North, so that the thousand years again had their light, another has
Satan in these raged so much, as he has since those years were complete.
Doubtelesse since the Turks began to rule and reign, al matters of religion
grew every day worse and worse. And the war into the Holy land ded very
much hurt to religion, and gave great courage to the Saracenes and ungodly:
whereof I shall speak afterward. And Images began to be set up in
temples, and to be defended. But the Histories testify that the same was done
with great difficulty, and hardly could the use of them be obtained, all
good men most constantly resisting. And what time they were now admitted, yet
were not the Idolaters so stark mad, as we se they are now, and have been
certain years paste. Wherefore it is rightly said, how after a thousand
years, Satan should be loosed from his chains, which before also moved the
unbelievers, yet finally rages more furiously.

S. Ihon assigned to Antichrist a certain number of years, to wit.666. Whereof
we might understand the name of Antichriste. But therefore it follows not,
that the Devil was than quyte lowsed, or the light of the Gospel utterly
extinguisshed. For the Apostle in his time, speaking of him: The mystery,
says he, of iniquity now works. Antichriste therefore has his seeds, he
has his beginning, he has his rising up, his growyng and increaces. But after
a thousand years, he went to work most impudently and most boldly, which
before also had uttered his maliciousnes: but now most venemously of al he
speweth out his poison, oppressing Kings, and all that speak never so little
against him. We know moreover that in these thousand years paste, the
Devil has raygned in many by murder, perjury and innumerable and
unspeakable euilles. But if ye consider what has been done sins those
thousand years, and what is done at this day: you will say those ages of the
thousand years to have been Golden and Silver worlds: and ours now for these
five hondreth years to be of brass, Iron, leed, The corruption of ye last age.
and claye. Lactantius in the seventh book of Instit. the.15. chapter toward
the last end of the world, says he, the state of worldly matters must
needs be altered, and iniquity preuayling, to incline to the worse: so that
these our times, in the which iniquity and mischief is grown to the highest
degree, yet in comparison of that incurable evil, may be accounted fortunate
and in manner Golden ages. For justice shall than ware so thin, ungodliness,
couetousenes, wilfulnes and lust shall be so common, that if there shall be
than happly any good men, they shall be a pray to the wicked, and every where
vexed of the vnrightuouse. And evil men only shall be welthie, and the good
tourmoyled in all vexation and misery. All right shall be confounded, and
laws shall perisshe. Than shall no man have any thing, save that which is
either evil gotten, or evil kept. Goldenes and violence shall have all. There
shall be no faith in men, no peaxe, no humanity, no shamefastnes, no truth.
And the remnau^t which are red there. By all the which our days now seem to
be paincted lively.

But what is that, which is annexed, He must be loused a little season.
that the Devil must belowsed for a little season? seems this a little
season, which continues now five hondreth years? And this place we expou^de
so, as that same in the gospel: unless those days were shortened, no flesh
should be saved. For it is evidently by stories, that another the Devil, nor
Antichriste, has inioyed that his kingedome long quiet. For evermore, and in
all ages have sprung up some holy and learned men, which being illumined and
comforted or God, like Enoch and Helie, have resisted the ungodly and
ungodliness, and have maineteyned the true religion. Whereby consciences
afflicted of Antichrist have received comfort, God of his mercy so temperyng
matters, that the chosen should not despeyre into great temptations, errors and
darkness.

Therefore both Satan and the Pope could inioye these matters but a small
season. For immediately after the thousand years sprange up the Waldois,
which constantly impugned the Pope, and his ungodliness. The lord has raised
up certain kings, emo^ges whom be the Friderickes Germane Emperors, Lewis of
the house of Bauier, and many others. The Popes also have been at dissension
emo^ges themselves, whilst many have been chosen, and every one of them will be
the vicar of Christ, and so tear all that ecclesiastical body of theirs with
Schisms. There rise up against these preachers erneste and vehement, Wycliffe,
Husse, Hierome of Prage, and diverse others. What is done at this day, and has been now these 30. years and more, against superstitions, and idolatry, against
the Pope, and al his clergy, the Papists themselves cry out and al parts of
the world can testify. Therefore is the Devil lowsed a little season. The Lord
Jesus tread him under our fete shortly.

What those thousand years shall be, and of the certain felicity of souls
after the death corporal, and of the first resurrection, and second death.
The.lxxxviij. Sermon.
ANd I saw seats, and they that sat upon the^, and the judgment was given
unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, which had not worshipped the beast, another his
Image: another had taken his mark upon their foreheades, or in their hands:
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand year: but the other of the
dead men lived not again, until the thousand years were finisshed. This is
the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection. On such has the second death no power, but they shall be the
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

By these S. John declares him self, Here is declared what those thousand
years shall be.
expoundyng what those thousand years shall be. Not such doubtless, as very
many, (emongs whom are accounted also the Millenaries or Chiliastes) do Imagine
with themselves, in the which they say, there should be tranquillity upon
earth, and in the which years the saints here in Earth shall reign corporally
with Christ in most exquisite pleasures and joys. For S. John himself
confuteth this opinion, whilst he shows, how the saints should be beheaded
of the beast and of his Image: and that the others which remain in death,
should not live again, or receive the gospel of Christ. It is manifest
therefore that the beast, and his Image shall be in those thousands years. It
is evident that the Gospel of Christ shall by those thousand years so shine,
that Satan should be so strayte tied in chains, that nevertheless all
should not receive the gospel, another should there be quiet tranquillity: but
that the Saints for Christ's verity should suffer persecution of the beast,
and that many should not believe the gospel, but rather withstand the same and
perisshe. Yet that the Devil in the mean time shall not have so great power,
as he has obtained sins the thousand years were finisshed: another that the
gospel should in those thousand years be so darkened, as it was after
corrupted and depraved. And he touches with all certain opinions right notable
and necessary, and opens the same, to wit what should be the state of
them, which either are killed for Christ, or reiecte Antichrist: verily for
that their souls do not sleep til the judgment, but live with Christ in
heaven. He treats moreover of the first resurrection, and second death. Thus
unto them that marvel, where the souls of the dead shall become, and what
they shall do immediately after the corporal death, he answers, and so much
as is requisite to know declares.

The souls of the^ that be beheaded.
Therefore S. John sees seats, and those that sit on them. And who be those
that sit? he adds by an exposition, and says: and the souls of them that
are beheaded. For by an exposition it is taken, as though you should say, they
that sat on the Heavenly seats, were the souls of them that are beheaded.
Souls are not beheaded, but bodies: the souls remain in their state and
life. Wherefore he says the souls of them whose bodies were beheaded or
slain. And here let us note, that S. John speaks not of the bodies
reassumpted, changed, or raised again at the last judgment, but of the
souls delivered from the bodies of the martirs. For he speaks of souls
lowsed from the bodies, before the Judgment, according as every one in his
time lives here in this world, and is called from hence by death. For Aretas
also Bishop of Cesarea expounds this of the souls of Martirs: yet thinks
he not nevertheless that no man should be saved, unless he die by the
tirauntes sword. For he adds this moreover: or verily he names to be
beheaded tropically, which have mortified their members, that are on Earth.
Hitherto he. And we also have showed before, that first and chiefly the holy
martirs are rewarded with eternal life, secondely all they that have honored
God truly, and have done penance, and crucified their flesh with all the
concupiscences thereof.

Beheaded for Christ.
And he says expressly, that the saints were beheaded, not for theft,
murder and mischief, as also Saint Peter teaches, 1. Peter. 4. But for the
word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ. The word of God, (...) is the very
son of God our Savior: and the testimony is, that wholesome gospel, and the
very preaching and professyng of the same: like as by the conference of
Scriptures we have declared before. They are rekened moreover emonges the
Saints, which have not worshipped the beast, etc. And such are the Martirs
beheaded or slain, for that they have worshipped God, but the beast and his
Image would they not worship. Howbeit al are not slain, that reiecte
Antichrist, and therefore particularly as a peculiar membre he rehearsed the^
also. But what it is to worship the beast, and his Image, and to receive his
mark, etc. I have declared before at large in the.13. chapt. Now let us
see, what their state is, that shede their blood for Christ, and abhor
Antichrist with all his inchau^tmentes: they lived, says he, Of ye state of
souls after death before the judgment.
to wit by faith in this present world. As S. Paul said also: I live not
I now, but Christ lives in me. And of that same life follows life
everlasting, in an other world. Wherefore S. John has annexed, and they
reigned with Christ a thousand years: to wit all that whole process of
time. Not for that they reigned not and lived with Christ afterward, but for
that their souls hitherto, or to the judgment, have not slept, but have lived
rather in Heaven a blessed life. The which also from the beginning he
declares by an other notation. For he sees a seat ((...)) set, and the
souls sitting in them. And by a figurative speech he signifies, that certain
seats, and honorable places, are prepared in heaven for the blessed souls,
as also the Lord him self says in the gospel: In my fathers house are many
mansions, and now I go to prepare you a place. He calls the seats thrones,
alludyng to the royal Trones of kings. But of these celestial seats, we must
conceive, greater, divine, and spiritual matters. They sit in the^ not for
that they do nothing else but sit on a cusshion: but they raygne, triumph,
rest, live, and have fruitio^ of the comfort, joy, and glory everlasting.
This I say is the manner of the souls and spirits to sit. He adds
moreover, how to those souls was given judgment, verily for that they are
exempted from judgment, and come not into judgment (even as our savior
says) but have passed from death to life. It is also declared in an other
place, in what sense the saints are said to sit upon the seats, and judge
the world: where it is manifest in deed, that all the judgment of God is
given to the son. It is evident therefore by this infallible place of
scripture, that the souls of saints sleep not after the death of the body,
until the last judgment, but to live in Heaven with Christ. But at the
judgment they shall return to their bodies raised again, and together with
their bodies shall be received into blessed seats. And this is the state of the
faithful. From this hope let us never suffer ourselves to be withdrawn. In
my Decades I have discoursed more at large of the souls separated from their
bodies and have showed that they do not sleep.

A towle error of John the 22. pope.
And here I can not refrain, but must needs set forth and recite that which D.
John Funceius, a learned man dilligent, and one that has red much shows in
the.10. book of his Chronology, under the year of our Lord.1332. in these
words: about this time the most holy father Pope John, the.22. of that name,
fell into this heresy, which also he professed openly, and taught that the
souls saw not God before the last day. For so had his father taught him,
deceived by the visions of Tantalus, which were commonly carried abroad in
writing. And Pope John sent two preachers to Paris, to wit a couple of Freres
one of the order of preachers, an other Minorite, which might profess his
error there. But one Thomas a preacher of England resisted the Pope stoutely,
whom the Pope committed to prison. And the King of France called a Synod in
his palace, in the foreste Vitinian, where all that were assembled subscribed
against the Pope. Than the king sent Ambassadors to the Pope, exhortyng him
to recante his error, and that he would deliver Thomas out of prison. Which
enlarged the prisonier: and also (as it is said) following the admonitio^s of
his friends, at the hour of death repented. So much Funccius. It is a shame
therefore for some, which at this day in so great light of the gospel dare
renew that most folishe error affirmyng that souls separated from their
bodies lie snoring I know not in what dormitorie or dortour, another to feel any
thing, till at the day of Judgment they be joined again to their bodies, and
rife again.

The remnaunt of ye dead lived not again.
S. John adds: and the remnaunt of the dead lived not again, til the
thousand years were accomplished. Not that they lived afterward, but that
they revived never at all. As the Scripture speaks in an other place, Michol
David his wise remained barren, until the day of her death: not that she had
child after her death. But whom does he mean by the re^naunt of the dead?
surely all we that descend of Adam, are dead. As S. Paul right well declares
in the.5. chapt. to the Romans. But we have heard how some through faith have
received Christ, and so being quickened, have shed their blood for Christ, and
would not worship the beast, nor his Image. Now is added to this membre: but
the remnaunt of the dead, which are another regenerated through faith, nor
would bestow their life for Christ, but had rather worship the beast and his
Image, these I say for their unbelief lived not. For without faith there is
no true life in this world. A double life and double death.
We speak nothing here of the vital or natural life. And we say that life is
double or of two sorts, to wit the one spiritual, which is of faith and of
the sprete of God, and of Christ, which is by faith received and lives in the
hearts of his, and his life in him. For the Lord him self says: he that
eats me, he shall live also for me. The Other life is everlasting, to wit of
an other world, in the which we shall see God as he is, and shall be as he is,
living in God and with God for evermore. Contrariwise death is of two sorts,
spiritual, whereby wauntyng Christ, and his sprete, and void of faith, we live
in sin. The Apostle speaking of this death, says, that a widdowe living
wauntonly, being a live is dead. And the Lord also to the disciple, that would
return home, and bury his pare^tes, says: suffer the dead to bury their
dead. There is also a death everlasting, that is everlasting wretchedness and
misery, which follows the spiritual. Yet see what we have said of double
death in the.3. chapt. of this book, in expoundyng the Epistle to them of
Sardis. Wherefore S. John here signifies, that there shall be many in these
thousand years, which should not receive the gospel with a lively faith, and
therefore should remain in death: as the Lord said in the.8. of John.
Therefore they err shamefully, which suppose that al nations in the whole
universal world shall come ones to an unity of faith, and most assured peace in
this life.

And S. John himself again expoundyng himself says. This is that first
resurrection. Which I pray you? by the which men receive Christ by the true
faith, Of ye first resurrection and the second.
and rise from sin in the newnes of life. Of this thapostle speaks much in
the.6. to the Romans. The same to the Ephesians. out of Esaye: awake, says he,
that slepeth, and rise from the dead, and christ shall shine unto thee. Therefore
be they not pertakers of ye first resurrection, so many as another acknowledge
their sins, nor be regenerated, another are quickened by faith in Christ, nor
rise again with Christ in the newnes of life. The second resurrection is that
universal resurrection of al flesh: wherein shall all men arrise in deed,
but with unlike state for the faithful rise unto life everlasting: the
unfaithful to death everlasting. Which the Lord him self also has repeted
out of the.12. chapt. of Daniel, in John the.5. chapt.

Theffecte of the first resurrection
And he shows by occasion, and after an Apostolic manner, a threfolde fruicte
or effect of the first resurrection. First says he, blessed and holy is he,
which is pertaker of the first resurrection. He is bleste, says he, happy,
and heir of celestial and eternal life. Holy: that is to say purified,
sanctified, and justified. For faith in Christ does sanctify, and make
blessed. Than in such as be thus sanctified the second death has no place nor
power. And the first death, is the death of sin: therefore is the second
death eternal damnation. See what I have spoken hereof before in the.2. chapt.
of this book, in the Epistle to the church of Smyrna. Finally the faithful are
made the priests of God and of Christ, the elect I mean, segregated,
notable, excellent, both of God and Christ most derely beloved, which in
eternal life might offer eternal praises to God. It is repeted again, and
they shall raygne with him a thousand years. And this signifies, that al
Saints shall reign with Christ for ever, but chiefly the souls, even olso
before the judgment.

Primasius Bisshoppe of Vtica expoundyng this place: it is not spoken, says
he, not only of Bisshoppes and Priests: but like as we call al christ's, by
reason of the mistical chrisme or oynctement: so are all priests, for that
they be members of a Priest: of whom the Apostle S. Peter: an holy people,
says he, a royal priesthood: thus says he. But this whole place of the
bindyng and lowsing of the Devil, of the thousand years, and of the first
resurrection, and second death S. Austen has well and dilligently for his
time, and for so much as he could see discoursed at large in the.20. book De
ciuit. dei. I propounde these things of mine to be dillige^tly considered of
the faithful. Let every man hold that which he shall think most consonaunt to
the truth. To the lord our God be praise and glory, now and evermore. Amen.

What shall be done when the thousand years are expired, of the world
deceived, of war and grievous persecution of the godly, and of the everlasting
pain of the wicked. The.lxxxix. Sermon.
AND when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be lowsed out of his
prison, and shall go out to deceive the people, which are in the four
quarters of ye Earth, Gog and Magog to gather them together to battle, whose
nombre is as the sand of the Sea. And they went upon the plain of the earth,
and compassed the tents of the saints about, and the beloved city. And
fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them. And the Devil that
deceived the^ was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and
the false prophet were and shall be tormented day and night for evermore.

He declares herby, What shall be done after ye thousa^de years.
what shall happen after those thousand years. And he says chiefly two
things, that the devil shall be lowsed out of his prison, yt he may deceive
the people in the world, and may assemble Gog and Magog unto battle. To the
which again he annexeth other two, a most cruel persecution of the church,
and pain of the wicked, and everlasting damnation of the devil and his members.

And the seducyng of the world must again be expounded by ye figure
Sinecdoche. How the world is deceived again.
For the sense of the scripture will not permit us to understand, that there
should be no godly left at that time. For we believe all that there is a church,
and that an holy church, and shall be always in the world until the judgment.
And we have heard morouer in this book, how many thousands are sealed yt they
should not perish. And also that the dragon must be lowsed for a little season.
Like as therefore we read in the gospel, that Satan is cast out, and his
kingdom taken from him: where nevertheless S. Peter warns and says, that
the devil goes about like a roaring Lion, and seeks whom he may devour:
verily for that the greatest force of Satan is for the faithful infringed, by
Christ that mighty champion and noble conqueror, the Devil not withstandyng
going about and aspiryng again to the Empire, and to be restored to his former
place: so at this present we understand, that Satan lowsed after those
thousand years, raungeth now abroad more freely, exercises greater
authority, seduceth more people in the world, and rules further, tha^ he
has raygned these thousand years: yet so that there shall be nevertheless in
the world a fellowshippe of Saints dispersed and vexed miserablely. For
immediately S. John says, that the beloved city of God is besieged of the
enemies. Therefore shall the church be in the mids of the enemies. Wherefore
all that same place must be expounded not of the verity and religion wholly
extinguisshed, but of the more large and ample power and seduction of satan
the old serpent.

The devil comes out of prison.
Wherefore he says, that when the thousand years shall be expired, the Devil
shall be lowsed out of that his prison, whereinto through the power and might
of Christ, or preaching of the Apostles he had been shut. For the chain ones
broken, to wit the sincere doctrine and preaching of the gospel corrupted and
depraved, he came out: and to this end he came out, that he might deceive the
gentiles, that is to say al people and nations, which are dwelling in the
four quarters or parts of the Earth, I mean in the whole universal world:
and to the end he might allure Gog and Magog, namely fierce men, barbarouse,
worldly, mocking and contemnyng the true religion, addicte to robberies, and
given to evil things, and regardyng only corruption and naughtines, that he
might draw, I say, such men to vnrightuousenes, and keep them still in
errors. For such does Ezechiell signify Gog and Magog to be. But those
which through the divine grace be not such, shall not be deceived of Satan:
but grounded on Christ, shall persevere in the doctrine of prophets and
Apostles, and shall rightly worship Christ, shall abhor Antichrist, and al
naughtines in the world.

But that a deuelisshe deceauyng has passed through the world far and nere,
sins the thousand years expired, What deceauynge shall be in ye world after ye
thousa^de years.
experience teaches, and Histories witnesses of times testify. For it is
plain, that during those thousand years, there were famous churches of
Christ in the East, which not withstandyng to have been distroyed within
these five hondreth years we lament. Therefore the wicked and abominable sect
of Mahomet began six hondreth years after the birth of Christ, and from that
time forth was auaunced by the Saracenes, but prevailed at the last after those
thousand fatal years. For how great is the power of Turks now in Affricke,
Asia, and Europe, no man is ignorant. And Papistrie had his beginning and
procedyng over soon: but after a thousand years it was of full force. For
Bisshoppes of Rome through the abuse of exco^municatyng have oppressed eue^
most mighty Emperors and Kings. For who knows not with what shameless
boldenes the popes have withstand both Kings and Keysars, Henry's,
Fridderickes, Lewysses, and many other Princes, whom their lewdenes has vexed,
vanquished, and overcome? After much and greuouse contention the Popes
extorted to themselves the consecratyng of Bishops. They usurped moreover the
church goods also, by the which (such a force has lady money) they might do
in the world what they list. For by this means Papistrie received strongest
sinews. Moreover after those thousand years was raised up and established
that God Mayzim, The God Mayzim.
of who^ also Daniel makes mention, which brought also a great strength unto
Popery. I mean transubstantiation, and the horrible polluting of the lords
supper, and manifold abuse of the holy mysteries. And of the force hereof
increased an infinite nombre of priests and filthy Freres. For after those
thousand years at the length came up the sect or order of Iacobines,
Celestines, Gilbertines, of Graye freres, black freres, white freres, and many
other freres, and monstrouse Mounkes, which have craftily cropen in the favor
of all princes, to the intent they might know al their secrets by auricular
confession. Than began all things more impudently to be set forth and sold in
the church, than ever before. Superstitions and unprofitable and hurtful
ceremonies ouerflowed. For we have seen thirty years sins and more, how much
increased daily idolles and Idolatry, worshippynge of creatures, and abuses
innumerable about the same, pilgrimages to dumme Idolles, and an infinite
nombre of the same sort. I recite not that holy matrimony waxed now vile after
those thousand years, in so much that ministers of churches were prohibited to
marye. Than waxed whoredom rife, rape, and aduoutrie, and yet more filthy
things tha^ al these, etc. I pas over here very many things: this only I
rehearse, if ye compare the rites, ceremonies and superstitions of Papistrie
with the heythen gentilitie (as I have partly showed here and there in my
works) ye will say that Papistrie passes far all gentilitie. For in case,
the false opinion and perswation ones taken away, ye do way what Papistrie
is in it self: you will grant, that there was never such a corrupt thing
in the world. Full rightly therefore says S. John, that Satan is broken
lowse out of prison. We say in Englisshe hell is broken lose.
By the which proverb he signify matters extremely corrupted, nothing to be
done in his place or decent order, but althing confused, all turned up side
down, at the will and lust of the evil sprete.

Gog and Magog at gathered to battle.
Herunto is added an other thing, that the thousand years expired Satan should
gather Gog and Magog to battle. By the which words doubtless S. John has
alluded the prophecy of Ezechiel, which we read in the.38. and.39. chapt.
Ezechiel seems to have prophesied of the wars of Macedonie and of Antiochus,
speaking hereof by a prophetical phrase, and an hyperbolical amplification.
The Prophet says that Gog is the land of Magog. And evident it is that Magog
was Iaphetes son, which dwelt at Mount Cancansus, and extended his Empire
to Aethiopia and Aegipte. And afterward out of Asia, and that out of the East
parts, Antiochus Epiphanes made war on the people of God. The same was a
figure of Antichrist: as all expositours do confess. Wherefore it appears
that S. John brings forth these his things by way of comparison. As though
he should say like as in times pasie the people of Gog and Magog did sore
moleste and afflicte the people of God: so in the times of Antichriste, most
greuouse warrss shall arrise, wherewith the church of God shall be shaken and
laid wast. And says verily that the host of these distroyeis shall be
innumerable. He adds after the manner of the Scripture aparable for
perspecuitie: as the sand of the Sea. And also by an other phrase of speaking
he signifies, that the enemies of Gods people shall be bold, and ready to over
run the whole world, and and turmoyle all things with wars. For he says:
And they went upon the plain of the land. As much to say, as they being
swifte and bold, shall ru^ne over all the world. Every where, and through out the
wide world shall be cruel wars.

For most purposely he adds: Theico^pat fed about the tents of Saints and
beloved of God.
and they compassed about the tents of Saints, and beloved City. And means
that the church of God shall be most greuouslye plagued with those Gogicall
and barbarouse wars. For in times paste Jerusalem was called the chosen and
beloved City: but after she rejected the word of the Lord, she was no more
beloved of God, but rather rejected and hated. Therefore Saint Ihon speaks
of the Catholic church, which Saint Paul also in an other place out of
Esaye names, Jerusalem that is above. The same is also called the tents of
Saints. For the faithful are in the church as it were in tents, fyghting
against Satan, the world, sin, and flesh. And where he says, they
compass about the tents of Saints: he says some what more, than if he
had written, they assailed or beseiged, or assaulted the tents of Saints.
For they compass them about, which give the assault round about, and vex
them most greuouslie, as though they were already taken, that no hope can
appear to any man, no refuge or way to escape.

Undoubtedly if we confer these things with Histories, The church plagu^d
most greuouslye by ye holy wars.
we shall find that the church has been many times assailed with cruel
wars: but never yet with crueller, than after those thousand fatal years.
I mean the holy war as they term it. Whereof have written at large William
Archbishop of Tyrus, the Abbot of Vrspurge in Chronic. Item Benedecte Coltes,
and Paulus Aemilius in the fourth book de reb. gestis Francorum. Fynallye
Volaterane in the eleventh book of Geographie in Coelesyria and Palestine.

Historiographers report many things of the battle af Troy. Others suppose that
those of Assyria and Babylon were greatter. Many extol the wars of the
Persians and Macedomans, as in very deed they were horrible. The Romans have
also their wars Punicall, Methridaticall, Civil, Cimbricall, and
Germanicall: but I suppose verily that the war, which they call Holy, was
more cruel than all these, more bluddy and sore, and of longer continuance. In
this have joined together in maigne battaylles, with multitudes of men
innumerable, in a manner all nations and people of the whole world inhabited.
Wonderful and monstrouse slaughters have been made. There have died more
hondreth thousa^ds of men than can be credited. It has continued moreover many
years, yea mo than the fourmer, or any wars that ever were in the world.
Furthermore it was done with most hostile minds. And the which makes most
for this purpose, in this war were exasperated the Orie^tal Saracenes, Turks
Aegiptians, Babilonia^s, and other barbarous nations, that they brent with an
unquenchable hatred against the christian religion, and went about to pluck
it up by the roots, and a great part thereof have plucte up, and cease not to
do yet at this day. That same war therefore most greuouse of all others, was
cause of the persecution of the faithful in the East and Weste. And to the
intent I may note somewhat hereof, and may rehearse, for those that be
ignoraunte in stories, it is plain, that under that Child of pardition Pope
Gregory the.7. there were many and most famous churches in the East, and that
Patriarchall churches yet safe: but whileste this Pope above all others, dealte
wickedly against Christ the son of God, and his holy church, like as we read
in the time of Solomon, that after he had revolted, many enemies arrose against
him, and that most cruel: so in the wicked and tyrannical reign of Gregory
the seventh, In ye time of pope gregory the.7 euyls began to ouerflo.
Solymanne the Turk invaded Antioch, at the which time the Emperors of Greece
are said to have been dispatched of the East country. And the Turks marching
forewarde, are said to have invaded and vexed first, the straits or ports of
the Caspiane hills, and the country of Armenia, about the year of our
Lord.764. Whereof there is now no time to speak. After Solomon succedeth
Belchiaroke the Turkyshe Prince, whom others call Belzet, which also invaded
Greece it self, the Emperors of Constantinople despised. Alexius, which then
was Emperor is said to have demanded aid of the western men against the
Turks. And also one Peter an Heremite (who^ certain Historiographers blame most
greuouslie, not without cause) coming out of the East, and running through
out the Weste, cries Alarm. Vrbane the second, whom some call Turbane, and
disciple of Gregory the.7, calls a great counsel at Cleremounte in France,
The counsel of Cleremounte.
wherein he propounds a question of the recovering of the holy land, and
delivering the Lords sepulture out of the hands of the Infidelles. That
counsel puts me in remembrance of that which is described in the.8. book
of Kings the.22. chapter, under Achab and Iosaphat, for the recovering of
Ramoth Galaad, out of the hands of the Syrians. For there was in this also a
deceauing spirit, there were Achabbes, there were Iosaphats, and many other
things like. And to the intent not to make many words, a journey is decreed
against the barbarous infideles of the East. This was done in the year of our
Lord.1095. In the mean time Peter the Heremite bestirred him a pase, and
gathered certain thousands, which he leads through Hongarie in to Asia. And
immediately after, follow the unlucky captains Folkemar, and Gottschalke
priests, which by the way distroying all with fire and sword are slain. The
first voyage into the holy land.
At the last Godfrey and Baldwyne most noble Princes, with certain excellent
Captains and Noble warriors, with an innumerable multitude of men tra^sported
into Asia: which they say was done in the year of our Lord.1096. And
within.4. years space at the most, or three, they had taken by assault or
surre^drie, the Cities of Nice, Heraclea, Tarsus, Antioch, and Jerusalem. The
Abbot of Vrspurge reports that there was so much blood shed in the City of
Jerusalem, that in the very temple it self, the horses stood up to the knees
in the blud of the slain there. The same man tells of a notable battle
foughten at Askalon, A notable battle.
in the which about fiftene thousand footmen, and five thousand horsemen of
Christians, ouerthrewe and discomfited Solimanne of Babylon, furnisshed with an
hondreth thousand horsemen, and four hondreth thousand footmen, and that
there were slain in that battle, above an hondreth thousand men. And this
journey of Godfrey was the first emonges the worthy voiages of Syria or Asia.

2. After this voyage followed others mo, and that best furnished. For whilst
the victory and good luck of them that went first into the East was highly
extolled and commended through out the West, William Prince and Duke of
Poictiers being put in great hope, leads also about an hondreth thousand
footmen in to the East country. The year of our Lord was accounted.1101.
But of so great a nombre scarcely one thousand are written to have returned
home in safety.

3. After in the year of our Lord.1147. through the exhortation of Barnarde
Clareualle, Lewis King of France, and Conrade King of Germany, and
Frederick Prince of Swaland, took their journey in to the East, which led
with them an Army almost innumerable: but the same died in a manner all,
scarcely the Princes left on live.

4. In the year of our Lord.1189. what time the City of Jerusalem was taken
by the Soldane King of Persia, where the Christians had kept it only about.89.
years. The Emperor Frederick surnamed Barbarousse, Philippe King of
France, Richard King of England, and other Princes most puissaunte, levied an
exceeding great Army of Christen people, to recover the City and Holy land:
and very luckelye transported their Army in to Asia, but after had most evil
luck. For the Emperor Frederick was drowned: and the whole Army, as
Vrspurgens. testifies, died of the plague.

5. The fifte (and that famous indede) voyage in Syria made the most mighty
Kings Philippe of France, and Richard of England surnamed Coeur de Lion. The
same was done in the year of our Lord.1191. Howbeit they returned without
any worthy exploicte done, wauntinge not a few of their men.

6. And Palmerius a Cronographer: Henry says he, the son of the Emperor
Barbarousse, sent an Army in to Syria: which retourneth again the next
year. The Christians therefore being destitute of aid in Syria, lost utterly
all the dominion, that they had left. He seaketh these things in the year of
our Lord.1198.

7 Again in the year of our lord.1213. Pope Innocent the.3. of that name
sends his letters public to all the faithful of Christ, wherein he exhorts
them to take armor against the infidelles, which possessed the holy land.
Innocente ye.3. as did Vrbane ye 2. ringeth a larme.
If any manne have leisure, and list to read the letters, he shall find them
in the Chronic. of Vrspurg. And not long after in the year of our Lord.1215.
he holds a general counsel in Laterane, wherein war is decreed against the
Easterlinges. And also Honorius the.3. about the year of our Lord.1217.
treats and confirms the same thing. Whereupon many christen Princes, met
at Accon, which some time was called Ptolemais, and made mortal war upon
the Easterlynges. Wherein they took the noble city Damiata. Yet another the
end nor fruicte answered so great enterprises, and costs, perilles and
losses.

8 Therefore Fridericke the.2. and Emperor most excellent, hopyng to do some
good, marches also with an enge and well furnisshed army into the East:
which they say was done in the year of our Lord.1234. In the mean season
whilst he does valeauntly in the East, the Bisshoppe of Rome Gregory the.9.
of that name, taking an occasion (I use the words of Vrspurgens.) of the
absence of the Emperor sent a great army into Apulia, The pope sets upon
the emperor in the west, whilst he warreth in the East.
and took away the lands of the Emperor. Which was absent in the service of
Christ, (which is most wicked to be spoken) and kept them thus subdued to
his own use, and by no means would suffer those which had taken the holy
cross (that is to say, which should go a warfare to the Emperor) to take
shippyng or passage, but let them to his power as well in Apulia as in
Lumbardie. And more such stuff, which they may read that have leisure, in
the same. Wherefore the emperor constreyned, his matters there left imperfect,
to fall to a composition with the enemy, returned, that he might recover
such things as the Pope had taken from him.

9 And no long time after, to wit in the year of our Lord 1248. Lewis King
of France with his brethren Roberte and Charles, and a most puissaunt army,
sayleth into Syria: where Robarte is slain, and Charles taken of the Soldane,
is hardely delivered at the last, and with a few escapes.

The same king Lewis of France, in the year of our Lord 1270. imbarketh
himself with his three sons at Marselles, to sail into Affricke. The plague
light upon his Army in the enemies land, wherewith both the father and the
son died, and the whole Army received an excedyng great calamity.

And again, although they had but evil favored luck in the wars against
the Barbarians, yet was it nevertheless treated again in the counsel of
Lions under Gregory the.10. about the year of our Lord.1273. of recovering the
holy land, But Palmerius in the year of our Lord.1291. Where many thousands
of the Christians, says he, were slain in Syria by the Saracenes, all the
rest for fear fled out of the country. And the Chronicle of kings of
France. Aemilius, says he, made here an end of the holy war (to wit in
the year of our Lord.1291.) Ptolemais in the East being destroyed by the
Soldane. It is manifest therefore that this Barbarous and gogical war has
lasted about.195. years. So long time as I know no other war in the world
that ever was made with such obstinate minds, with so great armies, and so
much shedyng of man's blood. We see in the mean time the tents of saints,
and the city of God beloved, to wit the faithful church through out the
world in the East especially, and in the west also, to be most greuousely
afflicted, and more than oppressed and destroyed, a few small remnauntes only
remaynyng: that not with out cause we may perceive that the lord said in the
gospel: but when the son of man shall come, shall he find any faith in the
Earth?

Here is a place of Daniell treated by the way 11. chapt.
The most holy and wise Prophet of God Daniel seems to have foresene and
prophesied al those things, as he did all the rest concerning Antichrist,
which after he had spoken at large of the power of Antichrist, and worshippyng
of the God Mayzim against the Apostles institution, he adioyneth in the 11.
chapt. And in the time of the end, to wit the end of the world and last
judgment approachyng, shall set upon him, namely upon Antichrist, the king of
the South, and the king of the North shall fall upon him like a whirlewinde,
with charettes and horsemen, with a strong and great Navy, and shall invade
his realms, he shall ouerflowe with armies, to wit innumerable, and he shall
pass through, that is to say, he shall overcome all like a conqueror doing
what he list. For we have perceived, that the armies sent into the East by
the counselles, and motion of the Bishop of Rome have molested by Sea and
land the turks and also the Soldane of Babylon and Aegipte. What will ye say
that Daniel poincting as it were with his fingar the war called holy, adds?
He shall come also into the chosen land, and invade the land of desire: namely
Iewrie, which some time was called the chosen, delectable, and pleasant
land. And many shall fall, in the war verily, that shall be made for the
recoueryng of the holy land. It follows in Daniel, these shall be delivered
out of his hand, Aedom and Moab, and the Princes of the children of Ammon. For
those nations are not red to have been so destroyed as the rest were, by the
Saracenes, and after by the Turks, for that they framed themselves to them in
time. Daniel annexeth, and he shall lay his hands upon realms, another shall
the land of Aegipte escape. For it is evident, that the same also was
possessed of the Soldanes princes of Babylon, and of themperours of Turks. It
follows, and he shall have the rule of the treasures of gold and silver and
all the preciouse things of the Aegiptians. By the which the prophet has
signified the inestimable treasures and richesse, and excellent majesty of the
Soldanes, and Turkish Emperors. All the which things, even so as the Prophet
has said, experience proves to have been, and as yet to be fulfilled. The
Prophet adds, finally the Libians and Aethiopians shall be in his iourneyes.
Which tholde tra^slatour has turned. He shall pass also through Lybia and
Aethiopia: or as others have translated it, they shall be in his way. And he
means that those regions shall be open to those Barbarous Soldanes and
emperors of Turks, by leage, vicinitie, and amity. S. Hierome expounding
this place: when Aegipte, says he, was taken, those lands were also
affrayde. Wherefore he says not, that he took them: but passed through Lybia
and Aethiopia. Whether sense of these so ever thou chousest, t^ou shall not
err, as I think, from the truth. And Daniel adds the brute from the East
and from the North shall trouble hi^, in so much that he shall go forth in a
great fury to distroye and kill many. The which S. Hierome shows must be
understand of Antichrist. The Pope of Rome affirms that the seats
Patriarchall are subject to him, as Jerusalem, Antioche and Alexandria, and
the holy land to be his right. And he hears, out of the East, and out of the
North that al those parts are possessed of the Soldanes, and Emperors of
Turks: he calls therefore great counselles, and decrees war against them.
He hears moreover that Constantinople is taken, that the Rhodes is won,
Dalmatia subdued, Bulgarie and Hongarie vanquissed, etc. Again therefore he
sommoneth cou^selles, he armeth kings, he leads forth soldiers, he moves
war, and decrees that war shall be made for the recovering of the holy
land, and to root out the Turks. So verily this Gogmagog war is not yet
ended or appeased at this day. Whereby it comes to pass that an infinite
multitude of men are slain on either side. Furthermore at the end of this
Prophecy, the prophet shows, and as it were with his fingar poincteth, the
palace or seat of Antichrist, by Antiochus figured before: leeste any manne
should not know, The seat and palace of Antichrist.
where Antichrist were to be found. And he shall plant, says he, or six
the tabernacle of his palace betwixt two Seas: to wit the Hadriatical Sea,
called now the goulfe of Venise, and the Tirrhene or Tuscane Sea, in the mount
of desire of holiness: that is to say in the pleasant and holy hille. We have
heard certainly, that the palace of S. Peter is preferred both before mount
Zion, and also Sinai. There sits the most holy, in the seat of holiness.
There is most full remission of al sins. There is the mouther, and supreme
head of al churches. There is the high court and judgment, from whence may
no man appeal. There sits the king of kings, and high Bishop, which so
far excels in brightness and Majesty the Emperor and other kings, as the
sun does the Moon and Stars. There is thought to be perfect holiness, and
all the treasures of Christ and of his Saints. Therefore said Daniel rightly,
that Antichriste shall dwell in the noble and holy hille, namely in the seven
hilly Rome: as we heard also in the.17. chapt. Finally he prophecieth also of
the end of this most puissaunt prince, Antichrist, and says: and what time
he shall come to his end, no man shall help him. For Christ coming to
judgment, shall thrust him out of his seat. And Daniel in the.12. chap.
followyng describes the judgment. To Christ alone be glory.

Let us consequently proceed to add to a few things, concerning the pains
of the ungodly, and the everlasting condemnation of the Devil and his members.
S. John: and fire came down from heaven, and devoured them. And the prophet
Amos in the.1. chapt. calls Gods vengeance, fire, as the others do also.
Wherefore S. John signifies, that the vengeance of God shall fall upon all
the enemies of the church. In times paste also fire coming down from heaven
burnt up Sodom and Gomorrhe: and also consumed the enemies of Helias. And
although corporally fire does not always fall from heaven, yet shall the
persecutours of the church never escape vnpunnisshed, in that they have vexed
the Saints of Christ. Doubtless if we will behold and consider, what was done
in that holy war, and what chau^ceth daily, we will say that the vengeance
of God is most present both against the Turks and the Papists. But if any
man understand, that about the end of the world fire shall rage and consume
the wicked, as also S. Peter mentions of fire and burning out of the
prophets.2. Pet. 3. I will not be agayns^ it.

Last of all he touches also the everlasting damnation of Satan and all his
members. For where the Lord said in the Gospel, if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditche: it follows, that both Satan the
deceauer, and the people of him seduced, should be carried together to hell:
where S. John now places, and as it were joins to gether the devil, Gog and
Magog, the Saracenes, Turks, briefly all nations deceived, the Beast, and
false Prophet, and all the Antichristians. We see therefore, that the judgment
of God is rightuouse, the which to describe, he retourneth now again. And we
admonisshed before, by this speech, they shall be tormented day and night,
etc. The perpetuity of damnation to be signified. From the which the Lord
our God deliver us: to whom be glory for evermore. Amen.

The Judge, and last judgment is described, with the resurrection of the
dead. The.XC. Sermon.
AND I saw a great white seat: and him that sat on it, from whose face fled
away both the Earth and heaven, and their place was no more found. And I saw
the dead, both great and small stand before God: and the books were opened: and
an other book was opened, which is (the book) of life, and the dead were
judged of the things which were written in the books, according to their
deeds. And the Sea gave up her dead, which were in her, and death and hell
delivered up the dead, which were in them: and they were judged every man
according to his deeds. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire.
This is the second death, and who so ever was not fownde written in the book
of life, was cast into the lake of fire.

The order or disposi^io^ of this place.
S. John had begone to speak of the universal and last judgment, about the
end of the.11. chapt. And resumed the same to be finisshed in the.19. chapt.
Where we heard, that Antichrist should be throwe^ down out of his seat and
glory into hell. Where chanced a question to arrise of the^, which although
they cleave not to Antichrist, yet are they not joined with Christ, what shall
become of them at the last judgment? That same when he had soluted, and showed
the equity of Gods judgments, he retourneth as it were with an after song
to the description of the general and last judgment, and compe^diousely
describes the same: and that more generally now, than before in the.19. chap.
Where he seems chiefly to have treated of the destruction of Antichriste: yet
so that he showed after a sort also, what should happen to the other ungodly.
Now he handles more generally the self same judgment, showing that al shall be
judged herein, and sets forth the same wholly as it were paincted to be seen
of our eyes. For after his wonted manner he expounds all this matter by an
heavenly vision, that he might not seem only to tell the thing to our ears, but
also to show it forth to be seen of our eyes, to the intent it might be more
depely printed in our minds. And al these things are most certain and
undoubted (as I also admonisshed you before) revealed of the judge Christ him
self. But the judge and Lord himself can be ignorant in nothing of this
matter. Another can we perceive that S. John has hitherto ben deceived or
abused in any thing that he has set forth to us, but has hitte rightly al and
singular poinctes, as we see, that ca^ testify his prophecies to be fulfilled:
why than should we so much as doubt ones of such things as are spoken of
the judgment? Therefore let us credit these things, and not be emonges the
mockers, whom the Apostle S. Peter prophesied should come and say: where is
the promise of his coming? The consideration of the last judgment is of
greatest in i^portaunce.
doubtless this matter is of greatest importance, the foundation and rote of
our faith. Here are to us expounded not a few articles of our sincere and
catholic faith, chiefly these: I believe that Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead: I believe the communion of Saints, the resurrection of
the flesh, and life everlasting. Let us therefore be dilligent in hearing and
marking these things, leeste we be accounted of their nombre, which hear with
out any fruicte the mysteries of the kingedome of God: but let us rather
prepare our selves to go mete the judge, to the end we may with the wise
virgins, enter with the brydegrome, to the marriage, and joys everlasting.

And the description or demonstration of this vision has these things
chiefly: what the judge shall be: The principal articles of this ^^ace.
who shall be judged: how they shall be judged: of what sort shall be the
^^surrection of the dead: and of everlasting damnation: finally who shall be
properly damned. Which things I shall in order according to the grace that God
has given me, declare as plainly as I can.

What judge at ye last judgment.
What manner of judge there shall be, we have understand before: at this present
he is shadowed by certain notes or marks. These things agree with the same
vision, which is described of Daniel in the.7. chapt. Where by the way we see
again how this book has his testimonies of the prophets, of who^ it is
commended to us, like as John also expounds to us the prophets. S. John sees
a seat, and that white and great. For the judge him self said, that he would
come in glory and majesty, to wit with great light. And we believe also that
his judgments are rightuouse, just and white. And Aretas an expositour
says: the seat is great, because he sits therein, of who^ the prophet
said: great is the Lord, and great is his power, etc. And in the seat as
judge of al, and that most rightuouse, he sits, furnisshed with all power
and virtue. For all this signifies the word of sittyng. They that are to be
judged stand, he sits. Therefore he calls him that sits, as you would
say judge. For other name he gives not. But we believe, that al judgment is
given to the son, and that he is appoincted judge over all. S. John therefore
sees, and also shows us to behold the Lord Jesus Christ coming in the
clouds of the air, a rightuouse and mighty judge. S. Paul also in the.2. to
Titus calls him a great God: not that there is one great god: and an other
little God, but that the Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ shall at that day
most evidently be seen, and the lord him self shall than show him self to
the world with greater glory and power, than ever heretofore.

From whose fight heaven flees.
The same shall appear also most severe and most just. Whereupon S. John
says figuratively, from whose face fled away both heaven and Earth. For if
those things which have not sinned, dare not come in the judges sight, but
seek as it were to save themselves by Sight: where I pray thee shall appear the
ungodly and sumer? And doubtless the prophet Malachie also: who, says he, shall
abide the day of his coming? or who is able to stand, when he shall appear?
So in the sixte chapter we heard, that heaven fled back, and was folden up
like a scrolle, that the mountains also and Isles flitted, and that Kings and
Princes and other men hid themselves in caves: and said to the hills and
rocks, fall upon us hide us from the face of him that sits on the seat,
and from the wrath of the lamb, etc. By which words although be described
the effect of a desperate conscience out of corrupt doctrine: yet the same
shall appear chiefly in this judgment, what time the severe and most
rightuous judge shall appear. A much like figure is red in the.18. Psalm.
Where is added, and their place was no more fownde: it is annexed to amplify
the matter, not that Heaven and Earth shall be no where, but for so much as
they dare not (which is spoken by a figure) appear in the judgment of God. By all these things therefore is signified, that the ungodly being destitute of all
counsel, shall not know at that day whither to turn them, or what to do:
but trembling and despayryng to be vexed with unspeakable torments before the
seat. It might be thought in the mean season, that S. John signifies this
also, how heaven and earth should at the coming of the judge be renewed. The
which also the Apostle S. Peter more plainly expresses in the.3. chapt. of
the second Epistle, which nevertheless refers and applies al those his
sayings to the same sense that we have touched before. For he says: seeing
than that all these things shall be disolued, what ought you to be in holy
conversation, loking for and hasting the coming of the day of God? Aretas of
Cesaria: the flight of heaven and earth, says he, signifies no chaungyng of
place, (for whither should they flee?) but flight and flittyng from corruption
to incorruption, and the last coming of the lord, under the which this mortal
body of ours shall put on immortality, and the face of the Earth shall be
renewed. This says he, a like phrase of speech is had in the 12. of the
Apocalipse, of the Angels cast down out of heaven: another was their place
found any more in heaven, etc.

Now touches he also who shall be judged, Who shall be judged.
verily the dead. For he says: and I saw the dead. And shorteth after we
shall hear, that the dead shall be raised up. Therefore they shall be judged that
rise from the dead. Nevertheless the living are not exe^pted, whom the Apostle
says most manifestly shall be judged in the.4. of the first to he These. But
these he names not at this present, the dead he names: for that the
resurrection of the dead is more hardely believed: and more easily believed, that
those which remain in flesh should be judged at that day. And verily the
souls never die, the bodies die. Therefore where it is said here, that the
dead shall be judged, we mean that al those, which are dead at that day shall
come in their own bodies to the judgment of Christ. And al men must be
judged. All me^ are judged.
Wherefore S. John sees great and small: that is to wit, men of all sorts,
state, sex and age. Kings and princes are not excepted, the common people
shall not escape, another children, nor old folks, men nor women. All these
sees he standing before the face, or judgment seat of God. The gilty or
accused, or to be accused shall be set before the judgment seat of God. And
S. Paul also testifiyng expressly of this matter: we must al, says he,
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive in
his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil.2.
Corinth. 5. chapt. but after a diverse manner appear both good and evil. For
the wicked as guilty are brought to be judged and punnished, and that their
giltines may be openly known to al creatures. The ungodly are judged, not the
godly.
The good, for as much as they be justified and quitte, and have now no more
gilte nor crime by reason of Christ's satisfaction, appear in judgment with
glory, ready to judge the ungodly after their fashion and manner, and not to be
judged of any. And this thing is singular that, he says, that we shall be
judged in the sight of God. For who can appear in the sight of the tremblable
God, and fire consumyng all things, save he that is purged with the blood of
Christ? and what shall we think can be hid or escape the sight of God,
seeing all things?

How men shall be judged in the last judgment.
S. John moreover declares, how the dead should be judged: books, says he,
are opened: and an other book is opened, etc. Therefore by the books, after by
the book of life: that is to say, of such things as are written in those
books, the dead are judged. For the Scripture ascribes unto God the manner of
men, whereby men are wont to write for themselves remembraunces, leest they
should forget things: but with God al things are ones and always present, he
another forgets, The forgettyng and reme^bryng of God.
nor remembers: not withstanding the Scripture attributes to him both.
Howebeit God is said to forgette, when he helps not, or punnissheth not:
again he is said to remember, what time he helps or pu^nisheth. In Malachie
the ungodly say, how God has no care of men's matters, another does he for
the godly, nor yet pu^nisheth the wicked. But immediately answer is made:
than they that feared the lord spoke every one to his neighbor: the lord gave
ear and heard and a book of remembrance was made in his presence, etc. As
follows. Therefore their books opened, that is to say, the secrettes of al me^
brought to light, or made manifest, the lord shall judge what so ever has been
thought, said, done, or left undone. The books also of consciences (for the
conscience is in stead of a thousand witnesses) shall be opened in judgment,
God reuealyng and judging al things. For S. Paul speaking of the gentiles:
they, says he, show the work of the law written in their hearts, their
conscience also bearyng witness, and their thoughts accusing one au other, or
also excusing, in that day, wherein the lord shall judge the secrettes of
men, according to my gospel, through Jesus Christ. And these are in deed the
books which shall be unclosed in the judgment. Whereof it appears, that the
judgment shall be done with most expedition, another shall every man be reasoned
with all, by books written to make the judge weary, as the ignorant might
imagine hereby.

But what is that singular book of life, The book of life.
which also shall be opened in the judgment? of ye book of life is spoken in
the.3. cha. There you may see. To be brefe, the book of life has but one
article: he yt believes in the son of god has life everlasting. And therefore
me^ are judged of this yt is written in the book of life. For they that believe
are saved: they that believe not, are already judged, that is to say are most
assuredly damned.

And for as much as faith shows it self by works, Every man is judged of his
works.
incredulity also hid in the heart bewrays her self by works: therefore
S. John adds incontinently, according to their works. For man in the
Scriptures is likened to a tree. And the tree is judged of the fruicte, whether
it be good or evil. A tree has a growing or increasing life which in latin is
called, Anima vegetatiua, and a nature or disposition, bringyng forth fruicte
after his nature and kind. But that soul vegetatiua and that good
disposition, bringing forth in us good fruicte, yt is to say good works, is a
lively faith in Christ, where the same is, there the man is regenerated, and
has a good disposition: therefore ca^ he not scharse by reason of his good
disposition, but bring forth good fruictes. Therefore after our works we shall
be judged al. For the judgment must be open and manifest: but faith appears
not, but in works. For it is ye gift of God, and is of it self invisible, to
wit a sure trust in the promesses of God. And it is seen in works. Howbeit
thereof it follows not, that men ar justified by works also, and not by faith
only: but that by works faith is declared, which purifieth and justifies,
that afterward we may be able to bring forth ye works of rightuousenes. It
follows, how in judgment no pretense, no hypocrisy shall be allowed. For
many say they believe, which declare their faith by no good works. We learn
hereof, yt no book shall be of force at the last judgment, save the books of
God, or the books of co^scie^ces, wherein god writes with his fingar: finally the
book of life written of God before ye worlds were made, through his divine
predestination, whereby he has predestined us, yt he might adopt us for his
children by christ Jesus. And the rest, which S. Paul recites in ye.1. to the
Ephesians. Therefore shall the hurtefull books of Jews. Christians in title only,
and Turks, as the Thalmud, decretalles and Alcorane perish. These shall be of
no force at al in the judgment.

Of the resurrection of ye dead.
Now he retourneth to ye dead, of who^ he had made mention before, and leest any
man should say: how shall the dead be judged, which were drowned in the sea,
whith were swallowed up of fishes, and devoured of wild beasts, which were
consumed with fire, or in the earth, were brought into duste? he preuenteth, and
declares, that the bodies of the dead rise again, and being so restored come
to judgment, and says: and the sea gave up the dead, yt were therein: that is
to say, which had perished in the Sea. And by these words also has he
touched the manner and mean of the resurrection of the dead, and has sent us
withal to the.1. of Genes. The manner of ye resurrection is gods omnipote^cie,
as S. Paul also witnesses in ye.3. to ye Philip. For god by his omnipotency
reiseth up, and calls those things yt are not, that they may be. If this
thing seem unto thee new or impossible, behold ye beginning of things, and
thereof esteem ye small restitution. Was not ye Sea or water from the beginning?
but is it written to have had any fishes from the beginning? none at al. But
God commanded that the water should be replenished with fish. And did not
straight at gods commandment all manner of fishes appear, where before there
was not one? what marvel is it tha^, if god in the end of things, command the
Sea, and other elements also, to yield again their dead, and they obey their
maker? Verily the Lord in the gospel says, that they which are in their
graves also, Ihon: 5
shall hear the voice or commandment of the son of God, and shall rise
again. The bodies moreover of them that dye, are turned for the most part in
to the same elements from whence they were taken out. There is that putrifieth
in the earth, and is converted in to earth. There are some consumed with fire.
There are some that perish in water. Some hang in the air, and are there
consumed. But at the Lords commaundent, by what kind of death so ever they
perish, they shall rise again to the judgment whole. Aretas also Bishop of
Cesaria perceived this and said: he recites these things, to the intent he
might declare what the final and universal resurrection shall be. For where
many beleuyng not that the same shall be, do say, that it is by no means
possible, to be in those bodies, which have been long corrupted, and brought to
that poincte, that they be not at all: this sermon now correcting this,
says: Like as the bodies, when they were not, began to be, not by a certain
chance, or of themselves, but of the four elements, namely of Water, Fire,
Air, and Earth: So also being reasonably returned again into the same, may be
of the same composed again. etc.

And for a further declaration he adds again: Death and hell gave up them.
etc.
and death and hell gave up those, which were in them, dead. For he
understands by death, any kind of death, as though he should say: death it
self restores to the Judge and judgment, whom soever, after what sort soever
he has dispatched. Death therefore is feigned to be as it were a person, which
holds the dead in himself, or in a prison. And hell has yet but a few
bodies (for some we read to have gone down to hell quick) but the souls of
the wicked. The same return to their bodies, that the whole man may be
judged, body and soul. Others by hell, after the Hebrewe phrase, understand a
sepulture or grave. Again is repeted, that the whole man shall be judged body
and soul, after every man's works.

Thus much hitheto of the resurrection of the dead, Of everlasting damnation.
whereof in our books else where, we have treated more at large. In the last
place followith of everlasting damnation, and who be properly condemned. And
Hell, says he, and death are cast in to the lake of fire. Whereof has been
spoken before. And Hell here signifies not the place of pu^nishme^t, but those
that are inhabiters of Hell, to wit whose souls are yet detained in hell, or
appointed thither. Death also signifies those that are dead in sin, and
they which from the spiritual or te^porall death, go straight way to death
everlasting. Whereupon is immediately annexed. This is the second death, by the
which verily they that are dead to Christ, are adicted to perpetual fire, and
that live to Antichrist and the world. Others expound these things hereof,
that after the judgment the Saints shall another be buried any more, nor die.
Which S. Paul affirms also out of Osee in the first to the Corinth. the.15.
chap. Aretas and Primasius make with us. For Aretas says: and he calls
death and hell, those that have committed things worthy of punnishment, as
fulfilling the number of the second death. And Primasius, by these names,
says he, he signifies the Devil (because he is author of death, and pains
in Hell) and also the whole fellowship of Deuylles. For this is the same, that
he spoke more playnelye before, by the way of preue^ting: and the Devil, which
deceived them, was cast in to the lake of fire and brimstone. And that which
he added there more obscurely, saying, and the beast and the false prophet,
here more plainly. So much Primasius. And who knows not, that the members
must follow the head, all ungodly the Devil, the head of all ungodliness.

Which are not written in the book of life.
And most evidently he expresses, who properly at the judgment, are addicte
to fire everlasting: they that are another written, nor sound in the book of
life. Therefore shall the only faithful in Christ, in whom they are
predestined unto life everlasting, shall be saved. All others, of what
religion so ever they be, or what so ever kind of life they have lived be it
never so strayte, shall perish. Others refer these words to such as are left
a live at that day. For we believe that the son of God shall judge both the
quick and the dead. Doubtless whether they be living, or whether they be dead,
certain it is, that no man shall be saved in any other, but in the faith of
Jesus Christ, all the resydewe shall be damned. And this is the final end of
the good and evil. To Christ Jesus judge of all, and redemer of the faithful,
be praise and glory for evermore. Amen.

That the world shall be renewed, the Saints glorified and made blessed: and
what that felicity shall be, and how certain. The.XCj. Sermon.
AND I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth. The.21. chapter.
For the first Heaven and the first Earth were vanished away, and there was no
more Sea. AND I Ihon saw that holy City new Jerusalem, come down from God
out of Heaven, prepared as a bryde garnished for her husband. And I heard a
great voice from the seat, saying: behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them. AND they shall be his people, and God himself shall
be with them, and shall be their God. And God shall wipe away al tears from
their eyes. And there shall be no more death, another sorrow, another shall there
be any more pain. For the old things are gone. And he that sat upon the
seat, said: behold, I make al things new. And he said unto me, write: for
these words are faithful and true. And he said unto me, it is done.

I admonished you about the beginning of the.15. The order
chap. of this book, that the fifte part of this work began at the.15 chap.
and treated of the judgments of God righteous and just. And forasmuch as the
judgments of God are of two sorts, in this that he requyteth the evil
according to their wickedness, and rewards the good with rewards: I said how
this place consisted of two parts. For first I said that S. Ihon most
plentifully treated of torments to be inflicted to Antichrist and all ungodly:
secondly of rewards, especially in the end of the world, to be imployde upon
al saints. For often times have we heard in this book that the souls
separated from the body, are immediately after the corporal death, taken up in
to life euerlaking, but that the felicity of al most complete, chau^ceth to
the faithful in the end of the world, what time the bodies now raised
again, receive the rewards of glory everlasting. And this place is treated
through out all the.21. chap. and beginning of the.22. cha. And like as in the
former part he has set hell in a manner wide open, and showed ye everlasting
torments as it were to be seen presently: so in this later part he vnlocketh
after a fort, or opens heaven it self, that with the eyes of faith, we
should se what hope and glory abides for Saints. And with all is most
clearly expounded the article of our faith, I believe life everlasting.
I believe life auerlasting. And again for the more perspecuitie he declares
these things by a vision. Which others no^bre the seventh and last. Therefore
ar al things figured spiritually, not carnally to be understand and taken.
Doubtless the matters are excellent understand, even after the letter: howbeit
we must think of spiritual matters, and greater always, than the speech of
man can atteine to. For we know as taught by the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, to be always true that is said: yt the eye has not seen, nor the
ear has not heard, nor ascended in to the heart of man, those things which
god has prepared for them yt love him. 1. Cor. 2

The chief articles of this place of ye g^orye of the blessed.
And the chefest poincts of this place be these. First he shows that ye world
shall be renewed. Secondly he signifies that the Saints shall be glorified and
blessed. And declares in general what that same fiticitie shall be. And
inco^tine^tly he confirms these things by many reasons, moreover he
describes the place, the court and Palace of the blessed, and likewise the
glory and felicity of Saints. The which in the beginning of the.20. chap. he
finisheth up excedingly well, under the figure of a r^uer and ^ree of life. And
like as he has for the most part borrowed al his things out of ye books of
prophets, the which S. Ihon also with his revelation lighteneth: so has he
also at this present borrowed these out of the.65. and.66. chapt. of Esaye.
And.37. of Ez^chiel, and the last chapters of the same.

Of the renewyng of the world he speaks plainly, Of the renewyng of ye world.
as does also thapostle S. Peter in his later Epistle, the.3. chap. that al
things verily should be purged by fire, and not wholly abolished and
adnichilated, but should doubtless be purified from all corruption: for Aretas:
he signifies not, says he thextinguisshing of the creature, but a renewyng
for the better. Therefore says S. John expressly, that he saw a new heaven,
and a new earth, whereunto he adds by exposition: that the first heaven, and
the first earth are vanisshed away: to wit they are changed in their
qualities: so yt the corruptible things are now gone, created for corruptible
uses. For even so is the Sea no more, also doubtless subject to corruption, but
changed into better. S. Austen, and his scollar Primasius suppose that the
troublesome state of the world (signified not seldom in ye scriptures by the
Sea) about the end of the world shall cease. Read ye.17. chap. of the.20. book
De ciuitate dei. Expou^ding this place, he reasons likewise at large of this
innouatio^ of the world, in the same.20. book De ciuitate dei, and.18. chap.
and other places. I think mere in this matter to put away al curiosity: and
if any hid thing appear therein, that it be reserved unto yt day, in the which
we shall see al things evidently. And I suppose yt these things concerning the
renewyng of heaven and earth are not therefore spoken, yt so there should any place
be prepared for us, which we should inhabit again in these inferiors parts
under heaven (for we believe yt we shall fly up into heaven, and go mete ye lord
in the clouds, according to the doctrine of thapostle. 1 Thessalonians. 4.) but for
ye our minds are thus confirmed, that the faithful shall undoubtedly be renewed
and glorified. For if heaven and earth, made for man, be renewed and purefied:
who will doubt now, that men themselves shall be most chiefly clarified?

For consequently now S. John declares, Saints must be glorified.
that the Saints shall both be renewed and glorified, and placed in blessed
seats: and signifies yet generally what ye glory of saints shall be. After he
will declare more at large and severally all those things most dilligently.
For he hears an Angel saying: come I will show thee the bryde the wife of the
lamb, etc. The same now figuratively he names a city, and that in deed holy,
and new Jerusalem. And a city signifies as well the place and habitatio^, as
them that dwell in the place, I mean the citezens themselves. This city
therefore is not only the place of the blessed, but also the very communion of
saints, in old time prefigured in the city of Jerusalem. But he puts a
great difference betwixt this of our new, and that visible and corporal
Jerusalem. Jerusalem.
For he calls ours holy: that other in the land of Palestine was profane,
polluted with the blood of Christ, prophets and Apostles, and for the same
cause destroyed utterly. Ours is also called new. For the communion of
Saints shall be renewed at the same day. And therefore by interpretation
follows, coming down from heaven: not that the habitation of Saints after
judgment shall again be in earth: but that the glory and renewyng shall be
granted from heaven of the divine majesty and power. As also S. James is red
to have said, every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming
down from the father of lights. And S. Paul also in the.4. to the Galath.
said that the free church is the heavenly Jerusalem. The same in the.1.
Corinth. the.15. The first man, says he, of the earth earthly, the second
man the lord himself from heaven. Such as that earthly was, such are they also
that be earthly: and such as that heavenly was, such are they also that be
heavenly. And as we have borne the Image of the earthly man, so shall we bear
also the Image of the heavenly. Therefore said S. John most rightly, that the
church of Saints comes down from heaven, to wit from heaven receiving
her glory. For again by a demonstration: prepared of God, says he, as a
bryde garnished for her husband. For the Apostle in the.2. to the Corinth.
the.5. We know, says he, that if our earthly mansion of this tabernacle be
destroyed, we have bildyng of god, a mansion not made with hand, everlasting
in heaven. And anon: he that has prepared us for the same is God. He remoueth
from his saints al corruption, but gives and teaches to be purified with all
gifts of the body, that so they may be garnisshed worthily, and may dwell in
the everlasting bryde chamber with their brydegrome Christ. Wherefore this
garnisshynge consists in the abolishinge of all corruption and mortality,
and in the gift of uncorruption, immortality, and glory. Of the purefying and
deckyng of the bryde speaks the Apostle S. Paul also in the.5. chapter to
the Ephesians. And in this world begins the purging and trimmyng, and
finally at the end is finisshed most perfitly. For than shall the church have
another spotte nor wrincle, al corruption verily wiped away, and al glory
received. And here learn by the way, that the Saints are prepared of God:
therefore salvation to be of mere grace.

And he proceeds to declare yet more plainly, What shall be the eternal
felicity.
what the glory shall be: whereof in this work he has been occasioned to speak
oftener than ones. Blessedness chiefly consists in two things. For God will
give unto his Saints all that good is, and will take from them al evil: and
so shall these for ever inioye the sovereign good, and felicity most perfect,
and shall waunte al pain and misery. S. Austen in the end of his book De ciuit.
dei: How great, says he, shall that felicity be, where no evil shall be, no
good shall waunt? and this declaration of eternal felicity has her parts,
whereby she is made manifest. For first a voice, and that a great cried from
the Trone: behold the tabernacle of God with men. The conjunction of God with
holy men, was in time paste prefigured by the Tabernacle of wittenesse, whereby
God testified that he would be in the mids of his people. And the same shall
he at the end after the judgment verfourme most abou^dantly. And therefore that
voice annexeth: In ye presence and fruition of god shall b^ al good. etc.
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
with them, and will be their God. The which S. Paul seems to have uttered
more succinctely and briefly, and God shall be all in all. For what so ever is
good, what so ever is fair, what so ever is pleasant and delectable, what so
ever the mind of man can imagine to be wisshed for, briefly what so ever
apperteyneth to the true and perfect felicity, and blessed life. That same
shall that great God almighty be whole, and shall show in him self most
fully. And like as al and singular men do inioye unto a pleasant satietie
the amiable brightness, and hol^ some heat of the sun, that neue^theles the
same loses nothing by the same: and albeit that al men use the sun in
common, and every man^e nevertheless inioyeth the same as proper and peculiar:
right so in another world we shall use that eternal light, and joy everlasting
and unspeakable. Whereof incontinently shall follow things more plentiful.

God will deliver the Saints from all pain.
And than, like as God in himself gives to the glorified al goodness, so will he
remove al evil from the same: so that they be not only delivered from
calamities, but the same shall never return, nor be feared more. The which in
most plentiful wise he declares, by words borrowed out of the oracles of
the prophets. God shall wipe away, says he, al tears from their eyes. Which
kind of speech he used also in the.7. chap. verily taken out of the.25.
and.65. chap. of Esaye. And David also in.126. Psalm. They that sow in tears,
says he, shall reap in gladness. He seems to have alluded to moothers, which
wipe the eyes of their tender and dear children criyng, comfort the
sorrowful, and cherishe them hurt or bruissed. Therefore if the Saints have
suffered any pain or grefe in this world, when they shall come into an other
world, it shall be requited the^, and provided, that they shall feel no more
adversity. The lord said also in the gospel: verily verily I say unto you ye
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and you shall be sorrowful,
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, etc. In the.16. of John.

Consequently he declares yet more fully by nombryng of the calamities, that
the saints in an other life shall be delivered at ones from al evil: and
death shall be no more. For they shall be rewarded with life everlasting.
Therefore shall there be no more fear of death, which is in a manner more
bitter than death it self. The same affirms the Apostle in the first to the
Corinth. the.15. alledgyng the testimony of the Prophet Osee. There shall be
no mournyng nor sorrow, which dries up the bones, although most full of
juice. For the joy of Saints shall be perpetual. There shall be no clamor,
no complayncte, no expostulatyng or vmbraydyng. For why, there shall be no
injury, no malice or envy. This world sowndeth and redoundeth full of the
clamorous and cries of poor wretches. But in the blessed seats shall be no
misery. There shall be no pain ((...)) labor, sickness, werines. The cause
hereof, for the old things are gone. There is now an other life, yea and
that a most diverse manner of living, from that which we live now. Therefore
what soever is of sin, and subject to corruption, shall there be taken
away: as the Lord said in the Gospel, John. 5.
the children of this world do marry, and are married: but they that shall be
accounted worthy to attain to that other world, and resurrection from the
dead, shall another marry, nor be married. For they can dye no more: for they
are egall with Aungelles, and be the children of God, sins they are the
children of resurrection. Luke. 20. chapt. But of eternal life we have spoken,
more in our commentaries upon the.12. of Matthew. And the Lord him self in John
collecteth the some of all, and says, how he makes all things new.
Therefore in the world to come we shall think of no carnal nor corrupt thing,
but an heavenly.

But the minds of the faithful are greuousely tempted in this matter, the
Devil suggestynge, A weighty co^firmatio^ yt all these things are undoubted
which are spoken of the blessed life.
that the hope of the faithful is vain: and that is a thing most folisshe,
to contemn good things present and certain, for glory uncertain. There be
innumerable others of the same sort, which come to the mind of man, and
trouble and shake the faith of eternal life. The Lord therefore the faithful
Physician of his, leeste they should feel any hinderaunce in this behalf,
confirms these things g^auely and many ways: declaryng the hope of the
faithful to be most certain, and al things to be undoubted, which are or
shall be taught of eternal life, of the felicity and glory of saints. And he
places this assertion as it were in bat^ayle raye, after he has certainly
collected the some of felicity, whereunto by and by he will add fuller
things after the vision exhibited.

And here is to be understand, that the certentie of the blessed life is showed
most expressly of al by these words: and he said unto me, write, etc. And
nevertheless by the former words also no weak reasons of the verity be
gathered.

And first in deed he said: I John saw. And we know John

Secondly he hears a voice, and a great, moreover pronounced out of the
Trone, to wit of the.xxiiii. Elders and spretes angelical, and of the whole
heavenly host. And who can doubt of their testimony, which already are in
bless everlasting? They know, and have experience what the felicity is,
therefore they speak and testify that is tried and known.



.16. chap. or else that the thing which is spoken, and believed to come, to be so
certain as though it were done already. We Germans so often as we will
signify, that the thing which we have pourposed, or promised and said, to be
sure, we are wont to say, Es is it gemacht, it is done. Let us therefore believe
assuredly these and all Gods words. Moreover let us give our lord God most
hearty thanks, which with so great faith and diligence susteyneth and
confirms our hope: and has commanded these mysteries of our salvation to be
put in writing, and publisshed to the whole world in all ages. To him be glory
for evermore. Amen.

It is furthermore declared, that the hope of the everlasting and blessed
felicity and glory to be certain and undoubted. The.xcij. Sermon.
I Am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to him that is a
thirste of the well of the water of life freely. He that overcomes, shall
inherit all things. I will be his God, and he shall be my sun. But the
fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers,
and sorcerers, and idolaters and liars shall have their part in the lake, that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Unto all the former comes now the sixte testimony of the certentie of the
true felicity of the faithful, God is beginning and end.
taken of the very nature of God. For he pronou^ceth of himself and says, I
am a and o: And immediately by exposition, the beginning and end. This he took
out of Esaye, with who^ the lord says oftener than ones, I am first and
last. And here let no man imagine that God is first in order, referryng the
beginning to the consequences, as though he had a beginning: or that he is
called the last or end, as though he should ones have an end: but the
contrary rather in this form of speaking is to be understand, to wit that
God has no beginning, no end, but to be everlasting, of whom al things have
their being, and by whose decree al things have an end: where he himself
indureth for ever, and his years never fade: like as in an other place the
prophet says, and the Apostle also. And for as much as he is eternal,
without beginning and without end, which lives always, and al things that
live he quickens, and preserves in life: how I pray you should not he
quicken the faithful? So certain therefore is the life, salvation and
felicity of the faithful, as it is certain that God is life, and that in
deed life everlasting. For he is everlasting, and the life of the faithful. Of
the phrase of speech, I am a and o, I have spoken in the first chapt. and third
Concion or Sermon.

God has promised everlasting salvation.
The seventh testimony of our undoubted salvation is taken of the verity of
God, and his promesses, and has a certain cosygnage with the former. For that
which God has promised, the same also ca^ he perform with no pain. He has
promised, a blessed life, most assuredly therefore will he perform the same
to the faithful. And he alleges the promise of God in deed at this present,
and brings in God speaking to John and to us also in these words: to him
that thirsts I will give of the well of lively water: that is to say, I, that
am life and eternal, and even eternal life, will give the faithful to drink
the water of life, that is to say I will quicken him, preserve him in life,
and deliver him from death and al evils, and will reward him with all heavenly
gifts. Who can here doubt of the verity of him that promises, especially
sins this place or this promise is red in mo places than one. David in the.36.
Psalm sings plain: thy mercy, O lord, reaches unto the very Heavens: and
thy faythfulnesse unto the clouds: thy rightuousenes is like the strong
mountains, thy judgments are like the great deep. Thou lord sauest both
manne and beast. How excellent is thy mercy O God? And the children of men
shall put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. They shall be satisfied
with the ple^tuousnes of thy house: and thou shall give them drink out of the
river of thy pleasures. For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall
we see light. Full many of these things are in the Prophets, and are
expounded of our savior him self in the.4.6. and.7. chapter of S. John. Where
he shows, that he gives water, and wholesome drink to the faithful, which
at the length should spring up into life everlasting. Most certain it is
therefore, that the faithful are quickened by Christ: and therefore, the
blessed life of the faithful is, and shall be most assured and certain, as
promised by so many express promesses of God. Of this water of life we had
some things in the.7. chapt. of this book toward the end, and shall have
certain plain matters in the beginning of the.22. chapt.

But in the mean while and by the way, How e^e^nall l^fe is communicated to
us.
he shows and declares unto us, after the Apostolic manner, who willingly
and often declare unto us the manner of our salvation, how eternal life is
communicated to us, to wit free, (...), freely which notwithstanding for the
doubtefulnes of speech, or understanding of words we express not properly the
force of the greek word (...). They are justified says the Apostle in the.3.
to the Romans. (...), freely through his grace: that is to say, by the mere
mercy of God, by no merit of man. For the same Apostle in the same Epistle
to the Romans the.6. chapter. The reward, says he, of sin is death: and
where on the contrary side he should have set, and the merit of
rightuousenes eternal life, for this membre he places rather, and the gift of
God is life everlasting. And adds incontinently, through Christ Jesus our
Lord. Therefore S. John says rightly, that eternal life happens to the
faithful freely: that is, by the very grace of God, Salvation comes to us
freely. And of this vocable freely.
through the merit of Christ, and by no deserte of man. For if we could by
our works and rightuousenes deserve eternal life, than Christ had died in
vain, (...), for naught. There was no cause why he should die, seeing we might
of our selves have be^ saved. There is no effect, nor merit of Christ's
passion: such effect verily as it is in very deed, yt by the blood of Christ
alone we be purified. For if there were or had been an other mean of salvation,
Christ neded not to have been incarnated and have suffered. And that this
vocable (...), ought after this way and manner to be expounded, many other
places of Scripture prove. In the.10. of Matthew. the lord says: freely, (...),
have you received, freely give. The lord will not have his Apostles to receive
any recompense for the gift of healing. But speaking of the ministry, he
says: the workman is worthy his hire. In the.15. of John the lord says:
they have hated me without cause (...), doubtless without my desert, or
undeserved of my part. In ye.2. Corint. 11. thapostle says, that he preached
the gospel to the Corinthia^s freely, (...), for he took no reward or
reco^pe^ce therefore. And in the.2. to the Thessal. the.3. chapt. another have I
taken, says he, bread of any man for naught, (...), to be short, where S.
John says, that life is given to the faithful free (...) he claymeth al
things of our salvation to the grace of God, and merit of Christ's passion and
plucketh it from man's merittes. And the same affirms Esaye also in the.55.
chapt. rebukyng folish men, spending their money about things of naught.
Here ought therefore to cease the faires of indulgences and pardons, and holy
things in the church. Let the Pelagians keep silence.

Wh^t is required of them that be justified freely.
Howbeit leest any by the free preaching of the grace and merit of Christ,
against the deserte of man, should gather, that the blessed life chau^ceth to
Idle folks, slepers, and ceasing from all good works: and that God alone
works, and we work nothing: but only to suffer the operation of God in us,
and for the same cause nothing to be required of us: he preuenteth, and first
the lord says that he will give to them that are a thirste to drink of the
water of life. There is required of us therefore faith, and a fervent desire of
godly things: not that faith is ours but is given of God. For by thirste to
signify the faithful desire of a godly man, the Lord himself is author in
the.5. of Matthewe pronouncyng them blessed, which honger and thirste for
rightuousenes. And also in the 6. of John the Lord him self understands by
drinkyng to believe. Faith therefore is required of us, that is that we should
thirste for the water of life. The which self thing also the lord grants by
his spirit and word, as else where we have declared. And he says how he yt
is freely justified must fight also: nor fight only, but must overcome.
Therefore the duties of charity be required, whereof is spoken in the.2. and.3.
chapt. of this book. Wherein is most frequent mention made of this fight and
victory. And God will than acknoweledge such as labor thus valeauntly for his
children, to them will he show him self a father, and take them for the
heirs of all their fathers possessions. They are bastardely children, which
being idle brag of faith, praise God with their mouth and words, and deem
him with their deeds. Ye see therefore that both must be preached in the
church: that we be justified and beautified freely: and so being justified must
work good works whereunto notwithstanding, as to their merits they ascribe
not salvation, but to the mere grace of God through Christ.

Whereupon consequently and on the contrary part he recites, who be excluded
from the fellowship of the blessed life and of the blessed, compilyng a
register of sins and of wicked men, such as he has compiled also about the
end of the.9.21. and.22. chapt. And such as the Apostle has in a manner
recited to the Corinthians.

And we suppose that in S. John his time these sins were most common, nor
sufficiently known, Who are excluded from ye true felicity.
as apperteyned. Many also at this day judge more lightly thereof, than true
godliness permits. And we doubt not but that in this register, which in
eight kinds or members is comprised, are contained al other like sins and
wickednesses. But we understand that hell fire is assuredly dew unto them
for their sins committed, which another have any faith at all, another can by
any means be persuaded to repent, and turn unto God. For in the first
Epistle to the Corinth. the 6. chapt. Ye were, says he, such, but ye are
purged by the blood of Christ, and with the sprete of our God. Therefore if we
have been such at any time, let us repent: or in case we be fallen into
these sins again, let us rise up, and turn to the Lord, which calls
unto him sinners, and promises pardone and grace. But woe be to the incurable,
walkyng always and without repentance in the way of iniquity.

And we shall touch severally eight parts of this register. Fearful.
First are placed the fearful. But the Lord him self was affrayde, and
even quaked for fear of death: the Saints of God have feared also, and often
fled for fear: yet are they not for this cause condemned in the Scriptures.
Therefore an other fear is meant, to wit that same immoderate fear, by the
which compelled, we do for fear of men, that thing which God has
prohibited: and we our selves conuicte in our own consciences, understand
that we sin in so doing: or what time through carnal fear we leave undone
that thing which God has commanded us: briefly, when we more fear men, as
princes or leagefellowes, or enemies, or any other men what so ever they be,
than our lord God him self. And therefore the Lord himself in the gospel said:
fear ye not them which kille the body, and can not kill the soul, etc. Matthew.
10. The same in an other place says: he that denies me before that
aduouterouse generation, I will deny him also before my father in heaven.
Doubtless it is a foul shame to fear more a most wicked manne, than most
holy God. But men offend in this behalf at these days most greuousely. For
some attribute so much to wicked and cruel persecutours, that even for them
they will command to peruerte the preaching of the Gospel, or to keep
silence al together. There is that will set more by the King, Prince, Earl,
Baron, Citezen, or plowma^, Bishop or Abbot, or some flatteryng Friar, or vile
massemongyng Priest, and will feign and dissemble for his favor, rather than
he will freely confess the truth, and fear and glorify God to be feared
only. Unto them says Esaye: say ye not conspiracy, and be not affrayde of
terror of the enemies, another be you discouraged. But rather sanctify the
lord of hosts: let him be your terror, let him be your fear. He shall be the
sanctuary, and stumblyng stone, and the rest in the.8. chapt. of Esaye. For
unless we put away this vain and wicked fear, and go about to funisshe up
the Lords work valeau^tly, constauntly, and without fear, we shall surely be
cast down to hell. Let timorouse men think hereof, and call upon the
Lord, and take unto them the sprete of strength, and of wise and godly
boldenes: and do the work of the Lord not negligently, but dilligently,
valeauntly, and constantely. He is greater that is in us, says S. John in his
Canonical, tha^ is he that is in the world.

Unbelievers Unbelievers.
are not weak in the faith, modeste, and fearing God: but such as believe not
gods word, promising, co^mau^ding threatening, another follow God, nor his
Christ: but rather follow strange Gods, had rather believe fables, and have
withdrawn their hearts from God. And of these is there a great multitude at
this day which notwithstanding have al in their mouth, yt they believe God and
his word, but they believe not the preachers: thinking verily yt their
incredulity is thus sufficiently excused. But where the preachers show
nothing else but the word of God, they cannot but conte^ne gods word, whilst
they despise the Sermons of the preachers.

In the third place follows, Abominable.
that the tourmentes of Hell are dew (...), to the abominable, and detestable.
For (...) signifies abomination and stench. He notes therefore abominable and
detestable men, to whom al religion is a mockery, which deride God, and his
word, and blaspheme all holy things, the children of Beliall, incurable, and
spurners. These although they know the truth, yet they know it to their own
condemnation, seeing they contemn it known, and with dogs and hogs return to
their vomit and wallowyng in the mire. Whom also the Apostles have noted.
Peter in ye second epistle the.2. and: 3. cha. S. Paul in the.3. to Titus.
and.12. to the Hebrews. Judas Thaddeus through out the chefest part of his
epistle: S. Ihon himself about the end of the.22. chapt. reciting in a manner
the same register, calls them dogs. And would God we wanted examples at
this day of abominable men, and such kind of dogs. But there is no cawse
why we should maruayle hereat, considering that we live in the time of all
other most corrupt of Noe and Loath: Matthew the.24.

Of Homicides there be sundry kinds. Murderers or Homicides.
For we kill with the heart, mouth and work. Whereof you may se thexpositours of
the.x. co^mau^deme^ts, chiefly D. Musculus. But I think the world had never a
more notable, mor cruel, and more shameless murderer, yea paricide most verily,
according to ye word of Christ in the.8. of John, the first begotten child of
the Devil, than the Bishop of Rome. For he in a manner at all times, for
these five hondreth years and more, has blown the trumpet to all the
greuouse wars of Europe or Christendom: and again has granted to
murderers, especially warring for the Sea of Rome, most large and ample
pardons, and promised heaven to them that die in that warfare: all the which,
being many of them excellent men, had not the great mercy of God ben, he had
destroyed both body and soul.

Than S. Ihon raccompteth whoremo^gers. Whoremongers.
And he names the lowest kind, to the end we should understand the higher and
vyler as rape, adultrie, incest, and Sodomitical: another that we should
exclude here glottonie, dronkennes, and all kind of riorousenes, and
nourryshing of voluptuousenes. Where doubteles we see that S. Paul under the
vocable of whoredom, co^prehendeth all filthy lust and riot. But in our days
whorehu^ting is made so common, yt every most shameful whoremonger is admitted
to the altar: a married priest that keeps holy matrimony is expelled from the
same. For the which we may thank Syricius, and other Popes: whom the Apostle
has grievously noted, in the first to Timothe. 4.

Sorcerers
Of Sorcerers is spoken in the.9. chap. of this book. S. Ihon has (...), and he
means magicie^s, inchau^ters, sothsayers, witches, and by deuillish crafts
love makers. The latin men understand them also, that give poison to drink.

Idolaters Idolaters.
be worshippers of Idolles. And maruayle it is, that the Papists at this day,
deny themselves to be Idolaters. For what other thing is an Idol, but a shape
or image made of any matter visible, representing the form of God or a
Saint, but without spirit? An Idol therefore is an Image of wood, stone, or
metal, representing the shape of God the father, of God the son, or of S.
Peter, etc. David describes an Idol, and says: the Idolles of the heythen
are silver and gold, even the work of men's hands. They have mouth and
speak not: eyes have they and see not, etc. Psalm. 113. And I would feign know
what the Idolles of the Papists differ from these? Concerning worshippinge of
them, they can not deny, but that they worship those Idolles of wood and clay.
For they attribute to them holy names, and even the sacred name of God, to be
communicated to none other, saying: this is (pointing to stone or wood, that
is, an Idol of wood) God ye father, this is God ye son, this is S. Peter. I
tremble in my mind, whylest I report these things: especially sins the lord
himself has said, whom will ye make me like? Esaias. 40. And S. Paul calls
this plainly, cou^terfeting folishnes: and expressly denies ye godhead to be
like a stone artificially polished: To. 1. Act. 17. Again these Images, which
they call their gods and saints, made with men's hands, they bring into the
churches, namely a place of worshipping, and set them upon the altars: unto
these they go on pilgrimage, fall down before them and worship, sense them,
offer oblations to them, and hang Jewels on them. And moreover attribute to
them also a part of the heavenly doctrine and instruction, saying that the
unlearned sort are taught and admonished by these. And what is to worship, if
this be not? Let them se therefore, whether they can herein excuse themselves
before God and men: and provide rather to save their souls. How be it all
these things they wype away as it were with one word, and say: we worship not
the signs, but the things signified. Than if the signs were taken away, would
ye return to the Idolles on pilgrimage? do ye not think it done in a manner to
God himself, that you se done to the Idolles? do ye not punnish am Image
breaker, as a traitor against ye divine majesty? For he shall not seem to
have cut a sunder wood, but to have defiled God himself. Therefore ye
acknowledge somewhat more in this wood, than wood alone. For you think yt some
divine thing is hid therein: and therefore is this wood accounted of you no
como^wood. Which thing you declare also by sundry tokens otherwise. Moreover ye
gentiles excused themselves after the same manner, saying, that they worshipped
the things, and not the signs. But this seemed not a sufficient excuse unto
godly men: as it is to be red in Lactancius and Athanasius in their books
against the gentiles. But God has at one word cofuted you and said, who has
required these things at your hands? if any will exhibit to me worship, let
him worship after the prescripte of my most Holy law. They worship me in
vain, teaching the doctrines of men. These things have I declared somewhat more
at large, to the intent that such as will yet hear any reason, and in whom the
word and law of God has any place, might know and avoid that gross and
mortal sin of Idolatry.

And liars comprehend men that are light of their tung, Liars.
sclaunderers, taletellers, whisperers, deceauers, couetouse persons, thieves,
usurers, bribers, and al manner of hypocrites and slipperie persons. For as God
is verity, so loves he verity, simplicity, constancy, integrity. This
vice of lyeng reigns at this day far and wide. For there is the leeste, or
rather no faith at al in the earth. The Lord be merciful to us.

And touching the lake or ponde, burning with fire and brimestone, and of the
second death, I have spoken before in the nynetene and twenty chapters. And
else where. And he signifies, that all these and the like shall be cast down
of the Lord into the everlasting fire of Hell. For he puts here part for
inheritance, as also in the eleventh Psalm: he shall rain upon the ungodly
fire and brymstone, and this is part of their cup: And in the.24. of Matthew.
And shall put his part with hipocrites. And we say also, he has no^e obtained
his right: or he is pu^nished as he is worthy. Like as Saints therefore
obtain the Kingdom of Heaven by inheritance: so are everlasting tourments in
stead of inheritance to the ungodly. To the Lord the righteouse Judge be
praise and glory. Amen.

Here is set forth a goodly picture, a description or figure of the blessed
seat, and of the heavenly life and glory everlasting. The.xciij. Sermon.
AND there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vyalles
full of the seven last plagues: and talked with me saying: come hither, I will
show the the bryde, the lambs wife. And he carried me away in spirit to a
great, and an high mountain, and he showed me the great City, holy
Jerusalem, desce^ding out of heaven from God, having the brightness of God.
And her shyning was like to a stone most preciouse, eue^ a Iaspar clear as a
Cristal: and had great and high walls, and had twelve gates, and at the gates
twelve Angels: and names written, which are the twelve tribes of the children of
Israel: on the East part three gates, and on the North side three gates, and
toward the South three gates, and on the west side three gates: and the wall
of the City had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the Lambs twelve
Apostles.

S. John retourneth to the description of the city celestial, A description of
the heavenly city.
which in the beginning of this chapter he had attempted. He has inferred
certain things in place right necessary, touching the certain hope of the
faithful: which after he has finisshed, he seems afterward to unlock and
set open Heaven, that the godly, with the eyes of faith, might as it were look
herein, and see clearly what is the hope and glory of Saints to come. For
under the tipe of a most beautiful city, he sets forth a picture or
description most evident of the blessed seat, or palace and city of God or
of the everlasting country and church triumphant. We shall not here feign and
forge to our selves things earthly and corporal, but spiritual and
celestial. For the sprete of God will have us by occasion of temporal
things, with our minds to ascend to eternal, and by temporal things, more
excellent. Therefore are al things figured, with amplifications, Hiperbolies,
and full of other figures. We shall therefore imagine in these far greater
things: as we are wont to do, what time we read or hear such things as our
lord has taught under the parables of weddynges and feasts.

And first is declared unto us, The shewer of ye heavenly vision.
who is the shewer of this godly and wonderful vision: that is to say, who is
the opener of the mysteries, verily an Angel of God, and the very same,
which before in the.17. chapter to the same John said, come, I will show
thee the damnation of the great whore, etc. For it is the same God, which
punnissheth the ungodly, and gives rewards to the godly, and denounces unto
men by his ministers those his rightuouse judgments. Moreover sins we see
them to be most certain, and partly also accomplisshed, which he showed
before of the judgment of Rome: who would not gather, that the same shall be
also most certain which the same now utters and shows of the
everlasting glory of the faithful? And gatheryng a some of the things which
he will show him, he sets before and exhorts him, to follow him, saying:
come, I will show thee the bryde the wife of the la^be. Of her has been often
times spoken before. He signifies the congregation of Saints, coupled by
faith to our Savior Christ. And not only shows to John (and in the same to
us al) the spowse: but the glory also given her of God. The meaning therefore
is this: come, I will show thee, what shall be the glory of the church of
Christ in the life to come, what shall be the state of the life everlasting.
Certes he speaks also very many things of the church, but chiefly of her
glory in the world to come.

The manner of the revelation.
Tha^ touches he also brefely the manner of reuealyng. For he adds, and he
took me up in sprete into a great and high mountain. Therefore like as in the
fourmer visions he was carried away in sprete, his body remaining in Pathmos:
and as we have red and admonisshed before, that such manner of visions and
rauishmentes happened to Ezechiel: even so says he now also that he is
carried away in sprete, and in mind to have seen the things which the Angel
showed. Wherefore if we will also read or hear these things to any profit, we
must lift up our minds, and be carried up in our sprete, and think, that al
these things must spiritually be understand. Aretas: rightly, says he, in
the mountain was showed the heavenly life and conversation of the Saints.
For with them is nothing earthly, low or abiecte: but all things lofty and
high. This he. Certainly what time in the Gospel the Lord Christ would
exhibit to his disciples a certain taste and say of the glory to come, he
conveyed them up into a Mount, and was transfigured before them: which thing
S. Matthewe affirms in the.17. chapt. to have chanced to Peter, James, and
John.

And now he annexeth the vision it self, and generally and briefly describes
or shaddoweth the blessed seat and glory of the life to come: afterward he
amplifieth the same more largely, particularly, and as it were by parts, and
so enlarged and beaultified he sets it forth as it were to be seen of the
godly. The city of God ye great city.
And he calls the heavenly country, and habitation of saints, the great
City. For it is the city of the great king, and in it shall dwell an
innumerable nombre of the blessed, and of Aungelles thousands infinite, and
shall have the fruition of great glory: another is there any fear, leefte the
place should not suffice so great an host of men and spretes, or that it shall
be over strayte. Great is ye city of God, which is verily able to receive all
good men abundantly. In the gospel of John the Lord says: in my fathers
house are many mansions, and so forth. the.14. chapt. The self same place is
called holy Jerusalem. For like as no filthiness shall there be espied, so shall
there no unclean person there appear. Of the heavenly Jerusalem is spoken
before. Thomas of Aquine: says: She is said to have descended from heaven,
for that what goodness so ever the holy church has, she acknoweledgeth her
self to have received it of the grace of God. But of this matter I have spoken
in the last Sermon. Having ye glory of God.
And the city of God, I mean heaven, has the seats of God and the blessed,
the glory of God, that is to say the divine majesty and brightness, and what
great thing so ever the mind of man can think or imagine, or in all things
the unspeakable excellency of God, such as another the eye has seen, nor the
ear has heard, nor yet has ascended into the heart of man, 1. Corintb.
the.2. chapt. These things has he sommarely, and generally touched hitherto.

And consequently he declares by particulars and at large that celest^all
glory, and blessed seats. The city of God most ample and large.
For what things so ever are ^mple, what so ever are in cities commendable,
the same a^^ plainly found in this our city most excellent, as the
largenes, strength, majesty, surenes, excellency, beaultie, pleasauntnes and
plenty of things. These things I say, and al other like do wonderfully
excelle in the city of our god, and in our fathers house: and where as these
things are on this wise set forth and amplified most liberally, yet seems
there nothing at al said, in case a man consider the unspeakable majesty of
the glory celestial. To what end these things are spoken.
But al these things are alleged of the lord by S. John to this end verily,
that we should be taken with the desire of so worthy a life, and should think
in our tribulations, and troubles, that the afflictions of this present world
are nothing, being compared with so excellent and sovereign glory: finally that
al are madd^, which begin to doubt of the eternal hope of the faithful.
V^ry many things of this sort are red also in Ezechiel in ^^t. 40. chapt. and
after. We will touch every part of this treatise, vsyng nevertheless a
succincte brevity, leest we should be tediouse to any man. And verily he
touches the principal and most commendable things of Cities, and in them
shows that the city of God excels.

The light of this City.
In cities and houses the chiefest praise is, if all things be light and clear:
for darkness is horrible and unpleasant. Therefore is an excellent light
declared to be in the city or house of the lord. There is added a parable,
whereby is showed the excellency of this light. It is like a most preciouse
stone, suppose a Iaspar, as it is commonly called, or a Chrysolithe, or some
like stone most brighte. And S. John him self adds more, as it were a
Iaspar stone like a Crystal. This is a new manner of speaking, but it has a
maruelouse grace, if we understand it rightly. For a Iaspar is grene, a
crystal is bright. He seems therefore to say, how that celestial brightness
is continually grene, and whithereth never: that is to wit that the heavenly
light is everlasting, and in it self after a sort waryng grene, and in growyng
grene wareth bright and rejoices all heavenly dwellers. For herafter
follows: for the glory of God has lightened her, and the Lamb is her light.
This brightness and most ioyeful light the Lord in the gospel of John promises
in sundry places: and the whole blessed life, of this not the least part, is
called commonly blessed light, and light everlasting, or light of heaven. It
seems to have been prefigured in the golden ca^delsticke of the tabernacle,
etc. For if it were not hard for our Lord God to give unto precious stones
wonderful colors and brightness: if he illumine this world full of naughty
men with most goodly lyghtes, the Sun Moon and Stars, what a light I
pray thee, may we think to have in heaven, where no man shall dwell but the
best, and of God most derely beloved? Of this light much mention is made with
Esaye and in the Psalmist.

the walls of ye city.
Walls in Cities are most notable and excellent, in case they be high, thick,
and strong, able to abide all force of enemies, and defend the Citezens from
al injuries and to keep them in peace and security. The heavenly walls
therefore, are both great or strong, and also high or vnpregnable. Hereby is
signified, that the protection of Saints in heaven shall of God be most safe
and sure, so that the Saints shall be inperfit security, and exempte from all
fear. There shall no man trouble or take away their joys: as the lord in
the.16. of S. John's gospel has affirmed. For there shall be perpetual
security, and gladness in heaven most perfect and everlasting.

Moreover in the walls are placed gates, The gates of the city.
by the which me^ go into the city. In the wall therefore of the heavenly
country shall be twelve gates, that is to say, a most large entryng into
eternal life shall be open on every side. And we believe, that there is no other
way to heaven, no other port or gate, or any other door or posterne to
remain, than the only and sole Christ Jesus our lord: as he himself has
taught in John the.10. and.14. chapt, But for as much as he has appoincted
Angels or prophets, and Apostles also, porters of heaven, to who^ he has
committed the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and these do bring the chosen,
and let them into the heavenly country, many gates verily are red to have been and be. And for a further declaration is added, that in every gate was an
Angel, Twelve Angels in the gates.
in no^bre twelve. And we have heard in the beginning of this book, that
Angels, are gods ministers, and pastors of churches, sent of God for the
salvation of me^, I mean that they might bring them by the word of verity,
and holy ministry, through faith into life everlasting. Morouer we read how
the soul of pore Lazarus diyng was carried by Angels into the bosom of
Abraham. Why than should we marvel that Angels stand at the gates? For by
the true and only gate Christ, they bring in the faithful into the heavenly
country.

And again for a further declaration is annexed, In ye gates are written the
names of ye children of Israel.
and in the gates were names written, which are the names of the twelve tribes
of the children of Israel. For the Lord would signify, that he used the
industry of Patriarchs and Prophets of all tribes, in openyng heaven unto
me^: and again that all the chosen of al tribes appertain to the felloweship
of felicity. We shall see therefore in heaven the Patriarchs and Prophets, and
all the Saints, which before the coming of Christ are written in the
registers of the heavenly: like as the Apostles also saw Moses and Helias
talking with Christ in the Mount. Wherefore not without great cause wrote the
Apostle to the Hebrews: you are common to the mou^te Sion, and to the city of
the living God, to the celestial Jerusalem, and to the multitude of many
thousand Angels, and unto the congregation of the first borne, which are
written in heaven. And the rest which is red in the.12. chapt.

The situation of the gates.
And he touches also the situation of the gates. For he assigns three unto
every part of the sky. Another does he this without consideration. For our
savior himself says in the gospel, that they shall come from the East and
from the Weste, and shall rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven. Aretas also searches here the mystery more dilligently, and
supposes that no man shall enter in by these gates, save he, which both
acknowledges the eternal trinity of God, and also understands the mystery
of the cross of Christ. For he says how the twelve tribes are divided by
the Trinity of the fourefolde figure of the world, etc. Whereupon Aquinas
also: who so ever are saved, says he, they are justified by the faith of the
holy Trinity publisshed in the four quartes of the world by the Apostles
preaching.

The foundations of the City.
Now shows he also, that the foundations of this city are most sure and
immovable. For the wall of the City, says he, has twelve foundations.
Touching the foundation of the church and our salvation have spoken expressly
David in the Psalms. Esaye also in the.28. chapt. our Lord and savior in
sundry places of the Gospel. Peter moreover in the Acts, and first epistle:
likewise the Apostle S. Paul, which said, any other foundation can not be
laid, tha^ that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus, 1. Corinthians. 3. How
than are laid here twelve foundations? doubtless Christ remains one and a
sure foundation. Howebeit in as much as in placyng and reuealyng him, the Lord
has used the ministry of the twelve Apostles, for this cause the city is
said to have twelve fou^dations. Not that the Apostles are in deed the
fou^dations of the church and our salvation, but in this that Christ that true
foundation, was by the twelve Apostles made known to the faithful, and as it
were laid under, whereupon the beleuers have builded themselves by the
Apostles faith. Whereupon he says pourposely, and in those twelve, the names
of the lambs twelve Apostles. For the gospel also, which is both in very
deed and vnchaungeably Jesus Christ's alone, is called also of John, Matthew,
Mark and Luke, of Peter and Paul because it has been preached by them. And we
understand hereby not only the church, which was before the coming of Christ
of Patriarchs and Prophets, being received into heaven to rejoice in God: but
also the church Apostolical, I mean that al men in the whole world, which
have believed the Apostolical doctrine, shall live with all the Saints in that
heavenly country: all the which we shall both see, and with them also shall
glorify God for evermore.

Primasius Bishop of Vtica dissenteth not much from this our exposition,
Whether thapostles be foundatio^s of the church.
expounding how the Apostles are called fou^datio^s. For thus has he left
written: where we know, that the church has one only foundation, that is to
say Christ, we ought not to be moved, yt here he says she has twelve. For
in Christ have thapostles deserved to be the fou^dations of the Church: of
whom the Apostle an other foundation, says he, can not be laid, besides
that which is laid Christ Jesus. In him are also the Apostles said to be
light, sins he says unto the^, you are the light of the world: where Christ
alone is the true light, which lights every man coming into this world.
Christ therefore is the light illuminyng, and they the light illumined. And
after a few words the same Author. Here it behooves, says he, to
acknoweledge the twelve Apostles to be foundatio^s, yet called in the only
foundation Christ Jesus. Hereunto apperteineth also, that he has not concealed
the name of the Lamb. The Apostles therefore be foundations, but in one
foundation Jesus Christ. And christ alone without the Apostles is rightly called
the foundation: but the Apostles without Christ, could by no means be called
the foundations of the church. These things Primasius. Which Aretas Bishop
of Cesaria declares more briefly and plainly, and says: they are in deed
called foundations, for that they have laid the foundations of the christen
faith: and gates, for that by them that is to wit by their preaching, there
may be found now, that may bring them to the christen faith. Thus much he.
Doubtless the Apostle S. Paul in the.2. to the Ephesians. calls Christ the
foundation of Apostles and Prophets, which verily in preaching they have
laid, and to the which they have leaned, and by the which also they are
saved. To him be glory.

Yet again is described the seat of the everlasting country in heaven.
The.XCiiij. Sermon.
AND he that talked with me, had a golden reed to measure the city with all,
and the gates thereof, and ye walls thereof. And ye city was buylte four
square, and the length was as large as ye breadth of it. And he measured the
city with the reed.xii. M. furlo^gs and the length and breadth, and height of
it were equal. And he measured the wall thereof 144. cubits, after the measure
of a man which the angel had. And the building of the wall of it was of
Iaspar. And the city was of pure gold, like unto clear glass: and the
fou^dations of the walls, and of the city were garnished with all manner of
precious stones. The first foundation was a Iaspar, the second a Saphyre, the
third a Calcedony, the fourth a Smaragde, the.v. a Sardonix, the.vi. Sardeos,
the.vii. a Chrysolite, the eight Berall, the.ix. a Topas, the.x. a
Chrisoprasos, the.xi. a Iacincte, the twelft an Amatist. And the twelve gates
were twelve pearls, and every gate was one pearl, and the street of the city
was pure gold, as a through we shining glass.

He proceeds in describyng the blessed seats, and that life of the world to
come, under the Image of a most goodly and most excellent city. We shall
understand al things not after the letter, but after the sprete. All things
are said for our comfort, and to the end we should stoutely contemn this
world, and the pleasures thereof, and the furies of persecutours: and should
always desire so great, and the same everlasting good things promised us, we
have heard in the description, yea even seen four singular things of this
heavenly city as it were of a lively picture, what a light it has, what
walls, what gates also, and foundations. Now in the fifte place follows,
what is the widenes, receipte or largenes of this City. For hereof are cities
commended. And necessary it is, that the greatest nombre of Citezens, should
have the largest or greatest City.

Therefore comes forth a meater of this city, He measures ye city with a
golden reed.
an Angel sent to John from heaven, holdyng in his hand a reed, that is a
long polle or measuryng rod, not of wood, or leed, but of gold. And by the
measuryng he would we should esteem the quantity of the blessed seat. In the
meter therefore and in the measure we shall not need to seek any great
mysteries. For the eternal wisdom and providence of God has prepared seats
for his chosen: and that in a golden order, that is to wit most purified,
which is signified by the g^lden reed or measure. For the judge in S. Matthew.
provoke the She^e to take the inheritance, prepared from the beginning of
the world. He alone knows also, who be his.

The situation of the city is declared, planted in a square, A squadre or
squares ye City.
whereby is signified the strength and stablenes (...) the blessed in heaven.
For the place is no balle, bowl^^, or globe, rolling and easy to turn.
Another need we to doubt of ^he certentie thereof. For hope shameth no man: and
he that ^eleueth in Christ, shall never be confounded.

Moreover the length, The length and breadth.
breadth and height of th^^ city are equal. Every side, in his squadre, has
twelve thousand furlonges, which make in all forty and eight thousand in
the whole circuit. Touching the furlonge, Furlonge.
what and how much it conteyneth, I see that learned men vary. Pliny in
the.2. book the.23. chap. attributes to a furlong an hondreth and.25. passes,
that is to say, six hondreth and.25. foot. If ye now account these things,
and divide them into miles you shall ^^nde that the city is most ample and
large. There be some that reken it.150. Germane miles. Hereby I suppose to be
signified, that the place and space is great enough, what innumerable
multitudes so ever of Angels, of blessed spretes and men shall flitte into the
blessed seat, and dwell therein. As also the lord in the Gospel said: In my
fathers house are many mansio^s. In the.30. chap. of Esaye about the end is
showed, that there shall be space and place enough in hell also for the wicked.
Equality.
And the equality on every side declares, that men of people or nations shall
have no prerogative. For whether so ever thou be of the East, or of the Weste,
whether thou be Greek or Barbarian, so that thou be a faithful, thou shall be
received of the Lord. Moreover in the gospel equality is declared, whilst the
pe^ny is paid not only to him yt wrought in the Vineyarde al day long, or
half the day, but unto him also, which came into the Vineyarde in the euenyng.

The height.
The height of the wall is doubtless unmeasurable. Whereof we gather, that the
blessedness is most sure: and that none can come into the same, but by the
gates. For no man can clime over such an height, no man can scale those
walls, whether he be enemy, that would moleste the^: or hipocrite, which goes
about as it were by stelth to win heaven.

Where he says, and he measured the wall thereof, an hondreth and.44.
cubits, it ca^ not surely agree with the furlonges: The thickness.
therefore must we needs understand it of the thickenes of the wall. By the
which again is figured the strength and security of the blessed. It is added,
how the Aungel did mete with the measure of a man, which the Angel had: that is
to say, that the Angel measured the wonted cubits, and furlonges to men
accustomed. The measure of a man, which the Angel had.
Wherefore this Angel had the same measure in this metyng, which is commonly
used of men. For so would he signify that the place of eternal felicity
should be determinate and certain. For there shall be after the resurrection
bodies true and determinate. If there be any other mystery herein, perauenture
it is the same, which the Lord spoke of in Luke, Luke. 20.
namely of the bless of the faithful in an other world: they be egall with
Angels, and are the children of God, sins they be the children of the
resurrection. If any man will account these nombres more exactely, and show
higher mysteries, I will gladly give place. I suppose here rather celestial
things to be figured, than either Arithmetical nombres, or geometrical
proportions to be taught. Nevertheless I can willingly grant, that those
arts help to the understanding of the Scriptures.

In the sixte place he treats of the matter of this heavenly City. For
Cities are commended of the stuff and matter. The matter of this city.
The saying of Caesar Augustus is well known, who is said to have spoken of
Rome: I found it of brick, I leave it of marble. And the cities builded of
stone, are justly preferred to those that are of timber, and such as are
buylte of free stone squared, to them that are made of rough stone. But what is
the buildyng or matter of the city celestial? That same he declares by five
parts of members. the walls.
First the walls are of Iaspar. Let no man here forge to him self carnal
things. The Iaspar is grene. The celestial City always florisheth, God his
protection never fails.

2. The city it self, that is to say, the buildings in the city, the palaces
and houses, are pure gold. For all things be purefied in the eternal country.
There is no uncleanness, Habitations.
no evil affections, there shall be no trouble or pain. As the lord said also
in the.19. chapt. of Matthew. Disputyng against the Sadduceis. Therefore like as
gold is most tried and pure, so shall the celestial habitation be most clean.
Therefore must the bodies also that shall dwell in heaven be clarified or
glorified. He adds, that this gold most pure is not glass, but in brightness
does represent most pure and shinyng glass. For in heaven al things are
clear. There we shall be seen face to face. There we shall most perfitly know al
things.

3. Foundations.
And first he says generally that the foundatio^s of the city, are
beaultified with all manner of precious stones: after particularly he recites by
name the stones yt are most excellent. Doubtless nothing is more preciouse,
nothing more excellent, than Christ the foundation of our salvation, than
thapostolical doctrine, whereby we are induced to ye knowledge of Christ and of
our salvation. And he sets in order.xii. stones, to the intent we should
understand, that there is not one precious stone alone placed for the
fou^datio^, but a row of one sort in such a length, as the side is square,
and so consequently likewise in all parts of the squadre. For the first order
therefore is placed a Iaspar stone, that is to say, in the first place of the
fou^datio^ Iaspar stones are set in their rank: again in the next row upon
the Iaspars are laid Sapphires, through out ye whole space, in such length as
the foundation was, and so consequently the other stones were couched and laid
in order. By all the which is signified, that the foundation of our salvation
is both most excellent and sure. Which we ought of right to set more bie, tha^
by the price of all the Iewelles in the earth. And there are found men godly
and beneficial, which bestowyng, or sellyng these earthly Iewelles, according
to the Apostles doctrine in the.1. to Timo. the.6. prepare for themselves a
good foundation in an other world. There are found fools, which are over much
in love with Iewelles, and many times in stead of precious stones that cost
very much being polished, they bie glass. Full worthy doubtless to be deceived.
Verily precious stones have their use and virtues, another were they made of God
in vain. But we must always remember that saying of the wise man: al things
are not mete for all men.

Precious stones.
4 By the register of preciouse stones he seems to have alluded to the
precious stones that were set in the attire of the high bishop, in the.28. of
Exodus Another doubt I, that S. John took these things partly out of the.54. of
Esaye, which place S. Hierome expou^ding, sends the^ that desire to know
more of stones to Epiphanius, and to the.37. book of the Nature. Hist. of
Pliny. Aretas in his commentaries, applies the twelve precious stones to
the.12. Apostles of Christ. There remain moreover the writings of Bid upon
this place: out of who^ took Thomas of Aquine such things as he has in his
commentaries upon the Apocalipse. I see not how I can with any great fruicte
tarry longer in this treatise. Wherefore I refer the curiouse reader to these
Authors: it is enough for me to have showed, that by these costely Iewelles is
signified the excellency of the foundation of our health and salvation.

The gates
Morouer in the fourth place is declared the matter of the gates. They were of
one whole pearl every of them, whereof the price is excedyng great. The gate
of heaven is Christ, and the porters of heaven are Apostles as is declared
before. Therefore are the gates most preciouse and most strong. In the.13. chap.
of S. Mathewes gospel, Christ himself and the salvation that is of him, are
compared to a Pearl, which the merchant selling all that he has, byeth for
himself, thinking himself rich enough, if he may have this Pearl.

5. In the fifth place is also described the Street, what it is. Street.
In the Cities here in Earth, the streets are many times myrie, though
otherwise the cities be never so famous and noble. Where they be notable, they
are paued with stone or brick: but the Street of our City, is paued with
gold both clean and bright. For in heaven is found no noysomenes, no obscure
darkness. All these things doubtless are spoken most beaultifully: but yet
must far greater things be understand and imagined: and we must endeavor with
all our might, that the thing which the tung of man can not utter, nor our
mind here for the greatness and excellency conceive, we may at the length
behold the same in Heaven presently, and may experience the same in those our
glorified bodies, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Furthermore yet is described the everlasting country in Heaven. The.xcv.
Sermon.
AND I saw no temple therein. For the Lord God almighty and the lamb is the
temple of it, and the City has no need of the Sun, another of the Moon, to
lighte^ it. For the brightness of God does lighten it, and the lamb is the
light thereof. And the people which are saved, shall walk in ye light of it: and
the kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it. And the
gates thereof shall not be shut by day. For there shall be no night there. And
they shall bring the glory and honor of ye Gentiles to it. And there shall enter
into it none uncle an thing, another what soever works abomination, or makes
lies: but they which are written in the lambs book of life.

The Aposte proceeds in the description of the divine or celestial City, to
comfort and keep the faithful in all temptations and afflictions. Therefore in
the seventh place he discourses of the temple. The temple.
For in famous Cities there is no small consideration and praise of churches.
This is manifest by all writers of stories places and times. What temple is
than in heaven? none at all. For S. John: and I saw, says he, in the city of
God no temple. This place repugneth not with those things which are in the.11.
and.15. chapters of the temple in Heaven. For the temple is there exhibited in
a figure and vision, not that there is in deed any temple in Heaven: but that
thus might be signified Gods justice and certain salvation promised in the
Scriptures, like as we have in those places declared.

No temple in Heaven.
And what is the cause, that there appears no temple in heaven? The divine
revelation answers: for ye Lord God almighty, and the lamb is the temple
in that our heavenly country. The use of temples is this. The Lord first
instituting the tabernacle, after the temple, would have it testified that he
will be present in the mids of his people, a father, Lord, and defender. And
therefore ar they said in the scriptures to come unto the Lord, which came
either to the tabernacle or temple of the Lord. The temple moreover was erected
for preaching and prayer and the external service of God, for receiving of the
Sacraments, or offering up of sacrifices. But the Saints in the heavenly
country have no need of all these things. Therefore they need no temple.
Therefore is no temple seen in heaven. For the Lord god now shows himself to
them to be inioyed of ye same, the saints ar now with him, wherefore they need no
toke^ of his presence. We are taught by doctrine what God is, and what is his
will, and yt we be saved by ye lamb: but now that we se god himself face to
face, and yt salvation is common by the lamb of God, what needs there a
temple in heaven? By prayer we require life and joys everlasting: now since
these are happened to the elect what needs any house of prayer? The Saints
now without any temple, offer up eternal praises unto God. And seeing that
sacrifices and sacraments have no further place in the everlasting country, I
se not why there should be any temple in Heaven. We rest, and keep in Heaven,
an everlasting Sabbath. This place moreover proves, that Christ is very God,
coequall with the father, as to whom he is joined inseperablie in all glory.
Another is the Holy ghost separated from the father and the son, which else
where is said to dwell in us: for the which cause, we are called the temples
both of God and of the Holy ghost, of the Apostle, in the first to the Corinth.
the.3. and the second Cor. 6.

The eight place of this description is repeted of the light celestial, The
light of the city, God.
and that not without great cause: yea and the same light is again commended
in the.22. chap. For in buildinges there is nothing more excellent than light.
Otherwise without light, all things are blind. Furthermore he says not, that
the Sun and Moon should be no more: but that the City of God should not
need those lights. He shows the reason: for the glory of God has lightened
it. And the glory of God, is the divine, celestial, and unspeakable brightness
of his vnapprochable light, which he inhabiteth, and according to his good
pleasure, co^municateth to the chosen. The Lord Christ (which here is called
the lamb, for the mystery of redemption) illumineth the blessed. For by him
we are clarified, and enjoy that eternal, most beaultifull, and celestial
light. S. Ihon has borrowed this place out of the.60. chap. of Esaias, where we
read: The Sun shall not be there, for the light of the day. And the
brigtnesse of the Moon shall not shine there: but the Lord shall be to the
thee a perpetual light, and thy God (shall be) thy brightness. Furthermore the
seats of the blessed, are thought to be fixed above the Sphere of the Sun
and Moon, and also the brightness of Saints to excel far the light of the
Sun and stars. The same has Esaias testified also in the.24. and.30. chap.
To God almighty and light eternal, be praise and thanks giving, which has
prepared so great things for us, and gives us gifts such as no tung can
exprsse.

He shows in places mo than one, Who be Citizens of this City.
who are partakers of that light, or who be Citizens of this celestial city,
and what is the state of the Citizens. All nations and people saved, are
citizens of the eternal country. Here ar two things to be noted. First, that
ye gentiles are made inheritours of glory, and that without any choice. For
here excels not the Jew, nor the Greek, another Roman, nor Barbarian.
Again yet not all without respect, and confusely obtain everlasting light,
but the saved only: that is to sai, whom Christ has saved and redeemed from
sin, the Devil, Antichrist, and from the curse and the world. And Christ saves
thelect and faithful. They therefore shall in deed be partakers of ye light:
These ar the citizens of the country everlasting. But what is their state and
inhiritaunce? They shall walk in the light of God the father and the lamb:
that is to say, they shall have the fruition of the light and of God himself,
to their ioiful swetnes and fill. For it is a figurative speech, to walk in
the light, for that which is, to enjoy light. Verily in the.88. Psalm is red
with a figure not much unlike: Lord they shall walk in the light of thy
countenance. And again: Thou shall make known unto me the foot path of life,
the fulfilling of joys is in thy sight, and gladness in thy right hand for
evermore

Kings are in ye court of heaven.
But especially the places in heaven, and in that Palace divine, are for Kings.
Kings ar governors, and captains of the people, as they be, which are called
Kings and Princes, governors, Magistrates, rulers as well of the politic, as
ecclsiasticall government, Doctors, masters, teachers, Artificers, and
Parents. For their duty is, vertuouslye to govern their subjects, scollers,
or children, to keep them under awe or discipline, to chastise, and direct
them to the duties of life and all godliness. This if they do, they shall have
a worthy place prepared in Heaven. For Daniell says also in the.12. chapter.
But the teachers shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that
bring many to righteousness, as the stars everlastingly. O therefore, O happy
are you, if ye bring many to execute the office of righteousness. But woe be to
you Princes, and teachers, and masters, and Parents, if herein you be
negligent. There is prepared for you in hell a place most horrible and
miserable, as also Ezechiell has testified. But if Kings have their place,
and the same right honorable, in Heaven, wherefore do the Anabiptistes teach,
nay why do they lie, that a Christian can not execute the office of a
Magistrate? For here are Kings mentioned to be in heaven, not only as men, but
as they were kings, that is, as they were good kings, and executed their
office duly, and not forsaking their place, have lived a private life. For it
follows, they shall bring their glory and honor unto it. And what is that
glory, and what is the honor? it follows again: and they shall bring the
glory and honor of nations into it: that is to say, they shall bring into
heaven with them, the very nations, their people and subjects, who^ they have
helped in true godliness and salvation, in teaching, correctyng, defendyng,
alluryng or drawyng, etc. And these be their glory and honor, for S. Paul in
the.2. to the Corinth. the.1. chapt. says, for we be your glory, as you shall
be ours also in the day of our Lord Jesus. And again in the.1. to the These.
the.2. chapt. the same Apostle says: for what is our hope, joy, or crown of
reioycyng: are not you, in the sight of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his coming?
for you are our glory and joy. Full well therefore says Aquinas: S. John
speaks after the manner of co^querours, which bring their spoils into Cities.
Therefore he fayneth that Princes, preachers, and parents bring with them into
heaven such as they have won, which to them shall be an honor and glory.
These things always let us think upon, and do our duty enjoined us of God,
which we perceive in the everlasting country to have so great reward. For it
shall be the greatest glory that may be, to stand with so many won in the
presence of the eternal God, La^be, and al saints. Contrariwise the greatest
shame to stand with so great a multitude of men lost, and that lost through
our fault and negligence. Read what things are written in the.1. chapt. of
the book of wisdom, etc.

In the tenth place follows the custody of the gates celestial. The gates
are not shut in the day.
Certainly in great Cities there is great and dilligent watching and wardynge
and head taken to the gates, that they be shut and opened in dew time and
season. But in heaven there shall need no such carefulnes. The reason is. The
gates are not wont to be shut in the day, but at night. But in the
everlasting country there is no night, therefore are the gates never shut.
There is doubtless no night, but continual day. There is no treason, no
Ambusshes or wait laid, no perils or dangers: all thing, in general are
safe, peaceable, quiet, sicker and sure. The same things are red also in
Esaye, but some thing in a diverse sense. Aretas: here is a double
understanding, says he, for either he means that there shall be peace and
security, and that so great, that it shall not need to keep the city by
shuttyng of the gates. Or else that there also the godly gates of the
Apostolical doctrine are open for all men, unto their learning, which have
more perfection, etc. Certainly they shall need no teachers nor guides, which see
al mysteries now presently, and are brought into heaven it self.

The cleanes of the heavenly ^^tie.
And especially cleanes in Cities is highly commended, if there show or appear
nothing that offends the sight, hearing and smellyng, which is loathsome to
look upon, and to be abhorred. And in private houses the chief praise is, if
all things shine, and stand every thing in order, and lie not scattered and
stink.

Now therefore in the eleventh place he shows, that there shall be nothing in
heaven, that may offend, that is to say, which shall not be pleasant and
delectable most clean and nete, absolute and complete. The same place also
must be referred to the persons. For it follows: save they that are
written in the lambs book of life. We understand therefore, how into the
kingdom of heaven shall not enter whoremongers, Idolaters, liars, deceauers,
and what so ever is unclean, and not purged with the blood of the son of God
through faith. This same the Apostle affirms in the.1. to the Corint. the.5.
and.6. chapt. and to the Ephesians. the.5. chapt. David also demands: Lord who
shall dwell in thy tabernucle, or who shall rest in thy holy hille. And
answers incontinently: he that walks without spotte, and works
righteousness, and that which insueth in the.15. Psalm. Finally here shall be
fulfilled such things as are written in the.23. chapt. of Deuter. Touching
the^ which are prohibited to enter into the church. Wherefore this place has a
secret doctrine and privy admonishment, instructyng us, that if we will, or
covet to be heirs of the everlasting country, we should al apply our selves
whilst we live here in Earth, to rightuousenes and Innocence. For it shall
follow in the.22. chapt. For without are dogs and inchaunters and
whoremongers: etc. The Lord bring us by the way of rightuousenes unto life
everlasting.

He continues yet in describyng the blessed seats. The.xcvi. Sermon.
AND he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal, The.22.
chapt.
proceeding out of the seat of God, and of the Lamb. In the mids of the
street of it, and of either side of the river was there wood of life, which
bare twelve manner of fruictes, and gave fruicte every month: and the leaves of
the wood served to heal the people withal. And there shall be no more curse, but
the seat of God and the lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve
him. And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their foreheades. And
there shall be no night there: and they need no candle, nor light of Sun: for
the lord God gives them light and they shall raygne for evermore.

In the twelfth place is described of John the pleasauntnes, The pleasauntenes
of the city of God.
trymnes, the plentuousenes and abou^dance of food in the City of God. Rivers
make cities pleasant and delectable. Without fountaynes, sprynges and wholesome
waters cities decay, and are scarsely worthy the names of Cities. But in case
they waunte victualles, they are wholly lost. Therefore this our heavenly City
excels, and is most noble in all these things: another has it vitayle only,
but gives the same unto us with great pleasure, and finesse most pleasant.
For trees in this City do not only bear fruicte, but give also a
pleasau^tnes unspeakable and inestimable. The river moreover runs through
the mids of the streets: on the banks of either side are trees most
beautiful to behold, bearing the fruictes of life. And as I have many times in
this description intimated, so I repete now the same again that those things
are not to be understand after the letter as the Millenaries take them. For
the Lord talks with us and even lispeth, to the end we might after the
imbecillitie of our wit conceive these things. If any should wisshe for
earthly things, I wene he could covet no greater things, tha^ be here
described. We shall think therefore, if the Lord could give these earthly
things, if he would, why can he not give greater to the souls of the godly
and bodies glorified? yea the Lord will that being withdrawn from the
contemplation of earthly things, we should look altogether for celestial and
divine, worthy of blessed souls and bodies clarified. Which verily how
great, and what they shall be, no tunge of man can express to us, be it
never so eloquente. For the Lord has prepared greater things for his
servants, than here we can comprehend. Therefore he brings forth here
matter^ most ample, that after a certain manner we mighty conceive heavenly
things much more excellent than they be. Therefore the sense and meaning of
all those things, which are spoken here of the river of life, and wood of
life, by an amplification right excellent, is none other, but that the blessed
in the heavenly country shall be quickened of God, and preserved in that
happy life with high delectation for evermore. And there is no doubt, but ye
S. John has borrowed these things, as he does all the rest, (sins he is the
expositour of the Prophets) out of the Scriptures. And therefore has he
alluded to Paradise, whose description set forth in the second of Genesis,
does with this description of Heaven very well agree. For there springs also
a river in Paradise, which immediately is divided into four heads and
waters the garden of pleasure most pleasauntly. The very paradise of ye
faithful is heaven it self.
In the same Paradise is the wood, that is the tree of life, bryngyng forth
lively fruicte to the eaters: as it is expounded of S. Austen in the.13. book
De ciuitate dei. The.20. chapter. But for the sin of our first parente we
were cast out of that Paradise: and Christ is come, to the end he might
bring us again into Paradise, that is to say into high felicity. Now
therefore that true paradise, prepared for us of Christ, is showed in heaven,
and is here described, into this Paradise entered the Lord after death, and
brought with him into the same also the faithful thief, to whom he said:
verily I say unto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in paradise.
Therefore ought we not here to forge to our selves the gardens of Aleinous in
Earth, or in the air above the globe of the Moon, and reason of Paradise
terrestrial. Our Paradise is celestial, which is prepared for us in heaven:
as S. Paul has said in the third to the Philipp. And Paradise is called a
garden of pleasure, as at this present it is called a golden City or of
preciouse stones, verily by a trope on either side. Hereunto apperteyneth also
a place of Zachary in the.14. chapter. There is also an other place of
Scripture in the.47. chapt. of Ezechiel. Which is this, and translated or
written out by S. John into this place in a manner word for word: by the river
says he, on either side of it shall grow up all manner trees that bear
fruicte, whose leaves shall not fall, nor the fruictes fail, but every month
shall they bring forth new fruictes. For their waters flow out of the
sanctuary, and their fruictes shall be meat, and their leaves medicinable. And
Ezechiel under a figure sees that same blessed life, and happy seats, which
S. John at this present sees, by the showing of the Angel. And either of them
both sees the happy seats after the same sort, and under the like figure.
For there is one only blessedness, common to all the faithful of the whole
world. The Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martirs atchieue all one
felicity. They see the River on either side, and the same runnyng out of the
Sanctuary, or seat of God. They see on either side the river, trees planted
that bring forth the fruictes of life. They bring forth fruictes every month
fresshe and new: and the leaves of either do heal. I suppose the old Poets
borrowed out of the Scriptures such things as they wrote in verses concerning
Ambrosia and Nectar, the meat and drink of the Gods. the meats and drinks
of gods.
That short verse of Martial is known.

Ambrosia is the meat, and Nectar drink of Jove. And Grammarians derive those
vocables of immortality. But our S. John here reasonyng more elegantly and
better of these matters, says, how the Aungel showed him a river, which he
commends unto him by such properties, as water is wont to be commended: of
the pureness, brightness, and clearenes. He adds a parable, which gives light
to that he has said, and says, clear as a crystal. After he adds, that
this river is the river of the water of life, to wit lively water, which
preserves the drinkers thereof in life. Finally he shows also the original
or spring head of this river, deriuyng the same from the seat of God, of the
which seat or Trone I have spoken in the.4. and.5. chapter of this book. And
by all these things is signified nothing else, but that life proceeds of God
alone, which he gives to the^ that serve him in that blessed country pure,
clear, bright, most tried and most perfect, and altogether divine. Touching
the lively springes and fountaynes of waters, we have touched some what in the
end of the.7. chapt. of this book. Mark again, that God and the lamb are so
joined together again, that no man unless he be mad, will deny the son to
be of the same substance with the father.

The vitaile of this city.
Now follows the victual of this divine city. The meat in the country
everlasting, is the tree of life. And it is the Hebrewe phrase the wood of
life, for the tree of life, or lively meat. For there is added bearing
fruicte. And whether you understand that S. John saw one only tree, as also
in paradise was one tree only: or mo, as in Ezechiel, so that by the general
word we may understand the particular kinds of trees, it shall be all one.
The Situation of the tree he shows dilligently, to be set in the mids of
the street of the City, and on either side the river (whereby doubtless is
gathered that there were many trees) to wit on the banks of the river, that
they may suck up lively juice out of the river, which flows from the Trone.
And hereby I suppose is signified, that the heavenly fode is common and free
for all, not locked up, or kept for a few. It is found in the mids of the
street of the city: than does the meat stand open, and is not hid. And it
draws a lively force out of ye river, which springs out of the seat. For
that heavenly life is (...) God, and flows to al his elect. Moreover it is
also declared most dilligently, what manner of fruicte this shall be: the tree
of life says he, The fruic^
does fructify or bring forth fruicte twelve times in the year, so that every
month it bears fruicte fresh and new. The first fruictes to men are
deintie: and they that do commonly abhor old fruicte, had rather have new.
Therefore in that blessed country of ours shall nothing be tediouse,
unpleasant, lothesome, or in any wise to be rejected, but all things shall be
most pleasant, most delicate or deintie, fresh and delectable.

Now also he neglects not the leaves, and, as Ezechiel did, The le^ues.
shows some use of the same. They serve, says he, for a medicine to heal
ye people. Not yt there shall be diseases or sores in yt heavenly country: but
yt the blessed shall have continual and perpetual health. These people he calls
gentiles: not yt the gentiles are yet unclean, but for that they were ones
such, but now being purged by Christ, live hoale and sound for ever more.

And by those allegories has he hitherto figured by parts those blessed
seats, To what end these are written.
prepared for the faithful in that everlasting country, under the Image of a
most noble city: which after he has showed us, he seems as it were to have
opened heaven it self, and set forth the eternal felicity to be seen in a
manner with mortal eyes, and eue^ to have poincted with the fingar, to no other
end, than that we should be strong and constant in the faith of our lord
Jesus Christ: and should never think ones, who has ever seen those blessed
seats, whereunto we are called by the deniyng of all pleasures? what if thou
should despise the pleasures present, and should obtain none in time to
come? This thought is wicked. Faith teaches thee otherwise. But what say
thou more? desire thou to know and see such things as God has showed thee?
Thou have seen enough and abou^dantly at this present. The lord has shows
thee abundantly enough of life and pleasure celestial at this present.
Endeavor now only, that the devil, the world and Antichrist trodden under, thou
may aspire and be lifted up into those heavenly seats. Moreover beware thou
be not more curiouse, than is mete or requisite: and that thou sekest not to
know mo, and more exact things of the heavenly tower, and perpetual joys,
than the Lord himself, which only knows these things, has to thee revealed.
Let this evident demonstration of eternal life suffice us. I believe never none
has disputed better or more rightly, more elegantly and more evidently of the
blessed life, tha^ here S. John has done. Let us therefore repose our selves
in God, let us believe his words, let his revelation suffice us, and let us
desire to be joined with him in this heavenly court, in all felicity and
eternal life most perfect.

A ^ome collected of ye doctrine of the blessed life.
And now S. John recollectyng the chiefest poinctes of this matter, and
concludynge this place of eternal life, he finissheth this everlasting
felicity in seven members: which we will but touch only, for that many
think we have spoken hereof already sufficiently, and plentifully enough. And
to begin with all, there shall be no curse, no execration, no malediction,
another war, nor famine, nor diseases, nor yet any such thing, There shall be
no more curse.
as is recited of Moses emonges the curses in the 27. and.28. of Deuter. Not
that all are accursed, which are subject to the same. For Job and other holy
men, were tormented with sickness: but that commonly the accursed, unbelievers
and wicked are plaged there with. Not that they should be exercised and profit
in godliness, but that they should first be afflicted here, and so by certain
degrees pass unto greater torments. What than?

The seat of God in the city.
The second membre inseweth: but the Trone of God and of the Lamb shall be in
that city. To wit the kingdom of God shall be there, and God shall raygne and
al blessyng, no malediction, in the chosen. Therefore what ioyefull things so
ever the Prophets Christ and the Apostles have spoken of the kingedome of God,
the same shall be in heaven, and the blessed shall have the fruition thereof. And
again are joined together inseperablely the father and the son in the unity
of essence, which nevertheless in the distau^ce of persons are excedingly well
not divided, but discerned. These mysteries of the blessed Trinity are known
unto the faithful.

His servants shall serve him.
Here follows the third membre. Some may marvel, what the blessed shall do in
the world everlasting. Therefore S. John says, and his s^^uauntes, (...),
shall serve him, God I say and the Lamb, they shall worship him in
honoring, praising, and magnifiyng him for ever. Therefore shall they wholly
addicte themselves to godly worshippyng. Which thing shall in deed be to him
great pleasure. As also S. Austen shows in an other place.

Fourthly, they shall see the face of God. They shall see ye face of God.
S. Austen treats much of seeing of God, to Paulina: and warns godly, that
we should not here Imagine to our selves carnal things. Moses in the.33. of
Exodus. And Philippe the Apostle in the.14. of John have accounted it for the
high felicity to see God, as he is, and as it is commonly said, face to
face. And there is undoubtedly in this sight and fruition, high felicity and
joy everlasting and most complete: howebeit in this present world, as the
lord said to Moses, it chances to no man. The holy fathers have in deed
seen God, but by a shape, and so far forth as he has vouchesaued to reveal
and show himself to them to be seen. Like as Tertullian shows in the book
against Praxeas: but with full eye, to see the full glory of God with joy
inestimable, is than first granted us, what time being delivered from
misery, and purged from corruption, we shall also in body be clarified: than at
the last, as S. John said also in the.1. of John the.3. we shall see him as
he is. Job most rightuouse speaking of this vision of God, Job. 19.
said: when they shall have put about or clothed (to wit the father, son,
and holy ghost) this (namely my body) with my flesh: I shall behold God out
of my flesh: whom I shall see to my self, and mine eyes shall look upon,
and no other. The which is my only desire. Of this seeing spoke Paul also the
Doctor of Gentiles, and said: now we see in a glass, 1. Corinthians. 13.
even in a dark speaking: but then shall we see face to face, etc. And of this
vision S. Austen has also disputed in his book De ciuitate dei. about the
end.

Fiftely, they shall have ye name of God in their foreheads: The name of God
written in their foreheades.
either because they shall be the children of God, as we have heard in the
Epistle to the Philadelphians, in the.3. chapter of this book. And verily in
the country celestial it shall be manifestly known to all, who be the
children of God: In this world they are commonly taken for the children of the
devil which in very deed are the children of god. But this shall clearly appear
in an other world, to ye great glory of ye chosen. And verily the brightness of
God shall shine from the foreheades, or countenances of the elect: as in times
past the brightness of the lord shone from the face of Moses and Christ. Or
because al Saints shall know one an other, sins the virtue of God rests in
their countenaunces: which sense I perceive has pleased Primasius. Or for that
they shall be priests before the Lord for evermore: as the prophets have
taught of the chosen. In old time the high priest bare the very name of God
in his forehead in a plate of gold, bounden to his head with a lase.
Undoubtedly in the heavenly country the glory of the children of God shall be
wonderful great, of those chiefly that have confessed the name of Christ in
earth: for these the celestial father shall glorify.

God lightneth the chosen.
In the sixte member is repeted again, which has ones or twice ben spoken
before, that the elect in heaven are illumined with the glory divine, whereof
has been spoken enough before.

In the last and seventh membre comprisyng as it were all things of life and
felicity, and uttering with one word: they shall raygne, They shall reign.
says he, for ever more. The lord Jesus grant to us his faithful, that such
things as we have now heard plentifully of his mouth, we may shortly
experience in our souls and bodies, and may cry with joy, to God the father
most merciful, and to Jesus Christ the redemer most mighty and benign, and to
the holy ghost the most sweet comforter be praise and glory for ever more. Amen.

The conclusion of this work, wherein is established the authority of the
same, and the some collected briefly. The.XCvij. Sermon.
AND he said unto me, these sayings are faithful and true. And the lord God
of the holy prophets sent his Angel to show unto his servants the things
which must be shortly fulfilled. Behold I come shortly. Happy is he that
keeps the saying of the prophecy of this book. I am John which saw these
things, and I heard them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to
worship before the fete of the Angel, which showed me these things. And he
said unto me: see thou do it not. For I am thy fellow servant, and of thy
brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this book.
Worship God.

The sixte and last part of this work conteyneth the conclusion, The
conclusion of this work
which affirms the things which we have heard to be divine, certain, and
undoubted: for he collecteth the chiefest things, and moves al men to faith,
and study of godliness, that in steadfast hope we should look for ye judge of al,
to come shortly, and to judge the quick and the dead. And in goodly order this
last book of the Canonical scripture finisheth the godly narration and
doctrine, with the judgment, and end of all things. The Apocalipse is ye
last book of the canonical books of ye scripture.
For the holy Scripture begins at the first original of al things, and
continues a narration until the end of all things, containing in it self
the universality of things, and al such things as are requisite to be known
of matters nedeful and profitable. And al those things has our good Lord
given us to be known in the holy scripture, that is to say, in the Canonical
books. For they be false harlottes, that say, that al things which apperteyne
to the true and full godliness, and salvation of the faithful, are not set forth
in holy writings, and therefore to have need of traditions. They in deed have
need of those traditions, which will utter their crafty wares: we need none,
which esteem al their wares not worth a gally halfpenny to be bought of any
man. For Esaye has sufficiently diswaded us from their disceauable and crafty
iuglinges, in the.55. chapt. And this conclusion conteyneth about.16.
Articles. Which we shall discuss in order.

Immediately after the beginning is set a grave asseueration, That these
things be true and undoubted.
yt the things which he has said or written hitherto are true, sure,
certain and undoubted, (...) he has in a manner the same sentence also in
the.19. chapt. of this book. And he calls faithful sayings, which are
stable, ratified steadfast and undoubted. And the sentence is referred in the
things which he has spoken of the blessed life to the world to come, leest
we should be left in any doubtfulnes. Again it is referred to the whole
narration of this book. And this sentence seems to be a clause of assertion,
and confirmyng the certentie of the matter propounded: as be those also in the
prophets: for the lord has spoken: and again, thus says the Lord of
hoostes: and that same most used in the gospel, verily verily I say unto you.
And that in the Epistles apostolical, God is my witness, that I lie not. And the
goodness of god does succor our infirmity, whereby many times we doubting of
the verity of Gods words do waver, and confirms our hope with these as it
were ankers. Wherefore these must be dilligently beaten in and urged in the
ecclesiastical doctrine. Aretas expoundyng this place: as the wo^ted manner of
this holy Euangeliste is always, so is it here also. For like as in his
gospel, in token of loyalty he says: and we know that his testimony is true:
so in this place also, setting to his seal, he says, these sayings are
faithful and true. Hitherto he. Therefore shall it be an unworthy thing to
doubt be it never so little of the things that are written in this book, and
in other books of the canonical Scripture.

The Author of this work God of the holy Prophets.
Secondly he repeteth, who is the Author of this work, and all these things
are revealed to him. And verily there is none other Author but the lord God
him self, and that the God of the holy Prophets. The which has a great
efficacitie, for he shows him not only to be one and the same god of both
Testamentes, which by his spirit has inspired the prophets and Apostles:
but also bids us secretly to esteem the verity and certe^tie of this book
of the prophetical matters. For if he could in old time tell his people
before of things to come, and utter al things by the prophets, what marvel
is it, if he now also perform the same by S. John? And if all those things
came to pass, which the prophets did prophecy to come, another did there any
word, no nor one jot fall unto the ground, which was not fulfilled: there is
no man also that will doubt of the verity of this book, if at leest he consider
that the same God which in times past was with the prophets, is now also with
blessed Ihon. The Prophets said, how the land of Chanaan should be delivered
in to the possession of the children of Israel: it was delivered. The self
same prophesied that the people of Israel should for their sins be cast out
again of the same land in to Babylon: they were cast out. After they
prophesied again yt they should be delivered, should repare ye City, to the
which Christ would come, which should redeem mankind, and call into the
fellowship of life and bless, all nations: They were delivered, they repared
their City: Christ came, and redeemed mankind, and the gospel was preached
through out ye whole world. What thing than remains, but that the church
should be turmoiled, Antichrist should come, and reign, and that the true
Christians and he should wage battle together, and the Judge come at the last
unto judgment, and reward every one according to his doings? And this place
proves the divinity of Christ infalliblie. Christ very God.
For what can be spoken more plainly, than was said? The Lord God of holy
Prophets sent forth his Angel. So in the first chapter is said: The
revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him. And a little after he says: I
Jesus sent my Angel, that he might testify unto you, etc. Herein therefore is
showed the unity of the substance divine, and destruction of persons.

And the manner of the revelation is showed, How this book was revealed.
or repeted and collected rather: he sent his Angel. Christ therefore by his
Angel shows all things to S. Ihon. For no man has seen God at any time:
another shall the Lord come down again from heaven before the judgment.
Wherefore this whole vision was exhibited and declared by the Angel, which was
the messager of Christ the Lord. Wherefore all things are properly referred
to Christ which sent the Angel. But to whom ded he show or reveal these
things? To his servant. For the co^temners of God laugh at these things,
and take them for fables. But God loves his worshippers, and warns them of
all things in due season.

3. The some of this book in two poincies.
Now he gathers the some of such things as he has treated hitherto. The same
ar chiefly co^nteyned in two poincts. For he shows hitherto, what thing must
be done ((...)) shor^^. For this book contains the destinies of the church
from the Apostles time to the worlds end. Therefore he prophesied not a far
of, but the things that began in the very time of S. Ihon. And if they must
be done, who shall resist? Not that I will establyshe the necessity of the
Stoyckes, but that I acknowledge the mighty workyng of God, after his
providence and righteousness. After he adds another membre: Behold I come
quickly (...). For this book comprehends many things, which concern the
judgment it self, and the last judgment, to the which I will come so
swiftely, and unlooked for, that the wicked and light men shall look for nothing
less. For the Lord says in the Gospel: it shall be as in the days of Noe
and Loath. And in the hour that you think not, the son of man will come.
Item, as the brightness comes forth of the East, and shyneth in the Weste:
so shall be the coming of the son of man. And therefore the Lord says now
also at this present: Behold I comme quickly. For sodaynely, whyleste he
seems in the mean time to do an other thing, at unawares he brings in the
Lord speaking, and that a matter wonderful, as this particle. Behold
imports. For S. Paul has written also, whileste they shall say peace and
security, sudden destruction shall come upon them.

The commodity of this book.
4. But what profit shall the servants of God look for of this book? In a
short sentence he co^priseth much, and says: happy is he that keeps the
words of the prophecy of this book. Felicity and blessedness, is the fruict
that is taken of this book. In this present world being lincked with Christ,
w^ shall walk in the way of righteousness, and eschew the crafts of
Antichriste: and shall not feel the tourme^tes which arrise in the conscience,
of the corruption of religion depraved. And when we depart hence, we shall go
straight to those blessed seats. This is the high blessedness and felicity.
And let us mark, that it is not enough either to have seen, or heard, or red
this book: it must needs be kept. For we must beware that it goes not in at
one ear, and out the other, that we forget not the things that are told us,
but that we rather frame our whole life after the doctrine of this book. And he
attributed to it the title of prophecy. All the Scripture is called a
prophecy, as much as to say divine: But consyderyng how this book for the
more part thereof shows things to come unto the church, it is rightly called
a prophecy.

5. He repeteth again and beats u^, The writer of this book Ihon which
repeteth his name.
both his name and also that he is a witness that saw and heard, who may
surely be credited. And thus he will get authority to this book. For it must
needs be had in great estimation, that which was conceived and written of the
Apostle and Evangelist S. Ihon. Many account a fault in John, that he so
dilligently expresses his name. But marvel it is, that they observe not the
same also else where, and of others not without praise. Ded not the self same
Ihon repete and inculke the name of a Disciple in the story of the Gospel? who
should reprehend this? I see not therefore what he has offended herein: But
rather sins he foresaw in the spirit, that many would speak against this book,
not without great cause, and with much fruicte, and also of extreme necessity
he importuned his name. And the Apostle S. Paul also to the Galathians:
Behold I Paul say unto you, says he, in ease ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing. The same also, to move affection, inculketh his name
to Philemon. Aretas therefore very aptely expounding this place. And this,
says he, a certain propriety of speech in this Apostolical soul. For even
as he ded in the Gospel also, where he says: And he that saw has borne
witness, and his testimony is true: the same does he in this place also,
testifieng that he was both an hearer and beholder of these things, which are
prophicied. For hereby he wins credit to the things which had been seen. Thus
much he. Others have thought that not without cause, S. Ihon has in this book
repeted his name oftener, than in his story for that men will more hardlye
believe a prophecy speaking of things yet to come, than a story, which tells
of matters paste.

6. In the sixte place he annexeth, why Ihon would worship the Angel again.
what chanced to him again with the Angel, revealing unto him these huge
mysteries. A like story for all the world, had we in the ninetene chapter,
where also we expounded the same: where he that list, may see. And yet the
expositours demand, how chau^ceth it, that again Ihon does the same, that
he did before, and was prohibited of the Angel? Thomas of Aquine weneth that S.
Ihon being besides himself by reason of the excellency of visions, did this
as one astonished: The gloss: before says he, the Angel forbadde, that he
should not worship him with Latria, here he prohibiteth, that he worship
him not with Dulia. But to me appears (preferring always the better judgment
of others) In S. Ihon to be showed to all the godly, how great is the frailnes
of man to fall, unless he be restrained and drawn back by the mighty hand
of God. The Angel had showed Ihon expressly before, that he should not do,
that he than did, and now repeteth it again. For having as it were forgotten
those things, by reason of the excellency of the Angel, he would surely have
done him some worship. For so we permit to our selves more than is dece^t,
especially toward nobler personages, whom for thexcelle^t gyfts of God we
esteem worthy, whom we may also without the offense of God even worship. That
opinion deceaueth in our time ye most part of them, which against the comlines
of sincere religion worship and honor Saints. But the Angel of the Lord here
another forgeth nor brings forth any new doctrine, but that old in form,
as they term it, to the intent we should understand, that the will of God is
always one and perpetual, which will not have the most excellent creatures to
be worshipped, but one God alone to be honored. He repeteth therefore the same
causes, which he also objected before. Therefore be they always of force, with
all, and at al times. S. Ihon in the mean time seems, that he would commend
unto us the excellency of this vision or revelation: and that the Angel did
admonish him co^stantlie of his duty, and us al by him, that the thing which
is proper to God, we should transpose to no creatures, and it deserves
exceeding great praise here, that S. Ihon here discembleth nothing: but by
express words commits to writing his fall, and rebukyng of the Angel
most evidently. For by his fall he would admonish, that the godly should not
fall in like cases, but give all glory to God. Here seems also to be observed,
a maruelouse affection in the manner of speaking. For the Angel cries out to
Ihon being ready to fall down now, yea prostrate already, and now about to
worwip, (...): See thou do it not, that thou verily intendest to do. Here is
expressed the carefulnes of mind, and haste, wherewith he goes about to prevent
the enterprise of Ihon. And thus diligent are the Holy spirirites in heaven in
letttyng al things, that by any means do turn us from God, to ye worshipping
of creatures, much less would they themselves be worshipped, or to have ye
things attributed to them, which the Papists at this day attribute by force of
Arms. The Lord of clemency and mercy convert them to a right mind, that
they may attribute al glory to God. Ame^.

S. John is commanded not to seal this book, but to publishe it, having
respect to no man. The.XCviij. Sermon.
AND he said unto me: seal not the sayenges of the prophecy of this book. For
the time is at hand. He that does evil, let him do evil still: and he which
is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is rightuouse, let him be
more rightuouse: and he that is holy, let him be more holy.

7 The seventh place that is treated in this conclusion, forbids John, that
he seal not the book written, Seal not the book.
(...), says the Angel, seal it not. And certainly letters and books are
wont to be sealed, either for credit and confirmatio^s sake, or else that they
should not be openly red of al men: but those only, to whom they are assigned.
An Angel says to Daniel in the.12. chapt. And thou Daniel close the words,
and seal the book until the last time. He is commanded to shut his book,
that is to say, to make an end, another to look for any more revelation:
finally he is commanded to shut it for the ungodly, unto whom assuredly this
book shall seem dark and closed. For it follows: for many shall err, and
knowledge shall be manifold. For they that are not ruled by the certain and
sure word of God, have nothing at al certainly tried and known, but wander
through manifold or sundry and uncertain opinions, judgments, and
traditions of men. For Daniel says, that knowledge shall be variable: yt is to
say, there shall be innumerable opinions and sects of the religion and serving
of god: where nevertheless there is but one only true opinion, doctrine,
faith or religion, the fame I say, which Daniel set forth in his book, which
book also he sealed: that is to say, confirmed it as it were with godly
seals, as authentical, or authorized, and which was worthy to be credited:
howebeit at this present S. John is not commanded in the same sense and
meaning not to seal his book, which we know to be altogether autenticall: This
book should be open for all men.
but such a thing as this is the Angel means, co^ceale or cover not, and hide
not this book: whom God therefore would have to be written, that it might be a
public doctrine in the whole world whereby al men might be instructed in the
things that are revealed from heaven, that they be not through the crafts and
tyranny of Antichrist withdrawn from the kingdom of Christ, unto the kingdom
of Antichrist: for God would that al these things should to all men be most
common and manifestly known. And this sense has Aretas opened also, saying:
Seal them not, says he, that is, keep them not sealed to thy self, but
publishe them to all. The reason is annexed: for the time is at hand, wherein
verily these things which I have said, shall come to pass. Wherefore the
faithful had need of warnyng, co^firmyng and comfort. Considering therefore
that this book is set forth, that it might admonish, strengthen, and comfort
the faithful, the same ought not to be shut but wide open. For this is the
good will of God, that this his word should be preached in his church to the
profit of al faithful. Let them look therefore, what they do, which would
have this book not only shut up, but clean taken away: another think it
can be understand as obscure and full of dark speakynges. But to God be
praise and thanks geuyng, which has vouchsaued to provide for us faithfully
and in time by this most profitable and most necessary book.

These things must be beaten in both to the hearers and to such as will not
hear.
8 The eight place of this conclusion seems to treat of a certain prevention.
For some man here might say: thou will have this book to be open, and come
unto al men of al states, sex and ages: but there shall be some, which will
utterly contemn the same. In vain therefore shall it be preached, in vain
shall we urge these writings, with them especially, which shall deride the
same, and expound them this way or that way at their pleasure. But he seems
to prevent this, and say: doubtless there shall be vnrightuouse innumerable,
which shall proceed unbridled in their iniquities, and shall more and more
excede and pass themselves: but yet there shall be also rightuouse, which
perseueryng in all rightuousenes, shall increase in holy virtues, and herein also
shall surmounte themselves: wherefore spare not thou to utter to the^ al, such
things as in this book I have commanded thee, being nothing careful for the
success thereof: let me alone with that: execute thou thoffice of preaching. I
will bring to pass, that thy faithful preaching shall not be vain. And let
them alone, if thou see certain that will be altogether filthy, and perish in
their filthiness, seeing they contemn al thy faithful labor. For thou haste
done thy duty, and art blameles: and they perish through their own fault.
Wherefore I will another have thee, nor yet no other to be over careful, what time
you see many, contemnyng the puretie of Gods word, had rather wallowe in
filthiness. And we read else where also, Math. 24. 2. Corin. 2.
that the Gospel is preached to many for their condemnation, and the savor of
the gospel to be sweet unto some unto salvation: and to others an intolerable
ste^che unto perdition. A like place in a manner is in the.2. chapt. of
Ezechiel, where we read that the Lord said to the Prophet: thou son of
man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to a people rebelliouse, which
have rebelled against me, they and their fathers have dealte traytorously with
me until this day. They be children of an hard favor, and of a froward
heart. I send thee unto them, and thou shall tell them: thus says the Lord
God, whether they will hear, or not hear: for it is a rebelliouse house, that
they may know yet, how there has been a Prophet emongs them. And thou son
of man fear the^ not, another be thou affraide of their words: for they be
contentiouse and prickyng like thorns, and thy dwelling is with Scorpions. But
therefore shall thou not be affrayde of the^, thou shall speak my words unto
them, whether they will hear them, or no.

Howbeit we must here take heed, God commands not that the wicked should
walk still in their wickedness
that we understand not that God commands, that the ungodly should proceed
to be more ungodly, where thangel says: he yt is vnrightuouse, let him be
vnrightuouse still, etc. For it seems in manner to be such a saying, as that
same is in the gospel: that thou do, do it more spedely. For he
commands him to do, that thing which he knew he would do. After the same
sort here also, that he knew the wicked would do, he says they shall do:
another wills he that their doings should trouble John, and the faithful
preacher, seeing there shall be also many good, which shall also apply
themselves unto rightuousenes. We are wont also to say with a much like
phrase: if it will no otherwise be, we must be content. Not that we bid him
that perissheth, to perish: but that so we reproach to him his madness, and
signify that he perissheth through his own fault, willingly and wittingly.
Aretas: It is no exhortation says he, but rather a rebukyng of every one,
unto the which study he applies him self. And Thomas of Aquine: The sense
is, says he, he that hurts, let him hurt still. That is he will hurt, by
doing other euilles: that the Angel be understand to have said these things
in propheciyng, not in wisshing, etc. And so the meaning were: the wicked
conte^ning the prophecy, shall continewe to be wicked, the godly again shall
grow in the holy study of righteousness. Which sense truly seems most
playnest of al. Another differ they much from these, that are red in the.12. of
Daniel by these words: go Daniel says the Angel, and search not over
curiousely the instaunt of the last time: for the sayings are closed and
sealed, until the last time. Very many shall be purified and made white and
cast new. But the wicked shall do wickedly and al ungodly shall not
understand. But the learned shall teach. From these things swerve nothing at
all the words of the Apostle, ^. Timo. 3.
speaking and propheciyng of the later times: all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution for righteousness. Notwithstanding evil
men, and deceauers grow worse and worse, whilst they both lead others into
error, and err themselves. Therefore seeing the later age of this world shall
be such, let us, which are called to this function, proceed constantly to
auaunce, set forth and beat in, the very word of God, and revelation of Jesus
Christ unto al men, regardyng nothing, what the world and worldly men speak
against it.

And full elegantly he sets two sorts of men against two others, the
vnrightuouse against the rightuouse, The vnrightuous^ and filthy are set
against the righteuous and holy.
and filthy to holy, (...), says he, he that does evil, let him do evil:
or he that is unrighteous, let him be unrighteous: or he that hurts by
persecuti^g ye godly, (...) let him hurt still, or furthermore. Against this he
sets: he yt is rightuous, let him be more rightuous, let him proceed
further, and grow more and more in all godliness, and go beyo^de himself in
righteousness, both of faith and works. For by rightuousenes of faith we are
justified: by the righteousness of works, we are declared to be rightuouse. And
they that be rightuouse, not only hurt no man but also profit and do good to
al. Contrariwise the unrighteous, which waunt true faith, wau^t light: and
walk therefore in darkness, and do the works of darkness: persecuting both
the rightuouse, and righteousness, and molestyng al me^. And that there should
be such men in the later days, the lord has also prophesied in the.24. chap.
of the gospel after Matthewe.

An other kind of men, is of unclean, polluted, filthy and vile, (...), etc.
He that is filthy, says he, let him be filthy stille. And the
interpretours of the Greek tunge admonisshe that (...), is that filthiness,
which we gather with our nails ends. And he signified unclean persons in
body and soul, Idolaters, fornicatours, gluttons, and such like. Against
whom he has placed, the holy, pure, and clean: that is to say purified by
faith, and appliyng themselves busily to sanctification. Therefore like as the
filthy do more and more wallowe themselves in the mire, and array and defile
themselves to vilely: so the godly do more and more apply themselves daily to
cleanes and holiness of life. The lord Jesus justify and sanctify us for
evermore.

He gathers such things as he has taught of the last Judgment, and of
the rewards of the godly, and of the torments of the wicked. The.xcix. Sermon.
AND behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his deeds shall be. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end:
the first and the last. Blessed are they that keep his commandments, that
their power may be in the tree of life. And may enter in through the gates
into the city. For without shall be dogs and inchaunters, and whoremongers,
and murderers, and idolaters, and who so euerloueth and makes lesinges.

A brefe rehearsal of ye last judgment, and of rewards and torments.
9 The ninth place of this conclusion, is of the coming of the lord unto
judgment, and of the reward prepared for the good, and appoincted tourmentes
for the impenitent and wicked for he collecteth at this present, that he
treated more dilligently and more at large in the.19. and.20. chapt. and other
places of this book. And this place before all others he inculketh and urges
most ernestly. For it is of great importance, if we both understand it
rightly, and ponder it very often in our minds. For we shall the less
licenciously sin, but shall watch more dilligently.

The lord Christ comes shortly.
And in this conclusion of S. John the persons are often changed. For now
speaks John him self, and inco^tinently he brings in the Lord speaking. As
at this present verily he makes the lord Christ himself to speak, and say:
behold^ I come quickly. For the word pronounced out of Christ's mouth is of
more authority, and has more credit with all, than that the Apostle speaks:
and in saying that he will come shortly, he would stire up all men to watch,
repent, and pray. For in the Gospel he said: watch, for you know another the
day nor the hour. Your Lord will come at an hour, when you think leest. He
fears therefore the slougthful and unclean persons, which comfort
themselves, that the Lord shall not come at al, and if he come, that yet it
shall be long first, and perauenture never. Against whom he pleadyng, says
how he will come quickly. Against the same also reasoned Malachie in the.3.
and.4. chapt. And S. Peter in the.2. the.3. chapt. Moreover in affirmyng that
he will come shortly, he comfort the godly tempted and tossed diuersely in
this world. For the godly some times cry also, that the Lord differreth his
coming over long, that he is to benign to his enemies. Wherefore he says,
yt he will now come sone enough, that is to say in dew time: that he may both
deliver his servants, and distroye and rote out his enemies and conte^ners.

For it follows, what a one, how, and to what end he will come: he will come
gloriouse with great majesty and power to deliver and save the faithful, and
condemn the ungodly, for he says, and my reward with me. Which words seem
to be taken out of the.40. chapt. of Esaye. And signify, And my reward with me.
that God is furnished abundantly with all implementes, wherewith it behooves a
rewarder and revenger to be furnisshed with. Therefore he says, the reward
which I shall give to every one, after his doings, I have presently with me,
and that ready, and plentiful. For our king and Judge wants not power and
treasure: as many times the Kings of this world, either can not pay their
Soldiers wages, as they ought, or have it not ready, and differ the payement a
long time. But this our Captain: and my reward, says he, is with me. And
immediately expoundyng himself, he says: that he will reward every one
according as his doing shall be. For so the Apostle also in the.2. to the
Corinth. 5. says, how we must al appear before the judgment seat of Christ;
that every one may receive such things as are done by the body, according as
he has done, whether it be good or evil. For in the.16. chapt. of the gospel
of S. Matthew. the lord said like^ise, that the ti^^ ^ould come, that the son
of man should come in the glory of his father, with his Angels, and then
shall he render to every one after his doings. The same is taught of the
Apostle in the.2. chapt. to the Romans.

And to the intent no man should doubt, I am ^. and O.
but that our judge can accomplisshe in deed, that in words he said he would
do, namely to render to every man after his doings, he adioyneth, and says,
I am Alpha and Omega; the beginning and the end, etc. By the which words he
signifies, that he is very God, eternal, and almighty. The sentence is taken
out of the.43. and.45. chapt. of Esaye. And is expounded before. These things
teach us, that Jesus Christ is very God, and therefore the rewarder of al,
most bountiful and most rightuouse.

Rewards prepared for ye godly
Conseque^tely again, expressly, more plainly, and by a pertition, S. John
with his words declares, what, and to whom the Lord will give. And first
in deed he treats of reward prepared for the good, after of punnishemente
appoincted for the evil by the just judgment of God. And reward is paid, or
given rather, as S. Paul says, to them that keep his commandments, namely
Christ's. For not they that read, or hear the commandments of God, or
boaste and preach them are blessed: ^. John. 3.
but they that keep, and perform them in deed. For so has our Lord and
savior Christ taught us in the Gospel after Matthewe the.7. chapt. and Luke.
the.11. And his commandments are those that are expounded in the ten
precepts, or in the gospel restreyned to the love of God and our neighbor,
or the which are named of S. John thapostle faith and love. It behooves us
therefore to be religious, in case we look to receive a reward of God. And what
is the reward that is given of the judge to the godly worshippers of God? That
is taken three manner of ways. For first they are called happy and blessed.
Secondely they shall have power over the wood of life, that is to say the
fruictes of the tree of life shall be in their power: that is to wit, they shall
live an eternal life with Christ, as before is declared. For he alludeth to the
fourmer things. Last: they shall enter in, says he, by the gates into the
city (to wit before also described) into the country everlasting.

After this he touches, or collecte^h ^ls^ the punnishme^tes appoincted for
the wicked: Without dogs.
and verily in one word compriseth al together, whilst he says, without.
For by this only vocable he excludes the wicked out of the heavenly country,
and includes or incloseth them in hell, and hell torments unspeakable,
endless and innumerable. And S. John here follows the lord in the gospel
saying: Matthew. 8.
I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and from the Weste, and
shall rest with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven: and the
children of the kingedome shall be cast out into the outward darkness, there
shall be weyyng and gnasshyng of teth. Matthew. 25.
So likewise in the parable of the ten virgins, the gate is said to be shut,
and the folisshe virgins shut out of the joys celestial. Even the^e he
commands the unprofitable servant to be cast out into the outward
darkness. Likewise in the.13. of Luke, the Lord says, how the unbelievers
shall be expulsed out.

And who be they I beseech thee, What holy scripture of dogs.
which in that last judgment shall be cast out? Dogs, and the residewe
which are recited in the register of the condemned. The vocable of Dogs is not
always taken in the holy Scriptures in the evil part, but yet for the most
part. Abner the Prince of king Saulles wars: am I the head of a Dog,
says he, to Isboseth, which defend the house of Saull against Judah?
Signifiyng that he had incurred the displeasure of the tribe of Judah, for that
he had retained ten tribes yet in their duty, and under the dominion of the
house of king Saul. Else where, as in the.15. of Matthewe the gentiles, or
heythen, or estraunged from the people of God seem to be called Dogs. As some
at this day call the Turks, namyng them Turkish do good: that is to say
turkish infidelles. Now also the prophet Esaye calls the false Prophets
dogs, shameless, ravening, insatiable, not able to bark and defend the
lords Shepef^lde, or else unwilling and slepie. After the same signification the
Apostle says to the Philippians: beware of dogs, beware of evil workers,
etc. Moreover in the holy Scriptures are called dogs angry men, fierce,
cruel, contemners of godly things, barkers at the truth, sclaunderers and
persecuters thereof, and blasphemers. For in the.22. Psalm. David a figure of
Christ the lord cries: Dogs have inuironned me round about, the counsel
of the malignaunt has compassed me. Whom he now calls Dogs, by and by he
names malignaunt. And when Semei cursed David, Abisai the son of Zaruia
says: why does this dog that shall die curse my Lord the king? Math. 27.
And the lord in the Gospel forbids to cast that is holy to dogs, or
pearls to Swine. Finally they are called dogs, these filthy men, unclean;
without repentance, wallowyng themselves in the dungehill of sin and
wickedness.

For S. Peter calls such dogs retournyng to their vomit. And the lord
prohibiteth, 2. Peter. 2.
that no man bring the price of a strompet or dog into the Temple. For even
therefore the Iewishe Priests refused the price of blood offered of Judas.
Therefore under the name of dogs we understand heythen or infidelles, false
Prophets or deceauers, cruel men, blasphemers, persecuters of the verity,
cursed speakers, contemners of the truth, unclean and filthy, etc.

And as for the members that follow, have been expounded before, to wit in
the.9. chapt. and about the beginning and in the end of the.21. He loves and
makes lesinges.
chapt. To a lie he adds here, he that loves and makes. For many make them
not openly, but they love, favor and auaunce them. Many both love and make
them. They love a lesyng chiefly, which mainteyne liyng learning, and
delighte therein. But hereof most purposely Primasius Bishop of Vtica: to
all these things, says he, must be given not diligence of expou^ding, but
carefulnes of avoiding the evils. The lord Jesus save us from al evil. Ame^.

Christ is showed again to be Author of this book, how great he is here.
Here is also declared the desire of the church, wisshyng for the coming of
Christ, and the liberal promise of the Lord. The.C. Sermon.
I Jesus sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the
co^gregations. I am the rote and generation of David, and the bright morning
Star. And the spirit and the bryde said, come. And let him that hears
say also, come. And let him that is a thirste, come. And let who so ever will,
take of the water of life, free.

The Author of this book Christ.
The tenth place of this conclusion shows again the author of this work to
be Jesus Christ, which is brought in here of S. John speaking, to the intent
the thing that is spoken may have the more authority, and credit be given
more easily of the Auditors to the whole work. Wherefore nothing is to be
ascribed to S. John, but the writing of ye work, that is to wit, that he first
saw al these things, indicted and committed them to writing. And the manner also
of the revelation is repeted. Christ himself came not down into the earth, or
into these lower parts, but sent forth his Angel, which from Christ, and in
Christ's name opened and showed these things to S. John. The end also of the
Angels sendyng or revelation is specified, that he should testify these
things in congregations, and to you all that are in the world, unto the end of
the world. And we learn of those few words that credit must be given to
this book, as that which is propounded of the very son of God by his Angel
and Apostle, and that in deed propounded to all that are in the church. Again
that Jesus Christ is very God, the lord of Angels: as S. Paul also affirms
in the.1. chap. to the Hebrews. Christ very God.
Of the which thing is spoken also before. And these most clear testimonies of
the scripture ought to move the faithful more, tha^ all the dotages of Seruetus
the Spaniarde, and Seruetanes playing the Arrians and Jews. Let us observe
moreover, that Christ sent his Angel, not to Judge or to teach: but (...),
The holy writings are Authe^ticall.
that is to testify. Testimonies lawefully taken, or committed to writing and
sealed, it is not lawefull to speak against. For they are altogether taken for
Authentical. But all this book was written by S. John, and is a witness or the
testimony of the Angel of God. Therefore is it unlawful to doubt any thing
thereof. And also ought to have the same opinion of all other books of the
old and new Testamente. For the Prophets and Apostles are called the
witnesses of God: and the Gospel, and doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles,
the witness or testimony. He is mad, that thinks not the Canonical
Scripture to be of it self Authentical, unless it be first made authentical
by the approbation of the church and Counselles. Moreover we understand that
the doctrine of this whole book belongs not only to the seven churches of
Asia, but to all dispersed through out the whole world: and therefore to
apperteyne chiefly and singularly unto us, which live at this day at Zuricke
or in Swycerlande, England, France or Germany. Aretas Bisshoppe of Cesaria:
that he should testify, says he, that is to say, that ^e should proteste
not privily, nor obscurely, but in the audience of all Churches, dispersed in
all the world, that no man pretendynge wilful ignorance, should remain
uncorrected.

And incontinently the Lord him self also shows and declares, Christ is
the root and stock of David.
who, and how great he is, and what we faithful have laid up in store in
him. And he uses again parables and allusions for the more perspicuitie: And
first he calls him self the root and generation of David, that is to say
a true and natural man. For we heard before that he was very and natural
God. And he cutteth of from al Heretics deniyng and impugnyng the true
flesh of Christ, all Senewes: most strongely prouyng, that he after the
flesh is of our own nature. Whereof he is called also in the Scripture the
fruicte of the womb of David, and he that is risen of his loins. Moreover it
is said to the Dauidicates virgin and mother of God: thou shalt conceive in
thy womb and bring forth a son. Therefore he calls him self also both the
root and generation of David. And the phrase of speech is to be marked. For
the like is red in the.16. of Ezechiel. Thy root and thy generation is of the
land of Chanaan: that is to say, thy birth is of the Chananites, or thy of
spring is of people polluted, yet seems here nevertheless also an other
certain thing to be signified. For the rote bears a tree, and nurrisheth or
quickens the same. The root is not borne or nurrisshed of the tree: and
Christ the Lord is the foundation, and preservation of the house of David, and
Church of the faithful. That David is preserved, that the ofspryng of David
is not rooted out, which often times has deserved to be, it is done in
respect or merit of Christ the Lord: Christ has saved them, the same
saves also, so many as are saved, as he that is of all the promesses made unto
David the head, virtue add some and even perfection, as in whom is perfect
salvation, and all fulness, as the clear testimonies of the Prophet Esaye bear
witness in the.7. and.37. cha. and else where, also in the 3. of Osee, 34. and.
37. of Ezechiel. And not a much unlike place is in the.3. book of Kings.
the.15. chap. John also the.1. Christ is ye bright morning star
chap. of this book named Christ the rote of David. etc.

Again the Lord calls him self a Star, and that not obscure, but
shynynge and brighte, and even the morning Star. When he called him self a
Star, he had respect to the most ancient Oracle of Balaam that most wise
Prophet in the East. He prophesied that a Star should arryse out of Israel,
that is to say a celestial star, and even the very son of God should be
borne of a woman. And that the same star did arrise the magiciens, being also
of the East, testify in the.2. chap. of S. Matthew. And it is called bright,
because Christ is the light, illumining all men that come in to the world. Of
the which matter the same S. Ihon has treated much in the first, eight, and
nynth chapt. of his Evangelical story. The same our Lord is also the morning
star, so called of S. Peter, 2. Pet. 1. And of this our S. Ihon in the.2.
chapt. of the Apoca. For like as Lucifer arrising, draws the day star
after him: so Christ shyning in the hearts of the faithful, does lighten them
more and more in this present world also, and in the life to come does cloth
them whole with the light celestial. Thomas of Aquine expounding this place:
the morninge Star, says he, is to wit the messager of the day, that is
the everlasting felicity through his resurrection. And these things have we
heard hitherto of the mouth of Christ, concerning Christ, who and how great
he is, and what treasures we have laid up in store in him. He is very God and
man, was incarnate for us, that he might be our root, virtue, life, light, and
salvation. Therefore have we reposed in him, all fulness of Salvation. And so we
see again, that this book is written with the Apostolical spirit, which
spirit verily so often as occasion serves, reasons excellently of Christ,
and preaches his salvation, and commends the faith in him, unto all the
faithful. The same spirit therefore has inspyred either book both of the
Gospel, and Apocalipse of Saint Ihon, and caused them to be written of the
same Author.

11. In the eleventh place is brought in speaking the church, The desire of ye
church for the coming of Christ.
wyshing the coming of Christ unto judgment. For sins our Lord Jesus
Christ is so good, so benign and wholesome, whom all this book has promised
to come, and to deliver the church of Saints afflicted in this world, now
is resited the desire of the same his church, wyshing and calling the Lord,
saying, come. For anon we shall hear the Lord promising, and saying, be it I
come quickly: And the church again reporting Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus.
And that the spirit within our body cries busily to the Lord for our
deliuerau^ce and glorifieng, the Apostle mentions much in the.8. to the
Romans. Notwithstanding that by the spirit may be understand every spiritual
man also. And therefore Aretas, he names them spirit, says he, which are
accounted worthy of the spiritual marriage: And the bryde, the church it
self. Thus says he. Of the bryde we have spoken many times in this work, so
that we need not to be tediouse in repeting the same. How be it with a
wonderful desire all the godly covet that the Lord would come unto judgment:
To the wicked that day is terrible and abhorred, to the godly most joyful
and wysshed for. For the godly perceive that they shall ones be delivered from
all euylles, and plentifully rewarded with all good things, that the glory and
verity of God shall be auaunced and established, that all ungodliness shall be
abolished, and the wicked by the just judgment of God tormented. Whereupon S.
Peter in the.3. chapt. of the Acts, calls this day the restoring and
perfourming of all such things as God has at any time spoken by the mouth of
his Prophets. In that same day therefore shall all the promesses of God even of
the greateste matters, be fulfilled througely. Therefore says the Lord in the
gospel: lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nere. They that
mourn and are desperate like, cast down their heads: The Lord bids us
lift up our heads, to be cherefull and of good hope. For we shall certainly be
delivered and glorified, which have been in the world a laughing stock, and had
in derisio^ of all men. Therefore must the places be expounded fyguratiuely,
which pourport the exceeding great lamentation and howling that shall be in that
day. For the wicked for anguyshe and pain and utter desperation shall cry
out, and tear themselves: The godly shall rejoice in him, whom they see
coming, showing the wounds wherewith they are redeemed. Like as therefore the
desire of Saints was greateste, when the first coming of our savior
approached nere, as in Symeon alone appears, Luke the second, right so at the
second coming of Christ unto judgment, all Saints with vncessable voices
shall cry, and continually do cry, come Lord Jesus, come and deliver us, come
and maynetayne thy glory and church, almost brought to naught: come our
redemer and Savior so wished and looked for, dispatch us from euilles, grant
us the good things promised, etc.

Wherefore the things that follow, Come.
may be referred either to the church or to S. Ihon, that either the church or
S. Ihon should say: And let him that hears say, come. Aretas expou^ding this
place briefly and well: by these words he insinuates them, says he, which are not yet assu^pted to the flock, yet ready to hear godly matters, and give
their diligence to know the Lord. So much he. And doubtelesse the desire of
the godly is so great, that they covet that all creatures should pray the
Lord to come unto judgment: as many times we se in the Psalms, the godly to
exhort the Sun and Moon and all creatures, to praise and speak well of the
Lord.

12. The.12. place of the conclusion, contains a most large promise and
comfort of Christ. And le^ him that is a thyrste, come.
For he promises again frankelie. As though he should say: I know what
things the faithful shall suffer under Antichrist, what also and how great
craft the same shall practice. All things will he sell for money, Heaven and
Earth, and those things also which are not in his power: And he shall deceive
many, and shall spoil many: And all the godly shall he vex and oppress with
greuouse persecution. Therefore if I tarry long, and come not incontinently, in
as much as the wisshes of Saints covet the same, you that love and believe in
me, flee Antichriste, give not your selves to be spoiled of him: look ye for
me, have recourse unto me. He that is a thirst, that is, he that desires an
heavenly gift, or he that is in angwysh or tourmented with cares, and sundry
euilles, let him come to me, to me I say let him come: I shall fill him with
good things, deliver from evil, and will comfort him, and strengthen him
with my spirit, in all manner dangers, that he may patiently bear and overcome
all euylles. And he seems to have borrowed these wholesome words and most full
of consolation, of the doctrine of Esaye, which is in the.55. chapter, and in
the seventh chap. of Ihon. Hereof are spoken certain things about the
beginning of the.21. chapt. Where we re^de ^he Lord to have said: And to him
that is a thirste will I give of the well of the water of life freely.

And he that will.
But where he says: and he that will: he means not, as many mistake him,
that it stands in our will, that we may be saved. For we know that the
Apostle has said: it is not in the will, nor in the running, but in the
mercy of God. The Lord of his own good will saves us: yet not withstanding he
saves not the unwilling, but the willing. But he gives us that we may will:
according to that saying of thapostle, it is God that works in us both to
will and to accomplish. Primasius: by no good gifts, says he, going before
he receives the water of life freely. For what haste thou, says the Apostle,
that thou haste not received? Therefore have we received of God freely the will
of coming also: unto whom we gave nothing first, that we should be: much
less that we should of sinners be made rightuouse. Thus says he. Not
withstandyng it might seem to be such a manner of speaking as is emonges the
Germans: which is I make it free for all to come: I do clearly exclude no man,
I bid al come: so, and he that will: that is to say, come al, and receive
water, etc. To the lord be glory.

Punnishment is decreed to the corrupters of this book. The lord says, that
he will certainly come to Judgment. The church wissheth for his coming. The.Cj.
Sermon.
I Testify unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this
book: if any manne shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him ye
plages that are written in this book. And if any man shall minish of the words
of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of
life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this
book. He which testifies these things, says, be it. I come quickly: Amen.
Eue^ so come lord Jesus. The grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you al.
Amen.

13. In the.13. A penalty for the contemners and corrupters of this book.
part of this conclusion is decreed a pain for the contemners of this book,
but especially for counterfetter or forgers, which (as D. Bibliander has said
full well and godly) dare attempt to corrupt or falsefie this godly
instrument, and holy charter of thempire and Bisshopricke of Christ, by addyng
any thing or taking away, or alteryng the true meaning and sense thereof.
This place is taken out of the common usage of men. For Princes are wont in
the end of their writings to establishe the same against deprauers by
menacinges and threatenings. Antichrist, the Ape of our lord Christ, about the
end of his Bulls adds: if any man shall rasshely presume to go against this
our commandment, or malapertly to infringe the same, let him know that he
shall incur the indignation of Almighty God and the blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul, and our high displeasure. And likewise in keeping of treasures and
public things, where danger is feared, they set on writings and sealyng
with wax. For the which cause verily where the Lord was not ignorant that
there would be some which would seek to oppress and abolish this book, he
sends it well Armed to all posterities. We read in old Authors, that certain
heretics in the beginning of the church took very much upon them in
corruptyng of the scriptures: yea and that some of them to have rejected whole
books of the holy Scripture. And Tertullian imputes the same unto Marcion,
which also depraved holy books. Howebeit through the goodness of God it came to
pass, that we have nevertheless received the holy books whole and
uncorrupted. Which thing S. Hierome shows plainly in his commentaries upon
Esaye the.3. book. And Erasmus of Roterodam in the Apology of the new
Testament, and also in his Apology against James Latomus. etc.

Howebeit the Lord at this present does no new thing, Nothing to bradde^^
nothing to be minisshed.
whilst he commands that nothing should be added, or taken away. For ones
or twice he commanded by Moses: Thou shall add nothing to my word, another
take from it any thing. And Solomon in the.30. of the Proverbs, commands
the same. But many marvel, and find fault, that he has threatened so many
plages to the corrupters. Why than do not the same me^ blame and reprove in S.
Paul, that he has in one word comprised as many plagues and displeasures, as
S. Ihon has here recited, where he said unto the Galath. Although I, or an
Angel from heaven shall preach unto you a gospel, other than this that we have
preached unto you, let him be an outcaste, or accursed. And the same words
again he doubleth and repeteth. Wherefore if they grant that Paul has
herein so little offended, that he has deserved praise also: let them leave
blamyng of those things, which are here most pourposely placed of our lord
Jesus Christ him self by S. Ihon in their place and time dew. Verily Anathema
(which word S. Paul used) is he, that is cut of from the fellowship of al
good men, deuoued to extreme punnishement, and even subject to all the euilles
both of this present life and the life to come. Which thing may be gathered
of Deuteronomie and other holy books.

Who add and who take ^waye.
And he adds and takes away, not which uses other diverse, and playner
words in expoundyng a sentence of the revelation: but he that puts in any
thing contrary to the true sense, and variyng from those things which are
here of the lord expressed: or he that takes away any thing, obscureth or
peruerteth, which here the lord himself has expresely signified. Whereupon
Thomas of Aquine: he adds to says he, which puts to a lie: he
minissheth, which takes away any thing of that which is written therein, or
also in deniyng gain says the same. Thus much he. Therefore this addition
and substraction, consists not in words only but rather in sense. For another
the prophets in expoundynge the law at large, are thought to have added any
thing to God his word: another the Apostles preaching the liberty of the
gospel, are said to have taken any thing away from the law.

And to testify, To testify.
is under the religion of a testimony to affirm any certain thing, or with a
protestation to urge and beat in any thing ernestly, and eue^ as it were to
bind the hearer, that he should certainly know that these things that are
spoken do ha^ge over him, and that God will plage, unless he do obey.

Concerning the pains or plages, which he threateneth at this present, is
spoken in the.15. 16. 17. and.18. chap. etc. Likewise is declared before that
might be here spoken of the book of life, and of the holy city. Moreover he
co^prehendeth here also all good things in like manner, which are promised in
this book to the godly and obedient servants of God, of all the which
things, the contemner, falsifier and corrupter of this book shall be deprived.
With how great euilles and dangers than do they entangle themselves, which
would have this book utterly suppressed, and let, that it should not be
expounded openly, and come in to the hands of al me^? again it is most
certain, that they shall obtain of God all manner of blessing, so many as have
a good opinion, and think deuoutely of this book, and will set forth and
commend unto al men the things that are written in the same to the glory of
God, and salvation of the faithful.

14. In the fouretenth place is sealed, Thus says he that testifies these
things.
and even signed as it were with a subscription, the authority of this book.
For it follows, he says that bears witness of these things: or he that
testifies these things. For in manner all the expositours suppose those to be
Christ's words, as though he him self, for a confirmation had put to the
same, and said: I Jesus have propounded al these things, and especially such
as concern the threatenynges against the corrupter, as a true witness, and the
same to be undoubted. For Aquinas: here says he, is brought in Christ,
affirmyng the foresaid menacyng, and approving al things that are written in
this book. But I for my part, reseruyng the judgments of others safe,
suppose this to be the subscription of S. John the writer of this book. For the
Notaries, Secretaries or chauncelers of Princes are wont at the end of the
kings or Emperors letters or writings, to subscribe their name. And verily
S. John in the History of the Gospel has observed the same manner. For in
the.19. chapt. he says: and he that saw, bare witness, and his testimony is
true. And at the end of the History he subscribeth and signeth underneath with
these words: this is that disciple, which bears witness of these things,
and wrote them, and we know that his testimony is true. For all the church
knew and confessed this. In like manner he seems at this present to have
subscribed these things also in his own name and to have said. He that
testifies these things, says.

Christ comes certeynely to Judge.
15. In the.15. place he brings in again the lord Jesus himself speaking
and promising that he will certainly come to judgment, verily to redeem and
glorify the godly, and to punnishe the wicked. Therefore with a great
asseueration he says, even so ((...)) surely, and doubtless I come quickly:
although I seem to tarry long, and to some not to come at al. Nevertheless
yet most certainly, and in time do I come: as before also is said and
declared. And the same thing is repeted, in manner with the same words, oftener
as a thing most worthy to be marked and known.

He annexeth immediately the faith and wisshe, and great desire of S. John, and
of the faithful church, or of any godly, submittyng him self to the promise,
and saying, Amen, even so, (...). That is to say, we acknoweledge it to be
most certain, and undoubted, that thou promisest that thou will come.
Therefore do we look for thee the Judge of the quick and the dead: yea and
pray with our inward bowelles, come lord Jesus. For else where also we pray
daily. Thy kingedome come. And all the godly with sighs unspeakable wish for
the coming of the Judge, for glory. Whereof the Apostle treats in the.8.
chapter to the Romans, and we have touched the same matter before.

The Apostles blessing.
In the last place of the conclusion he wissheth, after the Apostolic manner,
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to all the hearers and readers of this book.
S. Paul in the.2. Epistle to the These. the.3. chapt. Thus I write, says he,
in every Epistle, the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with all you. Amen. He
therefore here agrees to him self, as the Apostolical sprete does every
where. Grace comprehends the whole matter of the redemption and gifts of
Christ. He wissheth therefore to us all the blessyng, which we have in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Whereof most plentifully and besi^ has disco^^^ed ^he vessel
of election. S. Paul in the.1. chap. to the Ephes^ (...) ^he lord Jesus which
has revealed to us these holy mysteries, write the same in our minds, and
deliver us from Antichriste, and from all euilles: and keep us in the true
faith and in his grace. Unto him be honor and glory, praise and thanks
geuyng, together with the father and the holy ghost, for evermore: Amen. Come
Lord Jesus our redemer, and only Savior, and gloryfie them that look for thy
coming most wisshed for, that we may gloryfie thee for ever. Amen.

(...).
VIVET TAMEN POST FVNERA VIRTUES ET SI MORS, INDIES ACCELERAT printer's device
of John Day

IMPKINTED AT at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins.

Cum gratia and priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis, per Septennium.

These books are to be sold at his shop (...) the gate.


