Horae Subseciuae.

OBSERVATIONS AND DISCOURSES.



LONDON, Printed for Edward Blount, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Black Bear.

1620.

TO THE READER.
I Take not upon me to write either in the praise, or discommendation of this
Book; it belongs not unto me; but now it is abroad, must wholly be submitted
to your judgment and censure. And I know, it must be the worth of a Book,
and not the flourishing of an Epistle, that causes your approbation. So that
this must stand, or fall in your opinion, by the weight, or lightness that you
shall find therein.

The Author of this Book I know not; but by chance hearing that a friend of
mine had some such papers in his hand, and having heard them commended, I was
curious to see and read them over; and in my opinion (which was also confirmed
by others, judicious and learned) supposed if I could get the Copy, they would
be welcome abroad. My friends courtesy bestowed it freely upon me, and my
endeavor to give you contentment, caused me to put it in print. And therefore
to keep Decorum, and follow custom, in default of the Authors appearance, I
present it to you with this short Epistle.

The Book, you see, is of mixed matter, by the way of observations, or Essays,
and Discourses. There have been so many precedents of this kind, and (when
they have come out of the hands of good Writers) always so approved, that
there needs no Apology for putting in one Book, so different Arguments.

If the Observations, or Essays seem long to you, because most that have
written in that way, have put them in less room; for that, if the fault grow
by multiplicity of words, repetition; or affected variation of Phrases, then
your dislike is well grounded. But when you have read, and find the length to
have proceeded from the matter and variety, of it, I know, your opinion will
easily alter.

I will hold you no longer from that, to which this but introduces: But if the
Book please you, come home to my Shop, you shall have it bound ready to your
hand, where in the mean time I expect you, and remain

At your command, ED: BLOVNT.

OBSERVATIONS.
1 OF Arrogance. 1. 2 Of Ambition. 11. 3 Of Affectation. 30. 4 Of Detraction.
52. 5 Of Self-will. 74. 6 Of Masters and Servants. 85. 7 Of Expenses. 103. 8
Of Visitations. 114. 9 Of Death. 124. 10 Of a Country Life. 135. 11 Of
Religion. 176. 12 Of Reading History. 193.

DISCOURSES.
1 Upon the beginning of Tacitus. 223. 2 Of Rome. 325. 3 Against Flattery. 419.
4 Of Laws. 505.

Of such errors as have escaped in the Press, I have thought good to collect
only those, which may be supposed likely to trouble the Reader in his way,
the rest being few, and but literal, I hope shall either pass unobserved, or
excused.

Page. line. fault. correction. PAge 28. lin. 20. for metire read metiri Page
32. lin. 11. for observes read observe Page 39. lin. 17. for English read
English. Page* 41. lin. 20. for employments r. employments, Page 43. lin. 6. for
least read most Page 96. lin. 19. for he read they Page 112. lin. 17. for it
read and Page 126. lin. 16. for a read A Page 128. lin. 2. for naturally read
natural Page 133. lin. 8. for reduced some r. reduced to some Page 142. lin.
17. for a^ read and Page 156. lin. 11. for Nations read natures Page 173. lin.
3. for altogether read all together Page 174. lin. 18. for safe: read safe Page
184. lin. 14. for multi neglecta read multa neglecti Page 193. lin. 11. for
detraction r. detraction and Page 195. lin. 11. for must read much. Page 221.
lin. 4. for Mutius, read Mutius Page 264. lin* 13. for prescription read
Pr^scrip^^on Pa. 290. l. 12. for Tribunitiae, read Tribunitiae Page 319. lin.
5. for has read have Page 328. lin. 14. for and those. r. and (...) th^se Page
422. lin. 2. for unseen, read vns^ene Page 495. lin. 7. for anothey read
another p. 517. l. 13. for soul to inanimate r. a soul to animate

OF ARROGANCE.
ARrogance, is the assuming to a man's self, the Titles of Virtue, Learning,
Honor, Riches, or the like, without the possession, or (if with the
possession) without the evidence. For not only he that speaks of himself
more good then is true, but he also that says more then he is sure will be
believed, justly deserves the name of Arrogant.

This Vice is offensive more to equals, then to Superiors, or inferiors,
because they be seldom, the one sort or the other, competitors with a man in
praise: And more, when it concerns the gifts of the mind, especially Wisdom
and Valor, then when it touches only upon the favors of Fortune, or
abilities of the body, Prerogative in these being less esteemed. Nam cum omnis
arrogantia odiosa est, tum illa ingenij atque eloquentiae molestissima.
Quamobrem nihil dico de meo ingenio, etc. Whereas all Arrogance is odious, that
of a man's own wit, and own eloquence, is most tedious. Wherefore I will
speak nothing of my own wit, etc. says Cicero. Likewise it is worse in
mediocrity then extremes (though in most vices it be otherwise) because it
becomes by excess ridiculous rather then hateful, and so passes with better
toleration.

Pretending to sufficiency, argues the want of it. The claim it self is a
plain conviction that there wants right to the thing claimed. For where Virtue
is really, her own light discouers the owner. Vino vendibili suspensa hedera
non est opus. Good Wine needs no Bush. So that he need not be his own
Trumpet that is truly virtuous, but rather he that is not, but only in his
own conceit: which opinion makes him also by not pursuing that which he
supposes he has already obtained, to be out of all possibility of gaining
the same.

Honor found out Cincinnatus digging in his Garden and made him Dictator. And
many that in their own dispositions desired to live obscurely, have been
against their wills exposed to the toil of great affairs, by the luster of
that virtue which they never boasted. If to admire any thing argue defect of
knowledge, much more to admire a man's self, which al men ought best to know,
and are most familiar withal.

An Arrogant person, if he join in the performance of any laudable action,
with men of modest natures, deals with them in the sharing of the praise, as
the Lion in the Fable did with the other beasts, dividing the prey they had
taken; who making of the whole, four parts, pleades a title to three of them
at least, and if they yielded him not the fourth of their own goodwill, he
would be no longer friends. And such a nature can hardly hold friendship, that
admits not the Pillar thereof, which is Parity, but thinks himself
superior to all, if not in Fortune (at which he therefore grudges, taunts her
with her blindness, and rayles at her with Apothegmes,) yet in all other worth
and desert.

He is so puffed up, that to men in estate beneath him (for fear of contempt,
which howsoever he cannot avoid) he will never speak familiarly, seldom any
way, as if there could be no greater disparagement, then not to observe the
distance which he holds to be betwixt them. Which being to the meanest sort
unpleasing, causes him to want not only the respect he looks for, as due,
but even that (if any be so) that is due indeed.

He commonly commiserates his equals for their weaknesses, and loves to
teach, rather then learn the thing he knows not. Give him but such a handle,
and he will be sure to hold it till one be weary, and will instruct with such
confidence, that though he produce no reason, a man must believe him on his
word, or he will be angry. If he write or speak a discourse of any length, he
cannot forbear but he must make known somewhat of his own custom, or
humor, or life, With I was this, or did this, or like this, or thus am, or was
wont: belike, supposing that all men would be glad to make him the pattern of
their life and actions.

As he is distasteful to, so he distasteth all men; for according to his own
estimate, he must needs hold himself vnder-valued, even by those that prize
him above his just worth, then which nothing more vexes him. For though when
himself detracts, he thinks the detracted ought to bear it, as a righteous
censure: yet if another be but sleepy in his discourse, or when he talks, be
taken from him with any business, he is presently grieved thereat, as a high
neglect.

If he read another writings, he finds somewhat to correct, but nothing to
praise, and so in their actions. Himself being in his own Judgment beyond
censure. If he meet with one of his own nature, there is presently wars,
and it will appear that he detests himself in the person of his enemy, more
then another can do him in his own. But meeting with modesty, he deuoures it,
makes it his prey, and nourishes his Arrogance with such food; for whatsoever
the one shall in modesty lay from himself, the other will take, and yet think
too little.

But it is best when he encounters a cunning Flatterer, for such a one will
spur him on, and blow his folly up to madness, and set him out to the
laughter of them he most contemned. Or as the Fox served the Crow, make him
to let fall the meat from his mouth with attempting to sing. Or put him
forward to seek an emploiment, which he, not knowing his own strength, will
be always ready to take upon him, and so ruin him. For such a one will not
fear to undergo, what he does not understand. All which be the fittest traps
for this Vice.

Some are Arrogant (as one may say) indirectly, and will extol such a man in
such a faculty, as the hearers allow him to be better in, then the party so by
him praised. But it comes all to one purpose; for the face of Arrogance,
howsoever painted, is not without deformity. Yet I would not wish a man to be
so much affrighted with it, as to start to the contrary vice Pusillanimitie.
For a man should not derogate from himself, there being too many, ready
enough for that office, at least to believe him, as one that best knows, what
he most wants. And certainly he that does Sentence himself, has no color
for an Appeal, nor person to appeal unto, unless it be from his words, to
his deeds, which need then to be very remarkable. Howsoever, he must
acknowledge it to be great folly, to have denied that ability in himself,
which he desires to have made known.

But such men be seldom found, that say not of themselves full as much as
they can do.

Of Ambition.
IT is an unlimited desire, never satisfied. A continual proiecting without
stop. An vndefatigable search of those things we wish for, though want not. No
contentment in a present state, though fortunate, and prosperous.

An Ambitious man is in a kind of continual perambulation, or perpetual
courting of advancement, not respecting the means, Bribery, Flattery,
Humility, Popularitie, seeming Severity or Austerenesse. Any of which, so they
confer, and conduce to his own ends, whether for Titles, or Preeminence, or
Estimation, shall be disguises good enough for the present occasion.

The Scripture says, Quise exaltat, humiliabitur. Whosoever exalts himself,
shall be humbled. Not he that is worthily exalted by others, and whose merits
be the cause of his rising, but he that will Ambitiously exalt himself, he
shall be abased.

That disposition, which is naturally infected, with this Leprosy (which is a
spreading disease) can not foresee the inevitable dangers and events, that be
incident thereunto. Phauorinus speaking of these kind of men, said they were
either ridiculous, or hateful, or miserable. Aspiring ambitiously to places
beyond their worth, makes them scorned: obtaining, hated: and missing of their
hopes, wretched.

If the current of their Ambition be once stopped, like an impetuous torrent,
it beats and breaks the banks, grows dangerous, and many times causes
inundations. Therefore Princes respects, if they be fixed upon such natures, are
tied not only to a continuation, but an addition of favors; for the least
surcease makes declination in service. So that these dispositions should be
avoided: if discovered, sequestered from employment, as pernicious and
incendiary.

Ambition was the first temptation by which the Devil wrought upon our first
Parents, to encite them to a desire of knowing good and evil equally with God.

It is a strange insinuating affection, for whosoever is once therewith
possessed, neither Reason, nor Impediment, nor Impossibility can stay his
extrauagant desires. For though Nabuchadnezzar enjoyed all greatness possibly
incident to man, yet his Ambition stopped not, he would be worshipped as God. It
was not Virtue nor Reason that counseled Sylla and Marius, Pompey and Caesar,
to enterprise their domestique wars, but a disordinate love of flattering
Ambition; being in their own opinions not great enough, which caused the ruin
both of themselves and Country. And as this was theirs, so it is the general
and principal motive to all seditious, and treacherous attempts. But these men
whilst they toss all, be themselves most shaken, and inwardly feel the
torture of this pernicious fury, wherewith they have offended others. Therefore
it is Apocrypha to think that any man can become truly happy by the way of an
other man's misfortune, if for his own particular he be the contriuer.

When Ambition seazeth upon a man, peradventure his first aim will be but upon
designs within his reach, or fit for his capacity, which if obtained, is the
way to conduct him to higher cogitations, and so by degrees, from step to step,
the more Ambition is fed, the more appetite it has.

It is in a kind the Ape or imitater of Charity, says a Father; for Charity
endures all things for Eternal, Ambition for Transitory happiness. That is
liberal to the poor, this to the rich. The one suffers for Verity, the other
for Vanity. So they both believe all things, and hope for all things, but in a
different kind.

I cannot more fitly resemble an Ambitious man, then to one that should have a
fancy, to take a journey Eastward, to the place where the Sun seems in rising
to touch and to be joined to the earth, in hope to arrive within the reach of
the same, always going forward, but not coming nearer to his desire; still
progressiue, never at an end, being impossible to finish it, but the further
that he goes, the more earnest he is and impatient of protraction, and delays.
So that I may conclude such natures to be punished with Tantalus torture, of
whom it is said, that that he desired, ever seemed to be near him, yet never
within his command.

Some have similized these kind of men with the Camelion. As that has nothing
in the body besides the lungs: so the badge of Ambition, is only windy, and
boisterous ostentation.

It is a dangerous thing for men to love too much, or think too well of
themselves. The selfe-louer is the Arch-flatterer. Wisdom and caution may
avoid the insinuatio^s of other men, but when a man begins to admire and
applaud himself, there is no defense. Therefore this partial estimation, or
false glass of a man's own worth and merit, is the true cause of Ambition. In,
or by this we look upon our selves with our own eyes, which are so
quick-sighted in discerning and reading the infirmities of others, that they
turn dim when they reflect upon our selves, according to the Scripture. A
moate is easily spyed in the eye of our neighbor, but a beam in our own is
hardly visible.

Next to this Idolizing of a man's self, I cannot sever it from the company of
Envy. For as the nature of Ambition is to commiserate our selves, for that we
seemingly want or desire: so when we see another man possessed of that, that
our endeavors aspired unto, presently Envy breaks forth, privately maligning,
publicly detracting what we can, both from his person, and actions.

Again, if a Vacancie should happen of that place, whereupon our whole course
has been bent, then if another step betwixt us, and home, Ambition changes
into a malicious, and violent hatred against him that possesses against his
friends that opposed us, and against the giver, that conferred, or bestowed it.
And then upon this we grow auerse, and sullen in all our actions, and venture
upon any mischief of the highest degree, or largest extent.

Besides these, it is impossible for an Ambitious man to judge, and estimate
the parts, and qualities of another, in respect of his own: for his
opinionated sufficiency makes him undervalue, and his malice, to undermine
every man besides, and either to find, or out of his malignity to feign
whatsoever is done contrary, or unknowing to him, to be deficient.

But if it happen (as it does rarely) that their own consciences convince them
of another man's desert and merit, presently they suspect opposition in their
greatness, and that their eminency may be eclipsed. Wherefore they strive and
strain by all possible inventions to put disgraces upon his person and parts,
thereby to hinder his rising. For whilst he is out of employment, finding that
he cannot so publicly express his worth, they still labor to keep him in
obscurity, to the end that themselves may seem and appear more glorious.

But if this emulation happen betwixt them and one of as public note, or
equal estimation with themselves, then in all joint actions and consultations,
they will endeavor to take from him, and add as much to themselves in the
opinion of the world, as either industry or Art can devise. Which kind of
contention is pernicious to all well-ordred Commonwealths. For when every one
seeks to be principal, or to engrosse all within his own Circumference, and
to compass the rest with subjection, or affects to make himself the
increasing figure, whilst the rest serve but for supplies, faction in
business, confusion in directions, do necessarily follow.

And what be these men that so extremely affect Superiority, and Primacy in all
affairs? Do they good to the Public, or is their service equivalent to their
preferment? Do they show by their actions that this was the principal motive
that caused them to desire greatness? No. For an Ambitious man, so soon as he
is advanced, remembers no more the duty, but the precedence of his place.

Some of this sort that think themselves most cunning in their trade, will not
plainly profess Ambition, but mask, or shadow it with other colors, whereby
they hope they may more safely pass, vndescried, undiscovered. They will
propound their own merit and ability, or defect in others, and protest they
have no particular ends, but public reformation; for which only cause, they
are content to deuote, and enthrall themselves; when the truth is, the spur
that pricks them forward to these designs, is glory, and command above others.

Therefore there is no way to keep this desire concealed, but utterly to
extinguish it.

If we do but view these men that have their desires, and enjoy their wishes,
certainly we should not think it so glorious, and happy a thing, as it is given
out for. Vexation, and trouble continually attend it. And besides they be not
much more burdensome to others, then grievous to themselves. Long to continue
at the height, is seldom seen. Extraordinary favors be uncertain, and
slippery. Retire they cannot without staggering, nor descend, if not
precipitately. Light burdens be easily taken on, or cast off, without feeling;
but if we be ouer-loaden, we seldom fail but fall or sink. And no man
proceeds so happily, but sometimes he is crossed, the travels and ways of this
life be so mixed and confused. Therefore Ambitious men had need prefixe a
certain limit to their increase, and not to attend the retyring of Fortune.

To affect superiority above others, when a man's desire is predominant over his
reason, argues distemper and weakness.

Some great men that have, or have had great Offices, complain of the pains
and vexation they suffer, or have suffered, with the weight and burden of
their charge, being worn in years, and decayed both in spirit and strength. If
therefore according to this they would, or could have been content to
withdraw, or retire themselves, in respect of weakness and debility, from
Public affairs, it would have expressed an excellent temper, and moderation.
But few such voluntaries be found. The trains of Ambition, Profit, and Pomp,
detain them, and whilst they say they hate the trouble, they show by
continuing, that they adore the glory, and gain that follows it.

But lest we may confound Ambitious, with worthy desires, take these few
differences, or distinctions. For the desire of glory in it self is not ill,
but it is the excess, or defect that makes it so. The mean between both
cannot be expressed in one word, yet is commendable and allowed for a Virtue. So
says Aristotle, Laudatur habitus qui modum adhibet in expectanda gloria,
etiamsi uacet nomine. Showing the affecting of glory to be matter both of
Virtue, and Vice, according as it is governed, as well as any other passion of
the mind.

The undergoing, or undertaking of Public business, so it be more for the
general good, then a man's private respect, is ever profitable to the
Commonwealth; but to affect it too much in any kind whatsoever, is always
taken in the worst sense.

For men of place, or Favorites to be zealous in the stream, or general
course of business, is commendable, but to be violent, or singular, in the
particulars, vnsufferably dangerous.

To desire precedence above others in respect of ones service, or merit, is a
good emulation. Nam honos alit arts, omnesque incenduntur ad studia gloria,
says Cicero. For advancement nourishes Learning, and all men are enflamed to
study, by the hope of honor and glory subsequent. But to aspire unto it
without either, intolerable Arrogance.

To be hunting after all preferment, to follow every shadow, shows a man to
be inconstant, and expresses leuity: but to refuse Honor when it is offered,
which as Seneca says, is Fructus verae virtutis honestissimus, the honestest
reward of Virtue, argues Pusillanimity.

If a man seek or labor to attain favor, and preferment, with this only
intention, that by that way, he may have better means to do good, to reduce
ill Custom, to the most ancient, and commendable forms, and to amend
breaches, or intrusions, or decays, with particular respect to this, without
the least tincture of vainglory, or any other selfe-desire, this kind of
Ambition I admit as a Virtue, and in this case, I allow it to be generous.

Our first thoughts should be to make our selves worthy to receive dignity, and
employment; thesecond, that the world should have a good estimation, and
opinion of our merit; and (that which generally with others is the first) with
us should be the third, fruition of that we think our selves able to
discharge, and the world thinks us worthy to enjoy, and not that which our
private respects, and particular Ambition makes us forward to desire. According
to Pliny in an Epistle: Omnia metir ^ dignitate malim quam ambitione.

Scientia quae est remota a iustitia, calliditas potius quam sapientia est
appellanda, says Plato. Knowledge separated from that which is upright, is
rather called craft, then wisdom. So a mind that is prepared and ready for
any great action, never so worthy, or full of hazard, if the inducement to
this be only his own particular ends, or profit, and not the public, or
common good, this certainly is better termed in him impudent and rash Ambition,
then either Valor, or Virtue.

To conclude, men that have good aims and ends in aspiring, are not so
expressly Votaries to the Public, as that they be secluded (by honest and
just ways, free from scandal, importunity, vexation, and tax) even by the
means of the present favor, and place they enjoy, to raise or increase their
Fortune^, to honor and advance their Posterity, so it be done with
moderation, and modesty.

Of Affectation.
AFFECTATION is an ouer-serious love, to ordinary, and minute qualities: or,
the putting on the abiliments of sufficiency on the body of Pride.

It is a vanity, that shame forbids to be acknowledged, yet folly permits not
to be concealed. For howsoever a man may appear to himself more complete, and
full, in the vestiments of Virtue, by their largeness; yet in the eye of
another, their disproportion will make him seem the more slender. None being
fit to wear the coat of Hercules, but such as have strength to weild his club.
Nor shall he ever be thought to have Caesar's spirit, that much cares to
scratch his head like him with one finger.

It argues a desire of honor, but no action toward it: for whatsoever the
wishes of one that uses affectation aim at, yet his attempts reach no higher
then to the imitation of certain gestures, and manners of speech, which being
comely, facile, and natural, as they have the second place to real Virtue; so
if they be vnsuteable, forced, or counterfeit, they come no less near to Vice,
and diminish more the estimation, then some great crimes.

For whereas some such vices as be notorious, make a man more welcome into some
societies, and some make him to be feared. This vanity causes him to be
desired in no company, but scorned, and contemned in all.

I esteem it a great vexation to see one affect a gravity in behavior, as he
will look upon you with the stayednesse of a Statue, and obserue^ a set
distance between every word, like the Images that strike the Clock at every
quarter. And some again with more gesticulations then an Ape, to seem to
dance about you. Some will carry their heads as if they used a bridle, and
some so loosely, as if they needed one. Some had rather be lame of a hand,
then not seem so, that they may wear a Scarf. Or of a leg, then lose the
grace of carrying a French stick.

It appears most in some that return from Traveling, who being incapable of
other proficiency by their observations of governments of Nations, situation of
Countries, dispositions of People, their Policy, and the like, these things not
understanding, or not knowing how to apply, which to the bettering of our
judgment, and manners, is the right use of all we find either in reading, or
travel, they in their stead bring home only fashions of behavior, and such
outward apparances, that a man must guess they have traveled (for there is no
other way) by a Leg, or a Peccadill, or a Pieadeuant, or a new block, or a
mangled suit, or words all complement, and no sense, or mincing of their own
language, or making new and absurd deriuations, such as yet the world never
heard of: or in every period of their discourse, to say something of Paris, and
Orleans, Bloys, and Tours, and then conclude that the River of Loire is the
most nauigable of the world; or to talk of their Mistresses, and protest that
the French Damoiselle is the most courtly, most complete, and for
exquisiteness in behavior and fashion, may be a pattern to all the Ladies of
Europe: and from hence they will take occasion, to fall into a digression of
their loves, and to tell what hazzards they have past, with the Wife of such a
Merchant, or the Daughter of such a Governor, or Mistress of such a Prince.

All which fashions, observations and wonders, be collected with being a few
months in France. And thence being wafted over, the first man they meet, is
sure to know (if this half year in France has not made them to forget their
English tongue) the dangerousnesse of their passage, how near shipwreck they
were, and talk as learnedly and seriously of Navigations, only by the
experience they have gotten in this double passage in a little Bark, to and
fro, as the best Captain can do that has been three times in the East Indies.

But all these things before rehearsed, and diverse more of the same kind, are
not only their first month, or half years imitation, and discourse upon
their return, but continue to their dying day.

At London being arrived, they are sure to make their first appearance with
their last suit upon the Stage, there practice, their complement and courtesies
upon all their acquaintance, make three or four forced faces, thence upon
their Curtoe, with a Page and two Lacqueys all in a Livery, go to the Tavern,
find fault with all the Wine, and yet be drunk: in which disguise they post
to their Sisters, or Aunts, or Grandmother, where they will be admired for
their absurdities, and almost made madder then they are by their praises.

These be affected Monsieurs: but they that pass the Mountains, and leave all
this leuitie behind them, what do they observe? How do they return? (I
mean still affected Travelers) Of the two the worse, and the more absurd,
because the more grave. For a light fool is always more sufferable then a
serious.

The forced gravity of these, so set them forth, as any man may discover them
with half an eye, especially having the dependances of an Italian Suit,
Spanish Hat, Milan Sword, N^ds in stead of legs, a few shrugges, ^^ if some
vermin were making a Progress from one shoulder to another, and the like.

This for their outside: but their discourse makes them every where ridiculous.
The name of an English Gelding frights them, and thence they take occasion to
fall into the commendation of a Mule or an Ass. A Pasty of Venison makes them
sweat, and then swear, that the only delicacies be Mushrums, or Caueare, or
Snayles. A toast in Beer or Ale drives them into Madness, and so to declaime
against the absurd, and ignorant customs of their own Country, and thereupon
digress into the commendation of drinking their Wine refreshed with Ice, or
Snow. So that those things which in other Countries be used for necessity, they
in their own will continue, to show their singularity.

It were not hard in this discourse to point out the men, and it were a good
deed to give you their names, that they may be publicly known, lest some
ignorant of their manners, be by their outside misledde to admire them. But
this may suffice, by which you may see, that the leuity of the French, and
gravity of the Transalpine Traveler, be equally ill in the way of imitation;
for nothing can show well that is forced. Besides that, they imitate but
imperfectly, and with less grace, like the Stars, that show us the Suns
light, but with less splendour.

And they so extremely love to be thought well dyed into Italian and French, as
their eyes are offended at whatsoever has any color of English. And to be
esteemed familiarly acquainted with other Countries, will seem, and think it
an honor to have forgotten both the fashions, and language of their own.

But one sort of affectate Travelers yet remain, and they be the seeming
Statesmen of the time, empty bladders repleate with nothing but wind, such as
being abroad, though it be but in some butter Town of Holland, will make their
first enquiry after such as profess to read Theorie of Statisme; fellows
that swarm in most places abroad, especially in Germany, or those places where
the Dutch most usually frequent, that nation being easy and apt to be gulled
by these Impostors; beggarly Cheaters, that will no sooner undertake to teach,
but these constantly believe to learn. In the space of six months (for that
is the longest time strangers use abroad to stay in one place) they will make
them able, and when the time is past, they will so believe themselves to be, or
peradventure sooner (they are so fruitful in their own conceits) that they
may declare their abilities to be fit for the employment of the greatest
Prince, State, or affair in the world.

And this wonder by their professor of State, is thus miraculously wrought by
reading unto them, with some most pitiful observations of their own, and
diverse repetitions of the same things, as they use to deal with Schooleboyes,
a piece of Gallo-Belgicus. Some discourse in Tesoro politico, a part of Sleyden
with Pezelius notes, or the like, as, if by reading only, a man could apt
himself for public employment such a Master, such a Reader, such fragments,
so short a time would enable him thereunto.

Following this in all places where they come, the very name of a Manuscript
rauisheth them, though it be but copied out of some absurd book, printed the
last Mart; which once known, as it will be, by their often enquiry for things
of that kind, (any thing, it is no matter what, neither do they know more then
in general the name of a Manuscript) few mornings pass, that some poor
Scribe or other does not coozen them in that kind.

Meeting with any of their own Nation, they will endeavor to make them believe
that they are as well acquainted with the counsel, proiects, and policies of
that State or Court where they live, as any that be there, though of the
highest employment. They will tell what ways they have found out in Cyphring,
and what charge they have been at for Intelligence, which is demonstrated by
having some papers wauing in their hands, though empty, or at least but filled
with their Hosts last account.

They will protest their entirenesse and inwardnesse with the men of the
greatest name and employment in those parts, though peradventure they never saw
their faces, nor never heard them spoken of, but by a Mountebanke in the Piazza.

But for the great Ones, in their own Country, what is it not they will say,
to make us believe they are with them the only great and entire men of the
world? Which familiarity betwixt them they will endeavor to express by
showing their names to letters, though counterfaite, and Coppies of letters
they pretend they have writ to them, though never sent.

They will further tell you, that they are absent thus long abroad, (the State
at home taking knowledge of their ability) because they would yet reserve some
liberty to themselves, and not be wholly taken up (as they be sure, if they
were returned they should be) with public employment.

And then they will return to generals, and speak of Intentions, and
Treaties, and Things, where they will stop with a shrug, or a Desunt nonnulla,
and so refer you to the Stars for a consequence: as if these things were
too secret, too deep for your knowledge, or to make you believe that the
multiplicity of affairs and State-businesse distract and trouble their minds;
when God knows, the most that they think or ruminate upon, is to get the
estimation and opinion in the world, of that which they have no color to
pretend to, viz. Wit.

Again, being abroad, they will translate the very Gazzette, the most
ordinary and uncertain news in the World, to send over by whole bundles into
England, which some particular friends of theirs, that know no more of
foreign business, then their letters infuse into them, by this means are made
to believe that the senders are serious, intelligent, and grave, and so they
look too, when they come home; but that's all. And better use I know not which
way to put them to, then as a sign for those things they outwardly, yet
vnhandsomly imitate.

That little which they speak, or think, or do, smells of State. For to get
but the name of an employment abroad, they will engage themselves, their
friends, and fortunes. That is the uttermost of their Ambition.

But that small reputation which report gave them here, their own presence at
their return, does utterly make to vanish. And by this means, which no other
way could ever bring to their knowledge, they find the fruit of their
ostentation, and those vain imaginations which before possessed them. And thus
much briefly of an affected Statist. Now to other sorts.

It Is Affectation in one, though naturally an elegant Speaker, not to descend a
little to the capacity of such as he conferres withal. For to some Country
Husbandmen, one were as good speak Latin, as good English.

To use, in discoursing of an ordinary subject, words of a high, sounding, and
Tragic strain, is as unseemly, as walking on stilts, where one may as well
go in slippers.

Likewise Rusticitie in speech, and base popular phrases, in themselves show
want of education, but affected, discover folly to boot.

Old Antique words, such as have been dead, buried, and rotten in the time of
our Great Grandfathers, would become the ghost of Chaucer on a Stage, but not
a man of the present time.

Likewise, New words, like a new Coin, will not easily be received, till both
their weight, and stamp have been examined. To which may be referred the
saying of Pomponius Marcellus, who finding fault with some thing that was said
in an Oration of Tyberius Caesar's, Atteius Capito contrarily affirmed, that if
it were not now Latin, yet it would be hereafter. That is not so (says
Marcellus) for though Caesar can give naturalization in the City of Rome, to
men, yet he cannot do so to words. For they can never be admitted, till
Custom have allowed them. That must be referred to public vsance, not to
Caesar's power.

There be others that delight in figures, and their words fall in, one after
another like sequents; which they bring in, in spite both of perspicuitie, and
sense. And commonly, where a speech is all figures, you shall find the matter
a mere Cipher.

Like to these, are such as out of a poor Ambition to obtain the grace of
some good and decent word, or Metaphore, will not stick (so they may get it
into their writing) to write that which before they never intended, nor is
perhaps to the purpose, or to alter the whole frame of their discourse. And for
the most part such words, as they are sought with much pain, so they are
placed at little ease, and trouble either the matter, or the method, or the
style, for want of elbow room.

The worst Affectation of all other, is to affect horrible oaths in speech,
which some do, thinking them ornaments, or signs of a great spirit, as
indeed they are signs of such a spirit as they would be frighted to see
appear.

Or telling of wonders and Miracles, whereby expecting to beget admiration,
they carry away the reputation of liers.

Lastly, there is a sort of people, that as in all things they love
singularity, so in this, that they will subscribe to no word that savors not
of the Catechism, accounting natural and good Speech, as Ethnicke, and
unsanctified: But this were better called Hypocrisy then Affectation.

Of Detraction.
IT is the tongue both of Envy and Arrogance, which two, though they differ in
their nature, yet concerning the good name of another, they speak both one
language; equally striving to diminish, or takeaway the reward of their Virtue,
which is Reputation and Honor.

This, and Charity be directly Antipodes. The glory of the one is to cover, of
the other to discover infirmities. Charity interprets all things to the best,
the other in the worst sense: the whole respects of the first, are to do good
to others: but in the Detractor, all things are referred to himself. Many
other dissimilitudes might be found, but these suffice to show how contrary
they be; which at the first view, sets but an ill gloss upon Detraction, when
it is opposite to Charity.

From Contumely, it is no otherwise distinguished, then as a thief on the
way, from him that picks your purse, or privily filches your goods in your
absence. The first is more violent, but the second more frequent and more
damnifying.

It has little force where virtue is eminent. For there Imputation is
reuerberated, and made to return on the Author, who deprauing the fame of a
man of known desert, works no other effect in his hearers, then an opinion of
his own private malignity, like a tempestuous Sea, beating against a firm
Rock, which though it show much fury, works no damage.

The Detractor, to any laudable atchieuement, will be sure to find out wrong
causes, and to good things, wrong names; as if a man be liberal, he is
prodigal: if parsimonious, covetous: if magnificent, ambitious: if courteous,
then he is of a weak and servile spirit: if grave, then proud: if considerate
in danger, then a Coward: if valorous, rash: if silent, cunning: if a
discourser, then one that loves to hear himself talk. When John Baptist came
neither eating, nor drinking, they said he had a Devil: and when our Savior
came eating, and drinking, they said, Behold a Glutton, and a wine-bibber. And
so forward, that there is almost nothing that a man can be or do, which a
Detractor will not pervert.

Though to praise any thing, be against his stomach, yet he will magnify
Fortune when she has any hand in an enterprise, that Virtue (to which he
gives the name of the confining Vice) may the less appear.

They are the very moths, that corrupt and canker in every Common wealth; how
they work, and wear, and eat into every man's good name, experience
witnesses. They be of a poisonous quality, and deuourers of men's reputations,
and therefore aptly described by the Psalmist, Their throat is an open
Sepulcher, with their tongues have they deceived, the poison of Asps is under
their lips. A Sepulcher indeed: for men's fames and good reports are in a
manner buried in those graves, their deceitful tongues are the instruments,
and the poison under their lips the materials, by which so much mischief is
wrought.

And whereas men that bereave us of our lives, do rarely pass without the
encounter of some or other condign punishment; shall these that deprive us of
that which is inestimably dearer, pass unpunished? No. For we see that public
Justice does often meet with Libellers, and Defamers, and there is no
Commonwealth, or Kingdom, in which they be not branded. Nevertheless
anciently, and in popular States, the liberty of evil tongs has been more
tolerated then now it is, when they have not only pointed at, on the Stages,
but also usually named with derision, and taunts, the men of greatest dignity,
and that in presence of themselves so touched. And indeed in many
Commonwealthes, it has been a bridle to the lice^tiousnesse of Greatness, in
their moral conversation, though that were but an evil remedy. But in a
Monarchy, the same would but have been as a spur to seditions and tumults.
For it is not so much every particular man that suffers by these men's rancor,
and malice, as the whole Fabric of the Republike.

The actions of great men, their lives, their orders, be most severely and
strictly viewed. That which they do for the public, these will pretend to be
done for private ends. If things according to former consultation succeed well,
they will take the praise wholly from them, and bestow it upon chance; if
otherwise, they will take it from chance, and lay it wholly upon their
consultations. In brief, they will misconstrue and mis-apply all manner of
acts, and whatsoever tends to the peace, and good of the State, they with their
best subtilties will oppose, but howsoever, disapproue.

In which respect they justly deserve the punishment that is laid upon them,
Ecclesiasticus 28. verse 13, 14. Curse the whisperer and double-tongued, for
such have destroyed many that were at peace. The backbiting tongue has
disquieted many, and driven them from Nation to Nation. Strong Cities has it
pulled down, and overthrown the houses of great men. This so fully touches
the danger that the greatest men, and Nations fall into, by suffering this
kind of people, that I need not in this point further to illustrate it.

In the next place it will not be amiss by way of example, to show that by
this means, the worst causes do always set themselves of, in disgrace of the
better, which rule will never fail. One instance I will give. The Separatists,
or Sanctified, as they term themselves, what doctrine have they more frequent,
what point more urged, then for the propagation, as they say, of the holy
cause. First, with the Pharise to magnify themselves, and their own opinions,
then with terms unfit to be heard, talk of Ecclesiastical functions,
Ceremony, and Government, with that disdain and reproach, that they graffe in
their followers such an opinion against them, that they think all of the
contrary opinion, children of Perdition, in the state of Damnation, sons of
Belial, unsanctified, lewd, profane, and ungodly persons. But leaving this path
that has been so often beaten, let us view it in other colors.

Commonly if he hear any man out of discontent, or choler, let slip a word
to the derogation of another, he presently takes his advantage, and his
Exordium thence, for some malicious Oration. Which with that person confirms
the ill opinion already conceived, strengthens his malice, increases his hate,
and makes him glory with himself, that he goes not alone, but hand in hand
with other company in his erroneous conceits, and that which private respects
made him formerly to dislike, that now he thinks the others merits might as
well provoke.

By this artifice the Detractor would be thought but a second in the point,
whereas he is indeed the first, or rather only deprauer.

Sometimes he will profess love to a person, whom notwithstanding for truth
and sincerities cause, he will pretend not to be able to praise, and so fall
into an inquisition of his life, and manners, like the fellow in Horace.

Me Capitolinus conuictore vsus, amico-Que a puero est, causaque mea permulta
rogatus Fecit, and incolumis laetor quod viuit in vrbe. Sed tamen admiror quo
pacto Indicium illud Fugerit. Hic nigrae succus loliginis, haec est Aerugo
mera, etc. He deals with a man, as the stone in Nabuchadnezzars dream,
mentioned in the second of Daniel, did with the great Image which it overthrew.
But thus, it meddled not with the gold, nor the silver, nor the brass in the
Statue; but the lower parts, the legs and feet, which were of iron and clay,
those it brake in pieces, and so ruined the rest. In like manner the Detractor
touches not the Gold, that is, a man's Virtue, which shines like it; nor the
silver, which is a man's wisdom, and judgment, and resembles it; nor the
brass, that is, a man's Nobility which glisters like it; but the iron and clay
feet, that is, a man's infirmities, weaknesses, errors, those with an
unclean tongue they wound and strike, and by that means overthrow his Honor
and Fame in all other parts and qualities, though never so eminent, in the
mean time no body forcing him, without cause to utter that truth, to the
prejudice of another, that charity would have concealed.

Here it will be pertinent to enquire something touching the liberty of
censuring, with what cautions it is limited, and how far to be allowed.

A Censurer, is more the^ any other, obnoxious to Ce^sure, for he thrusts
himself into the office of a Judge, by which eminency he conuerteth men's eyes
on himself: and because he is to be supposed less faulty then the
reprehended, they are therefore also invited to a more strict consideration of
his life, and no less, but rather much more to censure him, then he another.

Yet upon occasion given, or urged, when a man is freely to speak his opinion,
the concealing, or covering, or blanching a known, or public error in any
man, confirms and strengthens him that is vicious, and by this approving, or
at least not blaming, incourageth others to the like, and withal greatly
darkens our own reputation: for conniuency in this kind, makes men believe,
that we our selves be subject to the same fault. But this liberty of censuring
I do thus far only allow, that it be amongst such, as do particularly know
that man's deformities, and not others that be strangers unto it. For then we
should increase rumor, and cause an ill opinion to be had of him.

Next, the liberty of love, and respect, will freely allow a man to do it
privately to his friend; but the^ let not any fool be his friend, lest he take
the benefit for an injury. And it must be without any bitterness, or spleen,
which will rather gall, then correct him, that we so speak unto.

If the particular errors of any one do, iudicially and pertinently to the
cause, come in question, there is no doubt but the blemishes, especially in
Public, be to be taxed with all manner of aggrauation: but the man, in
charity is not to be triumphed over, though this cannot but reflect upon him.
Yet humane frailety which is common to us al, is inducement enough, so long as
no prejudice follow by the example, to make the best interpretation that so ill
a cause, so ill a man, can deserve. And certainly there is a great deal of
caution, and sparing to be used in this kind of ripping up a man's life: but if
necessity bring such a man before you, and that he cannot escape a censure, yet
use no opprobrious, or disdainful words against him.

Sometimes such as have received injuries from a man, and in that respect be
disaffected to him: they will be often glad to take advantage, at his life and
conversation, in heat and choler, by that means to be revenged of him. But
though this be against the rule of Charity, yet in the strictest sense it
cannot come within the bounds of Detraction. For the one is impelled, the other
voluntary; a certain habit of doing mischief, without cause given.

All truths be not to be spoken, (especially if we receive them but by report)
but a man may be forced to discover such a truth, as may prejudice another,
and yet be free from Detraction.

Sometimes a man may seek into, or discover another infirmities, either upon
his own, or friends cause, and yet not detract, for these respects. If such a
man do an injury, it cannot but accidentally fall, in a man's Justification, to
show what a kind of man he is, from whom he has received it. Or suppose a man
have a cause iudicially depending, and the most dangerous thing against him be
the deposition of such a man, the civil Law then allows, that a man may, to
weaken or take away his testimony, bring what he can possibly against him that
may touch him in life or conversation.

Again, though a man need to have a door before his lips, and to use a great
deal of discretion and moderation, in whatsoever he shall say, yet if he
should chance to fall upon a man, a little too boldly in the way of censuring;
certainly if it proceed but from rashness, and no will, or purpose in
himself to do the other hurt, I cannot aptly call it Detraction. There may
be named other particulars of this nature, yet I cannot presently think of
any very material, that will not be included within some of these. But to go
forward to his description.

He inueigheth much against Flattery, and glories that he is free from it,
making that a cloak to shroud his calumniation. And though it be commendable
in every man else to avoid Flattery, yet it is not so in him, because it
proceeds from a perverse crookedness of nature, that cannot endure another
praise, though just.

He likewise protests against dissimulation. But if he discourse of any man's
actions but his own, you shall easily observe him to dissemble that which makes
most for his reputation. For, in reckoning up persons expert in some faculty,
to leave out one of the best, and most marked in that kind, or, in commending
a man's smaller virtues, to forget his better and greater parts, is a
dissimulation as deprauing as the bitterest Inuectiue.

Also he that gives willing ear to a Detractor, Qui non defendit, alio
culpante, solutos Qui captat risus hominu^, famamque dicacis, Hor. or applaudes
the Satyricall conceits of such a one, is an Accessory to this crime, if not a
Principal. For as the one has the Devil in his tongue, so the other in his
ears. Hear but a Detractor willingly, and you encourage him to speak;
whereas, if you but show an auersenesse to him, he then learnes unwillingly to
speak, that which he knows you do not willingly hear.

So that though his teeth seem placed only in his tongue, yet he has diverse
ways of biting, as David complains, Psalm. 57. verse 4. My soul is amongst
Lions: and I lie even amongst them that are set on fire, even the sons of
men, whose teeth are spears, and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

The persons that be the Detractors objects, are commonly greater then
himself, and therefore though he may darken their Fame, yet he can never
totally eclipse it. Yet his endeavor is especially against such, because their
brightness darkeneth and obscureth his. Like as the Moon, in conjunction with
the Sun, cannot show her own light, but can often hide from us part of his.

Some delight so much in speaking evil, that they will detract from the dead,
though never offended by them. Such spirits as these, if they have never spoken
ill of God himself; have only this excuse, that they never knew him.

The scope of them is commonly the disgrace of another, but sometimes also, the
showing of the acuity of their own judgments, in discerning of men's actions,
or sayings; as if they had been placed here as a Chorus on the Stage, to
censure and comment, or were the general Inquisitors of the world. But it falls
not out as they expect: for they discover not acuteness, but acrimony, nor are
esteemed sharp apprehenders, but bitter reprehenders.

Sometimes by depression of another merit, they aim at the advancement of
their own, finding themselves absolutely worthless and nothing, but
contending to be somewhat by comparison.

Lastly, the Detractor, though he sow but words, oftentimes reapes seuerer
requitals, or at least a plentiful harvest of his own grain. Dehinc vt
quiescant porro moneo and definant maledicere, malefacta ne noscant sua.
Terent. For he shall be sure to hear as much evil as he speaks, and howsoever
he put his faults behind himself, yet they hang before on the shoulder of
another.

Of Self-will.
WHereas in every man there be two faculties of the reasonable Soul; namely,
the Understanding and the Will: this Vice will admit but one, giving the whole
administration of man's life into the hands of the latter; which does so much
tyrannize over our reason, that it makes us wholly incapable of apprehending,
when we hear good counsel: so resolved we be in our own opinions, though
never so bad, that we leave no space for maturer directions, never calling to
mind the possibility of the rule, that Standers by, oftentimes see more then
those that play the game. And as this so opinionated conceit of our own
resolutions, continues the mist before our understanding, making us impatient
to receive any good counsel: so consequently, it deterres our friends from
giving it, as an unnecessary and thanklesse office, they being out of hope that
their endeavors shall prevail, and also in fear to hazard the ill opinions of
those they desire to continue for friends: as having in themselves altered the
received definition of man, who being Animal ratione praeditum, should this way
be Animal voluntate praeditum. Self-willed men being always violent and
impatient, if one endeavor to alter or cross their resolutions, which though
grounded upon little consideration, and sudden rashness, yet they be generally
so obstinate, and wel-conceited of themselves, that whatsoever they conceive
and purpose, must be peremptory, and without alteration. For Self-will is
nothing but a kind of will that usurps the place and office of reason, giving
Antecedence to her actions, before those of the Understanding: as to
Resolution, before Deliberation; Execution, before Counsel; and the like. For
it is not reason that guides this will, because they can give you none for it,
except you will take this for one, I will, because I will: which is an absurd,
womanish, and childish Justification, and an argument of so small force, that it
is a shame to use it.

And this is that depriues most enterprises of good success, but always
(howsoever be the event) the enterpriser of commendation. For good events
depending ordinarily upon good counsel, they seldom chance without it; when
they do, it is by fortune, whence can arise no glory to the doer, but must
wholly be attributed to some chance. And if any cross accident interpose it
self, this takes away all excuse. For as it is seemly in no man after a
chance, to say, I did not think; so it is inexcusable in him, when the cause
is his refusing of good counsel, or hearing and neglecting it, following none
but his own. Like a bad Logician, it lays the conclusion down first, and
seeks the premises and inducements after; or as a worse Judge, decrees at home,
and after hears the parties at the Bar.

A man so conceited of himself, can be no companion in deliberatiues, but
rather precipitates them, and is altogether of a nature unfit for business, as
coming with preiudicate opinions, so usurping upon our reason, that we will
hear none from any else. And therefore if this violence and self-conceit be
so dangerous in a Councellor, it is far more in a Judge. For in the first
there is equality of voices, and a man cannot so easily sway. But in a Judge,
if the will resolve before, with a kind of settled opinion, notwithstanding
any thing that can be urged to the contrary by the Council at the Bar, I see
no use of pleading, farther then to draw the Judges inclination, and for
formality.

It takes away also from a man both his sight and his guide, and yet hastens
his pace, which must needs cause precipitation. Whereas receiving of good
counsel, is to one both a light, and a guide, and a staff, and assures him
more then the wall, and the watch does a City.

A Selfe-will'd person most commonly stops his ears to advice, as to an
enchantment, and when he is content to hear it (which is seldom) he does it
either as only for custom, bringing with him a resolution what to do,
whatsoever shall be said, and (knowing that strong and evident reason has in
it self a kind of violence) he therefore arms himself against it with
obstinacy: or else admits of counsel, out of a desire to act his own devices,
as Xerxes, who began a speech to his Council with this, That he called them
together not to ask their opinions, but to have their confirmation of his.

Two things make this disease seem incureable. The first is, that it keeps
out the Physician that should open such passages, as being stopped, hinder
recourse from the will to the judgment. For he that will admit a friend
freely to give him counsel, and to show him the true causes of this vice,
might easily avoid it. The second is, because the poison of flattery is his
ordinary food, and few dare oppose the violence of his Appetite.

Yet on the contrary, me thinks in time, a Selfe-willed person should be
cured, and become very wise, because no sort of men do more often, or more
deeply repent, or buy their repentance more dearly, then they do. Yet such,
if they come to amendment, are beholding for it more to their enemies, then
friends; for they punish them for their follies, and by seeking advantages,
teach them to seek defenses for their safety, and fly to counsel. But as for
friends, they be not likely to have them many, nor wise; for who having jewels
of that price, as wisdom, and ability to give counsel, will be content to
remain and converse, where he dare not utter them, or they be not at all set
by? For as there can be no greater contentment to a wise man, then to have his
counsel made use of; so there is no greater scorn and vexation, then to have
it neglected.

This vice proceeds from two causes, which are first Arrogance, and next, a
debility of the mind, possessed with an earnest desire to some pleasure or
appearing contentment. The first cause works upon stiff and severe natures:
the latter, in women, and men of soft and effeminated affections. The first
makes the understanding by preiudging, unfit to discern of good advice: the
latter disableth the will to follow it. The first makes it more dangerous: The
second more incurable.

Yet betwixt Self-will and Affection, a man must distinguish as much as
betwixt a settled resolution, and a wish, as one many times desires prohibited
things may be lawful, though he approues them not to be so, and so follows
not, but bridles his inclination.

Besides, notwithstanding all this, I hold it better for any man that has a
mediocrity of judgment, to be wedded to his own will, then to the will of any
one man besides, the danger being equal of both sides; for as the adventure is
great, wholly to depend upon our own wills, so inconstancy is far worse,
when a man will bevaried and disposed with diverse, or single opinions. It is
better to subject our selves to our own appetites with little reason, then to
another man's with less. The mean is, neither to resolve without appearance of
reason, nor to be altered, unless with better; neither to be subject to the
will of another, nor too peremptory in our own. It is the Counsel of diverse,
and wise men, (amongst whom a man's self should be of the Quorum) that most
easily conducteth our actions to their desired ends.

Of Masters and Servants.
THis part of Oeconomicall Jurisdiction is in abstract, a representation of a
more public Government. To be unexperienced in the first, argues much
disability for the latter. He that cannot rule his own family, is much more
incapable to govern a multitude.

In this description I accept not Servants as bound, nor Masters as absolute,
but take them in those degrees as with us they be generally received, where
there is left to both an equal liberty, and free election. And as a Servant
is bound in obedience to his Master, which is the part he must act; so a
Masters power is limited, that he cannot impose upon him dishonest
employments, nor exact a strict performance of his servant in any action of
that sort. Wherefore, where commands be lawful, obedience is due, otherwise
not.

In your choice, first, the occasion is to be known, next, the man. For to
affect extraordinary multitudes, expresses ostentation.

If your own knowledge acquaint you not with a servant for your use, then
venture upon another recommendation, but cautelously. First, know his
integrity, and next, his judgment; lest out of his affection he prefer one,
for his preferment, and not for your use; or that through ignorance he presume
one to be fit, that is a mere stranger to such employments as your occasions
require. And to take a man of his own word, is the worst of all. For many will
promise for their own sufficiency in those very things they understand not.

To take a servant, though capable of any impression, yet wanting experience,
is more fit for a Master that has employment in expectancy, then present,
though certainly in time, such do prove the best Servants, and follow only the
method of their Masters directions; for they seldomest vary from his very
thoughts, and make such businesses as pass their hands, to be even done by
himself. But this way is laborious, and requires both an apprehending Servant,
and an intelligent Master.

In matter of business, never think it to be so well done by troops, as few
and able Servants; for in dispatch numbers ever breed confusion, where affairs
be alike, and equally distributed. For your Servants either trust too much one
to another, or emulate, and so it rests undone; especially if there be not one
Superintendent, that gouernes and directs the rest. But if you have businesses
of diverse and sundry natures, then it is good to divide the^ into such parts
and degrees, as one man may not depend upon another: for where one is full of
employments, he must of necessity rank his Servants according to the
diversity of his business, conditionally, that he be sure himself often to
take a particular account of their several dispatches, which using, or
omitting, prouokes either diligence, or carelessness in his servant. More
especially in the particular of employing your servant in matters of account,
and expense, you ought often to reuiew, and give allowance of those things that
pass under his charge. For first, you may trust one whom you think honest,
though he be not, and then you are sure without great care to be deceived.
Next, if you be negligent in taking his accounts, and not remembering every
particular, you may suspect him that is honest, and without a cause; so that
both for your own sake, and his, this course will be necessary.

Now in this great trust, that Masters be as it were of necessity tied to
confer upon their servants, one whose integrity you are most confident of, is
the man, that with the general bulk, and burden of your affairs, I would
have you communicate, especially concerning those parts require secrecy, either
in respect of your self, or others. If you should omit this, and refer all
to your own memory, somethings might be forgot, others mistaken, when you are
pressed both with multitudes, and variety of business. Yet a Master need be
very precise, what, and how much trust he reposes in a servant: no man but is
subject to some faults, which they ought rather to hide, then to reveal.
Communicating then of them to our servants, does not only decrease respect,
and opinion in them, but also subjects us to their danger; if either upon
coffeehouse, malice, or treachery, they have at any time a mind to do us an
injury; or, if their easiness, and facility make them liberal in disclosing
of trust, or else out of a hope to gain grace and reputation, they brag of
the confidence reposed in them, which must be expressed by seeming to know
those things of us, that in reason we ought to conceal. And if a man cannot be
so true to himself, as to keep those things he would have secret from the
knowledge of his servants, why should he expect more secrecy in a Servant,
then he finds in himself? For as we, out of some conceived good opinion, lie
open to them, it is likely, they also may have some acquaintance, whom they
equally esteem, and may be as confident in disclosing their own, and your
trust to them, as you were to your man, and that friend may have another, and
so in time, our most concealod actions, become public.

In particular and several businesses, you must apply your direction to those
that have the dispatches of that kind. For such as require consideration, and
debate, I would have you consult in general, with all those you have selected
for business: and when you have both discussed the difficulties, and resolved
on the course, then for the expedition, refer it to the particular care of
him, whose part is to deal with the affairs of that nature.

In this domination that Masters have over their Servants, two extremes are to
be avoided. Severity, and Facility. One makes them to fear, the other, to
presume too much. The first, brings them too near the nature of Bondmen; the
second, of Fellows. This breeds hate, that contempt. But observe the golden
mediocritie, both to command, and not be feared; to be familiar, and not
scorned.

Let your conversation be such, that your servants may take a pattern from
your actions, of virtue, and not deformities. The liberty and licentiousness
of Superiors does not only provoke, but nourish vices in lower ranks. Men be
naturally inclined to a pleasing and voluptuous kind of life: and when they
see those that be above them, to live loosely without any manner of restraint,
they think ^^ lawful to imitate, and be ambitious to follow the fashion, as
it were by president. Besides, this inconvenience happens to Masters
themselves, that they cannot with justice blame their Servants, for those
faults, whereof themselves be as guilty, and for the example more blameable;
especially, if they use their servants to base and dishonest employments, which
must needs turn to their Justification, if ever they fall into any errors of
that, or the like kind.

Alter your servants rarely, and but upon extraordinary occasions. Doing
otherwise, argues weakness in your first choice, leuitie in your change, and
shows you to be of an ill disposition.

And lastly, for those servants that be of chiefest employment about you, as
their business and trust is greater then the rest, so should their exhibition
be: it does not only reward their merit, but makes them more diligent. And yet
I would not have you to be at once so liberall-handed, as that they should take
that for their last reward: but upon new occasions, and several merits,
express something of your bounty. And in your preferments, if your place can
give you leave, they that way may be plentifully recompensed in subordinate
employments under you, and so together both serve you, and profit themselves.
If you have not this way to prefer your Servants, but that it must come out
of your own private state, then your business being the less, your train
may be the shorter. For as it expresses ingratitude, not to reward feruants,
So it shows little foresight, if in indeuoring to raise the fortunes of too
many you empaire your own. But howsoever, when a servant depends upon you, as
you ought not to defend him in doing of injuries, so you are bound to protect
him from receiving them. Men of quality and place, they may, and must have
servants, as well for Honor, as business. In appearing abroad, and
entertainments at home, they be necessary, and add respect. But leaving the
numbers, I will now descend to the description of such servants, as the wisest
Masters should affect to choose, and in what kind he ought for to use them.

And first in their choice, I would have them to avoid all, of whatsoever
present state, or fame, that had been noted for, or branded with any notorious
crime. It is seldom seen, that either punishment, or shame, reduce men to
good, but rather confirm them in evil, and dissolute behavior.

Neither would I take a man that presumed too much on his own sufficiency, or
that seemed to be extreme wise in his own conceit. Such a disposition is fond
and ridiculous in all sorts, but in a servant most intolerable. For whatsoever
he does, will smell of Ostentation and Arrogance.

Men that be married, they be ever less diligent then others, and therefore
he that can keep but few servants, had best make choice of those that be single.

Such a one as is always preaching to you of preferment, begging of Sures, and
putting you in mind of his merit, is a servant merely for his own ends, and
not at all for yours, and is ever accompanied with the spirit of impatience,
and presumption.

Such as affect Principality in your employments, and Primacie above others,
be of busy, envious, ambitious, and factious disposition, and therefore unfit
for service.

Such as are too officious, and instruments of dissension in a house, by doing
ill offices, betwixt a Master and the rest of his Family, in flattering of him,
censuring or slandering of them, those natures be made of too crooked timber
for this building.

Those that will be prying into your most secret affairs, censuring your
actions, murmuring at your rebukes, be most pernicious, and incorrigible.

And lastly, I would avoid such as have past through the hands of many Masters:
for, as that may be a sign of some ill quality that they have, so it
necessarily expresses them to be of inconstant and giddy dispositions.

But such as be diligent and constant in their duties, faithful in their
service, trusty in their places, and loving to their Masters, be the servants
of whom you are to make election, resolution should be to keep, and will to
prefer, according to their merits, and your own ability.

A Masters part is to command, and a Servants to obey: wisdom is required in
the one, and duty in the other. Masters should so live with their inferiors,
as they would wish their Superiors should do with them; and they know best
how to govern, that know how to serve.

Put not your servants to base offices, nor make them not the instruments of
your licentiousness, and luxury.

Neither tyrannize over them with strokes, for that argues intemperance: nor
rebuke them with public checkes, and scorns, which be both insufferable, and
disgraceful.

Suffer your servant sometimes the freedom of speech, and let not his lips be
ever sealed in your presence. They that speak least to you before your face,
seldomest speak good of you behind your back. Such servants as speak most
freely before their Masters, be most reserved in disgracing his person, or
publishing his errors.

Think not your servant, your slave. Fortune has as much power over the one,
as the other. You have no certainty of not being transferred to the same, or a
worse degree. You are borne after the same manner, enjoy the same air, eat
the same bread, breathe, live, and dye alike with them. Therefore insult not
too much, and reduce them not to ouer-great subjection. For love can never
suffer mixture with fear. And think not that there is so great a distance
betwixt you, and your servant: for there be few Masters, that serve not either
Pride, or Women, or Ambition or Fear, or Covetousness. And these kinds of
servitude, which be most voluntary, are always most reproachful.

Of Expenses.
Expenses do naturally divide themselves into actions of Honor, Charity, and
Necessity: the first requires a Great man: the second, a good man: the third
is common to both. Honorable expenses be commendable: Charitable, religious:
and Necessary, forced. The first adds respect: the second, love: and the
last, shows our humane frailty. Inaptitude to the former, shows a man to be
of a poor and ignoble spirit: backwardness in the next, expresses an
Atheistical, and heathenish nature: and not promptness to the third, argues a
most perverse, and covetous disposition. But on the contrary, to undo a man's
self with public, and magnificent charge, is the badge of a Vainglorious
man: to cloth another, and go naked himself, is a sign rather of Fryerly
Hypocrisy, then of Charity. To limit our whole expense for our selves, and to
be covetous in respect of others, and prodigal in our own particular, is the
true mark of a Licentious, Luxurious and Selfe-louing condition. Let not
therefore Honorable expense be stained with wasting: neither let Pharisaicall
ostentation be joined to our Charity: and take heed that superfluity choke
not either. And love not Riches, more then your Reputation, the Poor, or your
selves: but let your honor be maintained without Pride: the poor relieved
without Arrogance: and nature satisfied without Excess.

Expenses should ever be limited according to the occasion, and our own
ability. For unnecessary charges be as vain as the other dangerous. They that
spend more the^ they have, want government: they that spend all, Providence.
And as a man should take an account of his expenses past: so he ought to make
a rate of what he means to spend. For incertainties of this kind be never
good. As expenses be proportioned, so the reckonings should be certain,
otherwise, a man walks in the dark. But this is to be understood of such as
have a competencie, be come to years of ripeness and judgment, and that
have not been by any casualtie, or accident put behind hand in the world. All
which though they do not avoid the mischief, yet they extenuate the error.

Riches be ordained for our use, but neither to be adored, nor contemned. A
Prodigal runs through his estate, and is so entangled to other men, that he is
never master of himself: this is the fruit of the Contempt. A covetous man, as
he is far from benefitting others, so he is loath to accommodate himself,
but lives in the state rather of a Steward for another, then master of his
own. And this is the benefit of the Adoration. So that in this there can be no
other mediocrity, or better composition, then to spend with discretion, that
that you have honestly obtained. Liberality is a Virtue, and so is Parsimony
within their several bounds, but the error is, when the one steps, or the other
declines too near the contrary.

Those men that be blessed with great and fortunate estates, I think to be
tied even by the law of Nature, to a more public appearing, then those that
be below them, either in degree, or estate, to a willingness in relieuing the
necessities of others, proportionably according to their abilities, and so to
provide for their posterity, that they may rather find increase then
diminution of any part of their patrimony.

A man ought to moderate his expenses, and keep them within certain
limitations; for he is bound to increase and better the fortune of his Family,
to maintain, and marry his children, to be of a reasonable ability, not to
refuse, when that which he loves and likes, may chance to be offered unto him,
to have means to maintain himself from wrongs and injuries, to keep him
from being contemptible in the world, and many respects more in the same kind.
But for a man to suppose too great a necessity in these or the like occasions,
and make that a color for extremity of covetousness, I cannot imagine a man
so rich, that may not that way pretend an occasion for as much more, if it were
possible to be had; so that there is no end in coveting, if the more a man
enioyes, the more he desires, though in a man's fortune I think it better for
ones consideration, to fix upon the competencie, then superfluity of his
estate.

In private expenses it is good to be near, in public, magnificent, being
poor and base to spare in honorable expenses, to the end they may the better
spend upon their private pleasures. Therefore hate Covetousness, but endeavor
Thrift, despise Prodigality, yet love to be liberal.

To spend upon back and belly too sumptuously, too deliciously, cannot be
reckoned in the number of honorable expenses, but mere effects of Pride and
Epicurisme. And I am persuaded that indeed there be none more auaricious then
these gorgeous spenders. Honest expenses they think makes no show, and
honorable, they find gives no taste; wherefore they neglect them, striving
couetously to lay up, whereby they may feed their sumptuousness and
delicacie. And you shall commonly see in expenses of this kind, more desire,
more zeal then in any sort besides, as being governed by the square of
irregular passions, and neither by the rules of Honor, nor Honesty.

And it is not good to have our liberality wedded to some kinds of expenses,
and in others of as great account to grow miserable, as to be bountiful to our
horses, and keep a beggarly house, to be sumptuous at our Misers feast, and
then live like Farmers all the year after. These extremities be not good, but
according to every man's means, an equality is to be kept. Use pleasures, yet
forget not your profit; you may be liberal, yet hurt not your state.

I have known some, and very rich, who all their life time have not been
accessory to one good and charitable act, and yet, after their death, give
order to dispose of their estates more liberally in this kind then any other,
which show of Charity I esteem not: for it is necessity of leaving, and not
desire to do good, that enforces that act. Or, peradventure it proceeds from
custom: for they who all their life have never benefited any of their friends
or kindred, are loath to alter or differ from this habit in their death; and not
knowing else what to do with their estates, be after a manner forced to this
poor Charity, in spite of their hearts. For if it were possible to have
themselves and their money buried together, I verily believe that they would
rather incline to that way.

It is not the mere doing of good, but the willingness and cheerful
proceeding that crowns acts of this nature. The very deferring and protraction
argues it to be an action rather strained then voluntary. And besides,
benefits thus bestowed, when we are dead, deserve neither the Attributes of
Charity nor Liberality, for that that we then part withal belongs to
another owner, for it neither appertains to us, nor is in our possession.

If a man would truly enter into a contemplative consideration of riches,
certainly he would find them extremely ouer-valued, and in themselves worth
nothing, but that estimation makes them so; so that they have rather gotten a
name and reputation in the world by opinion then merit. For it is impossible
for the most careful prouider to foresee the fortune of his wealth, whether
continued, increased, dispersed, or lost. The first stock one may guess of;
but to presume of farther assurance, is vain, and uncertain.

Riches be therefore well placed, when a man can as contentedly leave, as enjoy
them: which every man will easily do, that esteems them not beyond their use,
nor is deceived by their luster.

Of Visitations.
FEminine thoughts, be for the most part enemies to Meditation; yet in this
Subject, a help. For it is an idle, womanish, and therefore unnecessary, and
no masculine habit, though their weakness in this kind has entered far
into our sex, as it were by imitation; from whence may be discerned the force
of ill examples, when so weak ones from weak women can draw us to
ridiculousnesse, being an outside quality, and expressing nothing of man's
inward abilities. And yet it is a wonder to see what multitudes there be of
all sorts, that make this their only business, and in a manner, spend their
whole time in complement, as if they were borne to no other end, bred to no
other purpose, had nothing else to do, then to be a kind of living walking
ghosts, to haunt and persecute others with unnecessary observation.

It is an argument either of folly, or deceit, for any to be more ceremonious
then real, which is necessarily employed in these unnecessary visits. For they
express either Simplicity, or Flattery, the one the weakest, the other the
basest quality that can be incident to any. Wise men will not view such
persons but with scorn, nor respect the^ but with disesteem; for men of
ability, and judgment undervalue, rather then praise them, for these
needless complements, as being the practice of light and fantastical, and not
of wise men, because these unnecessary visits, interrupt actions of more value
and worth, with making businesses, where there is none.

Some go abroad, and God knows, the Visited be not beholding to them. For if
these giddy goers be forced to give a reason for their wheeling up and down
the streets, their answer is, they know not else how to pass the time. And
how tedious it is, for a man that accounts his hours, to be subject to these
vacancies, and apply himself to lose a day with such timepassers, who neither
come for business, nor out of true friendship, but only to spend the day, as
if one had nothing else to do, but to supply their idle time: how hard a task
this is, those that be haunted with these spirits, do so sensibly feel, that
I am loath to enlarge their torture; but only advise them to let those know,
who make a profession to pass their time, with the loss of mine, that as
their visitations be unprofitable to themselves, so they be tedious, and
burdensome unto me. And if that serve not the turn against their untimely
visits, then bolt my door, or hide my self, which shift I have known many put
to for want of other defense.

And besides, when these spirits walk abroad, it is rather to show themselves,
then to see any, which for the most part is never in the Morning; (and
especially on Sundays, because it is the best day in the week) all that while
they be building themselves, and viewing their own proportions, feeding in
stead of a breakfast, upon how brave they shall appear in the afternoon, And
the^ they go to the most public, and most received places of entertainment,
which be sundry, and therefore they stay not long in a place: but after they
have asked you, how you do, and told some old, or fabulous news, laughed twice
or thrice in your face, and censured those they know you love not, (when
peradventure the next place they go to, is to them, where they will be as
courteous to you) spoke a few words of fashions, and alterations, whispered
some lascivious motion, that shall be practiced the next day, fallen into
discourse of liberty, and how it agrees with humanity, for women to have
servants besides their husbands, made legs, and postures of the last edition,
with three or four new and diminutiue oaths, and protestations of their
service, and observance; they then retire to their Coach, and so prepare for
another company, and continue in this vocation, till the beginning of the next
day, that is, till past midnight, and so home: when betimes in the morning, the
Decorum is, if it be a Lady visiter, to send her Gentleman Usher, to see if
all those be well, that she saw in perfect health but the night before.

This has been more to show the Deformity of it, then the Danger, which I
would rather avoid, then unmask, because it touches too many particulars; but
in general this. It is the Index of an idle and unprofitable disposition, a
taker up of time that may be better disposed; and such a spender of time, that
in few actions it can be worse employed. Many an unlawful bargain is
concluded upon this exchange: contrary purposes be concealed under this
vizzard, and few be practique in this art, whose manners and lives be not
corrupted. Besides, this vain custom once begun, induces a habit not
easily lost, therefore not good to begin; and once practiced, it is not so
safely left: for begun, and not continued, makes the leaving of it off,
esteemed a neglect: which otherwise would be never claimed as a due.

There be of this Family, or Sect, that are so punctual, and methodicall in
their art, that they turn Critiques, and censure those that be not as
pertinent, in impertinencies, and spit not with as good a grace, or speak not
to as good a tune (for all their words be but sound, and no sense) as
themselves, when such as are truly intelligent, think this scorn, their
praise: for no man that has any thoughts worthy consideration, will bestow
the labor to speak, or to entertain argument in such a case, upon so barren,
and worthless an occasion.

And these kind of ceremonies, be equally tedious to the Complementer, and
Complementee, if they reciprocally respect not this fond and dissimulate kind
of conversation: and though it often happen, that in some places where they
visit, their tedious society be well accepted, (which then must only be
allowed to such, as are of the same occupation, and are even with them in the
same kind;) yet sometimes it falls out, they thus running over all kind of
company, they be to many so unwelcome, and troublesome, in distracting, or
diuerting their better employments, that oftentimes those they come to,
conceal themselves upon purpose, or suppose some necessary business that calls
them away, with intention only to get rid of them. From which tediousness, if
no better employment of their own can divert them, yet the consideration of
the unseasonable trouble they put those to, whom they visit, should even shame
them from frequenting so bad a custom.

Yet custom has so far prevailed, that I dare not prescribe a total
neglect: but counsel to avoid frequent and assiduall practice of so
superfluous, though received a fashion.

Those that duty, love, respect, business, or familiarity bind us to, we
must observe, and visit; lest they interpret our absence to be either in
contempt of their persons, or a carelessness, and dis-esteeme of their favor,
and friendship.

And howsoever, with a non obstante, I do not by this seclude society, and
conversation: for such a solitary, and unsociable disposition, I hold to be
worse then this Gadder.

Of Death.
NOthing is more certain then Death, and nothing more uncertain then the the
time. Every man is to pay this debt, though few be ready at the day; life is
but lent us, and the condition of the obligation is Death, yet not without a
penalty, if in this wandering and uncertain state we make no preparation.

Life then being so short, Death so certain, a man should not confine his
thoughts within the small circle of the present being, but dilate them to more
high and worthy considerations; and one is the immortality of the soul, which
without comparison is the chief and only happiness; the next is, perpetuating
of a good name; which according to the actions of our life good or bad,
continue in memory and fame after we be dead: and surely, a man that has any
affinity with Virtue or goodness, and is not only borne for, but buried in
himself, as he should desire an honest report and memory to continue of him,
so he should fear the contrary. Every man naturally desires to have his name
continued by children and posterity; and certainly it is a great blessing,
yet surely the actions of a great man's life, if they be good, make his name,
when dead, more durable.

Beatitude is never seen in this life, but by a false light; we must be
dissolved, transformed, and changed, before we arrive to fullness and
fruition, which cannot be conferred in this, but a higher habitation. Many
examples, especially if common or usual, convert into precept, yet these which
be most visible, least avail; for though we daily see our acquaintance,
friends, and children taken from us, yet we provide and prepare for this life,
as if we were irremouable, and think of death no otherwise, then as a tale
that is reported to fright us, till the stroke come home to our own doors. So
fond, so unsettled be our cogitations. For a man in nothing more shows the
goodness, and greatness of his spirit, then in contemning and not fearing
Death; for it must come, and fear cannot prevent it. And me thinks therefore,
the certainty of it should abate timidity: therefore rely not so much upon so
uncertain and transitory an estate.

And the continual passing away of our children, and kindred, and friends, by
this gate, are but so many guides and forerunners to us, and the nearer one is
either in affection, or alliance, the application should be more particular to
our selves. Some think to deceive, or prevent, or delay this blow, and
attribute the cause of it rather to accident, then providence; as if the rules
of diet, or Physic, were able to oppose fate; though I dispute not against
those means the which God has appointed for the preservation of life; but I
esteem them only as helps, and not causes of continuance. All men in this life
be subordinately governed: we are naturally bodies, and live not by miracle,
but sustentation: so that it is as ill to avoid those helps, as to trust to
them.

It is a strange, but vulgar error, for men to say, counsel or temper would
have prevented such a man's death; might they not consider the several, sudden,
and strange accidents that lead to this end, that there be not more men then
ways that conduct to this condition? Children die before Parents; strong,
before weak; sound, before sickly; which as often happen by small and
unobserved chances, as great diseases: as a man goes well to bed, and is
smothered before morning; is well at the beginning of a meal, and dead before
the end; now in a serious discourse, and dead, in the midst of a word. He
that is a friend to day, proves a murderer to morrow; a pillow may stifle,
smoke may suffocate, a Fly may choke. This, if it were to be illustrated by
examples, would plainly show, that there is no action, nor instrument so
small, or unobserved, that is not master of our life.

Therefore to esteem life above the price, or to fear death beyond the rate,
be alike evil. No man can be in love with this world, that is not in some
doubt of the next. He that respects life, expects little beyond death. But then
it may be demanded, Are those the best men, that be most weary of this life,
and therefore hasten death with their own hands? Certainly no. For every act
in that kind, shows that it was not in respect they hated to live; but
because of want, fear, punishment, ignominy, and diverse other causes, that
these examples do daily publish, and are notoriously known. Man is created by
God, therefore not to be his own executioner, but to wait for the time, and
expect the hour of his Call.

A man's Peregrination in this life should be employed, but as a harbinger for
Death, nay rather, life: for whilst we live, we die; but live not till death.
Yet good men, may in a sort religiously fear death, in respect of the cause of
it. For the wages of sin, is death. In respect of not knowing the place of
our being after death (we our selves being altogether vnmeriting) these, and
the like considerations, may justly make death seem terrible. But to go on.

How can a man think himself happy in this world, without the expectation of a
better? If a man enjoy that his heart can wish, if he know not want, have
plenty in abundance: these things may sometimes make him glory in himself, and
in a kind of scornful pity to commiserate those that be below him; yet the
consideration of Death, and the little while he has to enjoy these temporary
happinesses, turns all his pleasures into melancholy, his sweetness, to gall.
This is the happiest condition, that the happiest man can have, that thinks
there is no happiness beyond this life.

But if you view other men, and see what cares, what hazzards, what iealousies,
what sickness, and what miseries, they endure in all kinds, only to preserve
and please themselves in this short, troublesome, dangerous, suspicious, and
wearisome life, you would think them rather dreams then substances, fictions,
then men.

But so live, as neither the pleasures of this world may possess, nor the
miseries confound you. Boast of nothing in your self, but that you are a
lively representation or Image of your Creator, which you deforme, if you look
to earth, or those things which be below. The benefits which God has here
bestowed upon you, use according to his direction, but not contrary to his
command; and fear not, but welcome death, as being the end of your
unhappiness, and beginning of your joy.

Many men without the knowledge of Religion, have excellently expressed their
contempt of Death, but that may be reduced some of these causes: peradventure
they had a kind of uncertain opinion that some greater happiness followed,
then accompanied this life: or, in respect of the daily examples of their
mortality, custom extinguished fear: or lastly, to perpetuate their
memories, or publish their fame to succeeding ages, have for the liberation of
their Country, or Friends, or Honor, voluntarily exposed themselves to a
certain and present death.

There be few lingering diseases, or sudden pains, that be not more sensible
and painful then Death, and the recovery from them, is but as a short
reprieue. Therefore I see little reason why a man that lives well, should fear
death much more then sickness.

Of a Country Life.
TO write of a Country Life in what respects it is necessary, or unfit, for all
degrees of men, would too much lengthen this part, in the resolution of sundry
questions, which I now do purposely avoid; I only intending to write in the
praise or discommendation of it, so far as it has relation to men of great
quality, and estates. So that in this description, I banish all that may
refer to any other kind and ranks of men, either for their use, or
necessity, of living in the Country.

This kind of life has been more familiar with us, then other Nations; so
that we have in a kind appropriated it to our selves; more Southernly people,
as rarely using the country, for retirement, or variety, or air, as our
Country Nobility and Gentry, were anciently upon extraordinary businesses
driven to the town. But different people have several forms of living and
behavior: that which is necessary in one place, is ridiculous and pernicious
in another. In these cases therefore we must not guide our selves by
precedent. It is as easy to introduce one common language, and reuerse the
confusion of tongues, as to parallel all men in one kind and fashion of life.
Rigidly to keep unseemly customs, because we receive them from antiquity, and
ancestors, no man will defend. Time as it has a quality in some cases to
degenerate, and corrupt; so in others it has to cleanse: but to alter so good a
custom as this, whereof we have had so long experience and benefit, upon
pretense only of imitation, appears in my judgment, to be altogether void of
reason. And yet this, taking it for a general question, I will at this time
neither dispute nor resolve, either by the numerousnesse of ancient precedents,
and example, or force of reason and argument; only as the case stands, with us
in the particular, conclude, That it is neither good, nor safe, to innouate, or
alter old and approved customs.

But as in the choice of any indifferent action, men's affections and fancies
predominate and govern, they have equal power, and work the same effect in
the election either of this, or any other kind of life: but what reasons in
this should induce us either to the one or other, that which falls accide^tally
by the way, passing, I will touch.

By a Country Life, I do understand such an habitation as impliesa retirednes
from the press, business, and imployme^t either of city or court; the distance
and that course of life secluding them from those kind of troubles: and how a
man of quality is to behave and direct himself in this way, shall be my first
enquiry.

To make living in the Country a veyle, or shadow, for base and sordid sparing,
becomes not the thought of such a man as I propose, whom I name not, as driven
to live there for necessity, and neerenesse, but for honorable and virtuous
endeavors. Amongst which his first should be to express freedom and
Hospitality in his house, and bountiful liberality toward his poorer
neighbors: these be the true ornaments of a Country housekeeper; an honorable
custom, so peculiar to our Nation, that that way we have out-gone all others;
and howsoever of late it has been declining and decaying, yet it is worthy of
renouation, being so great a stay to the Country, such a relief to the poor,
so honorable for themselves, and exemplary for posterity, the very knot which
contracts society and conversation, a receptacle for ones friends and children,
which be the chiefest solaces of a man's life, and the surest way to make a man
be loved of those that know, and esteemed by all that hear of him. To set
down a particular rate and order in keeping of such a house, is not now my
purpose: that it ought to be governed regularly and religiously none doubts;
and not replete with those confused disorders, and riots, which some licentious
and prodigal dispositions have allowed. That makes it rather a snare and
inuitation to nourish lewd, and base affections, then to be either a stay, or
relief to the Country where they live.

Next, under pretense of this noble and free life, for a man to take too much
upon him, expressing Arrogance and Pride to those below him, in his own
opinion, creating in himself that greatness and power, which is not his due;
squaring his actions by his will, not reason; forcing to his ends by the way of
greatness and authority, not equity and Justice; awing his neighbors with his
countenance and power; turning law into affection, and reason to appetite;
these should be none of the ends in a noble and good nature, when he chooses a
country life; but contrarily, a purpose to express such moderation and modesty
in all his actions, that he may be useful, not oppressing; serviceable, not
burdensome; loved, not feared in the Country where he lives.

And having here, and thus settled him, his life must not be wholly reserved to
his own quiet, and particular pleasures; but in that place whereunto he is
called, and destined to live, to apply himself, and service, for the common
and public good; which in such a life as this, will principally consist in
these particulars. The disordered and unruly life of those under his authority
and command, (setting aside those outrages of Murder, Theft, and the like which
the law punishes, and imposes also a duty upon his vigilance) he ought
besides, not only to suppress, but prevent all bold and contemptuous behavior
of one neighbor toward another, all seeds of seditions and quarrels, and
such common means as in the Country usually provoke them. Generally also, all
manner of distemper in the Country ought to be qualified by his judgment and
discretion; a^ in the better sort, if any faction or emulation arise, then the
virtue of his authority must appear in equal moderation. Wherein he is chiefly
to take heed, that when factions be sided, his Greatness uphold not one
faction, to the decay and ruin of the other; but contrarily to even and
compound them in mutual amity and agreement.

Again, in this place, he is not only to prevent il, but to do good, and that,
first by his example, in equally bearing part of the burden in country
services, with the rest of the gentlemen, (though in quality below, and in
akind depending upon him) and this not only in the private execution of his
duty and place, but also in the sollemne and public meetings, for
distribution of Justice; which will be a very great encouragement, and
inuitation, to awake others diligence, as also an excellent restraint of
partiality and favor, in the several votes of the rest, which oftentimes
respect persons, more then causes, or spleen then truth; this good will follow
the endeavors of so great a man, if he carry himself euenly, and without
private ends, in the businesses of the Country; otherwise the mischief will
be more dangerous in awing the Country, then the benefit necessary in
governing it: but if he be of a condition prepared with integrity; then to
declare his ability in Country services (I do not say always to engrosse
them) will make the rest more wary in their steps, and diligent in the
uprightness of their endeavors. But allow his carriage never so clear, if it
be either affected, or smell of ostentation, so that one may discern either
of them to be the spur of his endeavors, his labor is lost, will be
imputed to him for vainglory, and put upon the account of his disgrace. But
yet the censure of this must not be left to the ungoverned tongues of the
ignorant multitude, and envious people; but to men of quality, indifferency,
and discretion.

The next means of doing good in the Country, wherein men's endeavors should
never slack, nor their labors seem troublesome to themselves, is in
composing of differences and discontents, betwixt one neighbor or friend, and
another: it is the principal act of Charity; by this, they not only do, but
preserve it: This is the proper work of a superior power, men's passions will
not be so much misgouerned, nor reason blinded before them, as betwixt
themselves, or more low arbitrators. It is impossible for men to be competent
judges in their own causes, their affections will incline, and judgments lean
to their particular pretensions. This perverseness is it that brings men so
often to the hazard of censures, and suites; which may be manifested in the
still continuance of their peevishness; for the murmr remains when the
cause is sentenced, which is the ground of an ill Proverb, that Losers may
lawfully complain. And this misery of imputation is it, which Judges are
forced to suffer; wherein, in doing justly (for that I admit) impartial
judgments will be so far from finding fault, that they love their
integrity; for a Judge is to sentence according to the merit of the cause, and
not to arbitrate in respect of collateral circumstances. But I will no farther
digress. It is the best work wherein a man in the Country can employ
himself, to be a Peacemaker, and ender of controversies; it confirms
friendship; expells malice, auoids needless and extrauagant expenses; shuts
the gate against those bad instruments that move and stir suits, to make their
living upon that prey; expedites causes; and makes a more indifferent and
satisfactory end, then the Judge in his place can do. This common good
succeedes so worthy an endeavor. And why it is not more commonly practiced, I
rather impute it to the unwillingness of interposers, the^ a common
perverseness in the parties interessed, to submit their differences to an
upright and impartial neighbor; which his own actions, if conversant in this
kind, will sufficiently assure: and I see not such difficulty, but it may be
possible this way to give satisfaction to both sides.

But if eithers mistrust cause them not to yield to so easy and quick an end,
the merit of his endeavors and good will cannot be taken away. And if it fall
out, that the business be of such a nature, as may iudicially afterward come
before him, let not the parties jealousy, before in referring it, wrest or wry
his judgment in the least degree to prejudice. I will enlarge this no farther,
these particulars last touched being only in the power of men of degree and
authority; and here ends my first enquiry, how a Noble man in the Country
ought to carry and govern himself. I now descend to take a short view of the
more peculiar delights, and healthful conueniences, incident to them that live
in the Country, then in any other place.

All field delights, as Hunting, Riding, and Hawking, commendable, if used with
moderation, are properly belonging only to this life, and certainly they
greatly enable, and active men's bodies, making the difficulty of enduring
labor, and other accidents, that in times of war, a man may be subject unto,
more easy then any other preparatiue, or imitable practice that I know. The
unseasonableness of the times, early, and late: and so the uncertainty of the
weather, heates, and cold, and wet: of diet, little, or none, or course, and at
hours unlimited, and not set, assured also and ready in his horsmanship, by so
often occasions of practice, which is no small advantage. So paralelling these,
with the chances, and necessities in time of service; the often using of these
exercises, will make the labor less difficill, and hard, when necessity of
employment shall require it, and the body more agill, and healthful, free from
those infirmities, that rest, idleness, and full feeding do bring men into.
This is the good that follows the use of these exercises, setting aside the
delight which draws most men to follow and entertain them; which surely,
though not always discerned by wise men, yet may by good reason be proved to
be delightful.

If I should breathe the country air, and digress into the commendatio^ of
it, in respect of health from that cause, I think the whole College of
Physicions would subscribe to my opinion: for without doubt, it is freed from
those noisome vapors, and consequently infections, which thronged and populous
Cities do produce. And this daily practice makes manifest: for in those
Countries where towne-dwelling is most frequented, yet every Summer the better
sort retire, only for the freedom, and liberty of the air, to their
Palaces, and Villaes, as they term them; which shows there is a necessary,
and impulsive cause for their health, that drives them thither. And here with
us, those that be most in love with the town, in Summer ever fly into the
Country: and the general reason of it must only be, to change a bad air, for
a good; wherein though the Country does always predominate, yet in Summer the
air of the City is so far from good, that it is neither tolerable, nor
indifferent.

And being now in a meditation of health, to say truth, the helps, and
furtherances of it are much more appropriate to a Country then a City life,
which I will but touch, without robbing the Poets at this time, by falling into
the praise and pleasures of Gardens, Rivers, Fountains, Woods, places of
privacy, and retyrednesse, or the like: of most of which, though all Cities
have a show, yet it is but forced, and counterfeit, in respect of them in the
country, which is the proper element for those delights. But to return to my
consideration of health, the Country is the place most free, from that easy,
and sedentary life, which men in Cities be forced to entertain; there all
exercises for the health, and agilitie of the body be in daily practice; as
Riding, Shooting, Bowling, Walking, Hunting, Hawking, and the like: which
though some towne-liuers, sometimes make hard shift to practice, yet there,
there be so many other diuersions, that there are very few living in towns,
who can either take or find opportunities for that purpose, which must needs
greatly decay, and disable both a man's health, and strength. Of this argument
much more might be said, but I purposely avoid it: and indeed would have left
it out, but that I was forced to it in completing the description, for fear of
falling from my Title. But I now hasten to other observations: and first, of
those advantages and benefits, a man gains by living in the country.

A man in the Country is retired out of the crowd and noise of factions, and
emulations, dependencies, and neck-breaking of one another, which Court, and
Town, do too often yield, and though a man in his own inclination be free
from, and not busy, yet if present, can hardly be a neuter: or if he be one,
will yet scarcely be thought so, and suspected of either side for affection to
the other. But take him allowed for a neutrall, he then commonly is so far
from the affection of the sides, that they both turn his enemies, because he
is neither of their friends. These straites by being away, and by living in the
Country, men often escape from.

Next, he is free from those tempestuous winds of businesses, and multiplicitie
of vexations, wherewith many have been tossed; the calm of the Country being
void of those storms, and troubled waves, that commonly accompany a town, or
Court life, where men's desires and ambitions so abound, that they be always
in hopes, and proiections, wherein many times they do so outstraine and
ouer-graspe, that in reaching too high, they ouerreach themselves, in seeking a
new fortune, lose their old, and so convert their substance into pretensions,
their certainty into nothing.

Again, no man can expect to live in the same, or equal reputation, out of
the Country, and his own dwelling. In Town, or Court, he is as it were, in a
throng, wanting elbow room: there be so many his equals, and superiors, above
him both in place, and merit, that he is reckoned for number, not weight; one
of the troop rather for show, then use. Those Nations therefore who affect
this place, out of vainglory, and pride, to show themselves, and get opinion,
if they compare their estimation here, with their reputation at home, they
will find cause quickly to change their mind and place, to go thither where
they shall be sure to find that, which they so affectedly desire, and that is
to their own Country; ask but Northern men, or Welshmen, they will swear to
you this is true.

Besides, I believe, if it went to voices, most would opine, that the
stabilitie of a Country fortune were less subject to declination, and the
cataracts of adversity, then that whose only foundation is built upon the
present favor of the time. They who raise their estates above, the Haven they
strive for, is a Country fortune, that is the end of their ambition. When a
man therefore has that which the Courtier only aims at: why should he fix
himself in that sphere upon purpose, to look after those things, which he
has already? If that be not his end, and no other just cause can be
alleged, I cannot free him from the imputations of lightness, and vanity;
who besides the neglecting of that good he may do at home, offends first,
against his own estate, and next, against the Crown and state of the
Kingdom, in seeking relief there, for that which he has vainly, and
inconsiderately spent; when neither his own abilities, nor favor of the
Prince, have forced the necessity of his attendance.

And writing now as well to honest, as wise men, if through their own
infirmities they find themselves subject to the temptations of high, and
ambitious desires, and desire to abate them: there is no such correctiue as a
retired country life. For though in it self good and great places, where they
meet with men that be fit for them, may, out of honest ends, and for good
purposes, be both desired, and kept: yet when these be only wished, for the
greatness, and dignity of the place, it is an inordinate, and unruly passion,
and ought to be suppressed. If a man therefore in his own arraignment, find
himself guilty of such thoughts, and withal be not ignorant of his own
inabilities, let him avoid those occasions that may renew his desires.

Moreover, a man that lives in the Country, is more out of the way, and less
obuious to the malice and envy of busy and ravenous men, such as build up
their own fortunes upon others decays: curious inquisitors into men's lives,
and false interpreters of their actions, by that way to lay a ground for
ruining them, and so raise a step to their own advancement. And though a
Country Life do not totally conceal a man from these that be so quick-sighted;
yet he that takes that course, makes them seek farther off, and they often go
not down, when they find work nearer home.

And lastly, this kind of life gives a man more free hours, for reading,
writing, and meditation, then the public towne-liuers can possibly allow
themselves; their time in the Country being neither so taken away, nor
distracted, as unavoidably in town it must often be: both by several
occasions, to which their own wills inuit them, and also by often bestowing
themselves, and time, upon others, out of affection, and respect, which
accidents of diuertion, do more rarely happen in the Country, men being there
more free masters, both of their hours, and disposing of them, then they can
be in the other place. Many more advantages might be found; but it suffices
me, if I have said enough, though not all. But several forms, and actions, of
our Moral life, have as well their disaduantages, as commodity, and so has
this; wherefore to deal, and distribute, my opinion equally, my now search
must be to set down the disaduantageous inconveniences that accompany a
Country Life.

As in the choice, and reading of good Books, principally consists the
enabling and advancement of a man's knowledge, and learning; yet if it be not
mixed with the conversation, of discreet, able, and understanding men, they can
make little use of their reading, either for themselves, or the Commonwealth
where they live. There is not a more common Proverb, then this, That the
greatest Clerks be not always the wisest men, and reason for it, being a
very uneven rule, to square all actions, and consultations, only by book
precedents. Time has so many changes, and alterations, and such variety of
occasions, and opportunities, interuening, and mingled, that it is impossible
to go new ways, in the old paths; so that though reading do furnish, and
direct a man's judgment, yet it does not wholly govern it. Therefore the
necessity of knowing the present time, and men, wherein we live, is so great,
that it is the principal guide of our actions, and reading but supplementall.
Now this knowledge, which is obtained by conversation, and acquaintance, must
be sought where it is, and that is in Cities, and Courts, where generally the
most refined, and judicious men, be likeliest to be found: and as reading
forms a judgment, so conference must perfect it, or else it will be lame.

It must then follow, that a mere Country life; if men look as well to the
enriching of their minds, as fortune, is not the way to purchase ability, and
judgment; for it both secludes us from the knowledge of the Court, and
government there, and also eclipseth from our acquaintance, the Great men, and
guiders of the State, which any man who desires to store his understanding,
will find to be as necessary to be looked upon, and turned over often, as the
most useful books.

And this will appear, if any occasion or necessity of business, force them
thither: for they will be then so to seek, and imperfect, so incongruous in
their behauior, and discourse, that they scarce know how to do their
business, nor they that they go to, what they would have. And in this
negotiating, such cannot possibly guide themselves, by their own judgments,
but must submit to the direction of others, who many times for want of
judgment be ill chosen; or for want of honesty, be worse aduisers. So that if
any occasion happen, it is impossible for Great men always to want them, they
be by this long absence, both unknowing, unknown, and unable to dispatch their
own businesses when they happen.

Besides, if a man by his experience, and reading, have gotten much
sufficiency, and ability, in the knowledge of affairs, then a total
sequestration in the Country, does not only hinder him of that preferment, and
honor, which in all likelihood he may arrive too, but robs the State and
Commonwealth where he lives, of an able, and fit minister, to do it service.
Whereas if a man in his own judgment finds that he may be useful, and that
his first look is at his Countries service, in that case the wilful retyring,
and obscuring of a man's self, must needs be accounted a fault: for we are not
borne for our selves, and to please only our own fancies, but to serve the
public in that kind, and in those places, we be thought most fit for.

So then as it is ill for men, that know their own strength, voluntarily to
conceal and hide it: it is also certain, that continual absence from the face
of the world, causes an impossibility in men, though of never so good wits,
to have capacity, judgment, or experience, to undergo the charge of any
public employment, either at home, or abroad, if they should be called
thereunto: which forces the state oftentimes to fix their greatest places upon
men low, and meanly descended, and though their industry can never be
sufficiently commended, who wanting those means, that in all likelihood the
nobler degrees might have had, and have notwithstanding made themselves more
useful, and able for their Countries service: yet it cannot but be interpreted
as a disgrace, and must reflect upon the ill education, and weakness of
knowledge in our Gentry, and Nobility; who, me thinks, for that only
respect should strive, that as they precede others, in degree, and birth; so at
least to equalize them in sufficiency, and judgment.

Moreover the great trade, and commerce of the world, is in giving, and
receiving of good turns, (I mean amongst men of equal condition.) But a
Country Life absolutely solitary, makes a man neither capable to receive, nor
of ability to do one, and so they run out their days unprofitably both to
themselves, and all men beside, as if they neither had friends, nor were friend
to any, which is a hard condition for a man to live in.

Also it cannot be denied, but that a man's long absence from the Court, and
Town, makes him a stranger to all passages, and alterations of the world, both
at home, and abroad: for a man there will get that by conversation, he will
never learn either by Letters, or report. Who knows not, that wise men to
their friends will say that, which they will never write to them? Besides, if a
man hold correspondency abroad, he is tied to the Town, being very hard to
keep it, and live in the Country. Those therefore that thus desire to inform,
and enrich themselves, must either live where it is to be gotten, or else be
content with less knowledge, then other men have. And so for the necessities,
and conueniences, that may induce a man to live in town, for the present these
shall serve. Now in a word, still supposing as I begun, the man that should
either live, or not live in the Country, to be of quality and degree, I will
give my opinion, how, and in what manner, he must dispose himself, and then
end.

In the forming of this sentence, I will be very short; but first lay this
foundation, that no man is, or ought to be so absolutely master of himself, as
to take the liberty of electing that course of life, which only his own will,
and inclination, gouernes and desires: but to follow and direct himself in
that way, which his own abilities, and Countries service, make, and think him
fit to be disposed unto: it being one principal end of a man's being in this
world, to be serviceable in one kind or other, to that Kingdom, or
Commonwealth where he lives.

I will therefore first select those, whom necessity and conuenience, seclude
from a Country Life: who are such as be in the place of necessary attendance
about a King, or Prince: or such as finding their presence there well esteemed
of; do for the increase, and continuation of their favor at Court, give their
attendance: but that observance then ought to proceed rather out of respect,
and duty, then particular, and private ends: for he is very unworthy of a
Princes favor (which is freely bestowed) if in his love and hearty affection,
he truly, and reciprocally, return not the best of his service. Others also
that sit at the Helm, and have the charge of great affairs, and guiding in
the State, are bound to continual residence: and so such as be appointed to
any judicial places, and Magistracy, or any other office, that forces their
presence in town: or if a man have any tedious business, or suite, that
calls them up, and requires there their frequent attendance. And lastly, it
is convenient, for such to live about the Town, and Court, who have neither
settled state nor calling in the Country, because a man that has there nothing
to do, and little to live on, can hardly be tied to a worse place; whilst in
the mean time living abroad, they make better use of their time by
conversation, and knowing of men, as well as books, by that way to enable
their sufficiency, for any employment, public, or private, in Town, or the
Country, that the state, and their own endeavors, may in time advance them
unto.

And so these excepted, I think that notwithstanding the conueniences,
allurements, and advantages, which cause most men to be so much in love with
living about the Town, and Court, the Country to be the proper sphere for
all of quality besides. In that place they may do most good, as well by their
government, and direction, as hospitality, and housekeeping. For men of equal
ranks, can not altogether be of equal employment, in that they must submit,
to the choice and opinion of the Prince, and State, and go on in that path,
that they direct them. And though it be true that the greatest business of the
State, is commonly directed and concluded above, yet most they there consult
upon, is for the common good, and that is the good of the Country, which then
ought not to be abandoned, and left naked. Once allow but that liberty, and
there are few Noblemen, or Gentlemen there of quality, who will not pick an
occasion to live out of their country. Those therefore whose services be found
to be of use, and necessity there, and have no other calling to divert them,
are bound not to relinquish that confidence, and trust, which the State has
reposed in them.

But yet it seems very hard, so strictly to confine and imprison a man of
rank, and quality; and truly in my opinion, I cannot think it to be either
reasonable, or convenient: for by that means their former endeavors would be
lost and experience abated: therefore I mitigate thus. Their settled houses and
family must needs be in the Country: but for to make themselves altogether
strangers from the Court and Town is too strict, and withal not very safe for
such men to lose their friends, and acquaintance at Court, for the keeping of
home. Though a man be not tied to a continual attendance, yet he is to some,
and if he be but now and then there, his estimation, and respect, will be
rather more, then less, when he comes but seldom. So I conclude, such a man
should neither be a Plebeian, nor Citizen, more in the Country: sometimes at
Court; mixed together, but as the Frenchmen do allay their drink, three parts
water, to one of Wine.

Of Religion.
THere was never yet Nation; or people, either Civil or Barbarous, that
accounted not a Prescript or Law, for a kind of divine thing; and such unruly
and untamed desires, as would not be restrained by that bridle, have been ever
esteemed worthily to suffer such punishments, whether Corporal, Pecuniary or
Capital, as the laws have inflicted. If the laws then of men do deserve,
and indeed worthily, such reverence, without doubt that Law which a man's Maker
lays upon him, does beyond the degrees of comparison merit a far higher
valuation: the particulars whereof be diverse, but the general head that
comprehends the rest, is Religion, a blessed and most sacred name, in the right
understanding whereof, is concluded the whole labor of a Christian.

But this word, and the reverence also due unto it, has gone far; for the
very heathen are subject to the power of some Religion, and submit themselves
thereunto, as experience, and a number of voluminous writers do manifest. So
it seems all people have with one consent joined together, to make this the
ground, and Basis, of all their other actions, and laws, and the foundation or
principal Pillar to uphold the rest, but sometimes out of Policy, as well as
Devotion: for grant the multitude were awed with the reverence, and number of
their Gods, yet sometimes the wiser Heathen, though they thought it good
wisdom to nourish their opinions, yet had not so little wit as to believe
them.

Briefly now then to know what is meant by Religion: It is the true knowledge,
and true service of God, in these two consists Piety: without them it is maimed
and defective. The knowledge of God is revealed in the Scriptures, and wrought
by faith, which is not true, unless it be certain, and not mixed with error,
or doubts. And the true service of God, is a kind of restrained veneration,
within certain Laws and Ceremonies, and that either inward, or outward.
Inward, when a man powers out his soul in Prayers, and Thanksgiving. Outward,
in the several rites, gestures, and ceremonies of the Church.

Those men therefore, whose only joy consists not in this life, and the period
of whose hope lies not upon their deathbeds, will be assured that their first
choice should be, the true knowledge of Religion, which assures them of an
infinite addition, and continuation of happiness in the life that is to come.
This is the house built upon the Rock, this is the corner Stone of the
building, this is the Pillar that will not be moved, in a word, this makes a
man unlike that Reed which will be shaken with every wind.

The seat of Religion must be in a man's heart, conducted thither by the
means of faith, and knowledge, grounded upon Scriptures, and the consent of
the Church. It is a man's heart that iustifies him before God, his outward
works before men, by which they may guess, but not conclude, such a one to be
a godly, and religious man. For if works alone could justify; the Heathen in
their morality have out-gone us, very Hypocrites and Impostors go beyond us,
the Catholic glorifyers of works in their blind zeal exceed us. Wherefore
as it is impossible to justify a man by his works, so it is desperate to
judge a man for his not so frequent working, or not working at all, to our
knowledge: for keep true Religion within his bounds, that is, in the heart of
a man, it is possible for one to do the acts of a good man, and yet not to be
seen, or marked, for fear of being his own Trumpet, and that so his good
deeds may either taste of vaineglory, or least that his own heart,
(considering the frailety of humane nature, and that himself has sometimes
had temptations, and ticklings that way) be puffed up with Pride by the
Plaudities of other men. This case I only put, not to abridge men of their
good and public acts of charity; but to abate the ouer-bold, and common
censuring that is used. And I resolve thus, that as all the best, and good
deeds, that can be imagined, or were yet ever done, avail nothing toward a
man's salvation, without they proceed from a touched and religious heart, yet
no man can be truly Religious, that expresses not his faith by his works. By
which it is plain, though works be nothing without Religion, so Religion cannot
be without works; they are so unseparably linked together, they cannot be
severed.

There is nothing, if duly considered, that ought to be more dear, and of
greater comfort, and hope, to mankind, then the true sense, and Religious
application, of divine mystery: we now are, anon are not, when all leaves us,
and we leave all the world, it is the true joy we conceive by this knowledge,
which does strengthen us in death, and immortalize our souls. How miserable
were a man, and little above the fortune, and happiness of a beast, being of
so short, and uncertain continuance, if he put not a difference betwixt
passing and remaining happiness? and if he knew not that the knowledge, and
service of God were the only way to lead to so happy an end.

The inward thoughts, in the high and reverent estimation of God, is the first
degree of Religion, for only the formalitie of it, which is but hypocrisy,
and outward appearance, is as ill as Atheism. Then as we think well, so need
we to know truly, lest our good thoughts, and religious meditations, be
mis-placed by mistaking.

And let no man persuade himself, that there is any action, or virtue,
comparatively, in this world, of equal estimation, and power, with Religion.
It was the commendation Saint Ambrose gave the Emperor Theodosius, that upon
his deathbed, and in extremity of weakness, he took more care for the
state of the Church, and preservation of Religion, then of his own extreme
dangers and infirmities. And Justinian in the preface to his laws, disclaimed
all confidence in the greatness of his Empire, number of Soldiers, advice of
his chief Commanders, and Council, but relied only upon that providence and
mercy of God which Religion had taught him; knowing, the neglect of this duty
would otherwise awake Gods Justice and wrath: according to Horace; Dij mult^
neglect^ dederunt Hesperiae mala luctuosae.

It was the policy of the Roman State, and they pretended so much reverence, to
their made, and borrowed religion, that, as I find cited from Varro,
whenever the Se^a^emet, the first thing propounded, had always relation to
Religion, and no cause of the greatest weight, or that required the most sudden
expedition; could precede this; because (it seems) as in all their other
actions, they dedicated the beginning of it to religious and divine worship, so
they would not vary from that custom in their consultations. And certainly, if
an imaginary religion were of so great power with them, much more ought we, in
the height and certainty of this knowledge, to submit our selves thereunto.

It is excellently observed by Solomon, Prou. 29. verse 2. When the righteous
are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked bears rule, the
people mourn. For certainly the prosperity, and decays of States, do very
much depend upon good, and religious governments: morally good, I dare say all
stories will witness, and that is a handmaid to Religion: and so I understand
righteous, and wicked, in this place, as denominating virtuous, and vicious
persons. But for to affirm, that the prosperity of States has been ever in
those places only, where Religion is truly professed, I dare not go so
far. For God did heretofore confine, and yet does not much enlarge (in
respect of those secluded) the knowledge of Religion to multitudes.

But where God has declared himself, there good governments, if not Religious
withal, do commonly precede some stroke of Gods Justice, Knowledge revealed
always requiring obedience thereunto, which should awake the diligence of
Superiors, to see the service of God, and true substance of our Religion, not
in name only to agree, but in truth to be answerable to our profession: not
that God stands in need of our devotions, and worship, but proceeding from his
abundant love to mankind, to supply our natural, and spiritual necessities,
which commonly comes not vnbegged, nor stays not vnacknowledged: and this you
shall ever find, where Religion is not truly esteemed, and had in due respect,
men's manners turn so depraved, that the force of other laws can hardly
restrain them.

This is a law that works as well upon the restraining of inward thoughts, as
outward actions, working upon the mind, and inclination: but our corrupt
desires, and deeds, if Religion be wanting, nothing but the curb of laws, can
keep within bounds: and in actions that be forced, there is little assurance;
so that we may conclude, All the vicious, and disorderly behavior of our
conversation, springs from our simplicity, and neglect in Religion. Primae
scelerum causae mortalibus aegris naturam nescire deorum. So says Silius.

Without this there could be no safe commerce, and conversation amongst men.
The best can but be inclined to do good one to another, but this ties all
sorts to do it: take away this bond, and we plunge our selves into a sea of al
kind of mischief. No man, no Prince, no State, can be confident one of
another, though we have often seen pretenders to Religion, who make it but
their countenance to disguise their deceitful purposes, and corrupt thoughts:
and yet these, me thinks, if they entered into the consideration of their
mortality, and the vastness of eternity, with the succeeding happiness, or
miseries they must endure, they would be more circumspect in the ways of their
lives, which causes and continues all the good present, and to come, they can
desire, or expect. Aspiciunt oculis superi mortalia justice. So Ovid: and
Horace, Qui terram inertem, qui mare temperat ventosum, and vrbes regnaque
tristia. This acknowledgement was yielded to Religion, even in Paganism.

The pure, and primitive part of Religion, ought to be kept clear, and
unspotted, and they who innouate therein, are to be cast off, and constrained
to recognition, not only for Gods cause, whom whosoever neglects, disclaimes
all interest in his mercy, and favors; but even in Policy also: for innovation
in Religion, commonly precedes alteration in Government: and generally, most
seditious and conspiring actions, have their cause, and pretense, from
different opinions, and establishments of Religion; which even the Heathen were
so careful to avoid, and found to be of so dangerous consequence, that both
the Athenians and Romans had particular laws, against such as introduced new
opinions in Religion: for attempting of which, Socrates was condemned at
Athens, and both the Jews and Caldeans banished Rome. Let it then be the
endeavor of all good men, so to establish this unity, that it may be said of
them, as of the people mentioned in the Acts 4. verse 32. And the multitude of
them that believed, were all of one heart, and one soul.

It was the politic advice of Maecenas to Augustus, as Dion notes it, that in
matter of Religion, he should show all outward devotion and reverence,
according to the Law, and form of his Country, and force others to do the
like, and that as well in form, as substance, in which case men are always
tied to the rule of the Law, and bound to observe it: which caused Seneca with
more affection then religion to write, that sapiens seruabit ea tanquam legibus
iussa, non tanquam Dijs grata. By which you see, the maintaining, and
continuing of unity in Religion, was held a point of government and policy. But
though it be true, we cannot force religion, because no man is constrained to
believe, whether he will, or no, and that I subscribe to Saint Bernard, that
sides suadenda est, non imperanda: yet, there is no doubt but that in all
Christian good governments, the people have been forced to yield their outward
obedience to the religion publicly professed; otherwise inevitable confusion
would follow, and Religion would grow into contempt. To prevent which, it is
better for a time to force men to outward co^formity though mixed with
Hypocrisy, then suffer them to continue refractary.

Of reading History.
OF all studies, either for ornament, or understanding, I prefer History,
because by an exquisite expression it does show unto us the Acts and Councels
of precedent times. And it is certain, that where neither Affection, nor
Flattery, nor Fear bear sway, you shall find perfectly delineated the image
of truth, without obsequiousness, or detraction, committed to perpetual
memory the most worthy, and noblest Acts of Great men, without coloring their
defects; but leaving both their good and evil to posterity, the one for a
pattern of Honor, and Virtue, the other for a direction that we may not
follow their steps where they tread awry, lest we leave to our selves nothing
but an everlasting memorial of infamy, the true property of an Historian
being, Vera, non falsa, scribere sine ostentatione.

Of Histories some are Natural, some Civil; of Civil, some concern the state
of the Church, and some, the affairs of the Commonwealth. To them both
appertains the History of places, which is Geography; of times, which is
Chronology; of descents, which is Genealogy; and of actions, which is that I
now am to speak of, and is principally, singly, and by a kind of prerogative
called History. And the other three, namely, Geography, Chronology, and
Genealogy, are but assistants to the same. This kind of History therefore which
I hold most necessary, and profitable, may be written either by way of
Commentaries, which are only a mere relation of things done, without either
the Councels, occasions, pretexts, speeches, or any other circumstances of
action; or else more completely, by joining together both times, persons,
places, councels, and events. And this is that History that adds (if it be
read with attention and understanding) so must strength to a man's knowledge and
judgment.

But not to reiterate the so many and so much decantate vtilities and praises
of History, nor to prescribe the best way to an Historiographer (the one being
a vain, and needless; the other, a presumptuous task) but only to show the
means how by reading them, to reap most benefit for a man's private
instruction, I think that the first considerable point, is the end wherefore
History is to be read and held in estimation.

And that is (as is the end of all humane knowledge,) to make a perfect man,
namely, of an understanding well informed of what is true, and of a Will well
and constantly disposed to that which is good. For whosoever is so, wants no
virtue, or ability of the mind that can be imagined.

To the obtaining of which perfection, though this be not the only means, yet
is it the aptest, containing in particular and applyable examples, what many
sciences together, in general precepts, and such as have innumerable
exceptions, can hardly comprehend.

And besides, though Moral Philosophy have the same scope and aim, and has
been anciently learned, for the prudent, and virtuous government of a man's
life, and actions: yet at this day the books of it afford matter rather to
dispute of wisdom and virtue, and to define and distinguish of their natures,
and sorts, then to make a man either wise or virtuous.

And though heretofore they were accounted good Philosophers, that could
strain, and slack the bridle of their passions, when, and where they ought:
that feared turpitude most of all things, and death least: that in their deeds
could distinguish between two vicious extremes, and walk euenly in the midst,
not for fear of one Vice, running back as far as to the other, and finally,
that were able to master all their affections whatsoever, yet now such pretend
to that Title, as can do none of these, but only Syllogize of them, as if
they thought it were, Summum Bonum, to define Summum Bonum; or Wisdom,
Valor, and Virtue, to know what those notions meant. Whereas he that by
reading of History, desires to learn the Art how to govern himself in the
passages of this life, shall find no occasion to dispute: but either to
imitate, or eschew.

It was the counsel of Demetrius Phalerius, to Ptolomy K. of Egypt, Vt sibi
pararet libros, de Regno, deque militari imperio, and bello gerendo tractantes,
eosque euolueret. And what better books can a Prince have for that purpose,
then good Histories? He that would seek such knowledge in books of Theory,
written by such as keeping themselves at home in their studies, never once saw
an Army in the field, nor the face of an enemy, is as he that would go to
the school of Phormio to learn the Art of War, rather then to the camp of
Hannibal. But in Histories are those things written, which King Ptolomy might
apply to his own use, and which none else durst tell him of. And though a man's
experience of his own times, may give him much help and direction in all his
actions; yet the knowledge of former times, and applying those accidents which
then past to the present occasions, must needs be the greatest help to enable
us for action, or council; and is of such profit, that one says, Historia, si
adsit, ex pueris facit senes, sin absit, ex senibus pueros.

The benefit that the Understanding receives thence, arises two ways. First,
it becomes informed, as it were, with matter of fact, by the direct Narration
of things past, in manner as they fell out. And in this respect, History is
said to be, Testis temporum, Lux veritatis, nuntia vetustatis. Secondly, it is
enabled by particular examples, and by the events of humane counsel, (as by so
many rules and patterns) to take the wisest course in conducting our affairs
to their right ends. And for this effect, it is called Magistra vitae.

For the will of man, it is also inclined to goodness thereby, when it hears
recounted the commendation, and vituperation; the reward, and punishment; the
honor, and ignominy; the happy, and contrary estates, and successes, of good
and evil persons, and enterprises.

Now that the Understanding, touching the bare Narration, may the better
apprehend, and the memory retain, what is recounted unto us of the men and
matters of such times and places as are remote from us, and the faces of things
covered over, and sullied with the dust of Antiquity, may appear brighter to
our apprehension, there must be joined to our reading these helps.

First a good method; as namely, the History of what Age and Country you will
begin with, and with what follow. In which point, this is my opinion, that a
man shall with best success begin, at the beginning of time, and so descend
with it. And for the principal reading, to take the History of those Nations,
that from time to time lived in most flourishing, most extended, and most
civil estates: then as it were collaterally, of those people that were the
same age in ascent: and lastly, of such as were then declining, and of less
mark, until one come to the beginning of the Chronicles of his own Country.
And then it will be best to make that his principal reading, and the rest as
secondarie or incident.

Withal, if there be in the body of any general Story, some notable actions
registered in volumes apart, or described by occasion of writing the life of
some great Captain, or Statesman, or particularized in the Letters of
eminent, and wise men; these would be especially, and carefully read in the
places where they fall in. As in reading the second Punique war, written by
Liuy, I fortify my knowledge, by reading the lives of Hannibal and Scipio, in
Plutarch; or strengthen the Story of Caesar's time, with the reading of Cicero's
Letters to Atticus; or in reading the volume of the French Story, when I come
to the life of Lewis the eleventh, I join thereto that which is written of him
by Philip Comines, and the like in like cases; being commonly more exactly, and
with more pertinent circumstances in these manners delivered. This being done,
recourse should again be had to the body of the History. Notwithstanding, I
would not wish a man to be so long abroad, or a stranger at home, till he had
read all that precedes the Records of his own Nation, but rather both in, and
besides the set course spoken of, be conversant in them at all opportunities.

As for Epitomes, or brief universal Chronicles, for one that means to go
through all the singulars, they seem quite unnecessary: and for my own part,
I should less remember the Epitome, which is for the most part a iuycelesse
Narration, then I should the actions, with their needful circumstances, set
down at large in a complete History, which in the best Epitomes, may rather be
said to be lopped of their best parts, then contracted in the total.

Secondly, there is required a due, and diligent observation of the times and
Chronology, when you find it mentioned, and the Histories of the same age,
one to be conferred with another in every point of it; otherwise there will
want, not only credit sometimes to the Author; but also light to the
understanding of that which is read. For Relations concurrent, if they agree on
the time, both strengthen and enlighten each other, like diverse witnesses upon
several occasions, deposing one and the same truth. And as the sense
perceives nothing without the circumstances of time, and place; so the
understanding (which is the more perfect, as it has more sensible information)
without the description of them, conceiueth no business clearly. For they be
such circumstances as make things past and gone to come again, and as it were
be represented, rather then related.

And therefore also Cosmography in the third place, is necessarily to be
adjoined, as a special help to us in the reading of History, thereby to know
the forms and situations of the Regions, Seas, Rivers, Hills, Lakes, and the
like, every where mentioned, and the postures both of one in respect of
another, and of each in respect of the heavens. For the constitution,
complexion, manners, and proprieties of their several inhabitants, depend not
a little thereon. And oftentimes the qualities of the times, and places,
discover the reason of an event, when the Author does omit it. So in these
three observations, namely, of method, time, and place, is contained all that
in reading History is considerable, so far forth as it serves to inform the
understanding in matter of fact.

But now for the other more principal use of it, that is, to inform and
enable the judgment, and furnish a man with discretion, and wisdom; these
things are to be regarded.

First, the election of Authors, wherein I will not presume to compare, and
prefer one Author before another, (except the soueraign compiler of holy
History, between whom and men there is no proportion) by their several names,
which were a thing both tedious and distasteful. But yet we must be careful in
our choice, and have a special regard to the persons that have written, lest
by too much credulity we be led into errors. For some have written for favor
partially, for fear falsely, for spleen spightfully; but a discreet Reader may
easily trip them. And in general, such as you shall think to write most truly
and most fully, upon the passages of every Age and Region, you should labor to
find out, and read over. For where truth is wanting, the judgment shall want
a foundation, whereon to frame to it self any precept, for institution and
instruction of life: Truth being the form and essence of History, without
which it is but the worst kind of Poetry.

And though it would be hard to find any one History, (much less a sufficient
number for all ages and places) wherein there be not some untruths, yet this
ought not either to deter the Reader, or disgrace the Author, where the main
and best part is truly set down, but only to move a man to choose Caeteris
paribus, those that have fewest fables, and most sincerity in the maine drift.
And seeing that every relation is a story, a man may run over those passages,
which are false, and fabulous, without prejudice to the profit he shall receive
from the rest. As for example, though he lightly pass over the many
superstitious Narrations of miracles, and prodigies written by Liuy, and other
good writers, yet he may gather excellent recompense of his labor, by careful
observing their principally intended scope; namely, the true, and ample
Narration of the deeds of whom they writ.

Another thing to make choice of in a Writer, is fullness. Herein he is not
most to be commended that has most words, but rather he that relates most in
fewest words: for some are large by digressions, discoursing upon, and
censuring the actors, and acts, as they leave the Stage. Some mislike this, as
proceeding (it may be) from vainglory, or presumption, to anticipate the
judgment of the Reader, to whom, and not to the Writer, that part belongs. But
I am of this mind, that if it be done by a wise Historiographer, and such as
has been exercised in great affairs, whatsoever his intent is, (which is to
be judged to be the bettering of his Reader) a man should esteem himself
obliged to him the more, as to one that goes out of his own way, to show
another his. Besides, so many ancient and wise compilers of great Histories,
use thus to digress, that for a man of this age to tax them for it, were to
tax himself of Arrogance.

Some fill many leaves together with Orations, which though they are but the
invention oft-times of the Writer, and therefore declare not what was said; yet
they show what might be fitly said for such a purpose, entering herein the
confines of the Orator, for our instruction, which is the thing the Reader
should aim at, and not the censuring of the composer.

But those, whose volumes grow, by a care not to omit any necessary
circumstance that accompanies great, and remarkable enterprises, should be
your chief election. For this diligence in Histories is so needful, as
without it there arises no profit at al to the Reader. As for examples sake,
Where it is registered, that such a King in such a place, such a time began his
reign, reigned so long, builded such Cities, and was succeeded by such a man,
I cannot imagine what benefit I should draw hence for my instruction, or how I
am the wiser for it; only I may receive the contentment of knowing so much,
which is a very small purchase.

But the description of armies set in array, after this, or that manner, the
placing of Ambushes, the celeritie of Marches, the taking in, or preoccupying
of aduantageous places, the beleagring, oppugnation, expugnation and defending
of strong holds, the diversities of stratagems, and such like, in matter of
War: the occasions, and effects, of good and evil laws, the stirring, the
maintaining or appeasing of seditions, and conspiracies, the policy or
imprudency of wise, or unwise Senators, in consulting, or treating, the humors
and customs of Princes, and great Commanders, and swayers of State, and the
like, in administration of Republikes, being truly and lively related unto us,
are the things that so much confer to the enabling of our understanding.

And not barely to know the first and last day of a Kings reign, or what
Cities he built, no nor how great a slaughter was made at such a battle, or
who killed most with his own hand. For this the Poets do best, who because
they wholly take away from men, the precedent councels, attributing them to the
gods, whom they call to Senate, upon almost every great action, are held nothing
so useful as the Historian, though they set down the fact itself never so
truly.

For if, as Homer shows, the Trojans gave the Grecians many overthrows for
this cause only, that at the entreatie of Thetis, to show what need the
Grecians stood in, of the presence of her son Achilles, Jupiter was pleased
to make Hector appear more terrible, then is here nothing imitable, and by
consequence nothing profitable: but if they overcame as choosing fit seasons,
and places, and other advantages of fight: the^ there arises much for a man's
instruction, and imitation.

Having in your hands a good Author, the better to receive benefit by him,
there would be requisite assiduitie in reading, or at least, times chosen that
may be freest from interruption. For to leave any particular complete
Narration in the midst, or too much intermission in a general History, are
both of them very prejudicial to the memory: and in this especially is
verified the Proverb; Not to proceed, is to fall back.

Besides, as no great virtue can be attained without labor and diligence
according to Petrarch:

Non a caso e virtute, an^ie bella art. Virtue is not obtained by chance, but
it is rather a great Art; so in this particular it is so necessary, that
whosoever out of irkesomnesse, or haste, or impatience, in expecting the issue
of any Relation, shall run over a History in post-haste, shall be sure to
lose the best part of the profit, which with attentive consideration he might
otherwise reap.

He that reads, as it were for a wager, though he miss never a word, shall
miss almost all the matter: whereas the studious, and insisting Reader, reads
more then peradventure a hundred others.

Another necessary help, is the referring of those things that are worthy
observation to certain heads, and common places in writing, thence to be
sought again with more ease, as a man shall have occasion to use them. In this
case every man's own Method commonly sorteth best to his own profit: and diverse
men have their diverse ways. As some, considering that all humane actions fall
under one of these three heads; Thoughts, Words, and Deeds; to them, and to
their subdiuisions, do refer all their observations. And by this way, no
question, may aptly be comprised whatsoever there shall because to note;
except some Stories of strange effects of Nature, or the like, which no way
appertain to humane power; which being rare, may be referred to their places,
in the History of Nature or natural Philosophy. Or there may be made these
three places for referring of Historical observations; Deliberation, Execution
and Event. Deliberation grounded upon propositions certain, or coniecturall,
both concerning men's manners, or actions. In execution, to distinguish whether
it be defective, excessive, or equal, compared to what was deliberated. In
the event whether contrary, or conformable to expectation. Whether caused by
the providence, and execution precedent, or by accident. Which things upon
every story being noted, a man shall straightwayes find, if a thing has well
succeeded, where was the council, or if euilly, where lay the error. In this
compass also falls all that can be gathered out of History, for the
institution of a man's life.

But for more ease, if need be, all these particulars may be subdistinguished
diversely, and placed in a book accordingly for that purpose.

Some think it unnecessary to have for the common places of History any
particular book by it self, because they may be all properly referred to
their place, in some part or other of Philosophy. For how many rules of life so
ever be fetched from History, they are but so many Philosophical precepts;
Philosophy deriuing authority from the matter, and examples thereof; as Grammar
may do from the language wherein it is written.

Lastly, to compare the ages, and places one reads of, with that he lives in,
and when occasion is given to make in a man's mind application of things past
to the present, and to consider whether, and why, they hold, or hold not, is a
kind of imaginary practice, to confirm, and make a man the readier for real
action, though far from the perfection, that use it self, and employment in
great affairs would bring forth.

Thus much shall suffice to have been said of the means to benefit the
judgment and understanding by reading History.

The will of man comes to be inclined to virtue, by the examples which are
registered of good men, and good acts; and their commendations, rewards, and
ends; or of evil men, and evil deeds, with their reproaches, punishments, and
events; which being well delivered, inflame the mind with love, and desire to
imitate, or with detestation, and horror, according to the merit of the thing.

And though Philosophy be an Art that aims only at this scope, yet all the
precepts therein, will not so soon teach a man fortitude, and constancy of
mind, severity, and military discipline, temperance, and all other virtues,
as will the examples of Mutius Scaeuola, the Decij, Manlius, Fabritius, and
other such noble Roman Citizens.

But herein a man ought thus sarre to have a care, not to suffer his ^^^ection
to cleave too easily to every thing, that an Historian shall through humane
frailety, and peradventure erroneously commend, nor contrariwise presently hate
what he reuileth, driving and cleaving to every Rock, according as the tempest
of the writer shall stir him. But to remember this, not to think well of any
thing how much soever extolled, if it be contrary to Christian Religion.

For praising of things, though never so evidently blameworthy, if it be done
by an Author of regard, either directly, or indirectly, by a magnificent
relation in terms and words most received in the best sense, will insensibly,
and secretly bring on a love to the evil so praised; and likewise dispraising,
will nourish a mislike of such things, as deserve commendations.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE UPON THE BEGINNING OF TACITUS.

A DISCOVRSE UPON THE BEGINNING OF TACITUS.
THis piece of Tacitus, which I make the foundation of this Discourse, and to
which I have here confined my self, contains 1. The enumeration of the
several forms of the Roman government. 2. The Authors digression touching the
quality of one that is to write a History. 3. The means Augustus used in
acquiring and co^firming to himself the supreme and Monarchical authority. 4.
The providing for succession. 5. The plotting of Liuia for the advancement of
her children. 6. The estate of the times after Augustus was fully settled. And
lastly, the censure of such as (when Augustus began to grow weak and toward
his end) might probably be thought to succeed him. And therefore in this order
I begin with my Author.

[Vrbem Romam a principio Reges habuere. The City of Rome was at the first
governed by Kings] The first form of government in any State is accidental:
that is, according to the condition the Founder happens to be of. If one man of
absolute power above the rest, be the Founder of a City, he will likewise be
the Ruler of the same; if a few, then a few will have the government; and if
the multitude, then commonly they will do the like. And it is but justice, for
every man to have his own work subject to his own will. So here Romulus
built, and ruled; was the founder, and was the King. The building of this City
was about 800. years before the Nativity of Christ; and consequently from
that time to this present, about 2420. The Contemporaries of Romulus reigning
in Judah, were Iotham; in Israel, Pekaiah; amongst the Medes, Artycas; in
Macedonia, Thurimas; in Athens, Charops, who began the ten years government
there instituted; in Lacedemon, Polidorus; and in Italy there were many petty
States, of might not much unequal, whereby this new City might the safelier
grow up amongst them, and be the soonerable to match the most of them. For if
any of those States had been of eminent power above the rest, it is likely,
Rome should not have been suffered to have encroched so fast on her neighbors.

Now we have seen the times in which this City was built, let us next view
how many Kings successively reigned over it, and how long this government
continued. ^^r^t, Romulus began, and there succeeded him, after one years
interregency, Numa Pompilius, then Tullus Hostilius, after him Ancus Martius,
his successor was Tarquinius Priscus, next to him, Seruius Tullius, and last of
all, Tarquinius Superbus. All whose reigns being gathered together, amount to
the number of 240. years, and has been compared by Florus, to the infancy of
a man, and commonly accounted the infancy of Rome, though I cannot find that
they were much under the Rod, till this last Kings Reign, who, to his cost,
found them already grown too stubborn.

The next government of this State, was Consulary. [Libertatem and Consulatum
Lucius Brutus instituit. Liberty and the Consulship Lucius Brutus brought in.]
Every one that has read the Roman Histories, can tell how much this act of
Lucius Brutus has been magnified, insomuch as they instituted in the honor
of it, an Holiday, by the name of Regifugium: and how the imitation of it drew
another of the same race, and name, into such another action, who came not off
with the like applause, though otherwise with the like fate. But I shall never
think otherwise of it then thus; Prosperu^ and foelix scelus Virtus vocatur.
For it was but a private wrong, and the fact not of the King, but the Kings
Son, that Lucretia was ravished. Howsoever, this, together with the pride,
and tyranny of the King, gave color to his expulsion, and to the alteration of
government. And this is by the Author entitled, Liberty, not because bondage is
always joined to Monarchy; but where Kings abuse their places, tyrannize over
their Subjects, and wink at all outrages, and abuses, committed against them by
any either of their children, or favorites, such usurpation over men's estates,
and natures, many times breaks forth into attempts for liberty, and is hardly
endured by man's nature, and passion, though reason and Religion teach us to
bear the yoke. So that, it is not the government, but the abuse that makes the
alteration be termed Liberty. This Consulary government began about Anno Mundi
3422. not long after the beginning of the second general Monarchy, which was
of the Persians, amongst whom reigned Cambyses, Xerxes, and Artaxerxes, all
within the space of fifty years, or thereabouts. And in the Athenian State
lived Themistocles, and Aristides, in those days famous.

Now during this Consulary government, there were others intermixed. [Dictaturae
ad tempus sumebantur. Dictators were chosen but upon occasion.] This
Magistrate, for power, was limited only by his own will. For time, he had
limits from the Senate, and those so short, that their power could do little
hurt, and bred little ambition. They had now authority like absolute Kings,
and by and by had no more then a King in a Play. But when it came to the hands
of such as could not easily be constrained to lay it down, they found it of
that power, that by the color thereof the people were bereaved of their
liberty, and enthralled to Sylla during pleasure, and to Caesar during life.
But the Dictatorship is not to be accounted another form of government, but
only an Office in the Commonwealth, though for the time supreme.

[Neque Decemviralis potestas vltrabiennium. The Decemviri passed not two
years.] After the people had delivered themselves from the authority of Kings,
and came themselves to undergo the cares of government, they grew perplexed at
every inconvenience, and shifted from one form of government to another, and
so to another, and then to the first again; like a man in a fever, that often
turns to and fro in his bed, but finds himself without ease, and sick in
every posture. They that could not endure one King, were soon weary of ten
Tyrants, and for their extreme ambition, vexation, and cruelty, as also
because of the lice^tious and barbarous lust of Appius Claudius, one of the
number, (who for the satisfying of his appetite, had judged a free woman to
slavery) they soon extirped that authority: but indeed the thing they most
feared, was, that they saw those who possessed the power for the present, would
not give it over, but sought to make it personal, and perpetuate it to
themselves. They were jealous of their liberty, and knew not in whose hands to
trust it, and were often at the point to lose it: but at this time licentious
and inordinate lust gave them once more an occasion to shake off the yoke. As
before the Tarquins, so now the Decemviri suffer for the same offense. They for
the rauishing of a Wife; these for the intended deflowring a Virgin: the first
acted, and her self revenging it on her self by her own hand; the second
purposed, but prevented by a Fathers hand, in the murder of his own Daughter.
This alteration in government began 58. years after the expulsion of Kings,
about Anno Mundi 3500. And 19. years after this time, began the Peloponnesian
wars. In these times lived Pericles, Alcibiades, and Thucidides in the State
of Athens.

[Neque Tribunorum militum Consulare ius diu valuit. Neither did the Consularie
authority in Tribunes of the Soldiers remain long in force.] After the
Decemvirate, they returned again to Consuls: they were not long content with
them, but bestowed the same authority on Tribunes of the soldiers; and weary of
these, they had again recourse unto the Consulship. For the State at that time
being young and weak, loved change and variety of governments: but the
emulation of the Commons, to equalize the Nobility, did give the principal
occasion to these alterations. For on whomsoever the commons conferred the
supreme authority, the Senate and Nobility still gained in all suites and
offices to be preferred before them, which was the cause of most of the
seditions and alterations of the State.

[Non Cinnae, non Sullae longa dominatio The domination of Cinna and Sulla did
not long endure.] It is true that these men attained unto supreme power by
violence and force, but yet I cannot think that to have been the cause why
their power was so soon at an end. For though violence cannot last, yet the
effects of it may; and that which is gotten violently, may be afterward
possessed quietly, and constantly. For Augustus also took upon him the
Monarchy by force, and yet he so settled it, as the State could never recover
liberty. These took no order, and it may be, had no intention to reduce the
State of the Commonwealth to a Monarchy, more then for their own times, else
they might peradventure have found ways how to have mollified or extinguished
the fiercer, allured the gentler sort, prepared the whole State to a future
servitude, and what they had obtained by arms, have assured to themselves by
politic provisions: which not doing, was the cause that their authority came
the sooner to an end.

[Pompeij, Crassique potentia, cito in Caesarem. The power of Pompey and
Crassus soon passed into Caesar.] This was an authority, in the Roman State,
exercised without public permissio^ only out of their own private strength. Of
these Crassus was the most wealthy, Pompey the best beloved of the Senate, and
Caesar of most power in the field. Their ambition was equal, but not their
fortune, nor their wisdom. For Crassus was slain in the Parthian war, the
which he undertook only out of avarice. Pompey, though he affected the
Monarchy, yet he took not the course that was fittest for it; for he then
courted the State; when he knew his Rival had a purpose to use violence, and
to ravish it. But Caesar knew the Republique to be feminine, and that it would
yield sooner to violence, then flattery; and therefore with all his power
assaulted and overcame it: and so in him alone remained the strength of all the
three till his death.

Likewise after the death of Julius Caesar, [Lepidi and Antonij armain Augustum
cessere. The forces of Lepidus and Antonius came into the hands of Augustus.]
This was the last change of the Roman government, and was permanent; for now
Rome utterly lost her liberty. For Antony by occasion of Caesar's slaughter,
being himself then Consul, having taken arms, which the State feared he
would make use of to serve his own ambition, and to set himself up in Caesar's
room: the Senate gave authority to Augustus to leuy an Army, and make head
against him. Which he did, and within a while after agreeing with Antony, and
taking Lepidus in for a stale, established this Triumvirate, which in the end
was also wholly reduced to Augustus. So that hence may appear, that it is a
most dangerous oversight, to put Arms into such a man's hands for our defense,
as may advance himself by converting them to our destruction. To which purpose
the Fable is also applied of the Horse, who suffering a rider and the bit, for
his assurance against the Heart that fed with him in the same pasture, could
never after recover his former liberty.

[Qui cuncta discordijs ciuilibus fessa, nomine Principis sub imperium accepit.
Who when the whole Sat was wearied with civil discords, received it under his
government with the Title of Prince.] The manifold miseries that do accompany
Civil Wars, and the extreme weakness which follows them, do commonly so
deiect and expose a State to the prey of ambitious men, that if they lose not
their liberty, it is only for want of one that has the courage to take the
advantage of their debilitie. And when a mighty and free people, is subdued to
the tyranny of one man, it is for the most part after some long and bloody
Civil War. For civil war is the worst thing that can happen to a State:
wherein the height of their best hopes can come but to this, to venture and
hazard their own, to overthrow their friends and kindreds fortunes. And they
that are at the worst, have reason to be content with, and wish for any change
whatsoever. This was one occasion which Augustus laid hold of to establish the
Monarchy, they were weary, their strength abated, and their courages foiled.
Yet he would not presently take unto him the Title belonging to Monarchy,
especially not the name of King, but [nomine Principis sub imperium accepit.]
Every man that has an office of command, though never so mean, desires a
name that may express the full virtue of his place, and most men receive as
great content from Title, as substance. Of this humor Augustus retained only
thus much at this time, that he took a title which signified not authority,
but dignity before all the rest: as if the people of Rome had been to be
numbered one by one, he thought himself worthy that they should begin with
him. Also he knew that the multitude was not stirred to sedition so much, with
extraordinary power, as insolent Titles, which might put them to consider of
that power, and of the loss of their liberty. And therefore he would not at
the first take any offensive Title, as that of King or Dictator, which for the
abuses before done, were become odious to the people. And in a multitude,
seeming things, rather then substantial, make impression. But having gotten
the main thing that he aspired unto, to give them then content in words, which
cost him neither money, nor labor, he thought no dear bargain. And this was
but for the present neither. For he doubted not but that the power which he
had in substance, would in time dignifie any name he should take above the
name of King: and in the mean space he should keep the love of the people,
which is the principal pillar of a new sovereignty.

Hitherto, the several changes and alterations in the state of Rome, and how
the sway thereof, after the space of almost 800. year, being now arrived at
her greatest strength, remained wholly in the person of Augustus Caesar. He
therefore after much deliberation had, whether he should restore it again to
the former liberty of a Commonwealth, or convert the government into a
Monarchy, at length resolved on the latter. The means he had, and the devices
he used to bring the same to pass, are now by the Author likewise touched, and
should follow in order. But because Tacitus here digresseth, to show the faults
of Historiographers, and the uprightness he purposes to use in his own
story, I will also take his words as they lie in my way, and afterward proceed
with the History it self.

[Sed veteris populi Romani prospera vel aduersa claris Scriptoribus memorata
sunt. But of the ancient people of Rome, both the prosperous, and adverse
estate, has been recorded by renowned Writers.] It is a sign of too much
opinion, and self-conceit, to be a follower in such an History, as has been
already sufficiently achieved by others. And therefore Cicero said well of the
Commentaries which Caesar wrote of his own acts, and intended should be but
the notes, and the ground of an History, to be written by some that should
afterward undertake that task, that though that were an acceptable, and
welcome work to some arrogant persons, yet that all discreet men were thereby
deterred from writing. So, that as it was here to Tacitus, it should also be
cause enough to any man else to abstain from the writing of those Histories,
which are already wisely, and perfectly related. The reason why the times of
the Commonwealth have been better Historified, then those that came after,
seems to be the liberty that such a government affords. For where the
governor (who is always the main subject of the Annals of a City) is not
one man, but a great many, there personal tax breeds not so often public
offense.

[Temporibusque Augusti dicendis non defuere decora ingenia, donec gliscente
adulatione deterrerentur. And there wanted not good wits, to write Augustus his
time, till by the prevailing of flattery they were deterred.] Also under
Monarchs, so long as their deeds be such, as they can be content to hear of
again, the Historiographer has encouragement to follow the truth in his
writings; but when they be otherwise, men must dissemble, if they will please,
and must please, if they will have their writings pass vnsuppressed. Therefore
the known Law of History, which is, Ne quid falsi dicere audeat, neque vere
non audeat, that a man should not dare to say a falsitie, nor not dare to
speak the truth, must needs be abrogated, where Flattery has admittance. For
there it is more needful to have regard to the acceptance, then to the
substance of our writings. And hereby Flattery in time comes to wear out,
and consume the able writers in a Kingdom.

[Tiberij, Caijque, and Claudij, ac Neronis res florentibus ipsis ob metum
falsae; postquam occiderant, recentibus odijs co^positae sunt. The occurrences
of Tiberius, and Caius, and Claudius, and Nero, whilst themselves flourished,
were for fear, and after they were dead, out of fresh hatred, falsely
written.] It is the condition of most men, having been restrained from moderate
liberty in any thing whatsoever, when that restraint is taken away, to become
immoderate in the same. For their desires swell, and gather strength at the
stop, which when it is removed, they run more violently then if they had
never been hindered at all. Hence it is, that he which flattreth during the
danger, slandereth when it is past, when the truth lies betwixt both: so that
the same men that would before for fear most have blanched, are they that when
they may do it safely, will most detract. And from hence it is, that the
latter end of Augustus, together with the reigns of the four here named, had
not as then found a faithful relator.

[Inde consilium mihi pauca de Augusto and extrematradere, mox Tiberij
Principatum and caetera, sine ira, and studio, quorum causas procul habeo. My
purpose therefore is to deliver to posterity a few, and those the last things
of Augustus, and then the principality of Tiberius, and the rest, without
spleen, and partiality, the causes whereof are far from me.] The defects
above mentioned, and want of a true History of these last times, caused the
Author to take this task in hand, wherein to avoid the suspicion of the same
faults he has before taxed in others, he puts in to our consideration that
the causes both of spleen, and affection, are far from him. These causes
must be either fear, or hope, of future good or evil, or else some benefit,
or injury formerly received, which every writer of History should do well to
show himself void of, if he can; because most men measuring others by
themselves, are apt to think that all men will not only in this, but in all
their actions more respect what conduces to the advancing of their own ends,
then of truth, and the good of others. Thus much of the digression: now
follows the History it self.

[Postquam Bruto and Cassio caesis, nulla iam publica arma. After that Brutus
and Cassius being slain, the Commonwealth was no longer in arms.] Though
Cremutius, that called Brutus and Cassius the last of the Romans, writing it in
a time which would not permit a man so much as to look back at the former
state of the Commonwealth, was perhaps worthily punished; yet this may be
truly said of them, that they were the last Champions of the Roman liberty.
For after them no man ever bore Arms for Recuperation of that government. What
an advancement then was it for Augustus that these were slain? For now the
Commonwealth relinquished her liberty, and confessed her self subdued. So that
his strongest adversary yielding, he might the easilier deal with the next.

[Pompeius apud Siciliam, oppressus. Pompey defeated in Sicily.] This Sextus
Pompeius being the relics of the Pompeian faction, was defeated near Sicily,
by Agrippa the Lieutenant of Augustus, in such manner, as of 350. sail, he
fled away only with 17. So that this was another step to the quiet
establishing of his Empire. The first Civil war was between the Caesarean
faction on one side, and Pompey with the Republique on the other, and Caesar
prevailed. The next will be a subdiuision of the Caesareans, that Augustus
standing on one part, and Antony on the other, the authority may at length
settle in the individual person of Augustus, who hitherto has had to do
against the faction of the Commonwealth and Pompey, in the wars against
Brutus, and Cassius, and against Sextus Pompeius. How he will now divide from
himself the other heads of his own faction, is next to follow.

[Exuto Lepido, interfecto Antonio Lepidus being put out, and Antony slain.]
Lepidus if he had remained in the Trium virate, might have hindered the
contention of the other two, by keeping them in doubt to whether part he would
incline. Wherefore, as if they desired to try the mastery between themselves,
they won Lepidus, whose authority was least of the three, to dismiss the
Legions that were under his command, and to lay down his office. That done,
the desire of sovereign rule would admit no longer friendship in the other
two, so they fell to wars: and Augustus following it with all his power,
brought Antony (who was already vanquished with effeminate passions, and had
his heart chained to the delight of a woman) quickly to destruction, and
himself remained sole heir of all their claims, and interests.

[Ne Iulianis quidem partibus, nisi Caesar dux reliquus. There remained not
another Commander, no not in the faction of Julius, but only Augustus Caesar.]
This faction did not divide as long as Brutus and Cassius were alive, for then
they had soon come to nothing, and the virtue of Brutus might have had as good
fortune, for the maintenance of liberty, as that of his ancestor. But when
they had made use one of another, to advance both of their hopes, then they
parted, and contended who should be the sole gainer. Which happening to
Augustus, he had afterward no more to do, but only to keep what he had
gotten; which he might easily do. For first he was alone, and when a man's
power is singular, and his intentions are only of his own free election, he
is then most likely to reduce them into act. Companions in such affairs can
seldom be content, that all counsels, nay almost that any, should tend to
the others profit; so constant is every man to his own ends. This Augustus
foresaw, when he secluded from him those two, that were equal in authority
and power with himself; Antony by force, and Lepidus by deceit. And now having
power over the bodies of the people, he goes about to obtain it over their
minds, and wills, which is both the noblest and surest command of all other.

[Posito Triumviri nomine. Laying away the name of a Triumvir.] He had three
reasons to leave that Title; the first is of less weight, (except in Grammar)
and that is the impropriety of that word applied to him that has charge alone,
being proper only to such as be three in Commission. The second is, because
the name was too mean. For till this time, the Triumviri were rather for
ouerseeing, then governing; sometimes appointed to look to one business,
sometimes to another; but never had any whole charge of government of the
Commonwealth, till such time as Augustus, Antony, and Lepidus, being three men,
equally interessed in the State, gave themselves that Title. But the chief
cause was this, that the name carried with it a remembrance and relish of the
civil wars, and proscriptions, which were hateful to the people. And a new
Prince ought to avoid those names of authority, that rub upon the Subjects
wounds, and bring hatred, and envy, to such as use them.

[Consulem se ferens, and ad tuendam plebem Tribuntiio iure contentu^. Calling
himself Consul, and content with the authority of a Tribune to maintain the
right of the Commons.] This officer of Tribune was ordained anciently, and so
always continued, for a protector of the people, and a defender of their
rights, immunities, and privileges against the violence, and incrochment of
the Nobles. The authority therefore of this officer, together with the Title
of Consul, Augustus took to himself, that even of the old offices he might
have those, that were both for name, and effect, of greatest consequence. And
for authority, there was none now greater then that of Tribune of the Commons.
Insomuch as Tacitus says in another place, Id summi fastigij vocabulum
Augustus reperit, ne Regis aut Dictatoris nomen assumeret, ac tamen
appellatione aliqua, caetera imperia praemineret. Augustus found out that name
of chief dignity, that he might avoid the name of King, and Dictator, and yet
have a Title of preeminence above other Magistrates. But the main cause why he
affected the Title of Tribune, was this, because he thought it best to make
his faction sure with the Commons, who at that time were the strongest part of
the State, by having the Title and Authority of their Protector. And seeing it
is impossible to please all men, it is therefore best for a new Prince to join
himself to, and obtain the favor of that part in his State, which is most
able to make resistance against him. This Augustus neglected not. But rather
used all means to draw all men to be contented with his present government.

[Militem donis, Populum annona, cunctos dulcedine otij pellexit. He allured
the Soldiers by largess, the people by provision of corn, and all men by the
sweetness of ease, and repose.] Soldiers are most commonly needy, and next to
valor, they think there cannot be a greater virtue then liberality, from
which they think all Donatiues proceed; when, if the truth were examined, it
would appear that such gifts came not from the virtue Liberality, but were
merely the price of their Countries liberty. But, this the Soldiers were too
rude to examine. An open hand draws their affections more then any thing else
whatsoever. The same effect in the mind of the people is produced by provision
of corn, which if they can buy at a lower price then formerly they could have
done (though peradventure the measure be as much lessened as the price) they
think then the State to be excellently governed. How effectual this kind of
liberality has been, appeared long before this in the same State, when as
Spurius Cassius, by distribution of money, and Spur. Melius, by largess of
Corn, were very near obtaining to themselves, an absolute sovereignty, and
tyranny over the Commonwealth. This is also one of Augustus his designs. He
steals the peoples hearts by sustenance, and relief, as he did the Soldiers
by his money. Further he pleases them all with the sweetness of ease, and
repose. They saw that to bear the yoke of Augustus, was to be freed of other
vexation; and to resist, was to renew the miseries they were lately subject to.
When they were much stronger, they could nor make sufficient resistance, now
they are weak, they can much less do it. Therefore being weary, they could
not but be much won with the present ease, and vacancy of War, especially
civil war. So Augustus took in this, the best order that can be, to assure
a new sovereignty, which, is to to afford the Soldier money, the People a good
market, and all men ease, and quietness.

[Insurgere paulatim, munia Senatus, Magistratuum, legum in se trahere. He
began by degrees to encroach, to assume the business, and charge of the
Senate, of the Magistrates, of the laws to himself.] Augustus has hitherto
dealt with the State, as one that tameth wild horses; first, he did beat and
weary them; next, took care not to frighten them with shadows; then, showed
them hope of ease, and made provision of corn for them; and now he begins
gently to back the State. He gets up by little and little. For it is not
wisdom for one that is to convert a free State into a Monarchy, to take away
all the show of their liberty at one blow, and on a sudden make them feel
servitude, without first introducing into their minds some preuiae
dispositiones, or preparatiues whereby they may the better endure it.
Hastiness in any action, especially of importance, is most times the overthrow
of it, and to do that at once, which must be done successively, is an
argument of a rash, and intemperate man, that cannot contain himself, and
stay for his desires. Also to a people so long weaned from a Monarchical
government, it was most probable he might gain by degrees, insinuation, and
continuance of time, more then on any sudden he could. Therefore he takes
upon him the business, and charge of the Senate, of the Magistrates, and of
the Laws, and begins now to assume, what he had long looked for, and
expected. For whereas all the plots and policies he had before used, were to
this end, if he had not also come to fruition, he might have been justly
condemned of leuity, and his actions to have proceeded from a vainglorious,
and unconstant brain, and his authority would have in time come into
contempt. For action and continual managing of business, is the only thing
that preserves the life, and vigor of authority. And all men give their
respect, and think it due to those, to whom they have recourse in the dispatch
of their weighty affairs.

[Nullo aduersante; cum ferocissimi per acies aut proscriptione cecidissent. No
man now opposing him, the stoutest men being fallen either in battle, or by
proscriptions.] This encroching on the liberty of the State, in former times,
never wanted opposers: but now the stout Patriots were rooted out. For such men
being forwardest, and busiest in Arms, must needs waste sooner then the rest,
and finding too much resistance, must therefore break, because they were of a
nature unapt to bend. And again, in the proscriptions these only were they,
that were aimed at, whereas the less violent adversaries found safety in
contempt. The Proscription here spoken of, being that of the Triumviri, where
the heads of the factions joining, abandoned, and as it were sacrificed their
old friends to this new friendship, it could not be, that almost any stout, and
dangerous man, of what faction so ever, should be left alive. And it may be
it was no less aduantageous to the designs of Augustus, that some of his own
faction were slain, then was the slaughter of those that took part with
Anthony, and Lepidus. For they might have expected, for the requital of their
service, to have been paid with participation of his authority, which he might
not suffer, or else have grown auerse, and have plucked him down, though they
had with his fall crushed themselves to death. But Augustus was now rid of those
stubborn companions.

[Caeteri nobilium quanto quis seruitio promptior, opibus, et honoribus,
extollerentur; ac nouis ex rebus aucti, tuta et praesentia, quam vetera and
periculosa mallent. The rest of the Nobility, as any one of them was most ready
to serve, so he was exalted to wealth and honor, and being enriched by the
change, liked rather the present State of things, and that which was safe, then
the former, and that which was dangerous.] It is both justice, and good policy,
to reward with preferments those that yield their obedience readily, and
willingly; for it stirs emulation in men, to exceed each other in diligence.
And on the contrary, to heap benefits on the sullen, and auerse, out of hope
to win their affection, is unjust and prejudicial. For first, they shall lose
one benefit after another, through vain hope of winning them, and not losing
the thanks of their first benefit; and then also others will learn, and think
it wisdom to be auerse and stubborn, by their example. Also those that were
rewarded for their service, must needs strive to maintain the present State,
and help to keep off the Civil wars. For times of tranquillity be always
best for the rich men. In wars and trouble they pay for all, and in
desolation their loss is greatest. For Civil war is commodious for none but
desperate unthrifts, that they may cut their Creditors throats without fear of
the gallows; men against whom the Law, and the sword of Justice makes a
fearful war, in time of peace. But the rich, and such as were in love with
titles of honor, found more ease and contentment here, then they could expect
in the Civil war, and did accept the present with security, rather then
strive for the old, with danger.

[Neque Prouinciae illum statum rerum abnuebant, suspecto Senatus populique
imperio, ob certamina potentum, and auaritiam, magistratuu^; inualido legum
auxilio, quae vi, ambitu, postremo pecunia turbabantur. Neither did the
provinces dislike this state of things; for they mistrusted the government of
the Senate and people, because of the contention of great men, and
covetousness of the Magistrates for the aid of the Laws was weak, being
infringed by force, canuassing, and lastly by money.] The Roman State did not
consist in the magnitude of that one City of Rome, or in the extent of Italy
alone, but in the multitude, and greatness of Provinces, that were subject
unto it. And therefore it much concerned the surety of Augustus his government,
to have also them content with this alteration: which they were for two causes.
First, a Popular State, if the great men grow once too mighty for the laws,
is to the Provinces not as one, but many tyrants; so that not knowing to which
faction to adhere, they procure the enimitie always of some, and sometimes of
all, and become subject to the rapine of whosoever first seazeth it, and to be
the prize of their contention. At home they are commanded by contrary factions,
contrary Acts, so that they can neither obey, nor disobey without offense: but
are hurried, and haled, sometimes to this faction, and sometimes to that. Those
that were deputed to do justice amongst them, must not administer the same
according to the Law, but according to the humor of him, whom himself
follows; which may be now one, and anon (fortune changing) another. At Rome,
if they sued for any thing, though they could all be content their suit should
pass for the matter it self; yet the furtherance that one faction should give
it, would stir up contradiction in the other, and so cross it. Therefore it
is better for a Province to be subject to one, though an evil master, then to
a potent, if factious, Republique. Next, they found covetousness in the
Magistrates. For when they expected, that having truth, and equity on their
sides, their causes, and suits should not go amiss, they found contrarily,
that by that, their judgments were not balanced, but that they distributed
justice rather by weight then measure. That purse that was heauiest, that bribe
that was greatest, carried the cause Justice was not seen, but felt; a good
bribe was their best Advocate. Such in those times were the Magistrates, and
Judges. Every thing was carried by might, ambition, and corruption. He that was
not ambitious, was neglected: and he that was not corrupt, was esteemed
indiscreet. In this time the Provinces would have been content with a
Monarchy, or tyranny, rather then to be troubled with so different, and ill
humors of diverse men. But there may also be covetousness in Magistrates, when
one has the sovereignty, being a fault of the person, and not of the form of
the government. Indeed, there may be bribing in such a State; but in a
factious, and divided Commonwealth it cannot be otherwise. For where the State
is united, the Magistrates will have some respect unto that; but being divided,
every one is for himself, and must look to strengthen and enrich himself by
any means how ill soever. For faction has no strength, but from Injustice,
and Rapine. One remedy there is for such an inconvenience, and that is, if the
Laws be strengthened with authority; which also wanted in the former times.
For force, friends, and money overthrew their validity. For what Law was so
strong, that the force of Cinna, Sylla, Marius, Julius Caesar, and others, in
their times could not have broken through? Nothing is more prouerbiall, then
that Laws are like Spiders webs, only to hold the smaller Flies. Then, favor
and friendship, made way even for the weak men to break through. And lastly,
money gave the easiest passage of all. Wherefore the Provinces, conceiving
better hope of the rule of Augustus, could not dislike, but were rather glad of
the alteration. Thus far the acquist and assurance of the Monarchy to
Augustus: now, his ways to perpetuate the same, and derive it to posterity;
are to be considered.

subsidia dominationi Claudiu^ Marcellum, sororis filium, admodum adolescentem,
Pontificatu and curuli Aedilitate extulit. Augustus, to streng then his
government, prefers Claudius Marcellus, his Sisters son, one as yet very
young, to the Pontifical dignity, and office of Aedile.] A Prince that has
raised himself to the Sovereignty of a State, and is once quietly settled in
it, will for the most part have a desire to make the same successiue, and will
take all opportunities that may further such his intention. So Augustus does
now, and adorns with offices, and dignities, all those upon whom, he thought,
he might make the Empire to descend. Provision of successors, in the life time
of a Prince (besides that it is a kind of duty they owe their Country, thereby
to prevent civil discord) has this virtue, that it nippeth in the head, and
kills the seeds of ambitious, and traitorous hopes in those that think of
alteration: whereas the uncertainty of the succeeder, breeds, and feeds
Treason in aspirers for many years together. If any man therefore had any hope
alive in him, that when Augustus should dye, the State might again struggle
for liberty, or a new form of government might arise better to their own
liking, this providence of Augustus does utterly extinguish it. First
therefore, he puts his Nephew into these two places of great command, that
of Po^tifex, and the Aedileship: whereof the former, in matters of their
Heathenish religion, was of supreme authority. In places of authority, and
subordinate command, it is no small policy in the supreme governors, and
especially in the principal offices, to place such as are either tied in
nature, or necessity unto them; that as they themselves have supremacy in
command, so all their vnderministers may be so fast unto them, that their
actions may be always limited according to the will, and affection of their
Sovereign, by whom they were enstalled, and ordained for that purpose, to the
places they hold. This was one stay and strength of his government, to put into
the hands of his Nephew (as I may so say) the Supremacy in matters
Ecclesiastical, which is one of the chiefest guides of a Commonwealth.

[Marcum Agrippam ignobilem loco, bonum militia, and victoriae socium,
geminatis Consulatibus extulit. He makes Marcus Agrippa, one descended
meanly, but a good Soldier, and companion with him in his victories, twice
together Consul.] After he had advanced his Nephew, the next that he exalts
to dignity, was his friend. Wherein we may perceive, that in the opinion of
Augustus, when a Prince has a Minister of valor, and worth, which may make him
capable of great place, the meandness of his birth ought to be no bar to his
rising. Again, in raising him, first he should not need to fear that he
might enda^ger him, being one that could presume so little of his Nobility.
For a man that by his virtue raises himself from out of the common people,
shall more often get envy from the multitude, then any popular applause, and
consequently cannot be very dangerous. So Augustus conferred that honor
safely. Besides, Agrippa, in that he was a good Soldier, deserved to have the
reward of his virtue, which is honor. And lastly, as the companion of his
Victories, he deserved to participate of some fruit thereof. Which Augustus
might also consider, not so much for his company in the war, as in the
Victory. For men reward the success of actions done on their behalfes, rather
then the labor, and virtue, or the danger which they expose themselves unto in
the same. The office of Consul was a great place, and had been in former times
of supreme power in the Commonwealth: yet Agrippa being a man, of whose faith,
love, and worth, he had had long experience, and for the reasons before
recited, he doubted not to bestow the same upon him twice together: and more
then that, intends to make him another stay, and hope of the succession.

[Mox defuncto Marcello generum sumpsit. Shortly after when Marcellus was dead,
he makes him his son in law.] The greatness of this benefit, bestowed on one
that could no ways exact, or extort it from Augustus, gives here an occasion
to enquire into the minds of all men in the matter of giving and receiving
benefits. Tacitus in the first book of his Histories, says, Beneficia eo
vsque esse laeta, dum exolui possunt. That benefits received are pleasing so
long as they be requitable. When once they exceed that, they are an intolerable
burden, and men seldom are willing to acknowledge them; for who but a man of
desperate estate will set his hand to such an obligation, as he knows he
never can discharge? This is the reason that Princes are so slow in advancing
some men, that have deserved it; because they cannot easily do it according to
their full merit, or else they think it will not be so taken: So that they
should, by rewarding them, both pay, and yet remain in debt. And generally all
men, but Princes most of all, hate acknowledgement, and like not to have such
great Creditors in their eye; but will rather be content to take advantage
against them, as against so many vpbraiders of ingratitude: So that great
services procure many times rather the hatred then the love of him they are
done unto. On the contrary, when men can, without lessening of themselves,
reward those to whom they have been beholding, so as to satisfy them according
to their own estimate, they will then ouer-doe it, and heap one favor upon
another, thinking by showing their affection to them, to gain theirs in the
same proportion: but it falls not so out in humane nature; for benefits
increase the love of the bestower, more then of him that receives them: for as
it is proprium humani ingenij odisse quem laeseris, the property of humane
nature, to hate those they have wronged; so also is it on the contrary, to love
those to whom they have been beneficial. Agrippa had done great service to
Augustus; but Augustus was now able, without diminution of himself, both to
requite and surmount him; and therefore leaves out nothing that may express
his gratitude, but makes him his Son in Law, whereby his children might
become heirs even to Augustus his own power, which was the absolute
sovereignty of the whole Empire. Which act of Augustus, as it proceeded out of
affection, so it also agreed with good policy; for whom should he more trust,
then one whose love had been so much showed, whose fidelity so much tried? And
therefore he sets him near himself, and (Marcellus being now dead) bestows
on him the widow Iulia, his only child.

But here I must have leave to transpose these few lines of the Author, to the
end that that which touches the advancement of the children of Liuia, may
afterward be joined together.

After this, he aduanceth the Children that Agrippa had by this match.
[Genitos Agrippa, Caium and Lucium, in familiam Caesarum induxerat, nec dum
posita puerili praetexta, Principes inuentutis, appellari, destinari Consules,
specie recusantis, flagrantissime cupiuerat. He received Caius and Lucius, the
chil-of Agrippa, into the Caesarean family, and seeming to refuse, most
ardently desired to have them, while they were yet but boys, to be called
Princes of the youth, and to be designed for the Consulship.] His sisters
son Marcellus being dead, and having now of his own offspring to succeed
him, he desires that the people would be pleased to take notice of them
betimes, and in his life time, to put them into some possession of their future
dignity. He would therefore now, whilst they were in their minority, have them
honored first with the title of Princes of youth. This title, did imply as
much as Heirs apparent of the Empire. And to give it, was to admit and openly
consent, that the State should be, not only the possession of Augustus, for his
own life, but also the inheritance of his desce^dents for ever. Secondly, with
being Consuls elect, that they might have some command of importance, as soon
as their age could bear it. Though Augustus had force to bring this to pass,
yet he was loath again to irritate the minds of his new subjects; and
therefore he would not openly so much as make show of this his desire touching
his Grand-sonnes, lest they who were content to obey him for his own time,
upon this offering them a Successor, as the perpetuation of their servitude,
might turn desperate, and do some such act as might displease him. But he
turns to dissimulation, which was in those times held an inseparable accident
of a politic Prince. He makes show of refusing, and yet most ardently
desires it; and that desire must also appear by the refusal. And those that
saw him thus refuse, durst do no other then force his consent, and put these
honors on his Grand-sonnes, whether he would, or not.

and Claudium Drusum priuignos Imperatorijs nominibus auxit, integra etiam dum
domo sua. And his own house not yet failing, he adornes with imperial titles
Tiberius Nero, and Claudius Drusus, his wives children.] Augustus, to make the
succession certain, and not to have it depend upon the lives only of two, and
those but young, aduanceth also the sons of his wife, men of mature years,
and seen in the wars, and honored them with imperial titles, that if his
own issue failed, he might leave a succeeder, such as his own affection
should make choice of. This course in the general, is to be esteemed in a
Prince both a provident one for himself, and also in a manner necessary for
the public good of his subjects, considering the bloody and fearful wars,
that have followed upon the death of such as have not provided a successor
before their decease. But yet it falls out otherwise in some particulars,
then according to the intention of him that so nominateth his succeeder; as it
did in this: for had Augustus thought it should so much have prejudiced his
own blood, to advance those of his wives, he would I think have left them in
obscurity. Therefore it is not good for a Prince in appointing his succeeders,
to leave the reuersion of the State to such as may have power and means to
subvert the first heirs thereof. Thus far he has been tying the knot of
succession, which now Liuia his wife begins on one part to untie, or rather
cut asunder, for the strengthening of the other.

[Vt Agrippa vita concessit, Lucium Caesarem euntem ad Hispanienses exercitus,
Caium remeantem Armenia, et vulnere invalidum, mors fato propera, velnouercae
Liuiae dolus abstulit. As Soon as Agrippa was dead, Lucius Caesar going to take
charge of the Army in Spain, and Caius coming from Armenia, untimely Death by
fate, or else by the treachery of their Stepmother Liuia, took away.] As the
watchfulness of a faithful, and wise Counselor about a Prince, often
checketh the very thoughts toward treason; so on the contrary, the death of
such a one wonderfully facilitates the designs of a traitor. When Agrippa was
dead, his sons did not long out-liue him, and though Tacitus here does not
accuse Liuia directly of their death, yet there may be gathered these
presumptions against her. First, her ambitious and plotting humor. Then their
hasty and opportune death; as if fate, (if their death were merely natural)
had been of Counsel with her. And lastly, the benefit which thereby accrewed
unto her own sons. This last is of much importance in the judgment of men:
for to whomsoever comes the profit of strange and unexpected accidents, to him
also, for the most part, is imputed the contriuing, and effecting of them, if
they be thought able. To Liuia appertains the suspicion of their death,
because it was good for her that they should dye when they did, and she was
also generally suspected in that kind of evil.

[Druso pridem extincto, Nero solus e priuignis erat. Drusus being before dead,
Nero was only left of his sons in Law.] This was the fruit reaped by the
death of Augustus his Grand-sonnes; for hereby her son Nero remained the
only man that was likely to succeed in the Empire. For his brother Drusus dyed
of a fall from his horse two years before. So that now he had no competitor
neither of his own kindred, nor of the house of Augustus to oppose him, save
only Agrippa Posthumus, who for causes hereafter to be mentioned, was not of
much respect.

[Illuc cuncta vergere, filius, Collega Imperij, Consors Tribunitiae*
potestatis adsumitur, omnesque per exercitus ostentari, non obscuris vt antea
matris artibus, sed palam hortatu. All inclined that way, he is made his
son, his Colleague in the Empire, his companion in the Tribunitiall power,
shown to all the Armies, not by the secret artifice of his Mother, as before,
but by open persuasion.] Every man that followed Augustus in his strength, now
in the declining of his age turn their eyes upon the next change: for those
who had fortunes under Augustus, desired the conservation of them at the hand
of the next; and those that had none, began now to hope for estates and honors,
under his Successor. All men being of this condition, that desire and hope of
good more affects them then fruition: for this induces satiety; but hope is
a whetstone to men's desires, and will not suffer them to languish. It was
wisdom in Augustus to make manifest one certain successor, thereby not to
give occasion to the ambition of many. But that Tiberius should be the man
rather then his own Grandsonne, that was certainly the wisdom of his Wife:
for not many men would deprive their own offspring of so fair an
inheritance, without greater cause then is expressed, to confer it on the
issue of another. If Liuia had loved her own no better, the house of Caesar
might have continued much longer then it did. The honor Augustus gave to her
son, was to adopt him for his; which was to give him sole power for the
future, after the death of Augustus, and make him Colleague of the Empire, and
partaker of the authority of Tribune, which was authority equal to his own
for the present; and then, to cause the armies to yield him their respect, and
acknowledge him for their next Lord. These favors Liuia had been long
soliciting for, by insinuation, detraction, deceit, and whatsoever Art else is
requisite to the supplanting of a Rival in a Princes affection. But now the
way was so clear, by reason of the Emperors age fit to be wrought on, and the
rudeness of Agrippa, that she durst openly move Augustus to dis-inherit his
own issue, and prefer hers. But the favor that Liuia showed to Augustus
children, besides the suspicion of causing the death of two of them, was clean
contrary.

[Nam senem Augustum adeo deuinxerat, vti nepotem vnicum Agrippam Posthumum in
Insulam Planasiam proijceret. For she had so tied unto her Augustus, who was
now an old man, that he confined his only Grand-sonne Agrippa Posthumus into
the Island Planasia.] I have not found so great a defect in Augustus his
judgment, in all his former actions, as in this, so far to follow her will,
as to banish and confine his own blood, for the advancement of hers. But, as
Tacitus says, he was now grown old, and so the weakness that accompanies
old age may excuse that fault, which in his younger, and more mature judgment,
peradventure he would never have committed. It was hard for him, being now in
years, to want the comfort of his Wife; to live with her, and not to have her
pleased, intolerable, and against the dignity of an Emperor; and to extinguish
her ambition, impossible. So that if he had seen her drifts, unless they had
broken out into some violent actions, he must in a manner have been forced to
dissemble it. For it is contrary to the dignity of a Prince, to take notice of
that fault which he is not able to amend. But he saw them not: for what cannot
the craft of some wives, through opportunity, continual flattery, and
arguments framed with all the Art that can be used, work upon the weak
judgment of an old man? The place of Agrippa's exile, being a small, and
uninhabited Island, where he was rather imprisoned, then banished, was in a
manner, a sure argument, that he should not long out-liue his Grandfather: for
as the fear of Augustus kept him now alive, so the fear of his own Title,
would make Tiberius never let him escape out of his fingers.

[Rudem sane bonarum artium, and robore corporis stolide ferocem, nullius tamen
flagitij Compertu^. Ignorant (to say the truth) of good Arts, and bearing
himself foolishly fierce of his strength of body, but not detected of any
crime.] These are the causes, for which Agrippa was put by the right of his
succession, and wanted the respect which was otherwise due unto his birth. He
had not good education. That was the sum of all his faults. And in a State
which might freely elect their Prince, the same had been a just cause to pass
by him. For it is a great misfortune to a people, to come under the government
of such a one, as knows not how to govern himself. For where it is said, he
was unfurnished of good Arts, it is not meant of letters, though that also be
good in a Prince, and of ornaments the chief; for he may want these, rather
then judgment, valor, or goodness of nature. But the Art that he is
principally taxed to want, seems to have been the Art of conforming to
times, and places, and persons, and consists much in a temperate
conversation, and ability upon just cause, to contain and dissemble his
passions, and purposes; and this was then thought the chief Art of government.
And whereas he is said to be vndetected of any crime, that made not much for
the matter in hand; for though he might prove no ill man, he might be
nevertheless an ill governor. But Agrippa's defects were not the sole cause
of his dis-inheriting, though they were the sole justification of it, when it
was done. The hope of succession, notwithstanding the care of the Emperor,
being reduced by the Art of Liuia, to one only man, Augustus again takes order
for the bringing in of one more.

[At hercule Germanicum Druso ortu^, octo apud Rhenu^ legionibus imposuit,
adscirique per adoptionem a Tiberio iussit, quamquam esset in domo Tiberij
Filius iuuenis; sed quo pluribus munimentis insisteret. But yet he made
Germanicus the son of Drusus, Commander of eight Legions upon the Rhine, and
commanded Tiberius to adopt him, although Tiberius had a young son of his
own: but this he did, to have the more supports.] Augustus is still of this
judgment, that the succession ought not to depend on the life of one man, and
therefore will have more props to establish it. But as the advancing of
Tiberius, was thought to be the ruin of Caius, and Lucius: so now the making
of Tiberius to adopt Germanicus, might have proved the ruin of Tiberius, if
the Ambition of Germanicus had been answerable to his power. For Augustus put
eight Legions into his hand, the which afterward would not only have been
ready to have given him the Empire, but also went about to put it upon him by
force. Therefore if a Prince raise many to the hope of reigning, he ought to
provide against the emulation, ambition, and mutual iealousies that ordinarily
arise thereof. For else he shall hardly bring any of them to the fruition, or
if one, then all the rest to untimely ends. Augustus here gave Liuia indeed no
occasion to work against this last choice of his, being one of her own
Grandchildren; but yet to command Tiberius, who had a son of his own, to
adopt another, must needs breed a hart-burning in him, because he knew by
himself, how much rather men desire to possess, then expect such authority.
And fearing therefore; that Germanicus might bear the same mind, he
afterward, as is thought, took a course to bring him to his end, whereby may
be perceived in what danger an honest man stands, being near unto one that
is ambitious, either before or behind him, whose nature is to destroy before
him, out of hope; and behind him, out of fear.

After that Augustus had mastered, quieted, and taken order for the succession
of the Empire: the Author shows next the state of the present times. [Bellum
ea tempestate nullu^, nisi aduersus Germanos supererat: abolendae magis
infamiae ob amissum cum Quinctilio Varo exercitum, quam cupiditate proferendi
Imperij, aut dignum ob praemium. There remained at that time no war, saving
against the Germans, and that rather to wipe off the disgrace for the loss of
the Army with Quintilius Varus, then out of any desire to enlarge the Empire,
or hope of worthy recompense.] Wars are necessary only where they are just,
and just only in case of defense First, of our lives, secondly, of our right,
and lastly, of our honor. As for enlargement of Empire, or hope of gain, they
have been held just causes of war by such only, as prefer the Law of
State before the Law of God. But this war against the Germans, was to defend
the reputation of the Roman Empire, and was necessary, not for the curiosity
alone, and niceness, that great Personages have always had, in point of
honor, much more great States, and most of all that of Rome, but also for the
real and substantial damage (for some man might account the other but a
shadow) that might ensue upon the neglecting of such shadows. For oftentimes
Kingdoms are better strengthened and defended by military reputation, then they
are by the power of their Armies. For there is no man that does an injury to
another, and scapeth with it, but will attribute his impunity to want of power
in his adversary, (for there be few that want will to revenge disgraces) and
thereby be the more emboldned to do him another, and so another, as long as
they may patiently be endured; whereas, when they deal with one whose sword
is out at every contempt, they will be very wary not to do him wrong. And
besides this, Augustus might find commodity in this war, by employing
therein the great and active spirits, which else might have made themselves
work at home, to the prejudice of his authority.

[Domires tranquillae. Eadem Magistratuum vocabula. Iuniores post Actiacam
victoriam, etiam senes inter bella ciuium nati. Quotusquisque qui Rempublicam
vidisset? In the City all was in quietness, the same names of Magistrates.
The younger sort were all born after the victory at Actium, and even the old men
in the time of the civil war. How few were left that had seen the
Commonwealth?] After the violent storms of civil wars, succeeds now the
calm of Augustus his government. For it fares with the body of a whole State,
as it does with the body of one man, that when a Fever has spent the matter,
and bilious humor, whereby it self was nourished, the body comes afterward
to a moderate temper. Whatsoever might have caused a desire of returning to
their former liberty, and bred a grudging of the old disease, was now removed.
Few remained that had seen the ancient Republique. And there is never in men
so strong a desire of things they have not seen, as of those things which they
have. And a man's nature is to stir more for the recovery of a good, which
they once enjoyed, then for the acquisition of what they are ignorant of. As
for the longing which might arise in them, through relation, and report, they
had therein also some satisfaction. For whereas they might have heard of the
names of Consuls, Tribunes, Censors, and the like, the same they found also in
the present State; though the authority of them all, remained only in
Augustus.

[Igitur verso ciuitatis statu, nihil vsquam prisci and integri moris: omnes
exuta aequalitate, iussa Principis aspectare. So that the State of the City
being changed, nothing remained of the old, and uncorrupted customs, every one
(equality laid of) attended the commandment of the Prince.] In vita hominum
perinde accidit, vt si ludas tesseris, etc. Terent. It falls out in a man's
life, as in a game at Tables, wherein when one cannot cast that which is the
best, he must mend the matter as well as he can, by good play. The change
being now fully settled, and the ancient customs no more hoped for, they
find, that striving for equality, is not the best of their game, but
obedience, and waiting on the command of him that had power to raise, or keep
them low at his pleasure. For though other virtues, especially deep wisdom,
great, and extraordinary valor, be excellent ones under any sort of
government, and chiefly in a free State, (where therefore they thrive best,
because they are commonly accompanied with ambition, and rewarded with honor)
yet in the subject of a Monarch, obedience is the greatest virtue, and those
before mentioned as they shall serve more, or less unto that, so to be had
more or less in estimation. Therefore they now study no more the Art of
commanding, which had been heretofore necessary for any Roman Gentleman,
when the rule of the whole might come to all of them in their turns; but apply
themselves wholly to the Arts of service, whereof obsequiousness is the
chief, and is so long to be accounted laudable, as it may be distinguished
from Flattery, and profitable, whilst it turn not into tediousness

[Nulla in praesens formidine, dum Augustus aetate validus, seque, and domum,
and pacem sustentauit. There being at that time no fear of troubles as long as
Augustus vndecayed by age, sustained both himself, and his house, and the
Public peace.] Although that the principal strength required, to the
managing of an Empire, be that of the mind, yet ability of the body is also of
such necessity, that without it a Prince runs the danger of suffering many
disorders that he would else remedy. The cause hereof is obuious to every man,
namely, that when for weakness of age, or want of health, he cannot be
present at the consultations of those he uses in matters of estate, he must
be forced to rely on the relations of diverse, and so be subject to
distraction, or else wholly trust unto some one, and become liable to abuse.
And in the mean time every great man, hoping to make his private benefit out
of the public remissnes, severally oppresses the common people, and withal,
keep off their complaints from the Princes care; and thereby draw on the danger
of sedition and rebellion.

[Postquam prouecta iam senectus, aegro and corpore fatigabatur, aderatque
finis and spes nouae: pauci bona libertatis incassum disserere, plures bellum
pauescere, alij cupere, pars multo maxima imminentes dominos varijs rumoribus
differebant. But now that he was grown very aged, and wearied with his sickly
body, and that his end and new hopes were near at hand: some few there were
that discoursed in vain of the commodities of liberty, more feared war, some
desired it, but the greatest number by far, with diversity of rumors did
descant on those that were to be their next Lords.] When a Prince draws
near to his end the peoples minds are all set upon new hopes, and discourse of
nothing that is present, but only of what is in expectancy. The reason hereof
is this, the hopes of Subjects being much built upon the life of their Prince:
when he dies, they are of necessity to begin again, and lay their foundation
anew in the next. Augustus therefore being ready to leave his room to another,
there could not choose but be much discourse of the probability of the
succeeder. One of these three was of necessity to come in place: Liberty,
Civil war, or a new Monarch. If another Monarch then either Agrippa, or
Tiberius. For Liberty they had no hope at all, but yet that was also talked of:
for men have generally this infirmity, that when they would fall into
consideration of their hopes; they mistake, and enter into a fruitless
discourse of their wishes; such impression do pleasing things make in man's
imagination. As for war, it was both feared, and desired by many, according
as their fortunes required it; for without doubt, those whose estates were
whole, would be afraid, though such as had not a fortune able to sustain
their inordinate expense, thereby to seize the wealth of other men, would much
wish for it. Lastly, touching a Monarch, as it was most credible to come to
pass; so which of the two it should be, was now become the common talk of the
greatest part of men, who censuring their persons, gathered arguments thence of
their succession, and of the welfare of the estate under them; and used
liberty in their speech of them, more boldly (though nevertheless privately)
then in the times that came next after, they could safely have done. Thus far
the state of those times, wherein Augustus was come to the last Scene, and
ready to quit the Stage of this great Empire. And now Tacitus comes to the
opinion conceived of those that were next to enter.

[Trucem Agrippam, atque ignominia accensum, non aetate, neque rerum
experientia tantae moli parem. That Agrippa was cruel, and kindled with his
disgrace, and neither of age, nor experience sufficient for so great a
burden.] By the weight of these censures, I should hardly think they
proceeded from the common people, but rather that they sprung out of the
Authors own meditation, or else that he means by [pars multo maxima] the
greatest part of the Nobility, and men of knowledge in great affairs. Age and
experience are necessary for the government of a great Empire; therefore the
want of these in Agrippa, was of much importance against him; so also was the
fierceness of his disposition, the absence of which fault is more desired by
subjects in their Prince, then of any other vice whatsoever, that concerns
only morality. But that other note given to Agrippa, that he was ignominia
accensus, is a far greater exception against him then all the rest. The great
men had most of them no doubt approved his banishment, and he lived thereby in
contempt of them all; so that he could not choose but hold himself generally
iniuried, though his ignominy proceeded but from a few: and opinion of
contempt is a frequent cause of cruelty and tyranny. If now therefore they had
chosen him for their Prince, they had then given him full power to make his
revenge according to his own cruel inclination, and done contrary to the
custom of humane nature; for men more willingly trust him with their lives and
fortunes, that has done them injury, then one that has been or holds
himself iniuried by them: for from these they can expect nothing but revenge,
from the other they may hope for amends. But this is not always the best
course, considering on the other side another general disposition of mankind,
which is apter to remit to such as are under their power an injury received,
then to make satisfacton to them for one committed; because for the first they
shall have thanks, and the second is held but for a debt.

After the censure of Agrippa, falls in that of Tiberius. [Tiberium Neronem
maturum annis, spectatum bello, sed vetere atque insita Claudiae familiae
superbia, multaque inditia saeuitiae, quanquam premantur erumpere. That
Tiberius Nero was of ripe years, and of reputation in the wars, but he had in
him the old and hereditary pride of the Claudia^ family, and many signs of
cruelty brake forth in him, though he strove to smother them] Ability to
govern is not all that is to be wished for in a Governor; Tiberius was here
thought too able, that is, likely to hold the reins of government too hard,
especially over a people so lately weaned from liberty: for such are ever more
sensible of every restraint and pressure of Monarchical rule, then others are
that have been so accustomed. There are not two more tyrannical qualities in
the world then pride and cruelty; whereof the former imposes intolerable
commands, and the later exacteth immoderate punishments. They argued Tiberius
his pride both from his ancestors and education, and of cruelty himself made
demonstration. Men derive their virtues and vices from their ancestors two
ways; either by nature or imitation. By the former are derived all that depend
on the temper of the body; the rest are by imitation, and do seldom fail. For
the reverence that naturally men do bear to the qualities of their ancestors,
begets a lively imitation of the^, in their posterity. And so pride may
pass through a Stock by imitation, not that men would imitate that, but by
error under the name of Magnanimity. Then for his cruelty, by how much the more
he endeavored to hide it, and could not, by so much the more it was feared and
abhorred in him. For a passion that can be mastered, is nothing so dangerous as
one that cannot; especially in Tiberius, that knew best of all men how to
dissemble his vices. Those things that Tiberius would dissemble, were evil, and
those evils he could not dissemble, were great ones; therefore for such cruelty
as himself was not able to cover, he was justly to be feared. And yet it is
no easy thing to dissemble ones vices, I mean, if the dissimulatio^ must be of
long continuance; for, for once a man may overcome the most violent passion
that ever was: but difficile fictam far personam diu. Seneca Trag.


[Hunc and prima ab infantia eductu^ in domo regnatrice; congestos iuueni
consulatus, triumphos. That the same man was brought up from his infancy in the
house of Sovereignty; that be had Co^sulships, and triumphs heaped on him while
he was yet but a youth.] This is another argument of the haughtines of
Tiberius, drawn from his education Honors sometimes be of great power, to change
a man's manners and behavior into the worse, because men commonly measure their
own virtues, rather by the acceptance that their persons find in the world,
them by the judgment which their own conscience makes of the^, and never do, or
think they never need to examine, those things in themselves, which has once
found approbation abroad, and for which they have received honor. Also honor many
times confirms in men that intention wherewith they did those things which
gained honor; which intention is as often vicious as virtuous. For there is
almost no civil action, but may proceed as well from evil as from good; they
are the circumstances of it (which be only in the mind, and consequently not
seen and honored) that make virtue. Out of all these things, I suppose, may be
gathered, that honor nourishes in light and vain men a wrong opinion of their
own worth, and consequently, often changes their manners into the worse, but
especially that it increases their pride and insolence. As for his educatio^
in a house of souerainty, that might put into the heads of these censuring
subjects thus much: (for certainly they liked never a jot the better of
Tiberius for having bin brought up in so high a School of sovereignty as the
house of Augustus) First, that what seeds soever of haughtines and pride were
in him hereditary, and which he possessed by virtue of his blood, were now also
through long custom sprung up, and wanted but the season of reigning to bring
forth their unpleasant fruit. Secondly, that having by experience, under so
learned a master in the Art of government been taught how to hold them under
as much as himself should please, they could not look for any remissness to
proceed from want of knowledge how to keep them low, and consequently were
sure to find his government every way uneasy.

[Neijs quide^ annis quibus Rhodi specie secessus exulem egerit, aliquid quam
iram, and simulationem, and secretas libidines meditatum. Neither those years
that he lived under color of retireme^t in exile at Rhodes, did he meditate
anything but wrath, dissimulation, and secret lust.] It is reported of
Tiberius, that at the first he traveled voluntarily to Rhodes, but being
there, he was commanded to stay. Howsoever it was, he obtained the fairename of
retirement, to cover the ignominy of banishment. A man would perhaps think,
that adversity should rather quench, or at least assuage those passions, which
have their life especially from great prosperity, as wrath, and dissimulation,
and lust. And so it does, when the adversity is so great, that the hope is
lost of reducing their meditations into act. But otherwise it works a clean
contrary effect. For whereas anger commonly dies, where revenge is despaired
of; dissembling is laid aside, where the labor of it is vain; and imaginations
of lust diminish, where they can never be accomplished; when adversity is but
such as they expect to ouercom, it often falls out, that the hope which
nourishes such imaginations is enflamed thereby, and men please their vicious
fancies for the present, with the conceit of what they will execute with effect
hereafter, when they shall have the power. This was the case of Tiberius, and a
cause of fear, and ce^sure in those that were to live in subjection under him.
[Accedere matrem muliebri impotentia: seruiendu^ foeminae, and duobus insuper
adolescentibus, qui Remp. interim premant, quandoque distrahant. That besides
this, there was his mother offeminine impotence: that they were to serve a
woman and two young men, that would for the present oppress the Commonwealth,
and might hereafter rend it.] Next to the person of Tiberius, they considered
in him those of his Family, that would also look for service, and obedience at
their hands, namely, his Mother and two sons: Germanicus by adoption, and his
own natural son, and thought them no small grieuance to the Commonwealth.
For it is a hard matter to serve and please well one Master: but to please two,
or more, when there is, or may be, betwixt them competition, or jealousy
(leaving out that one of them, is a woman) is altogether impossible. The cause
hereof is not, because the diligence and dexterity of a man cannot suffice for
the quantity of service, but because the quality of it will not permit: for the
service that the one will expect from you, is most times this, That you
displease the other. And this proceeds from the emulatio^ of those that are in
the way to authority, that often labor not so much to outrunne each other in the
course, as they do to trip up one another heels. And the same emulation, when
they once draw near the races end, makes them snatch at the prize, and fall to
violence, and war, and to distract, and draw the Commonwealth into faction
and sedition.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE OF ROME.

A DISCOVRSE OF ROME.
IN the sight of any place there be two especial Objects, Antiquity, and
Greatness; both which none can sooner challenge then Rome: in the very
beginning noted for Sovereignty. The continuance of which, in such diversity of
governments, as Kings, Consuls, Tribunes, Dictators, Emperors, cannot but show
a divine power; for otherwise so many changes might in all likelihood have bred
confusion, and so consequently suppressed their rising to so great an Empire:
which as the last, so it may be truly styled the greatest that yet the world
ever knew, or heard of; obtained only by the valor of this one City, no
Commander, and for a long time no Soldier, that came not out from thence. So
that it may be said, the people of this one place, made themselves masters of
the rest. Whereupon they might have just cause to esteem Orbem in vrbe, the
world confined in their City.

In the height of whose Imperiality, which was in Augustus reign, Christ came
into the world. This as then the chief Commandresse of the whole, was the
place where holiness, and religion, aimed to have their principal plantation;
where, during the time of the infidelity of the Emperors, till Constantine the
great, who was the first that maintained the faith, it is infinite to
comprehend the tyrannizing over Christians, the martyrdomes they endured, so
many, that it is hard to name any who sealed not his faith with his blood.

But now Constantine was converted, to see the ill effects so good a cause
produced, cannot but breed admiration. For the Ambition of the Bishops of Rome
made this their first step to greatness, and subversion of the Empire. How
grounded upon this donation, I cannot imagine, nor I think they yet well
defend: but this was the true Original, by which in succession of time the
Empire was translated. The zeal of this, and some succeeding Emperors, was so
well taken hold of by the Prelates of Rome, that by degrees they assumed more
authority to themselves then was due; the other in a manner before they were
aware, losing all at Rome but the title. From which pretended power, the Popes
now take to themselves supremacy in all causes, through all Kingdoms in the
world, and those which were before, their superiors, to be as it were
subject, and created by them that were their creatures. Which shows a great
contrariety to the pretended arguments of Romanists, for superiority, and
rather may be returned upon them, that this their greatness has more risen
by encroachment, then right. Why therefore Princes have been so blinded with
their pretenses for greatness, I cannot tell whereunto to attribute it, except
to the fate of this place, that has ever been, or aimed to be the Mistress of
the world. First, by their wisdom and power, and then under color of
Religion and Saint Peter's Keys.

And now to the description of Rome, as I saw it. In which I will neither go
beyond mine own knowledge, and fly to the reports of others, nor yet so
strictly tie my self to a bare description, but that I may upon the occasions
of those particulars I saw, set down my observations, and the conceits I then
had; which consist, first, in the situation. Secondly, the Ethnicke
Antiquities. Thirdly, the Christian Monuments. Fourthly, the modern Buildings,
Gardens, Fountains, etc. Fifthly, the Colleges, Churches, and Religious
Houses. Sixthly, the present strength of the City and Pope, with the description
of his and the Cardinals Magnificence. And lastly, the safety and danger for
an English man to travel to Rome.

situation, it stands in a place that could neither afford pleasure nor profit
to the dwellers, other then that which is forced. Though not so seated, as it
may be said to stand in the Appenine, yet amongst those Mountains. All the
Country about is so barren, except some little, near the City, which is by
labor brought to fertility, that the wildest Forest of England may be
esteemed good ground, in respect of this. In some places heereabout, I saw
where corn had been gathered, but by the stubble might perceive had been so
thin, that a man would think one stalk had been afraid of another. The
ways thereabout both coming down the Appenine to Rome, and from thence
toward Naples, so impassable for a Coach, that a man may think himself well
blessed, if he break not his neck from horseback.

The sight of this so miserable a Country, wonderfully distracted my thoughts,
to think how the inhabitants of so wild a place could ever come to such a
greatness. And from thence proceeded these cogitations. First, that ease and
delicacie of life is the bane of noble actions, and wise counsels. A man that
is delighted, and whose affections be taken with the place wherein he lives,
is most commonly unapt, or unwilling to be drawn to any change, and so
consequently unfit for any enterprise, that may either advance his own honor,
or the good of his Country. Any actions that reach farther then their own
private contents, in their estimation be needless and unprofitable Labors.
And it has many times happened, that whilst men live in this Lethargy, that
Countries, Cities, their own fortunes and all, have been lost through their
negligence.

Again, a life of pleasure does so besot and benumme the senses, and so far
effeminate the spirits of men, that though they be naturally prone to an
active life, yet custom has brought them to such a habit, that they apprehend
not any thing farther then the compass of their own affections; think
nothing beyond their present enioyments. A strange Epicurean opinion, that men,
who were borne to have dominion over all creatures; should be now subject to
them, and under their rule. A mere inuersion of the prime ordinance.

From this consideration I declined to the contrary, that a place of hardness,
and a life exercised in actions of valor and not idleness, has ever produced
the brauest men, and arrived at the greatest fortune. Let but the Roman Story
be a mirror to you in this kind, you shall hardly, I think, find in the
first times any enterprise of great worth, that the cause of it might not be
drawn from this head. For their first poverty, being men brought to this place
by fortune, and rather by forced, then desired election, not knowing where else
to settle, in despite of want, their ambitions put them forward; first, to
encroach upon their neighbors, and then, as their fortunes were enlarged, to
go on in actions of greater consequence and more difficulty. Being a race of
such men, as could not confine and limit themselves to one place, but
successively from father to son, you shall scarce read of any, that was not
either a man of action or direction, though some peradventure naturally unapt
for the one, yet exquisite in the other: and ability to give counsel, is at
least, not inferior to the former.

To prepare a man fit for both, nothing so much preuailes, as a hard and weary
life, such an agitation as will not permit idleness, nor the mind to settle
too much upon private ends, which being so, could never be aptly applied for
Public. Besides, a continual working of the mind, which in an active spirit,
will still grow and labor in production of good effects, if it should be
suffered to rest, would soon degenerate. For if a man give over himself to an
easefull life, the sharpness of his senses will be dulled, and grow retired,
applying himself to his own contents, and then, can never have sufficiency,
nor will to prevail for the public, once being confined to his own
particular interest, and looking no further. Many men are naturally given to
such a life, and some by accident fall into it, but certainly their memory dies
with them: for no man is borne only for himself. This is so well known, that
I will not seek farther to illustrate it.

A third consideration that came into my mind, at the sight of the place, was
to wonder at a sort of men (but either ignorant, or malicious) who from the
spirit of detraction think to calumniate, the valors, and virtues of men, in
disgracing their Country for barrenness, for poverty, or the like. These men,
if they had ever seen this place, and known the story, would never have
imagined this a good argument. Cannot virtue and poverty be together? cannot
an unfruitful Country yield men full of worthiness, and Valor? a strange
mark of an envious disposition, to tax the men's virtues, for the
unpleasantness of the soil; as if virtue and plenty could not be severed, or
that of necessity a hard Country must produce soft and ignoble spirits: but if
they would truly look into themselves, they could not choose but see a
wonderful imperfection, and ignorance, who judge virtue by means, and men by
places. If Noble and worthy Spirits had consisted in these outward respects,
the men of this place would have been wonderful ignominious; but you may
plainly see, by the example of them, that a poor and hard life, a desolate,
and almost vninhabitable place, brought forth such men, and they performed such
actions, as in this age (we are most of us so much degenerate) we can hardly
hear of without incredulity. So I will leave the place it self, and speak of
the Country about it.

Not far distant from the City, is the Mediterranean Sea, and the principal
Port now is Ciuita vecchia, where since the Church has had dominion, the Navy
is very small, and chiefly consists of Galleys. But certainly, this was a
great help, in the time of the ancient Romans, as well to increase their
dominion, as to fortify themselves against foreign invasions: for by this
means men were more easily, and with less charge transported to those parts
of Africa, and Greece, where they made great conquests, which otherwise could
never have been compassed, and they themselves much strengthened against all
enemies that could come from those parts, seeing it a matter of great
difficulty to surprise, or take any place, that has so good a defense as the
Sea. And to a people who be strong, and of great power, it is not difficult to
defend themselves from the enterprise of any assaylers; and experience has
ever shown, it is harder to conquer Islands and places well fenced with the Sea,
the^ the Continent.

Thus much for this, and now I will confine my self within the walls, which
be the ancient ones, adorned in former times with many towers, but now the
most decayed, and not very many left. The River Tyber runs through the town,
and within this compass are those seven Hills so famously known, all of one
side the River, upon which old Rome was built. And still there be some Palaces
on them; but the City, as it is now, is more built in those spaces, as Campus
Martius, etc. which before were left vacant.

Mons Capitolinus, whereof almost nothing remains but the memory. The place
where the Senate sat, is now plain, and covered with earth, only some steps
you may see where they went down, and it is said to have been framed in the
form of a Cockpit. The houses now about the Capitol are assigned for the place
of Justice. Three several ascents there be by stairs unto it; and I have
heard those Romans, who are descended from the Ancient, do (though at any
price) desire to have their dwelling hereabouts. The principal of them be of
the Scipioni, and the Camilli. From this place Nero made a Gallery to his
Palace upon Mons Palatinus, whereof there is now nothing remaining, but some
few Pillars which bore it up, very great ones, and of Marble. This place is
adorned with many choice Statues, both in the open place, and buildings about
it. In the open place you shall see a Statue, lying upon a Marble stone in a
fountain, called Marforius, (Pasquins Intelligencer.) There is also the Statue
of Marcus Aurelius in brass, and upon horseback, not anciently here, but
removed hither from a more obscure place, by Paulus III. P. M. Besides, there
is the Statue of a woman Comedian, represented as if she were speaking, and two
Auditors listening unto her, so lively expressed, that a man not instructed, may
easily know they were made for this representation. In the buildings there be
also many principal Statues, as one of a Scolding Woman, so well done, as it
would almost fear one to look on it. A Hercules in Brass. Julius and
Augustus Caesar in Marble. Romulus and Rhemus sucking a Wolf, in Brass.
Quintus Curtius on horseback, in Brass, and Jupiter in Marble. Of Romulus and
Rhemus sucking a Wolf there be many in Rome, and not defaced, being ever left
by them that sacked it, to put the people in mind of their base beginning. But
it seems, in this respect, they never thought the worse of themselves, seeing
they have in so many public places made representation of this. There is
besides, the Statue of Nero's Mother, wherein her countenance of sorrow is
expressed, when the news of her sons unnaturalness meant to her was told.
There is another in brass, of a Boy, taking a thorn out of his foot, looking
so earnestly, and pitifully, that a man would think he had some sense of
pain. There be in this place many other Antiquities of this kind, which to
avoid prolixity, I omit to name.

Descending from the Capitol, there be three or four Triumphant Arches
dedicated to the honor of Emperors, as to Augustus Caesar and Constantine,
where be engraven their principal Acts, and victories: but the most
remarkable of these, is Vespasians erected upon his return from Jerusalem,
where you shall see the ouercomming of the City, lively set forth, and the
holy things which he brought away from thence in triumph, as the Candlesticks
and the rest singularly expressed. Here is also the great Amphitheater, but now
extremely ruinate, where the most public shows and sports were usually
shown. Upon Mons Palatinus, where Nero's magnificent house was built, there is
nothing to be seen but decays, and now employed to a Vineyard, which is
bestowed upon the English College. At the foot of the farther part of this
hill is the place, where, upon great Feasts, the Nauall Battles were wont to
be presented. Not far from thence is the Pantheon or Rotonda, in Campo Martio,
a place built round and high: at the entrance are many Marble pillars of great
thickness, and height, having one only light in the top like a Louuer. This
anciently was a Temple dedicated to all the Gods, and now converted to the
honor of all Saints. The two Pillars that be erected as Triumphs to Traian and
Antoninus, are of a great height, and exquisitely engraven upon the sides, with
their acts and victories. Upon the top of Traians, his ashes are said to be
in a ball of gold. In the house of Alfonso Suderetti, is the place where Caesar
made his Tomb, whereof now almost nothing remains but the ruins: this he
purposed not only for himself, but his Family; it is a great compass, built
round, and some old pieces of the Tomb yet remain. In many places of this
City, there are to be seen the ruins of the ancient Emperors Baths;
amongst which, the most principal are those of Dioclesian, of a wonderful
great compass. Upon this, it is said, that for twelve years together,
multitudes of Christians were condemned to continual working. Some part of it
now is converted to a Church and Monastery. Without Porta Pinciana, there is
the Temple of Bacchus, which stands upon Marble pillars, and it is a fair
Rotonda. Here his Sepulcher is set about with pillars, and the tomb it self
is of Porphyry curiously graven. This temple, is now divided into two parts,
and dedicated to two Saints, Saint Agnes and Saint Constanza, whose bodies have
been there lately found, and that of Saint Agnes is said to be vncorrupt. This
Temple was of late all covered with earth, and but newly discovered. By Porta
Ostia there is a Tomb of one Cestius an Aedile, which was an ancient office
amongst the Romans, principally to look to burialls. This is built in manner
of a Pyramid, all of great and broad Marble, half in the wall and half out.
In many places there be Pyramides set up, which are said long since to be
brought out of Egypt: of these you shall see at Santa Maria Maggiore, Saint
Peter's, and other places. There is moreover no house of any worth, that is not
replenished with infinite numbers of ancient Statues; so that a man might
think, in respect of the number, that in ancient time the inhabitants were
employed about nothing else. Courts, Galleries, every room is adorned with
them, and in many rooms heaped one upon another, there be so many. And yet,
for all this multitude, it is a strange thing to see at what inestimable prices
they hold every one of them; nay, it is almost an impossibility, by any means,
or for any money to get one of them away, they hold them in so great
estimation. Nevertheless, every day amongst their Vineyards, and in the ruins
of old Rome, they find more, which, in whose ground soever they be found, at a
certain price, do now belong to the Popes, who distribute them in their own
Palaces, to their favorites or kinsmen, and sometimes as presents to Princes.
And this is the cause that the houscs of such as have been Nephews or
favorites of the Popes; be best furnished with these ornaments.

If a man should make an exact relation of the Anticaglie in this kind, he
must have seven years time to view, and two men's lives to write them. But for
a taste and so away. At the Popes Palace, at Saint Peter's, the Statues of
Commodus and Antoninus, the Statue of Laocoon, which is written of by Virgil in
the second book of his Aeneads; and they say that his very seeing of that
Statue, was the cause of those verses: the Statue of Apollo: and in the midst
of this place the thigh of a man done in Marble, which the best workmen have
judged admirable in the true proportions; and they say that Michael Angelo
stood two days by it in contemplation, and the artifice was so excellent, and
beyond his apprehension, that he had like to have gone mad with the
consideration of it. In this place there be many more Antiquities, the great
Pine Apple of brass, wherein were found Adrians ashes. At the Popes other
Palace upon Mons Quirinalis, before the Gate, there be two other Statues done
in full proportion, of Alexander, taming Bucephalus, made by those two famous
men Phydias and Praxiteles, one in emulation of the other. And from these two
Statues being set here, this place is called Monte Caualli. In the Garden of
Cardinal Borghese without Porta Pinciana, there is a Tomb which is said to be
Alexanders. In the Palace of Cardinal Fernese, amongst an infinite number of
other Antiquities, there be the Statues of the twelve first Emperors, two
Tables of the Grecians Laws, which the Romans brought from thence, one of the
gods which is said to have given answers in the Pantheon, a Statue of the two
sons of a King of Thebes, after the death of their father, tying his
Concubine to a Bull, in revenge of those wrongs she had done their mother,
(this Story is said to be related by Propertius and Pliny) brought to this
City by the ancient Romans out of Rhodes, found in the time of Paulus, III. of
the Fernesian family, and by him left as a relic to this house. Here are
besides the ancient Statues of the Horatij and Curiatij, and such another of
Neroes Mother as I have mentioned to be in the Capitol, but better expressed.
In one of the Palaces of Cardinal Borghese, which in former times has been
the Kings of England, and given by Henry the 8. to Cardinal Campeio, at his
being here; now enriched by the best hands of Painters, and the most ancient
Statues: you shall see amongst the rest a Gladiatore (or Fencer) admirably
described in Marble, and a Statue of Seneca in brass, bleeding in his bath to
death, with whom this part also of the Roman Antiquities shall dye.

Now from these ancient ruins of Temples, Trophies, Statues, Arches, Columns
Pyramides, and the rest, there would be required in a curious pen a particular
observation, but I will only prescribe unto my self some general notes. How
venerable Antiquities both be and have been in all men's esteem, is so
generally known and received, as I will not enter into a Laudatory thereof,
further then to show the singular use and profit that may be gathered from the
knowledge of them.

First, they much illustrate Story, and in some cases illuminate the
understanding of the Reader, and serve as a confirmation of that he has read.
When actions of note be registered, the bare after-reading of them, without
seeing the place whence they proceeded, is by many men not so constantly
retained in memory. For every man knows, that if in reading an History (only
by a Map) the place be observed as well as the action, ones judgment is
better strengthened, and consequently much more when a man sees that which
others have but by description. They that have read of Antoninus, Traian, and
Vespasian, and find their acts which they have read, engraven in Arches,
Pillars, and the like, it is hard to express what credit they give to the
History, and satisfaction to the Reader. And if in this respect, any place in
the world deserve seeing, none can sooner claim it then Rome.

Secondly, the ancient Statues of the Romans, do strangely immortalize their
fame; and it is certain that the men of those times were infinitely ambitious,
to have their memories in this kind, recorded; and such was the benignity of
that people, that they willingly yielded to honor their acts, by public
expression, and in a kind, to Deifie the persons of their worthiest men, which
industry of theirs may be gathered by the numbers of Statues of Cicero,
Seneca, Brutus, Cassius, the Horatij, and Curiatij, Cato, and many more, whose
virtue, more then their greatness, made them famous. Otherwise if I had only
seen the Statues of the most powerful men, and ancient Emperors, I should
have thought there had been in those times as great Time-seruers, as there be
now, where power and authority is more esteemed of, then virtue, or valor. Yet
I think, if ever men of any place, in any time desired to have their names and
actions to continue to Posterity, not knowing any farther immortality, these
were they, and this one consideration produced better effects of virtue and
valor, then Religion, and all other respects do in our days. Certainly,
therefore, if they had been as well instructed in Divine, as Moral precepts,
no man of any age had ever exceeded them.

Thirdly, the multitude and riches of these Statues, and other Antiquities, do
wonderfully argue the magnificence of those times, wherein they have exceeded
all that went before, or followed after them; and yet this sumptuousness
nothing diuerted their minds from a generous and active life, but rather
instigated them; which now we most commonly find contrary. For greatness and
goodness do not always agree together.

Fourthly, the Architecture of many ancient Temples, and Statues, is so
singular and rare, that they that ever since have been esteemed the best,
durst never assume, or undertake, to equalize them in that kind of
singularity, especially of the Statues, which are so done, that never any
could come near the original for exquisiteness in taking the Copy: so that
a man cannot but gather, that in this place, and those times, there were
conjoined all singularities together, best workmen, best wits, best Soldiers,
and so in every kind Superlatiue.

But it may be there are some, who will draw ill conclusions from these
Antiquities, either tending to Atheism, or Superstition. For Atheism thus. If
men desire to immortalize their memories in this kind after their death, it may
seem the only happiness (being dead) they can expect, is by this means to
continue their fame for those acts which living they performed, and have
thought of no other immortality then this sort of continuing their memory: and
this may seem to be the end of such as in these modern times make Monuments,
or have left order for some to be erected after their death in their memory.

To this I will not deny, but that these peradventure might be the farthest
ends the Romans aimed at. But amongst us the erection of them is free from the
corruption. For first, where the end is out of a religious care to constitute
some place for our bodies to remain in, till the day of the general account, I
cannot see what more blame can be ascribed to any, for adorning these, then
their habitations whilst they live. And besides, in respect that these be
usually set in public places, which is an ornament to them, they are
therefore the more allowable. Again, in respect of the benefit and use to such
as live, they be not unnecessary; for if they be of such, whose virtues have
deserved perpetuity in our memory, they breed a kind of emulation to imitate;
if otherwise, their lives have deserved contempt, it is an expression of Gods
justice, who has suffered such men, who have lived scandalously all their
lives, so far to be blinded, that they perpetuate their shame to posterity,
and by such men's Monuments, those who have heard of their vices, seek to avoid
them.

Again, there be others, who to set a gloss upon their Atheistical opinions,
argue thus. If the Romans of that time, who were ever reputed men of most acute
judgment, and reverenced for their gravity, and understanding, thought their
chiefest happiness after death to consist in those outward respects, why
should it be thought in this declining age of the world, where men for
learning, and height of wit, come short of those which preceded, that we should
find new ways of immortality, which the elder world never dreamt of, and
charge those who have ever been so much esteemed for their wisdom, with so
gross an ignorance? To this it may be answered: First, that these Romans had
some sense of the immortality of the soul, but in what manner, and way, being
only guided by natural reason and learning, they were utterly ignorant. For
there is none but the fool that has said in his heart, that there is no God.
Again, it is not all the learning or wit of man, can find out the mystery of
true religion, without Gods blessing, and holy Spirit to assist the^. But to
such as these, who are only learned in natural sciences, and had no
inspiration from above: how can they but (as the Apostle says) count the
manifestation of Religion foolishness? So that this argument must be no
derogation to the truth of Religion, for that learned men heretofore understood
it not.

For the other error that may be drawn from these Antiquities, enclining to
Superstition, which may be defined to be a Religion exercised in false worship.
In those times, these durable Monuments tended that way: for either men were so
ambitious to expect Deification, or people so foolish to give it them,
ascribing miraculous operation to their dead Images. Which error needs no
confutation: for all men see the Arrogance of them that desired, and simplicity
of such as gave belief to these vain imaginations. And yet I cannot but
admire at the strange blindness of such, who in this clear Sunshine of
Christianity, have such a mist before their eyes (imaginary not real) that
they will still turn the image of the incorruptible God, into the likeness of
a corruptible man, which in any natural understanding, seems foolish, in a
religious, profane. I dare walk no farther in this Labyrinth, for fear of
growing too infinite, only this, it is the wonder of the world, that men should
be so far carried away with this Ideotisme, which is both against Reason and
Religion.

this place deserves consideration, in which, I profess a greater breuity,
then in that which is past. Of the seven Churches, to which men go upon
extraordinary devotion, the first is Saint Peter's, now in reedifying, of a
great length, with an answerable breadth. You ascend unto it by many stayres,
where, at the first view, is presented the most goodly Facciata, or forefront
of the world, supported with many great pillars of Marble. This Church is very
high, and upon the top of the Coppola, or circumference, is a Ball of brass,
which to them below seems no bigger then an ordinary Bowl, yet is of that
capacity, that it will receive at least forty persons. The inside of this
Rotonda within the Church, is most curiously painted with the acts of Christ
and his Apostles. The finishing of the high Altar is undertaken by the King of
Spain. The lower part of this round is adorned with Mosaique work, and the
Altar compassed about with those pillars of Marble which are said to have been
in Salomons Temple, they being curiously carved and fashioned in the form of
wreaths. On the left hand in a Chapel where the Chanons sing their Office, is
the Statue of our Lady, and Christ in her arms, cut in Marble by the most
famous Painter and Statuist in the world, Michael Angelo. Within a vault of
this Church be the bodies of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Here also be seven
Chapels resembling the seven Churches which be usually visited. Adjoining to
this Church is the Popes Palace of Saint Peter's, and from thence a Curridore,
or private way, to his Castle of Saint Angelo. In this Palace the Consistories
usually assemble, and here is the Conclaue where the Popes be elected. There is
also a private Chapel of the Popes, where the high Altar is set out by
Michael Angeloes curious description of the day of Judgment. Besides, in this
Palace is the Vatican, or famous Library of the Popes, which consists only of
Manuscripts, but of great antiquity, as well profane, as divine. Besides, all
correspondencies, and matters of State, that are and have been betwixt the
Pope and other Princes be here registered. This Palace has been sundry times
enlarged by diverse Popes.

The second of the seven Churches is Santa Maria Maggiore, seated upon one of
the seven Hills, called Mons Esquilinus; upon which goes this Story, that in the
time of the Primitive Church, there was a vision appeared to a man and his
Wife, that very night the same also appearing to the then Bishop of Rome, that
presently in that place where that good man and his Wife lay, there should be
a Church built and dedicated to our Lady: and this they say is that Church
which was erected for that dream. This Church is famous for these relics.
The bodies of Saint Matthew, and Saint Jerome, which lie here buried, The Cope
of Saint Thomas Becket, which he wore at his death, and sprinkled with part of
the blood which he then lost. And the picture of our Lady drawn, as they say,
by Saint Luke. But that which makes this Church now so remarkable, is the two
splendid Chapels, the one built by Sixtus Quintus, where he lies buried, and
the other ouer-against it (but more beautiful) by this Pope Paolo V. where he
is to be buried. In that of Sixtus Quintus, there be carved all his Acts,
during his Papacy, but especially the expedition of Ferrara, and in the other,
besides his own actions, and Statue, the whole Chapel is most richly and
curiously painted, the high Altar standing upon pillars of brass, inlayd with
Agate, and besides, in many places adorned with stones of inestimable price. To
relate particularly, the magnificence of both these, would ask a longer
Narration then I purpose.

The third of these Churches is Saint Paul's, without the town, about a mile
and a half in Via Ostia: here is underneath, the grottes or Caves, wherein, as
in others about Rome, the Christians in time of persecution were wont to
conceal themselves, and make their private conuentions.

The fourth in this way also, and without the town, is consecrate to the
memory of Saints Sebastian and Fabian. In one of the Altars here made of
Marble, and about a foot thick, you shall see a little hole, in compass
about the bigness of a twenty shillings piece. Of which there goes this Tale,
that a Priest in the celebration of Mass, and at the time of the consecration,
had an imagination of the impossibility, how upon the saying of the words used
in the consecration, the host should be converted really into the body of
Christ: whereupon the host suddenly and miraculously vanished out of his hand,
and made this way specified, proportionable to that bigness.

The fifth without Porta Esquilina, is that of Saint Lawrence, where his body is
interred. This Church was built by Constantine the Great, and those instruments
wherewith they were wont to sacrifice Christians, be here to be seen, and more
particularly, the Gridiron whereupon it is said Saint Lawrence was broyled.

The sixth is Santa Croce, one of the principallest Churches of devotion, built
by Helena, mother to Constantine. The ground upon which this Church is built,
is of the holy earth brought by her from Jerusalem. Amongst other Relics,
there is a part of the Cross, from whence it took the name, and one of the
thorns of that Crown, which was in derision set upon our Saviors head.

Now the last of these is that of Saint John de Lateran, where the Lateran
Council was held. The heads of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul be here retained
for Relics. The pillars that support the Altar in this Church, are said to
be brought from Jerusalem to Rome by Vespasian. Here is the Font where
Constantine was baptized by Pope Siluester. Besides, the pillars are thought to
have been taken out of Pilates house, and that upon one of them stood that
Cock, which by his twice crowing gave Peter warning of his sin. Here in the
Sanctum Sanctorum, (where women cannot enter) is also conserved the Arc of the
old Testament, Aarons Rod, The Sudatorium, which is a Napkin, with which in the
way to the Cross Christ wiping his face, there remained in it his picture, The
Table upon which Christ celebrated his last Supper, and one little Glass of
his Blood. At the entrance of this Church be those Stayres, brought from
Jerusalem, by which Christ ascended when he entered Pylates house, some twenty
in number, whereupon daily many people go up, upon their knees for devotion,
upon every one saying a Pater noster, and an Aue Maria, and then kissing it.
Some also whip themselves as they go up. And this Church was also built by
Constantine the Great, at the instance of Pope Syluester.

To go more particularly in the narration of the holy Relics, and Monuments
of Rome, after the description of the seven Churches, they are so infinite,
that I should be too prolixe. This may serve as aview to the rest, only I will
remember one strange tale in the Church of San Pietro ad vincula: Saint Peter
coming to Rome, was cast in Prison, and bound with a chain, which after his
death was kept as an holy Relic: sometime after this, the chain wherewith he
was bound in his imprisonment at Jerusalem, being by Christians brought to
Rome, and into the place where this other was kept, they, as it may seem, for
joy, being a good distance asunder, leaped together and joined themselves, and
still remain so: so was this Church builded in remembrance of that miracle,
and herewith I will end this part of my Discourse. Now for my other
observations, that I gather from these holy Antiquities:

First, I must profess for my self, that I am not so credulous, as to tie my
belief to these miraculous reports; nay, I am so far from it, that I esteem
most of them rather feigned then true; yet such is the Artifice of these popish
traders, that they are feign to sell their commodities by this false light, and
to set a gloss upon their Religion, by these and such like Illusions.

So that here in the next place we are to consider, how easily men are drawn
by circumstances, to think they embrace certainties, by shadows to conclude
truth, and by outward show of zeal and Religion, to embrace impiety. Such is
the flexibility of our nature. And by way of digression there can be nothing
more obseruable, then the variation of minds, as well as faces. Some have such
stony hearts and leaden heads, that they cannot conceive (beyond themselves,
and nature, as they term it) any supernatural, or powerful government in
their life and actions, nor any heaven, besides their sensuality. Others so
believing, and uncertain, that every tale, or imagination creates in their
brains a new Creator, and forces a false worship. Such are these which I now
speak of. A false miracle preuailes farther then the written verity, a
Monastical, and seuere-seeming habit more persuades, then sincerity in life
and manners; the representation of an image strikes deeper into their
affections, then that way whereby God has made himself manifest in the
Scriptures. So that they are carried away with every wind: so great is their
corruption, so stupid their senses, so monstrous their ignorance.

By this you may see, it is no difficult matter to persuade these men's
consciences to ones own fancy, and to serve ones own turn. Alas, an
outward show of devotion, and a few good words carries them into admiration,
and to imagine that God is better pleased with ceremony, then truth, with form
then substance. This trade has been so long, and this deceit so customary,
that many, though otherwise of strong capacities, are blinded with the same
ignorance as it were by prescription: but if they would but give themselves
leave to review the grounds, upon which they retain these opinions, and search
to the original from whence they sprung, they would quickly discover the
deceit. But if men will believe impossibilities, and for no other reason, but
because other men do so, and their Fathers did so before them; I can think no
otherwise of such, then as of blind men, who are to follow their leaders, and
may be sometimes drawn into the ditch. A man might spin out a long Discourse of
such a subject: but thus much shall serve for this observation upon the
Religious antiquities, and Relics of Rome.



For the first, I will only for a taste, name some few places, by which you
may guess the rest. There be in this town multiplicity of Palaces, which for
Architecture, and curiosity, may compare with any City of the world, of
which, I will but nominate two. The first is a house newly built by this Pope,
at the foot of Monte Quirinale, or Caualli, given to his brothers son the
Prince of Sulmo (a Principality in the Kingdom of Naples) built round, and
standing upon Pillars of Marble, divided into three heights, separated by
Tarrasses, and every one standing alike upon Pillars. The Court, Tarrasses, and
particular Chambers adorned with antique Statues, many of the rooms being most
curiously painted both upon the top, and sides, and equal rooms in all three
heights, both for pleasure, and use.

The second is a Palace beyond Porta Pinciana, built by Cardinal Borghese,
this Popes Sisters son, a house full of pleasure, and spacious, where about
the middle, from room to room, the doors being open, you may see in a direct
line, the whole length of the house, as it were a prospectiue, a kind of
curiosity very much followed in the best buildings of Italy.

Now for houses of pleasure, gardens, water-workes and the like; there is that
Garden-house (as I may term it) of Burgheses, near Monte Quirinale, built in
that place where Propertius the Poet lived. This is very pleasant, not many
rooms, but three or four Gardens, enriched with diverse Statues, and
Fountains. Then there is that of the Beluedere by Saint Peter's, which is the
Popes, and another garden rare for Fruits adjoining to it. That Garden of
Cardinal Bandinoes, by the Nouiceship of the Jesuits, toward Santa Maria
Magglore, has Statues and Fountains in it, and is all vaulted, the better to
take the fresh air in the heat of Summer. Then the Garden joining to the Popes
Palace at Monte Cauallo, is very splendid: but amongst those, and all the other
Gardens of Rome, which be most remarkable, those of Montalto, Maffei, and
Lanfranke, be the three rarest for pleasure, beauty, store of banqueting
houses, Fountains, and other delicacies, that can add ornament to such
places: and thus much of this division.

From hence I observe, that as man's life ought to be sustained with those
necessities which most uphold it; so there may be an addition of lawful
delights, and pleasures, to comfort and refresh it. For there is no man, or
mind, so retired, but requires some delight, and pleasure: otherwise the
sharpness of our apprehension would be tired, and the progress of our life,
solitary; it being an impossibility, and Solaecisme in nature, for a man
continually to travel without intermixture of recreation, because we be so
subject, as well in body, as in mind, to variation.

And in this kind I know few recreatiues that possess us more, then the
humor of building, in respect they both satisfy our own present invention,
and serve to our posterity, as perpetual remembrances, and memorials of their
progenitors, adding present content to our selves, perpetuating reputation in
the world, remaining as living Monuments of our magnificence, and beneficent
expressions of our greatness.

And although munificency in this kind, be by many esteemed superfluous, I
rather hold it convenient, so it be of our abundance, and diminish nothing of
the competencie of our estates. If it should do so, it were too great an
argument of our folly, to propose unnecessary charges. Otherwise these respects
might make it allowable.

First, this Art of Architecture is honorable in all men's esteem, and
profitable to our selves. Next, it keeps us busied in thought, and action, and
so diuerts us from delights more dangerous. Then upon occasion it enables us in
the use of fortification. Fourthly, it gives a kind of extraordinary delight
to our selves, when we see those things, which before we had but formed in
conceit, made visible. Next, it is an addition of repute to the City where we
live. And lastly, it makes a man's fame to spread both at home, and abroad.

But to descend more particularly to the pleasures of this place, the delicacie
of Gardens be of inestimable consideration, where a man's mind may receive such
content, and his eye such diversity of objects, as in nothing more. If a place
of delight and pleasure content our minds, it may here be satisfied with the
beauty of walks, sweetness and diversity of Flowers, melody of Birds, and
the like. If sometimes a man be inclined to melancholy, the priuacy and
solitude of this place, the murmuring of the waters, fills us with a strange
kind of satisfaction. If one would contemplate the wonders of nature, here he
may find all things necessary, and pleasurable; healthful, or hurtful for
man. If we be inclined to any serious study, or meditation, here is the place
where our thoughts cannot be perturbed, nor diuerted, nor our senses
vnsharpened, because they continually meet with such variation. If you
meditate, sit by the fountain, or walk in the most remote and obscure places.
When you would read, or write, then is there Arbors and Banquetting-houses to
repose in. And to conclude, if at any time a man would desire to give himself,
and some few of his friends, the height of civil entertainment, no place can
be more apt then this, especially in the heat of Summer, in a Country so
subject to the violence of it as Rome is.

If a man were Poetical, then this discourse, he could not find a better
field to exercise his wit. The Houses of these places be adorned with many
rarities, but especially painting, the praise and excellency whereof is
sufficiently known; so that I will forbear the repetition: and thus I
conclude this consideration.

Ignatius, and his Tomb is there to be seen. There be besides diverse Churches
appropriate to several nations, as that of Saint Apolinarius, to the Germans,
Saint James, to the Spaniards, Saint Stanilaus, to the Polackes, a Church
dedicated to the holy Trinity, built by Lewis the eleventh King of France, to
the French, and another dedicated to the holy Trinity, for the English.

There is their College, and in the Church be the Tombs of Cardinal Allen,
and Parsons; upon the walls whereof be set forth in painting, the Martyrdomes
(as they call it) of such as suffered persecution, and death, for their
Religion in England. And in this, now amongst the rest are Campian, and Garnet,
and the Hangman, and Tyborne, as perfectly described, as if they were better
acquainted with the place, and person. Here is also a Library consisting most
of Controversies. To the maintenance of this Church, and College, there be
some lands appointed, besides other pensions that they receive from the Pope,
and King of Spain. The persons here be all English, and were governed by a
Rector of the Jesuits order, called Father Owen, lately dead. They are al
Priests, and young Youths, sent thither out of England, to be brought up in
Philosophy, and Divinity, in number about 120. all going in the habit of
Scholars, and no sooner come thither, but they take upon them false and
supposititious names, as the Rector himself told me.

This town is full of Monasteries, and Religious houses, many public
Schools, where Divinity and Philosophy are read in Lectures, and many
public Libraries. Besides, there be sundry Hospitals for strangers, maimed,
poor, sick, and mad folks. The number of the Churches be about 140. And so
I will leave this part.

Now for my observation, it is this, to show the Policy that they use for
confirmation, and establishing of their Religion, and consists, first, in an
outward show of devotion, with strange expressions of humility, set forth in
the poor and austere life of many orders, in their sundry acts of penitence,
in their daily visitation of their Churches, in their outward actions of
grief, and repentance at the celebration of Mass. Wherein is inserted all
possible inventions, to catch men's affections, and to ravish their
understanding: as first, the gloriousness of their Altars, infinite numbers of
images, priestly ornaments, and the diverse actions they use in that service;
besides the most excellent and exquisite Music of the world, that surprises
our ears. So that whatsoever can be imagined, to express either Solemnity,
or Devotion, is by them used.

Their next way, is in their acts of Charity, wherein they exceed, and imagine
this a great argument to make the world believe the truth, and certainty of
their Religion.

The third is, their boasting of miracles, with which they make such a noise,
and would have them infallible arguments, to uphold their faith: but when a man
sees the ridiculousnesse, and finds proved the falsitie of them, they are of
great force to persuade the contrary. For example, if a man going down a pair
of stayres, by chance his foot should slip, he would presently make a miracle
of it, and say, that in that instant he called upon Saint Francis, or San
Carlo, or some other Saint, by whose prayers he was relieved, that otherwise
he had maimed himself, or lost his life. Or if in riding in a Coach, it by
chance be ouerthrown, he presently attributes to some Saint whom he then
inuoked, the liberation of him from an imminent danger: and with the
expressions of these miracles, all the Churches be hung full. But for others
that be more strange, it is certain, and has been proved, that many of them
are false, and broached only to delude the people, which may give a great
suspicion to the rest. But more, it is the Jesuits doctrine, and they labor
to prove it lawful, to forge a miracle for the furtherance of their Religion.
By which Position, if any thing happen, which may seem a wonder, as in the
recovery of some desperate sickness, wound, or the like, in the attribution of
it to some particular Saint, or extraordinary operation by their means, they
diminish the power and glory of God. And if any sign should happen to confirm
it, of which they will nominate thousands, as the bleeding of a Crucifix, the
speaking of an Image, etc. It may as well show the now delusiue power of the
Devil, still blinding the eyes of the world in this kind, as he has
formerly done by Oracles.

Now the last policy is, in the course of their teaching, and disciplining,
which I will only exemplify by the practice of our English there. First,
there shall no scandal pass, that they will not be sure to lay upon our
Religion. And this at the first they beat and insinuate into the ears of
their Nouices. Next, they use all possible Art to magnify their own: in the
mean time, barring the reading of any defense of our parts, and put them to
study such books as be written against us; so that they will conclude a
Judgment, before both parts be heard. But when they have them more strongly
grounded, and they be sure that their opinion is preiudicated, they will
suffer them then to read some of our books (but by the way, this liberty is
seldom given to Italians) and then for our selves, that be so strongly
instructed of one side, and strangely opinionated of the other, he is a rare
man, and receives from God a great blessing, that ever finds the true
difference. And thus being wouen in their nets, they be in a manner destitute
of all possibility of recovery. And so much for this.

Saint Angelo, and that also very weak, to withstand any strong assault. But
the truth is, there be so many Princes in league with this Sea, and ^yed in so
diverse obligations unto it, that it is free from danger, without the Turk
should make a war; and then there is so strong opposition like to be made by
the Princes of Italy, and other forraigners, that it will be hard to prevail
against it, if the Emperor, Italy it self, the King of France and Spain,
should not cast off their yoke and subjection: if so, then it were impossible
for the Bishop of Rome by his own strength, to oppose, or subsist.

Now for the government of this place, it is wholly subject to the Pope, which
he holds as a temporal prince, but solely guided by spiritual Ministers; all
causes of judgment in matters divine are brought hither, as to the last Court
of Appeal for final sentences.

For the Popes Revenue: that which he receives from his own principalities, is
the least part; the rest consists in the Fair of Indulgences, liberation from
Purgatory, conferring of Church-liuings, sale of Offices, Pensions from other
Princes, and the like. The treasure is never great, in respect of the changes
of their Governors, who for the most part have employed all the Revenue of the
Church to their own private families, and friends. If upon occasion they be
forced to make any great, and sudden supply, they make bold with the
treasures and ornaments of Churches, which be in Italy of very great value.

Now to the person of this Pope: he is descended of no great family, an Italian
borne, and exercised the former part of his life, before his Papacy, in the
office of a Judge. He was made Cardinal by Clement the eighth, and Pope by the
difference of the two great factions, in that conclaue of Montalto, and
Aldobrandino; both striving to make one of their own creatures, yet finding
the other opposition too strong, were in the end forced to make a neutrall. And
so by this fortune it lighted upon this man. His Court is not great (some small
guard of Swizers excepted) but he rather lives a kind of retired life; the
chiefest of his actions tending to the advancement of his Kindred. He is most
governed by his Nephew the Cardinal Borghese, but for matter of greatness in
correspondency with the greatest Princes, he is behind none, having Ambassadors
from, and sending to them, more then any other temporal Prince whatsoever. And
when he shows himself, it is in as great majesty, and with more ceremony then
is used to any other Prince, which for exemplificatition shall be showed in
the custom that is used of kissing his feet, and the manner of his carrying in
a chair when he goes publicly.

For the first, upon his Pantofle there is a cross, which people in show of
their reverence and devotion, kiss at the time of his giving audience to
Ambassadors, or some other public assembly: and this is to show the peoples
reverence to his person, and to set forth his own dignity. And the sign of
the Cross upon it, is to declare that in that action, the peoples devotion to
our Savior, as well as honor to him, might be expressed, and in a kind, for
acknowledgement, that Religion is under his government, and subjection. For his
being carried in a chair upon men's shoulders, they urge this to be used as an
argument of his sanctity, and holiness, to stir up reverence in the
beholders, and devotion in their hearts, and that as all outward respects be
used to honor the Princes of the world, so there ought to be much more to the
Pope, being head of the Church. In this kind he is usually carried, when he
goes to Church or Consistory.

Now to end this part with the Cardinals: it is strange to see their pride,
every one esteeming himself of equal rank with any Prince, and are served
with a kind of extraordinary pomp, using in their rooms of audience,
clothes of estate, as Princes do, and when they go to Consistory, you shall
have one of them atte^ded by their friends and followers with 20. or 30.
Coaches, and at least 200. or 300. Staffieri or footmen. Some in this kind
exceed other, but the principal be Montalto, that was Sixtus Quintus, and
Aldobrandino, that was Clement the eighth, and Borghese, that is this Popes
favorite. Some others live more retired, of which rank Bellarmine is chiefly
noted. Most of them be in faction Spanish, and all receiving bribes and
pensions from him. Their creation comes either from the Popes particular
favor, or some great Princes intercession; younger brothers of great families,
and all in a manner by the way of the present favorite, who enriches himself,
and makes his faction great, by the distribution of these honors. I only saw
them once assembled together, and that was in the Popes private Chapel, at
Saint Peter's, upon All Saints even, when the Pope sang Vespers or Euen-song:
there were in number of them about some 30. I think, all that were then in
Rome.

Where I observed 3. things; first, their places, all sitting round about the
Chapel; secondly, their habits, of Scarlet; thirdly, their reverence to the
Pope, in the time that the Antheme was sung, every one in his rank, one after
another, rising out of their seats, and going to his chair, which is by the
Altar, where they adore him in this kind, by bending their bodies, kneeling,
and kissing his garments.

Amongst these Cardinals I principally observed two: one for his learning, and
that was Bellarmine, a little lean old man; the other was Cardinal Tosco, and
he, at the Conclaue when this Pope was chosen, was so near being chosen, that
many yet think the election went on his side. For of 60. he had 45. voices.
But when he was set in his Chair, and they coming to adore him, Baronius came
in, and said, Will you choose him head of the Church, that cannot speak a
sentence without that scurrilous byword of the Lombards (Cazzo) what a shame
will this be in our election? and upon this diverse of his voices fell from
him, and he lost the Popedom.

Now for that I gather from this place, which shall be very short, it is this;
That the sumptuousness of the Pope, and the pride of his government, is one
token of the falsity of their doctrine; seeing they which pretend to have rule
over, and to give direction unto others, are tainted with this leprosy. For it
is never seen that the body is sound, when the head is corrupt, and it is
impossible for any to guide another, that stumbles in his own way, or to be a
directer to others, that stands in his own light.

More particularly for these Prelates: it is quite contrary to the ordinance of
God, and different from the example of Christ, and his Apostles, to challenge
temporal jurisdiction or superiority, when their charge is only to instruct.
And they who should be examples for others to imitate, in life and
conversation, and in that kind to teach as well by example as precept, what
instruction can we gather from them, but ambitious thoughts, and unsatisfied
desires after the wealth and glory of this world?

Again, their excess in this kind is unnecessary; for what can be pretended
for these Popes and other Ecclesiastical persons, that they should so
violently desire honor, and superfluity in wealth? Are they not, by their own
rules, in a manner, separated from the world, and bard from any hope of
succeeders in their own posterity? Therefore one should imagine these so
immoderate desires, impertinent. And it could be no diminution either to the
glory or progress of Religion; for the very function it self is honorable,
and reverenced; and moderate attributions both of dignity and living ought to
be ascribed them. But why all should be included within this center, and
wholly referred to the person of the Pope, I neither see for it Reason, nor
Religion.

But lastly, this extremity of their pride is adua^tageous against them, and
gives dangerous examples even amongst themselves. When the People be taught
moderation and sobriety, and see excess and liberty in their teachers, none is
so blind but must see their deceit. When they are instructed in acts of
charity, and persuaded to impouerish themselves to enrich a Priest, who can
shadow their cosenage? When they pronounce Indulgences, and we pay for them;
what man can think the Pope has so much interest in God, as to make him pardon
us, for his profit? When they profess sanctity and strictness of life; who
will believe him, when, after he has gotten to be a Bishop or Cardinal, he is
found to be as proud, seditious and covetous as the rest? When the Pope
professes poverty, and as they say in his procession, when he is elected,
being carried publicly to show himself to the world, hurles brass amongst
the people, and uses these words of Saint Peter, Gold and silver have I none,
but that which I have, I give unto thee, what man perceiues not their abusing
of the Scripture, and mocking of the people? When the Pope, to show his
humility upon the Maundy Thursday, washes the feet of the poor, and in the
mean time is attended with Cardinals, and Ambassadors, some giving him water,
some the towell, others holding his train, himself carried into, and out of
the room, as if he were too good to tread on the earth; what man can be so
stupid that discernes not his pride? Thus you may see what contrariety there
is betwixt their profession and practice. And so I will leave this observation.

think it unnecessary to say something of the safety and danger for an English
man to travel thither. And I am the rather induced unto it, because I have
heard from many that have been there, such strange tales, and such wonders of
their escape, as if they meant to scarre us with Rome, as children be here
with Hobgoblins.

It is true, that for some persons there can be no place in the world so
dangerous for them to come in, as this; and they are such, as have been noted
either to be extreme persecuters of them, violently addicted against them, or
such as have opposed them by public disputation, or writing, in matter of
Controversy; for these, it is certain, if they be found, they shall be either
brought into the Inquisition, or forced to be reconciled to their Church. And
yet I do not think it impossible for any of this sort to make a Voyage
thither, and never be surprised; but then they must neither publish their
purpose nor time; for the English there, have eyes and ears in all places, and
such a man is no sooner gone, or purposes to go out of England, but they hear
of it, and he can live in no place of Italy, but they have intelligence of him.
Therefore the safest course for such a one, is to pass that, before he settle
in any other place, and in the mean time neither to make himself, nor
intention known to any body living, for then there may be a possibility of
discovery. And besides it is necessary, that he have some other Language
besides his own, that he may pass for that Countryman: and amongst some of
them he should troop himself, and be careful also, that with them he
never show any dis-affection to the Religion; for then they may grow jealous,
and discover him. Besides, I would not have him stay there too long, nor
converse with any of his own Nation.

There be some others also that may not come hither safely; and they are of
this sort, who though themselves have in no action given them cause of offense,
yet some of their name or Kindred, either were, or be professed enemies
against them. Others also are endangered here, if they have any particular
enemy, that is great in, or has interest with any of the College (for no
Englishman is put into the Inquisition, unless he give some public offense
but by their means) then peradventure he may be brought into trouble, only
upon revenge and malice.

But for others, and specially men of Quality, their coming hither may be
with as much freedom, as to any other part of Italy. I my self have, and have
met with diverse that do find it so, and therefore, I believe it, whatsoever
other men say to the contrary, to grace, or make wonderful their own Travels.

Now after the person, those actions which may bring a man into danger, ought
to be avoided. If a man, in his going thither, or being there, converse with
Italians, and disclose, or dispute his Religion, he is sure, unless he fly,
to be complained on, and brought within the Inquisition. For they hold it an
act of merit, to discover an Heretic (as they term us) thinking that by this
means we may be drawn from our Religion, and the honor of our conversion
(as they call it) must be attributed to them.

Next, when you are in the Church, or near any Relic, Cross, or Procession
in the street; you must give no scandal, nor seem to to be singular from the
actions of other men: but if you be desirous to avoid their superstition, you
must forbear coming into their Churches, at Masse-time, or Vespers, and
bevvare of their street-encounters.

Thirdly, in the place where you lie, you must be careful to observe their
Fasts, and not be curious in desiring, or seeming to desire such fare as those
days will not admit.

Besides, it ought to be one of our principal cares, lest in any place where
we should reside, before our coming thither, we show our selves too bitter
and violent against our Nation there, especially in their persons; for that may
exasperate, if it come to their knowledge.

Fifthly, it is a mere folly in any man that has lived publicly in any town
of Italy, before he come thither, to hide and conceal himself there, for he
cannot live undiscovered: and peradventure this jealousy of ours, and distrust
of them, may produce some mischief against us, which otherwise they would
never dream of. But some will be so quick, that they will come to Rome, and
away before they have half slept. And certainly, such dispositions, I think,
they had even as good lived in England, with their Nurses, and would have there
got as much experience, I am sure, as much wit.

Sixthly, I hold it very dangerous, for a man that is known to be there, to
go about to cosen the College, and make them believe he is a Papist, when
there is no such matter. For this dissimulation may cause them to force him to
express that which he affirms, by some act, that may foil his Religion. And
therefore, methinkes, it is a strange Arrogance in those people, to go about
to deceive them, that know their Religion, and Character, as well as themselves.

Next, in your conversation, show (and so peradventure you may have cause) to
express a thankfulness for those courtesies you receive: and though they
give you cause to speak something in the defense of your Religion, show no
violence, nor reply not too much, by which you shall argue your own temper,
and give them less cause to urge you. For heat in disputation, especially
where a man comes with disadvantage, shows folly in us, and stirs malice in
them.

Now the final caveat is, that by no means you go about to persuade any from
thence, though formerly your friend, and near acquaintance. For you must
believe, that they who dare let him converse with you, be sure that he will
discover whatsoever you say, and there is not any one thing, will sooner breed
a mischief against us, then the attempting to divert one from their society.

The last point that a man is to enter into consideration upon, when he
travails to Rome, is the time. First, those times of public hostility, as in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when the Pope thundered excommunications, and
professed himself an open enemy to the State, as he did then, it is dangerous.
Next, if the Governor of the English there, were of so violent and malicious a
disposition as Parsons was, there were little safety. Thirdly, in the time of
the holy week, because then there is an exact view, and every householder is to
render an account of those strangers he entertaines, that they have confessed,
communicated, and the like. Fourthly, if a man should enter into any quarrel,
and be apprehended by the Temporal Magistrate, the Inquisitio^ also takes hold
of him, and he cannot be delivered till he be reconciled to the Church. And
lastly, if a man should fall sick, during the time of his being there, within
three days the Physician is to take his oath, that his patient has confessed,
and communicated, otherwise he must leave him, and the party be delivered over
to the Inquisition before he depart. And thus have I briefly, and sincerely
discovered my knowledge of this place.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE AGAINST FLATTERY.

A DISCOVRSE AGAINST Flattery.
FLATTERY may be described to be a kind of seducing, or deceiving by a
counterfeit, or fained commendation, whereby men are drawn to have an ouer-good
opinion, and liking of themselves; through this false glass, making an undue
and too great estimate of their own parts, and actions; which, though
peradventure increased by the subtlety of Flatterers, yet is nourished, and
enlarged by their own self-love.

Flatterers do not only dazzle, and deform our Intellectual parts, but are
mere moths in our estates, and live upon our spoil, by conforming their
words; and acts, to our wills and inclinations; whereby insinuating themselves
into our favor, they draw from us our understanding, and so reduce us to be
either the scorn of other men, or Tributaries to them; one of which, Malice,
or Gain, must needs be their aim; the first the more dangerous; but the
second more common.

And therefore Chrysostom desines Flatterers to be those, Qui colunt aliquem,
vt auferant ab eo aliquid boni temporarij. For when they commend any, for that
he deserves not at all, or more then he deserves to be praised, for any private
end, or gain to themselves, I can call this excessive pleasing others in words
and deeds, nothing else but Flattery. By that insinuation, they wind
themselves into the familiarity of those, whose fortunes and dispositions
appear to be such, that with probability they may hope to work and prey
upon, by this sweet infusion of Flattery; all men being naturally inclined to
think the best of themselves, and to hear of it too.

Now the humorist, that must please, and tickle our fancies, is a smooth and
sly enemy, a Wolf in sheep clothing, and so much the more dangerous, and
necessary to be observed, and avoided, fishing with a subtle, and unseen*
bayt, Mel venenatum, or venenum mellitum, sweet poison, or poison sweetened; as
coloring treason, with the show of friendship; disguising dissimulation, with
the pretense of liberty, and freedom in speech, and the like. And this
seldom but in presence, and commonly to such, out of whom they hope to suck
some commodity. Wherefore I may say, Quod diuitum sunt asseclae, a man of
means seldom wants such followers, such shameless and fawning creatures,
that force can hardly repel them. And I think this to be the reason why
Diogenes gave the Epithete to Aristippus, of Canis Regius, the Kings Dog, in
respect of their course of life, more sit to be compared with the fawning
nature of Dogs, then worthy to be honored with the title of men.

I take Flattery to be that which the Prophet allegorizeth in the Psalms,
under the term of Oleum Peccatoris. Emendabit me iustus, and arguet me: Oleum
autem peccatoris non impinguet caput meum, distinguishing between the reproof
of a Friend, and commendation of a Flatterer, choosing rather the seuerest
correction of a good man, the^ the smooth and pleasing praise of Flatterers,
who tell us we are happy, in the midst of misfortune, and make us think our
selves to be well, when we are most desperately infected. Those therefore that
be made proud, and insult, and swell, by the praises of these Dissemblers, and
Sycophants, of such a one it may be well said, Creuit caput, Impinguatum est
oleo peccatoris; a fat and swimming head indeed, when it flows, and is full of
this kind of oil.

Flattery, and Dissimulation be of near kindred; for all the Art of a
Flatterer, is to seem that he is not: mark but the difference betwixt his
outward appearance, and inward desires; his words, and his thoughts; his speech,
and his meaning. Before your friends, or your self, they give a Plaudite to al
your actions, with a show of much love, and respect: but in private with your
enemies, or such as they may hope to make so, by doing you injuries, they
deprave and detract you with a great deal of liberty, and scorn: in the
mean time, peradventure taking occasion under the color of abusing you, and
lessening your merit, to fall comparatively into their praises, and so at one
time, and with one tale, play both the parts of a Censurer, and Flatterer. Such
men as these, it were not hard to show you every day, whose continual trade is
to abuse the company they were last in, and to praise those they are now
withal: such as appear with the face of frie^dship, but have their hearts
fraught with more malice and venom the^ the stings of Scorpions: such as would
make the world believe (and so every man, whom by their close and cunning
Flattery they surprise, does) that they be the only men that give good and
honest advice, and discreet cautions, charitable in peacemaking, and all other
good offices of that kind: whereas indeed they be the closest breeders of
mischief, malice, and detraction that do unworthily live.

These men's minds be truly Hermaphroditized; these be Plinies Androgyni in
mind, though not in nature, whose sex resemble both Male and Female: for you
shall have them vary and change as often as thought. And as the parties with
whom they have to do, or as their fortunes alter, so do they. Sometimes also
they be so gross in their Flattery, that they become ridiculous. As for
instance; the Flattery of Carisophus to Dionysius, who seeing Dionysius in
company laughing and merry, he smiled for company, though he knew not the
cause. Dionysius seeing him smile, asked him why he did so? Because (said he) I
think that which moves you to laugh, is worth laughing at. And this kind of
imitation is commonly the note of a Flatterer; but sometimes also the badge of
a Fool. And so Clysophus the Parasite in Philip of Macedons Court, when his
master halted because he had the Gout, he counterfeited lamenesse too; and
whatsoever his Master was forced to by necessity, he would always affectately
imitate, according to Ouids description of a Flatterer, what you deny he
forsweares; what you affirm he iustifies; if you weep he is sad; if you
laugh he is merry.

So that a Flatterer is a Monster ugly to behold, if visible; dangerous to
trust, if discovered; has the heads of Hydra for any mischeuous invention, the
hands of Briareus for any base or dishonest action, the eyes of Argus for any
lewd or false intelligence; legs swift as Thalus for any treacherous or wicked
design. This is he we dare (and it is a wonder we dare) admit into our
priuacies, appearing with a tongue as sweet as honey, though his heart be as
bitter as gall; whence grows that old description allotted to them, Melin
ore, verba lactis, fell in cord, fraus in factis. Yet for the most part, these
kind of men ouerweigh, and sway down the most faithful and honest friends and
Counsels. Aristippus flattery with Dionysius, out-ballanced the honest
freedom and endeavors of Dion the Syracusan. Cleo wrought more into the favor
of Alexander by his Flattery, then Calisthenes could prevail by his free and
honest Counsel.

Of this tribe and generation were Achabs false prophets; they assured and
promised him to be free from all dangers, certain of prosperity and good
fortune; but it fell out otherwise, and his Fortunes (which they only served)
were decayed and lost. Even so the Flatterers of this age play the false
prophets, and always prognosticate of fair weather and good fortunes to
attend us, in the mean time, passing over with silence those plain, obuious,
and present errors, that be manifest Symptoms of our certain overthrow, if
not suddenly altered and amended. So you may see what a weakness it is for
any man to trust these uncertain winds, to build upon these sands.

Adulatoris verba, says Trismegistus, sunt iniquitas and dolus. The words of a
Flatterer be iniquity and deceit, ouer-growne with canker and rust,
incroaching upon us: at the first, intruders of small appearance, and by that
means taking the surer hold. These be they that with their Syrenicall charms
throw us upon the unavoidable dangers of Scylla and Charybdis. These be those
Infernal Spirits, that dissuade from all good purposed or intended, and from
any thing that has affinity either with honesty, or goodness. But on the
contrary, prouokers of all uncleanness, corruption, wickedness and
obscaenitie, and as Theodoret notes, Incipiunt a Placebo, sed in fine sepeliunt
in peccatis.

Some there be of this damned crew, who, so they may please you with praises,
care neither why nor wherefore they do it: against which kind of men,
Salomons caution Pro. 27. v. 6. to us, is worthy the observing. The wounds of a
Lover are faithful; but the kisses of an Enemy be to be shunned. And again,
his malediction to them should serve as a bridle, Pro. 27. v. 14. He that
praises his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be
counted unto him as a curse. And for the most part these traders practice this
Art, either in hope of favor or gain; and that is the reason why they press
into the company of such as be men of dignity and place. For as no vermin
will breed, where they find no heat; no Vulture haunt where they find no
prey; no Flies swarm where there is no flesh: so no Flatterer lurkes where he
finds no gain.

A man may oftentimes find out a Flatterer by this, that their praises, if you
well observe them, do oftentimes fall upon contrarieties. So, it is plain,
that they speak ficte, non vere, fainedly, not from the heart; and that
manifests their dissimulation and deceit; and their praising of such actions
as we know and acknowledge to be naught, argues their aim to be directly for
private ends, neither for the benefit of him they praise, nor good example of
others. Wherefore I could wish, that all men were of Achilles his mind, who,
as Homer reports, Hated not the gates of Hell so much, as he did those that
spoke otherwise then they thought. And we had need be very well fortified and
constant in this resolution: for they be of so servile a condition, that
though you reject them, they will still observe; though you banish them your
company, yet they will attempt entertainment again.

But they wait only upon our good fortunes, and the least wind of adversity
disperseth them; when our means fall, they fail; which plainly shows them
to be of a most base condition. Of this rank were 2. Kings chapter 9. v. 35.
Iezabels Eunuchs, who in her prosperity served and followed her with all
diligence and observance: but when fortune turned the wheel, King Iehu had no
sooner said the word, Cast her down, but they did cast her down. They are
most diligent obseruers of the time, then to vent their Flattery, when men be
most likely to give ear unto them: therefore we ought at all times to be
very watchful over them; for if once they cast anchor in our affections, they
will hardly loose their hold.

Dolus, says Saint Augustine, duplicat cor, adulatio duplicat linguam. Deceit
doubles the heart, Flattery the tongue: these two be mixed together; for when
the tongue says one thing, and the heart thinks another; when the thoughts
go South, and the tongue North, there is the disease. So that Flattery cannot
subsist without dissimulation. And seeing they be so subtle and cunning to
deceive and entrap us, we cannot be too careful in the choice of our
company, our friends, and aduisers to choose such as love goodness and truth,
and such as so desire to please and commend their friends, that they may
encourage their constancy and continuance in virtue, not to puff them up with
ouer-great thoughts of themselves. But seeing such a one is hard to be found,
and not easily discerned, this advice of Ciceroes is worthy the observing, who
says, Amici tibi sint multi, Consiliarius autem vnus. Our friends may be
many, but one Counselor, and he such as hates this detestable vice. Diogenes
calls it Lethale mulsum, poison in a cup of gold; though outwardly beautiful,
yet full of hidden corruption, Masters of that Art which Tully calls
Mercenarium praeconium.

Flatterers by Symonides are compared to Cooks; for as they do sweeten with
sawces such kind of meats as of themselves be bitter and sharp: so
Flatterers, Verbis Coquinarijs (that I may use the Proverb) sooth us in those
things for which we ought to be reproved, and with their cunning Cookery
settle and infuse so good an opinion in us of our selves, that in aftertime our
judgments be so subverted, that we esteem our worst actions worthy praise,
and our vices virtues.

Quintus Curtius opinion was not without ground when he said, that More Kings
and Kingdoms were overthrown by the means of Flattery, then by public
Hostility. How plentiful Stories be to justify this Paradoxe, every man that
will take the pains to read them, may know; for there was never yet treason
closely attempted, but disguised with Flattery. A few examples I will give you.
Caesar had not been so easily murdered in the Senate, if Flattery and fair
words had not assured him of his safety. Alexander the Great, who was poisoned
in the midst of his triumphs at Babylon, received it not at the hands of a
stranger or enemy, but those he most trusted, his Cupbearer Iola, and Kinsman
Antipater. Who could be more cautelous then Cicero? and yet under color of
friendship, he was discovered and betrayed by his friend Popilius, in whose
defense he had formerly pleaded, and saved from an ignominious death. But not
to weary you with many more examples: Was not Judas his Flattery the apparent
and visible means of effecting his treason against Christ, when his
embracements and kisses pointed him out to be apprehended? And lastly, the
original fall of Mankind may be referred to the insinuating Flattery of the
Devil in shape of a Serpent, that so he might become more lowly and humble to
disguise his dissimulation, when he meant to work upon the weakness and
credulity of the woman; for you shall always find this way of deceiving,
shadowed with courtesy, treason under trust.

But although the infection of this pestilence be dangerous to all men, yet in
respect of the consequence, far more perilous to men of great and eminent
place. For as diseases be ever more violent, where they meet with full and
abounding bodies, and the cure more uncertain: so (the application is at hand)
when persons of quality be tainted with the poison of Flatterers, besides
their own loss, that folly of theirs, to be gulled by these Impostors,
aduanceth the trade of Flattery, and increases their breed. For all those that
serve and depend upon such, if they hope to obtain any thing by their favor,
or do desire to continue in grace, they must work it by soothing them in all
their ridiculous affections, and so slave themselves to Flattery; which, to
any honest mind is a vice as odious, as truth is a virtue superlatiue; for it
is the subversion of truth, a reproachful vice, as ill becoming a man, as
impudency a woman, which shameful and lascivious behavior, as you shall find
some strange compositions of men delighted withal; so Flattery bewitcheth and
benummeth other men's senses, against all probability of reason; acting a worse
part then that of a false witness; for he corrupts not, but deceiues the
judgment, producing an ill opinion or sentence against our will and knowledge:
but Flattery corrupts the judgment, inchants the understanding, and makes a
man incapable to take the least impression of any good or honest advice. So
that you see this domestical enemy of ours has a sting, though hid, and many
times hurts us most, where least doubted.

The credit these Flatterers gain to themselves, is commonly under the title
and pretense of friendship, and in stead of withdrawing us from ill, confirm
us in it: like those of whom Ezechiel speaks, Cap. 13. ver. 18. that sow
pillowes under our armeholes, so commending our vices, that we may sin with
more security, and delight, nourishing and increasing our errors, as oil
adds flame to fire: wherefore it is very dangerous to give credit to such, who
in the person of friends, prove so dangerous enemies, confirming and increasing
all our corrupt affections, by consent, either in conformity, or application
of themselves to the same actions, by approbation, in allowance, though not
imitation of their precedent, or by extenuation, or rather justification: as
terming anger, severity: fury, zeal: rashness, boldness: pusillanimitie,
humility: lavish expenses, liberality: covetousness, parsimonie, or the like.
And these be those deceivers, that in the frontispice, or outside, proclaim
the name of friend; but this is only in outward appearance, not inward
affection: like those spirits of darkness, that can transform themselves into
Angels of light.

It is the common practice of Flatterers, to counterfeit, rather the^ not
imitate, the passions and forms of those they apply themselves unto, their
sullenness and mirth, as they have their different variations: so they
sometimes with the Crocodile of Nile will nothing but weep and lament, and
immediately change that tune, to the mirth and songs of Sirens: now with joy,
sometimes with grief conforming themselves to that humor, which at that
instant they do think to be most predominant in us, making themselves
voluntary slaves to another inclination; in the mean time not caring how
untruly, so plausibly they may speak. So base is their mind, so mercenary
their tongue. But when the tide turns, there is no danger in their power that
they will not cast upon us, in laying us open to our enemies, disclosing those
secrets they have formerly by their Flattery stolen from us, and the like:
supposing by this dishonest means to stand upright, though his titular friend
be declined; or else expecting no more advantage from him, hope upon the ashes
of his ruin, to build a new fortune with him that caused his overthrow. For as
Acteon was murdered by his own dogs: so they, who advance and cherish
Flatterers, are commonly by them overthrown and undone: all which, by this
positive proverb of Salomons, Prou. 26. ver. 25. is confirmed. A false tongue
hates the afflicted, and a flattering mouth causes ruin. And therefore it is
good to follow his advice, Prou. 26. ver. 29. Though he speak favorably,
believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart And as Saint
Bernard speaks of it, Bla^da est, sed aspera; dulcis, sed amara.

Where Flattery bears sway, honesty is thrust out of doors; where Flattery
is advanced, there truth is banished and oppressed: and where Flattery obtaines
friendship, there truth finds hatred. Seeing then, in a manner, the
differences be as great betwixt this and truth, as truth and lying, we had
need to pray with David, Psalm. 28. ver. 3. That we may not be drawn away with
the wicked and workers of iniquity, that speak friendly to their neighbors,
when malice is in their hearts. Yet now adays it has gotten so much the upper
hand of the world, and is grown so common, that he who scorns to Flatter, will
generally be thought to be either envious, or proud: for it has now, in a
manner, quite left the name of a vice, and gotten the reputation of a virtue.
It has shaken off the old name of deceit, and is now covered with the title of
wisdom: it has quite lost his ancient attribute of cosenage, and has gotten
it self graced by the name of Policy. It is necessary therefore, to reduce it
to the former colors, lest the outside deceive.

Be therefore so far from it, as to esteem better of a friends reprehension,
then of all the praises a Flatterer can give you, whose end is to confirm and
fasten you in your errors, by his fained commendations, dissembled love, and
affection; subuerting and subduing your mind from any tincture of goodness,
which iustifies that speech of Saint Augustines, where he says, Quod plus
persequitur lingua adulatoris, quam manus persecutoris. For if the hand of an
enemy hurt not so much as the tongue of a Flatterer, much less the rebukes of
a friend, which will be able to abide all tests: agreeing with Solomon, who
says, Pro. 28. ver. 23. He that rebukes a man, shall find more favor at
length, then he that flattereth with his tongue. Crossing that passage of the
Comicall Poet, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Flattery, procures
friendship; but truth, hatred.

But this you may be sure of, that though these disguized and deceitful
praises of Flatterers, press more upon the confirmation of our ill, then of
our good parts; yet our nature is so frail, that we are commonly better
pleased with the couerers, then the discouerers of our ill affections; not so
much considering with our selves what we are indeed, as what we seem to be to
others, carried away with a selfe-opinion, requiring, as it were, the
Testimonial of our good parts, not from our own consciences, but the vain
report of others; nay, though our consciences accuse us, that those things we
be commended for, deserve nothing less; yet the Flatterer so surprizeth us,
that we no sooner begin to condemn our selves, but his dissembling praises,
and glorious glosses, choke that good meditation. Liking therefore so well, to
hear well of our selves, we should endeavor to deserve it. Whence proceeded
all those ridiculous and unnatural vices of Domitius Nero? whose beginning of
Sovereignty, whilst he gave ear to good counsel, is compared to the times of
the best Emperors; but when once the reins of his affections were let loose,
what absurd, what cruel, what unnatural acts did he stick at? and yet the
viciousness of the time so observed and praised him, that they turned his
belief into an imagination, that his grosest vices were reputed for principal
virtues. Witness the thanksgiving of the Senate to the gods, for the murder of
his Mother, and the vain Plaudites he expected for his ridiculous Rimes, and
foolish affectation, or rather emulation upon the public Stage of the part of
a Minstrel, and Player; which simplicities of his were by Flattery so wound in
him, that when he was, in a manner, certain of his destiny, yet some flashes
of these vanities did still remain.

Now the reason, why men against all reason be so strangely overtaken and
blinded with the praises of Flatterers, is, though common, yet uncertain to
guess; sure it must be either such a malignitie and disease in our affections,
as cannot abide to be removed, or else a strange and greedy appetite to hear
our selves commended for whatsoever we do: or otherwise, a superabounding
opinion, and self-conceit of our own abilities and parts, that we can do
nothing so ill, we shall not think commendable, and worthy of praise: and so
from all, or some of these, it comes to pass, that we despise friendly
admonitions, and are so subject to the snares of Flattery, by which our vices,
if never so notorious, be at the least disguized with the resemblance of some
virtues that be near unto them. Wherefore if we stop not the beginnings of
this dangerous and unseen mischief, the poison will grow past recovery, and
wholly bereave us of the true knowledge of our selves. For it is not the
present Flattery that does so much hurt, as the relics and remains of it in
our minds; for though the Flatterer be gone, yet the infection still continues,
as for instance, those who hear Music, though that be done, yet the harmony,
sweetness, and sound, does afterward possess and make impressio^ in their
minds: so these kind of praises remain longer with us, then the instant of
hearing them. And as a sweet and pleasing sound is not easily expelled our
fancies; and though we chance sometimes to forget it, yet it oftentimes
returns into our imagination again: so fares it with the pleasing discourses
of Flatterers. Therefore we should be deaf to their voices, and avoid the^ at
first.

Yet this seems most strange to me, when I see men of apparent wisdom, and
great parts, such as are able to discern and enquire of matters of the deepest
consequence, to be notwithstanding surprised by the cunning of these
dissemblers: but certainly any man that thinks well; and loves to hear well of
himself, can hardly avoid this trap: for they that Flatter, will shadow it
under the color of friendship; as in affability, advice, free discourse,
seeming reprehension, officiousness in our business, conformity of manners,
and the like. All which, though in a true friend, they be the very tokens of
friendship, and love; yet in a Flatterer they have only the representations of
it, that thereby they may more cunningly and craftily deceive such as they have
to do withal. The reason now why this kind of Flattery is so dim and
indiscernable, is because that in every motion of the mind, it is so closely
intermixed with friendship, that it can hardly be discovered from it, though if
once unmasked, it has no manner of affinity with it, nor comes nearer it, then
as glass which is dull and brittle, resembles Crystal, which is solid and
transparent: so this Flattery is only the Ape of Friendship. Therefore these
kind of men be far more dangerous to trust, then professed enemies, for from
them men expect nothing but the fruits of malice and ill will, whilst the
other sort, under pretense of love and friendship, do sooner and more
dangerously work the effect. And the difference of the danger, I put, as
betwixt those that assault us prepared, and such as take us unprovided, or
strike when our backs be turned.

But seeing from mean fortunes expectancies cannot be great, they are not much
subject to this kind of battery; the siege is laid to such as be men of great
means and place in the world, thence they hope for fortune, for credit, for
preferment; and commonly men of this high rank do seldom descend to the true
knowledge of themselves, that whatsoever they do, it is in such an assured and
imperious fashion, that it must pass uncontrolled, and whatsoever they do but
think, or wish to do, must be presently put in act, and whatsoever by them is
performed, shall be sure to find whole vollies of praises; and that they do
so certainly look for, and think they deserve, that it is dangerous for any,
with such to express the true parts of friends. And so it comes to pass, that
all about them are professors of this mystery: and to say truth, I see not how
this fault, though used, can be very much pressed against such as be followers
of these men. For this kind of Flattery is not so much affected, as forced: yet
surely an honest mind would be loath to subject it self to so base a trade. And
these great men that have so inured themselves to to be pleased with the
applause of Flatterers in all their actithough never so bad, can hardly weane
themselves from that habit, custom has so wrought it into them; and
notwithstanding sometimes upon better thoughts and considerations, they oppose
themselves against it, yet that has not long continuance, but for the most
part it returns again with greater force. Vnde saepe exclusa, nouissime
recipitur. Wherefore the danger is the greater at the first, to give way to this
humor which is so hardly repelled.

Now if the danger of this be so great, and the avoiding of it so necessary for
all sorts of men, then no doubt, but women, as the weaker vessels, had need to
be very careful, and circumspect of giving entertainment, or hearkening to any
of this condition. For besides the general danger, which is common to them
with all others, more particularly it does often precipitate them into worse
straits. For there is not an easier, or more ordinary way to corrupt and subdue
their affections, then by this means, with entertaining and feeding them with
the commendation of their person, beauty, behavior, comeliness, discourse, or
the like; being generally of their own natural inclination, so full of vanity,
and desirous of praise.

That which I have hitherto written of the danger of Flattery, is, when it is
severally applied to particulars: there remains one other sort which I cannot
omit, and that is the popular man, that insinuates and winds himself into the
love of the multitude, by pleasing and praising them in all their desires, and
by application of himself unto their humors. The end of which observance must
needs be, to strengthen himself in their good opinions; by that means
hoping, that in any design of his against the Prince or State, they would
second his attempts. This is the common end of affected Popularity, and that
thousands of examples can justify. If there be any other inducement, it must
be referred to a vain glory. I will only instance two or three examples of
the dangerous effects of this popular Flattery. The change of government
amongst the Romans proceeded from the favor and grace that Caesar had
obtained amongst the soldiers; and so the way was made plain and easy to him,
for the subversion of that state, and making of himself absolute Monarch. And
so in all, or most of the changes of the succeeding Emperaurs, popularity with
the multitude was the way by which they entered. In our own Stories, H.
Bullinbrooke, whom Richard the second did well enough foresee, was cunning in
the Art of winning the hearts of the people, and so sought means by his
banishment to prevent the danger; yet upon his return, he was so strengthened
by that means, that without all color of right, he acquired the Kingdom, and
assured it to himself by the death of the former King. So now, this point I
will conclude with one Story of the Bible, and will only relate the words of
the text. The way which Absolon proposed to himself in the treason against his
father, was to make himself popular by flattering of the people. Mark but the
Story, 2. Sam. 15. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6. 2. And Absolon rose up early, and stood hard
by the entering in of the gate, and every man that had any matters, came to the
King for judgment: him did Absolon call unto him and say, Of what City art
thou? And he answered, Thy servant is of the tribes of Israel. 3. Then Absolon
said unto him, See, thy matters are good and righteous, but there is no man
deputed of the King to hear thee. 4. Absolon said moreover, O that I were made
Judge in the Land, that every man which has any matter or controversy might
come to me, that I might do him Justice. 5. And when any man came near unto
him, and did him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him and kissed
him. 6. And in this manner did Absolon to all Israel that came to the King for
judgment. So Absolon stole the hearts of the men of Israel. The steps of this
popular Flattery (I think) cannot be more punctually described then in this
narratiue. You find his diligence, He rose up early; his purposed showing
himself to the multitude, He stood hard by, etc. his affability, And every man
that had; his finding fault with the present government, Thy matters are good
and righteous, but: a promising of redress, if power were transferred to
himself, Oh that I were. A show of extraordinary respect and love to the
people, And when any man came near. And this course he took, not with any
particular; but applied himself to all the people. And in this manner did
Absolon to all Israel. And so it came to pass, says the text, that, he stole
the hearts of the men of Israel. Thus having discoursed of the deformity of
this vice, and dangerous consequence of it both applied to particulars, and to
multitudes, I will descend from this point, and give you some rules and
directions how to avoid so great a danger, so dangerous an enemy.

Knowing the ill effects which proceed from so dangerous a cause, a man would
think reason, sufficient to avoid the occasions of being surprised with the
false and deceitful baits of Flatterers; but experience daily shows so great
a weakness in our natures, that we are apt to fall in love with our praises,
though far from our merit, and given but for private respects. Seeing
therefore, in this case we cannot be too surely fortified, it will be
necessary to add some cautions, to strengthen our resolutions in the avoiding
of so great a mischief. And the first must be, not only a professed, but an
inward auersenesse, from giving encouragement to any to think they may any way
possibly ever hope to catch us in this snare. For if we be found to have an
open ear, the disease is so catching that it will be hardly avoided. There are
few resolutions so constant, that can avoid the mischief, if they admit the
discourse of Flatterers. The first temptations therefore must be suppressed;
which if we do not in time, will so increase, that when we would we cannot.
For if we be content to have men think well of, and praise us for those things
which in our own consciences we do not deserve, we shall in time be so
besotted, as to think our selves worthy of those praises, so unjustly laid
upon us by these impostors, who as Solomon says, Pro. chapter 20. v. 19. Go about
as slanderers, and discover secrets; therefore meddle not with them that
flatter with their lips. And this may be a second reason to avoid the
insinuation of Flatterers, in respect of these two abhorred crimes, of
standering, and disclosing of secrets.

Again, as their cunning, so our care in avoiding them, should increase; for
they be come to that height and excellency in their profession, that they will
color their Flattery with the show of Friendship, usurping the offices,
behavior, nay even carrying the name and counterfeit of amity so artificially,
in taking upon them the highest part of friendship, which is free reprehension,
that the shadow is hard to be distinguished from the substance. Their love will
seem so far to exceed, where in truth nothing is more contrary unto it, not
injury, not professed enmity, not detraction.

Seeing therefore the only comfort of society, (which is in the assurance of true
friends) is so corrupted by the intrusion of Flatterers, who would usurp a
place in estimation so high, deserving one so low, concealing so dangerous a
poison under so wholesome an appearance, we need discerning spirits to exclude
such from our conversation, and not to measure our virtues by most voices, but
by most desert. So presuming every man to know his own merit in those things
for which he is commended, we must not esteem our happiness to consist in
having praises, but in deserving them.

But in these cases of persuasion, examples many times moving more the^
precepts, it will not be amiss to view the care that men in former times have
had to repress the increase and rising of Flatterers. Augustus Caesar, and
Alexander Seuerus are reported to have been so strict against Flatterers, that
if any did but extraordinarily bow himself, or show but the least sign of
Flattery toward the^, they were presently banished and expelled their Courts.
The Emperor Sigismo^d perceiving one to flatter him grossly, in stead of
reward, gave him a blow. Why strike you me, said he? Why bite you me? says the
Emperor. There is a Story of a Nobleman of Muscouia, who being imprisoned, and
desirous of inlargeme^t, fained to dream, the K. of Pole was taken prisoner,
and brought captive to the D. of Moscouia. This dream was told the Duke, who
perceiving it to proceed from an intention to flatter, commanded he should be
kept more close, til he saw the event of his dream. Suetonius reports, that
Caligula recalling one that was banished in the time of Tiberius, and regrating
his liberty, asking him how he spent all the time of his banishment; he
answered, he did nothing but pray that Tiberius might dye, and Caligula
succeed: for which kind of devotion the Emperor commanded he should be put to
death. And after this sort was the youngman punished by David, who hoping to
please him, brought news of Saul and his childrens death.

So that the nearest way to avoid so bad companions, is so to behave our
selves, that it may appear to the world how little we desire, how much we
scorn, what small confidence we put in the praises of Flatterers. This course
Canutus, once a King of this Island did take; who as Polidore Virgil recites,
walking upon the shore near Southhampton, the soldiers that were about him,
did palpably, in magnifying, flatter him, calling him King of Kings, and
Commander both of Sea and Land; whereat the King being amazed, he resolved
demo^stratiuely to show how gross their Flattery was, and how little he was
moved with it; for which purpose commanding himself to be stripped, sat down
close by the water, seeming to speak to the waves in this manner: I command you
that you touch not so much as my feet; they keeping their ordinary course, beat
upon the shore, and notwithstanding his charge, upon him too: so presently
retyring, he returned to his soldiers, and said; You called me King of Kings,
and Lord of Sea and Land, yet you see I could not command these waves from
touching me: therefore learn, that these titles belong not to mortality; but
only to him by whom all things are governed And this was his cou^terpoyson to
their Flattery, agreeing with the translation of a verse of Homers,

Nullu^ ego su^ numen, quid me immortalibus aequas? Alexander, who sometimes was
ambitious to be thought the son and heir of Jupiter, and wanted not those
Flatterers that would indeed have made him believe to have been so. A hurt
brought him back to the knowledge of himself, and fall into this speech, Omnes
iurant me esse Iouis Filium, sed hoc vulnus me hominem esse clamat. Alsweare
that I am the son of Jupiter, yet this wound proclaims me to be but a man. So
experience daily shows, that where they can get audience and gain, they never
care how absurd their praises be, laying most co^mendations upon those vices
that deserve greatest reprehension. If we run into riot, they commend our
temperance; when we express our folly, they praise our wit: which if we did
but well observe, how our vvorst faults by them are applauded for principal
virtues, our own consciences would tell us, they be but Impostors and
deceivers, discerning with Seneca, Vos dicitis me esse prudentem, ego autem
scio quam multa inutilia concupiscam, nocitura optem. You say I am wise, and
yet I find, that I have many unprofitable desires and hurtful wishes. Which
if we be as willing to practice, as capable to know, if our affections abound
not above our reason, discovering their Flattery for such things as we merit
not, we should quickly abandon them our society.

And hence it will fall into our consideration to observe the causes and
reasons for which we be praised, whether they be for such virtues wherein we
have a part or not, or whether they honor us for that we do not deserve, for
their own profit: and this must be done by the true contemplation of our
selves; not suffering our judgments in our own persons, to depend too
resolutely upon the opinion of others; but without partiality look your self
in your own glass, and if you meet with any other that be false, or flatter
you, trust them not, but let your own conscience be your own prayser, and be
not so simple as to be carried away with things that be not, neither be too
peremptory in your own judgment; but take so much as your conscience assures
you may be justly attributed, and no more; for as Seneca says, Si vera sunt
coram magno test laudatus es, si falsa sine test derisus es.

The way then to prepare and rectify our judgments in the knowledge of our
selves, is to love, to desire, to be pleased with the hearing of truth, though
it search deep into our own wounds: and if we come once to endure so sharp a
corrosiue, it is certain we shall never be delighted with the praises of
Flatterers. But it will be necessary to foresee (which I have enlarged before)
that a Flatterer creep not in, in the habit of a friend, and sometimes take the
liberty to find fault with our errors, by that means to give a better gloss
to the insinuation of their Flattery: but these, if truly observed, will be
found like false gold, which only has the representation of true, and such as
if thoroughly tried, cannot possibly abide the touch, notwithstanding the ring
of the piece be of the purest metal: but if it be not throughout good, the
deceit is greater, then if it were plainly counterfeit. Let us count then of
friends, as of the salt commanded in the ancient sacrifices; and of Flatterers,
as of the honey forbidden in them: for the salt of sound and faithful
reprehension, is the true relish and best part of a friend, whereas sweet
honyed Flattery, though for the present pleasing our fancies, yet is of a most
loathsome and dangerous consequence.

But a main impediment that blinds and choakes our understanding, from
receiving any advice and premonition that can be given against the subtilties,
and insinuations of Flatterers, is the too great confidence, and too permanent
assurance of the prosperity and continuance of this transitory and vanishing
life. Thoughts so low, so short, be the grounds upon which these men do lay
their foundation. How can any man Flatter us more extremely then we do our
selves, relying on, and delighting only in the pleasures and vanities of this
passing world? This Lethargy both Stories and Scripture manifest, to the ruin
of multitudes, who living in all manner of sensuality, yet discerned it not till
all hope and remedy were past, continuing the course of their life in pleasure
and idleness, never considering, how that in the mean time, their arraignment
was a making in heaven.

We need therefore to get the victory over our selves, and the Art of subduing
our own affections; for otherwise this selfe-louing inclination will so stir,
and move our appetites, and desires, to have our judgment concerning our
selves, seconded by the applause of others, that it will be impossible for us
to resist their snares, being so desirous of praises, and so willing to receive
them; which is the only advantage a Flatterer can get, when a man strives to
acquire reputation for those virtues of which he never participated, and is most
impatient to receive the least check for any vice, though knowing it to be
inhabitant within him; a kind of fancy, which is most certainly neither
guided by judgment, nor reason. And this is it which lays us so open, and makes
us so subject to the practice of Flatterers; which if for any thing before
said, we desire to avoid, that it should neither entrap nor endanger us: let us
look diligently into our selves, and make a true Character of our own
dispositions, not partially, but really: and then we shall find so infinite a
number of vanities, imperfections, and faults, mixed in our words, deeds, and
thoughts, that we cannot choose but see the falsity and deceit of such as have
praised and flattered us for those virtues, wherein we have had no manner of
share. And so leaving this part, I come to some differences, and limitations,
lest in the general inueighing against Flattery, it may sometimes be
misapplyed.

A man is not bound to be so censorious a Critic, as to take upon him the
disciplining of every body for their errors and imperfections. The error is in
defending or praising, not in co^cealing them. A man may be too busy, and
where there is no obligation of duty, or respect, too narrow an Inquisition may
be impertinent. If we smother the faults of those that trust and rely upon our
advice, that cannot be exempted from the imputation of Flattery; but to such as
we be mere strangers, and tied to in no manner of obligation, there as it is
most base to praise their defects, so it is not necessary at all to find fault
with them.

Besides, in common ciuility and conversation, to men though known yet above,
or equal with us, to whom we have no bond but acquaintance; as we do not
commend, so we are not bound to take notice of what we know of their errors.
Far be it from us to use any means to settle them: but on the other side to
take upon us the assurance of removing them, upon the strength of our oratory,
and persuasion, is many times too high a hope, and decreaseth friendship. Men
love not to have their faults seen or known, and there is no ground of advice
or direction, when those we converse withal, do seek to conceal their
infirmities from us.

Again, seeing praising is the Flatterers weapon; it may be demanded whether
it be impossible to praise a man, without Flattering him, as having a
consequence and dependancie the one of the other? Without question no. For if
we do truly and moderately commend those things in another which they justly
deserve, that tends to their good, encouraging them in those virtues for which
they be commended, to the end they may increase, and that others may be
animated by their example, to the imitation of the like. This kind of praising,
without any private end or respect to our selves, can in no sense be termed
Flattery, but Charity, which is the mark of true friendship, and not of
fained love.

There is now one question to be resolved, whether Flattery can be reckoned in
the number of sins, or no. For if it be one, how comes St Paul to say, 1. Cor
10. 32. Give no offense, etc. 33. Even as I please all men in all things.
Seeing that to please all men in all things, cannot be without Flattery; for
so our praising, and pleasing, may be referred to the Catalogue of our
imperfections. To this, I resolve, that neither to praise, nor please, in
themselves can be termed Flattery, but may be made so by their ends and
circumstances. And so Paul in the end of the 33. ver. expounds himself,
meaning that he would have us please all men, so as we seek not thereby our
own glory, and profit, but the good of our neighbor. And so neither pleasing,
nor praising can be called Flattery, more then the just reprehension of him
that is faulty, can be called detraction. And now I am arrived at the last part
of this discourse, wherein I will lay down some distinct rules, and notes,
whereby a Flatterer may be discovered.

In such a man you shall always see a strife and ambition, to steal into the
affection of those they depend upon, with more then an ordinary pace, too
assiduous care, and servile observation, by all means, endeavoring not only
to get the start, but to keep others back in the good opinion of those they
follow, by diligence on their parts, and laying imputations upon others, so
engrossing their affections; that willingly they will suffer none else to be
inward, or about them, but such as fight under their banner, and be of their
own stamp. And then as a shadow continually follows a man wheresoever he goes:
so they will imitate and affect whatsoever it be that their patrons apply
themselves unto; and there is no vice in them, which from these, will not have
their color, approbation, and allurement.

And the principal part they act, is either to further ill actions, or so to
conceal them, as a man shall not see his own imperfections. Arrogance, and
Pride, they seek to incorporate in our affections: they will swear we be the
men of only eminency and mark; That those to whom we show favor, and respect,
are sufficiently honored, and so praise us to a kind of dotage, that we
think all those who do not equally observe, and commend our supposed
abilities, neglect it out of ignorance, or envy; whereas the Flatterer yields
to, and approues of all his actions, though such as in his own conscience and
belief be manifestly worthy of reproof and scorn.

Then if you mark the persons to whom their praises be applied, you shall
seldom hear them give a good word of any man, but before his face, except it
be to such by whom he thinks his praises may be related, and that is his
cunning; otherwise slandering and backbiting is as common a trade of a
Flatterer, as commending of one in his presence. For in detracting from others,
they either hope to please those they now apply themselves unto, or else take
occasion comparatively by casting aspersions upon them, to magnify the
contrary virtues of those they be withal: but whether deservedly, or no, that
with them is not material.

Again, you shall find that those actions which they seem so much to approve,
and commend in us, their own judgment and understanding will not allow of:
for if a stranger, or a man, whom they purpose not to observe, shall by way of
argument, fall into discourse of such and such vicious actions, as they have
formerly allowed, in the person of their Patron, their reason will force them to
disauow and dislike them, except they imagine, this discourse is upon design
to convince them of Flattery.

And but observe whether those praises they bestow upon you for any action,
they only give to you, and no other; or to you, and all others; and you shall
generally find, that their praises go not according to the merit of the
action, but affection of the party: for those things they do now commend you
for, they will immediately disco^mend in another, and those things they commend
in another, they will as quickly dislike in you.

Besides, you may note that howsoever our actions and affections do vary and
alter, yet their praises be constant, and their opinions will seem to be the
same, though in contrarieties, which is a kind of Paradox; for let us but now
say or do one thing, we shall have their Plaudites for it: some distance
after, if our opinions, and actions chance to change to the contrary, they
alter not their praises, they be still the same they were before, they lie as
the wind goes; if you change into forms never so contrary, they do so too.
For there is no uniform equality in all their actions, and intentions,
because they have no permanent place, or person, to apply them to. Their
opinions can in no kind be settled, because they have wholly given over
themselves to content and please others, and the course of their life is
uncertain, being never like themselves, but changeable, and varying from one
form to another.

And if a man would but examine the beauty and deformity of his actions, by
the rule of his own conscience, he shall find those things, for which many times
he is so highly commended, to be naught, and of dangerous example; and such
vices, as notwithstanding their co^mendations, his own conscience has often
accused him of, and many times he has been ashamed of.

Now those that be diligent obseruers, are to be discovered also by their
inconstancy: for allow them now the followers of one that is great in fortune,
and place, if they chance to decline; and peradventure by the plot and malice
of an enemy, or competitor, their service falls off too, their expectancies
being frustrated, and are of a condition so base, as to apply themselves to the
ouerthrower of him they have have been so much bound unto; and peradventure
themselves too have been instruments of his destruction. But with their new
master, whatsoever he likes, or dislikes; approues, or disauowes; loves, or
hates, they are of the same mind that they seemed to be with the former, and in
a manner do like the Orator, who amongst many other flattering speeches, to
Augustus, said that they, who called him Caesar, knew not his greatness; and
they that called him not Caesar, were ignorant of his humanity.

Also in public assemblies, as Parlaments and the like, some of this sort do
often crowd in, the grosnesse of whose observance cannot possibly be concealed;
for you shall never hear them, but you may see a far off, their aim is for
private respects, not public good; either through Flattery or fear of some
person there present, whom they wish may always speak before them, that they
may be sure not to differ from his opinion, and whatsoever it be, good or bad,
it is by them sure to be seconded. And if speaking before, any thing has
chanced to slip from them that they see is disliked, they then fall to shifts
and excuses, to purge themselves, by interpreting their words; or if that will
not serve, acknowledging their ignorance, and altered judgment upon better
information, and so their note is quite changed; but these sorts of Flattery
being plain and palpable, easy to be found out, and so avoided, are the less
dangerous; for plainly to affirm, or deny as another does the same, the
grossnesse of that Flattery is easily discerned; whereas they that are more
cunning in their trade, are hardly visible, if not vn-vizarded, which is my now
endeavor to do.

You shall find some to flatter, when they seem to reprove, and flatter most,
when they show to be most opposite against it. Of this sort of Flatterers was
Agis Argiuus, who seeing Alexander liberal in gifts and rewards to a certain
ridiculous fellow, murmured that Alexander would show such bounty to so
unworthy a fellow. Alexander hearing him mutter, asked him what he said.
Indeed, says he, I must confess that I cannot with patience endure to see,
that all you that are descended from Jupiter, should be so delighted and
pleased with Flatterers. For as Jupiter kept Vulcan for his mirth, and Bacchus
took great delight in Sylenus: so such as these, be of account and estimation
with you. Tacitus also recites an example, though somewhat more gross, that may
be referred to this sort of Flatterers. When the Emperor Tiberius was in the
Senate, one rose up and said, It was fit that every man should speak freely,
and in matters belonging to the Commonwealth, no man ought to hold his peace:
Tiberius and all the Senate were in expectation what so bold a preamble would
produce, and then with the Proverb, Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus,
says he, Caesar, there is a fault we all blame you for, though none dare take
the hardness to tell you of it, you spend your self too much in caring for us,
wearing your body both day and night in labors for the Republike, not valuing
your own safety and health, in regard of our happiness and prosperity. This
kind of Flattery that goes in the habit of franknesse and liberty of speech,
is very obscure. And if this, which ought to be a remedy, prove the way and
means more colourably to flatter, without good caution and observation, we
shall hardly discover their aim.

Some again not unlike these will, by another way of reprehension, lay the
ground for their Flattery; as if by chance they spy in us any small and petty
errors, they will declaime with vehemency and earnestness against them; so
that their encouragement to, or conniuencie at our great and monstrous
deficiencies, by this their seeming severity, may in a manner be ecclipsed.
Which kind of cunning, as Plutarch notes, may be compared to Hercules his club
in a play, that seems weighty, though indeed light, and filled with wool or
feathers. So this reprehending liberty, which a Flatterer uses, will upon
examination be found weak, and of small force to give a blow. For instance, if
your clothes be not of the new fashion, your beard not of the late edition,
your hat not of the last block or the like; from hence, for these they will
take occasion with a kind of severity to censure and correct you. But admit
you should despise your parents, abuse your wife, neglect your children, scorn
your kindred, consume your estate, or fall into numbers of notorious vices,
these they will neither move nor stir, these they will neither take knowledge
of, nor regard.

Others sometimes you shall note, the better to disguise their Flattery, will,
by reproving of men for contrary vices, confirm those they have. As if a
covetous man once in his life show a little liberality, or if you will,
inclining to prodigality, (for the Proverb says, Whose feast is so great as a
mizers?) they will upon this single occasion, seem out of their love to be much
grieved at the vastness of his expense, and carelessness of his state. And if
an envious slanderer, that never loved to speak well of any body, by chance
be so convinced by anothey man's merit, that he speak a few words in his
commendation, they will presently impute this for a fault, and an argument of
facility, for commending of one rather out of easiness, then desert. And
after this manner, those vicious affections which we have inhabitant in us,
they do seek to confirm, and settle for ever removing, not by approving
their vices, or alone reproving the contrary; but sometimes also by
discommending the contrary virtues: as calling zeal, hypocrisy; liberality;
prodigality; parsimonie, covetousness; and so forward: using the same Art
toward the maintaining of any vice that they think a man has a mind to.

If they happen to meet with one that suspects all praises that be forced or
thrust upon him, such a one they will not commend as from themselves, but
invent some good reports they heard of him abroad, and express how glad they
were to hear so well; herein imitating the Rethoricians, who often in their
Orations use the third person for the first. Or, on the contrary, accuse him of
some ill they have heard laid to his charge, which he knowing to be untrue,
and so denying, they will find matter to fall into a laudatory of his
abilities, by showing how innocent he was of those vices that the world had
taxed him withal. And if these ways serve not to make him think too well of
himself, they will not in words commend, but in a silent kind of approving
and good opinion of his parts, will express it by seeking his opinion, or
relying and trusting to his judgment and discretion in some things that may
concern themselves; which when delivered, they will seem to admire, and
prefer before any opinion or Counsel they have received from any other
body. But if a man could suspect this beforehand, give them but some absurd
Counsel, and so you shall discover them. For they are prepared to commend it
whatsoever it be. Seeing then by this before, that the colors of Friendship
and Flattery be so like, and hardly discerned; I will in the last place show
some maine differences betwixt them both, and so conclude.

A friend will never be employed in ill, or dishonest actions: but in such as
may turn to the good and profit of him he loves, none is more willing then
he: where, on the contrary, a Flatterer seeks to gain our good opinion, by
being employed in actions of the worst sort, and most dangerous consequence, in
respect of our good either fortune, or name; not caring for the event, so they
may raise themselves by our ruin, loving our meat and means more then they
do our selves, continuing friends unto us, no longer then our purse persuades
them thereunto. And whereas a true friend imitates our actions in nothing but
that which is good; the Flatterer, like a Camelion, that turns himself into
all colors but white, can frame himself to any likeness but good; ordering
all his actions, not to the good of his friend, but his own private respect,
and turns all to his own particular benefit; whereas Friendship seeks not so
much the good of it self.

A Friend reproues his friends vices, and commends his virtues rather to
another, then himself; whereas on the contrary, a Flatterer always praises
him in sight, as well for his vices as virtues, and behind his back, is as
liberal in blaming and defamation of him; saying, that he possesses him
wholly, gouernes him at his pleasure, and makes him do what he list. So,
whereas a true friend preserues the good name and fortune of him he loves, the
Flatterer precipitates him to all manner of danger and ruin.

A Friend is always constant and settled in his opinions; the judgment of a
Flatterer being diverse, like wax, or a looking-glass, receiving different
forms, praising or dispraysing, ever applying himself to the mind and
inclination of him that he flattereth, vexing himself too violently in
whatsoever he does, in the knowledge and view of him that he observes;
continual in praises and offering of service. Non imitatur amicitiam, sed
praeterit, having no moderation in his outward actions, and contrarily no
inward affection, which is a condition quite different from the nature of a
friend.

A friend will never commend and approve any actions of ours that be vicious,
but friendly and freely dissuade us from them, whereas the Flatterer does
always give the victory, applauding whatsoever we do, aiming no further then
to please; whereas a true friend does not respect so much how he may please,
as profit.

A Friend endeavors always to procure in us a love of those things that be
reasonable and honest: a Flatterer rather desires to confirm us in liberty
and pleasure. And where all men have these two desires within them, the one
given to virtue and goodness, the other to licentiousness and passion: the
true friend always assists the better part, in giving counsel, and comfort;
and the Flatterer applies himself to the other, which is void of reason, and
full of passion; so feeding our affections by devising of some vicious and
dishonest pleasure, that they quite divert us from the rule of reason; like
some kind of meat, that neither breeds good blood, nor engenders spirits, nor
ads vigor or strength, but only breeds fogs and rotten humors that be
neither fast, nor sound: so, if a man look narrowly into a Flatterer, all the
good he shall find to come from him, is only the increasing and settling of
our worst and basest affections, whereunto we seem to have but the least
inclination.

So that, as it is plain, a true friend always respects the good of another,
more (which is the ground of his love) then any particular purpose or design
for his own advantage; on the contrary, the ends of a Flatterer be Antipodes
to the desires of a Friend, who will no less be willing to participate of his
calamity, then prosperity; whereas the other does observe and follow him only
in his prospering evil. By which you see, it cannot possibly stand together,
for one man to be both a Friend, and a Flatterer, which is as much as if I
should say, a Friend, and no Friend: or rather an enemy then a Friend.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE OF LAWS.

A DISCOVRSE OF LAWS.
THe nature of all sorts of Laws, whether they concern God, and Religion, and
so have reference to divine Laws, or whether they concern society, and
conversation, and so be merely Humane, is properly this, to be the straight
and perfect rule, by application whereunto, right and wrong are discerned, and
distingnished one from another: and the knowledge, and practice of them, bring
a double benefit, either Public, which is the general good, and government of
the State; or Private, which consists in the quiet, and peaceable life of every
one in particular. So the true end of all Laws is to ordain, and settle an
order, and government amongst us, the Jurisdiction whereof we are rather bound
to obey, then dispute; Laws being, as it were, the Princes we ought to serve,
the Captains we are to follow, the very rules, by which all the actions of our
life be squared and disposed. They are the peoples bulwarks, and defenses, to
keep them in safety, and peace, that no unjust thing be done against them;
that by the Laws men may be made good, and happy; and that the punishment of
offenders should appear to proceed from a necessity forced, rather then a
will voluntary, and that by the example of punishing some, others might be
made the better; that by the fear, and terror of them, men's audacities might
be repressed, and their innocence, and peace, secured from force and
oppression.

If men were not limited within certain rules, such confusion would follow in
government, that the differences of Right and wrong, Just and unlawful, could
never be distinguished; and that would cause such distraction in the people,
and give so great an overthrow to conversation, and commerce amongst men, that
all right would be perverted by power, and all honesty swayed by greatness:
so that the equal administration of Justice, is the true knot that binds us to
unity and peace amongst our selves, and disperseth all such violent and
unlawful courses, as otherwise liberty would insinuate, preserving every man
in his right, and preventing others, who if they thought their actions might
pass with impunitie, would not measure their courses, by the rule of Aequum
and Iustum, but by the square of their own benefit, and affections: and so not
being circumscribed within reasonable bounds, their reason becomes invisible;
whereas when they find that Justice has a Predominant power, they are
deterred from proceeding in those acts, that otherwise their own wills, and
inclination would give them leave to effect.

Plato affirms the necessity of Laws to be so great and absolute, that men
otherwise could not be distinguished from unreasonable creatures: for no man
naturally is of so great capacity, as completely to know all the necessities,
and accidents, which be required for a common good: and then if a man could
suppose in any so perfect a knowledge, yet is that man not to be found, that
either absolutely could, or would do all that good which he knows: so that in
an Vtopia of such men as be not, yet the necessity of laws are absolute. But
where men's affections and manners are depraved, and given over to unruly and
unreasonable desires, there Laws be so necessary; that Heraclitus said, A
City needed rather to defend their Laws, then Forts: for without Laws no
people can subsist; without defenses, it is possible that they may: agreeing
with Demosthenes observation, who supposed Laws to be as the soul of a
Commonwealth; for as a body without a soul, remains not; so a People without
due administration of Laws, do wholly decline: but take people, as they are
commonly mixed of the good, and worser sort, nay rather, more of the bad, then
better composition, yet it will evidently appear, that Laws are so absolutely
necessary, to restrain from ill, to confirm in good, to make a happy concord,
and union in our civil conversation, to make such a distinction betwixt
lawful, and exorbitant desires, as unlawful affections may not be colored
with good apparances; that it can not be denied, that Laws be the only
sinews of contracting people together, and not merely useful, but necessary.

But in the exercise, and execution of Laws, such moderation is ever to be
held, that it may appear rather to to be used, as a preventing Physic, by
way of example to warn others, that they fall not into the like danger, then
out of a desire to afflict, or make miserable any private person: and therefore
the conclusion of Tacitus is very obseruable, Pauca admodum vi tractata, quo
caeteris quies esset; In some few matters severity was used, by that means to
cause quietness in the rest. So that it is necessary in every Commonwealth to
cut off offenders, as well for present safety, as prevention of further
mischief, which will be plain, if we will but observe the benefits that follow,
and inconveniences that arise, if this exemplary Justice be not executed.

First, when any fact is unlawfully committed, there is no other satisfaction
left to the world, or the party offended, then the punishment of the offender;
which if it be not executed, Injustice were as well offered to the Public
State; as to the private person of him who has suffered the injury.

Next, as it incourageth honest men in their just and lawful actions; so it
abates the insolency of others, who be only bridled with the fear of
punishment; for otherwise the vvorst men by wickedest courses, were most likely
to make great fortunes, and to carry the greatest sway; which would so
discourage men honestly disposed, that they would neither have will, nor power,
nor confidence, to labor for the public.

Thirdly, it banisheth all presumption from such as think, that their
reputation and wealth, Riches, or Offices, can press down Justice, or make it
incline to their purposes: for if these respects should prevail, judgment
were merely inuerted, and would not look upon the cause, but the Bribe; the
right, but the power; the truth, but the greatness of the greater Adversary.

Again, it adds confidence to the poorer sort, when they see that equity, and
not favor, procures the sentence, and so by this means are conserved from
oppression. And if it were not for this, in what a miserable case were these
lower degrees of me^ subject to be trod under feet by their imperious
Adversary, and then to have no means left for redress.

Fifthly; it is the greatest honor, and reputation, a Kingdom, or commonwealth
can be ambitious of, and enjoy, to have Justice justly distributed, and people
obedient to Laws; Justice guarding the people, by correcting and cutting off
such as give ill example to the rest. And in what Commonwealth soever this is
neglected, it breeds confusion amongst themselves, gives advantage to their
enemies, and causes their disreputation to spread through the world.

Next to the honor of a Kingdom, it is the safety of the King, who being
reputed to be as the fountain of justice, so Justice keeps the fountain free
from corruption, infection, or danger, prescribing rules for fear it corrupt,
ascribing Antidotes for fear of infection, and preserving his person, and
reputation both from sensible, and insensitiue danger: whereas if Laws be
neglected, his person is more subject to the attempts of Traitors, his life to
the tongues of malice and detraction, and his reputation to perpetual infamy.

And lastly, this is it, that enriches and secures the subject in all
Kingdoms, gives him his right, protects him from wrong, increases commerce,
and proclaims traffic throughout all the world: whereas if Justice were not
duly administered, there would follow a diminution of our substances, a
general disconsolatio^ in our life, and a certain separation from all trade
with strangers. And mark but narrowly, and you shall seldom find that God ever
blessed that Country, where Justice was either neglected, or abused.

Those therefore (if any such insensible creatures be) that dislike
therestraint, and strive, and declaime against obedience to Laws (which may be
truly termed the walls of government, and nations) they make themselves so
co^temptible, as no objection of theirs can be worthy the answering: for a
general dissolution of Laws in a civil body, is the same with the conuulsion
of the sinnewes in a natural; decays, and dissolution, being the immediate,
and unavoidable succeeders. And yet a man had better choose to live where no
thing, then where all things be lawful: which is the reason why all men have
thought it more dangerous, to live in an Anarchy, then under a Tyrants
government: for the violent desires of one, must necessarily be tied to
particulars, in a multitude they are indefinite.

The first degree of goodness is obedience to Laws, which be nothing else but
virtue, and good order of life, reduced unto certain rules: and as reason has
the predominant power in our natural bodies, so the body Politic cannot
subsist with out soul to inanimate, to govern, to guide it, and that is Law,
proceeding from the reason, counsels, and judgment of wise men. For where
Laws be wanting, there neither Religion, nor life, nor society can be
maintained. There be three branches that men's Laws do spread themselves into,
every one stricter then other. The Law of Nature, which we enjoy in common with all other living creatures. The Law of Nations, which is common to all men in
general: and the Municipall Law of every Nation, which is peculiar and proper
to this or that Country, and ours to us as Englishmen.

That of Nature, which is the ground or foundation of the rest, produces such
actions amongst us, as are common to every living creature, and not only
incident to men: as for example, the commixture of several sexes, which we
call Marriage, generation, education, and the like; these actions belong to all
living creatures, as well as to us. The Laws of Nations be those rules which
reason has prescribed to all men in general, and such as all Nations one with
another do allow and observe for just. And lastly, the Peculiar Laws of every
Country, which mix with the general Laws of all places, some particular ones
of their own: and this is that which the Romans called amongst themselves, the
Civil Law of their City, and is indeed in every Nation: the Municipall Laws
of that Country, as it were Laws only created for those Climates, for those
estates.

Take away the power of Laws, and who is it that can say, This is my House, or
my Land, or my money, or my goods, or call any thing that is his, his own.
Therefore every man's state and fortune is more strengthened and confirmed by
Laws, then by any will or power in those from whom we receive them; for
whatsoever is left unto us by the Testament of another, it is impossible we
should ever keep it as our own, if Law restrained not others claims, and
confirmed the^ not unto us. In which respect, Laws be the strongest sinews of
humane society, helps for such as may be ouerborne, and bridles to them that
would oppress. So that we receive much more benefit from Laws in this kind,
then from Nature; for whereas men be naturally affected and possessed with a
violent heat of desires, and passions, and fancies, Laws restrain and draw
them from those actions, and thoughts, that would precipitate to all manner of
hazzards and ill, which natural inclination is prone enough unto; and do
govern, direct, alter, dispose, and as it were bend them to all manner of
virtuous and good actions.

Wherefore Laws be the true Physicions and preseruers of our peaceable life,
and civil conversation, preventing those il accidents that may happen, purging
and taking away such as have broken forth, and sowing peace, plenty, wealth,
strength, and all manner of prosperity amongst men. And for those things that
be ill, but yet introduced by custom, severe and just Laws will readily
correct; for the force and power of Law does easily dissolve an ill custom,
though it have been of long continuance: the excellency and praise of which
Laws can never be better illustrated, then in that saying of Solomon: Mandatum
lucerna est; lex, lux, and via vitae, increpatio disciplinae. The commandment
is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproves of instruction, are the way of
life.

The dispensers and interpreters of the Law, be the Magistrates and Judges, and
all sorts and degrees of men whatsoever, be tied and bound to the observance of
the same. To this purpose, Solon being demanded, What City was best governed?
answered, That, wherein the City obeyed the Magistrate, and the Magistrate the
Laws: and certainly that government is better, which uses set and firm
Laws, though not all of the best sort, then that where the Laws be most
perfect and exact, and yet not observed. Laws therefore ought to be the rulers
of men, and not men the masters of Laws.

There is no doubt but that Laws were at the first invented, as well to give
rules to the good, that they might know how to live peaceably and regularly one
with another, as to repress the audacity of those unbridled spirits, who, in
despite of discipline and reason, do thrust themselves into all kinds of
outrage and disorder; from which bad cause notwithstanding, according to the
old rule, a good effect is produced: Ex malis moribus, bonae leges oriuntur.
But the particular introducements of Laws, arise either from a pressing
necessity, or a foreseeing and prouisionall carefulnes of those that make them;
these proceed from providence, the other from some sense of evil. The
impulsive causes in the making of prouisionall Laws, are either love of their
Country, or desire of glory, or affectation of popularity, or sometimes
particular interest, and private respect; for it often happens, that a private
good may have connection with the public. And the sense of ill, decaying either
by the increase of it, or a seeming to be destitute of remedy, is the cause,
that where Laws are once forced, out of the sense of mischief, and
inconvenience, they be for the most part grievous and immoderate; as on the
other side, such as reason and providence do produce, are many times more
specious then useful. In the first, take away the spur and sense of ill, and
it makes men in the constitution of Laws, to be careless and unwary; and in
the other, if there be not continued a strong and constant affection, they
commonly faint in the execution of them.

But in the mean time there is no doubt, that there are certain fountains of
natural Justice and equity, out of which has been taken and derived that
infinite variety of Laws, which several people have apted to themselves: and
as several veins and currents of water, have several qualities and tastes, in
respect of the nature of that ground and soil, through which they flow and run:
so these Laws and the virtue of them, which be fetched from an original
fountain, receive a new kind of application, and tincture, in respect of the
situation of the Country, the genius and nature of the people, the fashion and
form of public actions, diverse accidents of the time, and sundry other
occurrences, I will not stand to repeat. And in the making of Laws, wise men
have always had these things in consideration. First, the Common-good, and
benefit, for which they intend them, and that requires that they should be both
just and profitable: now no law can be profitable, nor yet just; which is made
for private and particular respects, and not for the publik good.

2. The persons to whom they be to be applied; that for the execution, and
application of them, they be such as may be possible to be observed, and apt
for the customs, places, and time, where, and when they be to be used.

3. The present course of the State; what Laws there have been usually
received, by what special ones it has been conserved, and by what new ones
it may be assured: for one kind of care is not fit for all places, and
Countries.

But Laws, when they are once made, ought very rarely to be changed: to which
purpose the ancient position of wise men is not unworthy the observing, that
nothing is to be changed in the Laws of a Commonwealth, which has a long
time by these Laws preserved it self in good state and government: and as
Isiodor' well notes, after a Law is once made, we ought not to judge of it, but
according to it. And yet in these two cases the alteration of Laws may turn
to the better. 1. When by the changing of it the Law is made more perfect, more
clear, more positive, more profitable. 2. When the condition of subjects and
government is changed, there of necessity the Law must vary, according to the
difference and diversity of the times and persons: for change and variatio^ of
Laws, are either by occasion of entertaining foreign customs, or some
internal deficiences, or excesses, according to the alteration of time. One of
these is so far from innovation, that it is altogether necessary: but that is
not introducing of Laws by way of imitation of other people; it argues a
desire of change, rather then any cause that is material. But on the other
side, old and ancient customs, in respect of their very antiquity, do induce
a kind of harshnesse, and breed saciety; for the wilful retaining of a
custom against the present reason of the time, is altogether unequal.

This is to be understood of temporary Laws, made and applied to new and
several accidents. For the fundamental laws, upon which the fabric of a
commonwealth and people be grounded and built, they in no case will admit
innovation; neither are the other sort to be lightly altered, but where the
present custom of the time find them impertinent, and the State thinks them
vnvseful. To illustrate, in the same times, sometimes we see Laws mutable, and
fit to be so: such as are made in time of war, peace does extinguish, and so
on the contrary; agreeing with Liuie speaking to this purpose: Quae in pace
latae sunt, plerunque bellum abrogat; quae in bello, pax; vt in nauis
administratione, alia in secunda, alia in aduersa, tempestate vsui sunt. And
although change of Laws be sometimes necessary, it ought notwithstanding to
be done with a great deal of caution: but yet it must be confessed, that
time, of all things is the greatest innouator, and therefore wilfully to
prescribe the continuance of an old Law, in respect of antiquity, the face of
the world and affairs being changed, is indeed an introduceme^t of nouelty;
for the pressure of the use of it, urging and setting it only forth with the
grace of antiquity, if notwithstanding it be opposite or incongruous to the
present times and government, makes that old Law, if practiced, to fall, and
be converted into a new and unreasonable custom.

Now for my judgment concerning the use of Laws, I think this, that as the
use of much Physic and diverse Physicions, argue the abundance of humors,
and diseases; so the multiplicity and number of Laws, be manifest signs of a
diseased and distempered Commonwealth. And therefore to follow the similitude,
as in diseases new experiments be dangerous, where those that be ancient and
approved may serve; so new Laws be needless, when the maladies of the
Republique may be cured by the old: for it is a thing both unequal and unjust
to ensnare the people with multitude of Laws.

Law and Reason are twins, the absence of one, is the deformity of the other;
being in a kind conuertibilia, and inseparable. That common reason we have
ingrafted inour natures, is a Law, directing what we are to do, forbidding the
contrary, according to Cicero: Eadem ratio cum est in hominis mente confirmata,
and confecta, lex est. For Law is nothing but reason dilated and applied upon
several occasions and accidents, the comprehension of reason and Law, as of
public enormities, and necessities, for which they be severally, at several
times made, being infinite. The disease commonly in our knowledge, having the
prioritie of the remedy. And thus the reverence, and duty we owe to Laws, is
nothing else but obedience to reason, which is the begetter, correcter, and
preserver, of the very Laws themselves: those therefore who will not obey
them, do come more near the nature of Brutes and Saluages, then men endued
with reason: but I go on.

If a reason be demanded why all Countries do differ, and vary so much in
their customs, and Laws, I answer, that it proceeds from the custom of the
first inhabitants. As we may see where there are several plantations by one
people, they severally give different orders, and customs, according to the
intent and purpose of the first Planters, and according to the necessity, and
end of the present Plantation, as may be observed in the different
Constitutions, and Laws, in our two late Plantations, of Virginia, and the
Bermuda's. And though, I confess, that these original customs, may in time
be altered, upon several occasions, diverse changes of government, as in the
Roman State, or upon conquest, as with us; yet I doubt not, but that some
relics of the old customs would remain to perpetuity, if a people be not
wholly extirpate. I should now punctually search the several Authors, and
Inuenters of Laws, amongst different Nations, together with their diverse
oppositions, and emulations, one with another, but that would be too long, and
uncertain: I will therefore only in a word touch the original, and growth of
Law amongst the Romans, as being more certainly known, and of larger extent.

You must understand that at the first they had no other set Law, then the
will, and commandments of their Princes. That government being changed, and so
their constitutions extinct, the people were the^ governed by precedent, and
custom, without any direct, and written Law; but that continued not many
years. Then the law of the 12. Tables succeeded, which the Romans, in respect of
their own defects, had borrowed from the Grecians: and these, as in Laws it
commonly happens, being subject to dispute, were forced to be reconciled, and
decided, by the authority, and arguments of the most great, grave, and learned
men, which afterward being collected, and gathered together, became a kind of
volume, and body of Law, and so afterward, before the Commonwealth was
subverted, received by diverse men, in sundry ages, several additions: but
after the government was Monarchical, the present Emperors did add to the old,
or confirm or abolish them, according to their own will, and power. And all
together is that which is commonly known by the name of the civil Law; and
because it continues to be the most practical, and generally received Law of
the world, and that though all Countries have Municipall Laws of their own,
yet this Law in every place carries some sway, and authority, in some places
more, and in some less, and that an aspersion is cast upon the ground, and
foundation of our Laws, in being different and contrary to the original
beginning of the civil Law, I will briefly parralel them together; wherein if
any do not find so punctual an agreement as he expects, let him remember that
the nature of a comparison, implies but a similitude, and affinity of one thing
to another, and not a total and absolute agreement.

The Law which the Romans used, and so we, is either written, or not written.
Those that were written, says Justinian, were of these kinds. 1. Lex, and that
is such a Law as was made by the people, but first propounded by the Senate.
Such are those Laws with us, as are confirmed by the lower House of
Parliament, and propounded by the higher. 2. Plebiscitum, and such were the
Laws made by the whole people (the order of Patritians excepted) and offered
to their consideration by the Tribune; like those Laws that be approved by the
Commons in our Parliament, and propounded by the Speaker. 3. Senatus consultu,
and those were such Laws as were ordained by the power and authority of the
Senate, to which we may resemble the consultations and directions of the Kings
Council, and the Decrees of the Star Chamber. 4. Principum Placita, which were
Constitutions appointed by the Soueraign power of the Prince; some of them
being personal, and not exemplary; others more public; of which kind with us
be all the Kings Edicts, and Proclamations, of what kind soever. 5. Magistratuum
Edicta, as the commandments of the Generals in the Field, Governors of
Provinces, and the prime Magistrates in great Cities: like as with us is that
power which is deputed to the Deputy of Ireland, the Presidents of York, and
Wales, the Lieutenants of every Shire, and the Jurisdiction of Magistrates,
according to their particular customs, privileges, and immunities, in the
great Cities, and Corporations of this Kingdom. And lastly, Responsa Prudentu^,
which were the Judgments and opinions of such as were appointed to be Judges,
and expounders of the Law: and just of that kind be the resolutions of our
Judges, which in writing be delivered unto us, by the name of Reports, and
Cases.

Laws unwritten (amongst the Romans, were such as custom had introduced, and
yet never suffered contradiction by a Positive Law. Such Traditions as they had
received touching the ancient manner, and form of government of their
Ancestors, in precedent times; and of this nature with us is our common Law,
grounded much upon custom.

And the reason why these ancient customs may be collected to be of so great
force, is, because always before their approbation it is to be conceived, that
they had passed al censures for necessary, and to be without offense: and so
having received this facile approbation, are allowed, and most religiously
kept; for Laws of the greatest weight, and consequence, which occasioned
Cicero to write ante suam memoriam, and morem ipsum patrium, praestantes viros
adhibuisse, and veteru^ morem, ac maiorum instituta, excellentes viros
retinuisse. And believing Dionysius testimony, Romulus in the first foundation
of the Republique, did think to strengthen, and confirm it more, with Laws
unwritten, then written; peradventure being of the same opinion Demosthenes
notes of Licurgus, who would not write his Laws, but to have them more
public, and better known, would leave them only engraven in the memory of
his Citizens.

But more precisely to distinguish betwixt Law and Custom, that the terms,
as well as matter, may be understood, you must understand, that where any
form, or Law, has had any long continuance in practice, without any known
Author, it then receives the name of an ancient custom, or mos Maiorum: which
though in name, and Title it differ from a Law, yet in power, and authority,
it is the same: which Vlpian confirmed when he said, Diuturnam consuetudinem,
pro Iure, ac Lege, in jis quae non ex scripto descendunt, obseruari solere. And
there is great reason for it, because Laws are in esteem, and authority with
us, for no other reason, but in respect they have had the reputation to be
allowed, and made by the Judgment of the people. Then full as meritoriously
do those Laws deserve esteem, which all men have approved for necessary,
without any prescript, or rule; and this is the reason which makes our common
Law originally grounded upon ancient customs, of equal power and authority
with our Statutes.

FINIS.

