Of the first Tragical Act or persecution after the birth of Christ, in which
Herod surnamed the great, slew the young and innocent Children. Chapter. i.
AFter the persecutions of the faithful in the ancient holy Church, hereafter
I will declare the persecutions of the christian Church, which began immediately
after the birth of Christ, in the reign of Augustus the Emperor.

When Christ in great poverty was borne in a certain stable, there came wise
Herod the great first persecuted our savior
men from the East unto Jerusalem, declaring the birth of the late borne king.
With this tidings Herod (whom they call the great, and Ascalonite) being
merueilous affraied, for he doubted lest the newborn king should drive him
out of the kingdom of Judea, which then he possessed at pleasure and good
will of the Romans: he determined to slay this new and latelye borne King
whilst as yet he lay in his swath clothes. And being ignorant wl^ was the
lately borne king, yet ki^^inge that he was borne at Bethe^ because he
would be sure not to (...) him: caused all the infantes of Be^lem and the
places near about, sut^ were two months old or young be slain by his
officers, and s^ours. Amongst which his officers soldiers, this most cruel
T^ fownd some, that were not a frai^ commit this strange tragedy, an^ ^ell
murder. For the murderers, ungodly rakehelles, the servants (...) butcherly
king, departinge unto A cruel slaughter.
^thelem, fulfilled his commaundm^ killinge all the young children o^ ^thelem
and the borders about, w^ doubtless the number was not s^ For, which is
horrible to hear, an^ ^trarie to the nature of mankind, spared not so much as
the tender in^ in their cloutes, but haled them their mothers breasts: whereby
arose a great and miserable cla^ schritches and outcries of them, (...) most
dear pledges and children were plucked away by most unjust Tyranie and so
cruelly and unkindly murdered. Matthew the Evangelist makes mention of this
sorrow and heuines, by whom Math. 2.
this story is diligently written, and for the better settinge forth to the
eye the greatness of this misery and calamity, the words of Jeremy are by
him aleaged who writes thus: A voice was heard in Rhama, lamentation,
weepinge, and mutch mourninge, Rachell weepinge for her children, and would
receive no comfort because they were not. In which words this is also to be
noted, how persecution does not only touch and appertain unto those that are
tormented or slain, but unto those also, who, although they suffer not the
same things: yet do they love them, and are joined unto them that suffer, so
that by the pains and suffryng of their friends they sustain great grief of
mind, and thereby themselves do suffer, and are partakers of persecution.

Herod moved this persecution not so mutch for the infantes to slaye them, but
for our Lord Jesus Christ to seek him, find him, and kill him.

Wherefore these innocent Infantes were slain for Christ's sake, and they
whose Children they were sustained this great sorrow and heauenesse for
Christ's sake, although at that time they understood not the mysteries of God.

And therefore very well these glytlesse children, with their parents are
numbered among them which have suffered persecution for Christ's sake. Neither
is it to be doubted, but these children by the force and efficacye of the free
grace and promise of God, were in the league and therefore had received
Cyrcumcysion, the sign and token of the league, and were the suns of God,
and then also were endued with the crown of martyrdom for Christ's cause.
Curious questions touching these Children.


Since therefore God of his mercy, and goodness has so gloryouslye delte
with these Children, let these curious questioners cease here to inquire, what
God did mean, and why he suffered these seelly and giltlesse babes to be slain
for Christ's sake? Why he delivered not them also as he did Christ, whom he
conuaied by flight into Aegipt? why he suffered the cruel Tyrant to commit so
foul a murder? does any such unaccustomed cruelty and sauagenes delight
God? Likely enough it is, that at that time when these things were done,
troublesome and carnal men uttered forth mutch such like talk. But the
Godly, and men of sownde judgment, do quite reject such thoughts and
questions, nether do they speak against the government of God why he
premitteth this or that, but with all their heart they say with David: The Lord
is just in all his ways, and holly in all his works. Although the innocent
children were deprived of this present life, yet were they rewarded with
everlasting life, and endued with unspeakable glory and honor. As for the
mourninge and sorrow of the parents, God could requite that, sundry ways.

And God, likewise, who is displeased with cruelty, who also does no evil,
nether suffers it to be done unpunished, uses evil deeds, wrath, and
savage cruelty of his enemies unto the commodity of y^ faithful, their deeds
therwhile being naught, and nothing thereby the better. Poison is evil by his
own nature, but by ye skill of the Physicians ye which is naught by nature is
applied in medecines unto ye commodity of men. So said Joseph to his brethren
that they imagined mischief against him, when they sold him into Egypt, howbeit
god turned it to good, so likewise does God in persecutions. For in this first
persecution, we beeholde evidently, as it were in a glass, what is the
substance and state of al other persecutions. For although this persecution
were very cruel and unkind: notwithstanding it tended unto the salvation and
glory of all those whom it touched. And likewise al other persecutions of the
faithful, although they be sharp and cruel, yet are they profitable and
honorable unto those that suffer them. And like as the wise will not much
dispute in this place, why god suffered those children to be slain: so are ye
faithful of a moderate and quiet mind in persecutions, nether do they accuse
god demanding why he does this or ye for wicked men, suffering the godly and
innocent to be oppressed. For they know, and believe, ye gods government is in all
things good and just, and without all reprehention. And like as ye giltlesse
innoce^ts were killed for christ's sake and amongst them Christ was sought to
be slain: so in all persecutions ye faithful a^ murdered for Christ's sake, and
Christ is he whom ye persecutours seek and study to make away. And like as
christ then was nether found, nor slain, but escaped so al persecutions may
slay ye godly, but they are never able to extinguish christ. But as Herod,
contrary to his hope and expectation, notwithstanding this murder could not be
careless nor quiet in mind: so likewise, al persecutors, although they kill never
so many yet ar they not at rest but always remaining in fear, and carefulnes.
Ambition and desire to rule only enforced Herod to commit these horrible
slaughters: al other persecutions likewise The cause of this persecution.
have sprung forth from ye like disease and evil affection. For in times past
what stirs ambition, and desire to rule, have moved in ye kigdoms of Judah and
Israel it may be known by ye tyrannical deeds of Saul Abner, Iereboam, Athalia,
and such like. And in our age many of the clergy, and ecclesiastical order,
having obtained great honors: do fear least their glory, pomp, riches,
pleasures, prefermentes and honors should decay, if the Gospel were freely
preached. Such therefore for their kingdom, and pleasures: with Herod, oppose
themselves against Christ and his word, and are not stricken with horror in
eggynge forth unto, or executinge a cruel deed, so that themselves may lurk
safe and quiet in their neastes. To conclude, like as this grievous and cruel
persecution of Christ, beegan immediately after his incarnation by slaughter of
the innocent babes: so is there nothing that the church of Christ must look
for until the last judgment, but persecutions.

Of the second Tragical Act or persecution, wherein John the Baptist was
beheaded, Jesus Christ the Sun of God crucified, and his Disciples dispersed.
Chapter. ii.
THe second persecution began John Baptist first preacher of the Gospel.
at one time, with the preaching of the Gospel, and John the Baptiste first
preached the Gospel, as S. Mark witnesses writting: how that the Gospel of
Jesus Christ the Sun of God, began so as it was foretold by ye prophets,
namely by the forerunner of of Christ, who prepared his ways, and made the
minds of men apt and ready to receive Christ. Which John the Baptist,
pointed unto Christ, as it were What John preached.
with his finger, testefinge that he was the Lamb of God, that should take
away the sins of the world. The same exhorted men to believe in Christ, and
sent his disciples from him to Christ, as unto him in whom dwelled al
fullness, and through whom only the way was open unto everlasting life:
affirminge that he was the very Sun of God, into whose hand the father
committed all things, and whosoever beeleeued in him should have everlasting
life, and whosoever beeleeued not, upon him remained the wrath of God. Therewith
also he sharply rebuked the vices of men, exhortinge all to repentance,
pronouncinge unto the impenitent and vnbeeleeuinge, the wrath of God and
destruction to hang over them. These are mentioned by ye Evangelists Matthew.
3. chap. John. 1. and. 3. chap. and Luke. 3. chapter.

For this doctrines sake, when as many hated John and his disciples, and
specially the high bishops and priests, who by messengers sent unto him
required an accoumpt of his doctrine, endeuoringe to stop, and hindre him
from that function. Afterward, when he had rebuked Herod called Antipas of
incest, which was sun to Herod surnamed the great, that slew the children (for
the same Antipas had taken away John. 1.
his own brother Philippes wife and his daughter, and kept her openly for his
own wife) when, as I say, he had preached against that wicked deed mutch
blaminge the filthiness of the fact was by the said Herod apprehended, and cast
into prison. Then on a time, John taken.
when Herod had made a solemn feast for his nobles and courtiars: among his
great and many cups being ouerseene and merry with wine, promised large
rewards unto Herodiadas the daughter, a strumpet, because she had daunced in
his presence, where she being instructed by the old harlot her mother,
required the head of John the Baptist. Herod although he knew^ John to be a
godly and holy man, yet sending the executioner: commanded the innocent man
without judgment, his cause being unheard, shamefully, and through tyranicall
lust to be slain in the prison. The daughter presented the Head of John to the
incestuous harlot John beheaded.
her mother, in the feast, and even as she was sitting at the table. Which
cruel deed, what grief and sorrow it brought to John's disciples, and al other
godly men: every faithful man may easily repute with himself. Wherefore this
persecution by Herod committed, not only touched John: but was greenous also
to the rest of the faithful.

Doubltesse su^ch carnal reasons as these are, perplexed the minds of many
Sundry^e opinions of this deed.
that time, why God suffered that man to be afflicted that was so dear unto the
Lord, and greater then whom there was none borne of a woman? Why permitted
he him by incestuous persons so miserablye to be slain in prison, and they
the mean time drowned in riotinge, drounkennes, and dauncinge? why he suffered
that holy head, disdainfully to be touched and abused by the hands of a
filthy harlot? These things are strange in the sight of men, and the fact it
self is horrible, yet no wise man ought to accuse God in permittinge the same,
which does all thing in judgment, and justice yea, if he chance at these
days to see verteous and godly men, miserably slain by the ungodly and
wicked, and rereprochefully used, thus he reasons with himself: if God could
beehold it, that so holy a man, Gods freende, the first minister of the
Gospel, should so dispightfully be murdered in prison, and his head also
reprochfully handled: we ought less to merueyle if now like wise he suffer
the like to beefall to his freences, who are not yet in so great estimation,
and dignity as John was.

But like as John's cause was not therefore unjust, and Herodes just, in that
he prevailed, and oppressed, and slew John: in our age likewise their doctrine
and faith which abide persecution, and are woefully slain for Christ and his
words sake, is not therefore the worse, nether the faith of the persecucions
and murders for that cause the better.

Semblably, as there was none other Causes of Herod's parsecution.
cause that moved Herod to this persecution and grievous slaughter, then that
he would not be rebuked in his wickedness, neither offend his bousinge mates
and incestuous harlot: so, many persecutions are raised by those that will not
be reproved for Idolatry for their sins and wickedness, persecuting the
innocent, that they may please wicked men, which provoke them unto it.

In the same age, after John the baptist, Christ's doctrine.
under Tyberius the Emperor, our lord Jesus Christ beegan to preach the
gospel, and to pronounce remission of sins, and life everlasting through
faith in him, and also beegan sharply to withstand, and speak against the
false doctrine of the Teachers namely of the Pharisees, Scribes, and preistes
severely accusinge their hypocrisy, covetousness, and other crimes, warnings
them also of the wrath of God which hunge over them, and exhortinge moreover
all men to repentance. He declared this doctrine, and divine power, by sundry
wounders and miracles, whereby it is set clear, and undoubted, and as a man
should say showed with hands, that he was the sun of the living God, the
lord that had power over satan, sin, death and hell.

But the high bishops those Teachers or religious men as they call them, which
alonely ruled the roste, and were of greatest authority in the counsel of the
Jews, the priests likewise, and Leuits, acknowledged not Jesus, as indeed he
was, to be the true Messiah: but they maliced him, and laid wait to take away
his life. And at sometimes they called him Samaritane, sometime they said he was
possessed with a devil railinge, and reprochinge his doctrine, which they
could in no wise abide, because it was quighte contrary unto theirs.

For they spoke little or nothing of Pharisaical doctrine.
faith, but of works only, how we were justified by the law or observing
the law, but specially by sacrifice: likewise they taught little of Charity,
but applied all to their avarice making of the lords house a very shop of
Merchandise. For in the temple were sheep and Dxen, and doves to be sold, for
such as offered sacrifice, and for their farther gain they had set up tables
for usury, and exchange. But Christ making a scourge of small cords: drove
them all out of the temple, as well the sheep oxen, and doves as those that
sold them, as also the bankers, and exchangers, and all that sold religion for
money.

Wherefore, for this cause only they Christ's persecution.
daily persecuted Christ, goinge about to stone him or kill him, and he
oftentimes conuaid himself away, flying out of Judea in to Galile, and
sustained patiently sundry afflictions, reproaches, and traueyles. And last of
all, he was beetraid, and sold by one of his own disciples, apprehended, and
brought into the ecclesiastical judgment of the priests, and by Pontius
Pilate, the Roman Lieutenant, condemned to the death of ye cross, for no
other cause, but for that, as indeed he was, he affirmed himself to be the
very sun of the living God, the true Messiah or Christ, the only, and
eternal savior of all the world. But before that he was brought unto the
Lieutenant: ye servants and ministers of the priests shamefully mocked, and
misused him in ye high bishops hal: they blindfolded him, and spet in his face,
buffeted him, reprochfully and disdainfully entreating his divine wisdom
Accusation aginst christ
and majesty. In the morning, when they brought him before the lieutenant they
falsely accused him to be a seductor of the people, a seditious fellow, and
well worthy to be hanged on the Cross.

But Pilate, when he had diligently examined all the matter, understanding the
cause: sundry times pronounced that he was not guilty, and that he could
not condemn him by law, and notwithstanding that he was innocent, yet was he
handled dispightfullye. For he was led unto Herod, and by him contemptuously
abused, flouted of his courtiars and galantes, with all scornful demeanure. He
was compared unto Barrabas, the most notorious thief, His passion
and murderer of that age, whom the Jews preferred before Christ, supposinge
that he was worse then that wicked villayn, whom all the world hated. He
was scurged also, and crowned with a crown of wreathed thorns, and being in
this sort miserably handled and tormented: was brought forth into the sight
of the unthankful people. But for all this, there was no grace nor pardon to
be found, specially among ye preistes, egginge the Lieutenant to condemn the
innocent, and ye he should permit them to lead him to execution, and to
crucify him beetwen two thieves. And when he was in most grievous pains,
and the very panges of death: he was most outragiously entreated with
blasphemous frumps, scorns, and reprocheful vsages. For the priests with many
other mo walking before ye cross vttred forth sundry horrible and grievous
words against him, which are by S. Mathe diligently set down in writing.
Amongst which most grievous temptations and injuries, in the midst of these
sorrows, Christ yielded up the ghost upon the cross.

Whilst Christ suffered these things his disciples were miserably dispersed,
and all the faithful conceived wounderfull and incredible sorrow for the
passion, and death of Christ. Many fearfully doubted, least at that time the
doctrine of the Gospel were wholly extinguished. So that this persecution which
was against christ: both touched and troubled the whole Church, and all the
faithful. And although the enemies of Christ hoped that they had gotten the
conquest, and destroyed the doctrine of the Gospel: notwithstanding, their
victory made not the pharisaicall doctrine one jot the better, nor ye
doctrine of the Gospel: the woorser. For it is no good consequent: the
Pharisees put Christ to death, wherefore, their doctrine is true, and Christ's
false.

The cause which moved the Pharisees, and al other enemies of Christ to
persecute him: surely was none other, then ye they were desierous to retain
their own erroneous doctrine, and oppress the gospel we the followers
thereof, whereby they might with security enjoy their reign, lusts, and
pleasures. And likewise in our age, many of ye Papists do persecute ye faithful
for none other cause

This is a comfort unto us, that in so great afliction, when the disciples were
scattered, and Christ of all men forsaken: yet only John amongst al ye other
discipls durst boldlye approach to the cross of Christ, and join himself
unto Mary the undefiled and perpetual virgin the mother of our Lord, and Mary
Magdelen Cleophas, with other more. Here, by their infirmity the power of God
is declared. Likewise Joseph, and Nicodemus valiently beehaued themselves. Like
as at this day also it falls out, for where as the truth is taught to be so
grievously pressed with persecution, that there seems to be no man that takes
regard or care thereof: then most times by the meanest sort, and not seldom by
noble and great personages, there be new and fortunate fowndations laid,
whereby the truth is wonderfully increased. Wherefore we must not in the
greatest persecutions, cast of our hope and comfort.

Here, before althinges, this is to be observed, that we judge far otherwise
of Christ's death and passion, then of the death and affliction of John and
other saints, who have suffered persecution for God and the truethes sake, and
with their blood borne record to the heavenly truth: but we ought far more
excellently to account of the blood and death of Christ. For as he is the
everlasting sun of God, and life unto all those that beeleue in him: so his
blood, death, and passion are a cleansing sacrifice, and a propitiation for the
sins of the whole world. For by his death we obtain life, and by his
bloodshed we get remission of sins. And unto this opinion all the doctrine
of the Prophets, and Apostles bear witness, specially the epistle of Saint
Paul to the Hebrews. Wherefore our life and forgiveness of sins, is reposed in
ye death and passion of Christ only, and not in the martyrdom, or passion of
any saint.

Since therefore, Christ is the head of his Church, and he suffered so many
things: by his example the church also learneth that it must suffer many
things, as it is abundantlye shown in the writings of the Evangelists and
Apostles.

Of the third Tragical Act or persecution, wherein the Apostles were taken and
scurged Steeuen was stoned, the Church and congregation of Jerusalem banished,
and dispersed. Chapter. iii.
THe third persecution of ye church, began alitle after ye Ascencion of christ
into heaven which is ye feast of Pentecost or Witsontyde, when the Apostles
earnestly preached the Gospel, and had gathered together great and worthy
Congregations unto Christ.

The same is very dillygentlye and copiously described in the Acts of
Apostles Sermons.
the Apostles. The Apostles preached then openly the Gospel of Christ in
Jerusalem, only in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was crucified and
raised from the dead, in whom if they beeleeued, was remission of sins, and
life everlasting, that al men therefore ought to beeleeue in him, be baptized
and join in fellowship of ye church repent and live a godly life, and look
for salvation in none other thing, for that there is none other name under
heaven given to men wherein they may be saved: but the name of Jesus Christ.
These Sermons, the Scribes and Seniours at Jerusalem could not abide, wherefore
they laid hand upon the Apostles, and shut them up in Prison, and brought them
before the counsel, where quarreyling and chidinge with them: they forbid them
to preach this Gospel of Jesus christ. But the Apostles frankly professing
that in this behalf by no means they might obey them, but that God must
rather be obeyed then men: were nevertheless much, and grievously thretned by
the Magistrates and elders.

Upon occasion hereof, the Church being Sorrow, and prayers of ye church.
strock with great heaviness: prayed heartily unto God for continuance in the
Gospel. And when as the Apostles went forward constantly in teaching, and
Christ effectually woorkinge in them confirmed the truth of their doctrine
with great miracles, that a great number of men followed them, so yt the
Church was daily increased by thousands: then the magistrates and officers
setting upon them a fresh, cast the Apostles again into prison, intending to
put them to death. But by the intercession and means of Gamaliel the lawyer
that was Paul's master: they were delivered, but notwithstanding whipped, and
sharply forbidden, that they should not preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Who
departing out of the counsel and Court: praised God that they were found
worthy to suffer reproach for his name.

Shortly after, blessed Steeuen burning Steven stoned.
in the spirit of Christ, and with great zeal disputing in the synagogs
against the skillful in the law, and stoutly defendyng the doctrine of
Christ: was cast into prison and brought to arainement, and falsely accused.
Who although he clered himself with sufficient, wise, and grave reply: yet it
nothing avayled him, for he was condemned to die, and stoned to death.

There followed not long after a very Acts. 8.
vehement and sharp persecution of the christian Church, described by Luke in
the Acts of y^ Apostles, by these words: There ^rose about that time, a great
persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, and they were al
dispearsed through the Regions of Iudeae and Samaria, sauinge the Apostles. For
Saul wasted the Church, entering into every man's house, and haling forth Men
and women, delivered them to prison. Yea, Paul himself concerning this his
persecution against the church, spoke thus in presence of King Agrippa: Acts.
76.
truli I was determined with my self to do many things against the name of
Jesus of Nazareth.

VVherof partly I did somewhat at Jerusalem, and many of the Saints I committed
too Prison, having received authority of the cheef prists, on whom also I gave
judgment when they were executed. I punished the^ also in the Sinagogs,
compelling them to blasphem (that is to deny the Christian faith, which is a
great blasphemy) and raging against them above al measure, I persecuted them
unto strange Cities.

Now, as touching the cause that moved Paul, the Preistes, and people of the
Jews to persecute the Church: was almost none other, but a sinister and
unseasonable zeal and affection which they bare for the law of Moses, and ye
ceremonies, which being lead with error: they meant to retain and preserve, and
could not therefore believe in christ, nor his Gospel. For they supposed that
they should be justified and saved by righteousness of ye law. Contrariwise, the
gospel teaches us y^ we shall not be saved by works of y^ law, but by faith in
Christ. At this stone y^ Jews have stumbled, and fallen, and perished, as S.
Paul witnesses in these words: I protest for them that Romans 10.
they have the zeal of god, but not according to knowledge. For, being
ignorant of the righteousness before god and studeinge to establish their own
righteousness: they were not subject unto the righteousness which is allowed of
god. For Christ is the end of the law unto the justification of all that
believe. Likewise in another place: Israel which Romans 9.
ensued the Law of righteousness attained not to the law of righteousness,
(that is to say was not justified) because they sought it no^ by faith, but by
works of the law. For they have stumbled at the stumbling stone, as it is
written: Behold: I lay a stumblyngstone, and a rock to hurt and make men fall
and who so believes in him shall not be ashamed.

In this our age likewise, and for the Cause of persecutyon at this time
same very cause, they above all other, have most vehemently, and sharply
persecuted the christian church, y^ have bin better men then the residew, and
less given to carnal affection. They hate the Gospel, and persecute the
professors thereof, because they confess and ernestly defend, that we be
justified, and saved by faith only in Christ, and not by any works. Supposing
y^ by this doctrine good works are taken away, and nothing regarded, y^ men
are made careless, and stirred up unto wickedness, which is not to be
suffered in y^ church. But there is a far other understanding in y^ question of
good works, then they either think or utter, nether are they contemned, and
naught set by, although ye glory of Justification which apperteyneth unto
Christ only, be not ascribed unto the^. For unto faith is justification
ascribed, because the same depends on Christ only, y^ Christ only may have
al y^ glory, and he alonly be our salvation and righteousness, as we have in
another place declared more at large.

But before we proceed any farther: let every man, I beeseche ye, weigh
with himself, how great and grievous this persecution was against the first
Church of Christ, and how that they which were not slain, notwithstanding
received great sorrow, through the death, punishment, and torments of their
brethren, that which Luke also has not passed over with silence, wrytinge
after this manner: The holly men carried forth Steven, and made great sorrow
over him. What, and how great sorrow, grief, Acts. 8.
and misery did they feel, who although they were not slain: yet were they
spoiled of all their gooddes, driven into banishment, and brought to extreme
poverty and beggerie?

Heerewithall also, let every man consider, what Church it was that suffered so
grievous persecution, forsooth even the most holly and most perfect Church of
al. For of this Church Luke witnesses, writing: They were all filled with the
holly ghost. And of al Acts. 4.
the multitude y^ believed there was one heart and one soul, and no man called
any thing that he had, his own: but all things were common among Acts. 2.
them nether was there among them enie that lacked. Likewise: They continued
every day with one accord in the temple, praisinge God and giuinge thanks
before all the people. In this Church, Congregation, and fellowship, were the
Apostels of our Lord, and his threscore and ten disciples, Joseph of
Arimathie, Barsabas or Barnabas, Nicodemus, with other worthy men more, but
chiefly the holy and undefiled virgin Marie, mother of the Lord Jesus Christ,
with diverse other virtuous and devout women, whose virtue and renoume is
disciphered in the Evangelical history. In this Church there were no
divisions, no schisms, and the number of them that beeleeued was above five
thousand. To conclude, there was no Church in the Earth more excellent, holy,
perfect, or more acceptable to God.

Howbeit, god which suffered his own We must not ask why God suffers his
church to be persecuted.
sun to be crucified, suffered also this holy Church to fall into such
afflictions, and so general a persecution, as we have declared before. And who
is now so wicked and curious, ye in respect of this persecution, dare step
forth and dispute against God, and question with him: wherefore he suffered his
dearly beloved friends to be so grievously afflicted which had deserved much
better, and so many good and godly persons among whom christ's mother was one,
whose most pure heart the sharp sword of sorrow and heaviness had perced through?
why likewise god gave unto ye faithless Jews and hipocrites, so great power
over godly, and just men? why raught he not his helping hand to his Church, to
help it, causing ye neither Steeuen should be stoned, neither the Church
being spoiled of their goods be made poor, or banished, nether they which
lived in such concord together, with great sorrow, so miserably be plucked a
sundre, and scatred abroad? It pleased God it should be so, who is ye eternal
wisdom, and does no unjust thing. And that which pleased God: pleased also the
holly Church, which nether murmoured, neither disputed against the lord, but
received persecution willingly, and by the grace of God endured it patiently,
knowing and believing, that God, who was omnipotent and merciful, would so
moderate the persecution that it should tend to the commodity of the Church,
as it also came to pas. In the same mind it beehoueth all the faithful to be
in all manner persecutions, and patiently to submit themselves to the pleasure
of God.

Mutchlesse heerby may the reasoning of sum men take place, who gather out of
persecutions, that if the doctrine were true, and faith right: God would aid
them, and not deliver the^ over into their power, y^ are altogether out of y^
way concerning doctrine and beeleefe. For in the persecution of the primitive
church, these men, as apperteinyng to y^ body: had the victory, whose faith
was false, and they y^ were soundly persuaded suffered persecution, were driven
away, and slain, which slaughter and calamity notwithstanding, did nothing in
damage the true faith. And in our age also the case stands none otherwise,
neither for the persecutions which the Church induereth, the faith and
doctrine thereof is less to be regarded, or worse therefore to be judged. The
true faith and doctrine, d^pend upon no victory, but only upon God, and his
word.

Of the fourth Tragical Act or persecution, in which Saint James the Apostle
was slain, and Peter cast into Prison. Chapter. iiii.
ABout the year of Christ. 45. Herod surnamed Agrippa, sun to Herod the
great, and brother to Antipas moved ye fourth persecution against the James
Apostle slain.
Church, whereof Luke speaks in the Acts the. 12. Chapter. There he
declares how Herod had decreed to molest certain of the Church, and that he
had already slain with the sword James the brother of John the Evangelist, (who
also was one of the three whom the lord used most familiatly, and to whom he
opened his secrets) and not content with this cruel deed, proceeded farther,
and call Peter into prison to the intent to put him also to death.

And because these twain were the cheifest among the Apostles: the whole
Church was strooken in great sorrow and heaviness for this persecution, and
specially John, who was mutch grieved for his brothers death. The Church feared
also, least they should lease their faithful pastor Peter, as they had done
James, wherefore Luke writes, that daily they powered forth prayers unto God
for Peter, which prayers were not without effect. For the Angel of the lord
came into the prison to Peter, and delivered him out of y^ soldiers hold,
losed his theines and bands, opened the iron gate, and set him at liberty in
the open street, from whence by^ and by he departed out of Jerusalem.

This great affliction the Church endured patiently, neither murmured against
Christ, expostulatyng with him why he gave unto Herod that wicked verlet, such
power against his dearly-beloued ones? why he suffered his whole Church, and
specially John his best beloved of all the Disciples, to be touched with such
heauenesse? why he delivered not James, as he did Peter? they knew that God did
nothing rashly nor without cause, but every thing well and rightly. Wherefore,
the faithful in persecutions must likewise be semblably persuaded. For if ever
men had need to make their complaynt to God: then had they need, nevertheless
there were heard no complaynts, no murmurings, but earneste and humble prayers.
Wherefore in adversity, let the faithful fly unto God in prayer, requiring his
grace y^ he would govern al thing to y^ glory of his name and unto our
salvation, and whatsoever he does that we submit our selves willingly to his
holy will and pleasure.

Moreover, no man in the Primitive Church called the doctrine of y^ Apostles
into question, because James was slain with the sword, and Peter cast into
prison. For none of them said thus: if the apostles doctrine were true and
just: God would not have suffered them to have bin oppressed of y^ kings, which
erred in the faith, leadyng also a filthy, and wicked life. Therefore at this
day likewise, the doctrine of the Gospel is not to be doubted of, for that the
teachers and followers thereof, are by the Lord delivered over into the enemies
hands of the Gospel, and miserably and cruelly by them entreated: for the
truth notwithstanding is everlasting and invincible. Paul in the same cause
writes, that he was afflicted for ye gospel even unto hands, but y^ word of
god was not bound.

The cause that stirred Herod to persecute ye church, was his own perverse 2.
Tim. 2.
mind, which lothed christ, and his word. Moreover, the Jews greedely
thirsted the Apostles blood, wherefore Herod to currie favor with them: shed y^
blood of the Apostles. This Luke witnesses in these words: And when he saw
this (namely when he had slain James with y^ sword) to be acceptable to the
Jews he proceeded also to apprehende Peter, meaning after Easter to bring
him forth to the people. Like as in our age, many princes do persecute the
faithful for none other cause, but that with their cruel butcherous Tragedies
they might gratefie those Fathers of Rome and their adherentes, who also
unsatiably do thirst all their blood which cleave only to Christ and his
Gospel, and set naught by, and abhor their superstition, and Idolatrye.

Of the. 5. tragical act or persecution, wherein Paul and the Christian
Church sufferd many things, and the Apostles ended their lives full of
afflictions, by sheadyng their blood. Chapter. v.
THe fifte persecution against Paul yt Apostle continued many years, ye
Church also which believed the Gospel partly for Paul with whom they suffered,
and partly for the Gospel of Christ abode sundry troubles and afflictions, and
by that means was partaker of this persecution.

For when Paul had begun to preach Acts. 9. 2. Cor. 12.
the Gospel at Damascus, about the year after Christ. xxxiii. and iourneynge
through Arabya was returned to Damascus, and there disputed earnestly against
the Jews: Aretas the King layyng watch at the City gates, sought him to
kill him, when the faithful not being able otherwise to save him, let down
Paul by a Rope through the wall in a basket, and so with great care and
dillygence they kept him alive.

At Antioch also in Pisidia, Paul gathered Acts. 13.
together a great congregation unto Christ of Gentiles and Jews, but the Jews
which would not embrace Christ stirryng up a persecucion against Paul and
Barnabas, drove them out of that City, and Region.

In Iconium also, the Jews again Acts. 14.
mo^ued a tumult against Paul, wherhe with his companion Barnabas were in
forced to provide for themselves by flight. Also in Listra the same Jews
brought Paul so far into hatred, y^ being stoned and drawn forth of y^ town as
dead: yet christ raised him again to do him service At Phillippos in Macedonia
Paul and his fellow Silas, were taken, scourged with rods, and cast into a very
straight prison, out of which notwithstanding Christ delivered him, that he
might yet preach the Gospel, to more nations.

Moreover at Thessalonica there was Acts. 17.
agreeuous persecution moved against Paul, where he was constrained through
help of the faithful, to escape away by night. The like he suffered at
Berroea. At Athens, the Philosophers and wise men of this world, reprochfully
termed him a trifler, rayled at him, and mocked Acts. 18.
him, as the like was done to the lord himself. Likewise in the famous city of
Greece called Corinthe, he was apprended and brought to the lieutena^tes seat
of judgment and sharply accused, but then also the Lord delivered him out of
the power of his enemies.

But what grievous things Paul Acts. 19. 1. Cor. 1.
suffered in Asia at Ephesus, are by himself recited in these words: I would
not have you ignorant, brethern, of the trouble and affliction which happened
unto us in Asia, how we were wonderfully grieved above our power, that we were
in despair even of life. But we received a decree within our selves touching
death, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the
dead. In Luke also in y^ Act. of the Apostles there is set forth a notable
description of the tumult which was at Ephesus. Upon occasion of which tumult
there the faithful remained in great sorrow, heaviness, and danger, also by
reason of the continual wait layyng and persecutions, wherewith the
unfaithful both Jews and Gentiles persecuted them. After so many dangers,
Acts. (...)
afflictions, and most grievous traueles, when Paul was arrived at Jerusalem
bringing with him a great, and rich treasure, which he had gathered as a
donatiue for y^ poverty of y^ city, and relm^: there again y^ Jews raised a
most woeful sedition, and apprehending Paul scourged him biterly where he had
bin vtterli destroyed, unless the Tribune coming in all speed with his soldiers
had taken him out of their hands. This being done: he was by the tribune
brought into the Ecclesiastical Act. 23.
court, where he was also scourged, and unworthily entreated. Afterward,
because of the great treason of the Jews being guarded with a sufficient power
of horsemen, and footmen he was sent from Jerusalem to Caesarea, unto Foelix
the lieutenaunt, Before whom when he came: the chief of the Jews accused him,
layinge many things to his charge, wherein al though he could not be fownd
guilty: notwithstanding he was committed to indurance, where he remained the
space of two whole years. Act. 25.


Moreover, he was euelly dealt with Act. 2 7.
all by Festus also the new lieutenaunt who succeeded Foelix, and after ward
with other prisoners delivered over unto the Centurians and soldiers,
embarked, and with a long and dangerous journey brought to Rome.

But Nero then reigninge at Rome Act. 28.
he remained again prisoner there two years. Some are of opinion that at this
time he was slain with the sword by Nero, others think that he was acquitted
in judgment by Nero: as he himself witnesses in the ij. to Timoth. the.iiii.
chapter, and beeinge so set at liberty, that he departed directly intoo
Spain, as before he had declared in the Epistle to the Romans, that he was
desierous to take in hand that journey. Romans 15.
And traueylinge through Spain, and France, they say how he came the second
time to Rome, in the later years of the reign of Nero, and there was slain
with the sword at Neroes commandment. But this we leave as uncertain:
howbeit this is evident, wherein all do agree, that the most holly Apostle
Paul was put to death at Rome, under Nero.

The traueiles, afflictions, and sundry calamities which for none offense
Paul's affliccions.
he sustained, but for Christ his word, and the Church, the Apostle himself
imputynge them to his enemies, and false Apostles: recites in a breeif
catalogue in these words: Are they the ministers of Christ? I speak like a
fool, I am more, in labors more abu^dant, 2. Cor. 11.
in wounds surpassynge them, in prison more commonly, in death Deuteronomy. 25.
often. Of the Jews I received five times forty stripes sauynge-one, I was
thrice scourged with rods, and once stoned, thrice I suffered shipwrak night
and day have I been on the deep sea. In iourneinge often, in danger of
waters, in danger of thieves, indaunger of mine own countriemen in danger of
the heathen, in danger in the City, in danger in the wilderness, in danger
in the sea, in danger among false brethren. In weerines and traueyle, in
watchinge often, in hunger and thirst, in fasting often, in cold and
nakedness. Beeside those things which happen outwardly unto me, for the heap
of them daily rises against me, which is to say, the care for all Churches of
Christ.

Now therefore, by so many afflictions which Paul sustained, and by the victory
and good success of his enemies, can it be gathered that Paul's doctrine was
erroneous, or else God would have defended him, nether have suffered him to have
bin over whelmed with so many calamities, and reproaches? Shall we there fore;
dispute against god, whi he suffers wicked me^ somutch to prevail against the
faithful, and his holy ministers? or why he permits the sacred Church of
Christ to suffer so mutch in it self, and in the faithful pastor thereof
Paul? The godly men suffered all these things patiently and overcame them, and
continued always constant under y^ cross.

The cause why the Jews were enemies to Paul, and to y^ church: surely was
none other then y^, wherewith being before moved, they persecuted Christ, and
y^ apostles, as we have declared before.

Moreover, hystories bear record, that the twelve Apostles in all their life
All the apostles after afflictions were put to death.
time, and during the term of their administration in the gospel: sustained
grievous afflictions, and were all of them for Christ and his words sake,
persecuted, and put to death.

Although all writers do not agree of their kinds of death, yet they al
co^stanly affirm, y^ they were miserably slain. Peter and his brother Andrew,
were both crucified. James the elder, as we have shown before, was beeheaded
by Peter and Andrew.
Herod surnamed Agrippa. Whose brother John the Evangelist the beeloued James
the elder.
disciple of Christ, only of them al is John Euan.
reported to have died a natural death. Notwithstanding he was apprehended
and brought bound out of Asia to Rome, and conuented before Domitia^
the emperor, and there, as Tertullian writes, plunged over head and ears in
hot boylinge oil. But after that, the lord graciously providing for him, this
cruel deed nothing indamaged his life: he was banished into y^ Isle Pathmos.
Phillip was nailed to a cross, and there hanging: was stoned to death.
Barthelmew, they say, was by his enemies Phillippe.
most horribly flayne, and afterward beeheaded. Othersome say he was Bartelmew.
burnt. The enemies of Christ, thrust Thomas through with a sword, and so, as
it is reported, they dealt with Matthew. James the younger, the pastor and
Thomas.
doctor of the church of Jerusalem, was thrown down headlonge from an Matthew.
James the less.
high place, and afterward slain being buffeted with stones until he died.
Likewise both Apostles, Simon Simon, and Jude.
and Judas Thaddaeus ended their lives, being by the heathen slain in a certain
temple of Idols. Some also say that Mathias was crucified, others say Mathias.
he was stoned, and beeheaded. Al these bare witness of Christ, not with their
mouth and doctrine only, but with there blood also, and for the truth of the
gospel which they preached, were contented to die with well willing, and most
valient courage.

Now, for as mutch as all the Apostles were slain by the enemies of God Note.
who obtained the souerainitye over them as apperteyninge to the body: shall
we therefore say that superstitions of Gods enemies were right, and the
Apostles religion and doctrine false and erroneous? who shall accuse God,
because he delivered not his servants from a reproachful death but that he
gave to the worst men in the whole world, such power against his holly
Apostles? Who although they were ministers of the truth, and innocent men: yet
were they put to death for the greatest enemies of God, as malifactours and
wicked persons, for such were they accused to be: and therefore, at this our
age, in the like cause, we must judge so of their belief and doctrine, who ar
shamefully executed for christ's sake, as indeed the truth stands in the
sight of Christ.

Of the. 6. Tragical Act or persecution, which was under Nero, and of the
seventh which was under Domitian, and of the eight under Vlpius Traian,
Emperors. Chapter VI.
PAulus Orosius an old historician, who lived in the time of Austine, and
wrote unto him seuene books of Stories, begins the recital of the
persecutyon of the Christian Church, from the persecution which Nero had
moved, which he accounts the first whose order the later Historicians also
insued. And we likewise, in describing the Tragedies and persecutions committed
against the Church: will follow the same order, as consequently they follow one
another. But since it is manifest, y^ the five above recited persecutions, were
before these, as the scriptures do show, that which Orosius makes the first,
we make the sixth: although the matter be of no great importance in this respect.

Orosius writes, that Nero first (that is to say among the Roman Emperors)
Nero persecuteth the Christians
gave forth commandment, that at Rome, and in all other provinces belonging to
the Roman Empire, the Christians should be molested, and slain. And y^ this
was his determination to root out the Christian faith and all Christians
wheresoever they were.

The causes that moved Nero to persecute y^ Christians are not so dilygentlye
set down by christian historicians, as they are by profane writers, Suetonius
Tranquillus in the life of Nero and Cornelius Tacitus in the. 15. book of the
lives of the Emperors. Nero y^ emperor was y^ sink of al beastly
sinfulness, fullness, chiefly of lechery, and unspeakable incest, defilyng
himself against al course of nature, so y^ in all Histories of you shall not
find his match. This horrible wickedness he openly committed at Rome without
al shame, in sight of y^ Senate, and people. But there was no man that durst
speak against him, mutch less to reprove him, or assay to punish him, but
every man winked at him, the most filthy beast in the mean time doing what he
list.

Wherefore, God being offended with the city of Rome: punished it with fire,
Rome punished with fire as Sodom was.
as he did Sodom and Gomorrha even by Nero himself, when as for his
Sodomitical beastliness, he deserved to be burned himself. And seeing Rome
winked at his naughtiness, and did not y^ which it ought to have done: the
horrible Sodomite Nero, caused the city to be set on fire. For being certain
places in the city wherewith Nero mislyked, and the streates and passadges
there very narrow: he caused the houses to be set on fire, that after they
were brent, they might be builded again more fair, and sumptious. He himself
beheld the fire out of Mecoenas tower, saying: that he much desired to se the
burning of Troy which he beheld now some what resembled by that burning of the
city, singing therwhiles the destruction of Troy, and delighting himself with
beholding the great fire. Suetonius reports, that from that time that Rome
was first built, it never sustained so much hurt by fire: for it continued
always burnning the space of six days and so many nights. The same is also
diligently described by Tacitus.

But when the fire through the wrath of God had brent farther then Nero had
Nero imputes the fire to Christians.
thought it should, and indamaged the City with an vnrepayrable loss and
hinderaunce, the citizens which had sustained so great harm, were very much
moved, and ^ffended. Wherefore the Emperor Nero, to the intent that he might
put over from himself the (...) of the deed, raised a rumor among the
commons, that this whole mischief was long of the Christians, that they were
adversaries to the Gods and Religon of the Romans, and wicked burners of cities
and towns, who also in that sort had defaced the city. And that this report
might seem to carry some truth and authority: he cast many Christians into
prison, and examined them by tortures and torments, that they should confess
how the city was set on fire by them. And in deed there were some fownd, who
not being able to abide torments, but rather wisshing to die: falsely accused
themselves and other Christians, confessinge that they had set the city on
fire.

Wherefore immediately, there was a proclamation published by the emperor
against christians, in which it was commanded, that in Rome and al provinces
they should be rooted out, as enemies to the gods and religion of the Romans,
and men practiced in burning and setting on fire. And this was the beginning of
y^ persecution, and blouddy tragedy. For some in reproach, and for a mockyng
stock, were sowed into the skins of wild beasts, as Tacitus writes and cast
unto dogs to be torn. Other were brent, some ^a^^^ed and crucified, and so
destroyed with sundry and most cruel punishments, inso mutch that (as Tacitus
writes) the common people of Rome were moved with great pity toward them.
But with Nero there was no mercy, no end of torments. In this persecution were
slain, as historicians do testify, and we also have declared before: the
Apostles Peter and Paul. There be also numbered by Chroniclers many notable and
godly men, which in this persecution suffered grievous affliction, reproaches,
and punishment of bitter death not at Rome only, but here and there in other
provinces of the Roman empire.

Since therefore, this persecution was We must not dispute with God.
first moved by Nero for a filthy and horrible cause, who shall accuse God for
granting such power to a wicked, and Sodomiticall person, against so many
thousands of holy and innocent men, yea friends of God? or why he suffered the
christians to be brent for house burners and did not rather hale forth Nero
the true house burner and beastly Sodomit castinge him into the thickest of the
people to be torn in pieces? when therefore, in our age, the like do happen:
let all men humbly submit themselves to the power of God and his mighty hand,
bear their cross with patience which the Lord lays upon them, give laud and
praise unto God, and constantlye cleave to his holy word, which at Neroes
time was also true and just, although it was behouefull that the faithful
should suffer afflictions, and Nero overcome them, and have power over them,
with his profane, and superstitious Relygion.

After this, about the year of our Lord 97. with intolerable and devilish
pride Diuelyshe pride.
Domitian the Emperor set forth him self, sun to Vespasian, brother to
Titus, by whom the City of Jerusalem was destroyed, the Jews vanquished in
battle, and opressed. The same was not ashamed to boast himself to be God and
Lord, and would so be called and worshipped of al me^, and y^ which no Emperor
Note.
required before him, he commanded y^ they should kiss his feet, wherein no
Emperor followinge him did the like, except Dioclecian only, a cruel Tyrant,
and a murderer of holy men.

This Dominitia set a broch the.vii. persecutions against Christians, in the
which many holy men were driven into banishment, many flayne or spoiled of
their goods, and troubled most bitterlye. John the Evangelist
Amongst whom John the Apostle and Evangelist was brought prisoner from Ephesus
to Rome unto the Emperor, and there tormented. Flauia also, and Domicilla of
greatest nobility in the city, with diverse other mo, were by Domitian sent
into banishment. But John afterward returned unto Ephesus, and there died in
the year of our Lord. 102. after the passion of Christ, 68. and the third
year of the reygne of Traiane the Emperor.

After this, about the year of our lord. 110. Vlpius Traiane, a mighty and
victorious Emperor, was the cause and author of the eight persecution against
the Christians, in Rome, and in other places under the Roman Empire. Which
thing chiefly provoked him, and other Emperors that came after him to
persecute the Christians, because they thought good that there should be no
Schism suffered in the empire, specially in religion, but that there should be
one only religion received, which their forefathers had observed before time.
Now that disagreement in religion nourishes co^tentions and hatred a thing not
to be suffered in any empire Moreover, y^ they feared grievous calamities, and
punishments, if their gods were not woorshipped after their accustomed manner,
and therefore the Christians, because they hated their temples aulters,
sacrifices, images, and hollydayes, blamyng and disdaynynge the religion of the
Romans: were in no wise to be suffered. Wherefore, if any calamities should
chance to rise in y^ Roman Read Cyp. against Demetri.
empire, as are troubles, dearth of corn, famine, war, seditions,
pestilence, diseases, with other discommodities: by and by y^ Romans burdened
the Christians with y^ cause of all these anoyances, for contemnyng their gods
and religion, and doing contrary unto the same. That they woorshipped one God,
acknowledgyng Christ alone the sun of God to be the only savior, openly
pronouncyng, that the Roman religion was false and of the devil, that their
faith in Christ was true and right, nether that God ought to be worshipped
with images and temples, sacrifices and hollydayes, but in spirit and truth,
according to his word.

As for the Romans, and other nations abroad in the world, they were
altogether addicted to superstitions, valiently sheadyng their blood, leesing
their goods, and lives, in defense of their religion, exhortyng other firmly
to retain y^ same. For they boasted how they received y^ religion of their
elders, which were no fools but excellent wisemen: Moreover that there were
many learned men in their collegies of priests, and that their belief was
confirmed with many notable wounders and miracles, y^ whilst they observed that
religion they obtained sundry great victories, and y^ whole empire of all the
world, attributyng al their good success and salftie, to their religion,
which had remained many thousand years, not being so new and but thyrtie
years old as was the christian religion. That their Gods were friendly and
liberal unto them: helpyng them in such sort, that they wanted nothing, on
the otherside the christians were poor and unfortunate: wherefore they should
do amiss if they erred the breadth of one hear, or spared the sacrilegious
enemies of their ancient and victorious religion. Wherefore, these causes which
we have now recited, provoked the Roman Emperors to persecute the
Christians. The causes of the persecutions likewise in our age are not mutche
unlike whosoever Traians persecution.
weyeth them both uprightly.

Wherefore, in this persecution moved by Traiane there was an unspeakable deal
of Christian blood shed* At Jerusalem Simeon Bishop of the city, being an
hundred and twenty years old, was crucified. S. Ignatius also the servant of
Christ, and Disciple of the Apostles, was brought from Antioche where he was
Bishop unto Rome, cast unto wild beasts, and by them torn in pieces. Their
Tragedies were so cruel, their slaughters so great, the sheadinge of Christian
blood so horrible: that Pliny the second, a wise gentleman, and lieutenant to
the emperor, wrate unto the emperor, giuinge unto the Christians, a singular
testimony of their innocence. This epistle is to be seen in the (...) book
of Plinies epistles. By which means the state of Christians was some deal the
more at quiet.

Yet in respect of this persecution which was great, and lasted long time God
is just and the faith true.
wherein were destroyed many thousand Christians, y^ Christian religion ought
not be judged false or worse to be esteemed of, or that the gentile and
profane religion of the Romans is righteous and sownd. For throughout the
whole world, and in all ages the Christian religion is only true, righteous,
and constant: nether has God done amiss, in giuinge the Ethnickes so great
power against the faithful. For by means thereof, the Christian faith is
nothing diminished, nether by punishment, nether by sheadinge of blood: but it
is rather increased in all parts of the world, wherefore it is not without
cause among our forefathers grown into a proverb: the field of Christ is
dungged and made fruitful with Christians innocent blood. Wherefore let us al
likewise now be of good hope in midste of persecutions, and sheadinge of
miserable, innocent, Christian blood.

Of the. 9. Tragical act or persecution, which was under Antoninus Verus, with
his brother Lucius, and what worthy men exhibited Apologies of the christian
faith unto the Emperors. Chapter, vii.
THe year of Christ, 170. and. 178. the Roman Emperors, Marcus Antoninus
Verus, and his brother Lucius for none other causes then we have above recited:
sharply persecuted al christians, that generallye were under the Roman Empire.
This persecution Historicians call the fourth, but I term it the ninth. The
exact description and at large thereof, whosoever desires to beehold: let him
read the fourth, and fifth books of Eusebius ecclesiastical history. In this
persecution were slain, not only many of the Christian Church but also the
most famous and renowned doctoure of that age, who in teaching and writing,
set frooth the christian relygion, enlarged it, and defended it commendinge
their doctryn with their most holly life, and bearinge wytnes thereto with their
own blood. Among whom was Polycarpus, Discyple to the apostles, an extreme
old father, and minister of the congregatyon at Smyrna, whom they call the
doctor of Polycarp.
Asia, and father of the Christians: also the holy and paynfull Minister of
christ, Pionius: both these with many monotable christians, were burnt Likewise
Pionius.
y^ most learned and faithful mynysters of Christ: Iustinius a philosopher, and
Iraeneus Bishop of Lions in Justinius. Iraeneus.
France, whose books in defense of the christyan faith, against all kinds of
errors and heresies: are yet extant: were slain with the sword.

But chifly at Lions and Vienna in France nigh the river Rhodanus: was very
mutch cruelty and extremity shown. This persecution is described by the
ministers of Christ dwelling at Vienna and Lions, in an epistle unto y^
brethren of the congregations of Asia and Phrygia, let him read that list
hereof, Phoianus
the four first chapters of the first book of Eusebius ecclesiastical
history: there among other things, they declare how Photinus bishop of Lions,
a worthy man, learned, and holly, and above four score and ten years old,
and therefore feeble of body, but valiant of mind and without all fear, was
brought to the place of judgment: of whom when there was required an accoumpt
of his faith, with a wounderfull courage he professed Christ and the
Christian faith: wherefore he was by the rash and furious people stricken,
buffeted, spurned, and without al regard of age or calling, reprochefully
abused, so y^ he was drawn back again to the prison for dead, where not
long after he yielded up the ghost.

In the same place, are singularly described y^ cruel torments, wherewith the
holy men were long time tormented, as Maturus. Sanctus. Blandina.
Maturus, Sanctus, and Blandina, a woman of singular courage and constancy in
the true faith, with Attalus borne of a noble race, in faith more noble. All
these Atalus
were slain with most cruel and continual torments, because they would not
yield one jot from the truth.

They write moreover, how that the common rascal multitude in this persecution
was so sauedge, cruelly pricked forth with anger and rage: y^ they left
nothing undone that appertayned to the most cruel and ignominious vsedge of
them. For they would not permit the bodies of such as were slain in prison,
to be honestly buried, but cast them to dogs, who if they left any thing,
that they burned and threw the ashes into Rhodanus: these turmentours in the
mean time criyng alowd, as it is reported, behold, the Gods have revenged
themselves on the enemies of the Ethnicke religion, where is now their god?
what manner of faith and religion is this, that spoyleth them thus of their
lives? Thus they reioiced, and triumphed Triumphyng of the people.
like conquerours y^ had defended and confirmed their own religion: and on
the other part, the Christians remained in great sorrow, heaviness, and danger.
Whosoever desiereth to understand more of this matter, let him read it in Eusebius
in the epistle above recited.

Moreover, there is set down by Hermannus Contractus, in his chronicles, an
whole catalogue of principal blessed martirs y^ suffered in this persecution.
Wherefore, y^ which I have often said, I say again: is there any man so simple
and deuoyd of judgment y^ dares to say that the doctrine and religion of the
holy Martyrs and witnesses of Christ was false, because God delivered them
over into y^ hands of their enemies, gentiles, and unfaithful? either y^ their
doctrine and religion was true and righteous, because as apperteyninge to the
body they vanquished, slew, and oppressed the faithful? And who is so
presumptious that he will dispute with God, why he suffers his dearly beloved
Church to be cast down, and ^roden under foot, with so many afflictions, and
calamities?

But in this age, and the next following God through his grace, raised even
among y^ gentiles, worthy and renowned men, learned, holy, and well disposed,
who offered unto y^ Roman emperors, to the Senate, and lieutenants: books
written with divine instinct, perspicuous, and wise wherein they declared the
innocence of Christians, confessing the faith of christ praising, and
defendyng it, shewinge also, how falsely y^ christians were charged with notorious
crimes y^ were laid against the^. This kind of writing they term Apologies.
In which apologies, they vttred such constancy, and valientnesse of mind: y^
they durst also to discipher, and disprove, the error and vanity of y^
Ethnic religion. I mind to set down in this place, a catalogue and rehearsal
of al such as wrote Apologies, and I will note also the time of doing of al
those things out of Eusebius, y^ al men may perceive how courageously the
Christian religion set forth herself openly, and without all fear, in midst
of persecutions, glisteryng therein as it were the sun, howbeeit there whiles
the unfaithful persecuted the same as heresy and deceit, and washing the
Christians in their own blood.

In the year of Christ 119. Quadratus a grave and holy man, preferred an
Apologye Quadratus
or defense of the Christians unto the Emperor Adrian. After sereous Granius.
whom, the year of our Lord. 122. Seremus Granius, one of the nobillytie of
Rome, wrote also and Apology to the same Emperor. Likewise Aristides a famous
man, made means unto Adrian Aristides.
in the same manner. Al whose writtings prevailed so much with the Emperor:
that he directed his letters unto Minutius Fundanus lieuetenant of Asia, In the
eccles. Hist. book. 4. cha. 9.
commaundynge him, that thence forward he should receive no accusations
against Christians for their relygion, unless they were accused of other
crimes, and offenses.

Afterward, in the year of our Lord 141. Justinius.
Justinius a Philosopher, a man not only most renowned at Rome, but also in
other places: preferred an Apollogy for the christians, unto Antoninus Pius y^
Emperor. Which self same request almost, Asianus Appolinaris, bishop of
Asianus. Appolinaris.
Hierapolis, and Milciades who also exhibited their own Apologies unto
Antoninus. But the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Pius, in his letters sent
to the Lieutenantes of Asia, commanded them that they should in nowise molest
the Christians. The copy of this Epistle is to be found in the. 4. Milciades.
book, and. 13. Chapter of the ecclesiastical History. Besides all this,
Athenagoras a Philosopher of Athens, wrote Athenagorar.
an Apology and defense of the Christians, unto Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, and
unto Lucius Aurclus Commodus, which defense is yet extant, both in Greek and
Latin.

At Rome also Appollonius a Senator, Apollonius.
a noble gentilman and wise, being accused of the Christian religion: wrote a
worthy book of our Religion, and of the innocence of the Christians, and read
it in Rome in the Senate. Notwithstanding he was condemned to dye, the year of
our Lord. 188.

Last of all Tertulian, about the yer^e Tertulian.
of our Lord. 209. wrote a singular book in behalf of the Christians, wherein
he declares their innocence, and the folly of the Ethnic religion, and
contrariwise the truth and excellency, of the Christian faith. This book is
yet remaininge in our days.

By these and like reasons it appears, that our true, ancient, and undoubted
Christian faith, although y^ world contemn it, rail at it, and persecute it:
nevertheless is the only true, and autenticke faith.

Of the. 10. Tragical Act or persecution, under Seuerus, and of the. 11.
under Julius Maximinus, of the. 12. under Traiane Decius, of the 13. under
Valerianus, and of the 14. under Aurelianus the Emp. Chapter. viii.
ABout the year of our Lord Jesus Christ. 204. Septimius Seuerus the
Emperor, a prince of a firce disposition, began sharply to persecute the
Christian church. And in sundry places in all provinces of the Roman empire
many worthy men of the faithful, were tormented and slain, among all whom,
as chief, is numbered Leonidas, father of the most renowned doctor Origin.
Whose goods after his death were all confiscate, his wife and children among
whom was Origin, brought to extreme beggerie. At Carthage, Perpetua, and
Faelicitas were cast unto wild beasts and by them torn in pieces. And many
such like accidents chanced in other places.

After this, Julius Maximinus persecuted y^ Church of Christ. The same
commanded y^ specially the doctors and bisshoppes of y^ Christians should
Note.
be sought out, y^ those with their sermons and preachings seduced the simple
people, and moved tumults in the empire: and therefore y^ they ought to be put
to death y^ peace and quie^nes might be restored in y^ empire, and y^ subjects
quight discharged from y^ troublesome doctrine. There were slain in this
persecution very many ministers of the congregations, among who^, as chief ar
numbered most worthy me^ Pa^philus and Maximus Origin also at the same time to
the farther comfort of the Church, wroate a Origin,
book of martyrdom, where he shows that true Christians ought openly to
profess with their mouth, and express in their deeds, the faith which they
have received, and if occasion also shall serve: to bear witness thereof with
their own blood. At the same time sprange up the froward heresy of the
Helchesaites heresy.
Helchesaites, who taught that it was sufficient to retain the true faith in a
man's heart and that it skilled not if a man were in enie danger, to denay the
same with his mouth: Although this doctrine does openly repugne against the
doctrine of the Gospel and Apostles, as is to be seen the.x. of Matthew,
and.x. to the Romans This persecution conteinued three* whole year, duringe
which time there was mutch precious, and innocent blood shed.

Afterward, the year of Christ 252. or according to the supputation of other
254. Traianus Decius the emperor persecuted the Church yet far more cruelly,
sending a broad through out all the empire most vehement, and bloody edictes.
And this is the twelueth persecution of the Christian Church, which distroyed
many excellent and worthy men. For there were ^layn in this persecution
Sixtus bishop of the Congregation at Rome, who was beheaded, and Laurence his
deacon broyled upon a gridiron as Prude^tious writes by whom also is described
ye martirdom of blessed Hyppolitus, who was torn in sunder by wild horses.
Babilas also bishop of Antioche was then slain, a very famous man, and a noble
minister of Christ. This Babilas, desiered Babilas
that the chain wherewith he was lead unto execution, might be buried with him
for an ornament, and delight unto him Serapion being first hacked with
seradion.
many wounds and stabbed through, at the last was cast down headlonge from
the top of his own house. Macharius, Alexander and Epimachus: were burnt.
Many virgins most singularly with virtues adorned were most miserably
tormented and at length cruely slain, as Appollonia, Eugenia, Victoria,
Theodora, Anatholia, Ruffina and many more. There is extant in Eusebius in the
sixte book of his ecclesiastical history, the 13. chapter, the Epistle of
Dionisius Bishop of Alexandria written unto Fabianus of Antioche, wherein he
recites the blessed Martirs which suffered martyrdom in Alexandria under
Decius. Likewise in Hermannus Contractus in his cronicles, is to be found a
long Catalogue of Martirs that in diverse places of the Roman Empire, suffered
under Decius. In fine in this twelfe persecution under Decius, it is not able
welnigh to be recited what plenty of precious and holy blood of innocent
Christians was shed, and many notable men besides made away.

This cruel persecution was scarce fully finished: when immediately y^. 13.
began about y^ year of Christ. 260. at commandment of the Emperor
Valerianus. In which persecution were beheaded two of the chief doctors of
the Christian church, in Italye, Cornelius bishop of Rome, and in Africa,
Cyprian bishop of Carthage. There be also many more numbered in the cronicles,
that at the same time received the crown of martirdom. At which time, the
most cruel punishment of flawing was commonly used against christians, to
prove if by that means they would be reduced from the christian to y^ Ethnic
belief: but it was in vain.

I cannot in this place pass over, but Martirs provoked with pleasure to
revolt.
I must make some breef rehearsal of such things as are written of these
persecutions under Detius, and Valerius, by Saint Jerome in the life of Paul
the first Eremite, who reports that the persecutors studied not only to
defile the innocence of the christians through dread, and practice of such
punishments and torturs as y^ like had not bin heard before: but also by
provocation of lust and pleasure. For when they could not overthrow them with
torments, they tempted them with pleasures, to cause them to fall, offering unto
them bewtifull women y^ should allure them to lechery: In which place he
shows of a certain martyr that bit of his tongue between his teth, and spet it
in his fine miks face, y^ he might be so delivered from her. At the same time
Paul the Eremit fled into the wilderness and lived a solitary life in a
certain den, unto whom before he died came Saynct Antonie. And these twain
were the first beeginners of Eremites life, that is to say, of those that lead
there lives in wild and desert places, as though it were out of the world, a
life full of hardness and shapnes, laboringe with their hands, and vsinge great
abstinencie. Saint Jerome writes that Antony died the year of Christ. 661.
and in the.xv. year of his own age. And out of this fountain in process of
time, sprange Monkerie, which the Origin all of Monks Friars, and heremites.
holy Church of Christ knew not at all when it was most excellent, and pure.
Beesides that this life has no warrant nor commandment from the word of
God, and is nothing else but an invention and devise of men that were a fraide.

And like as in those former persecutions, they endeavored to pluck the
christians from the truth, through alurementes of pleasure: so likewise in our
age many are carried away from the true faith and confession thereof, and
after knowledge of the truth they are wrapped in errors through pleasures
honors, glory, riches, prefermentes, great offices, fat benefices as they
term them, or great revenues of y^ church.

The year of our Lord Christ. 273. Valerius Aurelianus obtained the Empire,
whom Historicians make the Aucthour of y^. ix. persecution, which according
unto our accoumpt is the. 14. This Aurelianus at first beginning of his reign,
was gentle and friendly toward Christians, but toward the end he changed his
conditions: and through persuasion of naughty persons, suffered himself to be
abused, fully determinyng with him self to persecute the Church of Christ.
Eusebius testifies in the 7. book, and. 26. Chapter, of his ecclesiastical
history, unto whom also Orosius agreeeth, that he rather intended to execute
this persecution, then fully accomplished the same. Howbeit the Church at that
time was in great peril and heauenesse, but when contrary unto expectation the
Emperor was taken away: the persecution ceased, and became nothing.

Of the grievous woeful and long tragical Act or persecution, being in number
the. 15. under the Emperors Dioclecian and Maximian, wherein innumerable
Christians were martired and slain. Chapter. ix.
NOne has written more dillygentlye Eusebius bishop of Caesarea.
of the persecution of the Emperors Iouius Dioclecian, and Herculius Maximian
then Eusebius in the last book of his ecclesiastical historye. For he lived
at that time, and beheld the doing of many things whereof he writes.
Wherefore the full and true discourse of these matters must be borrowed of
him, which although it be terrible: yet is it there withal pleasant, and
profitable to be read. As for me I mean but briefly to touch y^ chiefest
points.

The Christian Church enjoyed peace and tranquillitye a few years, from the
reign of Aurelian, unto the xix. year of the reign of Dioclecian and
Maximian, about the space of. 28. years. For the Christians had commonly their
Churches, and godly congregations and meetinges together, professing and
exercising their relygion openly without any fear: wherein also they had the
assistance of lieutenants of provinces every where, unto whom the Christian
Relygion was known, and many of great power in the Emperors Court, as namely
Dortheus and Gorgonius, who being Christians: aided and defended them of their
own religion. The Christians also in the beginning of this peace and quietness
agreed very well together, were fervent in y^ worshipping of God, and of holy
conversation, and therefore the number of the faithful increaced very much, so
that it was needful to enlarge their Churches, and places of common prayer.

But in process of time, that fervent Abuse of peace.
love of Relygion began to wax cold, and there arose dissentions and
contentions, chiefly among bisshops and doctors, who being addicted to
strife and unquietness: fell sore at debate among themselves, handlynge their
controversies, whereby the people were nothing edefied: wherefore, the Lord
taking away his hand from his people: suffered y^ faith less Gentiles to lay
their hands upon his Church, to scour away the ruste which daily increased
more and more. And this is the.xv. persecution of the Church which Orosius
calls y^ tenth.

At the beeginning of this persecution the Lord dealt very gently, not giuyng
the reign and bridle immediately to the persecution, and suffringe the Churches
to be destroyed: but the onset of the persecution was beegun by the soldiers.
And doubtless unto this purpose apperteineth that which is written by Otho
Frisingensis in the. 3. book and. 45. chapter, speakinge of bleassed Mauritius.
Mauritius.
Who marchyng forward into Germany, under Maximian with his legion of men
which were all Christians, goinge against the Bacharides, whom Eutropius
terms Bongarides, a troublesome and seditious kind of people, to bring them
to duty and quietness: and when the army had passed the Alps, and was
arrived into the country of the Veragri, which at this day they call the lower,
Vallesia: there Maximian commanded his soldiers to sacrifice to the Gods,
that they might obtain good fortune, and victory against their enemies. Then
Mauritius answered, that he would not so do, nor the residew of Christians
that were under him, franckly professinge himself and his company to be
Christians, for whom it was not lawful to do sacrifice to y^ gods. Wherefore,
they were first craftily divided, and some sent to Solodoru^, Bonna, Colen,
Santum, and abroad unto other places for defense sake dispersed. Last of all,
the greater part of the legion which remained with Mauritius near unto
Octodorum, which is at this day called Martenacum, and Agaunum, which is now
called by the name of S. Maurice: which was slain by y^ heathen soldiers. S.
Jerome reports, that the expedition against the Bagaudae, was in the year of
Christ, 290.

I cannot, nor I ought not in this place Foelix and Regula.
let pass to make mention of Foelix and Regula being Germans, who were also of
Mauricius company: both these and diverse other more, whose service it pleased
God that he would use to preach Christ to the Gentiles: by flight escaped
from the slaughter at Octodorum, and first they came to Glarona, and so along
the Lake were brought unto the most ancient city of Zuirick, in which at y^
time y^ Ethnic idolatry flourished, where they preached simply the Christian
relygion, and as we have showed in the beginning of this book, purely and
faithfully without any aditions of man. The same they approved valientlye, and
at length confirmed with their blood. For after many, and diverse torments they
were slain with the sword by Decius the Roman lieutenant that dwelte in the
castle of zuirick. And these most holly Germans, have left unto us the most
holly and precious treasure of the Gospel, and Christian faith. These our
Apostles, or rather teachers, sent unto us from heaven, are far more ancient
then y^ counsels. These lived and taught, and are blesledly departed this
life, before the Papisticall Church was establyshed in form and manner as it
is: for at their time there was not that Papacy which afterward ensued: there
were then no Images in Churches, there was no sacryfice of Mas, no invocation
of saints, no Munks, no institutio^s or fou^dations of Abbeies, for they lived
in those years after Christ which we have before noted, so that the
Christyan faith has continued amongst us, and also the ancient Congregation
of Zuirick above. 1270. years, which I pray God always with his grace to
preserve.

But when this loss which the Church had sustained, and this token of the
wrath of God against his people had moved but few in the Church to
repentance, the more part remaining careless and impenitent, and always
proceedynge farther in their unthankfulness: God also increased the
correction, suffryng the Church to be oppressed with a most sharp
persecution. For in the.xix. year of Dioclecian, which was the. 306. after the
birth of Christ, in the month of March and even on Easter day, were published
every where edictes from y^ emperors Edictes against christians.
against the Christians, wherein was charge given, that Churches and Oratories
of the Christians should be plucked down to the grownd, the Bibles and all
books of holly scripture burned, and whosoever of the Christians he were that
were in any honor office, and dignite should be disgraded and made imfamous,
with many other commaundmentes of that sort.

Shortly after, it was commanded by another edict from the emperors, that in
every place the bishops and ministers of the Church, should be apprehended
and constrained to do sacrifice to the Gods, and if any spoke against it: they
should be enforced thereto, or slain. Heerevpon ensued a miserable and cruel
slaughter. For the christian bishops, doctors, and ministers of the Churches,
were thick and threefolde led and drawn to the temples of Idols to do
sacrifice: and many times those that lead them moved with certain compassion:
exhorted them whom they lead, to hold their peace, and if they would but
dissemble as though they did sacrifice: they would then let them depart.
But they declared with a loud voice, that they neither had Sacrificed, neither
would Sacrifice, but that they were the servants and ministers of Christ,
wherefore unaccustomed and new torments, and diverse tortures and punishments
were laid upon the Christians, in execution whereof: the tormenters and officers
were more weary in appliyng, then the Christians in suffringe them. For they
through thee goodness of God, continnued constant in the Christian faith unto
death: notwithstanding certain, through fear and greatness of pain and
torment: renounced their faith, to the wounderfull sorrow and grief all the
godly.

At Nicomedia in Bythynia, when Done at Nicodemus.
the emperors commandment and proclamation was openly set abroad and both
emperors at that present soiurned at Nicomedia, a certain noble citizen and of
great dignity in that city rent down the emperors edict and tore it all to
pieces, wherefore with out delay he was brought unto the emperors. Who after
that he had confessed that he was a Christian, and that which he had done
he did it on a fervent zeal: he was delivered unto the hangemen and
Iurmagantes, who tormented him with sundry torments until he died. But
among the outrageous torments wherewith they martyred him, there never
appeered any one sign of sorrow in his countenance.

At the same time were tormented and slain the cheeife Princes and nobles of
the Emperors householde, among whom Peter after sundry vexations and
tortures, was laid upon a Gridyron, and roasted, with this most cruel kind
of death, ending his life. Likewise Dorotheus, and Gorgonius, Gentilmen of
the Emperors Chamber, after the bitter taste of sundry torments: were last
of all hanged.

Anthimus also bishop of Nicomedia was at that time slain with the sword and
with him a great number of cityzens, as sheep followynge their sheapheard
through torments and death, with a most constant faith.

In Nicomedia at that time, there arose Nicomedia the Emperors Palace burned.
a great fire suddeinly within the kings palace, as who should say that God
meant to punish the extreme cruelty of the emperors and the heathen people
which had burned, and broiled so many innocent, and godly men. But the same
chanced which befell at Rome in the time of Nero, for like as he imputed the
cause of burninge the city unto the giltlesse Christians, beeinge cause thereof
himself: so these emperors published new commandments, whereby they
strayghtly charged, y^ the Christians should be extinguished with fire, and
sword in every place.

In Syria likewise, the faithful Doctors, Persecucion in siria.
noble and unnoble, men and women, young and old, were drawn by heaps into
prison, in so mutch that the prisons and common places of the city were full
of prisoners, and but few men there were that walked abroad, the place
resemblyng the show of a forlorn wilderness. Whereof when the Emperors were
advertised: they willed that such as would do sacrifice to the gods should
be released, the residew that continued in the christian beeleefe, should be
put to death with most cruel kinds of torments.

The people of Tyrus also, in the land In Tyrus.
of Palestine, whole flocks as it were of men and women, in places of common
resort for shows, were thrown unto wild beasts, and when the wild beasts
were more gentyl toward the Christians then the men, neither forced upon them
to tear them, yea, rather tear their keepers and masters that egged them to
others: notwithstanding these faithless tyrants crueller then all beasts,
ran upon the miserable christians, woundyng them, stabbyng them and cruelly
without all pity murtheryng them.

A strainge kind of crueltye also the ungodly in Egypt, and Thebais, practiced
against the faithful, wherewith they In Egipe.
slew infinite numbers of them. They used in certain places to bend down two
Trees, and to bind the faithful unto each tree by the leg, then to let them
rise again, and so tearyng the men in pieces. And Vspurgensis reports, how
at the same time, in one months space were seventeen thousand men martyred,
and slain.

Eusebius in the. 9. and. 10. Chapters of the, 8. book, describes the strange
torments and punishments of many christians which he himself did behold
among whom he mentions one Phileas Phileas.
a worthy man, who was a Martyr himself, and had wroten of Martirs.

There was also in Phrigia a certain famous City, wherein all the people, A
woeful deed.
highest and lowest, young and old, professed the Christian faith. The same
City the Emperors army beseidged round about, and set it on fire, burninge
therein all that ever was, as well men as goods, that there was not one that
escaped Besides there are many other cruel tortures, and punishments recited
in y^ same book of Eusebius, whereby infinite multitudes of christians were
executed to death, and made away in Arabia Cappadocia, Mesopotamia, Alexandria
Antioche, and likewise in Pontus.

But after that these bloudthirstie dogs, Dioclecianus, and Maximianus
departed from the empire, there succeeded in their place other tyrants,
maxentius sun to Maximian, and Galerius Maximinus who persecuted the church
nolesse cruelly then their predicessours did, neither made they any end, or
moderation, or measure of punishing, staynge Dorothea,
or sheadinge of blood. At Alexandria, a noble and honest virgin. Dorothe, was
by Maximinus spoiled of all her goods and with other virgins also which would
not consent to his filthy lust: tormented, and slain. At Rome, Sophronia wife
to the gouerner of the city chose rather to die with her own hand Sophronia.
then to be defiled by a beastly tirant.

By this Tyrant very many christians were driven into exyle, punished, and
slain as Eusebius copiously declares in theneeinth and last book of his
story. Howbeeit the most famous amongst them all are three ministers of
Christ, and his Church: Syluanus of Tire, Peter of Alexandria, and Lucia^
siluanus. ^etrus. Lucianus.
of Antioche, who had traueiled very mutch in the scriptures, as S. Ierom
reports. These worthy men, not only by their teachinge and writing: but
also by their blood and death have borne testimony to y^ christian faith, and
have cleaued unto christ constantly to death.

This cruel and rare kind of persecution, continued from the year of
Christ. 306 unto the year. 320. that is to say about.xv. year in the whole.
For in the year of Christ. 321. Constantinus the emperor in the.x. year of
his reign, gave peace and rest to the miserable, torn, and almost oppressed
Church: and indeed, from the time that Christ suffered his passion unto that
present: there was no persecution more cruel, or that continued longer then
this, wherein notwithstanding the Church through faith preueiled, overthrew,
and cast down al false religion and Idolatry.

But that I may return unto the accustomed talk which I have used Christian
Relygion.
before this, in the discourse of most persecutions, is there any man I
beeseech you, which dares avoutch that the Ethnic religion of the Romans,
was therefore just and true, because the Roman emperors defended and enlarged
the same, castinge down, and defilinge the faith of the Christians with their
own blood most cruelly, and because the^ obtained prosperus success against
the Christians, the Christians the mean season tastinge none other but the
cross afflictions, miseries, and most cruel death? And who is he now, that
will dispute with God, why he suffered such naughty knaves, and wicked
varlets with so many and diverse kinds of calamities, molest and trouble such
men as were dearly beloved unto him? Who will de^aunde whether he did well or
ill, since God does no unjust thing? But he proves his servants with the
cross and afflictions, like as Gold and Silver are by woorkmen tried in the
fire. This the faithful know very well, and therefore if our wretched and
impatient fleash do move any contrary thoughts (as it often chances:)
immediately they suppress them. And Saint Peter says: humble your selves 2.
Pet. 4.
unto the mighty hand of god, and he will exalt you when he sees his time
and cast all your cares upon him for it is he that is careful for you.

Of the. 16. Tragical Act or persecution, under Julian the Emperor, and of
the 17. under the Emperor Valens, also of the. 18. under Genserick and
Hunerick, Kings of the Vandales. Chapter. X.
FRom the tenth year of the reign of Constantinus Magnus, the church of
Christ enjoyed peace and tranquillity, when as within xxi. years (for so many
years are accoumpted from the tenth year of Constantine unto the. 31. which
was the last year of his reign) it increased more then at any other time since
the nativity of Christ.

But not long after the death of Constantine, Abuse of peace.
the learned teachers, and ministers of the Churches, unthankfully abused their
peace, minglynge many contentions, and cauilles with y^ simple doctrine of
their religion, and mutch disagreeinge, and contendinge among themselves: they
drew the simple people from the unity of the Church into sundry sects, and
pluckyng them from the pureness and plainness of the true faith, with their
doubtful doctrine: they filled their heads with sundry altercatio^s. At
which time sprange up the blasphemous Arrius heresye.
doctrine of Arrius, who affirmed that our Lord Jesus Christ the sun of God
was not of one essency or beeinge with the father, nether very, and eternal
God. With this poison at that time, Constantius one of Constantinus suns, was
infected, for Coustantinus left beehind him three suns, beetween whom he
divided the empire: Constantinus the second: Constantius, and Consta^s This
Constantius was offended with the true and faithful ministers of y^ Churches
which withstood the doctrine of Arrius, and sent them into exile. But he
persecuted most vehemently Blesied Athanasius and with him many m^, whereof some
he Athanasius.
threw into most strait prisons, grievously afflicting the faithful, as is
declared at large in the ecclesiastical history. This persecution beegan
about the year of Christ: 343. but because valens y^ emperor, who was also
difiled with the heresy of Arrius renewed this persecution: we will atribute
them both to the Arrians comprehendinge them under the name of Valens
persecution.

God chastised his Church for contentions, falling out, disagreements, and
scismes, not only in this Arrian persecution, but also in an Ethnic the like
whereof it suffered many before the reign of Constantinus, as we have hither to
declared. For the emperor Julian opposed himself sharply against the Church of
Christ, laboring to bring it back unto the aun^ient superstitions of the
gentiles, about the year of Christ 366.

This Julian was at the first a Christian, and a reader in the holy Catholic
Iulians reuoltyng.
Church, but when he had fallen into acquaintance and frindship with certain
Philosophers, and chiefly with Libanius the Sophist: he began by little and
little to fall from the Christian faith, and at last received the relygion of
the Gentiles again, wherein he became so blind and hard hearted: that he washed
away the Baptism of Christ: yea he was so far possessed by the Devil, that
he used very much Magical arts, applying his whole study unto such things
as were pleasant, and exceptable to the devil.

But after that he came to the empire, having obtained a great victory against
the Almaynes nigh to the city Strausbrough of whom he slew. xxx. M: with all
his power he bent him self against the christian religion. The temples of
Idols which Constantinus had shut up, and in which upon pain of death he
commanded that none should do sacrifice: Julian set them open again, and
sacrificed in them unto Idols, and gave all men leave to sacrifice. So y^ the
Gentile religion and Idolatry very mutch increased under him: and such
Gentilisme increased.
as in the time of Constantinus had hid themselves, hopyng that shortly there
would come soome change: brake then abroad into light, and violently assaulted
the Christians. The emperor him self, spoiled the Churches, and the ministers
of the Churches, of all their privileges, immunities, liberties, and
dignities, which Constantinus had given them. He forbid also the Christians
all schools, that they should not learn poetry, oratorie, nor philosophy:
meaning thereby to make them unlearned, that they should not be able to
confute the Ethnic relygion, out of the book of Ethnic writers. Himself also
wroat certain books against the Christian religion, whereto very well answered.
S. Syrillus, bishop of Alexandria.

Moreover, he termed Christians disdaynfully Christians termed Galileans.
Galileans, and Christ himself the Galilean. He did not only confiscate the
goods of the Church: but also laid great tributes, and exactions upon the
christians: there withal also mockyng, and floutyng them saying, that their
God, y^ is to say our Lord Jesus Christ forbid them to heap up treasure,
commaundyng them that whosoever took from them their coat: they should give him
their cloak also. So y^ he both spoiled, and flouted the Christians, and
whatsoever trouble or reproach he put them unto he said how they ought to
bear it wyllyngly and patiently, for so their Christ taught them to do.

And like as Constantinus the great, took away the Images of the Gentile The
Roman Ensign changed.
Gods out of the Roman ensign or standard, placynge in the stead of them a
white cross: so contrariwise Iulianus restored the Images of Jupiter,
Mercury, and Mars, that the Christians worshipping th'ensigne, and bowing them
selves before it, should seem to worship the Gods. Likewise all that were
appoyncted to warfarre, and received their native or reward, must cast a
grain of frankincense into the fire upon the Altar, and so worship the
Gods.

This thing troubled him very much A francke confession.
For when certain Christian soldiers had unadvisedly done the same, and wayyng
the matter more dyllygently, perceued what they had done: of their own motion
they came unto the Emperor, and casting away their donatiue in his presence,
cried aloude saying that they were Christians, and would continue in the
Christian faith, that which they had done they did it unadvisedly, wherein
they had greeuouslye offended, wherefore they presented there their bodies unto
him that they might suffer for that, wherein their hands had offended. Then
the Emperor commanded that they should all be lead away to execution, and
be beheaded. But when they were gone out of his presence: he changed his
mind, and pardoned their lives: notwithstanding he made a law, y^ thencefoorth
no christian should be admitted to warfare, or into y^ Emperors court, or
unto any be^ch of judgment, or any other kind of preferment.

In every place also of the Roman empire, Christians were reprochefullye dealte
withal, pitifullye tormented and slain, amongst whom is remembered an ancient
man, and a notable minister of Christ, Marcus bishop of Artehusa. The same in
former, and more happy times, had destroyed ye temple of y^ gods at Arethusa,
by reason whereof Julian hated him, persuading with the citizens y^ they should
constrain him to build up the temple again, which being impossible for him to
do: they required that at the least wise he would contribute sumwhat to the
charges. But when he had answered that he would not give them the value of one
farthinge: he was by them most miserably, and cruelly, and Although he were
very ritche.
to their great shame tormented, and put to death.

Likewise renownied men, and worthy ministers of Christ were martyred, as
Gregory of Alexandria, Eusebius, Nectarius, Zenon, Basilius Ancyranus, and
Cyrillus Deacon of y^ church of Jerusalem. At Heliopolis many virtuous virgins
were brought naked into the Theater, and afterward their bellies cut up and
stuffed full of oats and barley, and cast to swine to be torn.

In Meroe a city of Phrygia, three honest citizens, Macedonius, Theodulus, and
Tacianus, when as the day before, the chief officer of the city had set open a
temple of Idols, which had until that time bin shut up, to th'eintent there
should now be sacrifice done in it, in the night entering into it they plucked
down the Idols, and brake them. But when this judge and chief officer Amatius
began to have tormented sundry Christians whereby he might come to knowledge
who had broken the Idols: these three coming unto the judge, desired him not
to torment any man for breakyng the Idols, for they were the doers of it.
Wherefore they were taken and roasted a great while, and at length burnt. In the
same persecution Artemius lieutenant of egypt, because he constantly professed
y^ faith of Christ: was spoiled of al his goods, and in the end lost his head:
y^ like whereof many good, and honest men suffered. whosoever desires a more large
description of these things: let him read y^ 6. book of y^ Tripartite history,
also the histories of Ruffi. Theodo. and Sozo. Moreover, Iulianus to y^ intent
he might Julian sends the Jews build the Temple at Jerusalem.
molest the Christans, whom he could not compel to the Gentiles religion: he
gave license to the miserable Jews, to return to Jerusalem, there to assemble
themselves together and to build a temple, and to frequent their sacrifice,
promisinge unto them his asistance for the better accomplishinge the same. But
after that a great multitude of them was gathered together out of al nations
and had prepared stuf for their present business, erected scaffoldes to woork
upon and partly had dug their foundations and partly laid them, being busy
about their buildinge: beeholde, a great earthquake shook the foundations, and
cast them down: there flamed also an horrible fire out of the very
foundations, and a strange and terrible tempest over threw the scaffoldes,
shakinge down what ever they had builded, and slew a great multitude of the
Jews. There was also a terrible boule of fire tu^bling there about all the day
long, which hindered and indamaged them very mutch: and whereas before the
Jews, and Gentiles triumphed, insulted over, and threatened the Christians,
Cyrillus bishop of Jerusalem, with great gravity and constancy forewarned them
out of Daniell the prophet and the Gospel, that it Dan. 9. Mat. 24. Luke 21.
was not possible y^ they should sacrifice here, or else build up y^ Jewish
temple. So y^ they, which before this dispersion or scattryng, had in derision
y^ minister of christ: after so great miracles of god were altogether quailed
and discouraged.

But after y^ Julian was slain in battle against the Persians, which was in the
year of christ. 367. there was quietness again restored to y^ Christians,
which notwithstanding continued not long. For Valens, with his brother
Valentinian, obtaining the empire: was seduced by the Arrians: and although his
brother Vale^tinian were sound in the Christian faith, yet he nevertheless
about the year of thriste. 371 began to persecute the godly christians,
intending to bring them to y^ Arrian heresy. But y^ church constantly
withstoode him, wherefore the faithful and Catholic bishops, were by him sent
into banishment, and many of the^ tormented and finally slain.

Since therefore at that time, there reigned such tirranny in every place, and
ye ministers of the churches and other faithful men, were nowher in salftye,
but were commonly reprochefully intreted spoiled, plucked out of their houses
and stayne: at length the Church decreed to send some notable embassedge unto
the Emperor, complaynyng of their injuries, and requiryng his majesty's
clemency, help, and protection. To which purpose were sent. 80. of the
chiefest, ye their countinaunce, and credit might be the greater. Who when they
were com to Nicomedia to the Emperor, and had exhibited their supplication:
the Emperor was grievously moved against the^ yet dissemblyng his anger,
charged privily Modestus one of his servants that he should destroy al those
bishops. But because he doubted, lest if they should be openly executed, the
people might chance to raise a tumult: they were all embarked in a Ship, as if
they should be sent into banishment. And when the Ship was come into the
midest of the deep sea: the mariners setting it on fler themselves escaped
away in boats thus in one Ship were. 80. holy servants of 80 Legates miserably
brent.
God consumed with fire. Which most cruel tragedy and impious fact, stroke
the Church of God into most grievous, sorrow and heaviness.

But who so is delighted to understand the most firce Barbarousnes, and most
outrageous tragedies, and heinous murders, which have bin committed against
the holy faithful of Christ: let him read the. 7, book of the Tripartite
historye, and the fourth of Socrates, and Theodoretus, where these things are
setfoorth at large. I omit in this place to set out the persecution of
Athanaricus Athanaricus King of the Goths.
King of the Goths, whom others call Athalaricus. He persecuted the
Christians about the year of Christ, 373. whereof some he flewe, some he
banished. But because some report, that they which suffered these things were
Arrians: therefore I thought it not convenient to reckon this among the
persecutions of the holy Catholic Church.

Howbeit after that the Vandales had possessed Africa driuyng the Romans
thence, about the year of Christ. 443. being then peace throughout all the
empire: Genserick King of Vandales and Lord of Africa, being infected with the
Genserick King of the vandals.
Arrian heresy, as were Constantinus, and Valens the Emperors, intended to
enforce the christians to the Arrian heresy, whereupon there began a bloody,
and butcherly slaughter. For he shut up the Churches of the faithful, and
spoiled the Ministers, whereof many he killed with hunger, and to be short: he
left nothing undone whatsoever before him Dioclecian, and Maximian the most
cruel tyrants, had practiced against ye faithful. Whom notwithstanding he
could not enforce to reuoult, for all their most grievous, and cruel
punishments.

After Genserick, there succeeded him both in his kingdom and tyrrannie, his
sun Honorius, in the year of Christ, 476. who persecuted also the
Christians most cruelly for the profession of the true faith. The whole story
of this persecution is described by Victor bishop of vtica, which lived in
those bloody times. After Honoricus, there succcded in the kingdom
Gundamundus, in the year of Christ, 484. who likewise as his predicessours
did: persecuted the Christians. The like afterward To whom Fulgentius wroat.
also did Trasimundus the year of Christ. 503. by whom were at one time. 220.
bysshoppes banished into Sardinia: but Hildericus sun to Trasimundus,
recallinge them home again out of exile, restored them to their churches in the
year of Christ. 523. This Hildericus was a good prince, and sound in the
Christian religion, but in ye year of Christ. 530. he was by Gilimer taken by
a trayn and cast into prison, and reprochefully used. Howbeit Gilimer enjoyed
the crown not long, but was by Bellisarius (as Procopius reports) about the
year of Christ. 535. vanquished and stain, with whom the kingdom of Vandales
also took his end. This persecution under the Vandales continued in Africa
about fouerscore years.

Of the 19. Tragical act or persecution which was the longest, and most
grievous of all other under Machomet, which the Sarracens and Turks have
mantayned against the Church of Christ. Chapter. xi.
BY means of these persecutions, which we have heatherto declared which are
to be accoumpted as certain Chastisement, and corrections of God, few in the
Church were brought to any repentance or amendment, but many became rather the
worse: for sundry heresies and schisms, as namely of the Macedonians,
Nestorians, Pelagians with diverse other arose, increasinge more and more, the
recital whereof were now to tedious: by occasion whereof grievous contentions,
troubles, and disagreement fell out not only amongst the learned: but also
amongst the common people and the unlearned sort, giuinge occasion of great and
outrageous divisions in religion over all the East. Beesides, in the west the
bishop of Rome wickedly advanced himself and his Church above al Churches and
ministers of Churches throughout all Christianity, and that expressly against
the holy doctrine of the Gospel, and the writings of Gregory the pope.
Wherefore while matters continued in this state, God suffered his Church to be
touched with most sharp troubles, and oppressed with grievous persecutions.

For in the year of Christ. 613. was The beginning of the false prophet
Machomet.
first known, and beecame famous in Arabia the wicked hypocrite, and most
crafty verlet Machomet, whom some term Muhammat: the same from his youth
upward was a merchant, but afterward he boasted that he was a prophet sent
from God. There had joined themselves unto him certain wicked and stubberne
Jews, and also one Sergius a munke, an apostata and an heretic: ^i whose
advice and aid, he devised a new law, which he called Alcoranus, for Alcoran
what it signifies.
this word Alcoran signifies a minglemangle of laws. In which he erred
directly from the scriptures of both testamentes, wherein are set down the true
laws prescribed by God, beeside whom we have no need of any other book of
laws: howbeit Machomet has set forth a new and peculiar law to his
Sarracens, Turks, and all that shall hereafter beeleeue in him, which law of
his, is in very deed a miserable feined devise, impure, false, and full of
filthy fables, that it was great meruell how wise men could give credit to
such absurd, and doubtful trifles. Howbeit therein appears the dreadful
wrath of God against al such as are not contented with the doctrine of Christ, and
the holy scriptures: for it follows deservedly, that al ye are not contented
we the truth to believe John. 9. 2. These. 21.
it, afterward they give credit unto lies, and ar shamefully deceued, and
seduced.

In this his law, Machomet the devilish and false prophet, has instituted,
The whole sum of the turkishe religion. God.
and divised a new religion, altogether repugnant to the faith of Christ. He
acknowledges ye there is one God maker of heaven and earth whom only we must
adore and call upon, and that we must not worship or honor any other Gods,
Idols, or Images, which the Sarracens and Turks do hate exceedingly. But he
does not acknowledge according to the effect of the holly scriptures, the
diffrence of the persons in one and indivisible substance of Godhoode, the
Father, the Sun and the Hollye ghost, but he impugneth, and raileth at
Christ.
the blessed Trinity. Likewise, he confesses that Christ was a great prophet
borne of the holy and undefiled virgin, who was taken also up into heaven, but
as for that poynct which is peculiar to the true and liuelye faith: he does
not confess that Jesus Christ is the everlasting sun of God, very God and
man, the only mediator of God and men who being crucified and slain for our
sake, arose again from y^ dead, and sits on y^ right hand of god, being of
one power we the father in heaven. These things he blasphemeth and impugneth
deneing y^ christ was crucified wherefore he teaches also erroniously touching
remission of sins, which only we obtain by faith in christ which was
crucified, Remission of sins.
ye he is altogether ignorant of faith and justification by faith in Christ,
devising Faith and justification
sundry woorshippinges and means to attain salvation, namely by fasting
praying, giuinge of alms, sustaininge many and great labors, suffering mutch
trouble, valientlye fightinge for the Machometan religion, and dyinge in
batteill. He is also of opinion that a man may fulfill the law, and demerite
salvation by his own works: he Works.
has his Moonkes and Priests, in whose merits he reposeth the hope of his
salvation. He confesses the resurrection Eternal life.
of the body, but he speaks altogether carnally and impurely of felicity,
as though in Paradise we should enjoy bodily pleasures, meat, drink,
beutie of the body, as if it were in the blessed Islands called Beatorum
insulae, or else in a certain Vtopia.

He despises the Evangelical and apostolical Congregations, rites, and
Sacraments.
doctrine, as he does also our holly assembles and congregations, co^maundynge
all that beeleeue in him to be circumcised after the Jewish manner, nothing
regarding our Baptism: he raueth and rayleth at the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, and al ye form and order of the Lords supper which was
instituted and appointed by Christ: he contemns all christian vsedges, and
has instituted peculiar congregations, temples, rightes, and ceremonies: he
commands the sixth day of the week, which we call Friday, to be Holidays.
kept holiday: he appointed fasting days and purging with water: he commanded
them to pray five times in a day: he forbid Prayers
to pray unto saints and creatures, but unto God only, which is truth in
deed: but he teaches to pray unto others beside Christ. Such prayers are
not acceptable unto God, because they are not made through Christ, through
whom we pray unto God our father in heaven, 1. John. 2.
whereat he mocketh. But S. John says: Who so has not the Sun, has
Matrymony, and deuorcement.
not the Father: He altogether prophaneth holly matrimony: for unto men he
gives license to marie as many wives as they list, and that which is
injurious and dishonest, to forsake them without cause at their pleasure, and
discretion. He forbids them after the Jewish manner to eat swynes fleash,
he debarreth them also from wine, howbeit the ritcher sort have devised certain
costlye kinds of drinks, whereby they beco^e nolesse drunk then with wine. And
this is ye doctrine of ye devil, whereof Paul entreats in the first of
Timothy, the. 4. chapter. And whatsoever I have said of the Machometan faith:
the same ar al to be understood of the Turkishe religion or supersticion, which
at this day is usual among the Turks. And as for these things, I have
reported them very breeflye, that those that know not the Turkish religion:
may have a brief extract, not of the whole relygion: but of the chiefest
points, and opinions thereof. The wrath of God.
Now through indifferent view of these things which we have recited: who does
not understand that through the most grievous yet most just wrath of God,
the world is by him most sharply punished, since y^ he has suffered so absurd,
filthy, and wicked relygion to take place? and here withal, let us also
behold and weigh, what a cruel and continual persecution which indureth also
to this day, this impiou^* and Machometan faith has raised against the holly
Church of Christ, and the true faith.

Machomet that false prophet and What the Sarracens were.
murdrous seductour of the world, had persuaded his Sarracens, that they are
the true children and heiers of sarra wife to Abraham, and that in respect
thereof: beelonged unto them all the promises made unto Abraham, namely that his
seed should rule all the world, and therefore he exhorted the Sarracens that
taking weapon in hand, they should valyently assay to possess all the kingdoms
of the world as their own inheritance.

The Sarracens were a barbarus and rough people of Arabia, which before that
time were called Agareni, the same receauinge stipende of the Romans, fought
under them in the war against the Persians. But when he which bare the name
of general, and had the charge of the army in giving them their pay, had
reprochefully called them dogs, saying: who shall give money enough to this
company of dogs: they reuoulted from y^ Romans, and being persuaded by Homer
their cheifteine: they chose Machomet to be Machomet is made King.
their prince, specially since he had persuaded them that they should not be
called Agareni of Agar the handmaide, but rather Sarraceni of Sarra the lawful
wife, by reason whereof, as it is said, they were the Lords, and heirs of all
kingdoms. These things were done in the year of Christ. 623. But this
seditious, murderous, and wicked villain Machomet, so soon as he had
obtained the Empire: began to enlarge and set forth his abominable religion
with the sword, and to enforce men to receive it, persecutyng also and
oppr^ssing the true Christian faith. And for the better ratefiyng hereof, he
continued in this travail the space of. 9. years unto the year of our Lord.
632. Unto all that would follow his relygion he promised felycitie, glory,
Empire, victori, riches, and after this life the pleasure of Paradise. And by
this menes he gat unto him great multitudes of men, specially when at the
beginning things prospered so well with him, for why, the common people
follows good fortune victory, and ritchesse: hatinge as mutch the cross, and
persecutions. He willed them moreover to persecute all such as spoke against,
and reprehended the Alcoran. Wherefore many reuoulted from the Christian faith,
and all virtuous and true Christians were oppressed with grievous persecutions:
and this was ye begi^ning of the Sarracens kingdom. After the death of
Machomet, the Sarracens called their chief princes Amiras, which as some say,
signifies as mutch as the name of Emperor. Whose names, and most famous
conquestes, are described in histories unto the year of Christ, 870. They
made many great wars: and fought sundry battles, and obtained conquestes
against y^ Emperors of Constantinople and other kings and princes. They
subdued Persia, Babylon, Syria, the city of Jerusalem, and gat sundry great
victoryes in Asia, and Africa, in which places they term their Princes
Souldans, souldanes.
or Sultans, and Caliphas, that is to say chief Princes, and Capitaines in
battle. The Sarracens have made irruptions into Italy, Spain, and France,
spoiling all y^ ever they could, wasting, burning, and bearing away innumerable
spoils. But how miserably y^ Church of christ was torn in pieces, how much
christian blood shed in so many provinces duringe the space of so many years
it is impossible to set forth in words. For at length y^ Sarracens were
driven out of Spain by Ferdinande y^ great, the year of Christ 1487 and out of
Africa they were expulsed the year of Christ 1517. but the Turks succeeded
in their place, for Selimus emperor of y^ turks slew, and drove y^ Sara. out
of Affri.

Hereunto also apperteineth that miserable The holy war.
slaughter, wherein there was an unspeakable deele of blood sheden, which is
commonly called the Holly war, wherein the Christians went about to recover
Jerusalem, and the holly sepulcher of the Lord, out of the Sarracens and
Machometans hands, whereby they brought none other thing to pas but beeinge
not able to obtain the sepulcher: they hastened themselves to their own graves
and destruction, and through their unfortunate war, brought the miserable
Christians of the East into hatred, great danger, and persecution, so y^
welnigh, they lost all y^ was remaininge. But to the intent that this great
grievous, long, and cruel persecution which the Sarracens have exercised
against the Christians, may be the better known: I mean to declare y^ whole
discourse of the war.

In the year of Christ, 1. 84. there The original of the Sarracens war.
came out of the East, a certain Anchor, whom historiographers do call Peter ye
Heremite. The same filled the ears of princes and men of all other sorts,
declaring unto them the miserable state of the Christians in the East, whom y^
Machometan Sarracens oppressed with woeful tyranie, and very mutch molested:
wherefore that it was right needful for the Christians in the west, to have
some care over them, and gatheringe an army both to overcome the Sarracens,
and release the Christians. Shortly after urban y^ ii. being Pope, and scholar
to Gregory the seventh called together a counsel at Claromo^t in France wherein
it was decreed, that the christians with Claromont. counsel.
all their power should make war upon the Sarracens, take Jerusalem, and the
holy Sepulcher, and so deliver the Christians from their tyrrannye. This
counsel was pernicyous and hurtful to the Christian commonwealth, and had the
very same end with the counsel which is described in the first book of
Kings, the last Chapter. For all things were unfortunate, and the Christians
were not only not released from the tirannie: but most part of them slain, and
afterward oppressed, and afflicted more grievously then before. And albeit many
holy and good men, upon a virtuous zeal yielded themselves and consented to
the war: yet lacked it the foundation of Gods word, which should have
commanded them to take Jerusalem and the holy Sepulcher from the Sarracens,
and to take in hand so great and dangerous a war. For although they atchiued
sundri noble adventures, and possessed many places: yet was there no constant
Fortune as to hold that which they had taken, or to establish peace for the
oppressed christians. The bishops also in their counsels touching this war
gave but evil counsel unto Princes, and many other godly christians, as they
have done also in many other matters. Other deceits and troubles which were
annexed hereto, for breuytie sake I omit at this present. The Claromont
counsel was holden the year of Christ. 1095.

After the Claromont counsel immediately The. 1. expedition.
began Peter y^ heremits war, who ledyng forth with him certain thousands which
voluntarely offered themselves in this expedition: marched through Hu^gary into
Asia, but atchiued there no noble exploit worthy of memory. And this was the
first unlucky journey.

Shortly after two rash and troublesome The. 2. expedition.
priests, whom Historicians call Volcomar, and Goddeschar, having gathered an
unfit multitude of the common people: began the second expeditio^ into Asia.
But when they were come into Hungary spoylyng althynge, rebyng, and using
themselves disordinatly, so y^ the Hungaria^s judged them worse then they
vnbeleeuyng Sarracens, they gathered an army, and slew those lewd The 3.
expedition.
pilfring varlets.

In the year of Christ. 1096. Godfree and Baldwine of the famile of Bullein,
Dukes of Lorraine took in hand the. 3. expeditio^ into Asia. These gathering
an army of a hundred thousand horsemen, and three hundred thousand footmen:
took many cities of Asia, and Jerusalem also. Vrspurgenfies reports, that
there was so much blood shed there, that in the very temple the blood was above
the hooues of the Horses. The year of Christ. 1119. Jerusalem taken
the city of Jerusalem was taken by the Christians, and made head of the new
kingdom of Christians in the East, whereof duke Godfree was created king. The
same reigned one year, after who^ succeeded seven Kings in order, which
reigned in all about one hundred year and in the year of Christ. 1189. all
things were lost again which they had taken. The. 4. expedition.


After that tidings were come out of ye East, how Jerusalem was taken, and a
new kingdom established many were pricked forward to take their iourneie
thither hoping for riches, and kingdoms. Wherefore in the year of Christ.
1101. William duke of Poicters, with. 100000. men took in hand ye holy warfare.
And this was. ye 4. expedition, which was not also very prosperous, for there
returned home again not many mo then a M. me^. Although Jerusalem was thus
taken by ye christians: notwithstanding ye Sarracens ceased not from war: but
urged them so sharply ye they were enforced to su foraid, when as S. Bernhard
abbot of Clarauallis joined himself in this unlucky war, and taking diverse
iournies in hand exhorted The. 5. expedition.
ye christian princes to take this war upon them, and at length brought to pas
ye Conrade the 3. being emperor, Ludouick king of France. Friderick duke of
Sueuia, VVelphus duke of Bauaria with many other princes more, with great power
beegan this expedition: but these also profited nothing, for their army
dyinge in sundry places in foreign countries, the princes scarsly returned in
safety. This great expedition was made in the year of our Lord. 1147.

Afterward Jerusalem was taken, as we have said before, by a very great power
of Sarracens, with an unspeakable loss and spillyng of Christian blood. Which
heavy tidinges beeinge arrived in the west: forthwith there beetooke them unto
armor, Friderick Barbarossa the emperor, Philippe king of France, Rychard
king of England, and with them many princes more. These took in hand the. 6.
expedition into the east, The. 6. expedition.
the year of Christ. 1189. With an exceedinge great power, who
notwithstanding brought nothing to pass but this only, that the noble prince
Friderik the emperor fell into a river and was drowned, the army for the most
part died with sickness, the residew whereof the number was not great, returned
home miserably.

After this there appointed again a new The. 7. expedition.
and which was the. 7. expedition, two most puisaunt princes, the kings of
France, and England, in the year of Christ. 1191. and came into Asia, where
leesinge a great multitude of men: they were constrained to leave Jerusalem to
the Sarracens.

In the year of Christ. 1198. Henry The 8. expedition.
sun to Friderick Barbarossa, beegan the viii. expedition into Syria: but at
the first receauinge a foil: he returned again without doing any thing.

After all these expeditions: Pope Innocentius the 3. a crafty and
presumptious The Lateran counsel.
man, went about afresh to beegin this war, caulinge at Rome a great
counsel, such as has not bin seen thee like, in the year of Christ, 1215.
but he died in the midst of this business, after whom succeeded Honorius the 3.
who with no less diligence applied the same matter, feigninge, like a false
prophet, that he had seen a vision, and that it was said unto him by Saint
Peter that in the time of his reign: Jerusalem should be recovered. Wherefore,
the ninth expedition was taken in hand toward Ancon, which once was
Ptolomais. Then was taken Damniata, yet with more loss then profit unto our
men, which was taken the year of Christ. 1222. and lost the next year
followinge. To be short, there was almost nothing gotten by the war, for
every thing had but little good success. The. 10. expedition.


In the year of Christ. 1228. Fridericke the second Emperor of y^ name, a
wise, noble, and victorious prince, undertook the tenth expedition into Syria,
where vanquishynge his enemies: he took certain principal Cities among
which also he wanne Jerusalem. But See how the Pope helps the Christians.
whilst this good prince makes war against the Infidels: Pope Gregory
the.ix. invaded Apulia, and took his native kingdom and country, and
therefore contrary to his intent and purpose, he was enforced to take peace
with the Soldane, and so depart. Which deed of the Pope, Abbas Vrspurgensis,
in his chronicles does woorthely blame most sharply.

Afterward, in y^ year of Christ. 124^ Ludouick king of France, with his
brothers The 11. expedition.
Robert and Charles, lead forth an army passing well appointed into Syria:
where he found no better fortune then others before him had done. For Robert
was slain, and Charles taken by ye Sultan the army discomfited, and the king
Ludouicke hardly escaped with a few. And this was the.xi. unhappy expedition.
The. 12 expedition.


In the year of Christ, 1270. King Ludouicke lead forth an army again
into Africa against ye Sarracens, which makes the xij expedition, but there a
sickness inuadyng the army: the king himself with one of his suns died, for
he carried three forth with him into battle, and a few of the people returned
home salfe.

Although in this war, which was first kindled by Peter the Heremite,
afterward proclaimed by the Claromont counsel, and successively mantayned by
means and provocation of Popes, there was no constant success, so that it was
manifest unto all men that God would bless it with no prosperous preueile: and
seeinge that Jerusalem was lost again, and the state of Christians in the East
was beecome most miserable from whom by reason of the wars, persecutions were
not taken away, but rather augmented: notwithstanding these unfortunate
Bysshoppes, with this unspeakable effusion of Christian blood, were not
satisfied, neither could be brought to yield or relent at these perpetual
and great discouragementes For Gregory the x. calling a great counsel at
Lions, in the yeeare of our Counsel at Lions.
lord. 1272. went about to renew the war, but all in vain, for so mutch as
thereby many had sustained such and so many miseries, and calamities both of
body, and goods. And Matthaeus Palmerius in his Cronacles writes: How that
many thousands of Christians being slain in Syria by the Sarracens, the
residew for fear departed the country: which was done the year of Christ
1291. about which year Paulus Aemilius, and the French Chronacles do report,
that this holy or rather unhappy war, was ended, which continued in all.
196. years, whereof the like is not heard of in any history. And this war
unto the great damage and oppression of the Christians, was first kindled by
Peter an unknown heremit (of whom vrspurge^sis. page 240.
many boast very mutch, others not without cause have doubted whether he were
a man or any thing else I know not what, many have said that he was a
dissemblinge hypocrite) helped by the Counsel and prelates, and this mutch is
sufficent to have spoken of the Sarracen persecution, Wherefore let us now come
to the Turkishe.

The persecution of Turks, wherewith Original of Turks.
they have molested the Christians is in some respect joined and coupled with
the Sarracen, making it more grievous and cruel: And the Turks are a people
of Tartaria, which in the year of Christ. 764. brake forth of their own
confines through the gates Caspiae, and planted themselves in Asia who first
seruinge under the Sarracens for wagies: afterward increasinge their power by
good success in wars, about the year of Christ. 1051. they created them
princes among themselves, who perpetually have afflicted, and persecuted the
poor Christians, for they also had then received the Machometan religion.

It is not to be doubted, but that God has sent this cruel, and
superstitious nation of Turks for a scourge unto the Christians. For like as
in the time of Solomon, when as he fell from the law of God, and suffered his
wives to build temples unto Idols: there sprange up and increased enemies
against him, and all the kingdom: so likewise among the Christians, when Pope
Boniface the. 8. committed many things repugnant to the Christian religion,
bringing in the Iubilee of the Jews, which was The popes Iubilee.
abolished by christ, whereby the redemption through Christ was no litel deele
diminished: at the same time in the year of our lord, 1300. sprang forth that
sharp rod, namely othomannus prince of the Turks, who at the beeginninge was
but a shepherd. From this sprange out Original of Othoman the first Prince
of Turks.
all the princes, and emperors of the Turks which hitherto have obtained the
empire, persecuting the Christians with unspeakable harms, wasting, and
destroying whatsoever ye Sarracens had left, and have established such a
kingdom: as has desended and enlarged it self (alas therwhile) with
impregnable force against all power. Othomannus has amplyfied his kingdom
large and wide, wounderfully indamaginge, vanquishynge, and murtheringe the
Christian Greeks, which were under the empire of Constantinople.

After the death of Othomannus, there Orchannes the. 2.
succeeded him in the Turkish Empire his sun Orchannes, in the year of our
Lord, 1328. The same ensued his fathers steps, grievously afflictynge the
Christians, he beesiedged the City Nicea, which when the Emperor of
Constantinople would have delivered from siedge: the army of the Christians
was miserably slain, the City yielded, and the Christians most truelly dealt
with all.

In the year of our Lord, a thousand three hundred and fifty, Amurates the
first of that name, third prince of the Turks, succeeded his father
Orchannes. Who sendyng an army over the Sea: took the cities Hadrianopolis,
Seruia, and Bulgaria, whom when the Christian Amurates the. 3.
princes assaide to drive away, were also with their armies slain by the
Turks.

Baiazetus the first, fourth Prince of Baiazetus. 4.
the Turks, beegan to reygne in the year of our Lord. 1373. The same has
vnspeakabli in damaged the Christians: and among other things he besieged
Constantinople very hardly ye space of eight years. And when ye Emperor of
Constantinople had desiered help of other christians: Charles ye. 6. king of
France, Sigismund of Hungary, John Duke of Burgundy, Rupert Duke of Bauaria
with other princes, sent him aid gathering an army of. 80000. me^. But all
these upon Michaelmas day were by the Turks slain at Nicopolis, in the year
of Christ 1395.

Machomet the fifth prince of Turks, Machomet. 5.
in the yeeare of our Lord 1399. came unto the Empire. He vanquished Sigismund
King of Hungary in a battle at Columbeciu^, and very mucth indamaged the
Christians, in the year of Christ, 1409.

Afterward in the year of Christ 1416 Amurates. 6.
Amurates the. 2. was created the sixte Prince of the Turks. The same made war
with Laudislaus king of Hungary and Polande, when Laudislaus through the help
of God vanquishing Amurates, enforced him unto conditions of peace, very
necessary and profitable for the Christians. This peace was confirmed by an
oath: at which time the state of Christians was in good case over the Turks,
had not Pope Eugenius the 4. vnluckely troubled all. Who sending Iulianus
Caesarinus in embasiedge into Hungary: persuaded Ladislaus the King that he
was not bound by the oath which he made to keep peace with the Turk, for
that no man ought to make peace with Infidels or heretics, and ye oaths and
promises made unto them are not to be performed. There were also diverse other
which provoked ye king Ladislaus that he should use and employe this happy
success which God had given him against the Turks, unto the commodytie of
the Christian commonwealth, that the Turk was now in great fear, and
troubled at that present with war by the Carmani, wherefore that it were an
easy matter to vanquish him. With these persuasions this young Prince, this
virtuous and well meannyng King, breakinge the peace, violatynge his oath, made
war upon the Turks, and pitched his tents between Danubius and
Adrianopolis, near to The reward of perjury.
the City Varna. Against whom came forth Amurates, accompanied with
fourscore thousand men, greatly blaming the perjury of the Christians, and
their breakyng of the peace, where he slew the young king which had bin
deceived by other, with many more princes and noble men, and as Platina
witnesses in the life of Eugenius the. 4. in that battle were slain, 3. C.
thousand Christians. The battle was fought upon S. Martins eeuen in the yeeare
of Christ. 1444. Who so desires to read a larger description of that woeful
calamity: let him peruse the Hungarian history of Antonius Bonfinius, ye 6.
book of ye 3. Decade.

But Amurates not being satisfied with this victory: immediately co^uaighing his
army into Greece, slew the Emperor of Constantinoples brother with all his
power, and wasted Peloponesus with fire and pilledge: and such Christians as
were reserved from the slaughter: he lead away into most miserable slavery. And
this was the great good provision and commodity, which the counsel of the
bloody and perjured Pope Eugenius purchased to the Christians.

After these calamities and grievous Machomet the. 7.
persecutions: yet were there greater mischeiues, which by the just judgment of
God oppressed the Christians. For in the year of Christ. 1450. Machomet the
second Sun to Amurates was made the seventh Prince of the Turks. The same
for the valientnesse of his deeds was surnamed the great, and called the first
Caesar or Emperor of the Turks, because he took away valiently by force
that Empire which The first Emperor of Turks.
from the time of Constantinus ye great, the space of. 1121. years had
continued under the dominion of ye Christians, and brought it in subjection
unto ye Turks.

For in the year of our Lord. 1453. he Constantinople taken.
besiedged costa^tinople ye head of ye empire, we a great power. And when he
had besiedged it ye space of 50 continual dais, and assaulted it we munition,
at length ye 29 day of May, he increased the assault we al his force from ye
morning until most part of ye dai were spent, and at ye length took it. Here
now it cannot be recited, with what sauadge cruelty, wantonness, pride and
disdain the barbarous Turks used the miserable Christians without al mercy.
Constantinus ye Emperor who was pressed and trodden to death by the multitude
of men, being sought out and haled from the residew of the dead carcases: had
his head strocken off, which being set upon the point of a spear, was
carried about in despite and derision of y^ christians. Some report also y^
there were 40000. Christians slain, CLM. carried away into captiuytie and
sold. The exact description of this most miserable calamiti, and unspeakable
persecution: is to be found in Nauclerus histori.

Also Ioannes Auentinus a writer of Machomets great victories.
histories, reports that this wicked Machomet surnamed the great, besides the
two Empires of Trapezunce and Constantinople, took away moreover from the
Christians. xii. famous Kingdoms, and 200 famous Cities. Also in the year of
Christ 1469. he made an irruption into Styria, and beesiedged the city
Graecium: whereby such fear invaded y^ christians, y^ from Saltzbrough which
some suppose of old to be called Iuuania, unto Monachum, in Bauaria, they
fled in such have: that they regarded not their Children which fell out of the
wagons and Chariots by the way. The same at that time they called the Turkish
flight.

In the year of our Lord God. 1481 Bajazet. 2. second emperor of Turks.
Baiazetes was created second Emperor of the Turks, and the eight prince
from Othoma^nus. The Same persecuted also the christians cruelly, and brake into
Wallachia, and Hungary, where near to the river Morana vanquishyng the
Christians: in reproach and dispight cut of the noses of all the prisoners which
he had taken: He made war also against the Venetians, sendynge forth
against them Scender a Bassa into Frioll, who sacking and spoylyng far
about carried away many Christians captive, of whom three hundred thousand
were most pitifully slain at the shore of the river Tiliauentum. Many things
also more have bin committed cruelly against the Christians by this most
barbarous, and Turkishe Tyrant Baiazete.

In the year of our Lord. 1512. the. 9 Selimus. 3. Emperor.
prince of the Othomanni, and the third in order of the Turkish emperors
Selimus, began to reign. The same quite destroid the Sarracens and Mammaluces
co^maundyng that their last Sultan Tomombeius most ignominiously should be
hanged, which was done the. 13. day of April, in the year of our Lord. 1517.
when he had taken Alcharyus or Memphis the greatest and most famous City of
Egypt. And by this means the Turkish Princes obtained three exceedyng great
Empires, to wit, of Trapezunce, Constantinople, and Egypt: and so continuallye
the Rod or Sword which God has prepared against the Christians is
fortified and increased.

Solimannus succeeded his Father Selimus in the Empire in the year of Soliman.
4. Emperor.
Christ. MDXIX. beeinge the tenth Prince, and fourth Emperor of the Turks.
The same took Bellogradum or Alba Graeca, a passing strong City and the key
of all Hungary, which was in the year of Christ. MDXXI.

After this in the year of our Lord. 1523 he beesiedged the I Will of Rhodes,
and Rhodes.
compelled it to yield. Then afterward in the year of Christ, 1526* he
discomfited and slew Ludouick king of Hungary with all his army. Again, in
the year of our lord. 1529. he brought an army into Austria, and beesiedged
vienna Vienna.
the head of the country, which although he obtained not yet he woundrouslye
indamaged the Region, with fire, spoylinges, murder, and captivity of many
thousand Christians, whom he carried thence. Beesides this, in the year of
Christ. 1537. he overcame the Christians again in Hungary, and did them
very mutch harm. After which in the year of our Lord. 1541. he took Buda.
Buda the Metropolitan City of all Hungary, and also the whole country. But
because all these things are fressh in the memories of men, which were done
within fifty years, I thought it sufficient only to touch them and repete
them: For it is not unknown what great harm he did, and what autragies he
committed in Hungary about the time that he dyed, which was in the year of
our Lord M. D. lxvi. when he took Ligethum, where either he slew or carried
away as prisoners Lige(...)
most part of the Christians, which in deed were very many.

And now last of all, what the Christians have to look for at the hands of
Selimus the.ii. son to Solimannus the selimus. 5. Emperor.
xi. Prince of the descent of Othomannus and the fifth Emperor of the Turks,
who bega to reign in y^ year of Christ M. D. LXVI. the experience it self
has taught in the year of our Lord, M. D. LXX. in which he took the noble
Kingdom of Cypres, slaying many thousand Christians, whom he had tormented
and then slain: or carrying the^ away into perpetual, and most cruel
seruilitie.

I suppose that in this place, many Note.
will marvel at this rehersall of ye Sarracenicall, and Turkish persecutions,
which are not of opinion themselves that they should be accounted among
persecutions: but rather among wars, whereof the reason and nature is far
otherwise sions are not excused that were infected with errors: Semblably in
these Sarracenicall and Turkish wars, I have applied the name of y^ Christian
church (like as I admonished in y^ beeginning of this book) unto all those
that are called Christians, whom the Turks for y^ names sake do persecute by
reason of an hatred which they bear to the christian faith: although many do
much want of y^ simplicity, and purity of the Christian religion: neither by
any means thereby are the errors of the Romish Church excused.

The things which first incensed the Motions unto these persecutions.
Sarracens and Turks, to commit these furious cruel tyranycall Tragedies,
these wars, and persecutions: was chiefly the Devil himself, who is
exceedingely delyghted with sheadynge of man's blood: secondly the hatred of the
true Christian faith, and a greedye desire to rule far and wide: covetousness
to hea^e up riches, and to live sumptushoppes theretelye: also a zeal and
Rome, Pope, Cache wicked and false which be now at the met, with other causes
which her after shall be declared.

And this mutch I thought breefly to set down, concerning the Sarracenical
and Turkish persecutions. And it is to be wisshed, that all those which are
Christians and would so be named: would soundly and surely acknowledge, that
this grievous tyrany of ye Turks, is a very true persecution, laid upon us
from above, to see if happily men would be brought unto wisdom, whereby to
embrace ernestlye the pure doctrine of Christ, studeinge more to lead a
Christian life then hitherto they have done: for surely unless we do so:
we must needs look for far worse.

But now in these Sarracenicall and Turkish persecutions, to return unto that
which we have often admonished before: I ask this question, if there be any
man of so small or froward discretion, that dares avouche that the Machometan
religion is true, and the Christian false: because y^ followers of machomet in
every place have ^^ among per^^ oppressinge the Chrismo^g wars, whermously
railinge at nature is far otherwise And who dares deney, that all these
religions, and Churches which Saint Paul the Apostle converted to the faith of
Christ, are now ouerturned, and destroyed by that filthy, and horrible
Machometan beast, and that the most impious, and froward faith of Machomet, yea
rather that lothesome abomination is there established: And who is so
presumptious, and deuoyde of all religion, that because God of his just
judgment permits the Turks to commit so many things, which he could
easily prohibit: will therefore dispute with God, and demand of him,
wherefore he suffers so mutch blood to be shed, so many thousand
Christians to be slain? How he can abide so many unspeakable calamities,
miseries, and afflictions of the godly, and that so many hundred years? And
why rather he distroyeth not with Thundre and lightdiffe^^ from Heaven, the
impure, and Church of ^^ire of the Turks, or ca^shoppes thereon* to gape and
swallow Rome, Pope, Car^ abomination? But which be now at this ^e and great
causes why God, who is true, holy, and righteous, suffers and permits all
these things. Furthermore, long since he Dan. 2. Mat. 24. Luke 21.
foretold by Daniell the Prophet, and Christ himself prophiseth in the
Gospel, that the last persecution before the later Iudgmente, should be so
sharp and great: that there was never the like upon the earth either heard, or
seen. And I am of opinion, that the final judgment and the redemption of all
the faithful, and glorious clarification, and blessed rewarding, is not far of
from us. Lord Jesus Christ, take pity upon thine aflicted Church, and
vouchsaue to comfort and help it in this latter cruel, and most rare kind
of persecution.

Of the. 20. and last Tragical Act or persecution, which the Bishops of Rome
have moved and practiced against the Chur(...) of Christ, certain hundred(...)
Chapter. (...)
THe Papistical pe(...) next to the (...) much the more dangerous: how much
the less it was to be looked for, and so much the more cruel: because it is
practiced by those who of all other ought most to be seekers of peace and
quietness, and such as would be accoumpted most soundest in relygion, and most
hollyest of all other in the Church, as unto whom Christ has given all power
in the Church, that in matters of faith they may rule all things according to
their pleasure, and to be the head and universal pastors, over the Catholic
church of Christ. For all men know, what titles the Pope, and all his
spiritual persons do boaste of.

But in the beeginninge of this book, we have declared that there be sundry
understandings and distinctions, not only of faith, and Religion: but of the
Church also, over which the ungodly seek to rule. There is also very great
difference beetweene the ancient Church of Rome, and the first Bisshoppes
thereof: and the Church of Rome, Pope, Cardinals, and bishops which be now
at this day.

The ancient Byshopes of the Church The first Bishops of Rome were Martirs.
of Rome, which lived and sat there from the year of Christ. 70. unto y^ year
314. and during the time of Constantine the great were in number. 32. who were
all faithful in their calling, profitynge the Church by teachinge, and otheir
means, and for christ and his Gospels sake were martyred and slain. They
meddled not at all with the civil government there was no Court of Rome, no senate
of scarlet Cardinals, no guarde for the body, no other superfluities, which
now adays are frequented by Popes. Histories of credit do confirm this same,
such as were not written in flattery of the Popes. Also the name of Pope at
that time was not proper only to the Bishop of Rome: but other Bishops
also abroad in other Provinces were called by the same name. For Aurelius and
Ciprian, Bishops of Carthage Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, and other Bishops in
other places, were also called Popes. And likewise Saint Jerome terms S.
Augustine which was Bishop of Hippo, in certain Epistles by the name of Pope.
For this Papa, or Pope, what it signifies.
word Papa Pope, in the Syracusian tongue signifies as mutch as this word
Pater a Father, as Suidas testifies. For it behooves the Ministers of the
church to be faithful fathers of the people, 1. Cor. 4.
as Saint Paul writes.

Moreover, among all the Bishops of Rome from Constantinus the great, and Pope
Syluester, unto Gregorye the first which were in number, xxxvi. there was not
one within compass of. 280. years, that used y^ pomp, pride, majesty, and
power, which the Popes use accustomably now now a days. Their The ancient
Popes authority.
authority was great among other Churches and Bishops, because for the most
part they were learned and skillful men, neither infected with heresies as
some other Bishops in other Churches were, but principally: because they were
Ministers of the same Church which the Apostles planted at the beeginninge,
Apostolic Sea.
which was therefore called the Apostolic Church, and the Apostolic seat,
and Saint Peter's Chaer. Howbeit the title, and name of the Apostolic seat was
not given only to the Roman Church: but unto other Churches also, namely
Jerusalem, and Antioche. And this word, seat, signifies not a judgment seat,
or a princes throne: but an ecclesiastical preachers pulpit. So Tertul. de
prescript. haeres.
that our forefathers in the old time termed the above named churches,
Apostolic seats of the Apostolic doctrine, because the Apostles taught in
those places, and from those Apostolic Churches, the Apostolic doctrine
stretched forth unto other Churches, as well far as nere. Wherefore those
places in which is not the Apostolic doctrine, can not glory of the Apostolic
seat, although indeed it were there many hundred years before. For there is
also a seat of the Devil, as Saint John declares in the 2. Chapter of the
Revelation.

But in the time of Pope Gregory the first, which was within. 300. years
after the birth of Christ, the Church of Rome was so far from the dominion
which now it obtains: that Gregorye very vehemently with stood John, which
was bishop of Constantinople, who ambitiously sought to have chief place, and
superiority in the Church, and would also be called universal bishop. Which
title, notwithstanding and greater to, the bishops of Rome do use at this
day: but Gregory said that this was a Deuilish pride, and the malice of
Antichriste. He that lust let him read the fourth, and sixte books of Saint
Gregory's Epistles touching this matter.

Howbeit not long after the death of From whence the Romish church received
her power.
Gregory, Bonifacius the 3. usurped that title, which was granted unto him by
Phocas the emperor, a naughty and wicked man. For Otho bishop of Frisingen a
writer of Cronacles, in the v. book, and eight Chapter: reports how Pope
Bonifacius the 3. had obtained of Phocas the Emperor, that by his authority,
power and commandment the Church of Rome might be cauled, and also be
indeed, the head of all other Churches. Beda also writes the same. And
Vrspurgensis says: that Rome ought to be mother of all other Churches.
Nauclerus writes: that al other Churches in the world, ought to obey the
Church of Rome, and the Bishop thereof. Whereby it may be easily perceived how
that this decree of Phocas the Emperor, whom all Hystoricians do very mutch
reprove: was no decree or institution of the Apostles, made by Peter or Paul.

The Sea of Rome being exalted after How the Bishops of Rome usurped.
this manner: the bishops which consequently ensued, began more and more to
busy and meddle themselves with civil matters, neither sought they only for
power, and dominion: but devised how they might pluck their necks from the
emperors iurisoiction, and extol themselves above them, how they might
challenge and bring in subjection under them, their provinces, peoples, and
majesty. But in y^ mean season they quight forgot their submission and duty,
departing far wide from thence, and became altogether Popes rose against
Emperors.
unlike unto y^ first bishops of Rome At length the matter proceeded so far:
that they durst boldly withstand y^ emperors, and rise against them, for even
so Gregory the.ij. and Gregory the.iij. Popes of Romes, opposed themselves
against Leo the.iij. and Constantine ye.v. emperors. For these calling certain
counsels, unto which there assembled a great number of learned men, and bishops
of Asia, Grecia, and other regions, they argued the controversy of Images:
namely, whether it were lawful to have and to woorship the Images of Christ,
and the holly saints in the Churches of the Christians. Whereas at that time
it was concluded, and confirmed out of the holy scriptures, and doctrine of the
ancient fathers, that Images ought not to be worshipped, nor to be suffered in
churches, but to be taken away whersoeuer they were found. But after that
the emperors had given forth co^maundment to the Popes, and unto other under
the Roman Empire, that all of them according to the word of God, and the
meaning thereof discussed in this present cou^seil, should take down th'images
out of their Churches: such was the presumption of the Popes, that being
called to y^ counsel: they neither appeared, and afterward by their own
authority, contrary to the commandment of ye Emperors: Anno Domini. 739.
they called peculyer Counsels of Italian Bishops, wherein they decreede y^
Images ought be to retained in churches, and more worshipped then ever they
had bin before. Nether presumed they only thus far: but withdrue the
Emperors subjects from due obedience toward him, excommuncaityng the
Emperors themselves without cause, raising morouer tumults and great
feditions, wherein the Emperors lieutenantes and debites were slain, as
namely, Paulus at Rauenna: and Mauritius with Adriane his sun in Campania.
And by this means all dutiful Emperor of Constant. by Popes driven out of
Italy.
service, and obedience was denied to the Emperors, and they were driven from
the government of Italye. But by what right, the Popes brought these things to
pass by their practizes: every man that is endued with common sense, and has
any knowledge of justice, may soon understand. Al these things were done with
in. 30. years after y^ year of our lord 724, or nere thereupon, unto the year
of our Lord. 754

In the year of our Lord, 750. Pope an honest practice.
Zachary the. 1. of that name, took upon him te^porall matters, and began to
meddle with the civil government, and assisted to depose ye king of France from
his crown and to place another in his rowme. For through his help and
counsel, Hilderik king of France of the ancient family of Merouingi, was
deposed from y^ crown, and Pipine of the familye of Charles, thurst into his
place.

But shortly after this great benifite of the Popes: Pipine brought an army of
Frenchmen into Italy against Estulphus king of Lumbardy, when having taken in
war the greater part of the country, he gave it for reward unto pope Steven
the second, and then first S. Peter obtained an inheritance, who before y^
time, y^ space of. 700. years: never had any: and although y^ Constantius y^
emperor sent Ambassadors unto Pipine, that he would not alienate the
Provinces of the Roman Empire: yet notwithstanding Steven the Pope gladlye
received those Provinces, peopls, and civil government which certainly S. Peter
would never have done, forasmuch as he refused the charge over the poor.
Acts the vi.

The Popes followinge thereafter, immitated the deeds of the^ which went
before, nothing like the deeds of the Apostles. For Hadriane the Pope,
likewise received all those things willyngly which Charles surmamed the great,
King of France, gave unto him when he had vanquished and overcome the
Lumbards, and taken prisoner Desiderius their King. But Leo the third attempted
more. For he took upon him the authority over all the Empire, which then
appertayned to the Emperors of Constantinople, and crowned Charles Emperor of
Rome without Charles made Emperor by the Pope.
the knowledge and consent of the lawful Emperors, when as then, as Palmerius
accompteth, the west had lacked their own Emperor the space of. 330. years.

The year of Christ 860. Pope Nicholas Emperors swear to the pope.
the first ruled the sea of Rome, a passinge ambitious man institutinge sundry
things not appertayning to the government of the Church: but to confirmation
and establishinge of the popish tyrany. First that no prince, no not the
emperor himself, should be present in the counseiles of the Clergy. Also
that no lay man should set in judgment over a clarke, or ecclesiastical
person. Moreover that the Popes decrees and sentences, ought to be judged by
no man: yea, that the Pope is subject unto no civil power, because he is God.
Read Antoninus Titul. xvi. Paragra. 9. and likewise in the decrees, in the 76.
and. 28* distinction.

Afterward in the year of Christ. 962. the Popes of Rome grue unto so great
power: that when Otho the. 1. emperor of that name, came unto Rome, he must
needs take an oath unto Pope John the xii. that he would defend the
inheritance of Peter, etc. Read the. 63. distinction which beeginneth: Tibi
Domine Ioanni.

But in the year after the birth of our Lord and savior Christ. 1000. the
tyranny of Popes against y^ emperors brak forth into light: for casting away
their yoke from their necks: they beegan freely to bear rule at their own
pleasure nothing regarding any Magistrate, yea bringynge Princes, kings and
Emperors into subjection under them and compellyng to obey them, or otherwise
through deceit and couen, bringing them to the bent of their bow. For I pray
you what horrible tragedies and turmoiles did pope Gregory the seventh stir
up against Henry the fourth?

For, not only he excommunicated him and entreated him most disdainfully: but
also discharginge his subjects, princes, and nobles that were under the empire
from their oath and allegiance: raised a sedition against him, causing an
infinity deal of blood to be shead. Who so is disposed: let him read this
most cruel and strange history, in the yeearlye records of Ihon Auentine,
and in other historicians.

Pope vrbane the.ii. which succeeded urban. 2.
Gregory in the sea of Rome, his very true and undoubted Disciple, in the
Claromont counsel was causer of the most cruel war, which the Christians
made against the Sarracens, whereof we have spoken before. Beesides, he
provoked Conrade the prince of Italye to rebel against his father the emperor
Henrye the fourth, which was a deed altogether against nature.

Likewise Paschalis the.ii. egged the Paschalis. 2.
sun Henrye the v. against his father Henrye the fourth, and thrice accursed
him tausinge the bysshoppes of Ments, and Coleine, and wourmes, in his palace
of Ingelheim by force to turn him out of his imperial ornaments, disgrading
the good old emperor, and adorninge therewith his sun Henrye the fifte. If
any man can be delighted herewith: let him read this woeful historye, in his
Saxony of Albertus Crantius the fir^^ book, the xx. chapter.

The same Paschalis was troublesome also unto the emperor Henrye the fifth, and
was the cause of mutch bloodshead, and all only for the donation and gift as
they call them of certain ecclesiastical benefices, and prefermentes, which
unto that time the emperor had always, and now the Pope went about forcibly
to take them away. But that which he could not bring to pass the same
afterward Calixtus the. 2 assaid, nether relented until he had taken away
from the emperor the same right of donation of spiritual prefermentes. Whereof
Abbas Vrspurgensis has written diligently. These things were done in the
year of our lord God 1122.

But the Popes of Rome were not Popes oppress the emperors.
contented with this: but the later sort have insued the trade of their
predicessours, touching wickedness and mischief in persecutinge the emperors.
For afterward they beecame grievous unto them, never making an end of cursing
seditions, wars, and perpetual fraud and deceit, until at length they had
oppressed the weerie emperors, and exalted their seat above theirs, placinge
themselves in power and superiority above all other. Who so desires to have
2. These. 2.
a sound, and perfect knowledge of these matters: let him read the storye of
Fridericus Barbarossa, and those things which the Popes Adrian the fourth, and
Alexander the third, practiced against him, of which the later most
presumptiously trod upon the Emperors neck with his foot. Also what
Caelestinus the fourth wrought against Henry the first. Let him also there
beeholde with what arrogancy, pride, and insolency, Pope Innocentius the
third, a lofty and bold Priest, used against Philip the Emperor. But
specially let it be well considered, what the popes Honorius y^ third.
Gregory the.ix. and Innocentius the. 4 committed wickedly, and deceiptfully
against Fridericke the second, a notable and most excellent Emperor, and a
man endued with most singular gifts, whom most unworthily and reprochfully,
they troubled and afflicted, as they did likewise his sun, Conradus, the
fourth emperor of that name.

These contentions, persecutions, and most cruel and perpetual wars,
beetweene the Popes and the emperors: continued. 181. years beeginning in the
time of Gregory the 7. unto the enstaulinge of Alexander the fourth, and unto
the year of our lord. 1256. About which time writers of histories, and
Cronacles, do make an Interregnu^, or space while none ruled, which endured the
term of xvii. or xviii. years, unto the election of Anno 1271.
y^ emperor Radulphus of Habspurge. And although in the mean time certain
princes were chosen, as Alfonsus, and Richard, whereof the last took upon him
the charge, and government of the empire: yet all these princes were so
terr^fied with daily molestations, and deceites, wherewith ye Popes had hitherto
troubled the emperors, that no man would willinglye take the empire upon him,
since every man evidently beeheld that by possession thereof he could obtain
no quietness nor profit, but only damage King of Rome without Rome.
and vexation. For although Germanye had the title of the Roman empire: yet
Rome was not the head of their empire, but of the Pepes and if that happily
through their great charge, trouble, and pain leadinge an army into Italye,
they had by force possessed the city: so soon as they were returned again
into Germanye, the Pope by and by reposessed the same.

Moreover, the king or emperor of the Romans, receives no great commodity
Se Theodor Nyem of scismes. 3. book 43. chap. and sleidan. de Monar. Page 120.
171. 172.
nor revenue out of the Roman Empire, so that unless he have otherwise
provision, and living of his own he is scarce able thereof to maintain his
port, and dignity. Yea, and beesides this: the Popes have molested, and gone
about to take away by force of arms, their patrimony which have taken upon
them the Empire thereof. Wherefore, princes that were of wealth and substance,
have not easily bin persuaded to take the Empire upon them. And Radulphus Earl
of Habspurge, when as he accepted the election: yet could he never be
persuaded to go to Rome, to receive the Crown of the Empire, for he always
answered, that he was afraid by the example of many which have gone to
Rome, whereof but few have returned again. And that he might cleerelye
discharge himself from that Cerberus: he cast into his mouth Romandiola,
which unto that time beelonged to the empire.

The Popes of Rome have used sundry strange practizes, to bereue kings and
Emperors of their power, and to extolle themselves above Kings and Princes,
or rather to cast the^ down under their feet. Their chief power consisted in
excomunicatio^, or having excomunicated Excommunication.
any Prince: they withdrue the subjects from obeying him, and exhorted them to
raise tumultes, and fall away from him: moreover they egged subjects and
servants to rebel against their Lords, and Masters shamefully discharging
them from their Loialtie and oath, under this title and pretense, y^ there ought
no honor, nor obedience be shewe^ or used unto excomunicate persons, nor The
popes Legates.
oath kept toward them. Then sent they abroad into all Provinces subtle men,
Legates with Bulls or Letters, and we ye Apostolic power, as they term it,
through whose means they bread sundry conspiracies, partly with the Bisshops
of the Provinces whom they put in mind of their dutiful obedience to the Sea
of Rome, partly with Princes of the Empire, and with all other that were of any
power, or aucthority. Thus having gotten certain of those in their faction, and
raising a dissension among the people, the next was that there must a new
Emperor, be chosen: and then fell they together by the ears which heeld
with the old Emperor, and they which took part with the new. Whereupon many
horrible, and woeful miseries Wars and sedition.
have ensued, as civil wars, seditions, murders, burnings, and generally
all kinds of calamities: wherewith the good Emperors sometimes being wearye,
many times overcome by force: have bin constrained to give place and abide
these things, and in the mean while the Popes have with more arrogancye and
boldness advanced their head. Al these things may be seen as it were in a
Mirror, in ye histories of the emperors Henry the fourth. Henry the. 5.
Frederick the first, and Frederick the second, and others, whom we have
before named. And so at length the Popes have overcome and beecame strong, as
Daniell writes, but not by their own power.

Beesides this also, they have used the Counselles
benifite of counselles unto the confirmation, and preservation of their
kingdom. For in those days they made themselves rulers of the counselles, unto
which they called men of their own faction, who in no point would gainsay the
Pope. And because that of oulde times such counselles as then were holden by
most godly and learned men, were of great aucthoritye: they were also very
mutch regarded of all men which the most hollye father (for so he was
supposed to be) with his adherents had concluded in their assemblies. And thus
under the title of counselles: the Popes mightily brought their driftes to
effect.

There was also a new devise, and Cruciata or Croysados.
such a one as the like has not bin heard of before, invented in the Claromont
counsel, under Pope Vrbane the second which by a new name they called Cruciata:
or Croysados. They preached the Cross, but far otherwise then did the
Apostles. For they preached the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, namely, how
that through his Cross and Passion, we are cleansed from our sins, and by
Faith obtain eternal felicity. But the Popes Cruciata or Croysados, was a
certain kind of Alarm. For the preachers of this Cruciata, exhorted the
christians to sign themselves with the Cross, (like as soldiers in war for
a sign or token, do wear white or red skarfes) and that they should march
into the East against the Sarracens, as we have showed before. And they preched
that they which were signed with the Cross in this warfare: obtained
indulgencies, that is to say, remissions of sins, and if they were slain in
battle: should be partakers of eternal felicity.

Afterward, these suborned preachers Mendican^ Friars.
of the Popes, not only preached the cross against the Sarracens: but also
against the Christians, namely against the Emperors, whom the Pope had
proclaimed to be heretics, and generally against al y^ would not adore the
pope, and obey all his commandments. And by this shift, the Popes have
gathered very great and well appointed armies almost without any charge,
obtaining their power, wealth, and greatness whereunto they be now grown, by
very force.

But in this matter the four orders of begging or mendicant Fries have done
the Popes very good service, which first beegan in the time of Pope
Innocentius, and Honorius, both the. 3. of that name, which kind of people the
Christian Church wanted the space of MCC. years, and that with more
quietness and commodytie then has since the time of their beeginninge, and
approbation ensued. Howbeit in prechynge and setting forth of the Cruciata or
Croysados: the Dominican Friars have taken most pain, who by preaching this
Cruciata or Alarm, obtained the name of preaching Friars. Whom Preaching
Friars.
the Popes in consideration of their pains and dillygent service: have endued
with Privileges, and honors, and loved them more tenderly then the restdue.
Of whose trauile employed to the pleasure, and furtherance of the pope many
things might be written.

At length the state of Christianytie proceeded so far, after the time of the
The Pope vaunteth himself to be Empe.
kings Radulphus, and Adulphus, under Albertus the first, in the year of
Christ. 1300. that the Pope vaunted himself to be Emperor. For at the same
time, Bonifacius the. 8. brought in again the year of Iubilee, which was
abrogated by the Apostles. Acts the. 15 Chapter, promising forgiveness of
sins unto all ye would come to Rome: upon ye first day of which Iubilee, being
adorned in his po^tificalrobes: he came abroad showing himself as Pope to all
men, and blessing ye people: the next day he came forth in his Imperial
apparel, openly declaring that the Empire and Papacy together with all civil
and ecclesiastical power, were in the popes hands. These things are written by
Albertus Crantzius, in the eight book, 26. Chapter of his Saxony. The same
Pope also set forth Decretals, which are called the Decretals of Bonifacius
the eight, where in much more impudentlye he challenges all power to the
Popes.

This power or rather tirannie, and intolerable arrogancye, not long after
Bonifacius: John the twenty and two, John the. 22 against the emperor Ludou. 4.
put in practice, and declared toward Ludouick. For he most reprochefully
misused him, excommunicated him, cast him into grievous wars, causinge an
unspeakable deal of man's blood to be shead, throughout all Germany. These
things are described dilligently, and at large, by John Auentine in the
seventh book of the yearly records of the Boi: which I declare for this
intent, that who so desires to have an exact knowledge of these things: may
know whereto find it.

Moreover, in the reign of Ludouick Zurick excommunicated.
the fourth, as also before, under Friderick the second, the City of Zurick
because it took part with the Emperors against the Pope, keeping always
their oath and allegance toward him: stood many years excommunicated, which
was not without great hinderance of the commonwealth, although since that time
it has again bin endued with sundry privileges, and honors. At which time
the first ground and foundation of the Swicers league, through the gift of God
was laid most happily, Ludouick the Emperor most largely and liberally
granting to the same, and favoring the Swicers, whom I pray god to bless, and
keep, and defend most mercifully.

Now perhaps you will ask me, whether these Acts of the Popes and
Emperors, and the increase of the Popish power and aucthority, do any thing
appertain to ye persecutions against the churh, whereof at the beginning we
purposed to write? yea indeed, altogether, and surely most properly they
appertain to the same. For in as much as the first bisshops of Rome persecuted
no man, but themselves suffered persecution, and were Martires, and those which
next followed were most part of them holy and faithful doctors, subjects
to the Emperors and civil Maiestrates, and ruled over no Provinces nor
Peoples so that none of them were Princes, and the later Popes in these last
times stirred up most grievous persecutions within the circute of
Christendom: it is expedient to know by what means and manner, how, why, and
when, the state of the bishops of Rome was so shamefully deformed and
changed, that the later Popes beecomminge so far diffrent from the first
bishops: beecame Lords of kings, and emperors, and cruel persecuters of
them. Now therefore, so many most cruel and sharp wars, which the Popes
being advanced to so great power have stirred among Christians, in which such
abundance of Christian blood has bin shead: may they not rightfully be
reckned amongst the persecutions of Christians? For like as abroad they have
bin sticklers of most grievous wars unto the Christians against the Sarracens
and Turks, as we have declared before: so have they bin also at home
aucthours of persecutions, troubles, and destruction to Christians. Does not
this very well deserve the name of a persecution, when as Christian emperors,
with such as duetifully obeyed his hestes, ar by Popes vexed and washed with
their own blood discourteously dealt withal with weapons, and warlike
torments, which, as we have showed before out of historys, many years with
infinite spillinge of blood, were most cruelly and tyrannically committed? But
in the midst of so many calamities, the woeful kings and emperors
perpetuallye suffringe affliction, and misery: at length they and theirs
quayled, and gave over, and the Popes beeinge conquerours: triumphed, and
althinges happened according to their desire, and so they established their
power, that they might stand hereafter in awe of no man, but rule at their
pleasure without all controulement.

And in very deed, these are not unlike unto Daniels prophecy, wherein he has
left thus written: While the ungodly are a growyng: there shall arise a king
with an impudent face, which shall understand darck sayings, and his power
shall increase but not in his own strength and he shall destroy above measure,
and all that he goes about shall prosper, and he shall destroy the valient
and holly people. And through his craftines, deceit shall prosper in his hand,
and he shall magnify himself in his heart, and in his prosperity he shall
confound many. Yea he shall rise up against y^ prince of princes, but he
himself shall be destroyed with out hand. Daniell the.viii. Chap. But if I
would here declare ye unspeakable deal of man's blood, which by means Wars for
sicill, and Naples.
of Popes has bin shead in Sicile, Naples, and Apulia: surely the recital
would be over long. For, from ye time of Innocentius the. 4. unto Clemente
the vii. ye space of. 284. years: sumtime the Germans, afterward the Frenchmen
again the Spainiards against ye Frenchmen, then a fresh the Germans against
them, then again the Frenchmen and Hungarians were by Popes called to such
and such kingdoms, and such and such peoples were at war, and by them set
together by the ears. All which troubles are diligently set down by
historicians.

Moreover, through the immoderate, Popes rulers of faith and the Church.
and unlawful power or rather tyranny of y^ Popes, no less also by other
means, blooddy persecutions and murders have risen. For after that, as we
have shown before, they had mightily usurped upon all Ecclesiastical and
Civil jurisdiction, and power also over counselles: then might they afterward
institute and ordeine all ordres of ye Church the doctrine of faith and
religion, rites and customs in the Church, at their own will and pleasure.
And hereof arose persecutions. For who so ever resisted: those they cried out
upon for heretics, and under that pretense persecuted them. And this same
(beesides the wars of the Popes) I term properlye the Papisticall
persecution against Christians, and the Christian Church, which was moved
against the godly and faithful only for their faithes sake, as it was
sumtime in the primitive Church. Wherefore, like as at the beeginninge, the
first faithful were persecuted by the Emperors of Rome: even so toward the
end of the world, the faithful of the latter times do suffer persecution by
the Popes of Rome. But undoubtedly the Lord will come shortly to judge both
the quick, and the dead.

But to the end that this matter may the better be understood, and for the
more exact knowledge thereof: it cannot Errors crept into the Church
be denied, that many errors and abuses not now first, but sumwhat before
have crept in and have bin received into the Church, so that through
continuance of time: they have grown into custom. Which things with many
other more, in process of time are confirmed, and chiefly by the Popes forced
upon men, and by subtle practices but specially by the swoorde enlarged, and
preserved: in so mutch that many perceiving the error, yet durst not openly
withstand it: for they saw well, that they might not so do without danger of
their own blood. But chiefly in these later times this custom has preueyled,
which I will now recite.

In the days of the emperors Lotharius, Original of the Cannon law.
Gratianus.
and Conrade the.iij. or as other some say of Fridericke, about the year of
Christ. 1130. Gratianus Bononiensis a Munke of the order of Benedictus,
gathered together the sentences of ye counsels, fathers, and popes, touching
sundry matters apperteinyng to religion and the Church, and setfoorth that work
abroad which is commonly called Decretum, or Decree. After Gratianus, certain
popes, as Gregory the. 9. Bonifacius the, 8 Clemens the. 5. and John the. 22.
following the example of Gratianus: have gathered also, and with y^ help of
certain munks and Doctors: they patched together se^tences and judgments of
Popes, concerning rites, and institutions, and businesses apperteinyng to
Churches, and ecclesiastical orders. The same are called Decretales, and
Extrauagantes, and were added unto Gratianus Decretum, and all of them together
do make the body of the Canon law. This law beegan to be taught in schools,
which all other followed in doing the like in their Schools, and Universities
under the pope
ecclesiastical judgments, and administration of ye Church. ^y which menes
Schools and universities which are called the Schools of laws and Canons
came under the Popes jurisdiction, wherein the scholars, Masters, and
Doctors, must take an oath to be obedient unto the Pope, and the (...) of
Rome, or unto such as are obedient unto him, or against his laws, and
institutions* Yea this matter has proceeded so far: that the emperors also,
as well as all other bishops, must take an oath unto ye Pope. The fourm of
which Oath: is extant in ye Decrees, and Decretals. Swear to the Pope.
And by this means the Pope has made subject, bound, and beeholding unto him:
al sorts, and orders of ye Church.

Heereunto oppertaineth, that at the same time with Gratianus, not long after,
according to the supputation of other, about the year of our Lord. 1172.
Peter Lumbard.
Peter Lumbard, whom they call master of the sentences, wroat, and setforth 4.
books of the Christian faith and doctrine, which were received into the
Schools, as was the body of the law: so that like as Gratianus is aucthour of
the Canonistes, and doctors of the Pontifical law: so Peter Lumbard is
aucthour of the scholasticall divinity. For the Doctors of those times, and
cheiflye mendicant friars, read Lumbardes sentences openly in schools, and have
written upon the same, as Albertus, Thomas, Bonauenture, Scotus, and many
other. And according unto these sentences: they ordered the doctrine of faith,
and all other affairs of ye Church. At which time the Christian doctrine was
wonderfully torn and cut into sundry questions, whereof they commonly disputed
and argued in ye schools and holy sermons, or rather skoulded, whereby the
Christian doctrine, beecame altogether unlike unto Agreement of the Church.
th'auntient Apostolic singlenes, and integrity. Althings were referred and
subjected to ye sea of Rome, and y^ pope unto whom al ye Canonistes, and
divines were bound by an oath. And this is ye conspiracy of the clargie, which
they call and vaunt to be the consent of al ye church, in faith, and doctrine.
Howbeit in very deed it is none other but this conspiracy which we have here
recited. Wherefore, out of this fountain and welspryng, flowed y^ grievous
papisticall persecution against the Christian Church. For whosoever misliked
with the Popes Monarchy, and conspiracy of ye clergy, which they term consent
and agreement of the church, and did not speak althinges according to the
intent of the Canonistes, and Theologistes: upon those they ran in flocks, and
through the Popes help, and asistance of the seculer arm: they proclaimed them
euerywhere heretics, persecuted, and oppressed them. Touching which purpose,
in the Decretals there is extant a decree of Pope Lucius the third the effect
whereof is this. Whosoever A popish decree.
think otherwise of the Sacraments then the holy Church of Rome thinks and
likewise, all whom the Pope shall condemn: let them be accoumpted for
heretics, and excomunicate persons. There is added also an explication how the
civil Magistrate shall proceed against such, which if he will not do: how
they shall proceed against the disobedient Maiestrate. The third book the
seventh Title of Heretics, Chapter, Ad abolendum. To abolish. etc.

Hereunto accorded the counsel, which Counselles do consent.
as we have before admonished, the Popes had under their own power, for by
occasion of them they have always kept their consent and agreement, and all
that ever resisted the same: those have they oppressed, put to flighte, or
quight rooted out. For whatsoever were decreed in the counselles: the same must
be brought to effect, and immediately put in execution, whereunto all Maiestrats
were bound, and as many as were able to bear armor. The sum of papisticall
counsel.


In the year of our Lord, 1215. Pope Innocentius the third, held a great
counsel in Lateran at Rome: the manner and form of the indiction, Abbas
Vrspurgensis has expressed in his Cronacles, which comprehends very many
things, the chief sum whereof be these. First of making war upon the
Sarracens, and recovering Jerusalem, and the holy Sepulcher. The second of
rooting out heresies. The third of mendinge of manners, and refourming the
Church. The same Chapters were propounded almost in all counsels, which have bin
holden from that time hitherto. They all entreat of three points. Of
repressinge the force of the Turks, of rooting out of heresies, and of
refourming the Church.

But although they have celebrated many Counsels, within the precinct of 300.
years and more: yet have they in none of them reformed that was amiss,
Counselles
whereby it might deserve ye name of a reformation. For errors and
superstitions with sundry abuses more, are not taken away but more increased
mutchlesse have they reformed any whit in the head (as they speak,) or
members of the Church. And although the whole world, during the space of certain
hundred years have woorthely accused the abuses, and most corrupt state of the
ecclesiastical order, with other enormities of the Church, which well deserve
to be taken away and mended: Notwithstanding they have not touched them with
their little finger, and therefore oftentimes arise some greater discordes, and
they fall farther of from the Christian discipline. Yea, and all such as seek
for, and require to have some true reformation, reprehending the disorders and
abuses, and specially y^ popes unlawful aucthorytie, the filthye, and
lecherous life of the Clargye, which all men are constrained to confess to be
very culpable: the same men nevertheless are condemned for scismatickes, and
Heretics, and ar sharply persecuted.

For unto them all are Heretics: Whom the Pope calls heretieks.
whosoever do not submit themselves to the Sea of Rome, and the Pope in all
things, and believe in althinges which that Sea believes and commands to
be believed, according to the above named conspiracy: and so Lucius the pope
defines Heretics in his Decretall, whereof we have made mention before, in
the Chapter Ad aboliendum, to abolyshe. Wherefore with them it is not
sufficient that a godly man confess all the articles of the ancient, true,
undoubted, and Apostolic faith, saying: that he believes in one God, the
father etc. that he also allow, and confess the four orders of our belief
set forth by the ancient counselles, and S. Athanasius, and whatsoever are
taught and confirmed out of the holy scriptures of both Testaments: and
moreover do condemn y^ heresies which were convicted and condemned in y^
ancient counsels. In old time this kind of confession was sufficient enough
for christians in y^ ancient church but amongst these men all these things
aveile nothing, neither suffice to the confession of the faith, but a man
must needs confess and believe in the church of Rome as it is now under the
Pope, and follow the consent thereof: or else he shall leese honor, goods,
body, life and all.

And therefore during the time of the Counselles cause wars. and persecutions.
Counsels, before, and after them, have bin many bateiles, murders, and foul
wastings committed, nether were these things done only against the Sarracens
and unfaithful men: but with mutche more extreamitie and cruelty against
Christians, which would be indeed, and named Christians, and not papists, and
which disallowed and also be wayled the pride, and tyrany of the Pope, his
great and manifest abuses and deprauations of holy things. Wherefore in the
old time it grew into a proverb: Every counsel breeds war: which is to
be understood of Papisticall counsels, and found indeed to be true by proof.

For that I may pass over in this place, wars and most bloody persecutions
of faithful men, but enemies to the Sea of Rome, which were waged and
committed in the reign of Pope Innocentius the third and certain other Popes
next ensuing: let us only examine those things which are not far past the
memory of men that are alive. The The counsel of Constance.
counsel of Constance, I pray you, what wars, persecutions, burninges,
wastyngs, and murders purchased it unto Boheme, and Germany? He that knows
not this: let him learn it at least wise out of Pope Pius the second, who
when he was called as yet Aeneas Syluius, wroat these things very dilligently
in his storye of Boheme. The troubles, seditions, and slaughters, which the
counsel of Basile brought forth are in part recited The Counsel of Basile.
by Platina in the life of Eugenius the fourth. But beesids this, we have a
more fresh and certain example of the Tridentine Counsel, which being first
appointed at Mantua, and afterward at Vincentia: was at the last by Paul the
third in the year of our Lord. 1542 called at Trident nigh Athesis, wholly in
manner and form as we have before recited, which was conluded and The
Trident counsel
ended by Pope Pius the fourth in the year of our Lord. 1563.

Howbeit, what things were done Persecurtions of our time.
certain years before this counsel, and also since, against holy and faithful
men, which only believed in the Gospel, but not in traditions of Popes nor in
ye sea of Rome, by Leo. x. Clement. 7. Paul. 3. and* 4. Julius, the 3. Pius,
ye. 4. and. 5. and by this present Pope Gregorye the. 13. the space of. 53.
years: I need not repeat. For they are known unto God and al ye world, and
as it were written in heaven, unto which place ye blood of all innocents
together with the blood of Abel: cries from the earth unto God for vengeance.
Many grievous, long, and bloodye wars for sundry causes were waged in those
years, but at the same time no less grievous and bloody persecutions were
committed against ye faithful: for faith, and religions sake. Faithful and
Godly men were reprochefully and injuriously dealt withal, apprehended, thrown
out of doors, driven into exile, spoiled of their goods, beheaded, hanged on
gallows, burned, vexed with all kinds of torments, and punishment. And by
this means were oppressed tormented, and slain, hundred thousands, of
faithful men and professors of the Gospel both in the higher, and lower
Germany, in Scotland, England, Spain, Note.
(which found out the new practice of the inquisition) in Italy, and other
regions. But cheiflye what has bin done in France: there is no man at this day
but knows. And there are extant whole books written of ye grievous, and long
Papisticall persecution, and the thing done is yet fresh in memory, wherefore
it is not needful that I should specially declare it again at large, since
yet at this present they make no end of their cruelty, and sheding of blood.
Since therefore, they which would seem to be Fathers, and pastors of ye
church, do make themselves executioners of this last papisticall persecution:
we may not only compare it we ye old persecutions, but in respect of the
greatness prefer it above it.

Moreover, as in ancient times the old persecutors of ye church were egged
forward to rigor through an insatiable desire to rule, to the intent they
might keep and increase their dignity, pleasures, riches, and superstition:
so likewise is the Papisticall persecution committed for the same cause. But
like as the Christian faith in the old time was no whit the less esteemed of
for the persecutions: so at this present the Evangelical doctrine is nothing
the worse nor viler, because the Papists do persecute the professors of the
Gospel, and many times overcome them. There are sundry causes, why God
suffers this to be done, neither ought any man to accuse, or call the
judgment of God into question.

And this mutch I had to say of the persecutions which the Church of Christ
has suffered from the birth of our Savior unto our time: comprehendinge
breefely the whole sum, whereby the matter being otherwise very large: might
seem ouerlonge, and tedious to the reader. Howbeit, much more might and ought
to have bin written of this manifold, and ample argument.

Of the Sundry causes, why God suffers the Christian Church to be torn with
Tyrants and afflicted with persecutions. Chapter. xvii.
Hereafter I intend to declare, the causes and effects of the above recited
persecutions of y^ christian church, which do work in the faithful, And
although I have already almost in every one, showed them: notwithstanding there
remain some more special, which are of us with more diligence to be
considered.

Persecutions are sent to the Church by the just judgment of god, as the
scripture plainly witnesses were sent unto Job the hollie man, and Servant of
Job.
God: the Cross, affliction, and persecution from God. Unto which purpose, God
used Satan as an instrument, prescribing him bonds how far he should
persecute Job. And Satan through his malice stirred up the ravenous and gredie
people of the Chaldees, to break in upon Jobs goods, to spoil him, and
bring him to poverty. Then Job, although he understood y^ ^through the
instigation of Satan, he was in such sort endamaged by wicked, and ravenous
men: notwithstanding he took regard unto the principal cause of
persecution, and he said not as the manner is now a days, that he was sore
afflicted by Satan, and maliciouslye spoiled by the Chaldees: but, said he,
the Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, y^ name of the Lord be
blessed for ever.

Likewise, the scripture in the same Captivity of Babylon
signification, calls Nabuchodonosor the servant of God, which persecuted
his people, and lead them captive into Babylon, for so it is written in the
second book of Paralipomenon, the last Chap. wherefore God sent his Prophets
unto them, exhorting the^ to repent, but they mocked at them. And therefore the
lord beeinge displeased with them: brought upon them the king of Chaldees
(which was Nabuchodonosor) and diliuered then into his hands. Likewise in
Daniel the. 9. and y^ Lord watched for a shrewd turn, and has brought it
upon us: Our Lord God is just in all his works, which he has done. And
although they were the Chaldees which lead away the people of God into hard,
and sharp captivity: notwithstanding the Prophets of God, Jeremy, Ezechiel,
Daniel, with many other hollie men, which saw, and felt these things: chose
rather with Job to ascribe their affliction and persecution unto God and his
justice, then unto the vnbeeleeuing and wicked men. So likewise at this day,
the faithful had rather to suppose, y^ they abide their afflictions at the
hands of God: then of men. For they know, that men can do nothing unless God
permit them. And in that he permits them: again thereby they know and
beeleeue y^ all things are done, and suffered by him to be done: by his just
judgment, and for ye profit of his people.

Wherefore, by all these things we may The godly suffer persecution.
understand, that the cross, afflictions, and persecutions ar sent from God,
and laid also upon holy and Godly men. And as touching Job: God himself bears
witness: that he was a single and righteous man, fearing God, and eschewing
evil whose like was not upon the earth. Moreover, all men acknowledge and
confess, that the Prophets, John the Baptiste, and the Apostles: were holly
men, and the servants of God, and yet notwtsta^ding they al suffered
persecution. Besides this, S. Peter writes: that Christians should not suffer
as thieves, or malefactors: but only for God, and the truethes cause. The
first epistle of Peter, the. 4. chapter.

Secondly, God sends persecution unto such, as ought to be the people of
God, and partly also are indeed, and so are named: but are not so innocent,
pure, and holly, as of duty they should be, as we said erewhile of the
people of God, which were lead away into Babylon: And Cyprian testifies, that
the cause of the persecution at his time under the Emperor Decius: was the
dissolute life of the faithful. Eusebius shows the like causes, where he
describes the persecution of Dioclecian. And it is seen, that booth guilty
and unguilty, good and bad, altogether are subject to the cross. I call
unguilty, those which being unlike to the children of this world: are not
defiled with all kind of wickedness, nevertheless have their imperfections,
and as it were, certain moales and staynyngs. Wherefore, they confess their
faults and defectes unto God, and glory nothing of themselves. According unto
which sense and opinion, Job says: Surely I know it is true, that no man is
just if he be compared to God. If he will strive with him: he is not able to
answer him unto one for a thousand. And although I have done some just deed:
yet will I not answer, but entreat my judge. And David in the. 142. Psalm
says: Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for there shall no
living creature be justified in thy sight. Wherefore, those which be
giltlesse, although they be subject to persecution with the most wicked men:
notwithstanding they murmur not against y^ Lord, but according to the
scriptures they confess and say: Thy judgments are just, O Lord, and all thy
ways are truth, and holiness.

Thirdly, persecutions are sent from god unto the Church, to declare his
glory, and Majesty. For when the Disciples upon a time, had enquired of the
Lord touching the man that was borne blind, whether he or his parents had
deserved the same by their offenses: the lord answered them, as appears in
John the ix. chapter, that this was done, that the glory of God might be
declared in him. The like also he said of the sickness of his friend Lazarus, in
John the 12. that the infirmity was not unto death: but sent to the glory of
God, that ye sun of God might be glorified thereby. For in persecutions, the
power of God is declared whereby he preserves his in the midst of afflictions,
and when he sees time, delivers them with great glory, as it is evidently
expressed in the stories of Daniell, Hester, and Esdras. Wherefore, it is written
by Saint Paul: we have the treasure of the Gospel in earthen vessels, that
the excellency of the power thereof may be Gods, and not our own, while in
althinges we ar pressed but not wrong: we are in trouble but we do not want,
we suffer persecution but we are not therein forsaken, cast down, nor
perish. we carry the mortification of our Lord Jesus Christ about with us
in our body, to the intent that the life which comes by Jesus Christ: may
be made manifest in our body, the.ii. to the Corinthians, the. 4. Chapter. For
which cause, the same Apostle writes how it was said unto him by the Lord: my
grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect through
weakness, the 2. to the Corinthias, the xii. chapter. The truth is known by
persecutions.


There is also another cause of persecutions, for that it pleases God through
them to reveal the truth unto men: namely, when the faithful being
apprehended in persecutions, and brought into judgment: do plainly and openly
profess the Gospel. And our savior christ says: you shall be brought before
Lieutenantes and kings for my sake, that this may be a testimony to them,
and the Gentiles. Matthew the x. Chapter.

Moreover, by persecutions which God lays upon the Church: he proves the
same how strong and constant it is, purgynge those that are unclean, like as
Goldsmithes use to try and cleanse their gold, and silver in the fire. For if
the fleash continue in rest and idleness, feelyng no manner of adversity,
oftentimes it waxes wanton, and lascivious: wherefore God exercises his
servants with persecutions, to awake them that they should not to mutch be
wedded unto temporal things, but with more ernest desire seek for things
eternal. Unto which purpose and meaning S. Peter writes: Dearly beloved, be
ye not troubled in this heat, which now is come among you to try you, as
though some strange thing had happened unto you: but rather rejoice, in as mutch
as you are made partakers of Christ's passions, that when his glory appears:
ye may be merry and glad. Peter the first Epistle, the. 4. chapter. Whereunto
also tend the words of the Apostle S. Paul: We rejoice also in tribulations,
knowing that tribulation brings patience, patience brings experience,
experience brings hope and hope makes not ashamed. Paul to the Romans, the.
5. chapter.

Again, when the Lord lays the Persecutions are tokens of the judgment of
God upon the wicked.
Cross upon those whom he loves, and suffers men which are not altogether
wicked to be afflicted, but such as fear God and serve him, although
notwithstanding they have some blemishes: therwithall he shows what wicked
men, and the children of this world must look for. Like as the Lord himself
witnesses, who bearyng his own Cross when he was lead to execution, said:
It it be thus in the green tree that bears fruit: what shall be in the dry
and unfruitfully? And Saint Peter: For 1. Peter. 4.
it is time (says he) that judgment begin at the house of god: then if it
begin first with us: what shall be the end of those y^ obey not the gospel of
God? And if the just be scarce faued: where shall the wicked and sinful man
show his face?

By persecutions also God draws unto him, and directs in the right way
those which before that time walked not strait in the ways of the Lord. And
he complains by his prophets, and blames his people, y^ being put in mind
of their duty with many stripes, yet would they not turn unto him.

Moreover, in persecutions and afflictions, there is given unto us matter and
occasion of trouble, that we may bring forth good works we patience, and we a
good hope, y^ we may call upon god in our passions, and never wax weary with
calling: like as the Lord. Jesus has manifestlye taught us in Luke the. 18
chap. And in very deed we find this daily to be true, that we are slothful
and cold in prayer: when we are grieved with no persecution, nor Persecutions
awake us.
touched almost we any kind of adversity.

Last of all, God exercises the faithful with persecutions, swiping from them,
as it were, the dust of worldly desire or fleshly lusts, that they should not
perish in their sins, we the wicked world. For it is sure, and true, which S.
Paul writes: But when we are judged of the lord: we are chastined that we
should not be damned with the world. 1. Cor. ca. 11.

Now when we be thus instructed: we must humble and submit our selves unto the
mighty hand of the Lord, who when he sees his time, can deliver us again,
when it shall seem convenient unto his good pleasure. Whereof we have an example
in David, who when he was persecuted by his own sun Absolon, among other
things he said: If I have found favor in the sight of the Lord: he will
restore me. But if he say unto me, I have no delight in thee: Behold I am
here, let him do unto me that which is acceptable in his sight. The same
Saint Peter wills al men to do which suffer persecution, writing thus:
Wherefore, let al them that suffer afflictions, according to the will of God,
commit their souls to him with well doing, as unto a faithful creator.

These causes, and effects of the persecutions 1. Pet. 4.
of the Christian Church, I have breefly chosen out amongst many, lest that
the store and over long reciting of them at large: should be grievous unto any.

The End

