Diatelesma.

The second part of the Modern History of the World, containing this last
Summers actions, IN Languedock, Italy, Piemont, Montferrat, Lorrain, the
Dukedom of Burgundy, the Franch County, and generally in France, Holland, the
West Indies, and Marine occurrences; With some passages of Rome, and Turkey,
brought down to November. 1637.

Quicquid agunt homines nostri est ferrago libelli.

Iuven. decorative design

LONDON, Printed by T. Harper, and are to be sold by Nathaniel Butter, and
Nicholas Bourne. 1638.

A Table of Contents.
CErbellone encampeth before Laucate. Page 2 The Situation of Laucate. ibid.
Cerbellon gropeth the Governor, ibid. And failing of his end, prepares to
batter the Fort. 3 The Castle of Roqueford taken by Cerbellon. ibid. The
Garrison re-enforced, 4 The Duke of Halewin prepares to relieve it. ibid.
Brings up his army opportunely, 5 Calls a Council of War. 6 The
resolution of the Council, ibid. Is put in practice. 7 The Spanish scouts
repulsed. ibid. The French General seeks to be informed of the Spanish
Fortifications, ibid. The Fortifications discovered, 8 Another Council of
War is called, ibid. It being concluded to assault the Enemy in five places.
ibid. Labourerers are sent to open the way for the horse, 9 And the French
army is divided into five bonds. ibid. A reserve set apart. 10 The battles
join. 11 The fight doubtful; the French horse come up, and get the victory.
ibid. The Spaniards fly, 12 The French seize on the spoil. 13 The Spaniards
loss. ibid. The King gives thanks to God, and rewards to his soldiers. ibid.
The Duke of Rohans march out of the Veltoline. 15 D. Bernhard goes into the
field, 16 Takes in the Castle of Romagne, ibid. Which yields upon discretion.
17 Some Peasants, to secure their gold, lose both money and lives. ibid.
Champlite surrendered to D. Bernh. 18 Mercy with seventeeene Regiments, opposes
the D. passage over Soan. ibid. Duke Bernh. encounters him, 19 And gets the
victory. ibid. Giz yielded upon discretion. 20 The Commander in Saint Loup
hanged up. ibid. The issue, and effect of the battle. ibid. Mercy again
defeated by the Rhinegrave. 21 Mountbeliard blocked up by Putler, is freed by
Schavelitzky. ibid. Altkirk, taken, pillaged and burnt by Schavelitzky. ibid.
Montbeliard re-victualled by D. Bernhard. ibid. Six Companies of Lorrain
horsemen defeated by D. Bernhard. 22 Boyseys Regiment defeated, and himself
slain. ibid. Mommartin and Veson taken in, the Duke marches toward the Rhine.
23 Many of the Lorrainers submit to the French King voluntarily. Le Pont de
Horde, ibid. Besieged, ibid. And taken by the Count of Medovie, Governor of
Montbeliard. 24 The Governor hanged. ibid. The death of Ponico, D. Bernhards
bosom friend. 25 A strange tempest at Tours. ibid. Buffara a Weaver, naiseth a
commotion in Perigot. 26 By an ill woven speech to the Peasants, 27 The people
assenting, take up Arms; 28 Are beaten in the field by the Duke de Valette.
ibid. Their Captain broke upon the wheel. 29 A Blacksmith raises a new
commotion in Querey, ibid. Takes Fons, ibid. Is re-enforced by three thousand
fresh men, ibid. Summons Pigear. 30 Is deluded by the Citizens, ibid. Taken,
and delivered to the hands of Justice. 31 The Marquess of Constans raised by
the Duke of Langueville. 32 The Castle of Courlaon besieged by the D. 33
Surrendered upon composition. ibid. The town of Lion de Saulnier besieged by
the French. 34. The Castle holds out. ibid. Two other Castles taken by the Duke
Longueville. 35 Montaigne taken by the Count De Guebriant. ibid. The Castle of
Lion de Saulniere surrendered upon composition. 36 Diverse Forts and Castles
taken by the D. de Longueville. 37 The Castle of Sovigny ayred before the
French enter. 38 The Duke of Longueville by suffering the Camptois to take
their Crop, relieves his Army. ibid. Orgelet yielded to the French, with other
Forts. 39 The Count of Soyssons gives evidence of his loyalty to the King. 40
Sundry Castles taken by Guebriant in the French County. ibid. S. Lawrence la
Roche, the Town surprised by the French, 41 Burned by the Spaniards, which
sly into the Castle, 42 Where they are besieged, and forced to yield. ibid.
Bleteran in danger of a siege. 43 The Burgesses prepare to fly. ibid.
Guebriant way-layes them, and they not coming abroad, addresseth a Stratagem
to surprise the Garrison. 44 That failing, he takes in Iosseau a Castle, ibid.
And the Fort de Loges, 45 Addresseth a new stratagem for the Garrison of
Bleterans, ibid. And surprised a part of the Presidiaries. ibid. Bleterans
besieged, 46 And described. ibid. The Castle of Fontenay surrendered. ibid. The
Town of Bleterans taken. 47 The besieged fly to the Castle, where they
capitulate, and surrender. ibid. Troubles amongst the Grisons after Rohans
departure. 49 Leganez Governor of Millain goes into the field. 50 The Spanish
Army is divided into three parts. ibid. Gildas sent toward Nisse le Pagly.
ibid. Summoneth the City. 51 Which by the treachery and seditious practice of
the Inhabitants, 52 Was surrendered, ibid. In despite of the Governor, and
Garrison. ibid. Agliano besieged by the Spaniard. 53 The Commander endures
diverse assaults. ibid. Slaughters upon the Assailants. ibid. Agliano taken by
the Spaniard. 54 The Duke of Savoy, and the Marquess of Leganez encampe near
each other. 55 The Marquess his Horses quartered without his Trenches, are
exposed to damage, ibid. The Prince of Modena sent into Langues, 56 Plundereth
the Territory, ibid. Takes in the Fort Santa Iulia, 57 Where he encampeth,
and is raised by Senantes, a Colonel of the Duke of Savoy. ibid. A Fort Royal
built by Leganez at Rocca. ibid. Leganez discampeth. 58 The French Army joins
with the Duke of Savoy, who sends a part thereof against the Prince of Modena.
58 Cairo besieged by Verrue. 59 Leganez to divert him, invades Veecelloia.
ibid. But his project takes not. ibid. A Battle betwixt the Marquess Ville,
and the Spanish Forces near Cesia, 60 Begun by a light Skirmish, 61 Comes to a
pitched Battle, which a while continued doubtful, ibid. Yet in the end the
French get the victory. ibid. La Rocca besieged by the French and Piemontains.
62 A notable Exploit done by Dallot a French Colonel. ibid. Leganez sends
Don Martino to relieve la Rocca. 62 The Spanish Vantguard surprised. ibid.
Leganez brings his whole Army against the French and Piemontains. ibid. A
Battle without victory. 64 The siege of la Rocca raised. ibid. The victory
gotten by the Duke of Savoy at Monbaldon. ibid. The death of the Duke of Savoy.
66 The King of France causes the Master of the Ceremonies. ibid. To proclaim
an Office for his soul. ibid. The Proclamation concerning the Dukes titles,
etc. 67 The manner of the service with all Ceremonies. ibid. The first days
service. 68 The Office for the second day. ibid. With all the particular
ceremonies. 69 Two Capuchins murdered by a Jew at Carriew. 72 The murder
discovered. 73 The Jews condemned and executed. ibid. The Popes sickness and
recovery. 74 The death of the Dukes of Mirandula, and Mantua. ibid. The States
purpose to war 76 Breda besieged. ibid. The description of the Town. ibid.
The condition under several Princes. 77 The Avantguard under Henry Cassimire,
blocks it up. ib. The Works begun. 78 The Cardinal Infant seeks to releeve
it. ibid. John de Nassau sent to descry the Princes posture. ibid. Observing
the Prince on his squadron, he departs. 79 Henry Cassimire like to be
surprised. ibid. The Garrison sally out upon the Camp. ibid. The Princes order
to keep the Garrison in. 80 Venlo taken by the Cardinal. ib. Rouremond
surrendered upon composition. 81 The Articles of Breda. 83 The Spanish design
upon the rode of S. Tropez failing. 89 The Spanish Fleet surpriseth 10 Holland
Ships bound for Genoa. 91 The Genovesses seek to have them restored but
prevail not, Ib. The arrival of Count Maurice at Pharnam-Boucq. 92 His
Victory at Porto Calvo. Ib. The Galleys of Bisera pillaged the Sea-townes in
the Kingdom of Naples. 95 The Vizeroy of Naples provideth to serve them. Ibid.
Coriale pillaged by the pirates of Alger. 96 The Bendetty in the Kingdom of
Naples, executed. Ib.

Diatelesma.
The second Part of these Summers Actions 1637 brought down, and published as
it was promised.
The Victory achieved by the French in Languedock. CHAP. I.
A Private man is happy in a mediocrity of Fortune, if he can content himself
with having what is necessary and sufficient. A Prince by seeking to enlarge
his Territories, not seldom draineth his Exchequer, always increases his
cares, often his own, and his peoples sorrows. The Catholic King might seem
to thrive the year past by his invasion of Picardie, yet now should it come to
an Audit, his losses in France would (it seems^ surmount his gain.

August ^^/^^, the Count Cerbellon encamped before Laucate, with an army (as
the French affirm) of 16000 Cerbellon^ encampeth before Laucate.
foot, and 1800 horse, an artillery of 70 pieces of Canon, a great number of
wagons laden with ammunition, arms, and other necessary instruments, (all
which had been in preparing the space of two years) with a purpose to surpriz^
some places of strength in Languedock, the Spaniards themselves having
seriously given it out, that the King in person was to command that army.

The town is sited in the south of Languedock, called by Caesar Gallia
Narbonensis, in a Peninsula, about 15 English miles in circumference of a
triangular form, bounded with rocks on the one side, a salt Lake called Salses
by the French on the second, and the Mediterranean Sea on the third, where
there is a good Road for Galleys, and Ships of a reasonable burden. The
situation The situation of Laucate.
of the place, they adjudging that it would much advantage their incursions
into Languedock, caused Cerbellon to bring his Spanish troops before the Fort,
who first sounded the Governor, the Lord de Ba^ry, offering him in hand (as is
written by some) 50000 Crowns, and promising him a yearly pension of 6000 to
betray it, and in fine, finding his loyalty to the Christian King his Master,
his constancy being revived by memory of the glorious death of his father,
formerly Governor Cerbellon gropeth the Go^
of the same place, who being taken by the Spaniard, preferred the conservation
of the Fort for the King his Masters service, before his own life, proceeded
from treaty to violence, to try if the walls could abide the thunder of his
Ordnance, and remain as firm as the Governors heart, which he had found
many a thousand double Pistolet proof.

Like a wise Commander, the Spanish General provided And failing of his end
prepares to batter the Fort.
first for his own security, before he attempted any offensive way against his
Enemy: ten days he spent in entrenching himself upon a lane of fifteen perches
long, (the place being no way else accessible, by reason of the salt Lake on
the one side, and a steep Rock-plum-down, on the other side) where because
there was little store of earth, he covered his trenches with a wall of stone
and clay, raised eight foot, where the ground was highest, and fourteen or
fifteen, where it was lower, with a Ditch before it, and a Mount behind it, for
the more convenient lodging of his Musketeers. Within his trenches he raised
two Forts, one called after his own name Cerbellon, of four bastions; another
in a place called Franquie, to which the lesser shipping and Galleys might
arrive; besides he made many redoubts upon which he planted all his Canons,
except 14 pieces, bearing bullets of 40 pounds weight, which he drew nearer the
Fort, and divided into three batteries, the first at Gran of six pieces, the
second of four Canons right against the only spring of sweet waters in the
Peninsula, many of his soldiers (being compelled thither to relieve their
necessities) lost their lives in time of the siege, and a third of the same
number of Guns, with the second, raised near the Bridge, which is laid over
the narrower channel, by which the salt Lake emptieth it self into the
Mediterranean.

His batteries began with his entrenching, but they were like the gentle
distillations of some few drops of rain before a violent storm, or the noise of
the gliding, purling rivolets at the Springhead, compared to the roaring falls
of Nilus, in respect of what ensued after. The Castle of Roqueford, taken by
Cerbellon.
His works being perfected, he first seized of the Castle of Roquefort, which
he garrisoned and fortified, to command that passage, and impeach the French
forces, which might be brought by the way of Narbonne and Defferecavall, and
next of the town of La Palm, and so blockt up the way from Bordeaux, and then
played from all his batteries upon the besieged Citadell incessantly (the
besieged in the space of 30 days, which the Spanish forces lay before the
place, having taken precise notice (upon an exact account) of 17000 Canon shot)
in the mean time, making the best use he could of his Morteren and Grenadoes,
which did the defendants far more harm then his Ordnance. The Governor had
set up his rest, resolved to die, before he would surrender a piece of such
importance to his Masters, the Kings enemies, and with the assistance of 300
men, (the number of his soldiers being increased to The Garrison re-enforced.
that height, by the access of two Companies, which were sent unto him by the
Duke of Halewin, Lieutenant Governor of that Province) maintained the place
bravely, till the siege was raised, and then affirmed, that he should have been
able to have holden out three weeks longer, if the succors had not come in, as
they did, so maturely. He hid not, but secured himself, by the strength of
the Fort, from the assailants violence.

But there is no cause of confidence in bulwarks and walls of stone, Famine
will scale them in the end, though the Enemies Ordnance cannot bore them; the
Duke of Hale-win held this position for an Aphorism, and employed all care,
summoned up his thoughts, used all art to relieve him opportunely, called a
Council of the The Duke of Halewin prepares to relieve it.
Bishops and Nobility, and having advised with them, what was to be done,
applied the means which were most probable to cure that ulcer which began to
gangrenate and spread it self in that Province. He mustered up the Regiments
of Vitry, S. Aunez S. Andrew, Castelan, and Murviel; and train bands of
Montpellier, Narbonne, Beziers, Nismes, Vzez, Carcassone, Lodesve, Sevennes,
Ganges, Mirepois, Ionquieres, Castre, Viellette and Valat, which served as his
Infantry. The Cavallary was composed of the Gentry of Languedock, his own
company of men at Arms, and his life guard, which divided by him into eleven
Squadrons, under the command of so many several, valiant, and expert Leaders,
at Narbonne, Sept 1^/2^, the time and place of the General Randevouz, marched
the day following to Sigean, where they lay enquartered that night, and the
night following, attending till such store of ammunition and victuals were
brought in, as were thought necessary for that expedition.

It was then upon the nick when the French Duke came in with his Army to
succor the besieged, the Spanish Gunners had made a sufficient breach in the
wall, to try the courage and manhood of the defendants by assault. The Duke of
Cardonne Viceroy of Catalognia's son was come to the Camp, and had
reenforced Brings up his Army opportunely.
the Spanish Army, with a new accrewt of 1000 men: the Count de Serbellon,
began to be confident of the prize, rode upon his Male about the Camp, to give
directions, promised the young Don to show him a fresh battery, the next day
opposite to the place, upon which he had before played with his Canon, and both
by gesture and posture, word, and work, expressed a certain assurance of a
speedy and notable victory. But let not him, that is putting on his arms, brag
as if he was putting them off. The chance of war, is of all other most
uncertain, and here if any where, we may aver:

Nescis quid serus vehat vesper. Discretion looks about, before it undertakes
an adventure. The Duke of Halwein for all this appearance of imminent peril to
the besieged, went not on to succor Calls a Counsel of War.
them without forecasting what might be the consequents of his adventure. He
would not involve his Friends in most certain difficulties of a greater
importance, to avoid a lesser danger of more uncertainty. The besieged brought
to extremity, might capitulate, and come off with life and honor; the worst
was, but the loss of the place, which being in the Kings Country, was in all
likelihood to be regained, though not without expense, the loss of an Army,
and such an Army as was drawn out of the most selected men of that Province,
was of more importance, and though he resolved to try the utmost for his
Friends relief, yet he would not attempt it without good Advisoes. Two
Councels of War, besides that at Narbonne, were called, the one in the
commencement, the other in the prose quution of his action. The one at Sigean,
Sept. 14/24, where he lay encamped, the other in the plain of Lawcate four
days after.

The conclusion of the first consultation was that Argencour, The resolution of
the Council.
the Field-mar shall with his Avant-guard of the Army, should go to take up his
quartier, at the passage of Deferrecavall, and surprise the Castle of
Roquefort, whilst the rest of the Army might march up to him: The task was an
hard and difficult one, the passage was narrow, there could march no more then
two abrest, yet his willing industry overcame that difficulty, and with a word,
a bare summons took in the Fort, the Commander according, and condescending to
depart with no other Arms then his sword, and his soldiers with staves in
their hands. The French General followed with the main body of his Army,
giving a testimony of impatience, to see the Kings Enemies so far advanced in
his Majesty's territories: and the same day about one in the afternoon, set his
Army in battalia in the sight of his adversaries. This his apparition somewhat
altered the course of the Is put in practice.
Spanish Counts designs. He was not so absolutely confident of his power, as
that hab-nab ^he would deal with the French Duke in open field: the trenches
in which he was hedged, were as strong as the Castle, and there he meant to
keep, unless some advantage might invice him abroad. He took it in foul scorn
to be outbraved, yet would not adventure forth of his fortisications upon
doubtful, much less upon desperate conditions. The Spanish scowts repulsed.
A glimpse he had of the French forces, but neither knew their number, nor
their order perfectly. To be better informed of each particular circumstance,
400 horse were sent out to desery the French Army. Halewin soon perceived what
was sntended, and to detain him in his ignorance of the particulars, sent out
five selected companies, under the direction of a man experimentally proved
both wise and valiant, the Lord de Boissat, to beat these discoverers back,
which charge (fortune waiting upon his valor) he performed so happily, that he
forced them to retreat, one part into their trenches, and another by the Lake
de Salses, toward the way of Spain.

All these actions were but the Proscoenia of the Spanish The French General
seeks to be informed of the Spanish Fortifications.
Tragoedie: the French General having thus defeated the Spanish Count of his
intelligence, endeavored to inform himself of his adversaries
fortifications. The day light might best instruct him, but would most endanger
him, the enemy stood all the next day in battalia behind his trenches, and
waited for so advantageous an occasion. The night though it could afford him
but a confused notice, would more secure him, and that he made choice of being
content to satisfy his understanding, which before knew the advantages of the
ground, with such a general discovery of his manner of encamping. He knew
before, that the Spaniard lay entrenched The Fortifications discovered.
amongst rocks, almost unpasseable, especially for his Cavallary, only he
desired to see if there was any way left, by which he might reach them in their
fortifications, although it must be done with much difficulty. The night
presented him with a passage on the right hand of the new Fort called
Serbellon, but so obscurely, that he durst not adventure, till the day
discovering the Landscape of the place more plainly, confirmed him, that he
might probably lead on his Army that way, not without any, but the least
danger. Upon this discovery, he caused the Commanders of the Army, again to
meet in counsel, gave them a particular relation of what he had seen, wished
them to prepare against 6 in the evening to execute, what he had designed for
assaulting the enemy, and being seconded by Another Counsel of war is called,
Mayola, Lieutenant of the Guard, to the Cardinal Duke Richelieu, who was come
that day to the Camp, with instructions from the Christian King, his speech was
crowned with applause, by the general votes of the officers, with an
expression of as much forwardness to perform, as the General propounded the
enterprise.

The hour drew on, and then after instructions to Arm, the Duke made a short
oration to his soldiers to encourage them to fight for the King, the Country,
their wives, childrens, and their own liberty, warned to be ready upon the
sound of the trumpets, selected It being concluded to assault the enemy in 5
places.
five times 80 men out of five regiments, to go on as the Perdues of the Army,
which he had divided into so many several parts, to assault the Spanish
trenches, in so many several places, ordered them to march with their swords
by their sides, a Pike in one hand, and a Bavin in the other, for assistance of
the laborers, whom he had appointed to open the trenches, and these being
supported by Mayola and Herisson, a Captain of the regiment of the Isles, (yet
scarce recovered of the wounds which he received at Margarita and Honorata)
which offered themselves to that service, following their directions, performed
their work so well, Laborers are sent to open the way for the horse.
that in the space of half an hour, the Perdues were earthed, and he Pioners
had cut a way for the more easy bringing up of the French Cavallary.

Mayola, who by his presence had encouraged the workmen, would also be the
first relator of this success, posted back to the Duke, told him what was
done, and the Duke who longed after such tidings, Went on immediately in the
head of his Army, not staying to give them a charge by word of mouth, with an
Ite, go you, like a faint-hearted Commander, but like a daring leader,
declaring a Venite, come and follow me, by his exemplary action. The places
appointed for the sive several assaults, and the Commanders which were to
manage them were these. The first place, was at the Bridge upon the mouth of
the Salt-Lake, the charge whereof was committed to S. Aunez, and his regiment
who was seconded by the soldiers of Narbonne, Beziers, and the Diocese of
Castres, a company of Volunteers commanded by the Lord de Lairone, a company of
Musketeers, horsemen of Tholouza^ under the Lord de Calvet, Treasurer of
France. The second place was upon the sea shore, at the Port Franqui, And the
French Army is divided (...) sive bonds.
and this was the charge of the regiment at Languedocke, which was backed by
three companies of foot, brought into the Army, by the Lords of Ionquieres,
Cauvisson, and the Baron of Mirepois, by a troop of 150 Gentlemen, friends and
allies to the Marquess d' Ambres, one of the Kings Lieutenants in Languedock,
and by a company of men at Arms, consisting of 50 Masters. Betwixt these two
places, on the right hand of the regiment of Languedock, a third place was
committed to the trust and valor of the Lord S. Andrew, and the military bonds
of Nismes and Castres, who was to be seconded by the Duke of Halewins company
of men at Arms, which were to be backed with 60 volunteers, and a troop of
horse under the command of the Lord de Magalas. The fourth place deputed to the
charge of Chastelan, who with his own regiment, and the Commons of Montpellier
lead the Vant-guard, being seconded by the Count d' Aubyoux, who commanded the
white Cornet of 100 Gentlemen, the Marquess of Mirepois, following him with 50
others of the same quality, and the Lord of Monsoleus, who marched after the
Marquess with 60 men at Arms of his own name, and kindred, was upon S.
Andrews right hand, and the last upon Castelans right hand, committed to the
regiment of Vitrye; in the head whereof marched Clermont Vertilliard, the
Field-marshall, seconded by a body of Infantery, commanded by Murveill, and
that by another, under the direction of the Lord de Vallat, all by the men of
Arms belonging to the Duke d' Halewin, and two other companies, under two
other Commanders.

All the Army was not to be engaged at once, a strong A reserve set apart.
reserve was set apart, to relieve their friends, if they should hap to be
necessitated, and that was ready to be supplied by the Archbishop of Bordeaux,
who by sea, about such time as both the hoasts began to slack their hands, as
weary of fighting, came in happily, with 4000 foot, and two squadrons of horse,
which he brought thither in such vessels, as the harbor was capable of, to
succor his confederates upon all occasions.

In this order, upon a signal given by the discharge of 4 Cannons, the French
Army marched up to the Spanish trenches, and began a doubtful battle, both
parties fighting courageously, and victory hovering over both the Armies,
without any remonstrance, where she would pitch. The Spaniards in the beginning
seemed her favorites, the French Commanders and soldiers, The battles join.
appointed for the four last places, were more disheartened by a false report
(that S. Aunez, who had the charge of the first assault, was beaten back with
loss of many of his men, himself being desperately wounded in the head with
one Musket bullet, and in his body with many others) then the offensive Arms
of the enemy, though by them they received much damage, being twice repulsed,
not without some slaughter of men. But the General still like himself, by his
word encouraged them not to faint, and leading on in person, charged upon the
invadors so roundly, that he beat them back again to the squadrons, which
were appointed to second them. The French Cavallary was not yet come up, the
foot only had maintained this ambiguous fight, by the space of two hours. In
the end the prauncings of the horse were heard, the Cavallary of both sides
met, and the violent shocks of their encounters gave the Infantry a time of
breathing. The fight doubtful, the French horse come up, and get the victory.
The Moon, whose light till then was shadowed by the interposition of a
foggy-dark-thick-womb'd cloud, then began to peep out of her silver orb, and
stood as a spectatresse of the battle five hours together. So long she lent
her borrowed light to the directors of the battle, who by her assistance,
ordered their squadrons so well, that though they were often broke on both
sides, they were as often rallyed, no man being able to judge which side would
go off with conquest.

Quis cladem illius noctis? the slaughter of men that night cannot be recorded
without expression of some compassion. Cynthia stood looking on till the rocky
mountainous field, rough by nature, appeared more uneven by heaps of slain
men, and horses which covered the earth, till those hills which had bin so often
courted of Neptune, who by her assistance, had often raised his curly head above
the shore, appeared an Aceldama, a field of blood: the French not without some
noted loss having got the victory, (some of their chief Commanders having
purchased it with their lives, (all the rest with sore wounds) and slain far
more Spaniards upon the place, and then she hid her head under the earth, as
unwilling to see that horrid confusion, and so determined the battle.

The adaequate object of wisdom is, facienda, and vitanda; things to be
undertaken, and avoided. Both the Armies had encountered with hazards and
difficulties to avoid The Spaniards fly.
them. Now the darkness of the night had concealed the conquest from the
victor, but could not make the loser unsensible of his damage. The Spaniard
saw his men utterly discomsited, few repairing to their colors, and to save
the remainder, made a volley of shot about 2 in the morning, from the Fort of
Serbellon, as if it had bin a signal to his scattered troops, to repair
thither that they might be ready the next morning for a new fight, though it
was (perhaps) but a trick to conceal his sight, himself and the remnant of
his Army, presently making toward Spain by the way of Perpignan: the French
stood in full battali^ till the morning, and at dawning of the day, marched
toward the Spanish quarters, which they found abandoned, and the sun climing
up the Eastern hill, by his splendour, discovered the way of Spain, strewed
with the Arms and baggage of the flying enemy, who had disburthened himself
of those encumbrances to make his slight the speedier. There needed no advise
of what was to be done, the one part of the French Army, was sent after the
sugitives, which overtooke the rear, and put the slowest to the sword, besides
great numbers which were slain at the Well of fresh The French seyze of the
spoil.
waters, during the time of the siege by the garrison, and the slaughter of
some of the reare-guard upon their slight, and those as were slain the same
day upon the place of battle, 500 were taken prisoners, (as the French boast)
for the most part Captains, and reformed officers, and above 500 drowned in
the sea, and the Lake de Salses. The other part went to risle the Spanish
Camp, where they found a booty beyond common belief, and their own
expectation. Serbellons, and all the officers tents stood whole, their Plate
was unremoved, which with their beds and utensils remained to the victors, who
also seysed of the Generals Mule, Coat, and staff of office, and sent them to
the King as a trophee of the victory. But this was not all the prey, which
befell to the Conquerors. The night The Spaniards loss.
which crowned them with this happiness, was the next which succeeded the
Christian Kings Birthday, and as emulous of the glory thereof, presented the
French Army with further spoils, (as the French write) all the Invadors
Cannons, and Morterers, 500 Quintaux of powd r, 600 of Lead, (a quintane is 100
pound weight) 30 Wagons laden with match, 7 or 8000 Bullets, 4000 Pikes, as
many Axes, more Bombards, and fireworks, seven Wagons laden with
horse-shooes, as many with iron nails, 26 Apothecaries chests, well stored
with all manner of medicines, and victuals in abundance.

News of this victory was brought to the King at The K. gives thanks to God,
and rewards to his soldiers.
Paris, who to express his thankfulness to the Author, by a solemn song of
th^^^sgiving, October. 8. new style, in the Church of Nostre-^ame at Paris, the
Q: the Cardinal, the Counselors o^ state, and the officers of all the Courts
of justice, with throngs of people attending at that solemn Service; and in
requital of the Instruments, honored the Duke of Halewein with the Office of
a Marshall of France, and the inferior Officers with rewards, tokens of his
Royal love, the Canons of the Arsenall and Townhouse, expressing the joy of
his Majesty in the Liberties of the people, and the Bone-fires, and continual
Acclamations of the people crying out Vive le Roy, testifying their affections,
and sincere love to his Majesty.

The Actions and Occurrences in Lorrain, Burgundy, the French County,
Perigort, and Turena.
AN aspiring flame is not easily suppressed, it often diffuseth it self about the
matter cast upon it, and recovereth the air, receives no hurt by the blow of
a staff, but giving way to the harder body, without any sensible separation of
its parts, comes together again. Such is the condition of a true soldier, an
affront by his Friends, an open desertion of his Allies, cannot so much abate
his spirit, as to make him lay down his arms, and give way to his adversary,
the stage of war is large, and if one part thereof be so encumbered that he
cannot do his part there, he will act it upon another. The Duke of Rohan by
the practice of the Grisons, was hindered The Duke of Rohans march out of the
Veltoline.
from promoting the Christian Kings affairs in the Veltoline, marched thence
with 800 horse, and 4000 foot, men of braver insides then outsides, tried Lads,
their weather-beaten garments testifying, that they had endured some storms of
war and weather, intending to join his Forces with the Kings Armies, either
in the French-County, or Piemont, a^ he should receive order from his Majesty,
who was then prescribing several Provinces to his several Generals.

Duke Bernhard of Weymar was appointed for the Rhine principally, but not with
so strict a Commission, as not to encounter with the Kings Enemies els-where;
some rubs were expected in his way, and it was in his election, whether he
would make any stay to remove them, the Christian King thinking himself
sufficiently honored by the voluntary service of so noble a Prince, so
absolute a Commander, not limiting him, which D. Bernhard goes into the field.
without chalking the way, knew both the manner, and time to further the Kings
business. His Majesty graced him with his personal presence to Rhemes, the
Metropolis of Campagnia, whence after a Dieu vous benie, God speed you, and
farewell, ordinary complement, the Duke marched first to Langres, a town in
the midst of Caesar's Lingones, now known by the name of the Province called
Bessigni, thence to Vescay, and thence to Dampiere, the General Randevouz of
his Army, where I find him first preparing for action, June 3/1^. The Almaine
Forces which were to be conducted to his Army under the General Major
Schavelitzky did not then come in, nor was their stay prejudicial to his
designs, but Hallier his Lieutenant General met him with 4000 able horse, and
seven Regiments of foot, and attended with this retinue, he began to execute
the Kings Commission. The Garrison of Gray, a town upon the Northwest of the
River of Sacue, right over against Auxounne, had lately got from the French the
Castle of Romagne, a place of such importance, that it being in the Takes in
the Castle of Romagne.
Spaniards hands, did not only hinder all correspondence, betwixt the two great
towns of Sangres and Diion, but did much annusance to the whole adjoining
territory. It was well manned according to the proportion of its capacity, 120
soldiers, and thirty peasants being laid into it, and better victualled, and
this was the first place where he employed his forces. Tupadell his General
Major was sent before with the avantguard of his Army to surround it, the Duke
imagining that such an apparition would be so terrible to the defendants, as to
make them prepare for a capitulation. The issue was otherwise, the besieged saw
but a small number of Enemies, and by the benefit of the Fort, thought
themselves strong enough to grapple with them, they imagined that the Duke was
confined to a day and place elsewhere, and would not stay to bring the body of
his Army thither, and in this confidence scoffed at the General Major, as if
he had undertaken a business which he could not accomplish: But se M^cque qui
cloque, they had no cause to scorn him, the avantguard which presented it
self before the Fort, was but as a flash of lightning before a thunderclap,
two days after, the Duke himself came down in person Which yiel upon
discretion.
with the mayn body of his army, spent 100 great shot against the Castle,
forced the Garrison to yield upon discretion, made all the soldiers prisoners
of war, with their Captain Tournon Major of Gray and an Alfieres, which
commanded them. The peasants were dismissed, and might have passed freely, had
they not been discovered, to have concealed some Pistolets which Some peasants
to secure their gold, los^ both money and lives.
were given to the soldiers as lawful pillage. Like those Jews when Jerusalem
was besieged by Titus Vespatian, they had shrined up some gold in their bowels,
and that treasure which should have served for their livelihood, was the cause
of death to some of them (the soldiers apprehending them, and ripping up their
bellies to find that Mine) and had been to all, if the Duke had not interposed
and restrained them, from proceeding so cruelly.

Champlete another Fort which much endamaged the Kings Country, stood next in
his way, and this he first summoned by a trumpet, June 1^/^0, and the day
following by six Canons, which forced the Garrison to surrender and redeem
their baggage with a good and Champlite surrendered to D. Bernh.
proportionable ransom, and then the way being cleared, and these Castle
committed to French presidiaries, a part of our Army, marched directly toward
the River of Soane^, with order to encampe about the town of Briot, till the
day following, which time he himself came to them with the troops which
attended him.

It is the soldiers glory to encounter with difficulties, and the Duke of
Weymar met with much opposition on his march, but never shunned it. The Colonel
Mercy in behalf of Charles Duke of Lorrain, with 13 Regiments of horse, and
four of foot, though not complete Mercy with 17 Regiments opposes the D.
passage over ^^an.
ones had planted himself on the East side of the River, to hinder the Almain
Duke and his French retinew, from passing it. Tidings of the Lorrainers
design, were brought him, by the Vantcurriers of his Army, and he immediately
put his men into battalia, and marched directly toward the River point blanke
against the place, a Village where the Enemies Army lay on the other side of
the water. The sight of the foe, standing to dispute his passage with arguments
of steel, raised his blood (not to an unadvised anger, which should make him
neglect counsel, and without respect of danger, cause him to go on desperately)
but to a well regulated emulation, and that expressed in action, his valiant
heart being thereby inflamed to make strong and speedy resistance, against such
a daring Antagonist. At once, he both drew out a Squadron of horse, and ordered
them to assay the passage, and beat off the Lorraiuers Dragoons, which lay
entrenched beyond the flood: and planting eight Canons upon an hill near the
Village, levelled them against the Lorrainers Camp, which Duke Bernh.
encounters him,
making some slaughter of his men (the Cavallary sent to that purpose, having
happily passed the stream, twice discharging upon the Dragoons, being seconded
by some Musketeers, which waded up to the arm-holes, to succor their friends,
cleared the passage, D. Charles his Dragoons perceiving almost 100 of their
companions slain upon the place, amongst which was their prime Commander, the
General Major of that Regiment, 100 wounded, and some taken prisoners,
retyring to an hill for their better safety. But the change of ground could not
secure them from the devouring sword which pursued them; the whole body of the
French Cavallary, without delay made over to their Companions, and Colonel
Rosa Lieutenant of the Alman Dukes lifeguard, having found a more fordeable
cut, brought that off Regiment of 800 men through the stream, to those who had
passed it before, which flankerd, or side-ways assaulted the Lorrainers forces,
whilst the French Cavallary them in fron^, near the Village d' Arralogne. The
battle might have proved doubtful if all Duke Charles his men had been
sons of one mother, if all had but the like courage to three Almayn Regiments
which stood to it stoutly, and maintained the sight valiantly alone by the
space of an hour, And gets the victory.
after the rest were sled. But the tergiversation of those fugitives lost the
day, the Germans in the end too were compelled to give ground, by an orderly
retreat from one Hill to another keeping their ranks unbroken, and themselves
from the Massacre, till being brought to a straight passage, and roughly
assaulted they disbanded in great confusion, exposing themselves and their
friends to the sword, or captivity, and their baggage for a prize to their
Enemy. The sum of all was thus. The Lorrainers, and Burgundians, the other
part of D. Charles his Army, sled to the neighbor Towns and Castles to save
themselves, but to the great damage of their entertainers; the town of Giz,
whither the major part of Giz yielded upon discretion.
them fled for shelter, was surrounded immediately by the German Duke, who June
15/25, constrained both it and some other small Castles, where he found good
store of viands, to yield upon discretion; only the Fort of The Commander in
St. Loup hanged up.
Saint Loup held out two days longer to the pain of the Governor, who then
yielding upon such conditions, as the victor should prescribe him after the
surrendry, (justice overruling mercy) was hanged according to the Law of
Arms, for his sauciness, in presuming to hold a place so weakly fortified
against so puissant an army. All the three German Regiments, 50 persons only
The issue and effect of the battle.
excepted were slain, or brought into captivity, 500 dead corpses of them being
found upon the place, and 900 known to be taken prisoners, besides such as were
kept secret by the soldiers for their ransoms, and 3000 horses gained by this
victory. The prisoners of note were these. First, the Count of Reux a Colonel,
2. two Lievienant Colonels, by name Siurry and Joseph Carr^^. 3. ten Captains
of horse. 4. Nine Lievtenants. 5. Fifteen Cornets. 6, 13. Quarter Masters. 7.
Thirty and seven Corporals. 8. Thirteen trumpeters, 9. Three Kettle-drums one
Provost, 426 common soldiers, and 400 Dragoons; besides women amongst which
was the wife to Baron de Langres, and a great number of Servants; the greatest
part of the soldiers freed themselves from thraldom, by a voluntary tender of
their service to the Duke of Weymar, but 16 Ensigns gained by the victory,
were sent to the King as Monumentall trophies of this achievement, and are
kept by his Majesty.

This defeat was seconded by another, Mercy had rallyed up his broken Army and
with 2000 horse applied himself to trouble Schavelitskyes passage, who was
coming from the Rhinoward, with 3000 men appointed to attend the Alman Duke in
this Expedition. Notice of the design was brought to the General before Mercy
again defeated by the Rhinegrave
it was put into execution, commanded the Rhinegrave against him, who so
behaved himself in the enterprise, that he slew 400 of them upon the place, put
the rest to slight, and pursued them two league to Vesou, one of the principal
towns of the French-County.

Whilst these things were acting about the Saone, some Montbeliard blocked up
by Butler, is freed by Schavelitzky
other of the forces appertaining to Duke Charles the General Butler and the
French County appeared about Monbeliard a City almost at the head of Mosella in
Lorrain, in all 4000 strong, surprised, and ruinated the bridge and Fort of
Voiaucourt, and began to block up Montbelyard; but retreated again upon the
report of Schavalit^k^s march, whose very name grew formidable Altkirk, taken,
pillaged and burnt by Schavelitzky.
by the ruins he had made in the Sundgow, where he had taken Altkircke and
the Castle, pillaged them, and burnt them to the ground, and now re-enforced by
the Count de Grandcey, Commander of Montbeliard, who came to him, with 200
horse, and 1000 foot, with their joint Forces took in Porreutruy, in the
Bishopric of Basil, where they stayed some few days expecting directions from
the General. June 25, July 5, they met his Highness at Viller-sexe, whither
they brought up only 2500 men, the roughness of the way, and tediousness of
the journey making the rest to lagge behind upon the way. The Dukes forces,
were now drawn all together, and though he hasted toward the Rhine, he
Montbeliard revictualled by D. Bernhard.
would not leave the French County, without some ampler testimony of his
sincere resolution to propagate the cause, which he had undertaken. Diverse
petit Forts and Castles in that only Province had submitted to him, and out of
their store, he had revictualled Montbeliard, both with Corn and Cattle, and
now for a farewell to the County, June 27, July 6, he first visited Beaulme,
which surrendered the same day, and furnished the Army with provision for the
belly, and ammunition for war; and then himself and his Lieutenant General
Halliere, having drawn out 350 horse, and 1200 footmen out of the army went to
seek out the Enemy about Bezauzon. July ^/^^, the Game sprung of it self. Six
Companies of Lorrain horsemen defeated by D. Bernb.
Six Companies of the Lorrainers light horse, and lifeguard, appeared near a
Country Village therabouts, assaulted them, and though for a time, they
defended themselves manfully, in the end vanquished them, slew, and took the
most part of them prisoners, and got all their Cornets and baggage. The Sun
had not reached the Meridian, when this Enterprise was accomplished, nor had
the Duke of Weymar, yet attained to the Zenith of that days happiness, Ridet
fatum quoi evexit subi^o, and nisi misereatur, rapit. Fortune deals with her
creatures, as the young Lion with the Dog, plays with it a while, and then kills
it. Boysey a man raised by Duke Charles to the dignity of a Colonel, as if
Fate had sent him to fill up the Crescent of the German Dukes glory, with a
Boyseys Regiment defeated and himself slain.
full Regiment of 1200 men, came into the field, and was discovered not far
from Bezanzon, preparing to impeach the Duke in his way to the Rhine, and
against him, some troops were sent out, who defeated him, and made him pay for
his ambition of glory, with his own life, and of above 100 of his men, and with
the captivity of his son, who had engaged himself with his Father in that
Expedition, and many other ordinary Soldiers.

Mont-martin a Castle sited advantageously, and the town of Vesou stood still
in his way, and he meaning to have his passage clear, would not leave them
unvisited, Mont martin was summoned July ^/1^, and yielded Mommartin and Vesou
taken in the Duke marches toward the Rhine.
the next day upon discretion, Vesou was surrounded by the Dukes army the day
after, and the inhabitants suspecting their disability to hold out a siege,
surrendered upon composition. And here was the period of the Dukes stay in the
French County, after these achievements he marched toward the Rhine,
desirous to prevent John de Werth, who was dispatched by the King of Hungary,
and the Duke of Bavaria, to make head against him there. Duke Charles intending
to join the remaynder of his army (abated already a third part and more) with
the Bavarian followed him at a distance, and seeking to assist his Consederate,
lost the love of his own people, who seeing their late Prince more careful of
another, then his own territories, both the Gentry and other inhabitants of
the Duchy at Nancy, and the Barrois came in by throngs, and voluntarily at
Nancy Many of the Lorrainers submit to the Fr. King voluntarily.
gave an oath of Allegiance to the Christian King, betwixt the hands of
Oq^incourt the Governor.

Le Pont de Horde a place upon the River of Doux, in the Frontiers of the
French County, was known to be garrisoned with such men; as much troubled the
Christian Kings Allies, and subject in the adjacent territories, yet he would
not stay to encampe before it, nor send a trumpet to summon it, that charge was
left to the Le pont de Horde,
Count de Medavy, Governor of Montheliard, from whence it was but three
leagues distant: The Governor according to his order. July 7/17, committed the
care of the design to the Captain la Capelle, Sergeant Major of the Regiment
de Perch, whom with 200 Musketeers, two Companies of light horse, and one
piece of Canon Besieged.
he sent the same day, to take it in. The Captain according to the common
course of war, sent first to summon it, and receiving not only a flat
denial, but a volley of shot, which wounded some of his soldiers, attending
the Commanders refusal, played upon it with his Canon, while Fresmey his
Lieutenant had advanced up to them, and broke it down. A small disadvantage
abates the edge of a Thrasonicall Braggart: He which before might have had any
honorable conditions granted him, if he would have desired them, now began to
beg for his And taken by the Count of Medovy Governor of Montbeliard.
life, and baggage, and that being denied by the Leaguer, which would not then,
being so far advanced, be tied to Covenants, and thus distressed, fearing to
be surprised in the Fury, the issue whereof is fatal, he submitted without
articling to the assiegeants mercy. The wheel of fortune turns in a moment,
the spoake that erst was highest, is presently lowest: The Sun but two hours
since, saw this Governor commanding like a petit Prince, outbraving his Enemy,
and returning words of defiance to the others admonition; and now sees him a
Captive, The Governor hanged.
a slave marked for death, manacled, and led to execution, the Count of Medovy
so adjudging it, that because the Garrison expected the Canon, and had done
many outrages with execrable cruelty in the vicinage, the Governor should be
hanged before the Castle gate, and the Soldiers be made prisoners of War, if
they would not serve under his Colors, which they did to recover their
liberty, were transmitted to Duke Beruhards Army, and dispersed into several
Regiments; that being severed they might not consult to run away. The Castle
was not great of building, but of some importance, the prize thereof secured the
harvest of that territory, as far as to Neufchastell, and opened the way for
the French Garrisons to make an inroad into the Mountain of Burgundy.

It is but folly for man amongst the multitudes of so many vanities, as attend
mortality, to expect perpetual felicity. Some molestations, are still calling
us to their embraces, and sorrows will intervene to season our merriments The
German Duke was not so much joyed in his achievements, as dejected by the
death of his bosom friend Ponica, a man whom above all other he had The death
of Ponica, D Bernhards bosom friend.
chosen out, to participate of his secrets, being both wise in counsel, and
valiant in action. He was taken from him by a violent fever in the midst of
July, and his embalmed body was reserved in the Camp, till the Duke went to the
Rhine, and then it was honorably interred at Basil.

Nor was the Christian King without his Cross, though his forces abroad on the
thriving hand, an insurrection at home, by the Croquans in Pirigort, and the
miserable devastation of Towers, the Metropolis of Turena upon the Loire, by a
strange sudden tempest, much disturbed him.

The damage at Tours was unevitable, it proceeded A strange tempest at Tours.
not from the hostile Arms of an open enemy, nor the mutinies of rebels, but
permission of the divine power, against which, there is not a thought of
contestation to be entertained. The thing was full of admiration, progress and
period. It was a great calm, with a little rain, when suddenly, two dark
clouds met together, which belched out a wind intermingled with fire, and
raised such a tempest, as has not been known in the memory of man. It was
first perceived near the wood S. Cosme, where it tore up the trees by the
roots, and as in a moment, drive them to diverse places, and thence extending it
self to the City, overturned the most part of the houses in the town and
suburbs, particularly that of La Rich, which had not a chimney left standing,
nor a piece of the roof to cover it, not sparing the Churches; S. Julians
besides the shattered windows, having one of the steeples laid flat to the
earth, and the other broke off in the middle: two of Saint Gratians Pyramids
being blown down, with the windows of S. Peter du Boil, the Dormitory and
chimneys of Marmonsti^r, a pannell of the wall in the Carmelites cloister, with
so much more loss, as cannot well be repaired with one hundred thousand French
crowns. This was the progress, yet the end was more wonderful both in its
time of duration, and the bounds of the tempest. It was supposed to be raised
by some damned Sorcerer, who by the assistance of the Prince of the air had
caused this outrage. The instrument of this desolation was limited both to
time, place, and persons; the time lasted not above half a quarter of an
hour: the Hericano, (so we may call it, though the true one was never seen in
Europe) did not dilate it self beyond the City, and the Southern banks of the
Loyre, where it rent up some few trees, nor killed any, save only two men,
which in a kind of diffidence in the divine providence, were going to shelter
themselves in the Tower S. Hugon, their eyes having beheld that strong place
cast down by the violence of the storm before their deaths, the supreme
Majesty reading a lecture to us all by their destruction, when they sought for
preservation, that the assured means of temporal safety are not in our
election; and that it is mere vanity to oppose his omnipotency.

His Majesty's troubles by the mutinous rebels, were Buffara a Weaver raises a
commotion in Perigot
within his power to remedy. The heads of such intestine commotions, are
commonly base fellows, neither fit for counsel in peace, nor command in
war; Jack Straw, Cade, and Wat Tyl^r in England, were formerly known the
ringleaders in such insurrections, and now Buffara, a Weaver in Perigot,
overshooting his shuttle, would be a stickler in state business, and convoking
some peasants, men of desperate fortunes, and more desperate minds, by an
heap of words, ill couched, but plausibly uttered, spoke thus unto them.

Is there any difference betwixt the King and us? we By an ill woven speech to
the Peasants*
have the shape of men as well as he. His greatness is supported by us, whose
shoulders must bear the heavy weight of all his impositions, if we will
continue in subjection to that too grievous a burden. There is scarce one of
us, but may know the sweetness of liberty; we have bin apprentices, or hired
servants, and then feeling the scourge of our masters over us, we desired to be
our own men, the expiration of some few years, delivered us from that
servitude, and we rejoiced in that liberty: But what got we thereby? A slavery
far above the former: while we lived with our Masters, their purses bore our
charges, we neither cared for house-rent, nor parish duties, we did our work,
took our ordinary repasts and rest, not caring for the morrow. Now we are
Masters, but worse slaves then formerly; we carke and labor, sit up late, and
rise early, and hardly can maintain our families, yet must be taxed with such
burdens, as we cannot support to maintain a war, undertaken for pleasure,
not profit to the Kingdom. The King has provoked an enemy, with whom he
might have had peace, and We must suffer for it. We see the Frontiers of this
Kingdom invaded, the Spaniard has got some footing in Guyenne, Languedock,
Province, and Picardie, it is to be thought he will go on, and if we mean to
save our selves, we must not appear in the Kings behalf, and if we mean to
enjoy our states, we must take up Arms, and oppose the Kings officers, that
pursue us with their exactions. I crave your resolutions, and as many as will
assent unto me, let them fling up their caps, and cry liberty.

Each offense (like Horace his Crow in the Iayes feathers) The people
assenting, take up Arms.
struts in the colors of virtue) The rebel, which preferring his private
interest before the common good, would alter the course of state, in an
Aristocratie ushering in an Ataxie, in a Monarchy introducing an Anarchie,
will have a plea of polity to varnish his rebellion, and if he can but deliver
it to the ignorant people in a fustian language, that many-headed beast does
often receive it as Authentical. The seduced people applauded his speech, and as
if P^itho had sat upon his seditious tongue, assevered, that he spoke truth in
all, took up Arms, chose him for their chiefetaine, and in a desperate
madness, following their more desperate leader, searched the Merchants
warehouses of that Province, slaughtered the Kings officers, proclaimed a day
of Jubilee to as many as would take part with them, and by their progress in
the beginning, finding no resistance, increased their first number to 7000 men.
Mischief, though not well supported at the first; grows higher, like the
luxuriant branches of a fruit-bearing tree: if a good Patriot, like a Gardner,
put in his pruning hook, the suckers are soon cut off, and the stock
remains entire. The Duke de Valette, son of the aged Are beaten in the field
by the Duke a^ Valette.
d' Espernon, Lieutenant General of that Province, his old Sires years
disabling him from performing his office, supplied his Fathers duty, summoned
the train bands of the Country, called together many volunteers, met them in
open field, when they were in the height of glory, gave them battle, slew 1200
of them upon the place, and chased them to Bergery, a a City upon the Dordonne,
a River which disembogeth it self into the Garonne, below Bordeaux, where they
fortified themselves, and stood in defiance of his Forces. The Duke omitted no
means to reclaim or subdue them: brought his Cannon into the field against
them, but that did not so much as affright them, promised them fairly, that
their taxes should be alleviated, if not totally taken off, but his oratory
could not provaile, yet at last with the old state trick of a pardon, Their
Captain broke upon the wheel.
made them submit, and deliver up their Captain into his hands, whom he
commanded to be broke alive upon the wheel, in the high way, as an exemplary
pattern of justice, and dismissed the others in peace to their own habitations.

A black Smith, a Farrier, born at Lavergne in Quircy, A black Smith raises a
new commotion in Quercy.
at the same time made another insurrection in that Province, and upon the like
pretext, had drawn together 3000 men from Tegrac, Lavergne, Padicar, and other
places of that territory, who gracing himself by the name and title of
Captain Basque, and attended with this goodly retinue, went first to Gramat, a
walled town, within one league of Lavergne, and thence enforced the
proprietor, the Count of Cabeces to fly, having slain five or six of his
domesticke servants, whom he had sent to restrain his insolent disorder. Proud
of his success, he proceeded further, went to Fons, near Figear, a small
walled town, but not garrisoned, Takes Fons.
commanded the inhabitants to open their gates and receive such conditions as
he would prescribe them, which they durst not refuse, there being no Army in
that peaceable, and by peace over secure Country to resist him. His success in
the first attempt, made him entertain a conceit, that he was a good Commander,
but the fortune of the last, raised him from an opinion of his own worth, to a
sure confidence of ability, the bladder of his timpanons ambition Is
re-enforced by 3000 fresh men.
being blown up, by the breath of 3000 other vain fellows, which came in to
his assistance. Buffara, in the adjoining territory, had given him a president
of vain arrogance, and he intended to out-doe him in his folly. His attendants
took upon them the name of Croquans, as well as those under Buffara, and to
make them resemble military men, that they might go into the field with
colors, he robbed the Churches of their Pennons, and Banners, employed and
used them as Ensigns: and that he might appear another Salmoneus, armed with
false thunder, he took a tree of proportionable bigness, boared and shaped it
like a piece of great Ordnance, thinking thereby to be more formidable. Waspes
make combs, and Apes imitate men: and Smug would resemble S. George on horse
back.

In this equipage he presented himself, ^0/^^. before the City Figear: first,
seysing of the suburbs, which the inhabitants had abandoned upon the report of
his march Summons Pigear.
thitherwards, and then summoning the town to open the gates, and to admit him
in, with the black guard which followed, his ragged regiment. The inhabitants
ironically humbly petitioned him, to stay till morning, acknowledged his
victorious Arms, but that they might not be proclaimed traitors to the Crown,
and forfeit their charter, they only requested a short time of deliberation.
The Farrier yields, plants himself that Is deluded by the Citizens.
night in the suburbs, expects the signal of his intramission the next
morning, when suddenly he was saluted with haile-shot from the walls, order
being taken that the Lord Camboulye then residing in the City, should place
himself there, with the old men, and such as could do no other service, to
discharge the small Guns against him, whilst the Lord of Roquefort with such a
Cavallary as could be suddenly raised in the City, and the Baron of Marinall,
with 500 armed Citizens, should sally out against him. The shot startled him,
and made the Peasants give ground; but Roquefort, and the Baron soon after
falling upon the Rebels with all their might, beat them out of the first
Barricado^, drove them to the end of the suburbs, where while their leader was
rally ing his disordered band, intending to renew the combat, the soldiers of
the City gave them such arough charge, that the most of them being slain, the
rest were compelled to fly for their lives to Fons, which they had surprised
the day foregoing, Taken and delivered to the hands of justice.
whither the Baron of Marinal pursued them, doing execution upon the Rear, and
besieging the rest in the town, which they had taken for their security. The
rabble of Rebels no sooner perceived themselves thus straightened, but they humbly
begged license to return in peace to their own homes. They were naturally the
Kings subjects, born in his dominions, and had sworn to persist in a faithful
obedience to his Majesty, and the Baron therefore was unwilling to proceed in
extremity against them, though they had given such an evidence of disloyalty,
it was reputed misprison, not malice which caused the common men to offend, and
though it was in his power to punish them exemplarily, he concluded it to be
far better to win their affections by an act of mercy, then to eloigne the
hearts of their fellows from him, by proceeding against them legally. Yet
still he kept at a politic distance from them, painted out the heinousness of
the trespass in glaring, oily colors, told them he could not answer it
before his Majesty, if he should suffer them to escape unpunished, and all to
make them sensible of their error, which he did so effectually, that the poor
souls perceiving what they had done, humbly begged pardon, which he granted
conditionally. First, that they should deliver into his hands, their Captain,
Lieutenant, and the Ensigns with the colors. Secondly, that each man should
return to his own dwelling, and sweere never more to meet with any intention to
oppose the Kings service: both which conditions were performed the same day,
and the Captain, Lieutanant, and Ensigns, were delivered to the officers of
civil justice, to be proceeded against as criminal melefactors, guilty of
high treason: the Baron of Marivall preparing for his journey to Paris, to
inform his Majesty of the particulars which had bin done.

Thus the Kings forces were happily victorious over the Rebels, which had
raised these intestine commotions within his own dominions; nor were his Armies
which were sent against the frontier Provinces under the Spaniards command
unfortunate, either when they undertook the recovery of what the King had
lost, the year passed, or made an invasion into the Spanish territories. The
Comtois were freed of D. Bernhard, but not of all the Kings soldiers. The D.
of Longueville, Lieutenant General to the Prince of Conde, had drawn together
all the Frenches which had wintred in Champagne, Lorraigne, and Burgundy, and
expecting to be re-enforced by the old soldiers, which came out of
Switzerland, under the Duke of Rohan, who by reason of the indisposition of
body, being forced to stay at Geneva, was transmitting his 500 horse, and 4000
foot to Longneville, though yet attended only with his own men, marched
directly against the French County, and began his work where Duke Bernhard
left, further advancing the Kings business, and more perplexing his enemies.
His first quarter was at Branges, whence I find him marching, June 11/^^. and
encamping the same night near Faix with his Army. Till then he found occasion
to make experiment of his men's courage, or his own forrunes. Here he found a
small adventure The Marquess nf Conflans raised by the Duke of Langueville*
to try his prowess. An expert Spanish Commander, the Marquess of Conflans,
was encamped near him with three regiments, against him he dispatched Guitry
the Field-marshall, with one part of his Army, who, undiscovered till he had
reached his Enemy, charged him so suddenly and furiously that had not the
Spanish Commander bin very careful to hold his forces in their military order,
his Regiments had bin rowted, and yet his care could not enable him to maintain
his trenches, raised he was, but not discomfited, receding in a well ordered
retreat, some of his Cavallary being slain, he saved the remayn of his men two
leagues, leaving one Cornetto, one Guidon, his plate, and all his baggage, as a
booty to Guitry, whose soldiers more greedy of that prize, then a glorious
victory stayed to pillage his Camp, not pursuing him.

June 12/^1, the Duke encamped near the Castle of Courlaon, The Castle of
Courlaon* besieged by the D.
which he rounded with his army the same day, but not without opposition of the
Garrison, which played upon him from the Castle, and wounded Gondreville, his
Armor-bearer close by him, and not far from him, Fevillan and Rembe two
Captains of the Regiment d' Anguyen. The Vicount Arpajoux Field-marshall, was
employed all night to plant a battery against the Citadell, whiles the
laborers, and some ordinary soldiers were sent to get bavins to fill up the
two ditches about the Fort, both which did their parts so carefully, that by
break of day, the great Ordnance began to thunder, the pioners had filled up
the outward ditch with faggots, Surrendered upon composition.
and plained the way for their easier access to the other; the great Guns had
made a reasonable breach in the wall, and the soldiers, each man with a faggot
in one hand, and military instruments in the other, were hasting to fill up the
inward ditch, and prepare for assault, by eight the same morning, when suddenly
a white flagge appearing upon the wall, a retreat was sounded, the French
Assailants made a stop, and the Garrison condescended upon condition of life
saved to surrender the Citadell. Less could not have bin desired, more perhaps
might have bin granted, if it had bin requested: to this petition the Duke
subscribed willingly, and so without effusion of blood, got tile Fort, where he
spent the next day to refresh his Army, repair the breaches, renew the
Fortifications, accommodate the place with a Garrison, and to dispose of the
ammunition, and other commodities found there, for his best benefit, and
subsistence of his Forces.

A worse Fate attended a neighboring City Lion de Saulnier, then befell the
Castle, it was a place late of emine^ce The town of Lion de Saulnier surprised
by the French.
in the County, the salt pans adjoining yielding a good annual revenew to the
inhabitants, and they again adorning the place with goodly edifices,
testimonies of their wealthinesse. Now it must both change its Lord, and lose
its splendour. June 14/24, the Duke went in person to survey it, and the same
day begirt it with all his power. The Garrison defended it well, whiles it was
theirs, and when they could not hold it, ruined it. The French got it by
piecemeal, first, the cloister of the Capuchins, then the Suburbs of Saint
Desire, and the town afterward; yet we cannot properly say they got it, though
the Spaniard lost it, unless the Spaniards loss may be called their gain; the
Garrison as it gave ground, The Castle holds out.
so the Assailants gave fire to the Cloister, Suburbs, and City, which put the
besiegers to a new trouble, laboring to save what they could from the
devouring Vulcan, while Rimcourt the Spanish Commander enclosed himself in the
Castle, the strength of the City well moated, well walled, and then of the more
difficult access, because the Dike was brim full of water; and he had broken
down the bridge, which led into the Castle, leaving the rubbish of the town a
prize to the assaylants.

Yet though the Duke could not then take that Castle, two others the same day
became subject to the Two other Castles taken by the Duke Longueville.
King by his and his Confederates means. Sancourt a Captain of one of his
troops of horse, took in the Fort of Chilly, and the Count de Guebriant,
Lieutenant General to the Duke of Rohan, who that very day came up with his
Forces to the Army, by the way took in another in the same vicinage.

Mutual salutations were scarce passed, betwixt the Duke the General, and
Guebriant the Field-marshall, when the Town and Castle of Montaigne sited on
an hill, in the view of Lion de Saulnier, presented it self to the Counts eye.
An active spirit apprehends each occasion to be doing: The Count though he
could not but be weary of his late march, expressed a kind of impatience
Montaigne taken by the Count de Guebriant.
in his looks, till he might come to action; acquainted the Duke with his
purpose against Montagne, and the Duke as forward to give way to the design,
as the Field-marshall was to undertake it, gave him license to use his force
there without tying him to conditions. The Count marched against it, and
carried the town, though the Commander tracing the steps of Rimcourt, intended
to fire it, and in the end the Castle upon Covenants, that the Peasants which
surmounted above the number of 100, who were in the Fort, should yield upon
discretion: and the soldiers with their arms, without baggage, should have
convoy to some place of the Catholic King, which being not specified, were
sent to Perpignan.

Matters of danger, not despair, are the true objects of valor: Every virtue
is tied to Rules; and bounded with limits not to be transgressed, the extremes
alter all goodness, if they be pitched upon: courage loses its merited
honor, if wilfulness and unguided petulancy overbear it: a well grounded
reason, without prejudice to a man's honor, may justly countermand a rash and
inconsiderate resolution. It had bin dishonorable for Rimecourt to yield upon
the first summons, and to hold out, it was almost impossible. Nor could the
assaylant enforce him, but by famine, nor his friends relieve him if it should
have come to that exigent. The place was pent up with numbers of souls within
it, the strait confines of a Castle scarce could contain his soldiers
amounting The Castle of Lion de Saulmere surrendered upon composition.
to 600 in number, and the inhabitants which surmounted that account, the Pest
was hot amongst them, and paid a greater tribute to the grave, then the
Enemies sword. Pharaohs lean Kine presented themselves daily before him, the
people began to cry out for bread, a morsel would have contented them, which
before fared delicately every day, and were not pleased without variety of
dainty dishes: Relieve them he could not but by an hard purchase of their
liberty, nor be eased of their clamours, but by absenting himself from them,
and that could not be archieved without the assent of his Enemy, and therefore
he rather resolved to buy his quiet upon hard covenants, then endure that
vexation, which otherwise must necessarily pursue him. Capitalate he would, and
upon any terms surrender, and capitulate he did, and surrendered upon a
strange Article, which though in the Generals it savoured of providence, was a
plain evidence, that harder terms would have bin accepted, if they had bin
required, viz. a convoy for the Garrison to any of his Catholic Majesty's
towns, which the Duke accepted, imbarqued them in so many Bottoms, as were
required for their transportation, and carried them down the Saone into the
County of Rousillon.

The first wheel of an Autocineton, a self-moving Engine being set a going the
others must follow: It is so in war, one prime place yielding, the appendants
must come in too. The Castles of Crevecaur, Chilly, and Estoille in the French
County, as if there had bin a contignation of their several buildings, sunk
with the main piece of that Fabric, the Castle of Lion de Saulnier and
without Diverse Forts and Castles taken by the D. de Longueville.
enforcement rendered themselves to the Duke of Longueville his Majesty's
Lieutenant General, who possessed himself of them to the use of the Christian
King his Master. The Fort of Savigny in the Province of Bresse, made some
resistance, and detained him some few days: The Spaniard had got it by his
puissance the year before, and would not let it go without knocks; A private
man is more tenacious of what he has got by his own industry, then what
descends unto him by inheritance: The Soldier, like the Merchant, will sell
dear when he pays dear. The others places descended to the Crown of Spain, by
marriage, this was purchased with blood, and naught but blood could redeem it,
14 days the Garrison held out, from the 2/^ of July new style, to the 16, and
then after blows both given and taken, was constrained to yield, upon condition
that the Garrison consisting of 200 men should be convayed to such one of the
Catholic Kings towns, as it should please the French General.

It is no happiness to be possessed of much, if there be no use to be made
thereof. The Castle of Savigne opened her gates to let the French in, but as
yet they durst not trust themselves within the walls thereof, the Spandards were
gone, but left a more dangerous foe behind them: the air was infected with
pestilent exhalations threatening an unavoidable destruction, to as many as
should dare to draw breath there: To make it securely habitable, the Dukes
first care was to have it well ayred, and having purged it of the stench, silth
and putrefaction, which caused the contagion, about three weeks after, put in a
The Castle of Sovigny ayred before the French enter.
French Garrison. The time which was spent thereabout was not consumed vainly,
order was taken by a politic Ordinance for the sustentation of his Army, which
though it was employed to the proper use of bearing arms against the Kings
Enemies, was by that means provided for plentifully, by the peasants of the
French County, not of love, but fear, while the soldiers following their own
profession, handled not the Sicle to cut down the ripe Corn, but the sword to
cut off their adversaries: The French County was full of grain, the Harvest
answered the seed-time, and the plowmans hopes* but they which sowed it, durst
not mow it, lest they should both lose their labors, and life's in that
adventure. To secure the laboring Husbandman, and to provide for his Camp at
once, by a Proclamation he authorized the Comtois to gather in the fruits of
the earth of what sort soever, with a condition, to bring in the The Duke of
Long, by suffering the Comptois to take their crop, relieves his army
third sheafe, shock, or rispell unto his Magazine. The covenant was received
joyfully, and the peasants with show of alacrity, brought in the thirds of
their Country commodities glad to have an assurance of two parts, which feared
they should lose the total.

And yet the effects of this Decree, were not the mayn sum of the account,
which the Duke could make of his time there. His forces came to action, and
whilst the Country people by supplying their wants, strengthened their hands
and hearts, they advanced the Kings designs. The Duke was informed by some
prisoners, that the Spaniards had made a little head, had assembled together
betwixt Poligny, and the Castle of Ruff, and himself in person attended with
1200 horse, and 5800 Musketeers went from the Camp at Savigni three days
before it was surrendered to give them battle. His intent was to have crushed
the Cockatrice in the shell, to have abated that little body, which was in
growing, before it came to perfection, but that project prevented by the
providence of the Spanish Colonel Maillart, who commanded those forces, and
hearing of the Dukes march, retreated to a place of more security, betwixt
Salines and Bezanzon, he took occasion by his own eye to inform himself of the
States, and strength of Bleterans, Poligni, and Arbois, the taking in of which
places would prevent the Enemy of all means to attempt any thing against the
Kings towns in Bresse, and Bagez, while the French armies were busied
elsewhere, and then returned.

July, 5/15, he went again from his Quarter in the Camp, Orgelet yielde to the
French with other Forts.
toward Cowleige, and thence again the next day to Orgelet, to besiege the
Town and Castle which defended it, where the Suburbs being mastered by the
Vicount d'Arpajoux his Lieutenant General, the besieged fired the town, and
betook themselves to the Castle, which they thought was strong enough to secure
them, and they able to hold, but were forced to yield the same day upon
discretion. Many hands make light work, Savigni by this was reduced to
extremities, and stood upon accord, only a part of the host was left before
it, the rest were commanded upon several adventures. The Baron of Cowpet, with
the Regiment of Anguien, was sent against the Castles of Montonne, Pymorain,
and latour-du-May, which he took successively upon accord, and last against the
Castle of Clervall, which he took by assault, put the presidiaries to the
sword, and took three Ensigns and two Cornets, which he sent to the King by
Ramboy Aid of the Camp to the Dukes army, as monumentall tokens of his
achievement.

His Majesty received some content in the happy proceedings of his Forces
against the professed Enemies of that Crown, but more in the successful
negotiation of Bautru a Counselor of State, whom he had employed to feel the
pulse of his late discontented Cousin, who as a subject ought him all dutiful
obedience, and by the obligation of Consanguinitie, being his nearest Kinsman
of blood, was tied unto him by nature, but upon a causeless distaste, in a
Malcontent was retired to Sedan, where Bautru being admitted to conference
with him, discharged his office so effectually, that opening the Kings good
affection toward him, he dispersed The Count of Soyssons gives evidence of
his loyalty to the King.
those clouds of doubts, which had hovered over his understanding, and made him
entertain some jealous thoughts against his Majesty, and after he had got some
evidence of his loyal heart, returned again to his Majesty, August 3 new
style, with the welcome tidings of his sincere and unfeigned obedience.

July 6/16, was a day to be recorded in the French Kalendars, and set down in
golden letters. Guebriant the Field-marshall, being sent out that day by the
Duke of Longuevill, against the Castle of Bournay, which was kept by a Spanish
Captain, ten soldiers and 200 peasants, after 58 vollies of Cannon-shot,
forced it to yield upon discretion, and trussed up three of the Soldiers,
causing them so to suffer exemplarily, marched himself against the Castles of
Pibly, Ruargues, and Presilly, which he surprised, and sent the lifeguard of
the Duke of Rohan with 400 Musketeers, to Beauregard and Binan, which they
seized of, doing such service thereby to the King, that besides the ground
which they had gotten in the French County, which gave them good footing there,
there being no place of strength in their Enemies Sundry Castles taken by
Guebriant in the Brench County.
hand, from Saint Claude to Bleterans, save only S. Lawrance de la Roche, nor
no place in the Frontier which might serve as a convenient Randevouz for the
Spanish Armies, which were then on forming, but Salines in the two only Castles
of Elymorain, and Beauregard, a booty was found worth in estimation above 50000
Franks, which the Duke de Longueville, distributed amongst the soldiers; who
thus encouraged with a general vote testified their forwardness to attend him
in his future designs.

The gaining of all these Forts brought not the French General to the period
and end of his pains, but renovation of his labor, and prosecution of his
Conquests. Toward Bleterans he tended, and to leave nothing behind him, which
might be an Harbor to the Spanish, he first ^o^k in three small Castles, that
of Chasteau-chalon, which submitted July 15/2^, and the other at Harlay, and
Pica which came in July 17/27, and then made toward Saint Lawrence la Roche,
one of the strongest picces, and of most importance in that territory.

An adviso which happened into his hands whilst he was at Chasteau-chalon, made
him leave the two last Forts, to the care of Montausier the Camp-master, and
march away with all speed to besiege that City. July 1^/^^, A Letter was
intercepted, which was to be carried by a S. Lawrence la Roche, the town
surprised by the French.
peasant from the Garrison of the town and Castle of Saint Lawrence to the
Governor of Bleteran, the purport whereof was, that they desired him to remit
them their own Governor, because the French Army drew toward them, and they
were threatened with a speedle siege. The Duke from hence collected, that if he
could surround them before the return of their Commander, he might easily carry
the place, the strength of a Garrison, not consisting so much upon the numbers
of ordinary men and common Fortifications, as the sage direction of an expert
Leader, who armed with authority, can both awe the men, and manage the action,
To lose no time, the same day he sent away a party of 400 chosen men, drawn out
of all the Regiments, under the command of Verstot the Camp-master, who reaching
thither the same Evening, sent away two of the Sergeants belonging to the
Regiment of Normandy, and twenty Burned by the Spaniards which fly into the
Castle.
Soldiers to view it. The Officers did their parts carefully, found it
assaultable, and so reported it; the Campmaster applies himself to their
relation, plants his scaling ladders, and at point of day, July 14/24, took it
by scalado, yet the Sergeants bought it with the loss of their own lives, and
one of the soldiers. The town was taken, and exposed to pillage, but the
inhabitants and Garrison retyring into the Castle, by casting fireballs upon
their houses, milked the assaylants hopes in their expected pillage, but doing
them withal one pleasure in their preservation from the pestilence, which then
raged so furiously in the City, that there was scarce one house free. The
Camp-master sent with speed to the General to inform him, of what had been
done, who the same day he received his intelligence July 15/25, marched
thither with the Vicount d' Arpajoux, viewed the place, notwithstanding three
Faulcons shot discharged against him, planted the Regiment of Normandy under
Where they are besieged and forced to yield.
the town wall, from whence they made their daily approches to the Castle being
supported, and relieved by the other Regiments of the army successively.
Sixteen days siege the Castle held out, and then wanting water, and afflicted
with postilence, yielded upon this condition, that the soldiers 48 in number,
the remaynder which had escaped the Sword and Pestilence, should depart with
one Captain, and one Sergeant, and their wives, the Drum beating, and without
baggage, and so be convayed to Bleterans. It was granted them, they were
dismissed with a Convoy of 100 Musketeers, and 50 horse to Bleterant, the
inhabitants being made prisoners of war.

An unexperienced Navigator to avoid Scylla falls into Charybdis, one extremity
drives unadvised souls into a worse, like the fish, which to avoid the frying
pan, leaps into the fire: the true Hierogly phicke of these poor souls, which
by leaving Saint Lawrence de la Roche, thought themselves secured in the choice
of Bleterans, whither they had a safe convoy, safe as for the way, not as for a
sure shelter, that being the next place of note, and strength which the Duke
meant to engirt with his Forces.

Critical prognostics of the issue preceded the Fate of that City, the French
omitted to do nothing, which might be for their advantage, and the inhabitants
admitted all things which conduced to their own prejudice, Bleteran in danger
of a siege.
the hearts of the inhabitants failed them, the best and wealthiest Citizens
took up a resolution to save their persons, and best goods in Dole, and yet
changed their counsel presently, fearing what they had just cause to suspect,
to be surprised by the way, though they were to be conducted by a Convoy. The
Count of Guebriant Field-marshall to the Duke of Rohan, had notice of their
first intention, by Letters intercepted from a peasant, who was entrusted with
that portage to Dole, and leaving the Campeat Chilly, August 1/11, went to
way-lay them. An ambuscado he prepared upon the way, expecting The Burgesses
prepare to sly.
each minute the wagons which were to carry their wealth, listened after the
Bells, and the Carters whistles, sent out his Scouts to descry them, yet neither
could the eyes of his Spies, nor his own diligent harkening bring him any
assurance of his hope: They neither did, nor intended to stir at that time;
perplexed, knotty doubts had staggered their resolve, something they meant to
do, to that purpose, but neither knew, nor could conclude Guebriant way lays
them, and they not coming abroad,
of the How or the When to do it securely. Guebriant would no longer attend the
Citizens, but by a devise thought to inveagle the Garrison, and draw the
military men into the trap which he had laid for the Burgesses; his party
consisted of 200 light horse, and 100 Dragoons, ten of his Cavaliers he sent
abroad to surprise the Peasants, which by night were employed Addresseth a
stratagem to surprise the Garrison. That failing he takes in Iosseau a Castle,
to bring home the crop of the Earth: thinking by this means to make the
soldiers issue out for their succor, and so to entangle them: the French
horsemen did their part, surprised thirty peasants when they had laden their
horses with corn, and by bright day light, deeming that the presidiaries would
come abroad to relieve and release the Captives, marched with these prisoners
hard by the Counter-scarpe. All this would not do, the Garrison sent some
Cannon-shot after them, but would not pursue them. The Count thus frustrated of
his expectation, rose from his ambush, and marched directly to the Castle of
Iousseau, which he reached by noon, being but three leagues from Bleteran, and
though it was a place of good strength, rounded with a Moate four perches
broad, eight foot deep of water, flanked with four good towers, and fortified
by a countermure, had it surrendered unto him at his first appearing, upon
discretion. Where Valor and Counsel leads, Fortune attends, and crowns the
design with a prosperous issue.

Jousseau, by the change of the Lord, had some alteration of its Laws, a
French Garrison was presently put into it, which must stand in opposition, to
the towns with which the Castle lately had commerce and correspondence, and
that done, the Field-marshall went to Loges another Fort within half a league
of the And the Fort de Loges,
former, which he summoned, took in, and then prepared for his speedy return
to the Army. But one raw morsel, the failing of his first project at
Bleterans, was not yet digested, he still concluded that he had done nothing
worthy himself in that expedition, if he did no Addresseth a new stratagem for
the Garrison of Bleterans,
more; and to allure the presidiaries in Bleterans out of the town, he marched
in their open sight with his army toward the Camp, leaving five or six
Dragoons behind him, with instructions that when it might be imagined that the
mayn body of his Forces were marched a two hours journey, they should arise
from the place where they lay hid, drive away all the cattle which were grasing
near the City, and if the Garrison did pursue them, they should with a secure,
but not overhasty pace, go on to such a place, where he would lay some
Carabins to save them, and surprise the pursuing Enemy. The actions of his men,
and the Event answered his directions. The Dragoons turned Drovers, and the
Garrison seeing the cattle which were their maintenance driven away, by that
maniple of men, sent out 40 horse and 50 Musketeers to recover them* the
Dragoons at the first drove on fair and gently, till they saw the bait had
taken, and then mending their pace, And surprised a part of the presidiaries.
but observing such a distance as might keep them out of the reach of the
Enemies Muskets, and give the purfuers hope to over-take them* led them on to
their Fate, the wood where Vilette lurked with his Carabins, which suddenly and
roundly fell upon them, and at the first charge, cut them all in pieces (but 15
who begged quarter, and obtained it, and five Cavallieres, whose Steeds stood
them in more stead then their swords, and by their speed saved their Riders,
and themselves in Bleterans.

This achievement, satisfied him for the present, he was well provided to give
an account to the General of his doings, and now returned to the Camp then at
Ruffey, where, before his coming in, the Duke of Bleterans besieged,
Longueville being re-enforced with 12 fresh Companies of the Regiment de
Castel-moron, had concluded to besiege Bleterans, and had sent Vandy the
Campmaster, and Marsin a new Colonel, raised to that honor by the death of
the Liegois Bl^queroy, which died of the plague at Chalon, with 60 Musketeers,
and 200 men at arms, to burn down the Mil^ upon the River, and described.
which they did accordingly.

The town is situated in the County of Burgundy, in figure square, consisting
of 600 Families, with one fair street, which extends it self from the East end
to the West, and many lesser streets, and lanes abutting upon it. A apiece
Castle, guarded with a double ditch, four great towers at the four corners,
and four others upon the firm land betwixt the two Moats, stands like a
Bulwark at one Angle of the City, which being strong by nature, built in the
middle of a Moorasse, whither the Cannon could not have been drawn, had not the
drought paved the ground, must now entertain these new guests which came to
visit it; it stood alone for the Spaniard, the neighboring Forts and places of
The Castle of Fontenay surrendered.
strength, had submitted to the Christian King, Fontenay honored still by the
birth of S. Bernhard, which held out last, being taken in by Guebriant, after
three Cannons shot against it.

Some days were spent in intrenching the Army, raising of batteries, making of
Gabeonnadoes and approches, Aug. 16/26, was the first day when the platform of
the siege was drawn, and Aug. 21/^1, the Duke having spent 600 Cannon-shot in
the four preceding days against the walls, and made a breach of 25 paces in
length first summoned the City, and the Garrison at first demanding three days
respite to acquaint the Lieutenant General of Burgundy, with the particulars
of their estate, and upon the Generals denial of The town of Bleterans taken.
their request, telling him plainly that they were able to guard the breach,
and would not yield, he concluded to assault it, and did so the same day, and
carried it by force, maugre the resistance of 300 Alman Soldiers, which lay
therein, in whom the inhabitants put a strange considence, for their valor
showed at Saverne, and in the fury put 200 men of the inhabitants, whom he
found in arms to the sword, but preserved the lives and honors of 300 women
which implored his grace, enclosing them in a Sanctuary, till the violence of
the raging tempest was over.

The Castle served as a place of retreat to the Garrison, and held out till
Sept. 2. new style, when the Defendants The besieged sly to the Castle, where
they capitulate and surrender.
desired to capitulate, sent out an hostage to that effect, the Master of their
Ordnance, received another from the Camp, Mico Lieutenant of the Regiment of
Anguien, and after much scruple, and many difficulties obtained these
conditions.

I. THat the Soldiers should have liberty to depart with their arms, baggage,
one Dum beating, bullet in mouth, and lighted matches. II. That they might
carry with them two field-peeces, such as should be assigned them by the Duke
of Longueville. III. That they should be furnished with wagons to transport
their baggage, sick, and wounded men. IV. That they should have a Convoy, with
security to Dole.
Lastly, that the inhabitants, which had retired into the Castle, should freely
go whither they pleased, and as many as would stay in the town, should take an
oath of allegiance to the Christian King. All which were accepted, and the
Garrison having stayed two days to pack up their trinkets, marched out Sept.
5, new style, 300 in all the most Almans, which took service under the French,
and the other Comtois, who according to the treaty, were conducted to Dole, by
150 French Cavalliers.

The Actions and Occurrences in Piemont, Montferrat, Millanois, and generally
throughout Italy.
THe departure of the Duke de Rohan, from the Valtoliue, not only promoted the
Spanish designs among the Grisons, and Valteliuers, the Grisons challenging
Troubles amongst the Grisons after Rohans departure.
a jurisdiction over the Valteliners, which they deny, and the Marquess of
Leganez, Governor of Millain, fishing in those troubled waters, interposing as
a stickler in that controversy, which is not yet agreed of, but strengthened
the Marquesses hands against the Duke of Savoy, in the Principality of Piemont
and Montferrat, his united forces of 20000 foot, and 5000 horse (because there
was no Enemy to flank him) being brought down against the Duke, before the
French succors under the command of Crequy, could be brought in to his
assistance. The Dukes Army which should make head against the Spanish host,
was but a small one, 5000 foot and 1500 horse, yet so well disposed and
ordered, that with this small number he guarded his Dominions, from that
universal devastation which threatened them Leganez Governor of Millain goes
into the field.
though with loss of some places, till the French came in to relieve him.
Leganez appearing in field at Novarra, June 6 new style, Grequy not reaching
the Duke till June 14/^4, eighteen days after, when he arrived opportunely at
Cassall, the Spanish Marquess, before the French came in, having threatened to
besiege it.

At Novarra the Marquess divided his Army into three parts, one was to stay
with him here, the second was sent into the Lomeline; and the third under
Gildas toward Nisse de la Paille, which was the first place The Spanish Army
is divided into three parts.
he aimed at; the victory there being prepared for him before his coming, by
the treachery of the inhabitants, who by private intelligences, had invited him
to come before it, and promised to surrender it, in despite of the Governor
and the Garrison. A traitor in a State is like a Serpent in the bosom, fatal
if fostered, and unremoved. The Duke of Savoy knew not the secret practice
betwixt those Rebels and his Enemies, but regarded them as subjects, and was
careful for their preservation. Upon the first bruit of Gildas his coming
down, he dispatched thither wards, two companies of light horse, one consisting
of 80, and the other of 40 Cavalliers, who came into the town, May 31, June 10
before day, and receiving intelligence, that the Spaniards were then at Ancisa
a place fast by, sent out some Vant-curriers to discover their number and
posture, who returning with an answer, that the Army consisted of 4000 foot,
1200 horse, and some Dragoons, these Cavallieres resolved to visit them, and
skirmished Gildas sent toward Nisse le p^gl^.
with them all that day, being secured from much damage by the Canons of the
town, which played advantageously upon the Camp, and at night were received
into the City by the Governor, who disposed them into their several places to
defend the City. The night nursing mother of those deeds of darkness, first
caused the evil affection of the Citizens toward the Duke their lawful
Prince to be suspected, when Gildas assaulting an half moon near the Cloister
of the Capuchins, carried it by the slacknesse of the defendants, who inclining
to his party, did as good as surrender it, without opposing him, and suffered
his Cavallary and Dragoons to pass the River of Borbo, and range themselves in
Battalia upon Saint Francis his Hill, and the day ensuing plainly discovered
it. The presidiaries did their best, both for their own defense and offense of
the assaylants: They skirmished all day, near the Piemont Port, with the
Spanish Camp, to give the inhabitants opportunity to go abroad to get forage
for the horses, of which they were almost destitute. Out they went, but did
little to help their friends at home, and much for the advantage of those new
ones abroad, Gildas were certified by some of them, of the estate of the town
more particularly, and sent a Scout of summons to yield before that Leganez
came down directed to the Governor, and the Lord Saint Paul then residing
Summoneth the City.
there by a trumpet, accompanied with two Capuchins, and the Curate of Saint
John de Nisse, (who fained himself to have been a prisoner to the Spaniard) to
which the Governor returned no other answer, but that he thanked Gildas, and
would prepare to entertain Leganez in a military bravery, with this answer the
Drum, and the two Capuchins returned, but the Curat stayed behind, to add more
suell to that fire of mutiny, which was kindled in the City, and to pass
intelligence of each circumstance to the Spanish* Army. The basest of creatures
are most prolisicous, and the unperfect animals produce more young ones in
number, and in a far shorter time, then the perfect; the seditious Which by
the treachery and seditious practice of the inhabitants,
Curate had prepared aspeech, a short one scarce of three lines, to divide the
hearts of people from their Prince, and it wrought so effectually, that the
Drum had scarce delivered his answer to Gildas, and he prepared to assault the
Curtain of Saint Francis, when the rebellion of the people (which like fire, if
it fall upon flax, or such combustible matter, does soon raise it self to a
flame) at first ashamed to show its head, fed with the oily words of a
traitorous Priest, began to be both insolent and impudent, they abandoned the
stations, to which they were designed, threatened the Savoyards Officers to
deliver them into the hands of the Spaniard, unless they would presently
capitulate, 40 of them marching up to the Governor, with menaces to murder
him, unless he did treat instantly. The Commander seeing how he was pressed
betwixt two extremes, apparent danger of life, if he should refuse, ignominy
if he should assent, though to spin out the time Was surrendered,
a little, till he could pacify this commotion, sent out a Drum, as if he
meant to Article, and in lieu of him received a Sergeant from the Camp, so
obtaining a cessation of arms, which he spent with all remonstrances he could
think of, to pacify the people, and divert them In despite of the Governor
and garrison.
from that shameful revolt, when not prevailing with the enraged multitude, he
was forced to come to covenants, and June 4/^4, the Garrison of 300 men (able
to have maintained the place against the enemy without, if there had not been
a worse within) departed from the City, and left it to the command of the
Catholic King.

Breme was the next place, designed by the Spanish Marquess to be conquered by
his forces, and a design only it was, which never came to execution, it being
a place of strength well garrisoned, and provided for by the Duke of Savoy,
Emery the French Ambassador, and Prastin who laid in an experienced, courageous
soldier Mont-gaillard to defend it, and that being known to the Spanish
General, he loath to spend his time and forces there, which might be employed
elsewhere more expeditiously left it, and with his Army first besieged Aglian or
Aillan, a Castle near Asti, situate upon an Hill, where Renato Roero, which
commanded there, received him courageously, hanging up a black flag, in
testimony that he meant to hold it, as long as he was Agliano besieged by the
Spaniard.
able, his deeds answering the outward sign whereby he expressed his resolution.

Several times he assaulted it, and was as often repelled, with more loss in
conclusion, then glory by the prosequution: the way he went, proclaimed the
Spaniard to be a man of undaunted courage, fit for the managing of such an
enterprise, three vollies of the shafts of fate, winged with rage, and pointed
with death, could not divert him from following his enterprise, nor the fourth
The Commander endures diverse assaults,
more dreadful then any of the former appale him; twenty wagons were laden
with men, wounded in this last attempt; the Hospitals of Alexandria and Miss
were filled with Creples, dismembered, impotent men: some Commanders of note
were slain outright, the Colonel Lion a German, the Sergeant Major Crevelli,
three Captains, 15 Lievtenants, and Alfieres, besides a man of more special
rank, known to be such by his habit, not his name, and yet all this misfortune
could not shake, much less shatter his grounded resolution: The Slaughters
upon the assailants.
Marquess was not in the siege personally, and yet was present there
powerfully, his quarter was then at Castighliote, betwixt Nave and Castignone,
places late appertaining to the Savoyard, but now si^sed by the Spanish Army,
being but open Dorps, Towers unfortified, and there informed of the former ill
success, concluded of another way to compass his design. The Castle was by
his direction undermined in two several places, and that near the Astisan Port
was sprung, June ^^/^^, more fortunately for the besieged, then the aslaylants,
these being covered and smothered with the earth, which fell upon them, those
having an halfmoon which defended the Castle near it, better fortified by a new
mount of earth, raised by the playing of that mine, then it had bin formerly.

Yet all this only deferred, prevented not the fate of the Citadell. A new
assault was concluded, and undertaken the next day, which though for that time
was Agliano taken by the Spaniards.
beaten off, with a notable loss to the assailants, so abated both the
spirits, and number of the defendants, that within two days having then
endured a siege of thirteen days, (begun with resolution to master the Fort,
and continued without cessation of hostile opposition) were compelled to
condition for their lives, and the Commander and Officers being dimitted with
their swords by their sides, and the soldiers with white staves, the Spanish
Marquess intending to demolish the Castle which he had purchased with the
loss of 3000 of his men, slain and disbanded, that it might no more steed the
Savoyard his adversary.

Gold may be bought too dear: so was Agliamo, the Marquess after this prize,
aimed at an higher pitch of Glory, but could not reach it, the wings of his
Army by which he was to mount being clipped by the valiancy of the Savoyards,
and the Duke hanging like a plummet at his heels, to pull him downwards when he
was rising. Albe was menaced with a siege, but that was strongly garrisoned
with 3000 soldiers, and the Duke encamped himself with his small Army, near
the bridge The Duke of Savoy, and the Marquess of Legauez encamp near each
other.
upon the Taner, to hinder the Spanish General from raising a bank against
it: which caused the Marquess about the end of June to retreat toward his own
Province, the Millanez, passing the River under the shelter of his Fort de Nom,
and to incampe in a small field betwixt Ancona and Asti, near the Taner,
laboring uncessantly about his Trenches, to earth himself within so small a
distance of his Highness, whose little Army lay fortified in the womb of its
common mother, the Ground, that the Sentinels could parlee together, as they
did frequently.

Strength is not the only thing that makes a soldier victorious: He that
carried a spear like a Weavers beam, was vanquished by a stripling:
presumption of the power of his brawny arms, was the bane of that superlatively
strong Crotoniate, and the Marquess his considence in the number, and force of
his Cavallary, exposed his horsemen both to danger and damage. The Spanish horse
it first were enquartered without his Trenches, the Duke perceived how open
they lay assaulted them, and forced them to seek a more secure station. But
what assurance The Marquis his horses quartered without his trenches are
exposed to damage.
of safety is there amongst the many turns, and doubtful changes of war? The
ditches and mudwalled stables whither they retreated, might shelter them from
the Savoyards sword, but not from famine. Grass did not grow in the new opened
bowels of the earth, but upon the surface, the beasts must abroad to fetch in
their forage, or perish, and their Riders to provide for them, made many
incursions into Montferrat, whence they still came short home, the Dukes
Carabins which he had planted there to guard that Province, cutting off the
men, which adventured to get food for the Cattle.

Hitherto the balls were but tossed, which afterward came to be banded. The
vigilant Spaniard lay close at his defensive ward, and would not offer to make
a blow til he thought he might do it certainly, and strike home: His Highness
(as it behoved him) was no less cautelous then his Enemy: Both lay upon their
advantages, though with some difference of their ends, the Spaniard aiming to
win ground from his Highness, the Duke who all this while labored only to
secure his Dominion from that foreign invasion.

The Marquess perceived that the Duke grew daily more and more strong, and
thereupon imagined, th^^ all his Forces were generally drawn into the Astesan,
that the other part of the Country was unfurnished of men, and therefore
selecting 4000 Foot, and 500 Horse, out of the mayn body of his army, sent them
with three The Prince of Modena sent into Langues,
pieces of Cannon, under the command of the Prince Borsio of Modena to Langues,
who razed Montbaldo^, and Reccaveran whence the inhabitants were fled, and
burnt all the Villages as far as Courtenville, which was designed for the
fire too, but bought its safety with a sum of money. The Prince finding such
a naked Country so far, thought to find all the rest unprovlded both of men
and munition, sent back his Cannon, which he would not stay to lugge after him,
to make Plundereth the territory.
the more speed, and in haste came before Salietto, which the inhabitants had
forsaken, but was then (the day before the Princes coming) garrisoned with 150
Dragoons, by the provident care of his Highness, who also commanded the whole
Regiment of Senantes, which till then was laid in Albe, to march thither also,
and to be assistant to that small Garrison against the Enemy. The process of
all this was made known to the Prince Borsio, who now missing the Canon, of
which he had disburdened his Army, and being once repulsed, when he intended to
have surprised the place by scalado, marched thence immediately against the
Castle Santa Iulia, which being defended but by 50 men, and Takes in the Fort
Santa Iulia.
undermined in two several places by the Prince his pioners, in the night was
surrendered the next day, before that Senantes, who was ordered by the Duke to
keep an eye upon the Prince his designs, could appear to his Friends with his
auxiliary Forces. The Commission given to the Savoyard Colonel was to attend
upon the Spaniard, and to impeach him, as much as might be, with the security
of his Regiment, which was then only of 500 men, but not to adventure the
hazard of a battle, in regard of the disparity betwixt his, and the Spanish
forces. The Colonel observed the directions to which he was limited, and
concealing himself from the Spanish Camp, which lay about Santa Iulia, lodged
himself upon the top of a Mountain till Where he encampeth and is raised by
Senantes, a Colonel to the D. of Savoy.
midnight, when rising suddenly, he fell upon one of the Spanish quarters
unexpectedly, slew above 200 men upon the place, took one Captain and some
Officers, and soldiers, prisoners of war, and brought such a confused
amazement upon the whole Spanish Camp, that the Prince Borsio discamped
presently, and retired in some disorder, by the way of Cairo, being pursued
three English miles by Senantes, who then returning met with another Savoyard
Colonel Cerruto, who by order from his Highness, joined his troops to those
under Senantes, to stop the progress of the Spaniard, if he should hap to
appear again in the parts thereabout.

Leganez in the interim, mployed himself to build a Fort Royal at Rocca,
point blank against that at Anon, A Fort Royal built by Leganez at Rocca.
wherein he used such diligence, that besides the great number of Pioners and
Masons, which he had mustered out of the State of Millan, to that purpose, he
ordered two Companies of each Regiment to help the ordinary laborers in the
speedy raising of that fortified building. He performed it happily, and was
thereby secured against both the French and Savoyards forces, the^ ready to join
if he had not bin necessitated through want of forage and victuals. The penury
of his men, pinched them more, then the hostile actions of his adversary. Many
would feign have run away from their colors, if the ways had been open for
their slight, the Leganez discampeth.
Duke of Savoy perceived it, and observing the old rule, that it is wisdom to
lay a bridge of gold for a flying Enemy, opened the passages to Montferrat,
which before were blocked up, relieved the Fugitives which fled from the
Spanish Camp, both with meat and money, and by this means did more scath to
Leganez, then he could have done by all mights the Marquess seeing his Army
abated every day, and himself vexed in his trenches, by the frequent assaults
made by his Highness discamping and retiring under the safeguard of his Forts
toward the territory of Alexandria, relinquishing Piemont and Montferrat, when
he had fortified Agliano, and Nisse de la Paille, lately gotten from the
Savoyard.

By this the French succors were come in, and one part of them under the Count
de Verrue, was employed to assist Cerruto and Senantes, against the Prince of
Modena, The French Army joins with the D. of Savoy, who sends a part thereof
against the Prince of Modena.
who with fire and sword made havoc in Langues and the other part under the
French General, the Duke de Crequy, was transmitted to his Highness, to
attend upon the designs of the Spanish Marquess. Verrue performed his charge
so well, that he chased Borsio out of Langues, became master of the Town and
Castle of Carchere, (a place of much importance, being the passage from Piemout
to Genoa, and Rome, by which the French Curriers could not formerly pass
without much peril) having first surprised the greatest part of that Garrison
in the open field, put the one half to the sword, the remaynder flying to the
Mountains for their preservation, and afterward besieged Cairo, a place of
strength in Langues.

The service done by the Count and his assistants, Castelan, Cairo besieged by
Verrue.
Cerruto and Seuantes, was no less offensive to the Spaniard, then grateful
to the Christian King, and the Duke his Consederate, Leganez to divert Verrue
from prosequuting the siege of Cayre, brought his forces out of the territory
of Alexandria, over the Po^ into the Legenez to divert him, invades Vercellois.
Vercellois, and burned certain Villages there, thinking to compel the Duke of
Savoy to recall Verrue to assist him with the French troops, and so make him
leave off the siege which he had happily begun, and was like to finish
fortunately.

But the project took not, Verrue took in the place and stirred not till he had
done it. His Highness was maturely advised of the Marquesses march and
purpose, and would not revoke the order he had given the Count de But his
project takes not.
Verrue, thinking himself strong enough (being now reenforced with the rest of
the French troops) to meet the enemy in Campania, but presently sent the
Marquess of Pianessa, to muster up all the Cavallary near Vercelle, and to
enquarter them in such a place, where he might most conveniently entangle the
Spanish forces, and stay them in their full careere: himself in the mean time
visiting the territories of Verrue, Cressentin, and Trin, and lodging that
night near the bridge at Sture; His stay there ministered an occasion of a
combat betwixt his and the French united forces* and the Spanish army, under
Don Martino de Arragon, Tiberio of Naples, Lucio Boccapiana, Don Giovanni
Cavalla the Spanish Camp-master, the Count Bolognino Lieutenant General of the
Infantery, Don Fedro Commissary General of the Cavallary, Spaden and other
Officers. It was thus! At Sture his Highness was informed, that these Spanish
Cavalliers with one part of the Army, had order to ravage the Lands of the
Prince of Masseran, upon whom they meant to avenge themselves, because that he
the year last past had driven them out of Crev^oeur which they had unjustly
detained from him, and afterward to make an invasion into the Ri^lois; where
they meant to plunder the Country, as they had done the Astesan, and the
D^rsellois, and to prevent them; he dispatched the Marquess Villa, General of
his Horse and Field-marshall of the Christian Kings Army to go and join some
companies of Horse with those under the Marquess of Pianessa about Verselle,
and take an opportunity to fight with the A battle betwixt the Marquess
Ville, and the Spanish forces near Cesia.
Enemy. The Marquess followed his direction, and par^ing from the Camp then
at Morani, July 21, August 1, with his troops making about 1300 Horse, attained
to Verselli about 11 of the clock, where he understood, that one part of the
Enemy was already passed over the River of Cesia, having carried away out of
the Versellois a booty of cattle, and taken prisoner the Captain Esprit,
Lieutenant of the Carabins, of Don Carlo, as he was scouring that Country with
20 of his men, five whereof they flue, and caused the rest to fly. The report
startled the Marquess, who seeing some other Spanish troops upon the further
bank of the River, made over the stream toward them with his Cavallary, and so
affrighted them, that they presently fled, and sheltred themselves behind the
Fort of Doval, whither the Marquess would not follow them, the Cannons being
planted against his Army, and the Musketeers being ready to discharge upon him
from the Fort, but returned toward the River, where he was scarce arrived, but
he perceived (within an hour) some troops of Spanish Horse, making in all
about 1500, marching toward Begun by a light skirmish.
him with a pretty hand-gallop, as prepared to fight with him who stood ready to
entertain them. The combat began in a light skirmish betwixt the conjoined
French and Piemontain Dragoons and Carrabins, and those of the Enemy, but
lasted not long, being broken off, by the coming in of a new Squadron of
French Horse, which charged this Avantguard of the Spanish Army so furiously,
that they were presently routed, and put to flight. The Spanish Battalia stood
whole still, whither the Avantguard sled, and were rallied to renew Comes to a
pitched battle, which a while continued doubtful,
^ fresh combat, which lasted doubtful on both sides, till the Squadron of
Souvray breaking in amongst the midst of the Spaniards broke their ranks, and
defeated them entirely, having slain betwixt three and four hundred upon the
place, and taken as many prisoners, the most of them Officers, and men of
quality. Amongst the dead were found Lucio Boccapiana, Camp-master, one
Marquess of Davie, the Lieutenant of the Colonel Sehic; the Provost Marshall
of the German Forces; two Lievtenants, three Cornets, and many other Officers
which are unknown. Don Martino of Arragon escaped hardly, his horse being
slain under him, and he beaten to the ground: Don Antonio Nephew to the Count
of Montery Viceroy of Naples, Spadin and many other Yet in the end the French
get the victory.
Officers and men of quality being taken prisoners.

During the time of this combat, the Count Verrue took in the City of Cairo,
and went from thence to beslege Larocca near Asti: lately fortified by Leganez,
in the time of his abode there. The Marquess had then a time of sorrows which
thronged together upon him. A Currier came from Spain with unwelcome news of
his wives death, sister to the Marquess Spinola, and another with a report of
a new Successor into his Government, yet neither of these did so much trouble
him as the success and hopeful progress of the united French and Piemontain
Armies; the first he knew to be a debt to Nature, and it did not trouble him,
the other he thought might be false and raised by the malice of some of his
enemies in Court, or, if true, yet he would take care to discharge his Office
conscionably, and comfort himself in the true account, he should make to the
Catholic King. La Rocca was besieged, and he encouraged La Rocca besieged by
the French and Piemontains.
the defendants to hold out manfully, promising to relieve them as soon as he
might conveniently. The defendants behaved themselves manfully, being animated
by the daily intelligence they received from their associates, by the favor of
a Hill upon the bank of Taner, and the French General to debar them of that
conference, commanded the Colonel Dallot to possess himself of that place:
it was a work of difficulty and danger, the Musquetadoes played upon him from
within, and the appointed succors withstood his way without, yet he performed
it with as much happiness as valor.

It was a work full of hazard, yet his industry joined with Fortune overcame
it, with much difficulty he entrenched himself near the pallisadoes of the
besieged, four days together endured the sallies of the Garrison, and the
assaults of the Spanish Camp, both which having A notable exploit done by
Dallot a French Colonel.
the benefit of a Mill, where the Enemy had flancout'd himself, and a wooden
bridge laid over the River for their mutual correspondence. Dallot resolved to
burn them both, and to that end putting off his clothes himself, his brother,
and two other soldiers good swimmers cast themselves into the River in the
view of the Enemy, who played upon them with their Muskets, but hit them not,
Fortune so favoring them, that they broke down the doors of the Mill with
the pickaxes which they carried in their belts, and burnt both that and the
bridge with the balls of fire which they had in their hands, and left not the
water until they saw them both consumed into ashes. The Marquess of Leganez
(conjecturing at the issue of this adventure) Leganiz sends Don Martino to
relieve la Rocca.
began to fear that la Rocca could not hold out, and thereupon discamping,
returned into the State of Millan, where he drew out seven Regiments of foot,
and 2000 Horse from his Army, and sent them under the conduct of the Marquess
Don Martin, d' Arragon to relieve it. His Highness had notice of his march,
and followed him. His speedy pursuit after him brought him upon the Vantguard
of Don Martin, consisting of 200 Dragoons and Carrabines, whom he assaulted so
roughly, that he slew and wounded most part of them, and put the rest to
flight. The issue made the Spanish Don to give over his design, till Leganez
with the main body of his Army might come in to his succor. The Marquess had
speedy intelligence of what had passed, and as speedily came up to him,
encamped upon the bank of Taner, with four pieces of Canon to impeach the
French and Piemountain Armies, who had pitched their Camp upon the declining
of the Hill near the river. The Spanish Vantguard surprised. Legonez brings
his whole Army against the French and Piemontains.
In fine, the Canons began to play on both sides, and thence (the Battalia's
drawing nearer each other) the small shot began to fly, and was spent so
effectually, that for a time both sides appeared losers, and neither could
promise it self a victory. Both Commanders and ordinary men fell down dead in
both the Armies, till the Spanish a little declining the battle, if either
party was the gainer, it is thought to be the Savoyards Army. Many of the
Spanish Chieftains fell that day, among A battle without vi ctory.
which was a younger brother of the Prince Borsio de Modenn, the certain number
of the common men is not known, only 600 dead corpses were reported by the
prisoners to be tumbled into the River, and thirty wagons laden with the
carcasses of the principal men which were slain, and some wounded soldiers
were known to be sent to Alexandria. Nor could the French and Piemontain army
glory of this conquest, it cost them dear, the lives of many of their Officers
and Soldiers, nor did the loss of the Spaniard do him so much prejudice, but
that by the help of his Canon at Annona, and some companies of Musketeers
(whom he afterward sent to guard the River) he laid in 600 The siege of la
Rocca raised.
fresh men into la Rocca, who defended themselves so bravely, that at last the
siege was raised, and the Duke of Savoy was forced to depart without a Conquest.

A victory soon after attended him, the French Fleet somewhat affrighted all
the Sea-townes of Italy, and the Governor of Millam to secure the Catholic
Kings towns upon the Seacoast of Montferrat, September the second new style,
drew out of his army 7000 footmen, Almayus, Spaniards, and Italians, six
Squadrons of horse, and some companies of Harquebuzen horsemen, who under the
command of the Prince of Modena, Don Martin d' Arragon, and Gildas with Cannon,
The victory gotten by the D. of Savoy at Monbaldon.
Petards, Bombards, and Morterers had order to pass through Languez toward
the Seacoast, and, by the way to selze upon the Castle of Cengio, a place
which his Highness of Savoy had lately fortified. The Duke was informed of the
Enemy his design, and to overtake him September the fourth new style, advanced
as far as Salycotte, within a league and half of Cengio, where
understanding, that the Spaniards (upon the report of his arrival, and because
they found Cengio newly reen forced with a garrison of 200 men) were returning
the way they came, he made after them, overtook them near Mombaldon and the
Valley of Espin upon the bank of Bor^io gave them battle, September the
eighth new style, and obtained such a victory, that of those 7000 Foot, and
1200 Horse, not above 2000 escaped, the rest being slain, or dispersed upon the
Mountains, where the Peasants of the Country pursued them with all hostil^^y,
and slew as many as they found. Besides the loss of men 40 wagons loadeh with
baggage, and 30 with ammunition became a prey to the united Armies of France and
Savoy, to the great weakening of Leganez his Army, who to re-enforce it returned
into the Millanez, and commanded each Family to supply him with a man.

The news of this victory ecchoed through Savoy and France, the Marquess of
Saint German, Master of the Wardrobe to his Highness, was sent to the
Christian King with tidings of that success, and was there entertained with
such state as became his person and office, Thur in re-ecchoed with the praises
of the Duke, to whose vigisancy they ascribed this Fortune, and the inhabitants
had made bon-fires of joy, had not this Foreign happiness been over-clouded
with some sorrow at home. The Duchess and her second son the Prince Emanuel
were both sick; and their maladies made the Citizens to sympathize of their
grief. The Duke was informed of the state of his Duchess, and posted from the
Camp to visit her, where after two days stay finding her recovered, he
returned into the Astesan to the Duke of Crequy, the Lord of Emry Ambassador
to his Majesty of France, and the other Commanders, to advise about the
further proceedings of his Army. A Council was called, near the River Cesia,
and the Duke (though known to be sage in Counsel, both for war and peace)
then seemed to outstrip himself, when suddenly a Colic passion took him,
which first changing The death of the Duke of Savoy.
into a single Tertian, and afterward into a double, accompanied with some
malignity, held him 11 days, till nature being overcome by the disease, there
followed a separation of soul and body in the one and fiftieth year of his
age: A Prince he was doubtless of a great spirit, wise in policy, valiant and
painful in war, and in demonstrance of his affection to the Crown of
France, and his Duchess a sister thereof, made her protectresse of his
Children, and Regent of the State.

The Christian King (as ill news has swift wings) had speedier notice of the
death of his brother in Law, than he had of the late victory, and to show that
his love was permanent after his death (according to the custom of The King of
France causes the Master of the Ceremonies
the Roman Church) gave order for a solemn Requiem, and a Dirge to be held in
the Cathedral at Paris with all solemnity. To this purpose, Le Sieur de Saint
tot, Master of the Ceremonies had order to command the Parliament and other
Sovereign Courts, the Provost of the Merchants and Sheriffs, the Rector and
Scholars of the University of Paris to suffragate at the Prayers and Service
which his Majesty had appointed in the Cathedral of that City, giving him a
Commission to that purpose, dated at Saint Germans, October 14/24. The Master
of the Ceremonies, according to his warrant the 16/^6, of the same month, in
the Robes of his Office, To proclaim an Office for his soul.
with a square Cap upon his head clothed in a mourning Gown, with a train of
four else long, carried by four Gentlemen, accompanied with three Heralds of
Arms, bearing in their hands their staves of Office, which were garnished with
slowre de Luces, then covered with Cypresle, invested also in long black Robes,
upon which they had their ordinary Coats of Velvet embroydered with slowre de
Luces, and attended with 23 ordinary Cryers of Paris, in mourning Gowns, each
carrying before and behind him an Escutchion of the Dukes Arms, they made this
Proclamation.

All Nobles and devout persons pray for the soul of the most excellent and most
puissant Prince, Victor Amady by the grace of God Duke of Savoy, Chablais,
Augusta, and Geneva, Prince and perpetual Vicar of the sacred Roman Empire,
Marquess of Saleucesse, Nizze, The Proclamation containing the Dukes titles,
etc.
Romaut and Asti, Banes, and Favoigni, Lord of Versellei, of the Marquesate of
Seva, and Doviola late deceased, for whose soul the King has appointed Prayers
and Service in the great Church of Paris, at which place, on Wednesday next in
the afternoon, shall be said the Vespers and Vigils for the dead, to continue
until ten of the clock upon Thursday morning.

Wednesday the ^^/^8, the Courts and incorporated bodies assembled in the said
Church, the train band of the City having work enough to make way for them
through the press of people, which was so great that the Church doors were
forced to be kept shut for the space of an hour, that time being spent to
setch in the Kings order for those Vespers and Vigils, which were said by the
Deane, Chanter, and Canons in a doleful tune agreeable to that mournful
action without sound of Music in the Quire of the said Cathedral. The Quire
was hung round with five several rows of The manner of the service with all
Ceremonies.
black cloth, and two of Velvet, besides the benches, seats, chairs, and pews,
which were covered as the high Altar, and the ground spread with black cloth.
The body of the Church was so great, that thousands of men there would have
seemed but a small number, yet that The first days service.
was hung round with two rows of black cloth, and one of Velvet to the great
door of the Church which was hanged double, as was that also which led to the
Archbishops Palace by a pair of winding stairs which were covered with black,
as were the two Halls of the Palace both prepared for the receipt of that
company.

This was the first days work, the next morning between eight and nine, the
same assembly met to attend the three young Princes of Nemours, the chief
Mourners, who expected them in the Palace Hall, robed in black The office for
the second day
Gowns with long trains each of six else apiece born up by the Gentlemen. The
Master of the Ceremonies thence conducted them into the Quire, having three
Heralds going before him attended with their King at Arms, before whom marched
the 23 Cryers in the same habit as they had done the day before, and among them
100 poor men in mourning Gowns and Hoods, each carrying a lighted torch
garnished with his deceased Highness his Arms, and before all these the train
band of the City, having work enough to keep off the multitude, whose
curiosity had drawn them thither in such troops, that they pestered the way,
and hindered the Mourners, who were to attend the Service and the Quire whither
they came at last, and there abode four hours together. In a Gallery above
them, were placed the Officers of the Chamber of Accounts, the Court of Aids,
and the Corporation of the City. Opposite to them on the other side, stood the
prime President the Duke of Montbason, the Counselors of the Court, and the
Rector of the University attended with eight Beadles with their silver Maces
covered with Cypress, which filled the lower end of the Quire. The Queen was
seated where she might see all and not be seen. Madamosella and the princess
of Condy for their better convenience were placed in the Archbishop's seat, he
being then absent. The Popes Ordinary Nuncio was seated on a bench at the side
of the Altar, and the Venetian Ambassador by him, the Ambassador of Savoy
being not able to attend by reason of the indisposition of his body, many
Bishops in their ordinary habits being seated on a bench at the great door of
the Quire, and the rest of the space filled with people of all conditions and
sexes.

The Office was performed by Routhiller, coadjutor to the Archbishop of Tours,
who with de la Barde a With all the particular Ceremonies.
Canon of the Cathedral, which assisted him in black Velvet Copes, garnished
with the Arms of the deceased Duke, celebrated Mass before the great Altar of
the Quire, which was adorned with many white wax tapers burning and garnished
with double Escutchions of Or and Argent. At the side of the said Altar, a
Cupboard was erected in form of another Altar, garnished with four great
Candlesticks, one Cross, and the sacred Vessels required for that service, all
of silver engraven. The Archbishop officiating. Le Sieur des Roches, Secretary
to the Cardinal Duke, Chanter and Canon of the said Church, and his
Sub-chanter held a Quire by the side of the burning Chapel, which was of 1 a
foot long and 10 wide, composed of nine pillars charged with double
crosse-bars, upon which were set 800 great Lights of yellow wax.

Under the middle of the roof was an Hearse representing the body of the Duke,
covered with cloth of gold, quartered by a Cross of white Satin, adorned with
four great Scutcheons bearing the Arms of the deceased Duke, in a broydery of
Or and Argent, and about it stood six great Candlesticks of silver gilt,
garnished with great white wax lights, and double Scutchions of the same
bearing. The four Heralds of Arms were seated upon four low-stools, at the
four corners of the Capella Ardente, toward the head of the representative
Hearse, betwixt the two chief Heralds stood an holy-water-pot of silver covered
with black, and near that were laid two cushions of black Velvet. At the feet
of the Hearse toward the Altar betwixt the two last Heralds, there was an other
lesser Altar, and upon that four Candlesticks, and a Cross of carved silver.
Upon the head of the Hearse, there stood a pillow of black Velvet, upon which
was placed a Dukes Crown, covered with black Cypress. The four Sesses, which
made the tower of the Capella Ardente, were covered with cloth, and black
Velvet, garnished with four great Scutcheons of the same bearing, woven with Or
and Argent, the rest being powdered with many other lesser Arms. Besides the
other lights, the place designed for the Choristers was hanged, with three
rows of cloth, and two of black Velvet; all which were garnished with great
lights, and double Scutcheons. About the Arches and Galleries of the body of
the Church and Quire, 1200 great lights were blazing: So that in all, during
the Service, which was performed with an excellent harmony of Music, by the
Chaunters, Chaplains, and Choristers, no less then 3000 wax Tapers were seen
burning. In the time of the Liturgy, the three young Princes of Nemours, made
their offering, and presented each one, a white wax Candle: the first offered
one garnished with four Scutcheons of Or, the second of three, and the third
of two, which were given them by the Master of the Ceremonies, for the same
purpose. Then the Sieur of Liugendres, placed in the Chanters seat, made an
Oration sit for the time, in honor of the Princes honor, containing a
relation of his acts in his life and pious death.

The Funeral Oration done, the service was continued: after the elevation of
the holy Sacrament, four torches of white wax, were carried by four Mourners
clothed in black without Hoods, and in the end the three young Lords, thanking
the company, with an accustomed reverence, their devotions being done upon
their knees, when they had cast some holy water upon the Hearse, as did all the
rest of quality, depart each man to his own place.

The Duke is dead, At non ille ferox qui se jactavit Iberus,
Nec scelerata manus Catilinae --
he neither fell immaturely by the hand of the Titans, the men of war his
Enemies, nor by clandestine treasons of a Jacques Clement, or Ravilliack, the
bloody practices of murdrous Assassinates, but submitted to Fate, sickness the
Harbinger of death, prepared his way, and he traced it: two of his subjects
Capuchins, of that order which in his life, he most respected, attended upon
him in his death, the thread of their lives being cut off by the violence, and
malice of some impious Jews, for professing the Name of Christ, the Divine
Power having so ordered it, that he would not want a clear witness against
that obstinate people, in the duskinesse of the Romish Christian Religion. The
story is thus delivered from Lions, Chambery, and Roven.

There was dwelling at Carrieu in Piemont a Jew named Macohabe, aged above 60
years, and so wealthy, that he maintained a Family of 12 Males, and nine
Females, and in these late wars betwixt the Duke of of Savoy and the State of
Millain, had furnished his Highness with above 12000 Ducats. He had a Nephew
called Jacob Rabby, who had some commence with the Christians, which desiring
his conversion, Two Copuchins murdered by a Jew at Carriew.
with much entreaty persuaded him to hear a Sermon made by a Capuchin in Lent
last at Carriew. The Argument of the Sermon was that Jesus the Savior of the
world was already come into the world in humane flesh, born of an immaculate
Virgin by the operation of the Holy Ghost, and that there was no other Prophet
to be longer expected in Israel; which being proved and explained by the
Prophetical Scriptures, caused the young Jew to search more narrowly into that
mystery, which had so long bin concealed from him, and (being aftewards
confirmed in the truth by private conference) to renounce his Iudaisme, and to
desire Baptism for his initiation into Christianity. Maccabe his Uncle hearing
of his conversion, swelled with despite and rage against the Capuchins, vowing
to be avenged of that order, and as many Christian souls, as he could meet
withal conveniently. The forenamed Friars fell into his hands, and were made
the Anvils of his malicious mischief. By command from their superior, they
were sent upon a journey, and belated upon the way, met casually with the old
Wolvish Jew, who forecasting how to glut himself with their blood, cunningly
invites them to take a lodging at his house, promises a fair and kind
welcome, which they being wearied, and benighted did not refuse, but they were
no sooner entered into the house of the persidious Jew, but straight the doors
were made fast, and they were environed with the whole Family, which
entertained them with words of despite, calling them Apostataes, saying, that
the Messiah of the Jews would come, and put the Christians to confusion, and
adding horrid blasphemies against our Savior, bound the poor souls, hands, and
feet, beat them with cudgels, threatening torment upon torment, unless they
would confess the blessed Virgin to have bin a common prostitute. It could not
but grate the ears of any Christian, to hear those execrable words, the
Capuchins would not have heard them spoken, much less utter them, but
comforting each other by mutual encouragements, they prepared to receive their
Martyrdom still mayntaining the fundamental point, and hing of salvation,
till the Jews grown mad with rage at their constant resolution first cut out
their tongues, and then stabd them to death with knives in many parts of the
body successively (Michaey first, and Seraphino afterward, and then carried
them in their habits into a dark Vault, thinking to conceal this horrid murder.

But the blood of the Friars cried to Heaven, and that justice, which will not
permit such heinous sins to go The murder discovered.
unpunished, made it known by the tongue of a Jewish child, of eight or nine
years of age, which playing with the Christian children in the street the next
morning, told how Macabe had assassinated two Franciscans, and hid their
carcasses. The words of the child, caused this truth to be suspected amongst
the inhabitants, who seeing the Friars go into the Jews house, and not hearing
of their return, came together, forced open his gates, searched for their
bodies, and found them as the child had told, and thereupon apprehended the
whole Family, the child only excepted, and the Actors by sentence The Jews
condemned and executed.
of the Senate at Turin were all burned alive, October. 2. 12, their goods
consiscate, the one part to the use of the Duchess Regent, and the other to
the child which revealed the murder, and turned Christian, and received
Baptism.

The Fabric of the State of Italy did seem to totter this last Summer, the
great Bishop was twice struck The Popes sickness and recovery.
with a palsy, and the Cardinal Barberino his Nephew, by his appointment
governed as a Vice-pope during his weakness, to the grievance of the whole
Conclave, The Cardinal of Savoy Comprotector of Spain, and de Medicis,
supposing his sickness mortal, labored to promote the Cardinal Sansisto to
the Papacy, but Urban recovered, was informed of each particular, which had
happened, assembled the Conclave created eleven new Cardinals, and yet lives,
Sansisto which was designed for his successor being dead before him. The Family
of the Dukes de Mirandola, is quite extinguished, their was but one lest of
that name, and he an illegitimate, who having obtained by the intercession of
his The death of the Dukes of Mirandula and Mantua.
Friends, the investiture of that Duchy, is dead since without issue. The Duke
of Mantua has yielded to Fate.

CHAP. IV. The Actions and Occurrences in the Netherlands.
War, if once begun, spreads like a Canker. A Prince, engaged in arms,
has commonly a troubled State, and restless head, his Enemy waits all
opportunities, and unless providence guide him, he can find security no
where. The Cardinal Infant stood like a common bounder between two Enemies:
the French upon the South and East of the Provinces under his care, made an
invasion upon him: the United States upon the North did the like, and now to
fortisie himself, first, he caused the City of Hulst to double their
Palisadoes, and renew their Fortifications, and then the Garrisons of Mechlen,
Lyre, Breda, and the other places in Flanders, and Brabant, where his old
soldiers were wintered, he drew out such Forces and Ammunition, as was thought
fit to withstand them. The beginning of June, the Princes Rendevouz was
appointed, 80 Boats were The States proparation for war.
sent from Bergenapzohm to Ramekens, the Enginers were sent to Nimminghem, the
Frizelanders met at Emerick, the Cardinal Infant fortifying in the interim
Stivensworth, Gennep, and other places, and sending the Avantguard of his Horse
from Antwerp toward Flanders.

His Highness the Prince of Orange kept his design secret, some thought it
had bin for Brugez, others for Hulst, but none imagined, nor could tell
certainly whither they tended. About the end of June, his Forces met together,
were shipped at Gorcum, and though the wind blew hard, and caused some
tempest, arrived July the seventh new style at the Keel. Free Camp was then
published about the Rhine, all Excizes taken off, the Army then assembling
together to attend his Highness Breda besieged
pleasure. Some time he staid upon the Vlack before Ramekens, and till the 19
of July, no man had any particular knowledge of his meaning: then it was first
discovered to Prince Henry Cassimere of Nassaw, who with the Vantguard of his
Army, led on toward Breda.

The name of the Town is dignified with the honor of a Baronry, is situate in
the Country of Kempen, which is on part of the Province of Brabant, between The
description of the Town.
Lyre, Antwerp, Bergenapzohm, Tourn-hoult, Hogstraten, Stievenbergen, and
Gertrudenberg: seven leagues from each of the two first places, five from the
third, four from the fourth, three from the fifth, and two from the last, and
has under it seventeene Villages, besides the Towns of Stiven-berg,
Rosendendall, and Osterhoult. It was the ordinary residence of the Princes of
the house of Nassaw, to whom it fell in the year 1404, by the inter-marriage of
Englebert, a Prince of that Family, with Jane the Inheritrix of that Territory.
Its condition under several Princes.
The Princes of that Race held it peaceably, till the year 1567, at which time
William of Nassaw was constrained by the Duke of Alva to leave it, till the
year 1577; at which time he was newly possessed of it, and kept it four years,
till that June 15/25, 1585, when driven out by violence, he again left it to
the Spaniards, who kept it till the fourth of March 1590, at which time Captain
Heranger surprised it by a Turf-boat which covered some force of men
underneath: Grobendonk in the year 1599, labored to surprise it, but failed,
yet the Marquess Spinola took it by Famine in the year 1625, July the fifth
new style, after a siege of ten months and 22 days, since which time the
Spaniards have kept it with a strong Garrison, which troubling the whole
adjoining Territory, and hindering all trade by the neighboring Rivers, the
Prince of Orange now resolved to besiege it. This was the motive which impelled
him to this Enterprise, for prosequution whereof, he used this method.

The Prince Henry Cassimere of Nassaw was sent before with the Vantguard of his
Army, consisting of 44 Cornets of horse, and 80 Companies of Foot to begirt it
round, which he did July 13/^^, driving away all the cattle that fed in the
medows near it, his Highness in person the next day, coming before the Town
with The Avantguard under Prince Henry Cassimire blocks it up.
the body of his Army consisting of 40 Cornets of horse more, and 230 Companies
of Foot, and above 100 pieces of canon, having before given order for 8 ships
men of war to guard the Channel from Gertrudenberg to Stieven-bergen, that he
might have a sure passage to victual his Army by that River, he began with
prayers, and caused supplication to be made through all the Provinces of the
United States for an happy happy issue of that design. Their devotions once
over, he fell to work, drew out the lines of his trenches, following the
Marquess Spinola his plot-forme, employed 8000 Boores in the work, and
appointed their quarters to the Colonels, The works begun.
taking his own at Ginniken, assigning the Count William of Nassaw to the
Village of the Hague, Colonel Morgan to lie upon the way toward Autwerpe,
betwixt his own quarter and the Count Williams, Count Henry Cassimere
Governor of Vriesland, being enquartered at the Heyde, and the Duke of
Bovillon at Tetringen and Heusenheut.

The Spanish Cardinal by this had notice of what the Prince intended, and loath
to lose so fair a Gem as Breda, with an Army of 14000 Foot, and 6000 Horse,
many pieces of Ordnance, and good store of Ammunition, marched from Antwerpe,
and came to Hogstraten, The Cardinal Infant seeks to relieve it.
thinking to impeach the Prince, and raise his siege before he was well set
down: but to adventure to a battle, had bin to have put all to the Fortune of
one day, he would not do it desperately, though he had concluded to assault him
courageously, therefore he sent before him a Vant Currier John de Nassaw an
experienced soldier with ninety Companies of Horse to view the posture of the
Princes Army, and to acquaint him with the particulars. He found the Prince
neither supinely sleeping, nor in a loose positure, as if there had bin no
cause of fear expecting him: He knew the Cardinal to John de Nassaw sent to
descry, the Princes posture.
he a man trained up from his youth in military Feats, and stood in a firm
Battalia to attend him. The Cardinal would not hazard all at once, but upon a
good ground and informed of the Princes strength and vigilance, made no attempt
upon the Camp, but retired toward the Hemerish-werth, and the Prince-land,
leaving the issue of the siege to the care of the presidiary soldiers. The
garrison enclosed within their walls, and the And finding the P. upon his
guard, the C. departs.
Princes Army, showed their courage by many sallyes, to get their liberty: but
his Highness his power ordered by his care, so far availed him, that still
he repelled them with loss, and in the end, entrenched himself so strongly,
cutting the Merk-dike to environ his trenches, that he neither feared the
invasion of the Spanish camp without, nor the fallies of the garrison from
within.

Count Henry, Governor of Vries-land, by too much confidence was endangered,
while the Pioners Henry Cassimire near to be surprised.
were laboring in the works. He went abroad to view the fortifications of the
City, and at an old ruined house, where he feared no peril, was in hazard of
his life or liberty: some of the garrison were lurking in the Cellar, and
leaping out suddenly, took hold of his bridle, and had surprised him suddenly,
had not his horse trained up to bounds and curvets) regained his liberty by
strength.

It would be long to proceed to each particular. July 23. old style, the
garrison made another sally, and for a time became masters of an half Moon,
but were beaten out immediately, and on Thursday following, about 3. of the
clock in the morning, 1400 men of them The garrison s^lly out upon the Camp.
assaulted again the same half Moon, seized on it, and held it for an hour,
at which time they were repulsed, with the loss of sive Captains, and many
other officers and soldiers: the assiegeants themselves not repossessing the
place, without the death of many men in Bredrods quarter, with one Lieutenant,
and 5 or 6 soldiers of Mauritius his company.

The Camp made its excursions abroad, as well as the garrison made its sallies
upon the Army. The Prince by his labor and providence, had taken such order,
that they could not break forth so frequently out of their enclosure. He
having already raised two batteries, The Princes order to keep the Garrison in.
one near the Ginniken Water-mill, about 600 paces from the City, and the
other in Count Williams Quarter, kept by two corpse de guard, and secured by two
Redouts to prevent their eruption. The way into the field was open for the
garrison, and August the 6. new style, young Monsieur de Me, went abroad upon
the Heath with 70 Cavaliers, and there encountered with 80 wagons laden with
Wine, Aqua vita, and Beer, designed for the Infanta's camp, surprised the
Convoy, broke the vessels in pieces, and brought to the camp 70 justy horses,
which were sold by sound of the drum the day following.

The hearts of the Spanish soldiers in the Cardinals Army by this, began to
fail them. A whole troop of Burgundians ran away together, and among them one
English man, who jointly affirmed, that if they were not kept in by the Spanish
horse, more would follow them. Yet though his men began to decline him, the
Cardinal Infant would not forsake himself; but seeing the improbability he
had to relieve the City, projected how to advance the affairs of the Catholic
Venloo taken by the Cardinal Infanta. A Bastard.
King elsewhere, and marched toward Venloo and Ruremond, end took in Venloo in
the space of 5 days, (though it was garrisoned with 1100 able men) by the
cowardice, treachery, and wantonness of the Governor. One of the family of
Bredrode, who enticed (as is reported) by the seducing face of a false Nun,
with whom it was thought he had too familiar an acquaintance, delivered up the
keys to the Infanta, who rewarded him with the wages of his perfidiousnesse, a
small sum of money, with the which he went to Collen, to be secured from a
just vengeance of the States, which though they could not apprehend his person,
and put him to an actual torture, executed him in essigie. Thence he advanced
to Ruremond, which he Ruremond surrendered upon composition.
thought to have surprised as speedily, but the Governor there, in his loyalty
to the State, maintained it as long as he was able, though in the end he was
forced to yield upon composition.

It had been vain to have stayed in that quarter longer, little hope was there
to advance his conquest further, the States, warned by the loss of these two
last places, had double garrisoned all the towns, and it was more probability,
that by his stay, he might there consume himself and his Army, than enlarge
his victories. Besides, he had other irons in the sire elsewhere. The French
began to domineere in Henault and Artois, and had they found no opposition,
they had invaded Flanders, the glory of those Provinces under the Spaniard; and
to make head against them. He was forced to leave the Maze, and march to the
frontiers of Picardy.

The hope of the garrison in Breda, depended upon his succors, and though they
could not be ignorant that he was gone, and had left them, they were not
dejected, but used all their policy and might to weary out the Prince of
Orange, and force him to rise, seeing they could not vanquish him. August
1^/2^. the besieged sallied out again, and fought so earnestly, that as if
their liberty were above their lives; they gave not over combat till the horrid
face of death appeared in the mangled bodies of some of their copartners, and
of the assailants; then they retired, begd cessation of Arms for two hours,
and obtained it for the burial of their dead; and that work of piety being
done, the remainder of the few minutes was spent in friendly drinkings betwixt
the garrison and the camp; the presidiaries carousing to them in their own
liquor, and the camp answering them in the Beer of Dort and Rotterdam, with
which it was furnished. The sands that measured out the time, were no sooner
run, but both sides fell again to their acts of hostility, the Prince still
proceeding to make his approches nearer, although they were already brought
within a stones cast of the walls. In time he perfected what he had in his
mind forecast, though not without cost and expense both of blood and money.
August 23. old style, he began to undermine the enemies Horn-work, and that day
our Noble Countryman, (whose valor not appearing in blossoms, but in fruits
in his youth) the young Colonel Goring, who commanded in the approches, and had
adventured too far into the then not fully fortified Shrubgallery, received a
faulcon-shot in his ancle, which to the eye of the Surgeons, appeared so
dangerous, that they concluded, he could not escape unless his leg were cut
off: the Noble Gentleman bore the hurt patiently, but not the conclusion of his
Chyrurgeous, he resolved rather to lose his life, then his limb, till persuaded
by the divine advise of his Chaplain, Doctor Calfe, he began to assent to the
course prescribed him. It was not without an argument of the divine providence,
that he should thus demurre upon the manner of his cure; while they were thus
persuading him, and the Chyrurgeons preparing to dismember him, an old expert
Chyrurgeon comes in, undertaketh the cure, and performed it happily, it being
now scarce a blemish to the eye, and discernable only by a little halting.

Monsieur Charnasse, Ambassador for the Christian King to the States, and
General of the French forces in that service, sped not that day so happily: He
not above two days before, had received a shot upon his hat-band, which slipped
away and did him no harm, but this day was struck more unfortunately upon the
forehead, so losing his life, to the great grief of the Prince of Orange, who
had often used his counsel both in his public and private affairs.

But the fate of the City now drew on, the Mines were ready, the galleries
prepared, and the City brought to extremity, the Governor and garrison
capitulated upon these conditions.

Tbe Articles follow, as they are delivered succinctly and plainly by the
French.
FIrst, the Governor of Breda, with all the officers of war, of what
condition or quality soever without exception, even those also who have
formerly left the service of the States, and now taken pay under the King of
Spain, shall have liberty to depart from the town without any stop or
impeachment, with Arms and baggage, the Drum beating, Ensigns displaied,
bullet in mouth, and match in cock, in the rank and form they used to observe
when they marched in battalia, with a safe conduct for their lives and goods to
Malines. 2. They shall have license to carry with them four Pieces of
Ordnance, and two Morterers, such as the Governor shall choose, with all their
attirall, equipage, and shot and powder sufficient for three discharges of each
of them. 3. They shall be furnished with horse, wagons, and drivers, to carry
that Artillery, those Morterers, the attirall, and ammunition to Malines. 4.
All the other ammunition of war, and provisions of victuals appertaining to
the King of Spain, shall without stand be delivered to him whom his Highness
the Prince of Orange shall appoint to receive it, except such victuals which
shall be found sold bonafide, before the 6 of this month new style, when this
treaty began, the sale whereof shall stand good, and no man shall be searched,
nor enquired after for buying it. 5 All the Officers and Soldiers, sick and
wounded, lying at the Hospital, or elsewhere, shall be permitted to abide
there, till they have recovered strength to depart, at which time there shall
be given them a safe conduct, and accommodation to transport their Arms and
baggage to the forenamed place Malines. 6 The said Governor shall be
furnished with such number of wagons and horse as shall be requisite, as well
for the transportation of his own luggage and baggage, as of all the Officers
and soldiers to Malines: under which names of luggage and baggage, are
comprised all the Arms of the soldiers of the said town of Breda, even those
that be absent, dead, sick, wounded or sled, nor shall those wagons be
searched by any man upon any pretense. 7 Such as will have their luggage and
baggage carried to Malines by water, shall be freely provided of boats to
conduct them through Holland, which shall be exempted and discharged of all
imposts, taxes, and payments whatsoever, and for the safeguard of that luggage
and baggage, there shall be a competent number of men to conduct them, and
those boats shall not be searched nor arrested by the way upon any pretext
whatsoever, nor shall they unload any parcel until they arive at Malines. 8
The Governor, Captains, Officers, military Judges, and others, receiving pay
of the King of Spain, both Ecclesiastics and Laymen, as also the widows and
children, which have in the said town of Breda, any houses or inheritances,
whether they be upon the States of Brabant in that jurisdiction, or in the
town, whether land or moveable goods, shall have the space and term of two
years of this treaty, to transport, sell, engage, or otherwise dispose of the
said goods, and during the said term, shall enjoy the said Rents, Farms with
the Houses, Fruits, and goods already gotten, or to be gotten in that space, be
they of what nature or condition soever they may be. 9. The Officers and
soldiers of all conditions, may leave their wives and children in the town
during the said term of two years, to dispose of their goods moveable and
immovable, whether they be in the said town or elsewhere, without danger of
seizure or confiscation. 10. No Officer or other soldier, neither now, nor
hereafter shall be arrested for the rents of the houses they have possessed, nor
have their baggage searched to make payment of any debt, be they either such as
shall depart presently with the Garrison, or such as being sick or wounded,
cannot depart till they be recovered. 11. All the soldiers, prisoners on both
sides, of what rank soever shall be set at liberty without ransom, paying only
for their victuals, according to the tax of the Quarter. The servants and
other prisoners shall depart also paying the charges of their expenses. 12 The
booty that has been gotten by those of the town, both before and during the
siege, shall not be required of them back again. 13 After the Articles of this
composition are sealed, the Governor of Breda shall have time given him to
send an express to the Cardinal Infant with a safe convoy to acquaint him
with what has passed, all which the Governor may do the same day this Treaty
shall be signed. 14. The conditions forenamed being confirmed, two days shall
be granted to the Governor and his Soldiers to prepare for their departure,
which time being expired, the said Governor, and the said Officers of the
Garrison shall promise to depart (to wit) upon Saturday next being the tenth of
October, new style, betimes in the morning. 15. It is intended that till the
two days be past, that no person of the town shall come into the Camp, nor any
of the army shall enter into the town, but that every one shall contain
himself, during this time, in their trenches and fortifications, without doing
any act or hostility, for assurance whereof, there shall be hostages
interchangeably given on both sides, this article being resolved of, to avoid
all disorder which might happen other ways. 16. Before that the Garrison
departs, there shall be given two sufficient hostages by the Prince of
Orange, which shall march with the said Garrison, their arms and baggage to
Malines, and in exchange of them two other hostages shall be given by the
Governor, which shall abide with his Excellency, till the said hostages and
wagons be returned, at which time his Excellency shall send the Spanish
hostages with a safe conduct to Malines. 17 The Officers, Captains, and others
comprised in the first Article of this present treaty, having any arms, Barks,
or Shallops, or other utensils of war, may either sell them or transport
them, neither shall such as are transported, bought or sold be searched upon
that occasion. 18 There shall no restitution be made of Horses, arms,
Merchants ware, or other baggage held for lawful booty, and sold, nor shall
any particular man be searched.
Dated at the Camp before Breda, the seventh of October, new style, 1637.

These Articles concerned the Garrison in particular, which came not to treat
till our English Soldiers had taken by assault a Ravelin in the Mote, and the
French an half Moon before the Gininkens Port: at which time, the mine being
ready to play, and 5000 Soldiers of diverse Nations, but of one heart, in
armor of proof, provided with Instruments for such an occasion expecting the
issue prepared for the assault: at which time they first hung out a white flag
upon their walls, as a token that they desired to capitulate, and afterward
send out two Captains to confer with the Prince of Orange about the heads of
the treaty, he sending two others of the army into the City. The Spanish
Captains, one by Nation a Burgundian, the other a Freeslander, dined with the
Prince October. the sixth new style, and upon the overture of their conference,
returned into the City, from whence about five in the Evening, eight men of
note and authority among the people came to his Excellencie's Gampe, to
conclude the forenamed Articles, (viz.) two men of authority among the Clergy;
the chief judge, and the President of the town, two Burgomasters, and the two
Sheriffs. These personages of quality thus contracted for Gomar Fourdin the
Spanish Governor, and the Garrison, which accepted the conclusion, and Oct. 10
new style, marched thence about 11 a clock, being in all about 1585 men
Musketeers, and Costlets, Almans, Burgundians, Spaniards, Walloons, and other
Nations, armed with 48 Ensigues, and four or 500 servants employed about the
baggage, having in the middle of their troops about 7 or 800 wagons, six
pieces of Canon (the courtesy of the Prince of Orange, giving them two more
than what they covenanted for, two Morterers, 12 tuns of powder with other
ammunition, the Governor followed in his Caroach by reason of the indisposition
of his body, with two Officers and some Cavallary, being come out of the town,
mounted an horse, and went to salute the Prince of Orange, who expected him in
a place where four ways met, accompanied with Charles Lodovick, the Prince
Elector Palatine, Duke Robert the Elector's brother, the young Prince his own
son, the Counts William and Henry Cassimere, and other Lords, and the
Complement ended, went on toward Malines, where this story must leave him.

CHAP. V. The Marine Occurrences.
THe dry Land was not the only stage of action, -- vidit in undis
Et Thetys ignotas and Galathea feras.
The Military Fleets of diverse Kingdoms, some employed only to secure the
coasts, others for transportation of Soldiers, others for invasion, and the
shipping for trade, plowing the face of the Mayn, made the Ocean seem to carry
so many moving Islands, that part appearing like a woodland where the Navies
lay wind-bound, or rode at anchor, yet discovering it self again to be Sea,
when the sails were hoysed, and the vessels left that station.

The Archipelago was furrowed by the Pirates of Bizerte, Algier, and Tunis
(Sally being then blocked up, by our worthy and vallant Countriman, Captain
Rauisborow) which sought for pillage upon the Christians either by Sea, or upon
the European shore: by the Galleys of Malta, which endeavored to make prize of
those Renegadoes, and the Navies of the Christian and Catholic Kings, each of
them intending to preserve his own, and endamage the others territories.

The Navy of Spain had changed its General (Don Melchior Borgia, being
assigned in the room of the Duke of Ferrandina) but not the former design.
The Dominions of the Christian King were the maine scope of its hostility, and
thitherwards 21 Galleys well armed and manned with above 3000 soldiers, rowed
by the The Spanish design upon the Rode of St Tropez and Rapheau failing.
way of Sardinia, and were discovered by the French in the Gulf of Saint
Tropez upon the Coast of Provence, June, ^/1^. The project must needs have took
had it not bin prevented by much circumspection, Mont Guion, who commanded the
French Garrison in the town and Cittadell, under the Marshall de Vitry, at
their first approaching prepared to hinder their landing, but their have
preventing his, and some of the Spanish Soldiers landed at B^rtr^t with a
purpose to surround the Cittadell, he sallied forthwith 120 Soldiers of the
Garrison, and charged the Spanish Vantguard so courageously, that he beat them
back to their Boats, and enforced them to seek for the safeguard of their lives
in the Sea, whither their precipitious confused have carried them. It was
fortune that crowned his action. His small Forces consisting of Landmen, could
not have maintained that Port-towne against such an Armado: By good hap there
was in the Harbor at the same time four vessels of the French Fleet, (viz) two
Pinnaces named the Royal, and the Cardinal and two Frigots, which kept the
mouth of the Harbor, and by their frequent Cannonadoes assisted by the
Cittadell, played upon the Spanish Fleet so successefully with 300 vollies of
shot, that they forced the Enemy to retire out of the Gulf, and defeated him
of his project.

Yet the Seen only was altered, and not the Spaniards purpose, The Port of St.
Rapheau did present It self to the fancy of the invaders, who failing of their
end at St. Tropez tugged thither intending to surprise it, before it could be
well provided for defense. The Marshall de Vitry was the first, but not the
only Discoverer of that enterprise, conceal it he could not, it being
apparently known to all the inhabitants about Fr^iu^, (where he then resided)
the Spanish Galleys rowing before the eyes of the people. The Count of
Harcourt, General of the French Fleet, the same day that the Spanish Navy went
from St. Tropez, departed from Treius, where he had been entertained at
Supper, by the Marshall de Vitry the night before, and had not failed above one
hour and an half, but that he kenn'd the Spanish Galleys, and observed with
what eagerness the slaves employed their sinews, to bring them up to some of
the Sea-townes, and presently made to land, mustered up the Forces of the
Country, which coming in continually, beat off the Spanish Armado from the
Port of S. Rapheau; when they had burnt one French Bark only, their intention
being to have done the like to all the ships which lay at anchor in that rode.

From St. Rapheau, the Spanish Navy retired into the Bay, where being informed
that ten ships of Holland Sp. Fleet surpriseth ten Holland ships bound for
Genoa.
were bound for Genoa, with Corn and Spicery, and other Merchandise amounting
to the value of three Millions of Crowns, the Flees way laid them, and in a
calm after two days fight, having sunk the Dutch Admiral, took the other
nine, two whereof they conducted to Final, and the other seven to Morguez,
where they sold the goods as a vile and unproportionable value. The state of
Genoa, to which these goods were consigned, labored much for their
restitution, and sent one Agent to the Spanish Admiral, and another to the
Governor of Millain to require it, and that being denied, it caused some
heart-burning betwixt the Genoveses and the Spaniards in Italy, Den Melchior
Borgia desiring liberty that his Fleet might come and refresh it self in some
of the Harbors of that State, and the Magistrate absolutely refusing to grant
it, upon pretense that they were infected by the Merchants lately taken from
the Hollanders, and not only so by his own word protesting the resentment of
that seeming injustice, but by the deeds of the peasants about Arasse, breaking
out with violence upon the Spanish Mariners, when they came to water upon their
Coast, slaying some, chasing the rest, and taking from them 170 barrels of
fresh water, of which the Navy stood in need, pretending that they found them
robbing of their Olive-yards. It is no point of providence The Genoeses seek to
have them restored, but prevail not.
to provoke a potent enemy. That politic State of Genoa, however displeased
with the Spanish proceedings, did not desist from promotion of their cause for
one denial, nor yet break out into open enmity. Again they dispatched Signior
Luca Spinola to the Spanish General, and the Signiors Chiavari and Someliui to
the Ambassador of Spain resident in that City, about the same negotiation, who
again denying to make any restitution, and justifying their detention of the
goods, because they were taken out of Holland Bottomes, and upon the French
S^^^, both those States being enemies to the Catholic King, they dispatched
another Advocate to the Viceroy of Naples to intermediate betwixt the State and
the Spanish General, and he refusing to meddle out of his own Sphere, as last
they sent an Ambassador to the Catholic King, whose answer is yet expected.

Here was the period of the actions of the Spanish Navy in the Archipelago. A
storm was risen in the new Western world, and had so shattered the frame of the
Spanish The arrival of Count Maurice at Pharnambuck.
State there, that is required both men and money to repair it. To this purpose,
Don Antonio de Ocquendo, was sent from Major^a, with one Gally to make choice
of the best ships in the Neapolitan Fleet, and to transport them to Brasil
against the Forces of the United Netherlander States there, whose fortunate
progress had dilated and enlarged the States Dominions there. His Excellency
the Prince Maurice of Nassaw, to whom the States had given a pleny-potentiary
Commission for the ordering of their affairs there, arrived at Pharnamboucg,
January 1^/2^, where being entertained with the joyful acclamations of the
Dutch plantations, after some days spent in giving and receiving of
entertainment, the end of his voyage And his victory at Porto Calvo.
not being complement but action, Ian. 26. Febr 5. he sent before him the
Admiral Lichthart to Serenhim, where his army lay on shipboard, himself
following by land with one company of horse and certain firelocks. His design
was against the Fort of Provocation, and Porto Calvo, where the Spanish
General the Count de Baniola lay with an army of 4000 me^ his name was grown
terrible to the Spanish army: the Gount would not abide his coming, but though
fortified with four Redouts, having garrisoned the Fort with 600 men, fled by
the way of Alegoa. News of his flight was brought to the Count of Nassaw, who
instantly begirting the Fort with one part of his Forces, dispatched the
Colonel Manifield to pursue the Spanish Count, who overtook his Rereward, and
slew about 200 of his men, and then returned to the Camp. Count Maurice all
this while was busied in making his approches, raising of four batteries, and
ordering of things required for the siege, which he followed so earnestly, that
by the end of February new style, he forced the Garrison to capitulate for
want of fresh water, their conditions being, that they should march away the
third of March new style, with high and low weapons, one piece of Ordnance, and
be transported to Hispaniola or Saint Dominga.

The victory was of consequence, both in regard of the strength of the place,
and the wealth therein contained; it was the strongest Fort the enemy had in
that territory, ordained for their Magazine, yielded the Conqueror 22 Pieces of
brass Ordnance, 5 iron Pieces, 4 Copper Morterers, 800 great Grenades, 2000
hand-granadoes, 46395 pounds of powder, 6034 pounds of match, 9750 pounds of
lead, opened the way to Todos los Santos, whither the Dutch General presently
sent his Army, was taken with the loss of six common men, and two prime
Officers, the Lord Carlo, base son to the late Prince Maurice of Orange, and
Captain Dunkarcke a valiant soldier, who was slain with a great shot from
the Fort in time of the siege: and this rich achievement, purchased so easily,
could not but cause a general thanksgiving, and triumphs of joy among the
Dutch plantations, which being celebrated upon March the 8 new style at
Pharnam, boucg, where after Sermon, 4 Companies of Citizens, and one of
Soldiers presenting themselves in their armours, victory was proclaimed by the
roaring throats of althe Canons about the town; first of those in the Redout of
Bruin, the next, of those in the Sconce of Bruin, the Land-Castle, and the
Water-Castle, and the ships then in harbor, and lastly by those of the
Stone-Redout, the Fort five-hook and the sconce Emilia, the Citizens and
Soldiers concluding the triumph with their Musquetadoes, joying that by this
means they enjoyed the 4 North Provinces of Brasil in peace, and had extended
their dominions to the length of 400 English miles, the Portugals coming in
voluntarily, and offering their fealty to the States of the united Provinces.

The Gallyes of Byserte made an invasion upon the Kingdom of Naples, and
surprised there 4 great Frigots armed and laden with corn, and other
merchandises appertaining to the Prince of Cariati, and enheartned with this
spoil, pursued the Signior Giovanni Baptista Lasagna a Genuesse appointed
Governor of Corsica, by the State of Genoa, as he was going to receive The
Galleys of Byserte pillage the Sea towns in the Kingdom of Naples.
his dignity. Yet him they mist; he was near upon L^gorne when they first
discovered him, and he perceiving again what they aimed at, made haste
thither, and saved both his ship and person: the Galleys of Tuscany putting to
sea presently, to surprise the bold Barbarians, whose number and strength
exceeding the Florentines, the Pirates having a fleet of 16 Galleys, and the
great Dukes subjects but of 6. the Tuscanes were feign to retreat to the Port
of Calvi for their own security.

It was then a time of terror to all the towns of the Sea coast in the
Kingdom of Naples and Calabria. The The Viceroy of Naples provides to secure
them.
Viceroy was enforced to exact strange contributions for the maintenance of
those places. The Nobility distasted his course, and would have sent to the
King of Spain to have acquainted him with their oppressions; the Commons
complained of the heavy burden* pretended their disability to bear it, their
states being already much impoverished by the late wars, yet the wise Viceroy
so behaved himself, that by his own private negotiations with the Nobility,
and the publiks exhortations of the Friars whom he sent abroad among the
Commons to persuade them of the necessity of the act in regard of it self, the
omission thereof exposing them to unavoydable miseries by foreign enemies,
and the acceptable service which thereby they might do the Catholic King, and
the glorious office they might do their Country, prevailed so far, that they
willingly seemed to bring in what he had demanded rationally.

The Galleys of Algier and Tunis were abroad at the Ceriale pillaged by the
Pirates of Algier.
same time, had burnt and pillaged in the State of Genoa the town of Ceriale,
near to Final; thence carried away 400 prisoners, and proceeding further, had
sacked the Seacoast of Sardinia, plundered the Churches, taken away the vessels
of Plate and Ornaments, and returning home, were met withal by the Archbishop
of Berdeaux, who knowing that these Barbarian Pirates had not taken those
spoils out of the lands of the Christian, but his enemies dominions would not
fight against them, but, inquiring of the prizes, and finding the Church
utensils in their hands, (religion and this pious observation of those
consecrated vessels, overcomming his hostile disposition to the Catholic King)
he redeemed those Ecclesiastical goods with his money, and sent them back to
Sardinia, to be employed to their proper ends.

Sicily was the next place which those Pirates threatened, and Melchior Borgia
the Spanish General, to relieve it, ordered 15 Neupoliian Galleys, (which then
lay at Legorne) to make to Sea presently after them, but they returned without
doing any thing, the Pirates out-sayling them. Six Galleys of Malta being about
the beginning of August, arrived at home from Trapani were counter manded by
the great Master for Naples, to join there with their Spanish squadrons,
against the Bysertains, and the other Pirates which began to dispeople and
ruinate the Seacoasts of that part of Christendom. Nari the Prior was
appointed for their General, who landing upon a Turkish shore, to take in fresh
water, was endangered by an Ambuscado of Turks, which lay there, and slew some
of his men, and wounded him with a Musquetado in the arm, yet he fortunately
arrived at Naples, August the 6. new style, and went to visit the Viceroy then
residing at Pa^sillp^, but the fleet was employed other ways; the Spanish
Galleys shaken with storms, and the tempests which they had endured in the
gulf de la Speti^. were appointed to transport Don Melchior Borgia into
Spain, and the Maltisan Galleys were to convey the Regent of the Vicaria of
Naples to Florence, whither he went in the quality of the extraordinary
Ambassador to the Catholic King, to congratulate the great Duke for his late
marriage with the Princess of Rovera, of the house of Vrbin, which was
solemnized at Florence, July the 5. new style, in the presence of Cardinal
Capponi and the Dukes of Parma and Modena.

The Kingdom of Naples in the interim, suffered The Bandetti in the Kingdom
of Naples executed.
much by the intestine commotions of its own subjects, Bandittes and other
malcontents. Francisco Caraffa, Prince of Lupino, the Duke of Salzi of the
house of Straboni, the Signiors Cesari and Ascanio of Bolognia, and some other
Neapolitan Lords, heads of the commonalty of Nid^ and Capna, had challenged the
Cavilliers of other commonalties to single duels, and for this fact were
condemned by the Collateral to have their heads struck off, yet because they
consented willingly to the contributions which the Viceroy required, upon the
intercession of the Regent Brancia, Duke of Belvidier, and the Noblesse of the
Kingdom to the Viceroy, the sentence was not abrogated, but altered, they
were only banished to several places. But the sentence and execution of the
Banditti Luigi Taglialatela was exemplary and unchangeable: He was apprehended
in his Fort with some of his companions, beheaded, and his scull was carried to
Giuliano, the place where he was born, and there set upon an iron bar, in the
place where his house once stood, that being rased to the ground, and sown with
salt. Piety commands justice against such malefactors, and policy will have it
exemplary. The ambitious heads of such stinking Poppies must be cut off, to
pardon such Delinquents life's, is to give life to their insolences.

Here we are becalmed, and though we see the sheare of Barbary somewhat more
glorious, by the happy success of our little English Fleet which lay before
Sally, cannot yet reach it. S. Hilary shall perfect that story, which crowns
our Nation, and makes it deservedly called Gentem Liberatricem. Dum sua
restituit spoliato jura patrono,

With a perfect narration of other Occurrences both by Sea and Land, whereof we
have already obtained some breviates, and do daily expect more, which we
purpose to continue and publish by the time promised, if God permit.

Finis.

