A Copy of a Letter, written by M. Doctor CARIER beyond Seas, to some
particular friends in ENGLAND.

Whereunto are added certain collections found in his Closet, made by him (as
is thought) of the miserable ends of such as have impugned the Catholic Church.

To which Also is annexed a brief exhortation to persevere constantly in the
said Catholic Church, what opposition soever may occur, and the danger of
living out of the same. And lastly, a few examples of the admirable prosperity,
of such as have defended the Catholic Church.



1615.

Pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.
MY most dear and loving friends, if the times were such (as when it shall
please God they may be) I would much rather choose to have a poor Vicarage,
where I might preach the truth amongst you, then a rich preferment in any part
of the world besides, where I might not enjoy your company and friendship. But
seeing it is otherwise, I will lay the fault upon no body; but rather have
compassion upon all, for such is the violence of the stream, that no one man,
no not the Master of the ship himself, is able to stir the ship out of the
stream: and yet the course that is held, is certainly very dangerous; not
only for all the passengers that are therein, but even for the whole vessel
wherein they are carried. If the loss of me might have helped it, I had been
happily bestowed at home: but seeing that my presence did nothing but procure
great danger to my self every way, and great anger to them, whose game I
seemed to mar as a stander by: I thought it the surest way to save my self,
and to becken to as many of my friends as may please to believe me; that they
would also look well about them, lost they be overtaken with death, as with a
storm, that in such summer times does often come, when it is least looked for;
and therefore against all adventures to convey themselves into a surer ship. I
do not desire they should follow me, and leave their lands and livings, their
friends and Country, and the presence of their dear and dread Sovereign:
(and yet if there be no remedy, for the honor of Christ and his truth, all
must be forsaken:) much less do I allow, that any man should withdraw his
allegiance and true service from King JAMES, and to bestow it upon any other
Prince, or Prelate in the world. Only for the duty I owe unto God, who has
called me to the knowledge of his truth, and the love I bear unto my Country,
and to all my friends that are therein, I do most humbly and heartily desire
them, that they would seriously consider and look to the state of their
souls, which being immortal, cannot be saved by any such religion, as is
temporal, mutable, and dissonant in it self: And seeing no man can be saved
that dies out of charity with his neighbor (for that an uncharitable soul
cannot be altered, and made charitable after it is departed.) Let every good
soul take heed, how by the railing slanders of ignorant, malicious and proud
men, it be brought and held out of charity with a whole Church, and especially
such a Church as cannot be deemed to be the mother of that Church, that is in
England; and being a mother Church, it is worthy at least to be heard quietly
to tell out her tale at length, before she be condemned by the outcries of
those that either of malice, or of custom, do rail upon her: which I write
not that I would have the Church of Rome gain by the goods of England, for I
know she intends it not, and the State may provide against; but that I desire
the souls of England should gain by the Church of Rome, which if you might
freely hear her speak, you would certainly desire also. And although she may
not be suffered to speak to you, yet you may enquire of her: and hear what
indifferent men without choler or passion do say and write of her. And if you
do find her indeed to be the true Mother, suffer not the Devil to possess
your understanding by heresy, nor your wills by malice, for any worldly
respect whatsoever; but unite your understanding to the understanding of the
Church by faith, and your affections to the will of the Church, by love and
charity: and if it be possible, unite your outward man also to the authority
of the Church, by the participation of the Sacraments, and by all spiritual
obedience. But if you find impossibility therein, then having done your best
to help the Catholic Church by your faith and charity; as S. AUGUSTINE
exhorts in his book de vera relig. cap. 6. Call upon Christ, who is the
immortal Priest and Bishop of your souls, that he would vouchsafe by his
absolute power to supply the want of his own ordinance, and to do that by
himself without Sacraments, which you unfeignedly would, but cannot have done
by any Priest of his sending, and by the Sacraments that he has appointed: And
there is hope that he will do it, as Saint BERNARD writes in his book de
Anima. This was the Course I took, until God gave me opportunity to take a
better; for which I humbly thank his heavenly Majesty, and am desirous to
give all good men satisfaction, that have any religion at all. But I do
consider that there are, as you may easily see amongst your selves, four sorts
of Christians in the world out of the Catholic Church.

1 Some do not believe either hell or heaven, and therefore they are content
to go to any Church, and be of any religion; but care for none at all.

2 Some do believe that there is hell and heaven; but that all things fall out
by absolute predestination, as by fatal destiny, and therefore there is no
Church, nor religion can do a man good, but only to read Scriptures and hear
Sermons and to believe that a man is predestinate.

3 Some do believe there is hell and heaven, and that Some religion is
necessary; but it is no great matter what; so a man obey the Kings Laws, and
live like an honest man. For, they say, every man may be saved in his own
religion. All these I am out of hope to satisfy, although their follies be
against the light of natural reason, but they have lost reason.

4 Some there are that believe there is hell and heaven, and that there is no
way to avoid the one, or attain the other, but only true Christian Religion,
which they would gladly embrace, if they could know which it were. To them, and
for their sakes, I would take any pains to give satisfaction. And I am
certain, if they will hear me with patience, they will be satisfied.

And for the ground of this question; I think it will be granted on all
sides, that, that only is the true Christian Religion which our Savior Christ
did teach himself when he was upon the earth, and which, as he promised, shall
continue until he come again.

Then the maine care is, to find what religion our Savior taught whilst he
was upon the earth. And here I would pray every man of reason to consider:

1 That our Savior did leave nothing in writing, but taught his Religion to
his Apostles by word of mouth.

2 That he commanded not his Apostles to write his Religion, but to teach it,
ite praedicate.

3 That of twelve Apostles, seven did leave nothing at all in writing, but
taught their successors the Religion of Christ by word of mouth.

4 That Saint MARK, Saint LVKE, and Saint PAVL, who wrote most of the new
Testament, were not of Christ his company whilst he was upon the earth, and
therefore must needs learn their Religion of the Church, before they wrote it.

5 That diverse others did write the Religion of Christ, as they did apprehend
it, but their Gospels and Epistles were rejected by the Church, LVKE 1. 1.

6 That at the day of Judgment, there will be no writing to try true Religion
from Heresy, but only the eternal truth of Christ in the souls of his Saints.

7 That the Scriptures were written by men of the Church; admitted Canonical
by Councels of the Church; preserved from Tyrants by the care of the Church,
and ever, until of late, expounded by the consent of the Church.

8 How few men are able to read and expound the Scriptures any way, and
whether it be not easier to believe the Church, then to believe a few private
men, that say they can expound Scriptures better then the Church.

9. That all sorts of Heretics have always boasted of Scriptures, and
despised the Church.

The Heretics have ever been wont to pretend Scriptures, the more easily to
deceive the simple. They know full well, that all the Fathers, all Doctors, all
ancient Writers, all general Councels, Canons, Traditions, all Ecclesiastical
Histories, all Chronicles and monuments of Antiquity, all Martyrs, Confessors,
Virgins, and all testimonies both in heaven and earth are flat against them;
and therefore they will pretend the word of God, which they know is a plausible
persuasion to the simple; and so they delude, and deceive them more easily.
These Scriptures they misinterpret, corrupt, falsisie, and abuse most
shamefully to serve their turns, as VINCENTIVS LI^INENSIS most excellently
shows in his golden treatise, Contra prophanas haeresum nouitates, against
the profane novelties of heresies.

Upon these considerations any man may assuredly pronounce, that whosoever
believes not the Church of Christ, can never come to know what is the Religion
that Christ did teach; and which he has hitherto maintained.

And therefore it is impossible for such a man to know which is the true
Christian Religion. The means then to know which is the true Religion of
Christ, is to enquire which is the true Church of Christ. Here it cannot be
denied, but that that is the true Church of Christ, which Christ himself did
found whilst he was upon the earth, to continue until the worlds end. And
whatsoever Church is founded by any other authority, then that which Christ
left unto his Apostles only, cannot be the true Church of Christ, although all
the Princes in the world would agree to make it so, and cause all their
subjects to swear it were so.

Now to know which is the true Church our Savior did found, we must observe
that this word Church does signify diverse things.

1 Sometimes the Church does signify the building or house of Gods service; in
this sense our Savior founded no Church by himself, but gave power to his
Apostles and Disciples to found and consecrate Churches, as countries should be
converted.

2 Sometime the Church does signify the Congregation of all those that are
baptized, as the Church of Corinth, Rome, etc. in Saint PAVLS Epistles. In this
sense our Savior founded no Church by himself, for he baptized none, but gave
power to his Apostles and Disciples to baptize.

3 Sometime the Church does signify the Clergy or Spirituality, chosen out of
the number of all Christians, to dispense the grace of Christ committed to
them, for the benefit of the whole body: In this sense our Savior did by
himself immediately found a Church, when he did call and send his Apostles, and
did give them the same power which himself, as Man, had received of his
Father, Sicut pater misit me, sic ego mitto vos, Ioh. 20. qui audit vos, me
audit, Luke 10. quorum peccata remiseritis, remittentur eis, Ioh. 20. mittam
vobis Paraclitum quivos ducet in omnem veritatem, Ioh. 14. Super hanc Petram
aedisicabo Ecclesiam, etc.

Then to know which is the true Church, we must enq^^^^ which is the Clergy
that was founded by Christ, and continues in the unity of the Church by
perpetual Succession from the Apostles, and so from Christ himself: and for
your certain resolution hereof, you have three infallible arguments.

1 The report of Chronicles and Histories, whereof there is great variety, that
can tell you the beginning and occasion of every Schism, if you do but turn
the books over.

2 The universality, antiquity and consent of Doctrine taught in the true
Church, and the variety, nouelty and repugnancie of Doctrine taught in Schism,
and herein you may inquire of the most learned, and most honest to inform you.

3 The Scriptures 1 Of the old Testament, to which our Savior sends us, IOH.
5. Scrutamini Scripturas. By those S. Augustine proves the visibility of the
Catholic Church against Donatists. 2 Of the new Testament: by which is proved
the perpetuity of the Catholic Church. Portae inferi non praeualebunt. Matthew.
16. Vsque ad consummationem seculi. Matthew. 28.

Consider then, dear friends, what a happy thing it is for a man to live in
such a Church, that is, with such a Clergy, as being lawfully called, and
continuing in the unity of the Church, have the very same power that the
Apostles themselves; yea that Christ himself, as he was Man, had to forgive
sins unto the penitent; to convey grace by Sacraments, as Christ conveyed it
himself sometime without Sacraments, to exhibit the Real presence of Christ
unto the faithful, and to preach the glad tidings of salvation both by word
and writing. And on the contrary side, what an unspeakable misery it is to have
such a Clergy, that is, such a Church as has no calling but from a Civil
Magistrate, and consequently no power from Christ, no remission of sins, no
grace in Sacraments, no Real presence of Christ amongst them, nor warrant from
Christ either to preach or expound the Scriptures; although they talk of them
never so much. I will not determine against the succession of the Clergy in
England, because it is to me very doubtful; but although the successions were
never so good, if there be not unity, there can be no grace conveyed from the
head unto such parts of the body as are by Schism cut off, and with hostility
opposed; as you see most of the Clergy of England to be. Whilst my self was
amongst you, I did what I could to reduce unity, and to withstand Schism, and
therefore I hope God has conveyed some grace by my Ministry amongst you; but
if you consider duly of the premises, you cannot condemn me for taking a
surer course for my self, especially seeing you cannot be ignorant how much I
was maligned, and opposed by the Masters and maintainers of Schism. It is a
continual grief to me, that I cannot preach unto you: And I pray God so move
the hearts of his Majesty and the Parliament, that it may not be treason, nor
felony to be a Catholic Priest, nor to maintain the succession of Saint
PETER. nor to preach Catholic Doctrine* as it is held in the Church of Rome,
according to all antiquity, with one universal consent. And if ever I may be
so happy to hear such news, I will think my self most happy that I may
serve you, and live and die amongst you. Otherwise I will continue as I do,
every day to remember you at the oblation of Christ's body and blood, and with
my most ardent devotion to pray for his Majesty, the Queen, their Children,
and Lords of the Council, my friends at the Court, my loving, and beloved
neighbors in the Country, and your self especially; and ever so I remain.

Your most affectionate and true friend and servant in Christ Jesus. B. A.
CARIER.
Leidge, February 20. 1614. Stilo Nouo.
The miserable ends of such as have impugned the Catholic Church: Together
With the admirable prosperity of such as defended the same.

Deuter. 32. Laudate Gentes populum eius quia sanguinem seruorum suorum
vlciscetur, and vindictam retribuet in hosts eorum.

You Gentiles praise his People, because he will revenge the blood of his
Servants, and will repay vengeance upon their Enemies.

Esaias 60. 12. Gens, and Regnum quod non seruierit tibi, peribit.

The People and Kingdom, which will not serve thee, shall perish.

1615.

The miserable ends of some notorious Enemies, of CHRIST and his CHVRCH.
Read JOSEPHUS, 7. belli, cap. 18. of the destruction of the Temple, and of
the most grievous punishment of the Jews, for their barbarous cruelty against
our Savior Christ. The number of captives was ninety and seven thousand. The
number of those which were slain and dead in the time of siege, was eleven
hundred thousand. Idem 7. belli, c. 28. The famine so great, as they were
brought to eat their own and their childrens flesh; to feed in sinckes and
channels. About forty thousand of them had their bellies ripped up, for the
gould they were supposed to have swallowed, etc. and more had been so
barbarously entreated had not come forth a Prohibition. They were so vile, as
thirty of them were sold for one penny. They have been hated and persecuted of
all Nations and peoples. Exceeding great numbers of them in one place or other
continually murdered. They have lived in intolerable slavery ever since the
destruction of Jerusalem, and ever shall. Joseph. 7. belli, cap. 28.

IVDAS hanged himself with a halter. Matthew. 26.

CAIPHAS being weary of his life, kills himself. Clem. Romans Constable. ap. 8. c.
1.

ANNAS also perished miserably, as writes Nicephor. lib. ^. cap. 40. Josephus
and others.

HEROD ASCALOMITA, as he sought all means to destroy our Savior Christ,
killed all the men children, abimatu and infra, from two years old and under:
so being most grievously afflicted with a horrible disease, Joseph. an. lib.
17. cap. 17. and cap. 8. sought all means to destroy himself, at last, his
dolours being intolerable by Gods just judgment, he was extinct of a dropsy
and corrupt humor, which ran betwixt the skin and the flesh, and eaten with
worms which crawled out of his skin. Eusebius. hist. eccl. li.

HEROD AGRIPPA, who put to death S. JAMES, and imprisoned S. PETER, was soon
after in a public assembly stricken from heaven with a most horrible disease,
and died eaten up with lice; yea his whole stock, according to Josephus, which
was most ample, within seventy years was clean rooted out.

HEROD ANTIPAS, which beheaded Saint JOHN Baptist, was first deprived of his
dignity, and with Herodias he was exiled to Lions in France for killing S.
JOHN Baptist, as Authors Ecclesiastical affirm.

PONTIVS PILATVS was diversely punished according to his deserts, and at last
banished to Vienna; he slew himself. Eusebius. Cass^odor. Ado. in Chron.

NERO hated of all men for his cruelty, at last forsaken of his soldiers, and
despairing ever to recover his former state, in great perplexity arrayeth
himself in vile attire, flies away, and perceiving he was pursued, killed
himself. Sueton. 25. Dion. in Nerone.

DOMITIAN, for his barbarous cruelty, generally detested, was stabbed of
Stephen, the steward of Flauia Domitilla: Sueton. Philost. trion. and others;
his name and memory was after abolished. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. cap. 12.

TRAIANVS, a cruel persecutor of Christians, is teported to have been
poisoned. See Baron.

HADRIANVS, like another Phalaris, raged against Christians. The persecution
under him was so extreme, as Christians were murdered at the cry of the
common people. Nevertheless in his time the Church was spread abroad far and
near. At last he was punished with grievous sickness, and so being very weary
of his life, sought often to kill himself, and finally procured one to slay
him. See Baron.

SEVERUS, in regard of his cruelty exercised upon Christians, was so punished
of God almighty, as he saw himself most unhappy in his children: for his
son Antoninus often attempted to slay him; and also he was not ignorant his
son Geta should be murdered as soon as Antoninus could get opportunity to
do it. Antoninus slew Geta afterward in his mothers lap. Lege Baron.
SEVERUS died, being consumed with thought and grief of mind. See Baron.

DECIVS, a most cruel persecutor of Christians, in the war he made against
the Goths, together with his son was extinct. Anno 2. Imper.

VALERIAN, as long as he favored Christians, flourished; but after he began to
persecute them, by the treason of Marrianus a Duke, he was delivered over to
Sapores, King of the Persians, who ever after used VALERIAN for a footstool
to stand upon when he went to horse, at last he commanded him to be flayed and
salted. Baron.

CLAUDIUS raged most cruelly against Christians, but in the third year of his
Empire he died of the Pestilence.

AVRELIAN, a severe bloody and cruel persecutor, was beaten down with
thunder, and afterward killed of his own subjects,

MAXIMIANVS, one of the cruellest persecutors that ever was, hanged himself.
Anno imper. Constable. Panegyr. 4.

DIOCLETIAN, a like persecutor, by the judgment of God was reserved unto the
eleventh year of Constantine, when he saw Christian religion most flourishing,
which he with his fellow Maximian, sought by all means they could to
extinguish. At last, this year suspecting some dishonorable death, it is said
he poisoned himself. Victor. Also Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. vlt. Zozim. lib. 2.
Zonor. Cedren, write of his miserable death. See Baron. anno imper. Constable. 11.

MAXENTIVS, a most cruel Tyrant, was drowned in Tiber. Eusebius. Zozimus and
others.

IVLIAN the Apostata used all policy and art he could (as formerly had done
Diocletian and Maximian, to extinguish Christianity; but all in vain: He was
slain in the field against the Persians; uncertainly by whom. S. Gregor,
Nazian. orat. 2. in Julian. ministeri^ angelorum occisum affirmat. See Baron.
When he died, he filled his hand with blood, and cast it up into the air,
saying; vicisti Galilee, thou have vanquished me, O Galilean, for so he called
Christ Jesus. Nicephor. 10. cap. 3. and also he said saturare Nazarene, etc.

VALENS, a most horrible persecutor, making war against the Goths, was
burned. See Baron, and others. He with his noble men fled into a poor
cottage, which was burnt over his head, etc.

MAXIMINVS, a most bloody persecutor, was overthrown and put to flight by
Licinius, and at last stricken with a most deadly and horrible disease, his
eyes falling out of his head; he dies miserably, confessing himself worthily
punished for his cruelty exercised upon Christians. Also, his children were
put to a most reproachful death: his statuaes, titles, and other monuments were
thrown down, razed, abolished. Constantini imper. anno 9.

HVNERICVS, King of the Vandals, persecuted Catholics most cruelly: he caused
Catholics tongues and right hands to be cut off, who, nevertheless, by the
help of God, did speak as well afterward as they did before. One of these,
to wit, Reparatus a Subdeacon, pronounced eloquent Sermons without any
difficulty; for which he was highly reverenced in Zeno, the Emperors
Palace; especially Iustina the Empress honored him. See the Comp. of Baron.
anno 484. fol. 425. There follows (fol. 426*) the miserable death of this
barbarous and cruel persecutor: who, when he prepared to triumph over the
Catholic faith, which he verily thought to have rooted out, perished most
miserably of worms which crawled out of every part of his body, the seventh
year of his reign. Victor. lib. 3.

EVARICVS, King of the Goths, spoileth France of Bishops, etc. upon desire to
propagate Arianisme* he was a horrible persecutor and enemy of Catholics,
like to Hunericus, as reports Ecclesiastical writers: being stricked from
heaven, perished most miserably, as writes Turon. in the History of France.

LEO ISAVRICVS, a most bloody persecutor, was taken by an Earthquake out of
this life, as writes Theophanes.

CONSTANTINVS CAPRONYMVS, no less cruel against Catholics, was from heaven
stricken with a plague and grief in his thighs* which in Greek is called
(...), and so died miserably, crying out, and saying (being yet alive) I am
given over to unquenchable fire. Theophanes and all other Greek Authors
witnesses the same. See Cedren. in Baron. anno 775.

LEO ARMENVS, a great enemy of the Catholic Church, was miserably slain
near the Altar, after he had reigned seven years and five months. And so
perish all which hate Sion.

FOUR MEMORABLE EXAMPLES FOLLOWING.
L. SEPTIMIVS PLAVTIANVS, from base state, was advanced to such honor, as he
was esteemed little inferior to the Emperor Seuerus himself. This PLAVTIANVS
thus exalted in such grace with the Emperor, as the like has scarcely ever
been seen, was honored with very many statuaes, chosen to be father in law to
Antoninus Augustus, the son of the Emperor. He married his daughter to
Antoninus, with whom he gave so much riches, and such a dowry, as had been
sufficient to have given with fifty, (should he have had so many to have so
highly preferred.) He was so horrible and cruel, as when he was to go any
whither, some Sergeants or Virgiers were to take order that none should be in
his way, or presume to look upon him* Of Christians he was a most deadly
enemy and cruel persecutor; with the spoils of whom* after he had murdered
and martyred them, he had infinitely enriched himself. But lo, this cruel
murderer of Christians fell from this sovereign dignity into extreme
infelicity: in so much as he was (even in the twelfth year of Seuerus Empire,
become a wonderful great laughing-stocke of humane felicity, and a most
dreadful example of Gods severe justice) he was (I say) put to a most
miserable death, by his son in law, Antoninus, his body cast into the street
unburied, his statuaes and monuments pulled down and defaced, his name scraped
out, and abolished. His son and daughter were exiled, and at last in great
misery made away. So as that of the Psalmist may be verified of him and such
like, Inimici domini mox vt honorificati fuerint, and exaltati, deficientes
quemadmedum fumus deficient, Psalm. 36. The enemies of our Lord forthwith after
they be raised to honor and exalted, vanishing away like smoke they shall
vanish. See Baron. especially the twelfth year of Seuerus Empire, where you
shall find all these, and much more of this horrible persecutor.

EVTROPIVS, a man of servile condition and lewd conversation, was so highly
exalted under the Emperor Arcadius, as he was of all other the greatest
Courtier, in greatest grace and favor with the Emperor. He was made Consul,
although generally hated of all people. He opposes against Saint John
Chrysostom, Bishop of Costantinople, and impugneth Ecclesiastical immunities,
and liberties of the Church: Against which immunities and privileges of the
Church in particular, that none flying to the Altar should have benefit of
Sanctuary. But behold the punishment of this Tyrant: It pleased God that Gaynas
being alienated from Arcadius, for his so much favoring and advancing this
EVTROPIVS, as all in fury and rage, he made war against the Emperor and
brought him to this, that the Emperor was glad to admit what conditions of
peace Gaynas would offer. Amongst which conditions, this was one* that the
Emperor should deliver into his hands EVTROPIVS, that he might put him to what
death it liked him. Whereupon EVTROPIVS was deprived of all his places,
dignities and riches, which were exceeding great: and so perceiving his misery,
fled to the Church, lays hold upon Sanctuary, and was for that time
protected by Saint Chrysostom, who stood in the defense of the privileges of
the Church, and would not permit the soldiers to take him from the Altar,
before he had caused the Emperor to swear neither to deliver him into the
hands of Gaynas, nor to put him to death. And although he had been a great
enemy of Saint Chrysostom, and all the people cried to have him made away. Yet
Saint Chrysostom, in regard of the privilege, would not condescend, but with
an eloquent oration disswadeth the people, and labors to save him. So as it
is to be noted, he that opposed himself against this holy Bishop, and
privileges of the Church, had no other refuge, then to the same. Finally,
being deprived of so many dignities, honors and riches, his name abolished, his
statuaes, ensigns and monuments in all, both public and private places
defaced, he was banished into Cyprus; from whence at the instance of Gaynes he
was sent for, and beheaded. All this here compendiously touched, is set down
in Baronius at large, together with the Authors Ecclesiastical which write the
same. This fellow was exalted and elevated, as a Ceder of Libanus, but
forthwith his place was not to be found. Psalm. 36.

CHRISAPHIVS, a most potent Courtier under Theodosius the Emperor, patronizeth
Eutyches the damnable Heretic; persecuteth and deposes Flauianus the holy
Patriarch, turns all vpside down: persuades Theodosius to favor the
Heretic* and to destroy the Catholic Bishop. But God almighty justly
punished him. For Theodosius finding out his treachery, repented he had
permitted him to protect this monster, whereby such a pestilent sect long after
troubled the Church: and therefore he presently depriueth this potent Courtier
of all his places, and substance, and at last puts him to death. Marcel. l.
14. c. 49. Niceph. Cedren. (...) Baron.

BARDAS, who ruled all under Michael the third, grievously persecuted the
Church, deposed Ignatius the Patriarch of Constantinople, a holy man, and
contrary to the Canons of the Church, intruded Photius. It is wonderful to
consider how hotly every one of these, as well the Emperor, who was a most
beastly monster, persecuted Gods Saints, and all holies, as also the usurper
Photius, and the tyrant Bardas; what a horrible Schism they made. See all in
Baron, and other Authors, cited by him at large, for it is most memorable.
These monsters most grievously afflicted the Church for some few years: but
God almighty, after long patience powered forth his indignation against the
factious and schismatic Princes. Michael the third, which gave himself to
nothing but his filthy pleasures, as also Bardas, who swayed all. And first for
Bardas, Curopalutes describes his miserable death, also Cedren, Glicas and
Nicetas, do the same almost in this manner. Bardas had a vision, which was,
viz. He saw Saint Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and two terrible men
assisting, and Saint Peter being set, he saw Ignatius the Patriarch, whom he
had expelled out of his See, lying at Saint Peter's feet, crying; O Porter of
the Kingdom of heaven, and the Rock upon which Christ has built his Church,
for as much as thou know how I have been injured, comfort my old years,
which have suffered many evils. And Saint Peter says to Ignatius, show thy
enemy which has done thee so much wrong. Et Deus faciat vna cum tentatione
prouentum, and God will make together with temptation issue. And Ignatius
turning to me, pointed me out with his right hand. This Bardas is he, who all
above others has offended and injured me, neither yet cease more and more to
afflict me. Then Saint Peter said to him that assisted on the right hand, take
away this execrable and cursed Bardas out of the Church, and presently cut him
in pieces, and therefore I was led to death. All this Bardas saw in a vision:
and moreover, he saw him shake his head against the Emperor, saying, Impie
sili expecta parumper. This terrible vision Bardas (himself all affrighted,
and with tears) reported to Philotheus his faithful friend. Who
notwithstanding all this, ceased not more grievously to afflict the holy
Patriarch Ignatius for three months after; at the end of which time followed
the execution of this vision. When as Bardas, with the Emperor and his army
went into Crete, where being suspected of treason, the Emperor commanded him
to be hacked in pieces. Now for the Emperor himself, he took one Basilius, a
Macedonian, to be his consort. This Basilius created Emperor, studying to
reclaim Michael from his wicked and detestable manners and conversation,
procured Michael to hate him: in so much as he perceived the Emperor Michael
sought to destroy and make him away, as he had done Bardas; and therefore
rather desiring to kill, then to be killed, contriueth presently the death of
the beastly monster: which act, though it was not lawful, yet was the
persecutor justly punished for his cruelty against Gods Church. Zonoras,
Nicetas and others. This Basil sends Ambassadors to the Pope, restores peace
to the Church, expulseth Photius the usurper from the Patriarchall See, and
restores the true Bishop Ignatius into the same, to the great joy and
exultation of all people. Many more like examples might be added to these, but
these are most notorious.

As God almighty has a special providence over his Church in the law of
grace, as it shall never be destroyed by any impugnation of what enemies
soever, but shall still remain glorious, though never so much persecuted by
tyrants; which tyrants, and enemies of Gods Church, often perish miserably even
in this world, besides the eternal miseries they fall into after this life, if
they die impenitent. So is it to be noted, that the same God almighty had also
a wonderful care over his Kingdom and people, even in the old Testament; and
such as persecuted them, we may see by many examples to what miserable
confusion they fell at last.

PHARAO with all his host was drowned in the red sea.

AMAN which had contrived the means to put to death, and massacre all Gods
chosen people under Assuerus, was hanged upon a gibbet fifty cubits high, which
he had prepared for Mardocheus. Hest. 7.

IESABEL, which slew Gods Prophets, was thrown down out of a window, killed
with the fall, and eaten of dogs. 4. King. 9.

ANTIOCHVS most grievously and extremely persecuted and afflicted Gods people,
as we read in the 2. of the Machabees: but as it is in the ninth chapter of
the said book; God which sees all, struck him with an incurable and invisible
plague. He threatened to destroy Jerusalem and all the people, and God
almighty, presently upon it, laid his heavy hand upon him. Read the ninth
chapter of the second book, and you shall see the miserable end of this most
proud and cruel enemy of God and his Kingdom. He could not go, but was
carried: his dolours and anguish was intolerable, and that by the just
judgment of God, for he had most unmercifully tortured and afflicted Gods
people; worms crawled out of his body, and the horrible stincke thereof
annoyed his whole army: who a little before was so proud and insolent, as he
thought he could reach the stars of heaven: him no man can now carry, or come
near, for intolerable stincke. This cruel homicide, and blasphemous wretch
miserably ended his life in his peregrination. See more in the Machabees.

In the fourth book of Kings, and the nineteenth chapter, you may see recorded
the miserable dostruction of Sennacherib and his whole army, which had
besieged Jerusalem, blasphemed God, and threatened to destroy the City, the
holy King Ezechias, and all his people. But God almighty, who knows how to
deliver his faithful people, sent his Angel into the tents of the Assirians,
which slew a hundredth and eighty five thousand of them in their tents, after
which, Sennacherib returned into his own country, where he was slain of
Adramelach and Sarasar his own sons. Read the seven and thirtieth chapter
of Isal.

It is also worthy to be noted, that such as divided themselves by any Schism
in the old Law, were most severely punished* as for example, Chore, Dathan and
Abiron, and their accomplices, to the number of fourteen thousand and seven
hundredth men, besides many others that perished in the sedition before. These
rebelled against Moses their lawful Superior.

JEROBOAM, who upon a devilish policy drew the people from the true worship
and service of God to Idolatry and Schism, God almighty so punished him, as
he left not one of his seed to piss against a wall. 3. King. 14. So as we may
plainly see there is no wisdom, no prudence, no counsel against God. These
Politics take a wrong course to advance and continue their states and
families, for Nisi Dominus aedificauerit domum, etc. Unless our Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 126. for these Houses,
Kingdoms and States that are founded by such Machieuellian policies, never
continue long, as appears most evidently, Psalm. 16. Noli ^mulari in
malignantibus, neque Zelaueris facientes iniquitatem, etc. Read the whole
Psalm, wherein it is said, the impious and wicked enemies of God shall wither
away as grass, vanish as smoke, their seed and very relics shall perish,
though for a while they flourish never so much, and be never so highly exalted,
increased and multiplied in the world; yet shall they come in short time to
confusion and destruction.

As God almighty dealt with JEROBOAM, Author of that notorious Schism and
division, so likewise did he to Baaza, Zamri and Achab, Kings of Israel, for
that (says the third book of Kings) they walked in the ways of Jeroboam:
that is, because they continued the Schism, and did not reduce the Israelites
to the true worship and service of God. You shall find that of all those, God
almighty left not one to piss against a wall, for this is the phrase of
Scripture in that place. These are dreadful examples of Gods severe justice
against the Authors, favorers and maintainers of Schism against God, his
Church and Kingdom.

To these might be added a great many more, which every where occur in the
old Testament. Read Psalm 82. where you shall see a great number of Kings and
Princes which sought to destroy Gods people, to come to miserable ends. These
seeking to overthrow Gods Kingdom, do nothing less, but they incur his
heavy wrath and indignation to their own utter ruin, confusion, and
extirpation.

Of all this before written, we may gather that God almighty has a singular
providence over his Church and Kingdom, he neither slumbreth nor sleeps
which keeps Israel. Psalm. 120. Tyrants, persecutors and foolish people may
oppose themselves against it, seek to extinguish it; but all in vain. Qui
haebitat in coelis irridebit eos, and Dominus subsannabit eos, He that dwells
in the heaven will laugh them to scorn, etc. Psalm. 2. God almighty does
graciously protect his Church, and though he suffer it to be mightily impugned,
yet faciet cum tentatione prouentum, he will make with temptation issue. The
Catholic Church, and Kingdom of our Savior Christ, has by this means been
maruailously increased and propagated, as all Ecclesiastical writers
perspicuously testify; as contrariwise the enemies thereof have most miserably
perished, and come to confusion.

CERTAIN MEMORABLE EXAMPLES OF GODS SEVERE REVENGE AGAINST such as were
rebellious and injurious to Priests of the old Law.
1 OF CHORE, DATHAN and ABIRON, we have spoken before, how themselves, and all that belonged unto them, was swallowed up of the earth. Numb. 16.

2 MARIA the sister of MOSES, for murmuring against him, was punished with a
leprosy. Number. 12.

3 SAVL, because he obeyed not Samuel the Prophet, lost his Kingdom. 1. King.
31.

4 ACHAB, for contemning the Prophet Micheas, and cast him into prison, was
slain in war, 3. King. 22. and Ioram, the son of Achab, and all his
progeny were slain by Iehu. That I may revenge (says the Prophet unto Iehu)
the blood of my servants the Prophets, and the blood of all the servants of our
Lord, from the hand of Iesabel. 4. King. 9.

IOAS, who slew Zachary the Priest and Prophet in the porch of the house of
God, was punished most grievously. Paralip. 24. For the year following the
Syrians came into Judea and Jerusalem, and slew all the Princes of the people,
and sent all the prey unto the King of Syria into Damasco: and whereas there
came but a small number of the Syrians, yet God delivered an infinite multitude
into their hands, and Ioas they punished with all ignominy and reproach, and
left him in great sickness and misery: And his own servants rose up against
him, to revenge the blood of the son of Ioiad^ the Priest, and they slew him
in his bed.

AMASIAS, King of Judah, because he contemned the Prophet of God, etc. was
delivered into the hands of Ioas King of Israel, being spoiled of all he had,
and afterward slain of his own servants. 2. Paralip. 25.

O^IAS his son, because he usurped Priestly function and authority, was
stricken with a leprosy, 2. Paral. 26. And that which Christ spoke in the
Gospel (the blood of all the Prophets, from the blood of Abel the Just, unto
the blood of Zachary the Prophet, shall be required at your hands, Luke 11.)
has terribly expressed this revenge of almighty God, for the dispersion of
the Jews throughout all the whole world until this day, is nothing else but
the just revenge of almighty God for the blood of Christ, and all the Prophets.

EXAMPLES OF GODS SEVERE PVNISHMENTS AGAINST SVCH AS Contemn Bishops and
Priests.
BY many example precedent, as also by these ensuing, collected out of
Histories Ecclesiastical and profane, it may appear how Emperors, Kings and
Princes, which would not be obedient children to Gods Church, but persecuted
the same, have come to miserable ends.

CONSTANTIVS favoring the Arians, after he had banished Liberius Pope,
Athanasius also Bishop of Alexandria, and many other Catholic Bishops, and had
arrogated and taken to himself, to hear and know all causes Ecclesiastical
(as at large shows Saint Athanasius, ep. ad. Sol. v. ag. whilst he
persecuted Julian, etc. ended his life in an obscure place, and in great
torment of conscience. As at large describes Ammian. Marcellin. l. 22. hist.

VALENS, who banished the Catholics into obscure places, and used all rigor
and severity against them, was punished with like measure himself, with his
Princes in the war against the Goths, flying into an old house, was with all
his Princes burned, and the house over their heads. Ammian. Marcel. l. 31. This
Emperor cast the holy religious man Isacius into prison, as Achab did Micheas
the Prophet.

VALENTINIAN the younger, who many ways vexed Saint Ambrose, to make him yield
a Church unto the Heretics, and threatened to exile him, was hanged by his own
servants ignominiously shortly after.

ANASTATIVS the Emperor excommunicated of Pope Gelasius, was an extreme
persecutor, as well of Bishops as of Monks, and religious persons, was killed
with lightning and fire from heaven.

MAVRITIVS the Emperor, who persecuted S. Gregory the Great, was slain of a
common soldier, his wife and all his children before put to death in his own
sight, and so cried, Iustus es Domine, and rectum iudicium tuum. Thou art just,
O Lord, and righteous is thy judgment. Blondus lib. 3. Decad. 1.

CONSTANS, the Nephew of Heraclius banished Pope Martine, for which he was
hated of all his subjects, says Zonoras, and so leaving Constantinople, lived
in Cicely, and there was killed in the Bathe of his own people about him.
Paul. Diac. lib. 18.

MICHAEL Emperor, the son of Theophilus, which behaved himself proudly
against Pope Nicholas the first, and most injuriously deposed Ignatius the
Patriarch of Constantinople: when he went drunk to bed one night, standing at
his bed side, was slain of his own domesticals, Zonor. Annal. tom. 3. in
Constante and Michaele.

CONSTANTINVS PROGNATVS, the son of Leo Isauricus, a most cruel persecutor of
the Catholic Clergy, was stricken with fire from heaven, and so died
blaspheming. Sigeb. ad Ann. 778.

These wonderful and notable judgments of God Almighty, happened to the
greatest Princes in the East, which persecuted Christ Jesus in his Vicars, etc.
And there have been no less renowned in the West.

PERSECVTORS IN THE WEST CHVRCH.
HENRY the fourth, the first of the Western Emperors, which opposed himself
against the Church: after many injuries offered thereunto, being excommunicate
by Gregory the 7. was deprived of his Empire by his own son, and at last
forsaken of all, died in great calamity in exile, out of the limits of the
Empire. Nauclerus, vol. 3. gener. 37.

FREDERICVS BARBAROSSA, which for many years persecuted the Church of God, very
rebellious and proud against the Sea Apostolic: when he was bathing himself
in a river for his pleasure in Cilicia, was drowned of a sudden, and so ended.
Naucl. genesis 40.

OTHO the fourth, after exceeding great injuries done to the Church throughout
all Italy, being assaulted in war, and put to flight by Philip the French
King in low Germany; a little after died a private man in Saxony. Staplet. in
prompt. mor. in dom. pass. text. 4.

FREDERICVS the second, a most cruel persecutor, not only of the Sea
Apostolic, but of all the Clergy throughout the whole Empire, excommunicated
by Innocent the fourth, was slain of his bastard son Manfrede in Apulia, as
some write, poisoned, as others report, hanged: and all his race following the
steps of their wicked father, came to the like miserable end. His eldest son
Conradus, for like cause excommunicated by Innocent the forth, was killed by
the same Manfrede in Apulia. And the same Manfrede entering upon the Kingdoms
of Apulia and Sicilia, being himself a cruel enemy of the Church,
excommunicated by Alexander the fourth, was vanquished and put to flight by
Charles, brother to the King of France, whom Vrbane the fourth declared King of
Sicilia and Apulia.

CONRADINVS, son to the said Conrade, vanquished by the said Charles, was put
to death. And Eutius the other son of Frederick the second, after many wars
made against the Church, being taken of the Bononians, was committed to
perpetual imprisonment; and so all the race and stock of the sacrilegious
Emperor, great in number and power, in short time extinct, left to posterity
an example of their wicked rebellions against God and his Church.

JEWS the fourth Emperor, twice excommunicate by the Sea Apostolic, in whose
defense against the immunities and privileges of the Church of Rome, those
Poets and Rhetoritians for this cause infamous, Petrarcha, Dantes, Marsilius,
and Io. Occhamus Schoole-man, write so many things: God almighty judgeing this
cause; when he was a hunting, taken suddenly with a palsy of all his members,
falling from his horse, died suddenly.

Memorable it is, which Nicephorus writes of Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem.
Three maleuolous persons falsely accused this holy Bishop, wishing evil to
themselves if they dealt falsely: The first, that he would be burnt: The
second, that he should die of the falling evil, or some other detestable
disease: The third wished his eyes out of his head. But Gods divine revenge not
sleeping, the first with all his house, kinsfolks and substance, was burnt by
one spark that fell from a candle: The second was taken with a most grievous
disease, which entered upon his whole body: The third forthwith confesses the
deceitful dealing, and fraudulent proceeding, ceased not to weep and shed
tears, until he perceived with his tears to lose the strength and sight of
his eyes. These torments of few, may be examples for all.

THE UNHAPPY ENDS OF ARCH-HERETICKES.
ALthough God almighty punishes and scourges his servants and children; yet
always at last he casts the rod into the fire: Deuteronomy. 32. Laudate Gentes
populum eius, quia sanguinem seruorum suorum vlciscetur, and vindictam
retribuet in hosts eorum. You Gentiles praise his people, because he will
revenge the blood of his servants, and will repay vengeance upon their enemies.

This thing is manifest by that which is aboue-written. And it may further
appear by the unhappy and miserable ends of Apostataes and Arch-heretiques. As
first of SIMON MAGVS, when he began to fly, he was thrown down by the
prayers of Saint Peter, brake his legs, and a little after died with great
ignominy. Hegesip. lib. 3. cap. 2. de excid. Hierosol. and Arnob. lib. 2.
contra Gentes.

MANICHAEVS was flayed alive by the King of Persians, not for his Heresy, or
his faith and religion; but for that taking in hand to cure the Kings son, he
killed him. Epiphan. haeres. 66.

MONTANVS, THEODORUS, and their prophetesses hanged themselves. Eusebius. lib. 5.
hist. cap. 16.

Certain Donatistes, when they did cast the blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist
to the dogs, were of the same dogs torn in pieces. Optat. lib. 2. contra
Parmenianum.

ARIVS, when he was going to the Church with great pomp, was suddenly
troubled with ache in his belly, and so forced to divert a privy, or house of
office, and there together with his excrements, avoided both his entrails and
his life. Witness S. Athanasius Orat. 1. contra Arianos, and Ruffin. lib. 10.
histor. cap. 13.

IVLIAN the Apostata was slain from heaven miraculously: he was never buried,
but (as says S. Gregory Nazianzen in his Oration, made in praise of S.
Athanasius, near the end) the earth of it self opened, and swallowed him up.

VALFNS the Arian, which succeeded Julian in persecuting Catholics, was burned
alive by the Goths, which also were Arians. Ruffin. lib. 2. hist. cap. 13.

NESTORIVS perished most miserably, his tongue being eaten and consumed with
worms. Euag. lib. 1. hist. c. 7.

ANASTATIVS the Emperor, a favorer of the E^tichian Heretics, was killed
with lightning, as write Cedronus and Paul the Deacon, in his life.

LEO ICONOMACHVS, that is, Image-breaker, burned sacred Images in the open
market place of Constantinople. Presently after which fact, the pestilence
consumed three hundred thousand people in Constantinople. See the Chronicle of
Matthew. Palmer. Anno DCC. XLI.

TO OMIT MANY OTHERS, AND TO ASCEND TO THE MONSTERS of our age.
LVTHER died suddenly, for having supped very delicately and pleasantly, being
in perfect health, and having delighted all his company with merry conceits;
the same night he died. Coclaeus in vita Lutheri.

ZVINGLIVS was slain in war, which he made against Catholics, and a little
after, his brother Oecolampadius going to bed in good health, one night, was
found dead by his wife in the morning. Coclaeus in act. Luth. an. 1531.

ANDREAS CAROLOSTADIVS, the Ministers of Basil write to have been killed of a
Devil, in their Epistle of the death of Carolostadius.

IOANNES CALVINVS was eaten and consumed of worms, and died as did Antiochus,
Hunery, Maximinus, etc. as witnesses Hieronymus Bolsecus in his life, who also
adds that the Arch-heretique died blaspheming, cursing, and inuocating
Devils. This Heretic, that besides his other heresies, denied prayer to
Saints, at his death prays unto Devils.

To all these former examples, we might add infinite more of notorious
persecutors, and enemies of Gods Church, which all came to miserable ends: and
so shall all others come to confusion which hate Sion, which oppose themselves
against Gods Church and Kingdom, which our Savior has built upon a firm
Rock, and therefore no storms, winds or tempests can overthrow it. Matthew.
16. 18. Port^ inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam. The gates of hell shall
never prevail against it, as has promised our Savior. Whatsoever the devil
can do by Tyrants, Heretics, or any other adversaries against this Church,
it stands immovable, Deus fundauit eam in aeternum. God has founded it for
ever, Psalm. 47. Saint Augustine expounds this of the Church of God. This
Church is Gods Kingdom, whereof it is said, Luke 1. and Regni eius non erit
finis, and of his Kingdom shall be no end. Of this Kingdom it is said, Dan.
2. Iu diebus autem regnorum eorum, suscitabit Deus coeli regnum, quod in
aeternum non dissipabitur, and regnum eius alteri populo non tradetur,
comminuet and consum^t vniuersa regna haec, and ipsum stabit in aeternum. This
Kingdom then of God, his Catholic Church, shall stand and continue for ever.
No tyranny nor persecution can destroy this Church, no it cannot diminish, but
rather increase it, as evidently has been seen in all ages. And this is that
Saint Leo writes, Ser. 1. de Petro and Paulo, in these words: Non minuitur
persecutionibus Ecclesia, sed augetur, and semper dominicus ager segete ditiori
vestitur, dum grana quae singula cadunt, multiplicata naseuntur. The Church is
not diminished by persecution, but increased, and always our Lords field is
clothed with richer grain, whilst the grain, which one by one do fall into
the ground, do spring up multiplied.

And although God almighty sometime leaves some particular country and people
for heresy and sin; yet he will still have his Church, he will raise others,
and call other countries, as we may see after the fall of the Church in Africa,
and some parts of the East, many other goodly Kingdoms and Provinces were
presently converted to the faith of Christ, here in the West-Church, as in
Ecclesiastical histories may clearly be seen. And now since the fall of our
Country, and some other places near unto us, from the Catholic faith, we
know that innumerable people in Africa, in the East and West Indies are
converted to this same Catholic Church, and true faith of Christ: whereby we
see verified that dreadful threate of our Savior Christ, Auferetur a vobis
regnum Dei, and dabitur genti facienti fructus eius. This Kingdom, that is,
the preaching of the Gospel, is taken from us, because we brought not forth
the fruits of it, and squared not our lives according to the rules thereof.
Therefore God has take from us our true Teachers, and lawful Pastors, having
lawful mission and vocation, without which none ever preached or taught
Catholic truth, but were brochers of seditious doctrine and pernicious
heresy, as we now see by lamentable experience in these parts of Christendom.

This considered, I hope all good Catholics and servants of Christ; which are
in the lap of the Catholic Church, will be of good comfort, cleave unto this
Rock, the pillar and foundation of truth, as the Apostle calls it. In so
doing they shall never be drowned in the waves of Heresy and Infidelity. If
some Catholics, either out of fear of imprisonment, or loss of their
temporalties, fall from this Church, God almighty will call others, yea even
Puritanes, and other seduced souls. These will he call to the knowledge of his
truth, these will he gather into his Church; and these once seeing what a
singular benediction, what a sovereign benefit it is, to be within the house
of God, which is his Church, will for ever laud and praise his holy name
therefore: Those will say with the royal Prophet, Psalm. 83. Melior est dies
vna in atrijs tuis super millia. Better is one day in thy Courts above a
thousand, and beati qui habitant in dome tua Domine* in saecula saeculorum
laudabunt te: blessed are they which dwell in thy house, O Lord; for ever and
ever they will praise thee: and Elegi abiectus esse, etc. I had rather be an
abject in the house of our Lord, then to dwell in the Tabernacles of sinners.
And therefore understanding the greatness of this benefit, they will pray with
the same holy Prophet, Psalm. 23. Vnam petij a domino hanc requiram vt in
habitem in domo domini omnibus diebus vitae meae. One thing have I besought of
our Lord; and this will I ask again, that I may dwell in the house of our
Lord all the days of my life. Out of this house, that is, the Catholic
Church, there is no means of salvation, neither by preaching, nor by
Sacraments; out of this Church no remission of sins, out of this Church no
good work can be meritorious of everlasting life: Whosoever falls out of
this Church, as he cannot merit by any good work of prayer, fasting, or
alms, because he is not in state of grace; so he loses the merit of all his
former good works, though never so many. What loss can ever be comparable to
this? Whosoever falls out of this Church* Ioseth the communion of Saints,
sets himself out of Gods grace, savor, and protection out of the patrociny
of Angels and Saints; such cannot be Gods children, but his enemies, such can
receive no influence of Gods grace, no sanctification, no justification, no
comfort of the holy Ghost: such can have no peace or quiet of conscience: such
as be out of Gods Church, cannot presume God will hear their prayers,
according to that, Psalm. 65. Iniquitatem si aspexi in cord meo, non exaudiet
deus: Such as are not capable of any Sacrament, and consequently, not of
salvation: such as die out of this Church, without doubt perish everlastingly.

If then, as I said before, Catholics do not weigh these things, but for
fear of temporal losses, or discommoditie, fall out of this Church, God
almighty will call unto him others, which are yet seduced and blinded with
heresy and sin. These after their calling to so great grace, after their
souls and hearts are illuminated, will take wonderful comfort in so
inexplicable a benefit, as this of their vocation and justification. These will
be fervent and devout in Gods service, these will never cease to laud and
praise his holy name: these will never suffer themselves to be separated from
almighty God again: these will contemn life, goods, friends, lands and all,
for this inestimable Jewel: these like to the Primitive Christians, will never
be daunted with persecution, but will rejoice in it, both in respect of grace,
Gods greatest treasure they receive in this life, and glory, that most ample
reward they expect in the next world.

And therefore to conclude, let none be discouraged with fear of persecution
or troubles: for whatsoever thou shall lose in this life, thou shall receive it
even here an hundred fould, and also a crown of glory in the Kingdom of
heaven. And therefore I say with S. Cyprian, Non vereamur occidi quos constat
cum occidimur coronari. Let us not fear to be murdered, whom when we are
murdered, certain it is we are crowned. We should be so far from being
terrified with persecution as we should exceedingly rejoice in it: Gaudete and
exultate (says our Savior) qu^niam merces v^stra copiosa est in coelis. be
glad and rejoice, for your reward is very great in heaven. To suffer
persecution willingly and joyfully for Christ's cause, for the profession of the
Catholic faith, is our glory: and the Apostle says, Absit mihi gloriari nisi
in Cruce Domini nostri Jesus Christi. God forbid I should glory in any thing,
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Cross is the most precious
Jewel of our Savior Christ: and of this Jewel he always gives the greatest
portions to his dearest friends. Let us therefore amids our greatest crosses
and tribulations be of good comfort; there is no better sign of our election
and predestination, then (living in Gods grace and favor, and keeping our
selves in the unity and obedience of our holy Mother the Catholic Church) to
be diverse ways afflicted and persecuted, to be robbed and spoiled, belied and
slandered by the enemies of Gods eternal truth. Let us not suffer for theft,
for murder, for other criminal matters, but if it be for Catholic religion,
for obedience to our lawful Pastors, and spiritual guides, which do watch
over us, as bound to render an account for our souls, according to the
Apostle, Hebr. 13. 17. Obedite praepositis vestris, etc. Let us not be ashamed,
but esteem our selves even blessed in this life, as our Savior pronounces of
us. And the more we shall suffer for so glorious a cause, so much more happy we
shall be: for there is no proportion betwixt our present sufferings, and the
future rewards. Non sunt condign passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam.
The passions of this time are not condign to the glory to come, that shall be
revealed in us. Romans 8. 18. Let us then rejoice in tribulation, and nothing
doubt but that our merciful Lord who sends it, will likewise send comfort with
it. 2. Cor. 17. Sicut socij est is passionum, sic eritis and consolationis in
Christo Jesus Domino nostro. As you are fellows of his passions, so also shall
you be of consolation in Christ Jesus, etc. And again Sicut abundant passionis
Christi in nobis: ita and per Christum abundat consolatio nostra. As the
passions of Christ abound in us, so also by Christ abounds our consolation,
as most excellently writes the Apostle Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 1. 5. To make an
end, let us rejoice in tribulation, at least esteem it all joy when we fall
into diverse temptations, as exhorts blessed Saint James, chap. 1. 2. But if
we do find in our selves this imperfection, that we cannot rejoice in
crosses and troubles, neither yet have that high esteem of it, as we ought, at
least let us dispose our selves to patience, for such as lose patience, as out
of fear fall away: the Angel, or rather our Savior Christ says in the
Apocalypse, Their part shall be in the burning lake, Apocal. 31. 8. And that
which may most encourage us, is that comfortable assertion of our Savior
Christ, often repeated in the Apocalypse, Qui vicerit dabo ei edere Mannae
absc^nditum, etc. He that shall overcome, I will give him to eat hidden Manna.
Qui vicerit dabo ei edere de ligno vitae quod est in Paradiso. He that shall
overcome, I will give him to eat of the tree of life, which is in Paradise.
Happy are they that shall feed of this heavenly bread, and that shall eat of
this delicate fruit, for they shall live for ever.

This which has been said may not only be of great force to confirm the
obedient, and resolute children of Gods Church, but also may avail much to
confound such as live in Schism, and participate with Heretics in their
execrable service and Sacraments, contrary to their consciences. Whom, besides
these former points, I beseech in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to reflect upon
the uncertainty of this life, and the vanity of all earthly things; upon Gods
severe judgments executed upon rebellious and schismatic people; upon the
four last things, to wit, Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell: upon the
constancy of innumerable most glorious Martyrs of either sex, etc. And they
cannot, considering these things with serious attention, they cannot possibly
(I say) continue longer in Schism, but with all speed reconcile themselves to
almighty God and his Church. And that this (I say) may take better effect with
them. I will conclude with those two excellent sayings of Saint Augustine, most
worthy to be noted.

Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites non solum omnes Paganos sed etiam
Iud^os, Haereticos* atque Schism (...), qui extra Ecclesiam Catholicam
praesentem fini^^^t vitam in ignem aeternum ituro^, qui paratus est Diabolo and
Angelis eius. B. August: lib. de fide ad Petrum. Hold most firmly, and in no
wise doubt, that not only all Pagans, but also all Jews, Heretics and
Schismatickes, which out of the Catholic Church end this present life, shall
go into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And
the other:

Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites quemlibet haereticum, atque
schismaticum in nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus sancti baptizatum, si
Ecclesiae Catholicae non fuerit aggregatus, quantascunque eleemosynas fecerit,
etsi pro Christi nomine etiam sanguinem fuderit, nullatenus posse saluari: Omni
enim homini qui Ecclesiae non tenet vnitatem, neque baptismus, neque eleemosyna
quantumlibet copi^sa, neque mors pro Christi nomine suscepta proficere potest
ad salutem, quamdiu in eo haeretica, vel schismatica prauitas perseuerat, quae
ducit ad mortem.

Hold most firmly, and no ways doubt, that every Heretic and Schismaticke
baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, if
he be not joined to Gods Church, how great alms soever he give, and although
he shed his blood for Christ's sake, can no ways be saved: for every man that
holds not the unity of the Church, neither baptism nor alms, although
never so great, neither death suffered for Christ's cause, can profit unto
salvation, as long as heretical lewdness perseuereth in him, which leads
unto death.

Finally, for such as are within the lap of the Catholic Church, I beseech
them to square their lives according to the precepts and rules of Catholic
religion, which induce to holiness and perfection of life; and I say unto them
with the Apostle. Abijciamus opera tenebrarum, and induamur arma lucis, sicut
in die honest ambulemus, non in comm^ssationibus, and ebri^tatibus: non in
cubilibus and impudicitijs: non in contentione, and aemulatione, sed induimini
Iesum Christum. Let us cast away the works of darkness* and put on the armor
of light, let us walk honestly as in the day time, not in banqueting and
drunkenness, not in champering and immundicities, not in contention and
emulation, but do you on our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 13. It is not enough to
be in the Catholic Church, unless we live according to the rules of our
Catholic religion. If we give our selves to sensuality and voluptuousness, if
we stick not to commit grievous and enormious sins; yea, if we endeavor not
to live virtuously, godly and uprightly, we cannot hope to be saved: for as
says Saint Augustine most excellently, Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites
non omnes qui intra Ecclesiam Catholicam baptizantur, accepturos esse vitam
aeternam: sed eos qui percepto baptismate recte viuunt, id est, qui
absti^uerunt se a vitijs and concupiscentijs carnis. Regnum enim coelorum sicut
Infideles, Haeretic^ atque Schismatici non habebunt: sic Catholici criminosi
possidere non poterunt. Hold it most firely, and doubt not any ways, that not
all which are baptized within the Catholic Church shall receive life
everlasting: but they which being baptized live well, that is, which have
abstained from vices and desires of the flesh. For the Kingdom of heaven, as
faithless Heretics and Schismatikes shall not have; so sinful Catholics
cannot possess. God almighty vouchsafe to grant, that we which be Catholics,
may so order and dispose our lives, as may be to the glory of God, edification
of others, and salvation of our own souls.

PRAYERS FOR CONVERSION OF HERETICS AND SCHISMATIKES.
OMnipotens aeterne Deus, erue quaesimus Haereticos atque Schismaticos ab
erronibus vniuersis, and ad sanctam Matrem Ecclesiam Catholicam atque
Apostolicam reuocare digneris. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum Filium tuum
qui tecum viuit and regnat in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

Alia oration.
OMnipotens aeterne Deus, qui saluas omnes, and neminem vis periro, respice ad
animas, diabolica fraud deceptas, vt omni haeretica prauitate deposita,
errantium corda recipiscant, and ad veritatis tuae redeant vnitatem. Per
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, etc.

Alia oration.
DEus qui errata corrigis, and dispersa congregas, and congregata conseruas,
quaesumus super populum Christianum tuae vnionis gratiam clementer infunde: vt
diuisione rejecta vero Pastori Ecclesiae tuae se vniens, tibi digne valeat
famulari. Per Dominum nostrum, etc.

OF THE TEMPORAL PROSPERITY AND FELICITY OF THEM WHICH have defended the
Church.
WE have seen to what miserable destruction diverse notorious enemies of God
and his Church have fallen: I could have added hereunto most memorable examples
of meaner, but yet honorable and worshipful Families, as also of diverse.
Countries, Kingdoms and Peoples, which either in respect of their revolt from
the Catholic Church, or their opposition against the same, have come to utter
ruin and desolation. And is not this that the Prophet Isay, or rather God
almighty, by the Prophet threatens, Isai. 60. 12. Gens, and Regnum quod non
seruierit tibi peribit, The Nation and Kingdom which will not serve thee shall
perish: that is, such Kingdoms and People as will not subject themselves to
the yoke of Christ, and obedience of his Church, shall perish. Were not the
most flourishing parts of the world for their fall to Arianisme, Donatisme,
Nestorianisme, and other condemned heresies, for a just punishment of God
overrun and brought to desolation by the Sarazens, and by infinite barbarous
and savage people, Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, Alanes, and others?

All Histories are full of these matters, expressly setting down the cause of
the overthrow of so many goodly countries in Asia, but especially Africa; and
in Europe, as Italy, Spain, France, Germany, England, with other more.

Were not these goodly parts of the world, near about us, together with all
Africa, ouerrun and destroyed by the Goths, Vandals, and other barbarous
people, for Schism and Haeresie? Were not the Britons in this Island, after
they were infect with the Heresy of Pelagius, thrust out of their seats, most
of them destroyed, and the remnant driven into the barrennest parts of the
Island by the Saxons? And I should never make an end, if I should proceed to
bring so many instances in this point, as are recorded in all sorts of
Chronicles and writings extant in the world.

But now let us relate some few examples of so many of the temporal
prosperity, and happy success of such Princes as adhered to the Church,
honored and defended it.

First, those noble victories are well known which are recorded in the old
Testament, as the victories of Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, Samuel, David,
Ezechias, Josias, and the Machabees.

In the new Testament, that is, in the Law of Grace, Constantine the Great,
which first of all the Emperors publicly defended the Church, almost in like
sort vanquished Maxentius, as Moses did Pharao; for Maxentius was drowned in
Tyber, as Pharao in the Red Sea. Eusebius. lib. 9. hist. cap. 9. Of him speaks
Saint Augustine, lib. 5. de Ciuitate Dei, cap. 25. Constantine the Emperor not
suppliant to Devils, but worshipping the true God, received so many gifts and
blessings from God, as none durst presume to wish: this one Augustus held,
possessed and defended the whole Roman Empire: In administering and making
war, he was most victorious; in vanquishing and repressing Tyrants,
wonderful prosperous* being of great years, he died of sickness and old
age, and left sons three, Emperors, to succeed him.

Of THEODOSIUS the elder, in the same place writes the same S. August. cap.
26. that he had wonderful success in all his affairs, because he was very
pious and Catholic: that in the battles he fought with his enemies, their own
weapons, darts and arrows, were retorted upon the authors, God almighty
fighting for him. Moreover, L. Theodoret, in his fifth book of history, cap.
24. reports that S. John and S. Philip the Apostles, appeared fighting for
the Emperor Theodosius in the same battle, riding upon white horses.

Of HONORIVS also, who was a most Catholic Emperor, and most addicted to the
Pope, as in his epistles to Pope Boniface appears, as writes S. Aug. l. 5.
de ciuit. Dei, c. 23. that God did so fight for him, as in one battle he slew
of the Goths above an hundred thousand, and did take Radagaisus the King, with
his sons, and put him to death: and (which was most admirable) there was not so
much as one of his army either killed or wounded.

Of THEODOSIUS the younger, writes Socrat. l. 7. hist. cap. 18. that his army
skirmishing with the Barbarians, and himself in the mean space making his
prayers unto God within the city, about an hundred thousand of the Sarazens
were beaten and driven by Angels into the river Euphrates, and so perished
miserably.

IVSTINTAN the elder, whilst he was Catholic reigned most prosperously, in so
much as he restored to the Roman Empire-Italy, Africa and many other
Provinces, as appears in Euagrius l. 4. hist. c. 26. and sequentibus. But
after he became an Heretic, and purposed to set forth an Edict for receiving
of his heresy, forthwith he died suddenly, and so delivered the Church from
great fear, as writes the same Euagrius, lib. 4. cap. vlt.

HERACLIVS also, as appears in Zonoras, and other Historiographers, whilst
he was Catholic got a most honorable and admirable victory against the
Persians, and recovered the holy Cross, at which time the state of the Roman
Empire was altogether desperate; but after he fell into the heresy of the
Monothelites, he ever had evil success, nothing ever succeeding with him, and
himself was extinct of a new and strange disease.

Also it is manifest by the histories of the Greeks, that the Emperors of the
East, from that time, by reason of the dissension about Images, they divided
themselves from the Church of Rome, still decreased in power and authority,
until at last they utterly lost the Empire. And in the West it is plain by
the histories of the Latins, that the Emperors did more or less flourish, as
they were more or less addicted to the Church of Rome.

In the time of VRBANE the second, unto the year of our Lord M. xcviij. the
Christians in that holy war made by the Pope for the recovery of Jerusalem,
when they were in most desperate state, because of the approaching of an
infinite host of the Turks and Persians, and they were but a few in number,
and wel-neare sterued for lack of food; in so much as even the most valiant and
stoutest men did go leaning upon their staves, neither had they but a few
horses, so as the principal of them, to wit, Godfrey was forced to borow a
horse, and many Princes were constrained to ride upon Asses: at last God
revealed where was the Lance of Christ, and it being carried before them, gave
victory in the war, in so much as there were slain of the Turks an hundred
thousand, and scarsely four thousand of the Christians lost. And there fell
from heaven a dew upon them, which comforted and refreshed both their bodies
and their souls. Finally, there appeared from heaven three holy men fighting
for them. See Paulus Aemilius lib. 4. Guill. Tyr. lib. 6. near the end, and
Dodechimus, which continues the story of Marianus Scotus.

In the time of INNOCENTIVS the third, in France, of eight thousand Catholics,
were slain in one battle an hundred thousand of the Albigensian Heretics, as
writes Aemilius, lib 6. hist. Francor.

In our days, 1531. the Catholics of Heluetia fought five battles in defense
of the Catholic faith, against the Heretics of Heluetia, and in every one of
them the Catholics got the victory, whereas they were both in number and power
far inferior to the Heretics. See Io. Coclaeus in Act. Lutheri. 1531.

CHARLES the fifth got a victory against the Lutherans, not without a miracle
from heaven. Anno 1547.

Many other miraculous victories which the Catholics have got against
Heretics, both in France and other parts, might hereunto be annexed; but let
these suffice.

Regi saeculorum immortali and inuisibili, s^lt Deo honor and gloria in saecula
saeculorum. Amen. THE ENDS OF BVRDEN OF DOVER, AND OTHERS HIS ASSOCIATS, WHICH
IN THE beginning of Queen ELIZABETH'S Reign, went to Canterbury from Dover in
derision and lewd sort, to take their leave of diverse Catholics of
Canterbury. Burden was the Controwler of the Custom in Dover.
1 BVRDEN being their Pope, within a few years after died at Dover in most
loathsome and miserable sort, his friends which came to visit him, were not
able to abide the intolerable stincke of his body.

2 STORER a Preacher, which carried the Pix, with some filthy thing in it; in
their Procession died at Maydston in Kent, being the Preacher of that town; he
rotted from the toe upwards until he died: he did savor so, as he was
loathsome to all that in good will came to visit him in his sickness, and so
most miserably died at Maydston.

3 ROGER WOOD, the Towne-clerke of Dover being the Crosse-bearer, died in Smith
field at London, foming at the mouth, with his tongue hanging out in loathsome
sort, as big swollen as a bullocks tongue, and died most miserably with his
tongue hanging out of his mouth.

4 MINGE* a Iurate of Dover, another of that lewd company, himself sitting at
table eating, the loft over him fell down, and pressed him to death. His house
was at the Peter at Dover, where this befell him.

5 JOHN ROBBINS* a Iurate of Dover, another of this company, being at Dunkyrk
in Flanders, and putting his bark from the kaye of Dunkyrk, fell into the
water, and bet


