Certain godly and necessary Sermons, preached by M. Thomas Carew of Bilston
in the county of Suffolk.

The first concerns the mystery of godliness and religion it self.

1. Tim. 3. The second concerns regeneration, and the necessity of having our
part in that mystery.

John. 3. The third contains the means of attaining thereunto, together with
the small number (in comparison of those that are partakers thereof.)

Mark. 4. The fourth shows the remedy against Satan's temptations, who seeks
continually to keep and draw us from it.

Ephesians. 6. The fifth declares the shortness of our life, and uncertain
certeintie of our death, when we shall receive the reward of it.

Psalm. 90. The sixth comprehends an example and description of that reward,
together with the punishment of those that want it.

Luke. 16. In the end of follovveth three more particular Sermons.

The first concerning Gentlemen, specially those that are so by office.

Deuteronomy. 16. The second concerning Gentlewomen.

1. Pet. 3. The third and last concerning Yeomen and Tradesmen, especially
Clothiers.

AT LONDON Printed for George Potter, dwelling in Paul's Church-yarde, at the
sign of the Bible.

1603.

To the right worshipful M. Thomas Carew of Crokeham in the county of
Sommerset, and M. Clipsbie Gawdie of Gawdie hall in the county of Norffolke.
Having for some reasons begun, and by Gods goodness finished this little
book, being after the usual manner, to make choice of some person or persons,
under whose name I might commend it to the world, my affection carried me as the
first, so at the last, to resolve generally upon those who are my kinsmen in
the flesh, both by consanguinitie or affinity, who although by the providence
of God they be separated and seated as it were in the East and the West, yet I
desire and endeavor, that they may sit together with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
in the kingdom of God: and particulerly I made choice of you, as the chief
among the rest, especially that I am known unto and may be bold withal, to
whom for ancient love and benefits I have been most beholding, especially
because this little book, as a messenger of my thankfulness, might stand in
steed of other duties, which the distance of place, and other necessities, will
not suffer me to perform unto you and yours, praying you with all the rest of
my friends, as if I named them, to accept and read it with the same affection
that I have written it, which I shall take as a recompense of my travail, in
hope of the fruit thereof that may unite us more nearly by a new birth, in
the spiritual kindred of Christianity, which I beseech Almighty God in Jesus
Christ our Lord, by his omnipotent and holy spirit, to bring to pass in us all
for our mutual rejoicing in this life, and eternal salvation in the life to
come, Amen.

Your poor kinsman and ready friend to command in Christ, Tho: Carew.

The Epistle to the Reader.
ALthough (Christian reader) that the multitude of Books already set forth by
worthy men, the forbearance of many other to write much more worthy then my
self, and the censures of some that will pass upon every thing that is
committed to the view of all, as their several affections stand either to the
man or the matter, with some other things might discourage me from this labor,
yet because I see that ancient books though never so excellent, are laid
aside, and new books are taken into the hands of the common people, and that
diverse men according as they have several reasons, are of several all
dispositions this way, and because he that regards the wind shall not sow, I
lay aside discouragement, and also would have thee think that the reason
mentioned in the former Epistle, is a sufficient motive to me, though it seem
not so to thee, if thou will bestow pains to read this book, bestow thy
charity to use it well, and pray with me to God that gives increase to the
planting of Paul, and the watring of Apollo, that together with the greater and
better labors of other of his servants, it may be blessed at least in some
small measure, to Gods church, especially to those to whom I have chiefly
directed it, and so thou shall further my purpose, and bind me to
thankfulness.

^ The Sum of Christianity.
1. TIMOTH. 3. 16. Without controversy great is the mystery of godliness,
which is God manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into
glory.
Hen the Apostle Paul had by the preaching of the Gospel planted a Church at
Ephesus, and Acts. 20.
was for like purposes to depart from thence to other places, he left Timothy
the Evangelist there as well to confirm his doctrine and water that he had
planted, as to ordain ordinary ministers and officers, who might by
continual teaching, governing and providing for the poor, keep that church
in good estate, and carry the same forward unto perfection.

Now because Timothy was a young man, the business committed unto him
weighty, and his enemies and temptations many and mighty, he writes this
Epistle unto him, as he has said in the former verse, that he might know how
to behave himself in the Church, which for excellency he calls the house of
God, the pillar and ground of truth.

Now having in the former part of this chapter, showed what Ministers should be
chosen, and how they should be qualified, in these words he shows a reason
thereof drawn from the matter, whereabout they must be occupied, which is, not
in genealogies and Jewish fables, which he has forbidden them before, as too
trifling and unprofitable Chap. 1.
things for Ministers to spend their time in, but they must be occupied about
the doctrine of piety and Christianity: now as they must be special men, so
they must be occupied about special matters that are secret and unknown to
the world, that are of great use and benefit to the Church, and that are
amiable and admirable to the Angels.

Great is the mystery of godliness: Now the former description of Ministers
laid with this doctrine for Ministers, does show they must be wise, religious,
and sanctified men, that shall teach religion to the people, otherwise they
shall preach at the least in a great part that which themselves do not
understand, as our Savior Christ said to Nichodemus; Art thou a Teacher in
Israel and knows not these things, and as the Jesuits, John. 3.
who in the Rhemish Testament proves themselves to be the teachers of all men,
yet show they understand not the mystery of religion, for they have passed
over these words with silence, and speak not a word of this text that does
contain so great a matter, For without controversy (says the Apostle,) great
is the mystery of godliness or religion.

When he says Without controversy, he means it is confessed of all nations
and of all sorts of men, that religion is a great thing, for although there be
diverse opinions in the world, which is the true religion: the Jews think it
is contained in their Talmud, the Turks think it is contained in their
Alcaron, the Papists think it is contained in their Masse-booke, and we say it
is contained in the Scripture; yet all do confess, and it is out of
controversy, that religion is a great thing: and although many do not
approve of Christian religion, yet it being granted that this is the true
religion, to look for salvation in and by Jesus Christ, who was God manifested
in the flesh, all will agree it is a great mystery, he has said in the former
verse, he write in his Epistle to Timothy, that he might know how to behave
himself in the Church the pillar and ground of truth; now he says
immediately, Great is the mystery of Godliness or Religion, teaching us that
is the true and godly religion, that is grounded in the truth or word of God:
and that has always been professed in the Church, and that all the religions
that are out of the Church, and that do dissent from the word, are untrue and
ungodly.

Mystery, He calls true religion a mystery, because it is hidden from and
refused of the most, because it is perceived and therefore embraced but of a
few: and because it is preached but in part of any, and well may the Apostle
call true religion a Mystery, for the Heathens dream not of it; the Jews deny
it, Papists pervert it: yea many that are in the visible Church do not
perceive it, at least the truth and godliness of it, but do take
superficial knowledge for sound knowledge, a dead faith for a lively faith,
and counterfeite godliness for true godliness: and no marvel, for religion
is contrary to nature and reason: the eye of religion Adam has put out, and
all men are blind until they be again enlightened by grace: therefore the
Apostle says; The natural man perceiues not the things of God; neither can
he, because 1. Cor. 2.
they are spiritually discerned: If religion, could have been perceived by
natural reason, the wise Philosophers would have found it out, but in all
their writings there is a perpetual silence of it.

No man can by reason judge certainly of many natural things subject to
sense, as the exceeding swiftness, magnitude and altitude of the Sun, Moon
and Stars, of the causes and effects of the thunder, lightnings, earthquakes:
and how much less can men pearce into Gods secrets with their own eyes. There
be many arts and trades, in the world, and every of them is called a mystery,
because the perceiuerance and practice of them, is beyond the reach of common
men that have not been bound prentise to them, how much more must the art of
Christianity and religion needs be mystical.

All other religions are not mysteries, especially not great mysteries, but may
be perceived and conceived by natural reason, but true religion cannot.

Yea the Apostle calls it a mystery, not only in respect of those that be
irreligious and have no perceiuerance of it, but as I said in respect of those
that be religious, who although they know it truly, yet they know it not
perfectly, as Paul says of himself and all other Christians, We know in part,
if we know any thing, but in part it is mysteries. 1. Cor. 5.


Nay that which is more, religion may be called a mystery, in respect of the
Angels, for they know it not fully, as Peter 1. Pet. 1.
says, for having spoken of the Prophets, foretelling of Christ's sufferings and
the glory of Christians, he says, the which things the Angels desire to
behold. And that religion is a great mystery, we shall more plainly see by
the opening of the Text, and handling of the words as they follow in order.

But before we come to the particulers of it, let us mark generally: that
seeing religion is a great thing, we must not account it little, nor vnderprise
it as many do, but judge and esteem highly of it, and think all things in
the world little, in respect of it, and other persons no body, in comparison of
those that have it.

Furthermore let us mark, that seeing religion is a mystery, we must neither
be so arrogant, as to think we can easily conceive and understand it, nor so
negligent, as not to enquire and search after it, but humbly and diligently, by
hearing of Sermons, by reading the Scriptures, by conferring with good men, who
are best acquainted with it, and especially by prayer unto God, seek and
labor to be instructed in it. Men are inquisitiue after court news, and
strange news, that concerns great persons and great matters, that every one
knows not: then let us enquire for this heavenly mystery that concerns the
highest.

And lastly, seeing he calls religion the mystery of godliness, let us note
it is a mystery both in the knowledge of it, and in the practice of it.
Therefore as none can tell what true godliness means but those that be
religious, so none can tell what true religion means but those that be godly:
there is no religious man but he that is godly, and there is no godly man but
he that is religious.

God manifested, etc. Now we come to the words of the Text, wherein the Apostle
sets down the substance of religion, which at the first view seems a matter
not hard to conceive, but by the examination of the circumstances of it, we
shall by the grace of God see how truly and fitly the Apostle has called it a
mystery. And although there be some parts of religion that are not plainly
expressed in this Text, as that of election and the resurrection, etc. Yet both
those and all the parts of religion are comprehended in these words; for it is
said, God has elected us in Christ Jesus, Ephe. 1. Ioh. 11.
and also that we shall be raised up again by him: Saint John says; Every
spirit which 1. Ioh. 4.
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God, and every spirit
which deemeth that Jesus Christ is not come in the flesh, is not of God: as
there is no heresy or false religion, but does impugn Christ, either in whole
or in part, but does deny him in his names, in his natures, or his offices: so
on the contrary, there is no part of true religion but has reference unto
Christ: therefore when he comes to set down the mystery of religion, he says
it is this, God is manifested in the flesh.

So that religion follows from God to man, and again leads man to God: the
mystery of it is, that God and man, the creator and the creature, is joined
together, which as one says; Is such a thing that to speak of, no man is
worthy, and to utter no man is able. What then shall I do (says he) shall I
be silent, or shall I speak: be silent I dare not, least I should conceal so
great a benefit: speak I cannot, least I should obscure so great a mystery.

Now that we might the better see the greatness of this mystery, that God is
manifested in the flesh, as it were with a pair of spectacles, let us briefly
consider on the one side what God is, and on the other side what man is.

And yet I mean not to enter into any large description of God, least we
should think he may be fully conceived: for one says truly and wittily; If
all the world were full of books, if all the creatures in the world were
writers, and all the water in the sea were ink, the writers would be wearied,
the books would be filled, and the sea would be emptied and exhausted before
his perfection could be manifested.

Therefore Simonides being asked what God was, desired a days respit to make
answer; and being asked the next day, he deferred two days respit; and again
being asked the third time, said; the more I search it, the further I am from
it.

When I seek for God says one of the ancient fathers, I do not seek for the
glistering beauties of Dyamondes, and precious stones for the eye: I do not
seek for the pleasant melody of birds and tunable instruments for the ear,
I do not seek for the savor of flowers, spices, and ointments for the smell;
I do not seek for honey, and delectable things for the taste, which brute
beasts may be capable of, but I seek for a glory above all beauty, for a
voice above all melody, and for a savor and sweetness above all delicacie,
which neither beasts, nor men with their outward censes can attain unto.

God is the most absolute, supreme and excelent thing, a substance divine,
invisible, eternal, infinite, unchangeable, glorious, almighty, only wise,
true, just, merciful, gracious and bountiful, before whom the Esa. 6.
Cherubins do cover their faces, of whom, through whom and for whom are all
things, Romans 11.
says the Apostle, to him be glory for ever. Now as God is thus, and much more
excellent then can be spoken, so on the other side; man especially considered
as Adam has left him, is most base, insomuch that David comparing man but with
some of the creatures said. What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the
son of man that Psalm. 8.
thou do consider him; how much more compared with the Creator. Yea man is
not only base, but miserable; and so miserable, that if Christ had not come to
redeem us, it had been better for us we had been stones, yea bears, and
toades: therefore seeing all that can be said is too little, to set forth Gods
majesty; and nothing can be said enough to set forth man's misery, this that the
Apostle says. That God is manifest in the flesh, must needs be a great
mystery. By God the Apostle means, not the first person in the diety, which is
the father, nor the third person, which is the holy Ghost; but the second
person which is the Son: for though there be but one God, yet in the Godhead
there Mat. 28.
are three persons, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost: Now it was the
son, the second person, that was more manifested in the flesh as John says:
The word was made John. 1.
flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the
only begotten son of the father full of grace and truth; Therefore Paul
says; In him dwells the fullness of Col. 2. 9.
the Godhead bodily: And yet we are not to think he was thrust out of heaven,
as the evil Angels were, but he took flesh of his own accord, as the
Apostle says in the second to the Phillipians, he being equal with God took
on him the form of a servant: for as Adam sinned and overthrew mankind
voluntarily, so it was necessary that Christ should take our nature, and
redeem us voluntarily.

Manifested in the flesh. By flesh he means not the body of man only, but our
whole humane nature, consisting of soul and body: As when Peter says, He
suffered in the 1. Pet. 4.
flesh; it is not meant he suffered in his body only, but in his soul also:
as he says of Mat. 2.
himself; my soul is heavy even to the death: so when it is said here, he was
manifested in the flesh, he means in our humane nature, for he was in all
things like to us, sin excepted. Heb.
The manner of his taking flesh was of a woman, as it is said; God sent his
son made of a woman: Matthew tells us Gal. 4. Mat. 1.
what woman; namely, the virgin Mary: therefore he is in the Scripture called
the Son of man, not that any man was his father, but because on a woman he
took on him man's nature: this is that the Prophet Esaias spoke of him; They
shall call his name Esa. 7.
Emanuell, that is God with us: therefore are there such mystical speeches in
the scripture. John Baptist says of him; he that comes Ioh. 1.
after me is before me, that is, he comes after me in his manhood, but was
before me in his Godhead. He is likened to Melchisadeck, who is said to be
without father and Heb. ^.
without mother; for, as he was man he was without father, and as he was God he
was without mother: and he himself says in John. 5.
Ioh. 5. Before Abraham was I am. This is that which some divines have spoken
of in a wondering manner; That he which is eternal should be borne in time; that
he Esa. 7. Dan. 7.
which is called the ancient of days, should be a child of an hour old; that
he which is the word, should become a babe that John. 1.
cannot speak; that he which is infinite, should be compassed in the womb of
a Luke. 2.
Virgin; that he should not only make us like himself at the first, but make
himself like us: that the flesh of Adam and the sin of Adam, being joined in
all other men, should be separated in that man, that was the son of God,
because he was not borne after the ordinary manner of men, but was conceived
by the holy ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary, this is wonderful. Who would
have thought, that these two natures, the Godhead and the manhood, that were so
far divided a sunder, should have been so neerelie joined together, not in
one Paradise, as at the first, but in one person, and that more merely, then
the soul and the body, for they may be divided, but the godhead and manhood
of Christ cannot: therefore this is a great mystery, that God is manifested in
the flesh.

Yet we must not imagine two Christ's, one that was God, and another that was
man, but one Christ who is both God and man: the devil has stirred up some
heritickes to deny his Godhead, and some to deny his manhood; and some also to
confound them together, thinking to corrupt this mystery, and so to overthrow
religion: those that have denied his Godhead, allege for color thereof, our
Savior Christ's own words: My father is greater John. 14.
then I; Ergo, say they, he is not God, because he says he is inferior to the
father, not understanding the misterye of those speeches that he speaks there
of himself, as he is man, or mediator, and so he is inferior to the father;
but in the second to the Philipians, it is said. He Phil. 2.
thought it no robbery, to be equal with God in his divine nature. Those that
have denied his manhood, aledge these words of Paul: God sent his son in the
similitude of sinful Romans 8.
flesh, Ergo, say they, he was not man, because it is said he had but a
similitude of flesh, but the Apostle says not, he had the similitude of flesh:
But the similitude of sinful flesh; For though he seemed to be a sinner as
others were, as the Pharisees wrongfully John. 7.
said of him: Yet Peter says; In him was no 1. Pet. 2.
sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth; So that though he had true
flesh, yet he had but the similitude of sinful flesh, those that confound
his two natures, as if the one of them did destroy the other, were led thereto
by this; that the scripture does sometime attribute that to his manhood, which
belongs to his Godhead, as that it is said, the son of man is in heaven;
when he talked with the Jews and sometimes does attribute that to his
Godhead, which belongings, to his man, hood, as Paul says to the elders of
Ephesus, Acts. 20.
watch over the flock, which God has purchased with his own blood: Which
speeches are used by reason of Christ's personable union, that is the uniting
of his two natures in one person, for as in own nature of God there are three
persons, so in one person of Christ, there are two natures.

But to leave the confuration of heretics, whose property is always to pass
over all plain places of scripture, that do show the truth, and to cavil
with dark places, that may seem to maintain their error.

Those that would be confirmed in the truth of the divine and humane natures
in the person of Christ, let them read John. 11. Romans 9. 5 Heb. 1. 8. 1. Ioh.
5. 20.
these few places of scripture quoted in the margeant, for the heaping up of
many testimonies is needless in this point, that is so pregnant and plain in
this very Text, which says; That God was manifested in the flesh.

Furthermore, let us mark, that the son of God did not only become base
man, but the basest of men, for he was borne of a base person, a poor maid,
that had not a Lamb to offer for her purification, but was feign to offer a
pair of Pigeons: he was borne in a base place, in a Stable or Stall for
beasts; he lived diverse years in a base trade of a Carpenter, and after he
entered upon his public office, he kept company with base persons, with
Fishermen. Paul says, He made himself of no reputation: yea he was Phi. 2.
so base in outward appearance, that the (...). 5.
Prophet said, There was no form nor (...) in him, but he was despised and
rejected of men. The reason of this baseness, was because he did not only
take on him our nature, but our case and condition; that is, the frailties and
infirmities of our nature, I mean not our sinful infirmities, for that is
always excepted in his humanity, else how should he have been joined to God,
who can abide no impuritie; but I mean, he took on him our natural
infirmities, both of mind and body. The infirmities of mind that he took on
him without sin, were both in his judgment and affection. For judgment, it
is said of him, He grew in wisdom, Luke. 2.
which he could not have done, except there had been some want, and also Mark.
13
it is said; he was ignorant of the day of judgment, for his affection, it is
said he sorrowed, Mat. 9 Heb. 5.
and he feared: and that he took on him our infirmities of body appears;
when it is said, he was hungry, and that he Mat. 4. John. 4
was weary, etc. But we are not to think that he took on him every particular
man's infirmities, that grow of some special cause, franzinesse of mind, or
lamenesse of body, but generally the infirmityes, which be common to the
nature of all men; that having experyence of infirmities, he might be able to
succor us in ours, as the Apostle says. Heb. 2.


But is this all the mystery of religion, to know that the Godhead was joined
to our base and frail nature: No, but there is much more in it, that does
carry our consideration a great deal further, as appears by the words of
the text that follow; He was preached to the Gentiles, and believed on in the
world: yea it reaches not only to this world, but to the world to come; He
was received up into glory.

A great part of the mystery of Christ's personal union, stands in the use of
it, to unite mankind unto God, by a spiritual and mystical conjunction; the
Apostle Paul having said: The faithful are members of Christ's body, of his
flesh and of his bones; Ephe. 5.
He adds, This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church.

The son of God, was manyfested in the flesh, that he might be the redeemer,
not of Angels, but of men, as it is said: He Heb. 2.
took not the Angels nature, for the Angels that fell; shall remain in the
state of perdition without recovery, for ever: therefore, one wondering at the
work of our redemption says, let all the Angels tell me, if ever God did any
such thing for them; but he took the seed of Abraham, says the Apostle: That
is, our human nature, that he might be the redeemer of men, and yet not of
all men, for reprobate men are no more joined to God by Christ, then reprobate
Angels: but the elect that Ephe. 1.
were chosen in him, although by their fall in Adam they deserved to be for
ever separated from God; yet they are in and by Christ again reconciled and
joined unto him, again God was manyfested in the flesh, that he might do that
for men, that no other could do but he: Yea, that he might do that for man,
that he himself could not have done, except he had been both God and man.

For if he had not been man, how could he have performed our obedience, in all
the duties of holiness, righteousness and temperance, which the law of God
does require of men; and sanctify man's nature that was defiled: in which
respect he is called our wisdom, righteousness and 1. Cor. 1.
sanctification: again, if he had not bin man, how could he have suffered our
miseries, and borne the punishments which by sin we had deserved, in which
respect he is called our redemption; this is that one says, is a matter of
marvelous consideratition; that subjects had sinned, and the Lord must be
beaten, that servants had offended, and the master must die, that the guilty
should be spared, and the innocent punished, and yet Gods justice not impeached.

On the other side if he had not been God almighty, how could he have
encountered, and conquered the devil, hell, sin, death, and all the great
enemies of our salvation; that were too strong for man to battle with all: if
he had not been everlasting God, how could he by temporal suffering have
discharged us of eternal torment, and how should the merit of his suffering
have reached to those, that lived long before, and long after his death; if he
had not been infinite God, how should the father have accepted so many sinners
in him, and him for so many sinners, which he was angry withal, and how should
he be present with his people, throughout the world: therefore it was necessary
he should be both God and man, that being man he might be sufficient to suffer,
whatsoever was due from God, and do whatsoever was, and being God he might be
all sufficient, to make that acceptable and effectual which was suffered and
done for us. Therefore this is a great mystery, that God was manifested in the
flesh.

1 Hereof comes that near conjunction that is between Christ and his Church,
set forth in the Scripture: by many similitudes, he is called the head, and we
the body, not Col. 1.
his natural body, but his mystical body, as all true Christians are the body
of Christ, so every one is a member of his body, not hipocrites for they are no
more true members 1. Cor. 12
of Christ's body, then a brazen noase, or a woden leg, is a member of a man's
body: but true christians that are by faith and the spirit of regeneration
united to Christ: for though Christ be in heaven, and we in earth, yet as the
foot, which is a great way distant from the head, is by certain sinues and
veins, springing from the head, joined to the head, so Christians are by
certain spiritual veins, as faith, hope, love, etc. joined unto Christ, he is
also called the husband, and the Church is called his wife, therefore as the
wife looses her own name, and bears the name of her husband, so we loose our
own name, and bear the name of Christ, and are called christians, and as a
Acts. 14.
wife is endowed with the goods of her husband, so are we with the riches of
Christ.

He is called the vine and we the branches, John 15.
from whom we receive spiritual iuce and virtue, to bring forth fruit
acceptable to God and profitable to men, for as Adam did not only make us
guilty, but also corrupt us so Christ does not only make us innocent, but also
sanctifies us.

2 Hereof comes that mystical and spiritual aliance and kindred that is
between Christ and his people, therefore he calls those that do his fathers
will, his mother, Mat. 12.
his brother, and sister, how poor or base soever they be in the world. yet if
they be of the right streine of christianity, they be of the most royal blood,
and more honorable then they which come of the houses of Valoys, of Austria, or
any earthly descent, because they have God for their father, the Church for
their mother, Christ for their elder brother, and are made kings, and Queens
of heaven, as one says; Those that be noble by their first birth, in the
world do become unnoble by vices, so those that be unnoble by their first
birth, may become noble by a new birth and by virtues: therefore Peter calls
the faithful a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy nation, a
peculiar people. 1. Pet. 2.


3 Hereof comes that mutual exchange that is between Christ and us; he was
made with us the son of man, that we might be made with him the sons of
God: he by imputation and communication, took on him our sins and miseries,
that they might be imputed to us, his virtues and merits as the Apostle says,
he 2. Cor. 5.
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God by him.

This is a great mystery, that his poverty should be our fitches; that his
bondage 2. Cor. 8. 9.
should be our liberty: that his condemnation before Pilate, should be our
iustificatibefore God; that his stripes should be the Romans 8. 2.
cure of our wounds; that he should be Esa. 53. 5.
joined with thieves and robbers; that we might be joined with Saints and
Angels; Luke 23 Gal. 3. 13
that his curse should be our blessing: that he should overcome death by dying,
and that his death should be our life; that he He. 2. 14.
should descend into hell, that is, into hellish torments, that he might lift
us up to Mat. 26.
heaven and happiness. Therefore we are said to be crucified with him, to be
buried Gal. 2. 19 Romans 6. 4 Col. 3. 1. Ephe. 2. 6
with him, to be quickened with him, Ephesians. 2. 5. to be raised up with him, Col.
3. 1. to be ascended into heaven with him; for at the first Adam was not a
private, but a public person, in whom all mankind was included: so Christ
the second Adam, was not a private but a public person, in whom the whole
Church is to be considered: therefore in Christ's death and satisfaction, in
Christ's resurrection and justification, in Christ's ascension, and
glorification we must see the death, resurrection, and ascension of the whole
Church, for as he has done and suffered all these things for the Church, so
the Church has done and suffered all those things in him, and shall at the last
receive the fruit of those things, by and with him, this is a great mystery:
that God is manyfested in the flesh, therefore he is called our Savior, which
is set forth in his Mat. 1. 21 1. Tim. 2. 5.
name Jesus; he is called our mediator, to make intercession for us: where by
the way noate; that the Popish book called the Ladies Psalter, made by
Bonauenter, is blasphemous, because it appoints other mediators besides him: he
is called our Lord, to 1. Cor. 8. 6. Ioh. 10. 9
defend and govern us, he is called our door and way to bring us to the
father; he is called our Physician to cure our spiritual diseases, Mat. 9. 12
and to restore us to health: he is called John. 10. 11. John. 6.
our shepherd to gather us into the Church: he is called the bread of life, to
norish us to life everlasting; he is called our Ephe. 2.
peace to pacific our conscience, he is called Tim.
our hope because he is all in all unto us. Therefore it is said; we are
complet in him: Col. 2. 16
and therefore Paul says, I desire to know Cor.
nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and Phil. 3. 8.
I count all things dung that I may win Christ who does communicate to us not
only his name, his nature, and his graces, but also his privileges that we
should be Kings and Priests, that we should be Kings and Priests, that we
should have interrest in the creatures; and be waited on of Angels, therefore
this is a great mystery, that God is manifested in the flesh.

4 From hence comes the mutual feeling and affection that is between Christ
and us, that he takes the injuries done to us, as done to himself, as he says
to Saul; why persecutest thou me, when he went to Damascus, to Acts. 9.
persecute the Church: and he takes the benefits bestowed upon his members, to
be bestowed on himself, as he shall say at the last day, when I was hungry ye
gave me meat, Mat. 25.
when I was thirsty ye gave me drink, and he expoundes his meaning, in saying,
that which ye did to one of these little ones that believes in me, ye did to
me; as that which is done to the hand or foot, by reason of a natural
conjunction reaches to the head, so that which is done to Christians, by reason
of a spiritual conjunction; reaches to Christ the head of the Church, and on
the other part, from hence comes the feeling griefs of Christians: when
Christ is blasphemed or dishonored, as David says: T^^ rebukes of those that
rebuked, they are fallen on me: and the feeling comfort and rejoicing that
Christians have when Christ is honored, his kingdom furthered, and his will
obeyed. And from hence comes not only the simpathie and ^eeling that
Christians have with Christ their head, but that they have one with another as
members of the same body; as the Apostle requires, Be like affected Romans 12
one toward another; mourn with those that mourn, and rejoice with those
that rejoice: as in a natural body there is not that feeling with the members
of another body as of the same; so in Christ's mystical body, there is not
that feeling among the members of a strange body, as among those that be the
true Church and body of Christ: therefore the scripture makes th^^ a mark of
a true Christian and disciple, John. 13 1. John. 3.
to love thy brethren.

This is the great mystery, that the son of God is manifested in the flesh,
who^ he is God, is our father; as he is man, he^ our brother; and as he is God
and man, ^^ is our atonement maker: therefore let ^ not so look to his
humanity, as we forg^ his divinity, least we be offended at ^ baseness as the
Jews were, who call^ him the Carpenters son: and let us n^ so look to his
divinity, as we forget his humanity, least we be dismaide at his brightness,
as the man was that said; depart from me, for I am a sinful man.

But let us so consider the uniting of these two natures in his person; that in
him we may see our happy condition, and know assuredly that as there is no
salvation to them that are without him, so there is no condemnation to them
that Romans ^.
are in him: he knows not religyon that knows not this, says Master Calvin.

Justified in the spirit. All that which follows in this verse, serves but for
the amplification of this mystery, therefore having been somewhat large in the
former words, I will be brief in the rest. Justification sometime in the
Scripture does signify, to account a thing or a person just and pure that is
not so of himself, and so it is taken commonly, when it respects us, who are
by God esteemed just by grace, that are not so by nature: but so it cannot be
taken here, for in this sense Christ cannot be said to be justified, except it
be from our sins that he had taken upon him as our surety, as Paul says:
he Romans 4.
dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification: that is to say,
having by his Romans 4.
death paid the price of our sins, he was by his resurrection justified and
freed from them, and in him we are iustyfied from our sins, and the
punishments of them, because the penaltye of our sins being paid by him,
can no more be exacted of us, therefore Paul says, as by one man's
disobediene many were made sinners, so by the obedyence Romans 5.
of one many were made righteous: therefore contrary to the opinion of the
Papists, we must fetch our justification by the faith of the Gospel from him
that is just and has kept the law, and not from our selves that are unjust
and cannot keep the law, therefore says the Romans 3.
Apostle, we are justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of
the law, and yet faith does not iustyfie us as it is a quality in us, no more
then to see patience or any other grace, but as it is grace that lays hold of
Christ, neither is it the quantitye or strength of faith that does justify
us; but true faith how little soever that lays hold of the strength of
Christ; but I will stand no longer upon this point, though it be a special
part of this misterye of godliness because the Apostle does not speak of
this kind of iustyfication here as appears, when he says he was
iustyfied in the spirit.

Therefore justification is here to be taken in another sense: that is to allow
or acknowledge a thing or a person to be that which he is in himself: when
it seemed to some to be otherwise, as where Mat. 11.
it is said wisdom is justified of her children, that is acknowledged to be
excellent wisdom. Though other do deny it and account it foolishness in
this sense, the Apostle speaks here, when he says, Christ was justified in
the spirit, as if he should say though he were manifested in the flesh, and
seemed to be a base person; yet he was found and acknowledged to be the
everlasting and glorious God: to the like effect the Apostle 1. Pet. 3.
Peter speaks of him saying: He suffered in the flesh, and was quickened in
the spirit, which is the same that Saint John speaks after he had said,
the word John. 1.
was made flesh, he adds, we saw the glory thereof as the glory of the
only begotten son of the father, full of grace and truth, for though the
son of God took on him our humane nature and frailety he did not lay aside
his divine nature and majesty, but only covered under the veil of the
flesh; as the sun though it be covered with clouds, yet the bright beams
thereof do sometime break out and show forth it self to those that have
eyes; so the beams of Christ's Godhead did sometimes break out and appear to
those that were not spirituallye blind, and not only in his excellent words
and Doctrine, speaking as it is said of him, so as never man spoke, but in his
glorious transfiguration Mat. 17.
upon the mountain, which Peter calls the holy Mount, where says 2. Pet. 1.
he; We saw his glory: And also in his notable and divine miracles turning
water into wine, feeding many thousands with a few loaves and fishes, causing
the rough sea and winds to be still, making warlike soldiers to fall
backewarde, and even the devils to give place at his commandment: therefore
when it is said here, he was justified in the spirit, the meaning is, he was
apparently showed, known and acknowledged to be God in the flesh.

Seen of Angels. He was not only iustyfied and acknowledged to be the son
of God in the flesh by men, but also by Angels, who were acquainted with it,
and witnesses of it; they brought tidings of his birth to the shepheardes; they
brought Luke 1.
tidings of his resurrection to the women, Luke 24.
they were behoulders of his ascension with the Apostles; and they did not
only Acts. 1.
see him, but adore and worship him, and Heb. 1.
not only the good Angels, but the evil Angels did acknowledge him: this
Mar. 3.
is a great misterye that does appear wonderful to all creatures both good
and bad, that a babe lying in a manger, and a man hanging upon the cross,
should be the son of God and Savior of the world.

Preached to the Gentiles. This is a further amplifying of this mystery, for
Christ did not take flesh to the end to be hid and vnvnknowne, especially after
he had performed the work of redemption; for although he bad his disciples to
show his transfiguration Mat. 17.
to no man, till he was risen again from the dead, yet after that, he would
have both it and all other parts of religion published to all men, when the
woman powered a box of ointment on his head, he said; wheresoever this Gospel
should be preached, that which she had done should be spoken of for a
memorial of her, thereby showing that the Gospel should be preached through the
world, and if that little that she did before his death should be published
and praised, how much more his death it self.

This mystery of religion was hid 4000. years, or thereaboutes from the
Gentiles a long time, it was contained in one family and in one kingdom, in
which respect, the Apostle calls the calling of the Gentiles to the knowledge
of Christ, by the Gospel a mystery hid from the ages Ephe. 3.
past; but when the fullness of time was come, then God sent his son in the
flesh, a light to be revealed to the Gentiles, Luke 2.
as Simeon speaks according to that which was promised to Abraham; in thy
seed shall all the nations in the earth be blessed, therefore our Savior
Christ commanded his disciples to go to all nations and preach the things he
had commanded, Mar. 28.
for which purpose he gave them extraordinary gifts, and among the rest the
guifte of speaking with diverse Acts. 2.
tongues, according to that which Paul says, he ascended up on high, and led
captivity captive and gave guiftes to men, and appointed some to be Apostles,
etc. (...). 4.
Now as they were commanded and enabled to preach to the Gentiles, so they did
as we may see throughout the book of the Acts of the Apostles: they preached
first Acts. 13
indeed to the Jews, but when they refused they turned to the Gentiles,
although they suffered reproof and persecution for the same, at the hands of
the Jews, because the Jews misliked the calling of the Gentiles, some of them
of ignorance; thinking the promises belonged only to them, and not to the
Gentiles, except such as should enter into the Church by the ancient door of
circumcision, and some of them of duty thinking their dignity, of being the
only people of God would fall, if the Gentiles should be taken, in which is set
forth, in the example of the elder brother; who envied Luke 15.
the entertainemen of the prodigal son.

Now this mystery of calling of the Gentiles, is so much the more mystical,
because the Jews who were the natural Oliue-tree were broken, and the Gentiles
who were of the wild Oliue-tree were grafted; in this is a great mystery, that
the Gentiles that were poor beggars which lay by the hedges Mat. 22.
and high ways, as it is set forth in the parable, should be called to the
marriage of the Kings son, that no Gentiles that were strangers and
forreners as the Apostle speaks to the Ephesians, should be Citizens with the
saints, and of the household of God: and as the Apostles did preach to the
Gentiles, so the sum of their Preaching and Sermons was this mystery of
religion, that God was manifested in the flesh, as we may see in the Acts,
where Acts. 4.
they teach; that there is no name under heaven whereby we may be saved, but
the name of Jesus.

Believed on in the world. Having said, Christ, God and man, was preached to
the Gentiles; now he says, He was believed on the world: Whereby we see, that
preaching goes before faith: as Paul says; How shall they believe except they
hear, and Romans 10.
how shall they hear without a Preacher: and Peter says; God chose him that
the Gentiles Acts. 15.
should hear the Gospel, and believe the preaching of the law, though it
has an excellent use to be a Schoolemaister, to Gal. 3.
lead us to Christ, and to prepare us for Christ, as it did those to whom John
Baptist preached the doctrine of repentance, Luke 3.
yet it cannot work faith in men, that is the office of the Gospel, which
sets forth Christ Jesus, and this mystery of our redemption that he has
wrought in the flesh, as we have heard before: therefore is the Gospel called
the word of faith, which the Gentiles did hear and believe, for although all
that do hear, do not believe; yet none can believe but those that hear,
therefore it is said: It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
those that 1. Co^. 1.
believe.

Whereupon I infer this brief exhortation, (as a Parentheses) that those who
would be religious, should not think reading either by others or by
themselves, sufficient but that therewithal they do join ordinary hearing,
the word preached, which is the just, lively and effectual means that God
has ordained for the beginning Gal. 3.
and increasing of this grace, of faith, and all other gifts of sanctification.

For Christ being preached to the Gentiles, he was not preached in vain, but
as the Apostle says, he was believed on in the world; not of all the world,
for the Apostle 2. These. 3
says, all men have not faith, but in Acts. 13.
the world, that is as Luke says in the Acts, As many as were ordained to
eternal life believed, and therefore is true faith, which does apprehend
Christ, called the faith of Gods elect, which is according to Godliness.
Titus. 1.


This is not the least part of this great mystery that Christ is believed on in
the world, some marvel that all which hear the word so plainly, and
plentifully preached, do not believe, but rather considering the impediments
of faith: that are within us and without us, it is marvel that any do believe,
for faith is not of our selves by nature, it is the gift of Gods gra^e, and
Ephe. 2.
another manner of thing then many imagine, seeing no man knows it but those
that have it, as no man knows the sweetenes of honey but those that have tasted
it.

I will not enter into a common place of faith, because I purpose not to go
from the Apostles purpose, only thgat we may not be deceived in judging of it,
as many are, let us know that faith is a precious and unspeakable gift; which
God by his holy spirit works in the hearts of his elect in measure, whereby a
man does apply Christ and all his good things to himself, with comfortable
assurance, and whereby he is provoked and enabled to thankful obedience; thus
Christ being preached, he was believed on in the world, not talked on only,
but believed on also, he was talked on of many, and believed on of some though
but few in comparison as it is now, but we must not rest in lip faith, but
labor for heart faith, not rest in faith of the flesh, but labor for faith of
the spirit, not rest in the faith of common Protestants; but labor for the
faith of true Christians, not rest in a dead faith that is without finite, but
labor for that faith which may ma^e us alive from dead works, not rest in
such a counterfeit faith as is overcome of the world, but labor for that faith
that ^^oth overcome the world for Christ (...) overcome for us, except ^^ (...)
us, this is the commandment of the Gospel: that we believe in him whom God
has sent; that we believe this mystery, no^ only that God became man, but that
he did it for the salvation of men, and not only of other men, for so far
hipocrites may go in believing; but of our selves every one must believe, that
Christ so wrought the redemption of the Church generally, as he did it for him
perticulerlye, as a member of the same, and if there had been no more he would
have done it for him alone.

This is a part of this mystery, to believe that Christ being in heaven, and we
in earth, Christ being glorious and we base, Christ being pure and we defiled,
should be one with us and we with him.

But mark that it was said before Christ was preached to the Gentiles, and now
he was believed on in the world: the Gentiles were great sinners, yet when
Christ was preached, they believed in him. Some may thereupon ask this
question; Does Christ belong to wicked men? no, not so long as they be wicked:
but the Apostles did preach this mystery of forgiveness of sins and
salvation in Christ, to those that do repent, as Peter says; Amend your lives,
Acts. 2.
and be baptized in the name of the Lord jesus, for the remission of sins:
therefore those that would believe this mystery, must repent of their sins,
for the faith that wicked men boast of is but a fancy.

Repentance is a godly sorrow, rising from the sight of our sins, and the
punishment due unto them, which causes a man to hate the devil, evil men, and
evil things; to love God, good men, and good things in his mind, and to
forsake the devil evil men, and evil things: and to follow God, good men,
and good things, in his manners: but it is not so needful to show now what
repentance is, as to persuade men to go about it: neither is it so necessary
to show whether faith or repentance be wrought first in a man, seeing they are
always joined together, and are at no time separated in a good man: repentance
though it may be said to be the last in nature, yet it is the first in feeling.

Thus the Gentiles when they heard the Gospel, believed in Christ, as we may
see in Zacheus, and in those that burned their Luke 19 Acts. 19.
books of curious Arts at Ephesus, and many other: therefore those that
became Christians, are in the Epistles of Paul called Saints; and if any that
had been received into the Church upon a counterfeite show of repentance, did
return to his old sins, the scripture appoints him to be cast out and
delivered to Satan, as unworthy of a Christian estate; but those that did
indeed believe in Christ, became true Christians, such as were redeemed,
justified and sanctified by him.

Received up into glory. That is his manhood, for his Godhead was always in
glory; but the Apostle means he was received into glory in his manhood, that
he might enjoy that life which was promised to those that keep the law; this
is that he prayed for, Father glorify thy son with that glory that I had
with thee before the world John. 17.
was: This is that the Evangelist Mark speaks of, He was taken up into
heaven: Mar. 16.
The manner of his ascension thither, is set down in the first of the Acts.
Acts. 1.


Therefore he is not here corporally upon earth, as the Papists say, for we
believe in the creed, he assended into heaven which must contain him until
his coming again, Acts. 3.
this is that is said of him, he is crowned Heb. 2.
with glory and honor, not such glory only as the Saints and Angels have, but
the highest degree of glory belonging to the head of the Church; though he were
base for a time, yet is he glorious for ever, which those that believe in him
did see by says, as the thief on the Cross that said, Lord have mercy on me,
when thou come in thy kingdom, and therefore though in the primative Church,
the friends of the Church did expostulate with them, and say will ye believe
and suffer for one that was crucified, yet by faith they overcame such reasons,
and knew he was another manner of person, then they took him, as it is said,
he was received into glory.

This is that which is said of him, that he sits at the right hand of God,
Ephe. 1.
that is as Paul expounded it, exalted far above all principalitye and
power, Phil. 2.
as it is said to the Philippians, he humbled himself to the death of the
Cross, wherefore God has exalted him, and given him a name above all names,
that at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow: this he says of himself,
all power is given to me both in heaven and in earth, that as he has redeemed
his people from their enemies, so he might defend them from them.

This is a great mystery, that he which was brought so low, should be exalted
so high: but is this all that he was glorified in his person? No, but that he
might glorify his members as Paul says to the Thesselonians: 2 Thessalonians. 1.
He shall be gloryfied in his Saints, and made marvelous in all those that do
believe; he laid not down our nature again, when he had wrought our
redemption, but carried it with him into heaven, as one says when Christ went
away from us, he left us his pawn, that is his spirit, to assure us he
would come again to us, and took with him our pawn that is our flesh, to
assure us we should come to him, according as he says in John, I go to
prepare a place for you, that where I am there you may be also.

This is the misterye that the son of God came down to the earth tofetch us
up to heaven that after he had sanctified our humayne nature in himself, he
might glorify us with himself; as Paul says: He Phil. 3.
shall change our vile body, that it may be made like his glorious body; which
how excellent an estate it is, no tongue is able to express, As the worst is
past with Christ, so the best is to come with Christians, for he would not have
come from glory to baseness, but to have drawn us from baseness to glory:
therefore let us be content with our Savior Christ himself, to pass by the
cross to this crown, where we shall receive the end of our faith, which is
the salvation 1. Pet. 1.
of our souls.

The necessities of Religion, or Man's Renouation.
JOHN. 3. 3. Jesus answered except a man be borne again, he cannon see the
kingdom of God. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
Our Savior Christ being excellent and famous when he was upon the earth,
many resorted to him to hear his doctrine and see his miracles; and among the
rest there was one Nichodemus who was a Pharisie, a teacher and Ecclesiastical
ruler among the Jews, that came to him, but secretly by night, fearing the
displeasure of the rest of his sect (who loved not Christ nor his disciples) as
some looking John. 9.
too much to men, have a kind of fleshly shame or bashfulnesse in well doing,
and the higher any man is lifted up in wealth, authority or society with great
men, the stronger impediments he has to keep him from Christ.

But when he comes to our Savior Christ, he salutes him reverently and calls
him Rabbi, a title and salvation then commonly used to learned men, and he
says to him; we know (speaking of himself and his company) thou art a teacher
sent from God, for no man could do those miracles which thou do, except God
were with him; he knew him not to be the Messtas, but took him for some
special Prophet, the rest of the Pharisees asked him, by what authority he did
those miracles, seeing he was not approved by them that were the gouerners of
the Church, but Nichodemus being somewhat wiser then the rest, confesses he had
authority sufficient from God.

In the former chapter they required a sign, of him to confirm his calling if
it were extraordinary, as Moses confirmed his calling, by turning his rod
into a serpent, and Elias by dividing Iord^^ with his mantle; but Nichodemus
confesses there were signs ennow, for says he: No man could do those things
that thou do except God were with him. Now although our Savior Christ might
have taken exception to his manner of coming by night, and reproved his fear
of men, and ignorance, that he knew him not to be more then a Prophet, yet
letting pass these words that I have read, he begins with the chief point,
and that which was the cause of those faults in him, which was the want of
grace, and therefore says.

Except a man be borne again, etc. As if he should say, although thou do
call me master and thereby professest thy self to be a scholar, yet I do
not account thee fit for my disciple except thou be borne again.

For by the kingdom of heaven here, is not meant the kingdom of glory in the
next life, as some have taken it, but the kingdom of grace in this life, that
is, the true Church, as it is taken in the fifth of Matthew; the Church is called
Mat. 5. 19
the kingdom of heaven, because the laws whereby it is governed are from
heaven, the guiftes wherewith it is endued, are from heaven: the persons that
are members of the true Church, are Citizens of heaven; and because the Church
is as it were the suburbs, through the which we must enter the Kingdom of
heaven.

It is as if our Savior Christ should say, thou have made a journey to hear
me, and thou have used good words unto me, but that is not enough, thou can
not be accounted a true member of the Church, except thou have good thoughts
and good works as well as good words; except thou be borne again, that is,
generally made better both in thy mind and manners.

Let us mark, our Savior does not flatter him, though he were a great man,
but seeks to profit him; some do much extol small things in great men, if
they will hear a sermon or two, give courteous words and entertainment to a
minister, they greatly commend them, although their minds and manners be as
unformed as their natural parents left them; but we must follow our Savior
Christ's example to Nichodemus; except they be borne again, and reformed in
heart and hand, as well as in tongue, except they be indeed generally sanctified
as well as they seem to be so in some particular, it is nothing worth, although
they would go twenty mile to hear the choicest Preacher in the country,
except they do reform themselves by the word, and conform themselves to that
which is taught therein, they be no Christians. This doubtless was an
unpleasant answer to Nichodemus, for howsoever a natural man can be content to
have something added to him, yet he likes not to have all condemned that is in
him, and to have his estate called into question.

But our Savior Christ not regarding what would please him, but profit him,
condemns his first birth, and tells him, he must of necessity be borne
again: neither does he speak of Nichodemus in particular, but of all men in
general: for says he; Except a man be borne again: and not of men only but
women also; for that which was Nichodemus his condition, is the condition of
all by their first birth: the Potter would not break his pot to make it again
except it were ill made; so God would not regenerate men, except they were
evil generated.

Therefore our Savior Christ does in these words both condemn our first
birth, and urge the necessity of a new birth: as if he should say; except a man
in the time of his life become better then he is by his birth, except a man be
again begotten of God, who is a better father in the womb Iam. 1. 18
of the Church, that is a better mother by the word; that is immortal and
better 1. Pet. 1. 23.
seed, and so becomes a new creature and has better qualities, he shall not
have a better inheritance. It is as if he should say, as a man is by his first
birth become unlike to God, and like to the devil, and therefore belongs to
hell, so he must by a second birth be made unlike the devil, and like to God,
or else he cannot come to heaven: there is no other way to heaven for any man
but this: some will grant that Heathens, Papists, and those that be out of the
church are in a dangerous case, but they think all those that be in the
Church, that have bin baptized, and do profess religion are well, but as
Nichodemus was in the Church among the Jews, so there be in the visible Church
among us bastards, that have the same mother with true children, but not the
same father: as our Savior Christ said to some of the Jews; Ye call God
father, John. 8.
but ye are of your father the devil, for his works ye do: Therefore he
says here, Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
It is much like the Mat. 1^.
speech Christ uses to his Desciples; Except ye be converted and become as
little children, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Many that are naturalles in their old birthe and unregenerate, will say they
hope to be saved and to go to heaven, but seeing our Savior Christ says the
contrary, what is their saying? yea our Savior Christ does use a double
asseueration against their assercion; ^erily, verily I say unto you, except a
man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

Adam at the first was nobly borne, the son of God, and heir of all the
world, but by his fall he tainted his blood, not only to himself, but to all
his posterity; so that since his fall, all that are begotten of him and his
seed, are base borne and illegitimate: but as Princes have regal authority
to restore the posterity of Traitors to their former and fathers first estate,
and to create Dukes, Earls and Barons, of those that were none; so God has
much more power and authority to restore and recreate such as he will make
noble.

Therefore those who are regenerate and borne again, are Gentlemen indeed, of
how base account soever they be in the world, as Peter speaking to the
regenerated Christians that were afflicted and persecuted, says; Ye are a
chosen generation, 1. Pet. 2.
a royal Priesthood, a Kinglye nation. But those that are not regenerate, are
base, unnoble and miserable, howsoever accounted among men, therefore except a
man be borne again, it had been better for him he had never been borne; or
that he had died in his first birth, that his sins might have been the fewer
and his punishments the less.

Nichodemus said, how can a man be Verse. 4.
borne that is old: let us mark, he applies that which our Savior spoke
generally to himself perticularly, as if he should say, if a man must be borne
again, then I must be borne again that am an old man; this we are to imitate
in him, to apply general doctrine to our selves perticulerly, and this
doctrine of regeneration especially, for many have lived 40. yea 60. year that
are not an hour old in Christianity: Nichodemus speaks not this in scorn,
as some may think, but indeed of ignorance, as ye may see in the tenth verse.

It is as if he should say to Christ, thou say a man must be borne again,
but old men their mothers are dead, and if they were not? how should they that
are stiff and vnwildesome enter into their mothers womb and be borne again?
Who would have looked for such an answer as this from so great a clarke; but
the generation of the Papists are as gross as the generation of the Pharisees,
who when our Savior Christ says: Except ye eat the flesh of the some of
John. 6.
man, and drink his blood ye have no life in you, they understand it
carnally, that men must eat him, and not one y flesh and blood but bones also,
in the sacrament, which is as palpable as that conceit of Nichodemus, that a
man should enter into his mothers womb again and be borne; and where they say
God can do it, that is; turn the bread in the sacrament into the body of
Christ, so he can do the other; for as he can make a Camel to go through a
needles eye, so he can make a man to enter into his mothers womb; but we must
not only look what God can do, but what he will do, for men can do many
things that they will not do, so we must think of God: but by this speech of
Nichodemus, and that of the Papists, we may see how true that saying of the
Apostle is; the natural man perceiues not the things 1. Co^. 2.
that are of God, because they are spiritually discerned, but although
Nichodemus did not understand that which our Savior Christ spoke, yet he did
well to ask a question about it: some men if they do not conceive a thing
that is taught them, they will reject it, and say they will never believe it,
measuring the Preachers doctrine by their shallow understanding, and making
that which they have already conceived, a rule of all that is preached: but we
must believe that which the Scripture teaches, though we cannot conceive it,
as the mystery of the Trinity, the doctrine of the resurrection of the body,
and many other of Gods works and words cannot be comprehended; yet as one
says, They may not be reprehended: therefore we must not shut the door
against instruction, through presumptuous imagination; but think that there be
other men, especially our teachers, which knows that that we know not: and in
this persuasion of our selves and others, let us ask questions about the
things we understand not, especially those that we cannot be ignorant of and do
well.

It cannot be but many hearers are ignorant of diverse things that are spoken by
the Minister, and that most are ignorant of some things, and yet almost none
will ask a question about any thing, but as they were ignorant before, so they
continue ignorant still, as if they did love John. 3
darkness more then light: curious questions for which God has left no
answer, many will ask; As what God did before he made the world? why he made
it no sooner? How long the world shall continue? with what fire it shall be
destroyed? whether we shall know our kinsfolks in heaven? and such like, as
a fool may move more such questions in an hour, then the wisest man in the
world can answer in seven year: Therefore one says, to him that asked such
a question; I cannot tell (says he) that no man can tell, if ye will know,
ye must tarry till ye shall know, as ye are known. And captious questions,
such as one asked our Savior Christ, tempting him: Whether Mat. 22.
it were lawful to pay tribute to Caesar or not, some will ask, which must
be answered with silence or supposition; but necessary questions concerning
regeneration, faith, repentance, and the practice of godliness, few are
exercised in them, which shows a careless mind: but he that is desirous to
keep a good conscience, will enquire how they may do it.

If men would do as the Disciples of Mat. 13.
our Savior Christ did, and as good men did, Number. 6. 9. 1. Cor. 7. 1. Acts. 2.
observe their doubts, and write them either in their minds or in their tables,
and propound them in convenient place and company; they might be wiser then
they be, and do their duties better then they do, and avoid many sins that
they fall into, as the proverb is, the blind eats many a Fly, yea many a
Spider.

Jesus answered, Verily I say to thee, except Verse. 5.
a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven.

Because Nichodemus asked how a man could be borne again that was old, our
Savior Christ tells him how, and because he understood Christ's former words
carnally, he tells him they must be understood spiritually.

The Papists take these words to be spoken of baptism, and say, except a
man be baptized he cannot be saved, putting a necessity in baptism unto
salvation; it is true indeed that baptism is necessary, and that to salvation,
as all the means of salvation which God has appointed are necessary and
cannot be contemned without peril of condemnation; but baptism is not
necessary to salvation in their sense, as if none could be saved except they be
baptized, for the thief that was crucified with Luke 23. 1
Christ, who was converted after baptism, was instituted, was saved, and yet
he was not baptized, so if any should die without baptism when they would and
cannot have it, it hinders not their salvation: if infants die before they be
brought to baptism, though negligence herein may be a sin in the parents,
yet is it no prejudice to the child, no more then it was to those children
that died without circumsition when they might not apply it before the eight
day, for if the want of baptism should be shut from salvation, then it were
possible to overthrow the election of God, which Mat. 24.
Christ denies.

But although baptism be called the (...) and sacrament of regeneration,
because it does signify and outwardly represent to our eyes, that clensing and
renewing which the holy Ghost does work inwardly in our hearts, yet it is not
our Savior Christ's purpose in this place to speak of baptism at all: but to
teach Nichodemus that in his former speech he meant not a carnal but a
spiritual birth, and the reason why he names water, is because often in the
Scripture the spirit is set forth by water, to John. 7 38.
show the working of the spirit in those that are borne again, as water does
wash away the filthiness of the body, and make the same more clean, so the
spirit does cleanse and purify the soul: therefore it 1. Cor. 6. 11.
is called the spirit of sanctification, so that in these words it is as our
Savior Christ should say, I do not mean, that a man should be borne again
carnally, but that he should be borne again spiritually; as ye are borne
first like your earthlye father who is flesh, so you must be borne again like
your heavenly Father, who is spirit, and be made pertaker as Peter speaks,
of his divine nature, not in substance 2. Pet. 1. 4
but in qualities: as he says; B^^ Leui. 11. 4. 4. Mat. 5.
ye holy as I am holy: And as Christ says* Be ye merciful as your heavenly
father is merciful.

And in that Christ says here, A man must be borne again of the spirit, it
show(...) that regeneration consists not in a civil reformation, such as the
laws of the country, the company that men keep, and the respect of their
credit and outward safety, may draw them unto; but he means that Christian
reformation which the spirit, through the knowledge and faith of the word of
God, does frame men unto, begetting a knowing in or judgment, a hating in
affection, and forsaking in conversation of those things which are evil in
them by their first birth, that are contrary to the word, and that tend to
condemnation: and on the contrary, begetting in them a knowing in judgment, a
love in affection, and following in conversation of those things which be good,
that they have by a new birth that are agreeable to the word, and that tend
to salvation, Except ye be borne again of the spirit (thus says our Savior
Christ) ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God. To the same effect spoke
^ohn Baptist to some of the other Pharisees who Luke. 3. 8
came to him to be baptized, which was an entrance into the Church; Bring forth
(says he) first fruits, worthy amendment of life, as if he should say: What
should you do in the Church, or what should you do with the badge or name of
Christianity, when you are still corrupt and naughty men.

So our Savior Christ says to Nichodemus here, What should thou or any
such as thou art, do in the new state of the Church, where God is a King,
rules by his word and grace, and where men and women are subi^ct to him in
mind and manners, whent hou art still an old man in the strength of thy
ignorance and natural corruption, for the Church is the door of the kingdom
of God, and none are to be le^ into the kingdom of God in this world so far
as men can judge, that shall have no place in the kingdom of God in the world
to come: for if the Apostle would have known and gross sinners to be(...)
thrust out of the Church when they be in 1. Cor. 5.
then he would have them to be kept ou^ that they come not in, and in that
Phi(...) did admit Sin on Magus, it was because h(...) Acts. 8.
did dissemble that which was not in him and pretended faith and regeneration
when(...) he had it not, but though he deceived P(...) lip, he could not deceive
Peter, who perce(...) ued that he was an hipocr^^e and in the ga(...) of
bitterness, we now receive children (...) baptism and enter them into the
Church because the parents being faithful, the(...) ^eede is holy in the
account of the seruan(...) of God, as the Apostle says; but we mu(...) 1. Cor.
7. 14.
see some testimonies of grace in themselue(...) before we receive them to the
other sacr(...)meant: if any one will object ^udas, he w(...) then no open
offender, and also it was th(...) the Scripture might be fulfilled.

And those that have by baptism been^ enticed into the Church, must know
th(...) if when they come to years of understanding, they do not answer to
that they professed in Baptism, to renounce the devil and his works, and to
believe and obey Gods word, though they have a place in the Church and be
accounted Christians among, men, yet they shall be shut out of the kingdom
of heaven with the Mat. 25.
five foolish Virgins. Therefore says our Savior Christ, Except a man be
borne of water and of the spirile, except he been cleansed from corruption,
and made partaker of the guiftes of sanctification, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God.

But if a man be borne again, he shall enter; our Savior Christ uses the
like speech in Math. 19. 9. He that puts away his wife except it be for
fornication, and marries another, commits adul^erie but if it be for
fornication; it is otherwise then so in this place, he says, Except a man be
borne again he cannot see the kingdom of God; but if he be borne again, he
shall see it both here and hereafter, as Peter says; Blessed be God who has
begotten us again to 1. Pet. 1.
inheritance immortal, undefiled, rescrued in ^eauen for us. It is not indeed
our Savior Christ's purpose to set forth the excellency of a regenerate and
Christian estate, that is showed in other places of Scripture: but his purpose
is to show the necessity of it, and that without it a man cannot be saved.

That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. Verse. 6.
Our Savior Christ confirms his answer to Nichodemus, as if he should say,
I would have thee understand I did not mean, when I said, a man must be
borne again, that a man should enter into his mothers womb again, as thou
did carnally take me: for if he could or should, that would not profit
him, because it is carnal and all one with the first birthe, for that which is
borne of the flesh, is flesh.

By flesh, in the first place is meant the substance of flesh; and in the
second place the corruption of flesh: as if he should say; that which is
borne of natural parents bodilye, is sinful and corrupt. If Adam had stood
in his first estate, that which should have been borne of the flesh had not
been corrupt but holy: but since Adam fell, all that are naturallye borne of
him are flesh, that is to say, corrupt both in body and soul, and not only
the inferior parts of the soul, as the thoughts and imaginations thereof,
which in Gen^sis are said to be evil Genesis 6. 5.
continuallye, but also the higher parts of the soul, as the wisdom and
conscience. As Paul speaks to the Romans; Romans 8. (...)
The wisdom of the flesh is emnitie against God: and to Titus; Their
conscience is defiled. Tit. 1. 15


And as the soul is corrupted, so is the body and the parts thereof;
therefore Romans 3
the Scripture speaks of some men, and says: Their eyes are full of
adultery, and the poison of Aspes is under their lips: their hands are full
of blood, their feet run to evil. Therefore the Ephe. 2. 5
Apostle says of all natural men, They are dead in trispasses.

Therefore when the Papists say, there is free will in men by nature, and some
disposition to goodness, they speak contrary to our Savior Christ, That
which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. Let them show what part of a man is
uncontrolled in the Scripture: and in what part, either of religion or
conversation, we are not directed from the highest point of ^aith to the
lowest part of manners, as how to eat and drink, and to apparel our selves.

Therefore whatsoever the Papists do ignorantly speak, we must know, as it
is impossible for us to do any thing belonging to this life, till we be borne;
so it is to do any thing belonging to a better life, till we be borne again:
for we are not sufficient (says the Apostle) of our selves to think a good
thought, but all our sufficiency Phil. 2. 13
is of God, who works in us both the will and the deed, that is, by a
spiritual and new birth, for that which is borne of the flesh is flesh.

It is true that the corruption of our first birthe does not show it self in
all alike, but in some more then in other: some are so incontinent, that their
own wives cannot serve them, but are like fed horses, neighing after their
neighbors wives; some are so intemperate, that they become Iere. 5. 8.
like Swine in drunkenness and gormandize; some are so furious as they care
not who they revile and rail upon; some are so covetous that they will be
guile and deceive every one they deal withal: other natural men are more
civil in show, but no better in deed; some are in words as loving as Jonathan,
but in heart as spightfull as Absalon: some are in words as honest as Susanna,
but in deed, though secretly, as unchaste as Dalyla: some have new faces, but
old hearts; a new cloak but an old coat: yea those that have the best
natural guiftes, as wit, cloquence, knowledge of human sciences, and in
some points do^ seem to show forth special virtues; as it is said of
Socrates, he was so temperate, that he would never eat but when he was
hungry, and so pacient that he was never seen to be angry.

Scipio Affricanus is said to have been so pitty^ull, that he used his
captives as if they had been his own Souldyers. There are also great things
spoken of the Justice of Aristides, of the liberality of Mespania, and of the
chastitye of Lucretia.

But these, or whatsoever such things have been found in Heathens, they were
nothing else but gilded sins, because they proceeded from flesh, that is to
say, from pride, love of praise, and such like corruptions of nature, and not
from regeneration Mat. 6. 1.
and the spirit of sanctification. Therefore says our Savior Christ, That
which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: as if he should say, there is
nothing but corruption in a natural man, neither in his thoughts, in his
words, nor in his works, if we could but see the heart and the corners and
courses of a natural man's life, as it is indeed, it would seem more odious
unto us then any thing that ever we saw, for all that is borne of the flesh,
is flesh: and not only all that is in a man when he is borne is corrupt, but
all that afterward he does think, speak or do, according to his first
birthe, that is, according to his natural judgment, natural affection, and
natural conversation. Therefore the Apostle speaking of the estate of all
natural men, says; There is none that Romans 3.
does good, no not one.

For which cause we are commanded in the Scripture, to put off the corruptions
of our nature. Paul says to the Ephesians; Put of the old man which is
corrupt, Ephe. 4.
to purge them: As the same Apostle says to the Corinthians, Purge the old
^euin of 1. Cor. 5.
maliciousness and wickedness. To deny them, as our Savior Christ says:
He Mark. 8.
that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, that is, his own corrupt
judgment and affection, to cast them away: as the author to the Hebrews says;
Cast away (...). 12.
the things that press down: To mortify them, as it is said to the
Coll^sians; Mo^ti^ie your earthly members, and names diueis Col. 3.
perticulers to abstain from them: as Peter 1. Pet. 2.
says; Abstain from fleshlye lusts that fight against the soul. To have no
fellowship with them, as to the Ephesians Paul Ephe. 5.
says; Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
reprove them rather. To cleanse them, as the Holy Ghost says by ^ames;
Cleanse your hands Iam. 4.
ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wau^ring minded.

There be some things in nature indeed that must not be cast off, as the
faculties of the soul and members of the body, but whatsoever is corrupt in
nature must be laid aside: not judgment, but the corruption of judgment:
not affection, Ephesians. 4. 26
as some think all anger is sin, but the corruption of affection: So not the
members of the body, as some have taken those words of our Savior Christ;
Mat. 5. 29
If thine eye offend thee pluck it out, etc. but the corruption of those
members, and so of all the rest.

And as the Scripture does command us to cast off the corruption of nature
generally, so perticulerly, and says: Lie not, swear not, steal not, commit
not adultery, kill not, etc. Some will lay aside some sins in their manners,
but not the love of them in their minds, as the Pharisees were outwardly like
painted Tombs, but inwardly full of rottenness: some will leave some little
sins, but not great sins; as Herod that reformed many things, but would not
put away his brother Philips wife: and some will leave some great sins, but
not little Mark. 6.
sins, they will not forswear, but they will sweat in their common talk,
they will not rob openly, but they will deceive secretly.

But all these are borne of the flesh, and not of the spirit: In the new
history of Scot-land there is mention made of a controversy between Scotland
and Ireland, for an Island lying between them both, at length it was put to the
determination of a wise Frenchman, whose order was that a snake should be put
into the Island alive, and if it did still live, the Island should belong to
Scotland, and if not, it should belong to Ireland, because it is said there are
no snakes in Ireland; which is aleaged to this end, to show that if the
venomous corruptions of our nature do live and thrive in men, they belong to
the kingdom of Satan: for that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. And that which is borne of the spirit,
is spirit, That is, he that is a spiritual man, is spiritually 1. Cor. 2. 15.
minded, and walks after the spirit: as he that is borne of the flesh is
carnally minded, Romans 8. 1
and walks after the flesh, so he that is borne again of the spirit is
spiritually minded and manuered.

He means not that the substance of the spirit is infused into a regenerate
man, as the family do dream, but the qualities and guiftes of the spirit:
neither is it meant that a regenerate man that is borne of the spirit, is all
spirit, as a natural man is all flesh; for we must not think any man can be
perfect in this life. Paul says of himself which is true, much more Phil. 3.
12
of others, That he was not come to perfection, but only did strive unto it:
therefore to the Romans he complains of his imperfections, which he calls
the law Romans 7.
of his members or remnants of the flesh, that still did rebel against the
spirit: for although Saint John ^ayth; He that is 1. Ioh. 3. 9
borne of God sins not, yet the meaning is not, that he sins not at all:
for in the first Chapter he says; If we say we have no sin, we lie, and
sin in saying so.

But the meaning is as some take it, he sins not as he is borne of God, or
so far as he is regenerate, but as the most take it he sins not as he did
before he was regenerate, willingly and notoriouslye, therefore when our Savior
says, that which is borne of the spirit is spirit, the meaning is, he that is
regenerate is a spiritual man, not the flesh, but the spirit, not the
corruption of nature, but the sanctifying grace of God does rule and is
predominate in him.

Therefore the sins of the children of God are called infirmities, because
they proceed from corruption that is weakened and made infirm in them by
grace; and therefore the duties of the children of God are called good works
because they proceed from grace, but passing by our reason, our will, our
affection, our tongues, hands, and other members, that are corrupt by nature,
and but in part sanctified, they receive some defilement: yet because the
motion from whence they come, being the motion of Gods grace, the end whereto
they tend being Gods glory, and the ground whereon they stand being Gods
word is good, therefore they are called good works, are accounted good, and
accepted in the faith of Christ; who and whose works were absolutely good, and
therefore the works of those that are regenerate and believe in him, are
accounted as his are, for this cause a regenerate man is called a spiritual
man, taking his name of the more excellent part: as a man is called a
melancholic man, not as if he had no fleame or choler in him; but because
that humor bears the greatest sway in him: so a Christian is called a
spiritual man, not as if there were no remnantes of flesh in him, but because
the spirit bears the greatest swaye and over rules corruption in him:
therefore we must put a difference between justification and sanctification.
The Papists speak of such a sanctification as may justify a man before God,
but justification must be teached by faith from Christ Jesus, whose perfect
justice is imputed to those that believe: Gal. 3. 1^
our sanctification is always in this life imperfect and mingled with some
wantes: but yet so as regeneration makes a man exceedingly to differ from a
natural man: he that is of the flesh (says the Apostle) Romans 8. 5
savors the things of the flesh; that is corruption affectes them, delights
them, etc. But he that is of the spirit, that is as Christ says: Borne of
the spirit, saueurs the things of the spirit; a regenerate man in that he is
borne of God, loves his heavenly father and delights in him, but he that is
not borne of God but is a natural man, Job 27. 10.
does not, being nothing of kin to him. A regenerate man delights in the
law of Romans 7. 22. Ioh. 1. 20
God, an unregenerate man does not but hates the light; a regenera^e man
loves those that be regenerate, being the children of God and his Christian
brothers and sisters, Psalm. 16. 3
a natural man loves them not but rather hates them, as John shows in his
first Epistle.

A regenerate man does see and feel the remnants of corruption, and complains
Romans 7. 23.
of it: the natural man does not, but iustifies himself as the Pharisie did.
Luke 18. 11. The regenerate man would not do the evil Romans 7. 19.
that some time he does, and he would do the good that he does not, and that
good that he does he would do it better: the natural man does the evil that
he would, he does no good, nor has no mind to it, neither does he truly
desire to be any better then he is.

The regenerate man prays and cries Romans 8. 20.
Abba father, and by the spirit groans unto God for favor, for help against
temptation, for strength against sin, for grace to think, speak and do
better; the natural man spendes no prayers about these things; if he do, it is
but in few cold and fashionable words without affection of heart: the
regenerate man does truly and earnestly strive against the corruption of
nature, that Gal. 5. 1^
yet remains in him, and more and more overcome it, as Saloman says; In all
labor there is profit, the natural man does not so having nothing in him but
flesh. There is in a regenerate man as it were two men as Rebecca had two
nations in her womb, so a Christian has as it were two natures in his womb,
the members of the old man and the new man, of the fles^ and of the spirit,
as Paul says, the flesh resistes the spirit, and Gal. 5. 17.
the spirit resistes the flesh: therefore says Peter; abstain from fleshly
lusts, that fight against the ^oule; the striving against corruption is the
greatest exercise of a Christian, outward troubles and enemies are nothing
like it, when the flesh or corruption preuailes in the child of God; thereof
grows sorrow and grief, as David when he had sinned says, I go mourning
all the day, but when the spirit preuailes against the flesh thereof grows joy
and comfort.

But a natural man further then the fear of man's law, or the shame of the
world does enforce him, has no sorrow for his ^innes, except some few
examples, such as were Esau and Judas, whom God does touch with hellish
torments, that in them other great sinners might see as it were a toarch of
hell fire burning before their e^es: and as a natural man has no sorrow for
sin, further then fear of man or shame does force him, so he has no joy in
good things, further then pride or vainglory does prick him; so that to use
the common similitude of the scripture, as we may know a good tree from a bad
tree, by the difference of their fruits, so we may know a spiritual man from
a carnal man, by the difference of their* minds and manners. A regenerate man
that is borne of the spirit, though he be not perfectly sanctified in this
life, yet he is wholely sanctified: for as there is a natural birth of the
whole man, so there is a spiritual birth of the whole man, that is, as all the
parts both of his soul and body are vitiated and corrupted by the first
birth, so all the parts of his soul and body, his judgment, affection, his
will, his conscience, his memory, his eyes, his tongue, hands, feet, etc. are
sanctified by his second and new birth; and there is no part of a regenerate
man so corrupt as it was before: I speak not of some extraordynarye fault,
that some good man may fall into by strong temptation, which peradventure he
committed not, nor the like before his conversion, but I speak of that
ordinarye estate that Gods children are brought unto by regeneration.

Therefore we are in the Scripture not only exhorted generally to put on the
new man, to be renewed, to amend out lives, to be holy, as God is holy, but we
are exhorted to the particular virtues and parts of the new man, as to
knowledge, love, patience, temperance, humility, and diverse other parts of
sanctification: there is no natural man but does something that is good in it
self, though it be not so to him; but a regenerate man is good many ways
within and without, in words and indeedes.

Again he that is borne again of the spirit, does grow in grace and the
guiftes of the spirit, that is, not only to add one grace to another, as
Peter says: ^oyne to 2. Pet. 1. 5
your faith, virtue to virtue, patience to patience, temperance to temperance,
etc. But every grace and spiritual gift does grow greater and stronger, as
the disciples said to Christ, Lord increase our faith, so we must say, Lord
increase ours, and our love, our patience our zeal, etc. For as there is
growing of the first birth from children to men, as growing in the corruption
of the first birth, as the Apostle says; Evil men and deceivers wax worse
and worse, so there is a growing in the second and new birth from little to
much.

The means here of is the word of God, as Peter speaks, as newborn babes
desire the 1. Per. 2. 2
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, and prayer. As our
Savior said ou^ heavenly father will give the holy Ghost, that is, the giuftes
of the holy Ghost to those that ask him.

Now seeing it is so necessary that a man should be borne again, without the
which he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: let every man and woman
examine themselves whether he can find a new creature in him or no, which he
shall know by the former properties of a regenerate man; let him examine
whether he have a new mind and new manners in general, then let him examine
the perticulers first.

1 If he loves God with the affection of a child to his father.

2 If he loves the children of God with the affection of a brother or sister.

3 If he delights in the law of God, because of the excellent wisdom,
holiness and righteousness that is in us.

4 If he sees his own corruption of nature, and condemns it, and himself
for it.

5 If in his affection he would not do that which is evil and contrary to
the law, but would do that which is good and agreeable to the law.

6 If he prays to God with an unfeigned heart, not only for pardon of sin, but
for power against sin.

7 If he do truly and earnestly strive against sin; and for virtue, not
only without but within himself.

8 If he has remorse and sorrow for sin, though they be little in
comparison, and secret, that the world knows not, and joy in goodness.

9 If he desire and use the means of the word of God, that may make him grow
in the new birthe and become better.

If a man find these things in himself, he is regenerate and borne again; if
not, he is not borne of the spirit, but is in his natural estate.

What must such a man as finds not these things do, conclude he is a
reprobate: no, but fear it, and know that ^ames speaks Iam. 4. 6.
that the Scripture offers more grace; therefore hear the word which is the
immortal seed of our new birthe, while it is called to day, and among other
things, here that Saint James says, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge
you hearts ye wavering minded, let your laughter be^ turned into mourning, and
your joy into heaviness, never be merry, never eat your meat pleasantly,
never sleep quietly, but tremble and quake continually, hear, read, ask
questions, and pray diligently, till God has begun a true work of grace
in you, for that which is borne of the flesh, is flesh and cannot enter into
the kingdom of heaven; but that which is borne of the spirit is spirit and
shall enter.

Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must Verse. 7.
be borne again.

Our Savior Christ forbiddes him not simplye to marvel at this, for if David
Psalm. 8.
wondered to behold the natural creatures of God; how much more wonderful are
those things that be supernatural, David speaking of his creation, says, I
am fearfully and wonderfully made, much more wonderful is it to be created
and made a new: it is a greater matter to regenerate a man, then it was to
create the world; for at the first God created all things with a word, but to
recreate a man there must be words and deeds to, Christ must be borne for us
that we might be borne again in him, Christ must dye for us, that our old
man might be slain, and must be quickened and rise again for us, that a new
creature might be revived and restored in us: therefore regeneration is a
thing to be marvelled at, as many other of the great and excellent works of
God be; but when Christ biddes Nichodemus not marvel, he means such a
marueling as fights against faith, and causes a man to reject a thing as
fabulous, because he cannot conceive it; but to wonder at Gods grace and power
in the regenerate, and to submit our selves and our senses to the word and
work of God, there in is a commendable thing.

But mark we that Nichodemus not being regenerate himself, regeneration was
a riddle to him, as the Papists and those that have not true faith themselves
think that none can be assured of their salvation, whereby we may see how
true that saying of the Apostle 1. Tim. 3.
is: That Godliness is a Misterye.

Furthermore, note that our Savior Christ says not, we must be borne again;
but ye, because he would exclude himself, for his first birth was vncorrupt,
he was conceived by the holy Ghost and borne of a Virgin without sin, and
therefore need not be borne again: but all other men being corrupt by their
first birthe must be borne again; yea even the Pharisees who thought themselves
excellent in comparison of others: therefore he says to Nichodemus that was a
Pharisie, ye must be borne again, as he says in Matthew: Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Mat. 5. 20
Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

The wind blows where it lists, etc. Verse. 8
By this similitude he would reprove the follye of Nichodemus, that did
follow only his reasonable judgment and natural conceit in this work of
regeneration; this is supernatural, as Paul by a similitude taken from the
Corn, reproved the folly of the Corinthians, that followed reason in the
article of the resurrection: 1. Cor. 15 36.
It is as if our Savior Christ should say, we would know there is wind,
that God has created for many purposes, we hear it, we feel it, and see the
effects of it; but we cannot tell where it rises, nor where it sets: so
we may perceive the working of the spirit in others, and feel it in our
selves, changing our judgments, our affection, and conuersations: as how
evidently was the power of the spirit to be perceived in Paul, who of a
persecuter became a Preacher: in Zacheus who of an oppresser became a
distributer: in Abraham who of an Idolater became a true worshipper: and in
Marie Magdalen who of an adulterer became a chaste liver, and least any should
say these were choice persons, our Savior Christ says here: So is every one
that is borne of the spirit.

The sound of the wind is heard of many, and the force of it is seen in
carrying the Clouds, in moving the Waters, in dryuing the ships, in shaking
the trees; but in how few is the force of Gods spirit seen to move and
carrye men to spiritual duties, to zeal, love, liberality, justice, mercy,
etc. The blasts and force of the flesh are heard and seen in Town and
country, in swearing, railing, lying, adultery, drunkenesse, etc. But the
blasts of the spirit not so common, if I should also follow the other
similitude, so is every one that is borne of the spirit, there is good
instruction in it, what sorrow has a woman in bearing of children, what
faintings, what gripings and throws, as if she should be torn in pecces, and
all to bring forth a child, yea some are content to be ripped, that by their
own death they may procure the childs life: but how little pains do men
take to be borne again, to cast away the works of the flesh, and to bring
forth the fruits of the spirit, which will not be done with ^ase, but with
wrestling with Satan, resisting of sin, and denying our selves.

Nichodemus answered and said, how can Verse. 9
these things be?

A man would think that by this time we should have hard a newborn babe cry,
but he still reasons carnally, where is the goodness of nature to goodness,
that the Papists boast of, when this man that had nature helped by learning,
and many means, yet was altogether vnap^, so much as to conceive of
spirytuall good things.

Those that think themselves wise enoughe to conceive any thing; yea any point
of religion, are controuled by this man's example, where we may see how hard a
thing it is to work regeneration, in a man, when it is so hard to make men
conceive it.

Reason with many men about the points of religion, as faith, repentance, and
the like, you shall find such unsavory carnal and caueling speeches, as it
would make a spiritual man to wonder they should be so ignorant and
senseless.

But by this man we see though doctrine be delivered plainly, though it be
delivered diuersely, though it be laid forth generallye, and perticulerlye,
though it be showed by similitudes, and borrowed speeches, yet men cannot
perceive and understand it, except God give them grace: therefore David prays
to the Lord thus; Open mine eyes that Psalm. 119
I may see the wonders of thy law, but Nichodemus his eyes were still shut
up, and therefore says; How can these things be?

Because he could not conceive them, by reason he thought they could not be:
but there be many things done that we cannot perceive how they be done. An
Adamant stone draws Iron to it, though we cannot perceive how it does it: a
Diamond stone will write upon Glass, though we cannot perceive how: we see
the shadow of a Dyall is gone, but we cannot perceive how it is gone: so a
child in a short time is grown, but we cannot perceive how it grows. Now if
our reason be confounded in so many earthly things, how much more in this
heavenly work of regeneration.

Jesus answered, Art thou a teacher in Israel Verse. 10
and know not these things.

Seeing he lost his speech on him, he falls to rebuking of him, as if he should
say, take thou upon thee to teach and guide other, and art ignorant thy self
and know not the principles, that are as it were the A. B. C. to religion:
they had read the Scripture, that said; Circumcise the foreskin of your
hearts, turn to God, repent, etc. but they understood it not, for if they
had, they should have seen it all one with this that Christ says: Ye must be
borne again, but Nichodemus knew not these things. I doubt there be many men,
yea some ministers at this day which yet is more strange, that can but only
read the Scripture, and repeat the letter, but in the spiritual sense are as
ignorant as Nichodemus, to whom this reproof does no less, but much more
justly belong. Our Savior Christ has used doctrine and confutation before,
and now he uses reprehension, but if the two former would have served, he
would have spared the third; so after men have been taught and convinced, if
they will not learn and practice, they must be reproved, and so much the more
earnestly as their faults are more unworthy; as Christ says here to
Nichodemus; Art thou a teacher in Israel, the choice people in the world, and
art ignorant of the chief point of religion.

As if it should be said to a master, art thou a judge or justice and dealest
unjustly to a rich man: art thou wealthy and live nigardly to a Christian:
professest thou truth and speak and dealest falsely: and this is as
necessary a part of the ministry as any other, it as the purging part of a
medicine, that sets all the rest of working, for Nichodemus goes away and
is sharpened by this, and by this makes use of the rest; for we hear no more of
him till John says afterward he was a Disciple of Christ indeed, and though
now he came to Christ secretly, yet afterward he professed Christ boldelye,
and joined with Joseph of Aramathia to bury him honorably.

Let Ministers learn by our Savior Christ's example, to use all means,
doctrine, confutation and reprehension, even to great men when* need require,
they perish else: and learn by Nichodemus his example, to make use of these
things though it be long first, by doctrine to reform our ignorance, by
confutation to reform our errors, and by reprehension to reform our sins
and amend our lives.

Afterward the spirit of God in his good time did blow upon Nichodemus, and
by the grace thereof he was made capable of those things which he could not
perceive when he was a natural man: Therefore let us learn once more, and
once for ever, that though the Minister uses never so great wisdom, never so
great zeal, never so great faithfulness, constancy and patience in teaching
and admonishing of men, yet without Gods blessing and grace all shall be in
vain unto them: and let us know it is want of grace, that men continue
ignorant after so much teaching; it is want of grace that men are froward and
spurn against just reprehension.

And to conclude, let us know that those only who conform themselves in
judgment, affection and conversation to the word of God, are gracious men.

(...) The little flock of Christ.
MARK. 4. 3. Hearken, behold there went out a sower to sow.

4. And as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls of the heaven
came and devoured it up.

5. And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth, and by and by
sprung up because it had not depth of earth.

6. But as soon as the sun was up it caught heat, and because it had not
root it withered away.

7. And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, that
it gave no fruit.

8. Some again fell in good ground, and did yield fruit, some thirty fould,
some sixty fould, and some an hundred fould.

9. Then he said unto them, he that has an ear to hear, let him hear.


Our Savior Christ being sent to preach glad tidings of mercy, favor and
salvation, to poor and penitent sinners, many came to hear him, and at this
time the number of hearers being great, he left the house where he was, and
went into a larger room by the Sea Mat. 13. ^
side, and went it to a ship, that was instead of a Pulpit, which being
removed a little from the land, that he might be free from crowding and
interruption, he sat down and taught the people. This place of scripture I
have chosen, as I promised in the beginning, to show how small a number in
comparison, are pertakers of the mystery of godliness.

These words do contain a Parable, wherein our Savior Christ, as is usual
in Parables, does by similitudes and familier examples borrowed from earthly
things, Prou. 1.
set forth heavenly things. Solomon calls Parables, dark sayings; and so
they are if they be not expounded: as this Parable were dark, if the
explanation that Christ makes of it afterward were not added. This is called
the Parable of the sower, and contains certain borrowed speeches taken from
husbandry, and such things as concerns the body; whereby is set forth such
things as concern the soul.

When Christ had propounded this Parable, the Disciples did ask him the
meaning Verse. 10
of it, as we may ^ee in verse 10. and in the 14. verse he comes to expound
it to them.

To the sower he compares the Minister, 1. Cor. 3. 9.
who is by Paul called Gods labourer: to the seed he compares the word, in the
14. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
verse, which Peter calls immortal seed of our new birth: to the ground he
compares 1. Cor. 3. 9.
the hearts of men, which Paul calls Gods husbandry: and ^erem. 4. 4. calls
them fallowe ground that had need be plowed up: to the fruit he compares the
duties of holiness and righteousness, which Romans 6.
the word requires and works in men.

The drift of the Parable is, to show though many do hear, yet the word
takes no effect, nor brings forth no fruit in the most, because of their
unfitness for it; some give the word no entertainment at all, but it goes in
at one ear and out at the other.

Some receives it, but so shallowly that it vanishes again quickly: some do
more deeply consider of it. But there be other things that spread further and
thrive better, which choke the word so that it comes to nothing, only there
be a few of many, that do hear the word, conceive it, retain it, and
bring forth the fruit of it.

But before we come to the perticulers of the parable, let us mark generally,
that the Minister who is called Gods labourer, must sow the seed of the
word, that is, he must preach the Gospel, or else he has the name of a sower
in vain. This our Savior Christ commands his Disciples, saying; Go to all
nations and preach: and Mat. 28.
Paul commaundes Timothy and others to preach in season and out of season, 2.
Tim. 4.
and says of himself; Woe unto me if I 1. Cor. 9.
preach not the Gospel.

The reason is that Solomon speaks, Where Prophesiyng or Preaching fayles, the
Prou. 29.
people perish. And that the Lord speaks Eze. 33.
to Ezechiel; If thou tell not the people of their sins, they shall dye in
their sins, but their blood I will require at thy band.

Secondly let us mark, that as the Minister must preach, so the people must
hear; for it is a necessary consequent from the preaching of the Minister, to
the hearing of the people: therefore it is a great and common accusation in the
scripture against the people, that God sent hi^ Prophets early and they would
not hear.

It is in the end of this Parable, and often in other places said; He that
has an ear, let him hear: and he that will not, is compared to the dea^e
Adder that stoppes his ears, and will not hear the voice of the charmer,
charm he never so wisely. As there can be no fruit looked for where seed
is not sown, so there can be no goodness in them that do not hear: for
although all be not good that do hear, yet there be none good but those
that are to be picked out among hearers, both which are showed by the course
of this parable.

Thirdly let us mark, it is not enough to hear, for in this Parable Christ
shows many do so, and are never the better: but men and women must obey and
practice that they hear: as James says; Be do^ers of Iam. 2.
the word, and not hearers, only deceiving your own selves. For our Savior
says; They are Luke 12.
blessed that hear the word of God and keep it: And the Apostle to the
Hebrews says; Those that do not are cursed. Now because Heb. 6.
the most hearers do not practice the word, our Savior Christ in this Parable
shows where the fault is: not in the sower or minister, he is one to all; nor
in the seed or word of God, that is one in all; but in the ground, that is
the peoples hearts, they are not one but diverse; some are hard hearted, some are
fickle minded, some are couetouslie and carnally affected, few are carefully
and conscionablie disposed, to the love, reverence and obedience of that they
hear.

Now we come to the parts of the parable.

Some fell by the highway. Our Savior Verse. 4.
Christ says; When the sower sowes his feed, some falls by the highway side in
the filding countries, the highway for travelers to walk and ride in lies
hard by their corn grounds and headlands, upon the which when the husbandman
sowes his seed, some of the corn does sprinckle and fall, but the ground
whereon it falls is hard trampled and unfit, therefore the seed cannot enter,
but lies aloft, and the fowls that follow the sower pick it up: so says
Verse. 15.
our Savior Christ; some men's hearts are like to this kind of ground, they
are hard earth, the custom of sinning and trampling of satan, and unfit to
receive instruction. In Luke it is said; These men understand no^ Luke 8.
the word: the reason is, the devil comes and takes it away, as the fowls do
pick up the seed: this is that Paul says of such men; The God of this world
has blinded 2. Cor. 4.
their eyes, that the light of the Gospel should not shine unto them. These be
such men as Esaias speaks of, that must have precept Esa. 28.
upon precept, line upon line, here a little and there a little, and yet are
never the wiser, they grow no better in their judgment nor in their affection;
they sit at the Sermon like blocks, and have neither discerning no^ estimation
of heavenly things, neither the law humbles them, nor the Gospel comforts
them: these be such men as the Apostle Heb. 5.
speaks of; You that for your time ought to have bin teachers, have need to be
taught the first principles of the word of God.

Of this sort of men we have many, which Iam. 2.
James calls forgetful hearers, who though they can mark a tale of
Robin-hood, as we say, though they can repeat a story or old wives fable, yet
they cannot rehearse any profitable point of the Sermon, but are like those
that go to a fair or market, neither to buy nor sell, but to see and be
seen: such be these church Papists, that come to spare their 20. pound a
month, and civil men that come to spare their 12. pence a sunday, but not to
seek nor serve God, nor edify themselves: the reason of their unprofitable
hearing is, because the devil is present with them, either to rock them a
sleep, that they might not hear at all, or to cast in bythoughts of other
matters to occupy their minds, that though they hear a sound, they might
understand or bear away nothing, or if they do mark any thing, it is some
sentence of Fathers or Heathen writers, if there be any aleaged to garnish
their talk withal, that they might be like Butter-flies, who fasten upon the
flowers only to paint their wings. Or if they mark any thing out of the word,
the devil causes the^ to put it of to others, and to think that it co^cernes
not them: as some will say such a one had a good lesson to day: but if they take
any thing to be spoken to themselves, the devil persuades them the preacher
speaks of malice, and so reap no good by it, but Luke 8.
rather hurt. S. Luke shows the reason why the devil seeks thus to take away
the seed that is sown in their hearts, least they should believe and be saved.
Therefore as M. Gyfford says upon this Parable; When we go to hear the
word, let us think we go about a hard business, we shall have much a do
to keep our eyes from sleeping, to keep our thoughts from wandering, and our
hearts from rebelling: and if we pray not to God, and strive not against the
devil, we shall either not hear though we come to hear, or else as the
proverb is As good never a whit as never the better.

Some fell on stony ground. This ground is somewhat better the^ the former, for
though Verse 5.
it be stone in the bottom, yet it has some earth in the top, and the seed
takes a little root and springs up suddenly, but the earth is so shallow, and
the stones so many, that it cannot take any deep root, but when the heat
comes it withers away. To this ground our Savior Christ compares some men that
are not so senseless as the former, but go a degree further, they perceive
some beauty and excellency in the Gospel, feel some sweetness in it, as
the Apostle says in the Hebrews; They have a Heb. 6.
taste of the good word of God. Luke says, These men receive the seed with
joy, they Luke 8. 13
will commend the Sermon and the Preacher, and show a green blade of
profession, and flourishing show of religion: and though they have some joy
in the word, yet it is not in the commandment, to know and do their duty,
but only in the promises of the Gospel, that sets forth the grace of God and
salvation in Christ, as if it belonged to them; and therefore it is said, they
believe for a time, but their Luke 8. 13
hearts be so hard that they cannot mourn for their sins and wants: and
though the word be the means to soften men's hearts, yet it cannot mollify
them, but they remain stony. There is nothing so hard but by art and
workmanship may be sofned, metals are melted with the fire, Iron is made
pliable with the hammer, a Dyamond is broken with the blood of a Goat, but
some men's hearts are so hard, that neither the hammer of the word, the fire of
hell, nor the blood of Christ can soften them: there is great complainte of the
stone in the raines, but few complain of the stone in the heart, or of a
stony heart.

Christ says, these men have no root Verse. 17
in themselves, their religion stands in the Prince, in the Minister, in their
books, in their wives, in their friends, they have no true understanding, nor
power of grace in themselves, that which is in them, it is in their tongues to
speak a little, their hearts are so hard within, that the word cannot take
root enough to endure the storms and trials of heat and cold, that it might
bring forth fruit.

They continue but a time. That is, their joy they took in the word continues
not, their fresh show of religion continues not, as it is necessary to embrace
the truth, so it is necessary to continue in it, if we change, it cannot be
for the better but for the worse; Christ says; If ye continue in my word ye
are verily my disciples, if ye continue not ye are John. 8.
not my aisciples in deed, but in show. Some continue too long in error and
false religion, as the Turks, Papists, Anabaptists and others, but that is not
constancy but obstinacy: constancy is in the truth, it is obstinacy that
is in error. Solomon has said; Buy the truth, but sell it not: therefore it is
pitiful and fearful, that some should let it go when they have it.

Apostacy is the most dangerous and unrecoverable sin that may be, so
terribly described in the Hebrews; that it is impossible such a man should be
renewed by Heb. 6.
repentance: and John says; The prayers of the Church cannot help him: Peter
says, It 1. Ioh. 5.
had been better for him never to have known 2. Per. 2.
the truth, then after he has known it to turn from it: Therefore that he
might make this sin of Apostacy odious to all men, and Apostates odious to
other men: he compares them to the Sow that was washed and returns to her
wallowing in the mire, and to the Dog that returns and resumes his vomit.
Those that have been Apostates, as Judas and Julian, are never named in the
Church but with detestation, such a one is unfit for the company of men, he
must be given over to satan. Therefore Paul calls the Galathians foolish
Galathians, because they did not run out their race. These stony men though
they be fresh at the first coming of the Gospel, they are no body at the
last, but are like to Plinies Lion, that at the first litter had five at a
clap, after every litter bated one, till at last she had none at all. In
worldly matters men's after-wit is best, and shall it in matters of religion be
worst at last.

Therefore let us hear that weighty exhortation of the Apostle; Take heed
Heb. 3.
least at any time there be in any of you an evil heart and unfaithful to
depart from the living God. And so much the rather let us take heed of it,
because our Savior Christ says here, there be some men that receive the
word with joy, and yet continue but a time. Luke says; Believe for Luke 8.
a time, that is, profess the faith for a time, not that they had justifying
faith at all, for that cannot be lost, as John says: Whosoever believe in
Christ shall not perish, but have eternal John. 3.
life; And true faith says the same Apostle in his first Epistle ouercomes the
world, 1. Ioh. 5.
but the meaning is, these men do profess the faith as Simon Magus did, and
seem to themselves and others that they do believe; Acts. 8.
but it is a feigned faith that is overcome of the world, not a justifying
faith, for the gates of hell shall not prevail against Mat. 16.
that, much less the gates of the prison. It is not a true faith for that
bings forth ripe fruit, as James speaks, but a counterfeit and dead faith
without fruit; therefore it is said they believe and continue but a time,
that is a short time, for true faith also ceases in the life to come: therefore
2. Cor. 13
Peter says: The godly receive the end of their faith, even the salvation of
their souls; but 2. Pet. 1.
these men believe but a short time, they give over in this life, and never
come to that excellent end, because they never had any true beginning. When
persecution arises because of the word: Our Savior Christ shows the reason
why these men continue but a time, the chief reason is indeed because the
word took no root in them, they had no sound faith, they wanted grace; but
this is the sencible reason or occasion of their reuolting, they are afraid of
affliction, and love to sleep in a whole skin, such were the Israelites that
would go into the wilderness to worship God, but when they were pinched a
little, they became murmurers, such were the professors at Rome that Paul
speaks of, At my first 1. Cor. 10
answering says he, all men forsook me: such 2. Tim. 4.
were many in King Edwards time, which then had a blade of religion, but when
Queen Mary came it withered away: and such are all those that be time-seruers,
of whom we may have a great guess now, but no certain trial till persecution
come, it is woeful to think how many we shall see then of this kind of ground.

Some do continue till the gowte lays hold of them as King Asa: some till
the world lays hold of them, as Demas: and some do continue till
persecution lays hold of them, as Francis Spera: some men are like the Snaile
that put out a long pair of horns, but if ye do but touch them, in they
go: others will stand out some small matters, but the threatening of death is
the death of their religion: but our Savior Christ says to the Church of
Smirna; continue faithful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of life,
our Savior Christ having told his Disciples of wars, of enemies, and
dangers; says: he that continues to the end shall be saved, and bids them not
fear him that killes the body, Mat. 24.
for the fear of a thing is many times worse then the thing it self; for
though persecution be threatened we know not what the intent of it is. We read
of Domicianus the Emperor of Rome who made a proclamation, that all those that
would not worship an image should be banished, whereupon many of his subjects,
because they would keep good consciences fled, the rest yielded and became
idolaters. Then the Emperor called again those that fled, and placed them next
unto him, and those that worshipped the image he banished from him, saying,
they that will not be faithful to God, will not be faithful to me. But if
there should be a full purpose of the maiestrate to shed the blood of the
Saints, they cannot do it except and until God will suffer them, for Christ
says: A hair of your head shall not perish without your fathers providence;
he can change the kings heart, it may be we shall suffer but a few lewd words,
as they caled the christians in queen Mary's days, holy knaves, holy whores,
but remember the servant is not better then his master, it may be a little
imprisonment; yet he can give us favor in the eyes of the keeper of the prison
as he did Joseph, he can open the prison doors, and loose our fetters, as he
did Peter: and if God give liberty to the persecuters, Acts. 10.
yet they can but kill the body: and if Gods will be we should die, why should
we have a will to live, if Philemon did owe to Paul not only that which he
had, but himself? how much more do we owe our selves to God? as one says:
If God had but given me my life Iowe it him again, but seeing he has given
for me the life of his son, what am I to that gift; in the 11. to the Heb.
we read of many Martirs that were diuersely persecuted and would not be
delivered, it is reported of a French Martyr who being offered this favor to
be spared of his chains and fetters, as he went to execution, answered no;
but the more contemptible his death was, the more honorable. Remember
whatsoever we suffer for Christ, he suffered more for us: shall a fire of
sticks that lastes but an hour daunt a Christian man, that so many women, yea
so many children have endured, cannot he that caused the fire that it should
not touch the three children make it burn thee quicklve, cannot he that
caused the Lions that they should not touch Daniel, cause them to crush thee
softely; let us remember that the honor of Martyrs has always bin great in
the Church, and their reward is great in heaven: therefore says wise Solomon,
buy the truth but sell it not, no Mat. 5.
not for thy life: and on contrariwise let. us consider what an unwise thing it
is to deny the truth, for the company of friends to loose the familiarity of
God and his Angels, for hope of preferment to loose the inheritance of heaven,
for fear of pain to throw our selves into the torments of hell, for regard
of the body to cast away the soul; besides that it may be a man that so saues
his life shall loose it within a week after, by some disease or mischance, yet
if he should live twenty years he shall find his life worse then death, for
better is a happy death then an unhappy life, for the torment of conscience
that will follow the denying of the truth, is worse then persecution: as ye
may see in David who found the torment of his sin of adultery, from which
there was no escape; a heavier thing to bear then all the persecutions of
Saul: how much more heavy think we, will be the occasion of the sin of
Apostacy, as ye may see in Francis Spera who being a professor of religion,
for fear of persecution fell to embrace Popery, then he cried out of himself
that he was a reprobate, and wished that he might be ten thousand years in
hell fire, so that at length he might be delivered.

Seeing it is so, let us pray to God to soften our hearts that the word may
take deep root in us, that as we know and profess it, so we may believe and
bring forth fruit of it; for those that do not believe and practice it, will
not dye for it; those that will do nothing for it, will suffer nothing for it,
and let us pray to God that we may cleave unto it, not for a time, but always;
for our reward shall not be a reward of days and years, but for ever.

Also they that receive the seed among thorns. Verse. 18.


There is a third sort of ground that were fitter to bear fruit then the two
former, but that there are thorns, briars, and weeds in it vnpulled up, that
springes higher, branches further, and spreds wider then the Corn, and choke
the seed that it cannot bear fruit, to this kind of ground, our Savior
Christ compares those men that have wit, reason and capacity enough, and might
become good men, and do good duties, but other things which he call^^
thorns, takes up the room in their hearts that they cannot. Our Savior Christ
shows also what these thorns be that chaoke the word, that is to say, the
cares of the world, deceitfulness of riches, Luke adds voluptuousness: in
a word he means by thorns, the corrupt lusts of men's nature, that do carry
them so egerly after the profits and pleasures of the world, that they neglect
the duties of godliness that are prescribed in the word. By cares of the world,
o^^ Savior Christ does not mean moderate care, for that the word does
command, and may stand well with religion. Solomon reprooues carelessness, and
tells us that the Pro. 6.
little Emit that wantes reason does provide in Summer for winter: much more
should a man that has reason, and most of all a man that has religion, as
Paul says, He that prouides not for his house and familye 1. Tim. 5.
has denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel.

But by cares of the world, here our Savior Christ means, immoderate and
excessive cares that the world forbids, and is contrary to religion that does
so take up the room in a man's heart, that it hinders the grows of the word,
and keep a man from the duties commanded in the same. And by this we may see
how to discern of care, if it be such as does not hinder us, but further us in
the duties of godliness, it is good; but if it grow to that measure, that it
keeps us from those duties that we owe to God and to men, it is naught: which
our Savior Christ reprooues; Why care ye for meat says he, and for raiment
that is beyond measure, Mat. 6.
as appears, by setting down the practice of the Gentiles, and by showing
that it hinders a man from seeking the kingdom of God and his righteousness:
To prevent this care, Peter says: Cast your care upon God, for he cares
for you.

Riches is another thorn, that does choke the word in this sort of men, not
that we should think all rich men be unfruitful professors, for we read
of Ioh, Abraham, Cornelius and others, who were full of grace and goodness,
therefore he does not say simply riches, but the deceitefulnesse of riches
does choke the word, not that riches do deceive all men, but these kind
of men, or rather deceive themselves in the conceit of riches, for riches are
dead things without reason, how then should they deceive living and reasonable
men, if their own wrong judgment and affection did not deceive them: but they
think happiness stands in being rich, as appear by the saying of many,
when they speak of a rich man they say he is happy, but they are deceived,
how can they make a man happy when they cannot free a man from troubles, but
rather bring many troubles with them, when as they cannot content a man: but
men having abundance do still desire more, when they will leave a man, and he
them. Solomon in the book of Ecclesiastes, does show plentifully, there is no
felicity but vanity in these things: they think that riches are the best
things especially that he can (...)
have in this life, but they are deceived, a good name is better, as Solomon
says in the Proverbs: A good name is better then silver and gold; wisdom
is better, as also Solomon says, blessed is the man that finds wisdom,
Pro. 3.
the merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of silver, and the
gain thereof is more worth then gold. Godliness is better as Paul says to
Timothy: Godliness is the 1. Tim. 6^
great gain, they think riches will serve their turn at all needs, but
they are deceived, for David says: Riches auailes not in Psalm.
the day of vengeance; They think they can leave them to who^ they list, but
they know Solomon: Their life may be taken away this night; as it is said Eccle.
of the rich man in the Gospel, that made his barn bigger, and said he had
food laid up for many years, then whose shall these things be, says our
Savior Christ: Thus me^ being deceived with riches they choke the word, and
keep them from their duties, this also may teach a man when he has a right
estimation and use of riches, when they further him in religion and practice of
duties, and when either by the getting our keeping of them he is hindered in
his duty, they have deceived him.

Voluptuousness or living voluptuously, as Luke says, is another thorn that
hinders Luke. 8.
the grows of the word in men's hearts by voluptuousness, is not meant the
immoderate use of the lawful pleasures and delights of this life, as the
Stoike Philosopher condemned all pleasure but the sinful and unlawful
pleasures of the world, and the immoderate and carnal use of those that be in
themselves lawful, whereby men are hindered from their duties. Some think they
cannot be choked with riches for they have them not, but poor men may be
choked with immoderate cares: some think they cannot be choked with cares,
for they let the world go which way it will, but they may be choked with
voluptuousnes; some think they cannot be choked with voluptuous living, for
they fare hardly, go homely, and toil continually; but they may be choked with
riches: some are choked with one of these, some with another of them, and some
with all of them, Our Savior Christ compares these things to thorns, because
they choke or hinder the grows of the seed of the word, that it cannot bring
forth the fruit of piety, of hospitality, of equity, of mercy, of chastity,
of sobriety and such like, as otherwise it would do: When John Baptist preached
repentance to Herod, he was choked with voluptuousness and Mar. 6.
love of a harlot, that he could not bring forth the fruit of it. When Dives
should have relieved Lazarus he was choked with riches and voluptuous
living, that he could not bring forth the fruit of mercy. Luke 16.
When the Jews by the Gospel were called to the marryage of the kings son,
they were choked with the cares of the Mat. 22.
world, farms, oxen, etc. that they could not come. When the word calls on
men to keep the Saboth, they are choked with these things, they have
iourneyes to go, and other things in their head that carries them from
obedience. When men are taught by the word to pay their debtes to pay their
tithes, to make restitution of their wrongs, the world choakes them that they
never bring forth these fruits. Many men know such and such duties are to be
done, and they will purpose to do them, but such a building, such a purchase,
marriage of such a daughter, hinders and choakes them so as they never come at
them: but one says; Hell is full of purposes, but heaven of performances, such
men pretend to worship God in hearing the word, but they worship their belly,
their money, as Paul calls covetous men idolaters, and also of vosuptuous Ephe. 5.
men, he says to the Philipians. 3. Their God is their belly. Many men would
feign go to heaven, but they are so tied to the world, that they cannot walk
in the way to it: many men will be religious, but they will practice it no
further then may stand with their profits, and pleasures, if the minister
cross those affections in them, they will cross him if they can, and seek
rather to condemn his sayings, then their own doings: yet men will color
their covetousness with religion, and say they must provide for their family:
if they in following the world did obey the word, they would seek and do such
things as might set forth Gods glory, as well as their own glory, they would
seek to further Gods house as well as their own house, which the word
commandes, also in following voluptuousness men excuse it, by this we cannot
be Angels: but the word teaches we must be Saints and do nothing contrary to
holiness, therefore we must here the counsel of Jeremy: Plow up your fallow
ground and sow not among thorns; Ier. 4.
that is, pluck up these cares, covetous, carnal and voluptuous affections,
that do chaoke the seed of the word in us, the word should grow in our
hearts alone, but especially we must not suffer it to be ouergrone. They may be
calde thorns because they will prick men, for how egerly soever men follow
the world, yet when they die and consider how they have gotten their riches,
and how little good they have done with them, they will prick their heart and
the softest and sinfullest pleasure that men have followed, when they die will be
as the sharpest thorns, therefore those that live carnally and couetously,
cannot but die sorrowfully.

Mark, the seed that is sown in all these three sorts of ground do perish,
but not in all by the same means, but in some by one means, and some by
another, the devil, the world, and the flesh, be the three great enemies that
keep many men from their duties, and so from their happiness, those that
follow the devil, those that folthe world, and those that follow the flesh,
are all naughty men, they are none good but those that follow the word, and
that do resist the devil, overcome the world, and mortify the flesh; all the
three sorts of men spoken of heretofore in this parable are hipocrites, that
only have a show of religion, the second more then the first, and the third
more then the second and no substance, none are true christians but the fourth
sort of men that follow in this parable, who are compared to good ground.

Some fell in good ground. This is the last sort of ground that is fit indeed
for the seed, because, it is not hard but soft, not stony but mouldry, it is
not forlorn and groan with thorns, but fallowed and has those things plowed
and plucked up: this is called good ground and brings forth fruit, some more
some less, according to the degrees of the goodness of it. This our Savior
Christ expoundes in verse. 20. there be some men's hearts like this good ground,
they are not like the other three: the high way men are hard, they understand
not the word, but these understand it, as Matthew shows, these are neither
like the stony ground, they Mat. 13. 23.
continue not but are nipped and blasted with the heat of affliction, but
these endure those things with patience and abide, all weathers, neither are
they like the thorny ground, for they are choked with cares, riches and
pleasures of the world, but these overcome and ouergrow those things, and bring
forth much fruit. But mark, Luke Luke 8.
says: these men have an honest heart, God requires not the ear only to
hear, but the heart to understand, to believe, and love that they hear. And
mark that he says, They bring forth fruit, so that God requires the hand
and the body to practice that we hear, as well as the care to hear and the
heart to understand, some think if they hear it is enough, but all the three
former badde men do that: some think if they hear and attain to a little
knowledge it is enough, but two of the former sorts of ground that are naught
come so far, but those only are good men that hear the word with their ears,
understand it with their heart, and practice it with their hands, as our savior
Christ says in another place: Blessed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it; they be no good subjects that hear the princes laws and obey the^
not, they be no good servants, that hear their masters comandements and do
them not, so they are no good Christians, that hear the word of God and keep
it not: therefore hear it is said they be good men that bring forth good
fruit: if any will ask what fruit, the answer is: all such good things as
the word of God does require of men, which are generallye set down by Paul
to Titus, Titus. 2.
the grace of God, or word of his grace, has appeared, and teaches us to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live godly, justly, and
soberlye, in this present world.

The particular fruits are set down by Peter, to be faith, patience,
temperance, brotherly kindness, etc. And by John in 2. Pet. 1.
his first Epistle, love and liberallity: and by Paul Romans 12. and many other
places.

For as good men must bring forth fruit, so not strange fruit, but such as
spring from the seed of the word of God, that is sown in their hearts. The
Papists will build Abbeys, give money to maintain Tapers, wear hair cloth,
go of pilgrimage, and seem to be very devout and religious, but these be
such things as springs from their own invention, and not from the word of God.
Hipocrites also in the Church, will seem to bring forth fiuite, but it is
either in doing such things which the word commands not, or in doing them
otherwise then the word commands them: they will come to church on the Lords
day, because the Prince commands it, not because the word requires it, they
will give something weekly to the poor, keep hospitality at Christmas,
because shame, civility and others company in it mooues them, and not because
religion mooues them in their best actions: they want faith in God, love to
men, and humility in themselves, that should give a taste to their fruits,
and without which they are unsavory to God. Trees that are transplanted from
hot countries may bear fruit here, but not kindly not timely, because they
are not in their natural soil; so of all that hears the word, there never
grows good fruit in any, but those that have honest and good hearts.

So that those that bring forth bad fruit as it were wild grapes, those that
bring forth no good fruit, and those that bring forth fruit that seems to
be good, and yet with bad minds are all naughty men, only those are good men
that bring forth good fruit indeed with honest and good hearts, the want of
observing this difference has moved some to think themselves good Christians
when they have bin hipocrites, these men are called good ground, not that they
be so of themselves, or as if the word did find them good, but because they
be by the word and grace of God framed to goodness and made good when the
other three sorts of men, not withstanding all means do remain naught.

The word being a sharp two edged sword, does wound the old man in H^b. 4.
them, and kill the corrupt affections of their natures, as dulnes,
fearefulnes, covetousness, voluptuousness, that live and reign in the other,
and does quicken, inlighten, and sanctify them, making them fit to bear
fruit.

Mark those that be made good men, are ready, and do show forth the
goodness that is wrought in them, by doing the good things which the word
requires of them, and not one or two good things, but thirty, sixty, and
three hundred fould, they show forth the good fruits that are inward, as
faith, hope, love, patience, meekness, humility, chastity: and the good
fruits that are outward, truth, justice, mercy, etc. and the reason why many
men cannot be gotten to do their duties, is because they want grace and
goodness: if ye look for a thing where it is not, ye shall not find it; so
ye shall find no good manners in them that have no good minds.

And let us mark for our instruction, that of four sorts of men which do
hear the word, there is but one sort good, which confirms our Savior
Christ's saying, Math. 22. Many are called, but few are chosen: Because as he
says in another place, The way is narrow that leads unto life, there be
few that Mat. 7.
finds it.

It seems by this parable, that in the visible Church there are many more
hipocrites then true Christians, for not to speak of those that will not
hear, those that do hear, how many are dull and blockish, that can conceive
nothing of that which is taught like the high wave ground? How many be there
that do understand something, and seem to be some body, that when the least
trial comes shrink and show they had no conscience nor grace? How many be
there, that are so eaten up of the world, and overcome of their lusts, as no
doctrine can draw them to duty, especially to those things that are
contrary to their covetous and voluptuous humors and appetites? And how few
be there that do hear the word of God and keep it, with honest hearts and
good consciences.

But yet some there be which our Savior Christ calls his little flock, of
Luke 13. Luke 19. Acts. 10.
which number was Zacheus in Jerusalem, Cornelius in Cessarya, Dorcas in Ioppa,
Lydia in Philippi, and of this number there might peradventure be pointed out
some one or two in this Town, some two or three in that Town, although we
cannot see many: but those that be such, they must have the estimation and
commendation of good men and good women.

But it is to be noted, that these men have the same temptations that the other
have, the devil seeks to take away the seed, tyrants threatens them, the
world intices them, the flesh prouoakes them, but they resist the devil,
overcome the world, and subdue the flesh by grace.

A man would think all that hear the word, especially by some Ministers,
should become good men: so they should if there were not something to let it,
but there be great corruptions and enemies within and without, that do blind
and choke men, and carrye them contrary ways, only those become good that
have the seed of the word watered by the grace of God, that it may be
fruitful, for it is not the plainting of Paul, nor the watring of Apollo, 2.
Cor. 3.
but God that gives the increase.

Therefore when we hear the word of God, we must pray for grace, that we
may understand it, believe it, and obey it. Also let us mark, that of those
few that be good men, all are not alike good, but there be degrees of
goodness among them, some bear fruit 30. fould, some 60. fould, and some
100. fould, some have hard longer, some have heard better, some have profited
more then others, and according to the measure of their knowledge and grace,
they bear fruit.

Those that do perform some good duties, as it were 30. fould with an honest
heart, be good men, though they be short of others, but do seek to grow
further, and not envy nor darken those that be gone before them, and those
that perform more duties as it were 60. or 100. fould, be good men, and by
comparison better men, but yet pride not themselves in their gifts, knowing
where they had them, nor disdain nor account them no body that come after
them, but seek to draw them on and encourage them.

He that has ears to hear, etc. In the beginning Verse. 9
of this Parable in verse. 3. our Savior Christ has said, harken and behold,
which word behold has the same use in the new Testament, that Selah has in
the old, and does import dilligent marking: and now in the end of the Parable
he says; He that has ears to hear, let him hear: which shows this is a
matter of importance, else he would not thus often and thus earnestly have
persuaded them to hear that came to hear: and it shows that all men have not
ears, for though all have grisles upon their heads, and can hear other
things, yet they have not ears to hear God speak, for there be many that
turn away their ears from hearing the law, as Solomon says; There be many
that stop their ears like the deaf Adder, as our Savior Prou.
Christ says: And there be many that are dull of hearing, as the Apostle
says. Therefore he says, He that has an ear let him hear, for the ear is
the wicket of the Heb. 5.
heart, the sense of understanding, and the means of faith and grace: and
therefore it was a devilish and dangerous principle of Popery that the people
might not hear.

But the Scripture teaches us clean contrary, that we should hear and that
reasonably; To day if ye will hear his voice Heb. 3.
(says the Apostle) harden not your ^earts, that we should hear diligently,
as Solomon says, Hearken diligently to me: that Prou. 2.
we should hear swiftlye, Be swifte to hear, and slow to speak: Therefore
Iam. 1.
one said unto a young man that did speak much, that his ears were become
tongue.

Our Savior Christ says, He that has an ear let him hear; as if he
should say, Wisdom is worth the hearing: it is well ye may have it for the
hearing; therefore if ye be wise give it the hearing,

And as he would have them and us hear all wisdom, so specially that which
is taught in this Parable; hear not so as the devil may devour it; hear not
so as the heat of persecution may parch it, hear not so as the world may
choke it; but hear so as ye may bring forth the fruit of it, for that is
the hearing that is better then the fat of Rams. 1. Sam. 15


Hear this all those that come to the word, be not good men, but those that
are made good, and brought to do good by the word.

Hear this, though many in the Church be naught, idle and carnal professors,
yet there be good fruits brought forth of a few; therefore do not as some
do, judge all to be hipocrites because many be such, for though the Minister
looses his labor upon the most, yet he sees the fruit of his labor in some.

Hear this, seeing there be so many bad ones, take heed you be none of them,
beware of the temptations of the devil of the allurements of the world, of the
prouocations of the flesh, look to that the word teaches you, and do well:
and not to that the devil, the world, and the flesh would have ye, that is
evil.

Hear this, all ignorant persons, all timeseruers, all disobedient persons,
though they come to the word, be naught: none be good but those that
understand, believe and obey the same. Therefore seeing there be all these
sorts of men in the Church, as well now as there was then, look over this
Sermon again, view them severally and every of them, and see of which sort
ye be: if ye find your selves of the first sort, repent of your dullness
and ignorance: if ye find your selves of the second sort, repent of your
inconstancy and lightness: if ye find your selves of the third sort,
repent of your worldliness and voluptuousness, and deceive not your selves
with a show of religion, without true godliness, but pray to God to pardon
you, pray to God to enlighten you, pray to God to settle you, pray to God to
sanctify you, that ye may not only hear, but in hearing ye may understand,
in understanding ye may believe, in believing ye may practice, and in
practicing ye may increase from 30. to 60. and from 60. to 100. fould. Pray to
God, that of evil men ye may become good men, and of good men ye may become
better men, until at the last ye shall beeome perfect men.

And if ye find your selves to be of the fourth and best sort, that do
understand, believe and obey the word; be thankful to God, that where ye be
no better then others by nature, he has made you to differ from them by grace:
and seeing he has honored you with the title of good men and women, praise
him that is the fountain of goodness, and be careful to show forth the
goodness he has wrought in you, by doing those good things he requires of
you, for his glory and the good of others: and if for the same ye suffer
evil at the hands of the world, yet be not discouraged, but persevere therein
with patience, looking to the reward of goodness in the world to come.

The combat of Christains.
EPHE. 6. 10. Finally my brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the power of
his might.

11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil.

12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, and against the worldly gouerners, the princes of the darkness
of this world, against spiritual wickednesses which are in high places.

13. For this cause take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able
to resist in the evil day, and having finished all things stand fast.

14. Stand therefore and your loins girded about with verity, and having on
the brestplate of righteousness.

15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

16. Above all take the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked.

17. And take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God.

18. And pray always, etc.


THis Epistle was written by the Apostle Paul to the church at Ephesus, wherein
he has set down not only general doctrine necessary to be known,
believed and practiced of all Christians in the other chapters, but also
instructions for particular estates and degrees of men and women, in the former
part of this chapter. Now the Apostle comes to the conclusion of all, as
appears by this word sinally, as if he should say, last of all I give you to
understand, that the profession, faith and practice of religion, will not be
holden, performed and finished with ease, but with much hardness and
difficulty, because you have dangerous and unweariable enemies that seek your
destruction, whom you must encounter withal and overcome, that you may
obtain salvation.

He calls them brethren, because they were the children of God, and of the
church as he was, as sometime he calls the Jews brethren, because they were
of the same carnal kindred of Abraham, so he calls the Christian Gentales
brethren, because they were of the same spiritual kindred of Abraham; and as
by the name of brethren he means all Christian men, so under the same he
comprehends all Christian women, as often in the Scripture the female is
included under the name of the male, the wife in the husband, the sister in the
brother.

Be strong in the Lord. He exhorts them to Christian courage and magnanimity,
in respect of the enemies and dangers he will tell them of afterward, a virtue
very necessary not only for Maiestrates and Ministers, who have to deal
with many bad and turbulent persons, but also for every Christian who has to
deal with devils, for as cowardice and faint hartednesse has hindered many
strong men, so fortitude and resolution of mind has been a great help to
them that have been otherwise weak in warlike affairs.

When he says, Be strong, he means not corporal strength, for they could
procure no addition to that; but he means spiritual strength, as appears
by the spiritual enemies he names afterward, and by the spiritual armor he
appointes to withstand them. This spiritual strength is more excellent then
bodily, by how much the soul is more excellent then the body, and the
qualities of the mind more excellent then the faculties of the body yea by how
much the gifts of grace are more excellent then the gifts of nature.

In the Lord. But he says, Be strong in the Lord, not in your selves; for
the Prophet says, In his own might shall no man be strong: but we must be
strong in the Lord, that is the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Captain, who
has in our nature and in our name, fought our battles Mat. 4.
and overcome these enemies for us. Now as Sampsons strength lay in his hair,
so our strength does lie in our head, and though we be weak, he is strong,
called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who has power not only included in
himself, but which he reaches out to all his members, as he faith to Paul
in his combat with the Devils temptations, 2. Cor. 12
My grace is sufficient for thee: and Paul found it so, for says he, I am
able to do all things by the help of him that strengthens me. God is the
author of all Christian courage and fortitude in us, for we are naturally
fearful, and dare not stand to the defense of religion, or any good cause,
therefore this gift is from heaven, as all other good gifts are: therefore as
the Apostle prays Iam. 1.
for the Collosians, That they might be strengthened with all might through his
glorious power, Col. 1.
unto all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnesse: so he exhortes the
Ephesians, To be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, that is,
to see their own weakness, and to seek for strength at the hands of God in
Christ Jesus, to withstand and overcome all their spiritual enemies.

^ut on the whole armor of God. he tells Verse. 11
them and us of a battle we have to fight with dangerous enemies, therefore
he wills us to arm our-selues, not with the armor of men, for that will not
serve the turn against these enemies, but with the armor of God, which is
armor of proose indeed, that he sets down afterward, he calls it the
armor of God, because he is the author and also the appointer of it, alluding
to the manner of soldiers to whom it is appointed by their general what
armor every one shall were. And he would not have us to be like careless
Soldiers, who let their armor hang by them when they should be set upon by
their enemies, but he would have us put it on and be in a readiness, and not
only some part of it, for then a man may be wounded in that part that lacks,
but the whole, that he may be fensed on every side against all dangers.

A question may be asked; Were the Ephesians unarmed, that the Apostle does
speak thus to them? No, but he would have them arm themselves more exactly
and plentifully, as appears by saying, Put on the whole armor of God: as if
he should say, though you have attained to some measure of guiftes and grace,
yet that you might be valiant Soldiers, and more then conquerers, labor to
have them more plentifully and powerfully in you.

A question also may be asked, if the Ephesians were able to put on this
armor of themselves? No, the Apostle means to attribute no more natural
power to the Ephesians, then he did to the Philippians, to whom he says;
We Phil. 2.
are not able of our selves to think a good thought; it is God that works in
us the will and the deed, but his meaning is to tell them what graces are fit
for them, to strengthen them against their enemies, and without which they
cannot be able to stand, and what grace they must seek for, at the hands of
God to that end.

That ye may be able to stand against, etc. This is the reason of his
exhortation which is double, the first part is in this verse taken from the
diverse assaults of the devil that we are subject unto: the second part is in
the 12. verse taken from a description of the enemies themselves, that we are
to encounter withal. By assaults he means the temptations of the devil, but
he uses a millitary word, taken from soldiers which the Ephesians were well
acquainted withal, as he uses diverse other warlike speeches, to set forth
this spiritual conflict. The devil is called a tempter, and he will assault
all men, by temptation he did tempt A^am, he tempted our Savior Christ, he
tempted Peter and Paul, so he will tempt all other, much more he fears no man
for his strength, neither will he spare any man for his weakness; for he is of
the nature of a roaring Lion, that goes about seeking 1. Pet. 5.
whom he may devour. A question may be asked here if the devil does tempt us
at his own pleasure? No, but by the permission of God: he could not tempt Job
without lisence, Job. 1.
he could not be a living spirit in the mouth of Ahabs false Prophets, till
God 1. Ki^. 22
said Go: but God does give license to Satan to tempt all, not only the
wicked, but also the godly, that the power of his grace might be showed in our
weakness: Therefore he says here, Put on the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand 2. Cor. 12
against the assaults of the devil.

And mark, that he says not, assault only, but assaults, because the
devil will tempt us both diverse times and diverse ways: enemies in war do
use not only to assault by violence, but by ambushments and subtle
practices: so the devil will sometimes set upon us by force, therefore he is
called a Lion, and sometime by fraud and subtilty, therefore he is called a
serpent. Now as we must have spiritual strength to withstand him in the one,
so we must have spiritual wisdom to prevent him in the other; as the King of
Israel said; Wisdom and strength is for the war: sometime he will tempt us
to keep us from our duties, as Paul says to the Thessalonians; I purposed to
come unto you, 1. The. 2. 18.
but Satan hindered me: and sometime he seeks by temptation to mar our
duties, as he did Ananias when he should give the price of his land to the
poor; Peter says to him: How has Satan filled thy heart, that thou should
keep back part of the price and Acts. 5.
lie: And sometime he temptes us to do things clean contrary to our duties,
as he did to Eve to eat of the forbidden fruit, we must be armed to
withstand him in all these.

We wrestle not with flesh and blood. The second part of the Apostles reason
whereby he would move us to put on the whole armor of God, is taken from the
description of our enemies themselves, which are not corporal, but spiritual,
not few but many, not weak but strong, not honest but wicked and tirannicall,
and such as have the advantage of the place. But let us mark that he writing
to the church, says; we wrestle not with flesh and blood but with, etc. Those
that are not of the Church, their battles are only with men like themselves,
but christians do contend with diuils, the meaning is not as if we did not
contend with men at al; for the Prophet I^remy, the Apostle Paul, and other of
Gods servants, had great conflicts with men, but it was so far as those men
were the instruments of Satan, but says the Apostle: Our contention is with
the devil, whether he assault us by himself or by men, that are his
instruments of this battle; that the Apostle speaks of, is not between the
devil and infidels, ignorant, profane and wicked men, for although he temptes
all, yet such are in his subjection already, and they show no contention
against him, but all their contention is for him, because he rules in the
hearts of Ephe. 2.
the children of disobedience, but this battle is between the devil and
Christians. So long as men live in ignorance and wickedness, there is
agreement between the devil and them, as our Savior Christ says: when a
strong man armed keeps the house all is in peace, till a stronger then he
comes and drives him out, but when a man shakes of the subjection of Satan and
by embracing and believing the Gospel, gives his name to a new Lord, then
begins the war, then the devil will use his policy and power by himself
and his instruments.

Pharaoh never raged so much, as when the people of Israel should go into the
wilderness to serve God, Antichrist never stormed so fiercely as when the
Gospel was published by Luther and detected his Idolatry, then came in the
Spanish inquisition, then came in the French massaker, and other diabolical
practices, so long as men live ignorantlye, either wickedlye, or ciuillye
without religion, the devil will not disquiet them because they are his
peaceable subjects, but when they set their hearts to religion, and shake of
his subjection, then he will use all hostility against the^, and wrestle with
them. And as the devil does wrestle with us, so says the Apostle: we do and
must wrestle with him; For as we hold it not sure to have peace with the
Spaniardes, because we cannot have it without dangerous conditions, so it is
never sure to have peace with the devil, for then we must needs have war
with God. The Church is called millitant in this world, because it is always
fighting with Satan, sin and spiritual enemies, which does distinguish it
from the Church in heaven, which is called ryumphant, because it has won the
field, and gotten the conquest of the enemies; Now as it is with the whole
millitant Church, so it is with every member thereof, for which cause our life
is called a warfare, therefore the Apostle says: We wrestle, etc. Not showing
what every Christian must do, but what every man does if he be a Christian.
And among many other marks of Christianity, there is none more certain nor
sensible the^ this, to show our selves enemies to the devil by withstanding his
assaults and temptations, for although by nature we have neither will nor power
so to do, yet by grace being furnished with the armor of God, we have both.

He calls these enemies principalities, powers, he gives diverse of these
titles to the good Angels, in the first to the Collosians: But they are good,
these are evil; they are our friends, these are our enemies; they fight for
us, these fight against us: therefore this is the d^scription of the devil,
that he has spoken of before: he calls him a Prince of the world, that is of
the Ephe. 2.
wicked world, not of the Church; for he is in the Church not as a governor
and commander, but as a tempter only.

He is called the Prince of the darkness of this world, not of the light, his
dominion is by ignorance, error, sin and wickedness; he is an enemy to the
light and seeks to put it out, therefore has taught Antichrist to persuade
the people that ignorance is the mother of devotion, and that they should not
have the exercise of the scripture: Therefore in the time of Popery, when the
people were nusled in ignorance, what apparitions, speeches and practices of
Satan were there that the light has scatred: therefore when God sent forth
Paul to preach the Gospel, he tells him he shall turn the people from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan Acts. 26.
to God: Yea he says not only we wrestle with a Prince, but with
Principalities, showing that many of these princes do band themselves against
us, for although we commonly speak of the devil in the singular number, yet
we must understand there be many diuils of the nature and force that the
Apostle speaks of here; it is said a Mat. 5.
legion possessed a man, they al are not only enemies of the Church, but of
every member of the church. Now we know when one person is to encounter with
many such enemies, he had need to be well armed.

Powers: They be not only princes but powers, earthly princes are called
powers, not in respect of themselves, for Romans
they are weak as other men, but in respect of diverse helps, and assistan^es
that they have to command and take their part* but the devils are called
powers in respect of the force and strength they have in themselves by nature:
the devils power may be perceived by gathering together the Job. ^.
winds, and the fire, and an host of men to destroy Jobs cattle, his servants
and children, Mat. 8.
sea with violence, by causing those that he possessed in our Savior Christ's
time, to break the fetters and chains wherewith they were tied; master
Perkins writes of a man near Gen^ua, blasphemed God so, that all which hard
him trembled, who said if there be any devil let him take me, and carry me
where I shall be for ever: and presently he was taken into the air and never
seen more: Some when they see such corporal examples, say Lord how strong the
diuil is, thinking none are any way possessed of the devil but those that be
mad or straught but his chief power is exercised and is to be considered,
spiritualy in drawing men to sin, and thereby to destruction: we may see it in
tempting our first parents and prevailing against them, who were perfect and
endowed with as much knowledge as the nature of man was capable of, and we may
see it in tempting Caine and carrying him to kill his brother, contrary to
nature and contrary to his conscience: we may see it easily in tempting and
carrying men to diverse monstrous sins, idolatry, adultery, drunkenness, and
houlding them in them, as with spiritual snares and bands, that no counsel,
doctrine, nor sight of other men's harms, can draw him from them he was strong
before time, but he is more strong now, because he rages toward his end, for
anger is the whetstone of strength spiritual, and these be no corporal
enemies, but spirits that cannot be seen with bodily eves, therefore are the
more dangerous. There be diverse Athistes at this day, like the Saduces in our
Savior Christ's time, that think there be no spirits because they cannot be
seen, but shall we believe them or the Apostle: there be many things that
cannot be seen, as the wind, a voice, a savor, etc. which yet are, a^ we
have a corporal sight and sense of some things as we have bodies, so we have a
spiritual sight and sense of some other things as we have souls. Some have
painted the devil in a bodily shape, with horns, tail and such like, but it
is fond seeing he is an invisible spirit, and cannot be proportioned, therefore
the apparitions of Satan that have bin so much spoken of, are not to be
feared, but his spiritual delusions and temptations must be taken heed of.

Now as he is a spirit, so he has the properties, of a spirit, he has
great knowledge, for though he has not so much knowledge as the good Angels,
seeing he has lost by his fall that way as well as man has done; yet he has
much more knowledge then man has naturally, because he is a sole spirit:
besides that he has increased his knowledge by long experience and practice,
he has understanding of all languages, of the state of all countries, of the
condition and complexion of all persons, he knows to what sins men are most
inclined to, and by what means he has prevailed against them, and others that
have been like them.

Some because the devil has more knowledge then men, have taken occasion to
seek to him, to understand of things that are lost, etc. But these is one of
the assaults of the devil, that we must wrestle against, for the Scripture
forbids us to have familiarity with the devil the enemy of mankind: neither
will this be any color that they go not to the devil, but to a witch, seeing
God forbids that also: Leui. 20. 6. And Leui.
seeing, though not themselves, yet the witch has familiarity with the devil,
and they have familiarity with him in his instrument, and it is all one to take
counsel from the devil, at the first hand, and at the second hand there is a
curse pronounced against them that seek to witches. Our Savior Christ rebuked
Satan when he spoke the truth, because we would not receive it from him: no
more should we seeing whenever he speaks, either he lies, or speaks the
truth to deceive: I cannot better compare this seeking to the devil by
witches, then to those that seek money at the hands of biting usurers, I say
biting usurers who have no respect to the good of the borrower, but to their
own advantage, to wrap the party in bonds till they overthrow his estate,
for howsoever it seems a benefit that serves their turn to know that they
seek at the hands of the devil or witches, (which yet is not so commonly,
but in foolish conceit only) yet it turns to their great hurt and damage,
bringing their souls further into thraledome, Saul went to the witch of Endor
to 1. Sam. 18.
call up Samuel, but it was not Samuel, but a sinnelesse conceit, it was the
devil in the likeness of Samuel: for they would not bury Samuel in a mantle
that was his ordinary attire, but they did bury him doubtless in a lynen
cloth, as the manner was; but this practice of Saul hastened 1. Cro. 10. 13.
his destruction. As the devil has great knowledge, so he has great agility
and nimblenesse to pass from place to place, for though he be not infinite
but finite, yet he compasses the whole earth, as it is sade in Job, and that in
short time: some Job. 1.
men have been said to sail about the world in three years, the Sun that
is a bodily substance as we see compasses the world in 24. hours, how much
more the devil that is a spirit; therefore wheresoever a man dwelles he must
look to be assaulted of this enemy: he tempted Adam in Paradise: Job in the
land of Vz, our Savior Christ in the wilderness; the sea cannot hinder him,
stone walls cannot bar him as it may other enemies, but he has a
spiritual passage, and spiritual access to every place and every person.

Wickednesses: As the devil is a spirit so he is a wicked spirit, they were
at the first created good, as were the other Angels, but the Apostle says:
they kept not their first estate, but fell and became Jude.
diuelles: therefore as in the Scripture the other Angels that stood are
called elect and holy Angels, so they that fell are called evil and wicked
spirytes; the devil is called an unclean spirit he is called a lier and a
murderer. John. 8.


And as he is a wicked spirit, so he temptes men and women to wickedness, he
tempted Adam and Eve to pride and rebellion, Gne. 3.
he tempted Job to blasphemy, for though he afflicted him in his goods and
body, yet his purpose was to draw him to blasphemy, Job. 1.
as appears by his words to the Lord: does Job fear thee for naught, but
touch him and he will curse thee to thy face, he tempted Ahabs falce Prophets
King. 22.
to lying, he tempted our Savior Christ to Mat. 4.
distrust and presumption: he tempted Ananias and Saphira to hipocrise and
dissembling: Acts. 5.
he tempted Judas to covetousness Mat. 26.
and theft. So he temptes all men to one sin or other, and some time to one
sin and sometime to another.

He will tempt men to continue in ignorance, and not to hear sermons nor read
good books: if he prevail not that way, he will tempt them with error, that
they should believe lies instead of the truth; if he cannot prevail that way
he will tempt the^ to hold the truth in hypocrisy; if he cannot corrupt their
religion, he will seek to corrupt their conversation, and make them leaprous
christians: he will tempt men to injustice as he did Achab: to unmercifulness
as he did Dives; to uncleanness as he did Herod, to intemperance as he did
the prodigal child: if he cannot prevail to draw men neither from religion
nor good conversation, he will tempt them to be proud of their knowledge and
proud of their virtues, that will mare all the good things that are in them, as
he did the Pharisees.

The devil has diverse nets to take men withal, he has ease wherewith he
has intrapped David, he has pleasure wherewith he caught Solomon, he has the
beauty of women wherewith he vanquished the two judges spoken of in Susanna;
he has profit whereby he inthralled Judas, he has evil company by which
he endangered Iehosaphat, he has evil examples wherewith he corrupted the
Isralites, they would have a king like other nations.

He does endeavor, and that by all means to draw all men to wickedness,
Alexander was not so insatiable to conquer the world corporally, as he is to
conquer the world spiritually, Alexander fought to conquer but one age, but
the devil all ages.

If he were an adversary that had any goodness in him, we might expect some
gentle handling by yielding to him, but he is a wicked adversary, such a one
that delights in blood, therefore in the Scripture he is called a Lion, and a
Dragon full of cruelty, those that he ouercomes he will tyrannize over them,
and bring them to greater miserye then can be imagined; for this cause take
the whole Verse. 13.
armor of God, etc. as if he should say seeing we have a battle to fight,
and not with one enemy, but with many, not with bodily enemies, but spiritual:
not with weak enemies but strong: not with simple enemies but subtle: not
with honest and gentle enemies, but wicked and cruel, and seeing every
Christian, even the weakest woman must pass these perils and pikes of the
diuelles temptations, arm your selves thoroughly: the Apostle having told us of
the danger, shows us the remedy, he has exhorted to the same thing in verse
11. before; and now he repeates it again, giving us to understand there is
necessity in using this remedy, and that there is no remedy but this.

Wise men will be provided against all enemies, especially against domestical
and dangerous enemies, that every hour wait their opportunity to hurt them,
and if men be so careful to take heed of corporal enemies, that can but kill
the body, how careful should we be to take heed of these enemies that seek to
destroy the soul; avoid them we cannot, but prepare our selves to withstand
them we may, or else the Apostle would never have thus often and earnestly
willed us to put on the whole armor of God.

Some Christians when they do but hear how this man and that women is troubled
and tossed with terrible and tedious temptations of Sa^han, are discouraged
before it come at them; but when they begin to feel the diuelles assaults
and bickeringes in themselves, they conclude, they shall never be able to hold
out: but God has not left his Church in such a desperate estate, but he has
provided means of escape from their enemies, therefore here the Apostle wills
us to use it.

Armor of God: He tells us again it is the armor of God that must do it,
the armor of men will not do it; it is not humane power, policy or
ciuility, that can withstand this enemy, but the munition that comes out of the
Lords armourye, for though the devil be strong, yet there is a stronger, as
the Apostle says: 1. Ioh. 4. 4
Greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world, though his
ingens and artillery be sharp and dangerous to hurt us, yet there be
instruments and weapons of greater force to preserve us.

This armor he sets down in the 14. 15. 16. 17. and 18. verses following,
verity he compares to a soldiers girdle, that will fence us against all
Satan's temptations; to hippocrisie, herisie and lying: righteousness he
compares to a soldiers breast plate, that will fence us from all Satan's
temptations: to injustice and ^^iury, hope he compares, to a soldiers helmit
or head-peece, that headpeece, that will fence us from his temptations: to
discontentednesse, fainting and weariness: faith he compares to a soldiers
shield or buckler that will fence us from Satan's temptations: to diffidence
and despair, the knowledge of the word, he compares to a soldiers sword
that will fence us from the temptations of ignorance and disobedience: prayer
he sets in the last place, not that it must be used last, but first and last;
therefore for brevity sake, he puts it insteade of all the rest, for the
Scripture in other places makes mention of other virtues necessary to arm us
against other vices, as humility that will fence us against the devils
temptations: to pride and vaineglory, temperance that will fear us against his
temptations: to riot and excesses in meat, drink, apparel, recreation, or
any thing, chastity that will fence us against his temptations: to uncleanness
and adultery, love that will fence us against his temptations: to hatred and
revenge, brotherlye kindness that will fence us against all his temptations:
to morosotie and strangenes, meekness that will fence us against his
temptations: to wrath and waywardness, patience, that will fence us from his
temptations: to murmuring and unlawful means, using heavenly mindedness that
will arm us against all Satan's temptations to profaneness and worldliness.

But the Apostle does only set down these few that he names in this
chapter, either because these virtues were most wanting in the Ephesians, as
his manner was to speak fitly to the persons and purpose, or else because these
were sufficient to answer to the parts of a soldier, from whence he takes
his metaphor.

The Papists appoint other armor to withstand and drive away the devil, as
crucifixes, Agnis dies, a part of Saint John's Gospel about a man's neck,
crosses made on the forhead and breast, holy water, ringing of belles, but these
never came out of Gods armory.

If this were the armor to withstand the devil withal, the Apostle forgotte
himself that he told us not of it, neither here nor else where. Again if
this were good armor for that purpose, the wickedest man might withstand the
devil as well as the godliest man: for who cannot make a cross on his forhead,
wear a crucifixe about his neck, sprinkle himself with holy water, etc. But
that this is not the armor against the devil, appears hereby, that those who
have been most superstitious in these things* have been and are the vassels
of Satan and carried at his pleasure to Idolatry, heresy, blasphemy,
adultery, and such heinous sins.

But the furniture wherewith we must withstand the devil, is the armor of
God, that is prescribed to us in this chapter and in the rest of the Scripture,
that is the gifts and graces of regeneration and sanctification: as sound
knowledge, upright hartednesse, unfeigned faith and hope, a just and chaste
mind, an humble spirit, sober and loving affection, and a good conversation,
it is that which the Apostle has set down in a word, in the 4. chapter, put
on the new Ephe. 4.
man which is after God created in righteousness and true holiness, and this
is the cause that the devil, does carry men to many and dangerous sins,
because they have no grace nor divine power to resist him: the cause that he
carries men to hypocrisy and lies, is for that they want the girdle of virtue:
the cause that he carries them to injustice and wrong, is they want the
breast plate of righteousness: see the cause that he carries men to any other
vice, is because they want the contrary virtue. And mark, he wills the
Ephesians and us the second time to put on not a part, but the whole armor of
God: if a soldier be naked he may easily be hurt any where, if he be armed but
in some place he may be wounded on that part that lacks: but the Apostle
would have us to be wholely armed, that we may be foiled no where, neither in
our judgment, in our affection, nor in our conversation; the cause that some
of Gods servants have taken dangerous falls, has been the want of some of
their armor; how could Solomon have been so foiled as he was, if he had
not wanted sobrietye? had David received such a view of Satan think we if
he had put on chastity?

Some think if they have a little knowledge, they are christians good enough,
alas that is but one part, a man may have knowledge, what to believe, what to
do, and what to suffer, and yet be far enough of from the practice of it, a
Christian must be a general man, therefore says the Apostle Peter; Join unto
your faith virtue, and to virtue ^. Pet. 1.
knowledge, and to knowledge patience, and to patience temperance, and to
temperance godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness love; For there is no virtue or gift of regeneration, but we shall
have occasion to use diverse times in our life. One being advised by his friend
to ride with a weapon, answered what needs that, seeing a man shall meet with
a thief but once in seven years: but says he; if a man want it that once,
it is once too much, but we shall meet with this enemy every day, and shall
find by experience that all our Christian preparation is little enough to
maintain our pure religion, and keep our Iam. 1.
selves unspotted of the world, that ye may be able to, etc. Without this
armor of God, we are not able to resist the devil, for what power is therein
a subject to resist a Prince, what strength is in weak flesh to withstand a
mighty spirit, what wisdom is there in a foolish man to counteruaile the
subtle Serpent: but if we be armed with the armor of God and furnished with
his divine grace, then and there by we are made able to, etc. Therefore said
our Savior Christ to this Apostle when 2. Cor. 12.
he was in this battle and prayed for aid, My grace is sufficient for thee,
and he having experience that it was so, says, I am able to do all things by
the heple of him that strengthens me: and if it should be objected Paul was an
old man, therefore we cannot do as he did, Saint John writes to the church,
and speaking of common Christians, says; He that is borne of God, ouercomes
1. Ioh. 5. 4
the world. If we read the Scripture we shall see what great temptations the
servants of God have overcome by grace; as Moses, Joseph, Job, Daniel, and
others, we must be like the people of Ciuiensis who when the ambassadors of
Brutus would have them deliver their City unto him, returned his answer; tell
your captain Brutus our ancestors have left us weapons to defend our selves
and our City: so when the devil tempts us to yield our selves to him, let
us answer; our God has left us weapons to defend our selves from him.

Therefore if we would be able to stand upright against the temptations of the
devil, let us hear, read, pray and every way labor, to furnish our
selves, with knowledge, faith, hope, truth, justice, mercy, love, humilytie,
patience, meekness, and all the graces of Gods spirit.

And let us know this is none of the least of Satan's temptations, to persuade
men they may do well enough without them, or with some though they seek not
for all of them, and to think that those that have them do no great matters
with them.

How great a temptation of the devil in the person of a woman did Joseph Genesis
39
overcome by grace, when numbers with far less inticementes are carried to
adulterye? how great a temptation did the three children overcome by grace Dan.
3.
when thousands were for want of grace carried to idolatrye? as one says:
this proves not a man an innocent, because he is not accused, but being
accused he is able also to clear himself; so it proves not a man a Christian
that he is not tempted, but being tempted, he is able to overcome: therefore
says the Apostle: Put on the whole armor of God that ye may be able to
resist.

As the graces of God do enable us to withstand the devil in his temptations:
so we must put forth our strength and resist him. When Peter had said, 1.
Pet. ^.
your adversary the devil, goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he
may devour, he adds, whom resist steadfastly in the faith; James says,
Resist Iam. 4.
the devil and he will fly from you: some to excuse their falls say, the
temptation was so strong that it was impossible to withstand it: It may be it
was impossible for an unarmed man, but not impossible for a man furnished with
Gods grace.

Therefore let such a man know it was not so much the strength of temptation,
as his own weakness and cowardice that ouerthrewe him, he wanted grace or
did not resist; if he had he might have overcome, for there have been men,
yea women, that have overcome as great temptations as those; and let him tell
me, did he not use his own hands, his own eyes, his own feet, his own
tongue, whereof the devil has noe power, except by special license or
authority in the case of possession which is not ordinary, but his power and
practice is to entice men's hearts, and having won their Judgment, and won
their affection, they give their tongue to speak evil, or their hands or other
members of the body to commit evil; why do men these things and not resist,
but suffer themselves to be overcome of their spiritual enemy?

By this time we see cause, seeing it stands us upon life and death, to resist
the devil, but some man may ask how we should do it? I answer; our
resistance must be spiritual, as our enemy is spiritual: it is not enough to
say, I defy the devil, as some think, but if we would resist the devil, we
must resist sin, what sin soever it be that we are tempted to, whether
against the first table or the second table of the law, whether it be against
God directlye, as idolitry, blasphemy, perjury: or the worship of God, as the
neclect of the word, sacraments, or sabothes: or whether it be against men or
women, in the abridgement of their authority, of their lives, of their
chastity, of their goods, of their name* for we never are moved to any sin,
but we have to do with the devil directly or indirectly. If it be asked how
we should resist sin, I answer; I resist the motions unto it within, and the
persuasions and occasions unto it without; resist it in judgment, and say
with our selves, the devil stirs up my corrupt nature in my heart, or stirs
up such a man or such a woman to persuade me to such or such an evil thing, I
may not do it: resist it in affection, such a thing that the devil or his
instrument would draw me unto is evil, I wisl not do it: resist it in
conversation, such a thing that the devil persuades me to is evil, I will
have no hand, I will have no finger in it, I will stop my ears from hearing of
it, I will shut my mouth from defending it, I will turn away my feet from
following it.

Some may ask how a man should know the temptations of the devil, from the
corrupt motions of our own nature?

I answer; there is such an affinity and likeness between them, as it is hard
to distinguish them: therefore the safest way is to think that we have to
deal with both these enemies at once, and so to be the more strengthened
against them; but for a difference let us know when all evil motion to any
sin is raised, if spiritual force be added to draw us, or spiritual subtilty
to persuade us, which be two properties of the diuelles nature, let us think
besides our own corruption which is the broker, the devil himself is present
and is the prouoker; let us resist the first corrupt motions of our nature,
which the Apostle seems to call the 2. Cor. 12
messengers of Satan: as he says to the Collossians, mortify your earthly
members, Col. 3.
if we make such fair wars with these spiritual enemies, and kill them not
as many do, we shall have foul hands with them, and let us resist the devil
who will double and enforce those suggestions, by what reasons or persuasions
soever he does it, that all the power of hell may not prevail against us: and
to this end let us know as our Savior Christ says to his Disciples: Ye have
need of patience; so we have need of knowledge, of faith, of hope, of love
and other graces of the spirit of God, for Satan will not only assault us,
but perhaps continue his siege and battery a day, a week, a month, and give
us no respight and though he will sound the retreat and depart sometime for a
season, as Saint Luke Luke 4.
says, yet he will return again perhapes another way, and set upon us by
some other means: therefore arm your selves says the Apostle and resist him,
and if this battle seem hard and tedious unto us, remember in what cause we
fight, and for what crown: our Savior Christ says in the Revelation: He that
ouercometh, shall inherit great and glorious things: and Paul says; The
Saints shall judge the Angels that is the deuilles: Paul says to 1. Cor. 6.
Timothy; I have fought a good fight, and then he adds, I look for the
Crown, the Saints in heaven that are now crowned, have come unto it through
many temptations and tribulations: therefore let us harken to the Apostles
exhortation, be strong in the Lord, put on the whole armor of God, and resist
in the evil day, and the God of peace shall tread Romans 16.
down satan under ou^ feet shortly.

The Houre-glasse of Man's life.
PSALM. 90. 12. Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
to wisdom.
THIS whole book is called the book of Psalms, because it contains in it
for the most part matter of praise and thanksgiving, though there be many
other doctrines mingled therewithal.

They are called the Psalms of David, because he compiled most of them, not
because he made them all; for this was made by Moses, as ye may see by the
title of it.

We call this the 90. Psalm, because it is bound with the Psalms, and stands
in the place of that number, but it is entitled and that more fitly agreeing
with the matter of it* A prayer of Moses.

In which Moses sets forth the estate of man's life generally and
perticulerly of the people of Israel in the wilderness, where he saw many
thousands of them that came out of Egypt dye, some by one means and some by
another; as it is more largely recorded in the book of Numbers. Now Moses
considered that many of their forefathers lived almost a thousand years,
whereto he has respect in the 4. verse, where he says. One thousand ye^res
in thy sight is but as yesterday, and the life of man was grown shorter and
shorter, and in his time ordinarily it was not one hundred years, as appears
in the 10. verse. The days of a man are threescore years and ten, or
perhaps fourscore, which was nothing to their fathers: how much less when
they were cut off by strange punishments in the midst of their course, and
dyed thick and three-fould without warning.

Now after the mention of those things, he breaks out into this speech; Teach
us to know our days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom: In which words
are two things to be considered; first a petition, secondly a reason of the
petition. The petition is in these first words; Teach us to number our days:
The reason is in these other words in the end of the verse, that we may apply
our hearts to wisdom. Whereby we are taught first of al, that there is a
number of every man's days, for this difference to be considered between this
life and the next life; this life has an end, therefore it is called
temporal; the next life ends not, therefore it is called eternal the
certain number of our days is known Job. 14. 5
to God and not to us.

But he does not desire to know the certain number of his days, but rather
the uncertain number of them, that is, that God would teach them to know the
breuity and shortness of man's life: Therefore he sets it down by days and not
by years, and this he desires not for himself only, but for the people; and
therefore he says not, teach me, but teach us to number our days. Now
according to Moses prayer, God has taught us this point in the Scripture, that
all men are mortal and must dye, as the Lord said to Adam: In the day that
thou eatest of the tree in the midst of the garden thou shall die; although
the devil who (for that cause) our Savior Christ says John. 8.
Was a liar from the beginning, spoke contrary and said to Eve; Thou shall not
die at all: yet indeed Adam died; for although he dyed not by and by, yet he
was a dead man because sentence was passed upon him, and all his life afterward
was but a dying life: euerything then savoring of death, and every day being a
step unto death. If any will inquire what death is; to speak generally, it is
a separation from the condition of this mortal and temporal life: but to
speak more properlye, it is a separation of the soul and body; as the joining
together of the soul and body; at the first was the cause of life, as it is
said, God breathed into Adam the breath of life: and Genesis 1.
man was made a living soul, so the separation of the soul from the body, is
the cause of death, as Christ says to the rich man: This night they shall
fetch away thy soul thou shall dye; This Adam by his sin brought not only
upon himself, but upon all his posteritye, as Paul says: Romans 5.
By man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and death went over
all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned: therefore it is said not only of
Adam himself; but of diverse of the fathers that were his posterity, to show
the truth of Gods threatening to Adam: In the day Genesis 5.
thou do eat of such a tree thou shall dye; And to show the falcehoode of
the diuelles promise to Eve, that though s^e did eat it, she should not dye at
all: such and such a one lived thus many hundred years but he dyed, for though
the day be never so long, at length comes euensong; Heb. 9.
the Apostle says: It is appointed to al men once to dye, and after that comes
the judgment: when all men are dead, then comes the general judgment; but
when every one dies then comes his particular judgment; as appears in the
example of the rich man and Lazarus; for as the day of death leaves us, so the
day of doom shall find us; therefore David when he lay sick said: I go the
way of all the world, for death is as an impartial judge, that is
indifferent to all poor and rich.

Job speaks of some men that would seek death, either for the avoiding of
present sorrow, or procuring of future joy: but whether a man seeks it or no,
he shall be sure it will seek him. We read of a Heathen woman who when news
was brought her that her son was slain in the wars, answered: I know says
she that I conceived a mortal man. I once saw this posie written on the Tomb
of a dead man to be read of them that live: as I was so be ye, and as I am ye
shall be. But though reason and experience does teach us that all must dye, and
every one can say when he hears a knel there is one dead; and when he sees a
grave, here lies such a one: we see what we are, we have but a time here, yet
some do make no good use of it. When Alexander bad a Philosopher ask a reward
of him for some service or pleasure he had done for him, the Philosopher said;
give me immortality? Immortality said Alexander, how should a man that is
mortal give immortality? Mortal said the Philosopher, why then art thou so
greedy of kingdoms, and live as if thou should never dye? therefore God
would have it set down in the Scripture, that it might be a matter of faith,
as well as of reason that all must dye; both wise men as Solomon, and foolish
men as Nabal: both ^tch men as Job, and poor men as Lazarus: Marshall men as
Joab, and peaceable men as the inhabitants of Laish: both old men as
Methuselah, and young men as Josias: both tall men as Saul, and little men as
Zacheus: both strong men as Sampson, and beaufull men as Absalon, and not men
only but women also, as Dorcas: and not men and women only, but children
also as the Shunamites son, etc. It is not wit, wealth, strength, friends,
authority, nor any thing that can always preserve a man from death, who
knockes as indifferently at one man's gate as another. He that had come to the
tomb of Alexander, might have said; this great Monarch of the world, has
met with his ouer-match.

Now as both reason and religion teaches that death is certain, so that the
time, place and manner of dying is uncertain: there is no man knows the time
of his death; for although for special purpose God does reveal it to some,
as the devil being the executioner of some of Gods judgments, who the Witch
raised up in the likeness of Samuel, toulde Saul that to morrow he should be
with him. And it is said Julius Caesar was warned of the first day of March,
yet these were extraordinary and diabolical things: notwithstanding this is
ordinarily true in all men, that Jacob Genesis 49.
says of himself; I am old and know not the day of my death. Physicians in
the extremity of some disease, can give a great guess of others: and some that
have been at the departure of many, when they see the countenance wax pale,
the lips wax black, the pulse wax weak or gone, the hands and feet wax
cold, can give a near conjecture that death is not far of. Yet sometimes
these gesses do deceive them, for God brings down to the grave, and raises up
again; Therefore no man knows the day of his death till the day come, nor
the hour of his death till the hour come, but when it does come, then it
does as an enemy indeed assail the castle of the body, and ransack every
corner with terror, and drive the vital parts from one place to another, til
at the length it does chase away the soul.

As the time of death is uncertain, so is the place: some dye by sea, and some
by land, Saul dyed in the field, Eglon dyed in his Parlour, Ishbosheth dyed on
his bed, Senacherib dyed in the Temple of his God, Ioab at the very Altar, the
Infants of Bethelem dyed in the cradle.

And as the time and place is uncertain, so is the manner: some dye in peace,
and some dye in war, as Jonathan: some dye by Bears, as the children that
mocked the Prophet Elisha: some dye by Lions, as the young Prophet that
disobeyed the word of the Lord: some dye by the stinging of Serpents, as
many of the Isralites: some by Dogs, as Iesabell: some dye by Worms, as
Herod: some dye by surfeiting, as those that dyed with the Quails between
their teeth: some die by famine, as at the siege of Jerusalem: some dye by
violent winds, as the children of Job: some by fire as, the captains and their
fifties: some by the water as Pharaoh and his host: some by swallowing of the
earth, as Corah Dathan and Abyram: some dye by the Angel of God, as the first
borne in Egypt: some die by the hands of evil men, as Stephen who was
persecuted for righteousness: and some by the hands of good men, as Shemai who
having rayled upon David was executed by Solomon: some dye by their own hands
as Ahitophel: some die by the hand of God immediately and extraordinarily, as
Ananias and Saphira: some dye by the hand of God mediately and by ordinary
diseases: some dye suddenly, as Ezechiel says: When the people were gathered
in a great assembly, Pelatia the son of Benaza dyed: and as those that dye of
pestilent Feauours, Quinsies, Plurisies, etc. some dye of lingering sickenesses,
as Paulsies, Dropsies, Consumptions: some dye of excessive affections and
passions of the mind: some of sorrow, as the Apostle says; Worldly sorrow
causes death: some dye of fear, as Eli, when tidings came that the Arc was
taken he fell down and brake his neck: some dye of grief, as it is said
H^me^ did because he could not answer a riddle that certain fisher men
propounded unto him: some dye with joy, as it is reported of Sophacles, because
in a prize of learning he got the victory of his enemies: some dye by little
things as it is said, that a little gnat choked a Pope of Room. Auacreon had
his breath stopped with a Raysenstone, Lucia dyed with a Needle which her sucking
child smote into her breast.

Although there be but one way to be borne, yet there be more ways to dye.
Now as God has taught us that man's days are numbered, he must dye, so he has
taught us man's days are but a small number he must dye shortly: Job says;
Man that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live; Paul co^pares man's
life to a tabernade 2. Cor. 5.
or shed of bows that stands but a short time: the Prophet Esaias compares man's
life Esa. 1. 40
to grass that stands but a Summer: and in the same chapter, he compares it
to a flower* that has but his month. In the fifth verse of this Psalm, it is
compared to a sheep that has but his night, Job compares it to a shadow that
has but his hour: and in the 9. verse of this Psalm, Moses compares it to a
thought whereof there may be no less then a hundred in an hour, yea so
frail i^ man's life, that it may abide any extenuation in the world. We may be
compared to certain small flies which are bred by the River Hispanis, that in
the morning are bred, at noone are in their full strength, and at night make
their end and are gone. We now mourn for our friends departed, and shortly
other shall mourn for us. We supply the places of those that are gone, and
shortly other shall supply ours: We have here no abiding City, says the
Apostle, we seek one to come: in which respect we are called strangers and
Pilgrams 1. Pet. 2.
upon earth.

It is reported of one Artabanus, who seeing the huge army of Zearxes
containing a hundred thousand men, wept; and being asked why he did so? because
said he within a hundred years there shall not be a man left alive of this
great company: as I suppose this small company of less then a thousand men,
shall meet no more until we meet unto judgment, as we see many men shake
hands, purposing but a short absence, but it proves their last farewell.

And as the Scripture teaches Man's life is short, so that it passes swiftly
away, if the way be short, and the motion swift, there can be no hope of
any long continuance, where the way is short, and the motion slow, it may
stay the longer: as the children of Israel were fortye years passing through
the wilderness, because they went softely, which a swifte moouer might have
done in forty days: but where the way is short, and the motion swift, it
must needs come soon to an end, such is man's life: it is in the Scripture
compared to a Poast that hastes on the Kings business; it is compared to a
Weauers shuttle, that soon passes from one end of the Loome to the other: It
is compared to a thought that runs over the world in a moment: how short
do we think the time that is past? how soon do we think a week, a month,
a year to be gone? Therefore this is a necessary peticion of Moses; Teach us
so to number our days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. For what is
it by Geometry to take the breadth and length of the most huge things and
spacious prospects, and not to measure our life, which David says is but a
Spanne long. What is it with the cunning Philosopher to know the causes and
effects of many things, and neglect to consider our own frailety: with the
Historiographer to know and report what other have done, and to neclect the
knowledge of himself; with the lawyer to prescribe many precepts, and to
forget the common law of nature: with the Arithmetitian to be exact in numbering
and dividing the least fractions, and not to be able to number our days: What
is it to live like doctors in diverse faculties, and to dye God knows like
simple men: therefore says Moses: Teach us so to number our days that we may
apply our hearts to wisdom. For numbering of men, we have an example in David:
for numbering of money we have examples 1. Sam. 24
in Marchantes: for numbering of sheep and oxen it is found among Grasiers, and
every man has Arithmetic enough to number the things of this life: but there
be few that do rightly number their days, for where is there one of a hundred
that does not either forget his mortality, or if he do remember it does not
proroge his life, and persuade himself of many years: or if not, yet that
does apply his heart to wisdom in his time: therefore although Moses himself
had well learned his lesson, as appears by taking such a fit occasion as I
named in the beginning, to fall into this meditation, and as appears by the
diverse suitable speeches he uses in this prayer, yet because he saw the most
men still ignorant, forgetful, secure and unwise. He prays God to give them
grace to consider their frail and mortal estate, and wisely to make use of it.

But some may say, what need we seek any further? Moses himself in the 10.
verse has set down the number of our days, where he says; The days of a
man are threescore years and ten: but we must mark, there he compares the
shortness of man's life in his time, with the length of man's life in the days
of his fathers, who lived seven hundred, eight hundred and nine hundred
years, and now the age or life of man was but threescore years and ten, or
four score; as Jeremy prophesied, that the Isralites should be in captivity
in Babell seventy years, that is a whole generation: and yet in the tenth
verse, in those words Moses meant not to set down the certain term of every
man's life, for then he needed not to have made this petition; Teach us to
number our days: but he had experience as we have, that some dyed in their
infancy, some in their childhood, some in their middle age, and some live till
that full term, then they dye: yet whereas one Apple hangs on the Tree tell it
be mellow and falls of it self, there be a hundred that are broken off with
violent hands and violent winds.

But suppose a man should live till he be threescore years and ten, half
that time is spent in sleeping, which may be subtracted from the gross sum,
and then there remains but thirty and five years, whereof we may deduct
fifteen years of our childhood, wherein we are rather troublesome then
profitable, and not fit to do any great service, either to God or men, and
so there remains but twenty years: now take from that the time that is spent
in wickedness, the time that is spent in idleness, the time that is spent in
superfluous eating, drinking and other necessary things, and then consider how
little time remains wherein we apply our hearts to wisdom, even of those
who live threescore years and ten, how much less of those who dye sooner?
But this was but a supposition that a man may live so long, for Saint James
says; A man cannot tell Iam. 5.
whether he shall live tell to morrow. Now the time that is past is gone, and
cannot be called again, (therefore Time was wont to be painted with hair
before and balde behind:) the time that is to come, is none, and cannot be
presumed upon; (Therefore it is said of a wise man, he would make no
promise for to morrow:) so that we have none but the present time to apply
our hearts to wisdom.

Moses has done what he can in this Psalm, to instruct all men in the
knowledge of the brevity of their life, and uncertain certaintye of their
death, and prays to God in these words to teach them further and better: for
all that is said in the Scripture, as well in this, as any other matter, shall
be unfruitful, except God does teach the heart as well as the ear; for it is
not the planting of Paul, nor the watring of Apollo, 1. Cor. 3.
but God that gives the increase. Now we have seen his peticion for the
numbering of our days, let us come to his reason, that we may apply our
hearts to wisdom.

He desires God not only to teach us to number our days, but so to teach it
us, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, and not to folly: Men are in
extremities of every side; some all their desire is to dye and to be gone: some
all their desire is to live and never to dye: some again know they must away,
and are content to tarry their time, but do not seek for wisdom, and study
to live well while they be here. There be some, who although their lives be
short and too short if they were best employed, to become so wise as they
should, yet by laying violent hands of themselves do make them shorter, but
this is not wisdom but foolishness. In the sixth commandment it is said;
Thou shall not kill, one observes upon that, because it is not added, thy
neighbor, he means also thy self. If it be a great sin for a man to kill
another, it is a greater sin to kill himself: again, life is a blessing of
God, and death is a part of the curse. Now a man may not thrust from him the
blessing of God, and pull upon himself the curse: God and not we does appoint
the time of our birth, so God and not we must appoint the time of our death.

No good man that we read of in the Scripture, neither Job, David, Lazarus,
nor any other, though they were in great extremity did kill themselves, but
only wicked men and reprobates, as Saul, Ahitophell and Judas. Cleombrotus a
Heathen man, hearing of the immortallity of the soul, killed himself, that
he might obtain immortality, being ignorant that there is immortality in
hell as well as in heaven: and Lucretia and certain Heathen women killed
themselves that they might not be defiled with Soldiers, not knowing that the
body is not defiled, if the mind be chaste, and yet if it were uncertain,
adultery should not have been so much feared as certain murder, they should
not so much have feared a sin that might be repented, as a sin that could
not be repented, because time was cut off, homiside has always been so
detestable a thing in the Church, that such have been denied Christian
burial, that where most men are with-houlden from sin by the fear of death,
seeing they do not fear death, they might fear something after death, that
is, the reproach of those that live. There was one said to his son who had
often these words in his mouth; I would I were dead: I prithee (says he)
learn first to know what it is to live. Some in crosses will say, I would I
were as deep under the earth as I am high, but way first wherefore God has
placed you upon the earth, and caused you to grow so high as ye be, and what
he does require of you: and way whether ye have done it or no, and what
reward abides for you, if you have not; and then consider whether it be not
fitter to learn to be wise and to live better first.

Some again, as I said, are in the other extremity, and would live still and
never dye; many old men that have lived long already would not dye, as
appears by marrying young women, and building new houses; but such men have
neither right reason to consider of the estate of this life, nor true faith to
consider of the estate of the life to come, this is a life full of misery, and
the next to the children of God, is a life full of felicity. It is said of
Hereclitus, that every day he wept, and being asked the reason, he answered;
Because the world was full of misery. The Thratians at the birthe of their
children ever wept, their reason was, because they were borne to misery; and
at the death of their children ever reioysed, because they were freed from
misery, as they thought: Paul says of himself and the Church; If our hope
were only in this life, we were of all other 1. Cor. 15
the most miserable: All men are miserable in this life, but those most
miserable that have most afflictions, if there be not hope to sweeten them:
indeed no man lives one day, wherein one grief or danger or other does not
weight upon him in regard of his soul or his body, his goods or his name,
his wife, his children, his friends, his Prince or country, in regard of the
temptations of the devil, the world and the flesh; we see many dangers, but
wisemen do foresee more. From the Cradle to the grave we are toste with
troublesome things; and if in our life we meet with any profitable or
pleasante things, they soon vanishe away, at the least the pleasure of them.
As one says; When a Spider has emptied even her very bowels to make one
slender Web, one puff of wind blows all away: so when men with labor and
travel have procured any thing that they desire in the world, they are soon
blown away.

But a good man, that does not only consider the misery of this life, but the
felicity of the life to come, does find no such contentment in the best
estate of his life that he would desire always to dwell in it, and why should
any man desire to continue in the world? faithfulness in the most is gone, love
is gone, and so comfort in respect of men is gone, and seeing we must needs
away why not now, and if we would not now when then, will not the world be
unto us twenty years hence as it is now: where is the longing of Paul to be
dissolved and to be with Christ? where is the longing of Saint Augustine to see
that head that was crowned with thorns? and to see those hands that were
pearsed with nails? As death takes us from our friends, so it takes us from
our enemies, as it takes us from the delights of the world; so from the
griefs and sorrows of the world: therefore why should men be unwilling to
die, seeing Solomon Eccle. 7.
says, which belongs to good men indeed: The day of death is better then the
day that a man is borne; death indeed considered in it self, is to be
abhorted: but considered as Christ's death has made it to us having taken away
the sting of it; it is to be embraced, as the end of a miserable life, and the
beginning of a happy life. As the Apostle says of the seed: It is not
quickened except it ^. Cor. 15
die; So he says of us: and as it is not the worse for the seed that it is
plowed and harrowed into the ground: so it is never the worse for us, that a
little earth is thrown over us, when the Sun of righteousness shall
appear, we shall spring more freshlve. Therefore seeing Christ is to his both
in life and in death advantage, let a good man or good woman say, if I Phil. 4.
live I shall do well, and if I dye I shall do better. How does a bride
rejoice when her husband calls for her, though her mother and friends do
weep for her departure into another country, yet if modesty would suffer it,
then she could laugh because she goes to him that has her heart. It is a
worthy saying of Jacob that I have thought of many a time, when he was sick and
in the midest of his speech with Joseph and his other sons; Lord (says he) I
have waighted for thy salvation: therefore let no man so desire this life, but
let him be content to change it for a better; for it is an absurd thing, that
natural inclination should ouerrule the force of Christian hope.

There is a third sort of men, as I said before, who know they must dye, and
will peradventure be content to yield to death when it comes, but they will
not labor for wisdom while they live, therefore it were well they would often
take up this petition of Moses. Teach us to number our days that we may apply
our hearts to wisdom: But what wisdom does Moses mean? If he had bin a
Phisitio^, we might have thought he had meant natural wisdom, to provide
Methredates and preseruations for this life: if he had been a Philosopher, we
might have thought by wisdom, he had meant humane wisdom, to know the nature
of things in the firmament, in the earth, and in the sea, to observe things
past, and to guess at all things to come: but Moses was learned in all the
wisdom of the Egiptians; therefore he prays not for that wiseodme which he
had, but for that which he and the people wanted: if he had been a Politision
as Matcheuill calls him, we might have thought he meant here worldely
wisdom, to heap up honors, riches, and prefermentes for himself and his
posterity: but his practice was against this wisdom, for he refused to be
called the son of Pharaoes daughter, and the pleasures and treasures of
Egypt, and Heb. 11.
his drift in this place shows that he means not this wisdom; for what
similitude had there been between this petition, that God would teach them to
number their days, that is to know the breuitye and vncertainetye of their
life, and his reason: That we may apply, our hearts to wisdom: if he had
meant this wisdom to heap up riches and honors which we must shortly
leave behind us: therefore we must know Moses being a divine, he prays
for spiritual, Godly, and heavenly and true wisdom, that is, the knowledge
and practice of the word of God, which is able to make a man wise unto
salvation; this is the wisdom that Solomon 1. King. 3
the wisest man in the world prayed for, before riches, long life, or the
life of his enemies, and which he says in the Proverbs, is better then
Gold Pro. 3.
and Pearls, to show that it will recompense all the cost that can be
bestowed upon it.

This is the wisdom that the Queen of Sheba took such a long journey for,
to show that it will recompense all the 1. Kin. 10
labor that can be bestowed for it, and this is it that shall iustiye procure
the title of wise men, as Moses says, of those that hear and obey the word
in Deutron^mie: De^.
it shall be said of them, they only are a wise people; and in respect of
this wisdom, our Savior Christ calls the true professors of the Church
wise virgins. Mat. 25.


Wherefore Moses says: Teach us so to number our days that we may apply our
hearts to wisdom; For that which is rotten and tottering, had need lean to a
stable thing; we have seen how frail the body is, therefore we had need of
wisdom, whereby we may repair the soul: we have seen this life is short
and uncertain, therefore we had need of wisdom, that we may seek for a
better life that is everlasting: seeing we shall leave all outward things
behind us, we have need of wisdom that we may have some thing to carrye
with us.

Wisdom is a general word, and comprehendes all that a man is to believe, to
do, to suffer before death that may make him happy in the next life, Paul that
speaks of the shortness of man's life, and compares it to a tabernacle, or a
shed of bows: He 1. Cor. 5.
wills maiestrates to govern their subjects equally: and he wills subjects
to obey their gouerners dutifully; he wills ministers Romans 13.
to attend unto reading, and to preach 2. Tim. 4.
in season and out of season: he wills the gouerners of the Church to rule
with diligence, Romans 12.
and to redress the things that remain: he wills the Christians to come
Titus. 1.
together every first day of the week, not only to here the word, pray, and
receive the sacraments, but to distribute to the poor: Ephe. 6.
he wills husband to love their wives, and wives to obey their husbands: he
wills children to honor and obey their parents, and parents to instruct
their children: he wills servants to obey and show all good faithfulness to
their masters, and masters Titus. 2.
to do that which is right to their servants, for says he we must all die and
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ* and receive according
to that we 2. Cor. 5.
have done in this body; now he that would lie soft must make his bed
thereafter: therefore when Moses says; Teach us so to number our days that we
may apply our hearts to wisdom: he means that we may walk not as fools but
as wise, redeeming the time as Paul says: that we may get knowledge, Ephe. 5.
faith, repentance, and grow in every grace and virtue belonging to our
renouation here, and salvation hereafter, and that while it is called to day
according to the counsel of Solomon: Remember thy maker Eccle. 1^.
in the days of thy youth; before the keepers of the house tremble, that is
the hands; before the strong men shall bow, that is the legs; before they
wax dark that look out at the windows, that is the eyes: before the
daughters of music shall be abased, that is the ears: before the Grasshoppers
or crooked shoulders shall be a burden; and before the wheel shall be broken
at the cesterne, that is the heart: and before dust return to the earth whence
it came, for that which foolish men desire to do in the end, wisemen labor to
do in the beginning: as one says wisely; When I was young I studied how to
live, and now I am old I study how to dye. The Apostle says: It is appointed
to all men once to dye; now that which is once, and but once to be done, is to
be carefully done, for to dye well, says master Perkins is an art that must
be learned as long as we live: therefore he that would dye well, must be
careful to live well, he that must be at an hours warning will have all
things ready, his cloak, his boots, his spurs and all, we may be called for
within this hour where is our cloak, our boots, that is our virtues, and
readiness for our journey to be gone, he that would be perfectly wise in the
life to come, must labor to be partly and truly wise in this world,
therefore Moses says hear: Teach us so to number our days that we may a^ply
our hearts to wisdom. And mark that he says; Apply our hearts to wisdom:
Not our ears to hear of it only, nor our tongues to speak of it only: but
our hearts to think of it, and he means not a few wandering thoughts of
wisdom; but a serious and conscionable bending of our judgment and affection
to those things that wisdom requires, that we may look both near enough
what we are now, and far enough, what we shall be afterward, and think of
it soon enough, and think of it long enough.

It is not enough to hear a funeral sermon and to speak of death, but to
think of it; nor to hear of heaven and speak of better life, but think of
it, what it is to have it, and what it is to want it.

Mark, he makes to consideration of death a reason to apply our hearts to
wisdom, we are so unapt to goodness that we had need of reasons to
persuade us to every good thing, and we are so apt to foolish things, that we
had need have some reasons to persuade us to wisdom: now there is no reason
of more force then this; that our life is short and uncertain, and we cannot
tell whether we have a week, a day, or an hour, to learn this long lesson.

There is nothing can teach a man better how to live then to think every day
to dye, the wise man says; If thou would remembe^ thy end thou should
not sin; Ezechias when the message of death came to him, how profitable were
his meditations, Jacob, Joshua, and David, how careful Esai. 38.
were they to instruct their families, and to do such things as were to be
done? when they did see and say; we go the way of all the world: therefore
says Solomon, It is better to go into the house of mourning, then into Eccle.
7.
the house of banqueting: For he that is wise will lay it to his heart. Philip
king of Macedon appointed his chamberlain every morning to cry unto him,
Phillip remember thou art mortal and must dye: and it is said to this day
Presbiter John has served to his table a deaths head in a platter, to put him
in mind of his mortallity, and many men it seems to the same end does wear a
deaths head in a ring on their finger: nay every one does wear death it
self in his finger, for every ache and every pain does put a man in mind,
though he be now well he shall be sick, and though he now walk strongly he
shall lie weak though he now live, he shall die. Therefore says Moses; Teach
us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, for
forgetfulness of death, is the cause that we apply our hearts to follye, as
the five foolish Virgins, who thought not of preparing themselves till the
Bridegroom Mat. 25.
came. As many put of repentance till the last, and are busi^d about any thing
save that is most necessary. Moses knew that both wise and foolish dye, but
diversely; Wise men dye, and do after death receive the reward of their
wisdom; fools dye and receive the fruit of their folly. Therefore let us
apply our hearts to wisdom, that whether Christ send for us by his Angels,
we may be received into Abraham's bosom; or if we tarry till he come
himself, we may be received into the wedding chamber.

The reward of Religion and Godliness, and punishment of irreligious
wickedness.
LVKE. 16. 19. There was a certain ritche man which was clothed in Purple and
sine linen, and fared well and delicately every day.

20. Also there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his
gate full of sores.

21. And desired to be refreshed with the crummes that sell from the ritche
man's table, and the dogs came and licked his sores.

22. And it was so that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom: the rich man also dyed and was buried.

23. And being in hell in torments, etc. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30*


THis text stands of two parts; the first is a History, the second is a
Parable: the History continues unto the 23 verse, Wherein our Savior Christ
sets forth an example of a rich man, whom he describes by his apparel, by
his diet, by his death and burial: and of a poor man, whom he describes by
his name, by his infirmities, and other circumstances. The Parable continues
from the 23. verse, to the end of the Chapter: wherein our Savior Christ by
parabolicall speeches, for our capacity, sets forth such things as else we
could not conceive. For where it is said, the rich man being in hell should
lift up his eyes and see Abraham and Lazarus, and should speak to him with his
tongue, and Abraham should hear him and answer him again; These things must
be understood after the manner of Parables, for the rich man's body was not in
hell, but in the grave: it is said he was buried, only his soul was in hell:
therefore he had not the use or government of his eyes to see, of his ears
to hear, nor of his tongue to speak, neither were the bodies of Abraham and
Lazarus in heaven, that they should hear the rich man, or speak unto him;
therefore the rehearsal of corporal sight, hearing and saying, is after the
manner of Parables, for our capacity and instruction, that we might know how
the estate of the good and bad shall differ in the next life, from that it is
in this life: how they that have here served God, reverenced his word, loved
their brethren, fathfully done their duties, and patiently borne their crosses,
shall in the next life be comforted and rewarded, and those that have here
dishonored God, contemned his word, neglected their brethren, and not done nor
suffered such things as God would have them, shall in the next life be
perpetually punished, and in vain shall desire the least mitigation of their
misery.

The drift of our Savior Christ in this example, is to discourage the Pharisees
from their wickedness, or else in this rich man to behold their doom, and to
encourage his disciples in virtue and goodness, and so in this poor man to
behold their reward.

The rich man is set in the first place, because in this life he had the
preferment; and he is purposely described to have the world at will for the
back and the belly, he had as much as heart could wish; for the back, he was
clothed with Purple* a color both costly and goodly for the sight, and fine
linen soft and easy next the skin, for feeling for the belly he fared
deliciouslie, that is, he had many pleasant and dainty dishes of meat, and
that not once or twice a week, but every day: he had also diverse other things
answerable and suitable to these; as a stately house, for it is said, Lazarus
lay at his gate or gate house, and might not have access to his inner
building, he had also diverse servants to wait upon him, for it is said, no
man gave relief to Lazarus, neither the master nor any of his men: likewise
he had a kennell of Hounds for Hunting, or Spanniels for Hawking, for it is
said the Dogs came and licked Lazarus sores: but our Savior Christ
specially notes his apparel and diet, to show his unmercifulness, that
having abundance of the things that Lazarus wanted, being hungrye and cold
he would not relieve him.

The meaning of the Holy Ghost is not to condemn the use of costly apparel
and pleasant meat, as some peradventure may think, for if we could have heard
it said of this rich man, as it is said of rich Job, That he sed the
hungry, and clothed the naked; we should have had no cause to mislike his
abundance, for apparel and that of all colors is ordained of God, not only
for our nakedness, but also for our comeliness; meat and drink of all kinds
is ordained of God, not only for our emptiness, but also for our daintiness,
not only for necessity, but also for solemnity; although this man having no
grace, no doubt did abuse his abundance, to surfeiting and gluttony; therefore
he is commonly called the rich glutton, which sin is much spoken against in
other places of Scripture, and must be avoided of us as that which will bring
us not only to other sins, but to condemnation, as the Apostle says: and
therefore one says; No marvel Phil. 3.
though of all other creatures the devil did take such delight in the Hogs,
because they are so like his cormorants. But our Savior Christ condemns his
unmercifulness, that though he had plenty of means, yet he had no mind to do
Lazarus good.

This man was a carnal man, that did only feed his body, and cared not for
the food of the soul; he regarded not Moses and the Prophets, he studied to
clothe the ^ody, and cared not for the apparel of the soul; he wanted love
and liberality: he had his portion in this life, but none in the life to
come, for he went to hell.

Some think, because they fare not deliliciouslie, nor go apparrelled
gorgiously as this man did, they are without the compass of this condemnation;
but it is not the having of these things, but the want of grace to use them
well that condemned him: therefore though they have not that he had, yet if
they want that he had not, they may go to hell. Some think there be no bad
men but murderers, adulterers, d^u^kards, blasphemers, and such like, but the
Scripture says, that worldly and covetous 1. Cor. 6.
men be wicked men and shall perish also.

Some think if they cannot be charged with getting their goods ill, there can
be no plea against them for the use of them; but the Scripture condemns not
only oppressors and deceivers, but also uncharitable niggards, and not only
those that be unjust, but those that be unmerciful shall bear their
judgment: how much more those that be both unjust and unmerciful? Some say
they may do what they list with their own, but first consider the things we
have are not our own; The earth is the Lords (says David) and all that is
therein, he is the owner of them in fee simple, we have but a lease from him
for life, or for term of years, and with Prouiso, that we make no strip nor
wast, that we perform the Lords service, appear in his courts or assemblies,
that we pay him his rent, that is, tribute to Caesar, maintenance to the
Minister, and relief to the poor; and those that do not, the Lord may
daily, and will reasonably say to every man, as it was said to the unjust
Steward; Give account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer
Steward.

There was a certain beggar. There has always been, are, and shall be
diversities of estates and degrees in the world, some rich and some poor, and
many times it falls out, though not always, that wicked men have a greater
portion of outward things, then godly men, that Salomons words Eccle. 9.
might be confirmed; No man knows by these things whether he be loved or
hated, that is, No man can say because I am ritche, therefore I am loved of
God, for Dives was ritche and yet hated; not because he was ritche, but
because he was naught; and no man can say I am poor, therefore I am hated, for
Lazarus was poor, and yet loved, not because he was poor, but because he was
good.

How Lazarus became poor, it is not set down, there be many means of
impouerishment: sometime men become poor by the oppression of the rich, that
by force take from them that is theirs, as Ahab took away Naboth^s vineyarde:
sometime 1. Kin. 21
by rich men's defrauding and deminishing of their wages: sometime by fire,
water, Iam. 5. 3.
thieves, which we call mischances or casualties, though it come not to pass
without the providence of God, as we see in the example of Job. Job. 1.


But it is most probable that Lazarus became poor by sickness or other
infirmities of the body, spending that he had upon Physicians and Surgions, or
upon himself in the want of ability to labor.

And being poor he begged, for though it be said in the law there shall be no
beggar in Israel: yet the meaning is not that the poor being in extremity may
not beg, but that the rich, and men of authority, should use such contribution
and care of them, that they need not beg, which was neglected now,
especially toward Lazarus that he was feign to beg, for though David
says; I have been young and n^w am old, yet did I never s^e the righteous
forsaken nor his seed beg their bread; yet we must understand it, not as a
thing that never falls out: but that he never saw when the Church in his
time was well ordered, and the commandment of God regarded: but afterward the
state of the Church and common wealth of Israel grew out of order, and then
two blind men stood by the way side begging, then a cripple lay at the
beautyfull gate of the Temple, to ask alms of Peter and Acts. 3.
John; then Lazarus lay at the rich man's gate and desired crummes, but this
was the fault of the gouerners to suffer this, and not of Lazarus to do this:
now as the law of God says; There shall be no beggar in Israel: So the law
of the prince says there shall be no beggar in England, 2. Cor. 16
and as the Scripture appointes this means of releeuing the poor, that every
first day of the week that is every Saboth, when the people came together,
they should lay somewhat a part, as God had blessed them, in the judgment of
their own consciences: And the same should be distributed in simplicitye by
the Deacons: So the law of the Prince appoints, that men should lay apart some
thing for the use of the poor, as God has blessed* them, in the judgment of
their neigbours, and the same should be distributed by the hands of
ouer-seers: and if any Town be surcharged with poor, the law appointes that
other Towns and persons less charged, shall be assistant unto them, at the
discretion of the Justices: I would to God this Godly order were so well
observed, that we might say with David: In our time I have not seen the
righteous and their s^ede b^gge their bread.

But in some places this is not brought yet into order, and in some other
places it is again quickly grown out of order, for some Townsmen do not
rate themselves and their neighbors conscionably and proportionably, as they
may provide for the poor, but as they may satisfy their own humors, and
content one another: and overseers that should be as it were fathers for the
poor, are neglygent to call for the amendment of this fault, and where it
cannot be helped at home because of the multitude of poor: They are neglygent
to call to the justices of peace to procure help from other places, and I wish
Justices of peace being complained unto, would not be negligent to draw
other persons and parishes, to contribute to their neighbor Towns as the law
appoints, for then it will come to pass that not the poor, but the rich
shall be relieved by this good statute, who do spare a great matter of that they
did give at their doors, and as they traveled by the ways; especially
Gentlemen and yeomen that dwell in little villages and hamlets, as it were
alone, who were in time past most cloyed, are now either nothing or very
little charged, if they be not drawn into a proportionable contribution by the
order of the good law that is prescribed. What a furtherance justices of peace
may be to the relief of the poor; not only by their purses being of great
ability, but by their authority, having the ability of other men as it were at
commandment, we may easily conceive, now those that will not do the good
they may, shall not have the reward they would.

It was no great alms that Lazarus desired, yet he could not get it, the
dogs were more merciful then their master, they gave Lazarus their tongues,
but he would not give them his crumbs, the Prophet Amos speaks of such men in
his time Amos. 6.
that did drink wine in bowls, but did not remember the affliction of Joseph.

I might here take just occasion to enter into a common place of liberality,
and that not unprofitably, in respect of the great necessity and use of it:
especially at this time, when the love of many waxes cold, and in respect of
that which followed to this man for want of it: but because it is an argument
often spoken of by many, and plentifully written of by some, I will pass it
over; only let us mark some necessary circumstances that are pertinent to
this example.

1 Whereas the nobleness of all creatures consist in giving, and the more
bounty that is in any, the more praise; what a base thing was it in this man
that he would not practice it.

2 Although many are bound to this duty, yet rich men are most bound to it;
therefore consider what a covetous part it was in him not to do it.

3 The Apostle says: Rich men should be rich in good works, according to
that proportion that our Savior Christ speaks of; He that has much let him
give plentifully; therefore what a miserly thing was it in him, that he would
give nothing, no not the crummes.

4 Although there must be care had of diverse other poor, yet the sick and
sore should not be neglected: therefore how great vnmercyfulnesse was it in
this man that had no pittye on such a one.

5 Paul says, we are bound specially to respect the household of faith,
therefore what impiety was it in this man, not to relieve Lazarus who was a
godly man.

6 Lastly although many civil men that have no religion in them, who will not
give alms religiously according to the rules of the Scripture, yet for vain
glory, and ostentation they will give to those that come to their doors:
therefore what inhumanitye was in this man that would not give at his gate nor
any way.

He was one of them the Apostle speaks of, that is a reprobate to every good
work, and that our Savior Christ spoke of, to Titus. 1.
whom it shall be said at the day of judgment: Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire; Mat. 25.
for when I was hungry ye fed me not: therefore let us be content to feed
Christ in his members, with our meat, who was content, to feed us with his
own flesh.

Lazarus dyed: It is like he dyed for want of relief, and then the rich man
was gilty of his blood, and he was punished there after: in the law it is said
if a man be slain, the Elders of the Cittye shall wash their hands and say,
they are free from the blood of that man. How can rich men in some Towns now
wash their hands, and say they are free, when many of the poor do perish
through their default, both in not releeuing them, and procuring them relief:
But mark, Lazarus dyed. When Adam sinned, he killed himself and all his
posteritye, for although he died not by and by, yet his life after was but a
dying life, every day he set forward a step unto death.

And this example does witness that which Solomon speaks. Wisemen dye as well
as fools: but yet to a diverse end, good men dye that they may rest from
their labors, lay aside the miseries of this life, and receive the reward of
their virtues: bad men dye, that they may lay aside the pleasures of this
mortal life, and receive the reward of their vices. Therefore James speaking
to wicked rich men says: Houle for the miseries that shall come upon you; for
your meriment shall not last always, and speaking to the godly poor, he
says: Be patient therefore brethren and settle your hearts till the coming of
the Lord, for your oppression and misery shall not last always: It is said,
Lazarus was carried by the Angels, etc.

The Angels as the author to the Hebrews Heb. 1.
says; Are ministering spirits, for their sakes, who are appointed to
salvation, they do minister unto them diverse ways in this life, sometime
revealing the counsel of God unto them, as Gabriell did Luke 1.
to the virgin Mary touching the birth of Christ: sometime ministering to them
corporal food, as the Manna that the children of Israel did ea^e in the
wilderness is called Psalm.
Angels food, because it was ministered by Angels: sometimes by preserving
them from danger; as the two Angels did Lot from the insurrection of the
Sodomites: sometime in delivering them out Genesis 19.
of danger, as when Peter was in prison, the Angel opened the door of the
prison and the gate of the City: therefore it is Acts. 12.
said; they pitch their tents round about those that fear God also, as they
minister Psalm. 34
to the Saints dyuersely while they live, so when they dye to carry their
souls into the place of joy; therefore Doctor Fulke when he dyed made this
peticion, Lord send thine Angel to fetch away my soul.

But whether did the Angels carry Lazarus, it is said into Abraham's bosom:
he that in his life could not be admitted into rich Dives his house, but was
feign to lie at the gate with the dogs, at his death is taken into rich
Abraham's bosom, where Dives might not come: the Papists say, by Abraham's
bosom is meant Limbus patrum, or place of custody, where the fathers were kept
from the beginning, till Christ came and fetched them out: but by Abraham's
bosom is not meant their feigned Limbus Patrum, but the kingdom of heaven, as
our Savior Christ says in another place* Many shall come from the East, and
from the West and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom^ of
heaven, when the children of the kingdom shall be cast out: Lazarus was not in a
place of custody, but of felicity, he was comforted: if any shall ask why it is
called Abraham's bosom; he must know the Scripture gives it diverse names,
sometime it is called the presence of God; Solomon Eccle. 2.
says: The souls of the righteous go t^ God that gave them; Sometime it is
called Paradise, as our Savior says to the thief on the cross: This day
thou shall be with Luke 23.
me in Paradise; A place of honor and pleasure, after thy sorrow and shame:
here he calls it Abraham's bosom, because it is the reward not only of
Abraham himself, the father of the faithful; but of all his true seed: and
the rather because he speaks to the Jews, who all bosted they were the
children of Abraham: but Christ by this example teaches them, that those who
are the children of Abraham according to the flesh, may perish for all that as
Dives did, but those only who are the children of Abraham according to the
faith, shall be saved.

If I should remember you again of Lazarus his former misery, when he lay
full of sores at the rich man's gate, and should compare it with his present
felicity, I should but lead your minds into admiration, with the strange
difference. If we see a great man in his working day clothes, we think him no
body and little regard him, but if we observe him in his holy day robes, we
do make more reckoning of him: So consider Lazarus, as he was clothed with
corruption, and ye will think him worse then the Worms: but consider him as
he is clothed with incorruption, ye will think him better then Kings: of
Lazarus his former wretchedness, ye may sufficiently conceive, but his
present blessedness ye cannot fully reach, for says Saint John: We know what
we are, but 1. Ioh. 3.
it does not appear what we shall be; And Saint Paul says: No eye has
seen, nor no 1. Cor. ^.
^^re has heard, nor no heart can conceive the thing that God has prepared
for those that l^ue him.

We have seen many wonderful things, we have heard more wonderful things,
and we may conceive most wonderful things, but we never saw, heard, nor
fullye thought of this: therefore one says; If thou see any goodlye thing,
yet say that is not it, for if it were, it could not enter into thine eye: if
thou hear of any excellent thing, say that is not it, for if it were, it
could not enter into thine ear: if thou do conceive and comprehend any
excellent thing, say that is not it, for if it were, it could not enter into
thy heart, we cannot conceive the excellencye of Adams estate in Paradise
before his fall, which yet was but an earthly happiness, how much less can
we conceive this which is heavenly; therefore the Apostle says: We live by
faith and not by sight.

Yet that we might be encouraged to walk in the narrow way that leads unto
it, and be contented through many tribulations, to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, as Lazarus was: let us consider of the excellency of his estate, now by
comparing it with his former.

First for the place, before he lay at the rich man's gate or gate house
without, a base place for beggars: now he is advanced, not into the rich man's
parlor, or into the presence chamber of a Prince, no not of the king of China,
which as it is said is so set with precious stones that it shines bright in
the dark night: but into heaven it self, which is called the throne of the
king of kings. There are three places appointed unto a man, the first is his
mothers womb before this birth, the second is this world in the time of his
life, the third is heaven after this death: now how much the second does excel
the first, so much and much more does the third excel the second. And as
there is a great change unto Lazarus of the place, so of the presence: before
his company was beggars, yea dogs, for it is said the dogs licked his
sores: but now he was advanced into Abraham's bosom, that is the communion of
the Saints, and not only of Saints, but also of Angels, and not only of
Mat. 22.
Saints and Angels, but of God himself, and Christ Jesus the head of the
Church, as he says to his Disciples: I go to prepare John. 14.
a place for you that where I am there you may be also; and as Lazarus and
those that be in heaven, do enjoy this company, so no other company, they
have no more to do with bad Angels, and bad men and women, but with good
Angels and good men and women.

Thirdly mark, Lazarus before when he lay at the rich man's gate, was a base
and forlorn person clad with rags and full of sores: But now he is in an
estate of glory, as it is said; The righteous shall shine as the Sun, which
is so glorious a creature that in some countries they worship it, yea the Sun
is inferior in glory to those that are and shall be glorified in heaven.

Further mark, before when he lay at the rich man's gate he was hungrye,
cold, sick, sore and full of pain, but now as John says in the Revelation,
of all those that are translated into a better life: He does hunger no more,
thirst no more, there is no more sickness nor death, for the first things are
past.

And it is said, here he was comforted, and not with a small comfort, but
with unmeasurable comfort: such as Peter says, the Christians that were in
fierye tryalles and afflictions did rejoice with joy, unspeakable 1. Per. 1.
and glorious in hope of it. David in his meditations of it, and prayer to God;
says, In they presence is the Psalm. 16
fulness of joy, for there is nothing to abate our joy as it is here,
seeing the first things are past, neither shall there want any thing that may
further our joy: there we shall behold more goodlye things then ever we
saw, not only the perfect beautye and excellencye of the Saints, but the
shyning glory and majesty of God.

We shall hear more pleasant things then ever we heard: As the singing of
praise, honor and glory to God, for his wisdom, power, truth, mercy, and
goodness showed to the elect, and for his wisdom, power and justice to the
reprobate, with such matter in such order, and with such varyetie of voices
great and small of Angels, men, women and children, flowing from the
perfection of that estate; as to the which no harmonye in the world can be
compared, and there are not only such comfortable things as the body is
capable of: but also those that shall fullye satisfy and delight the soul,
largeness of understanding, plentiful remembrance, notable and perfect
holiness and righteousness.

Neither shall there be any abatement of our comfort by fear of change, for
these shall be everlasting and unchangeable. One says; If a man did know him
that should enjoy this kingdom, he would kiss the ground whereon he
treades and salute him, with Happy man that thou art, who shall enjoy the
presence of God, the company of Angels, the fellowshippe of Saints, and
possess infinite and everlasting honor, treasure and pleasure, happy was the
day wherein thou were borne, and more happy shall be the day wherein thou
shall dye, for then thou shall be happy infinitely: this is the estate that
Lazarus was lifted up unto. If he had changed his former poor and base
estate, to be like to the rich man in his pomp and bravery, it had been a
great thing: but when he is preferred imcomporably to this high estate of
excellency, it passes all speech. This is the glory that Paul says, Romans 8.
all the afflictions of this life are not worthy of: Therefore our Savior
Christ says; Blessed are ye when men revile you, persecute Mat.. 5.
you, and falsely say all manner of evil against you for my sake, rejoice and
be glad, for great is your reward in heaven; which Moses saw by faith, and
therefore as the Apostle says, Heb. 11.
refused to be called the son of Pharoes daughter, and chose rather to suffer
adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, esteeming the rebukes of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of
Aegipt, for he had respect to the recompense of reward.

The rich man also dyed. Where we see the saying of the Prophet verified; All
flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower Esai. 40.
of the field: Not some, but all flesh, not the flesh of the poor only, but
of the such also. David in the person of the Lord speaks of great men,
saying: I have said Psalm. 82
ye are Gods, but ye shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes,
meaning that are gone: the difference between men serves but for this life, as
in a cast of counters one has the place of one thousand pound, another of a
half penny, but shuffle them together and there is no difference, and all of
them are not worth a groate: Nabuchadonazer, Julius Caesar, Phillip of Spain,
and all the great men that have lived formerly in the world are dead. And the
Scripture says: There is not a man living that shall not see death; this man
in his life was like to a man that plays on a stage for an hour, in kingly
robes: but when his part is played he is turned into his Canuas dublet. Now
what did all his possessions avail him, when a little piece of ground of five
foot must contain him? what did his stately house profit him, when a small
and base coffin of boordes must hold him? what did his brave apparel help
him, when a Linen sheet must windo him? what did the pampering of his body
pleasure him, when the Worms must eat him? and what did his delicate fare and
sweet meat bring him, but sharp and sour sauce: we^l all his wealth could
not buie of death, for it is said he dyed.

He was buried. There is no mention made of the burial of Lazarus, it may be
he was not buried at all, because he was poor and loathsome; but it is no
matter to him, for wheresoever the bodies of godly men are bestowed, they shall
be found out at the resurrection, and glorified in heaven. But this man
because he was rich, was buried, and it is like in stately manner, as the
fashion is now, with a Harrald of Arms, mourning gowns, and a painted Tomb:
but it is no matter, for wheresoever the bodies of wicked men are bestowed,
they shall be called for again at the last judgment, and be burned in hell.

But here is no mention made of any thing he gave to the poor at his death
neither: some ritche men who will give nothing while they live, yet when they
dye will give some small matter, although the poor are beholding to death for
that, and not to them: therefore it might be wished that such ritche men would
dye quickly, that there might be some good done at their death, for they do
hurt while they live. Ye see the last of him, he is buried: so many men flante
it out in their bravery, and in their iniquity, but the next news we here
of them they are in their grave.

But what became of his soul? as Lazarus was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom, so he was carried by the devils into hell, for it is said he
was in hell in torments. We see many dye, and because we here no more tidings
of them we do not regard it; but the Scripture and this example tells us
what becomes of them, namely, that good men are in heaven, and bad men are in
hell. Many men at their death do bequeath their land to such a one, and their
goods to such a one, and know not what shall become of themselves, but
afterward they know what is become of themselves, but know not what is become
of any thing else. There be many like this man, that never think seriously
of hell till they come there: some will say scoffinglie and desperately, they
will cast fire-brandes there, but they shall be tormented as this man was,
and cry out for pain and grief, with weeping and gnashing of teeth. As his
riches could not buy of death, so it could not buie of hell: For ri^ches
auailes not in the day of vengeance, says David; for though the Prophet says,
there be some wicked men have made a covenant with death, and a league with
damnation, yet he means not as if they could do so indeed, but in their own
imagination: for it is said, this man was in hell in torments, which is the
place of all wicked men, for says one; If this unmerciful covetous man be in
hell, as James says, there shall be judgment Iam. 2.
merciless to them that show no mercy: where are unjust, unclean, proud
persons* idolaters, blasphemers, etc? In this man's portion they may see their
own punishment, for there be many in hell that in their life were not so
evil, as many that live now* who imagine never to come there: and if Lazarus
be in heaven, where are good Maiestrates, good Ministers, and all holy and
virtuous people? But in this man's salvation, all godly men may see their own
good condition, the difference that John. 5.
was between these two in the next life, shall be between all the good and bad,
as our Savior says, Those that sleep in the grave shall arise, some to the
resurrection of life, and some to the resurrection of condemnation. This is the
reckoning that followed his feasting, as men use to say when they have well
supped at an Inn, the worste dishe is behind: so it was with this man, as it
is with all wicked men, by that time they have made out their reckoning, their
lusts cost them dear, even in this world: for he that will needs be revenged
upon his enemy, must be hanged when he has done: he that will commit
fornication must keep the child with shame: he that deceiues other in
bargaining, shall loose his customer^, but specially the worste dish is behind
in the world to come, for what shall a man gain to win the world, and loose
his own soul.

Had it not been better for this man to have had one guarde or lase the less
on his coat, one dish the less on his table, and one Seruingman the less in
his house, and ^aue given somewhat to Lazarus: we our selves must sue to God in
forma papris, therefore let us receive the suites of the poor, for the
Scripture says; He that stoppes his ears at the cry of the poor, shall
cry himself and not be heard. As the poor now stand in need of our mercy,
so we shall stand in need of Gods mercy: therefore as our Savior Christ
said, to move men to take heed of back sliding, Remember Lottes wife; so it
may be said to move men to take heed of covetousness and unmercifulness;
remember this rich glutton.

If I should again compare this man's present misery with his former bravery,
I should but as in the former example, cause you to wonder at the strange
difference that a little time brought forth. But that men might be moved to
come out of the broad way that leads to destruction, and to take heed of
such wickedness; let us consider that before he dwelt in a stately and goodly
Palace, now he is cast into a deep and dark pit or dungeon: before he was
accompanied with diverse brave persons and gallants, now his companions are the
devil and his angels: before he fed of dainty dishes, and now his meat is
fire and Brimstone: before he lived in pleasure and delight, as Abraham says
to him afterward, but now thou art tormented. If he had been removed but from
his former estate to Lazarus his condition when he lay at his gate, it had
been a great alteration, but his estate now is more miserable then can be
expressed, and beyond the which there is no degree of comparison, for it is
said he was in hell, which is a place not of custody only, as are the
prisons of this life, but of custody and torment also, he was in hell in
torment, for hell is the place of torment, as he says after to Abraham; Send
Lazarus to warn my brethren that they come not to this place of to^ment. It
is not as Bridewell and the Hospital, where men are whipped at their coming in
and at their going out only, but those that go to hell are tormented at their
coming in, and all the time of their being there, which is for ever: for there
is no going out, but only at the day of judgment, to receive their bodies,
and to receive their sentence, and to be bound with more bonds of perpetual
perdition and malediction: the greeuousnesse of the torment of hell cannot be
expressed, for though the Holy Ghost in the Scripture has called it the
blackness of darkness, the second death* fire and Brimstone, and everlasting
burning, yet there are no words significant enough to show the greeuousnesse
of it, and as it cannor be expressed, so it cannot be conceived* for we can no
otherwise conceive that which is incomprehensible, then to know it is
incomprehensible.

Certainly all the punishments of this life, ^^cknesse, imprisonment, whipping,
racking, burning, etc. are but shadows of that punishment: yet if these be so
terrible that are mingled with mercy, what think ye are those that are
without mercy? If these be so fearful wherein the justice of God is showed
but partly, what are those where the justice of God is showed perfectly?
Therefore is the day of judgment to the wicked, called the day of wrath, and
declaration of the just judgment of God: but the greeuousnesse of it is not
all, the perpetuity of it is more then all; therefore it is called the
everlasting burning. The name of perpetual imprisonment is a terrible thing in
this world, which yet ends at the death of the Prince, or of the party, but
this word never, breaks a man's heart. If all the Arithmetricians in the
world were set a work all their life to do nothing else but number, and in
the end all their numbers should be set together, yet they could come nothing
near the length of time that the wicked shall be tormented in hell. One uses
this similye; If a man should every thousand year shed but one tear, until
it did arise to as much water as is in the whole sea, yet it would have an end;
but this, then the which what is more fearful or terrible to speak or think
upon, shall never have end. When a man is to carry a burden he will first peize
and weye it with his hand to see if he can carry it: wey this in thy
cogitation, and see if thou can bear it. Caine when he felt but a little part
of this torment, or rather did but fear it, he said; My punishment is greater
then Genesis 4.
I can bear: yet he must bear it. If men do not fear this, what will they
fear? if men do not fly this, what will they fly? what is more strange from
reason, then for a man to fly every little danger in this world, and not to
fly this great danger of condemnation in the world to come. Yet if these
things were doubtful and questionable, it were the less marvel though men
did live in sin, but when men know them, believe them, and profess the
truth of them, what madness, what wonder is it, that they do not study to
avoid them: Tell me O witless man, says one, what gain is so great that
can counteruaile this loss? what pleasure is so sweet that can recompense
this pain? look of this ritche man, who sometime sported himself in his
sins, and forgot himself of his duties; now he lies crying out of his
pain, and desiring release of his miseries and cannot have it: he may be
compared to a Kings sumpter Horse, who all day goes laden with gould and
silver, but at night his treasure and trappings are taken from him, and he is
turned into a foul stable, having nothing left him but his galled back. So
such wicked men that are all their life brave and wealthy, but when they dye,
those things are laid aside, and they are turned into the prison of hell,
having nothing left them but their galled conscience.

It is said being in hell in torments, He lift up his eyes and saw Abraham,
etc. all that follow to the end of the chapter, as I said in the beginning,
are Parabolicall speeches serving to amplify the misery of this man, for it
was a great increase of his torments to see Lazarus so exalted, and himself so
cast down. As it was a great vexation to Haman to see Mordecai sit Hester.
on the Kings Horse in royal apparel, and himself to hold his Stirrup. It
did much increase this man's torment, that he must beg of Lazarus that had
been his beggar, and that a drop of water which was a less alms then the
other had begged of him and could not have it: it was a great increase of his
torment to hear of his faults now, when he could not amend them, and to hear
of Moses and the Prophets that had showed him the way to prevent this misery,
and he did not regard them.

It was a great increase of his misery to hear that Lazarus was comforted,
when he was tormented: it was a great increase of his torment, to hear that
the bar of Gods eternal predestination had so bound him, that he could
never be removed from his condemnation, and that Gods election had settled
Lazarus in a permanent and happy condition. This did greatly increase his
misery, that in his life time he had many servants at commandment, and now
no body would do any thing for him, no not the beggar: in this life he might
have riden or gone whether he would; but now he was bound hand and foot and
could go no whether: in this life he might have taught his brethren and
friends any thing, but now he could do them no good. In this life if he
would have made an earnest prayer to God for a greater matter he might have
had it, but now it was too late, the time of mercy was past, the time of
justice was come: therefore says the Scripture; To day if ye will hear his
voice harden not your hearts: it was to day with Pharao when Moses and Aaron
preached to him; it was to morrow when he was drowned in the Red sea: It is to
day with men while they live here and may repent of their sins and amend
their lives; it will be to morrow when they are gone from hence: for as the
day of death leaves us, so the day of doom shall find us, as we see in this
man's example. Which glass let all rich men look on, and see how it is run
out.

A Iem for Gentlemen.
DEVTRO. 16. 18. Judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy Cities
which the Lord thy God gives thee thorow-out thy Tribes, and they shall judge
the people with righteous judgment.

19. Wrest not the law, nor respect any person, neither take reward, for the
reward blinds the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words of the just.

20. That which is just, etc. that thou may live. ando.


AFter the Lord had brought the people of Israel out of Aegipt, he prescribed
the^ laws for government, and here he wills them to apoint officers to
execute them; and not in some few places, but thorowout all their Cities and
Tribes, and commands those who shall be chosen for officers, to rule and
judge according to truth and justice, and because they should have many
temptations to do otherwise, he gives them warning of three vices that are
most incident to their calling, as wresting the law, respecting of persons,
and taking rewards. Last of all he makes a promise to those that govern
according to this direction, they shall live: which has included in it a
secret and contrary threatening to those that do not, they shall dye.

Whereas God commaundes them to appoint Judges, we may see that maiestracie is
not an ordinance taken up by the will of man, but by the will and
commandment of God. The chief maiestracie belongs to God himself, who is
called the King of Kings, Lord Genesis 18.
of Lords, and Judge of all the world, as appears by punishing the Angels
before Jude.
there were any governors upon earth, and as appears by punishing some
governors for failing in government, as Saul, Ieroboham; Ahab, etc. Paul
says, There is no power but of God, and Romans 13.
the powers that be are ordained of God, Therefore he wills Christians to
be subject to them for conscience, to pay tribute to them, and to pray for
them, and the Apostle Jude reprooues those that 2. Tim. 2.
despise them, and speak evil of them.

Again, in that God commands them to choose Judges, it shows the necessity
of Maiestrates, and not only among Heathens as the Anabaptists would have it,
but also among Christians in the church, as this precept was given to Israel,
and therefore Esaias the Propher calls Kings Esa. 49. 23.
Foster-fathers, and Queens Nursing-mothers of the Church, for although there
be some godly men and women in the Church, whose consciences are a law to
themselves, yet there be also many hipocrites that have no conscience: and
although Maiestrates are not so necessary to restrain the godly from hurting
other, yet they are necessary and needful to restrain other from hurting
them.

There be many faults that God does not punish himself immediately in this
world, especially with apparent punishments, but does turn them over to his
Liefetenants and Maiestrates.

Indeed if sin had not come into the world, there should not have been so
much need of Maiestrates to bridle men from iniquity, and spur them to
duty, but since pride, envy, hatred, covetousness and such corruptions came
into man's nature, it was necessary there should be authority in some to
suppress disorders. In the book of Judges it is said; When there Judge. 20.
was no Maiestrate every one did that was good in his own eyes; then Micha had
a Teraphin, then the Beniamites defiled the Levites wife to death, and so it
would be now, if the fear of the Maiestrate did not restrain the most, for
the fear of God does restrain but a few, it were better to live under the
cruellest tyrant in the world, then in an anarchie where there is no
government, for then every one would be a tyrant. It is better, says one, to
live where nothing is lawful, then where all things are lawful, in respect of
the outrage that men would show one to another, if they were not to be
bridled by some superior.

Maiestrates are divided into Judges and officers; by Judges it seems he
means the chief Maiestrates, and by officers, he means those under officers
that are to be appointed by them, howsoever they should be called. The
Apostle Peter speaks to the like purpose, when he says: Submit your selves
to all manner ordynance of man for the Lords sake, whether 1. Pet. 2. 13.
it be to the King, as unto the superior, or unto the gouerners that are sent
of him: so that the same that Peter means by the king and gouerners, is meant
here by judges and officers; the difference seems to be only in the names,
for his meaning is not as I take it, that there should be judges and officers
both in every City: but that there should be a judge or chief officer, as it
was in the time of Moses, Joshua, the Judges, and Samuel, as afterward there
was a king in one especial place, and officers under him in every City, and
in that he speaks of judges in the plural number, I understand it not of the
same time, but of the succeeding times, or else a judge being the name of their
governor, and other titles for civil officers being not yet invented, the
holy Ghost his meaning is to command them to appoint civil governors in
every Cittye, whether they should call them judges, or by what other title
soever, for every society stands in need of government: let it be the
society but of two, and that those who are most likely to agree, the man and
wife, yet among them their is a superior, now if this be necessary in the
lesser societies, how much more in the greater.

The equity of this appears in Exodus Exodus 18.
when Moses was sole gouerner, he was troubled greatly with the causes of the
people, therefore Iethro his father in law counseled him to choose inferior
officers, over hundredes; fifties, and tennes, for as the Apostles, though
never so excellent ministers, could not perform all Ecclesiastical duties to
the people alone: therefore did choose Deacons to look Acts. 6.
to the poor: so one maiestrate though never so sufficient, cannot perform
all civil duties to the people alone, but have need of many assistantes:
therefore it is said here judges and officers shall thou appoint in every
Cittye, that is to say, ye shall place maiestrates, and civil officers in
the societies of men: it matters not much how ye call them, whether Majors for
Cities, Bailiffes for Towns, Liefetenantes or justices for Counties, chief
Constables for hundreds, or pettye Constables for parishes, for the government
of the people.

It is not here set down what manner of persons should be chosen for
maiestrates, and how they should be qualyfied, that is taught in other places
of Scripture: in the first chapter of this Book of Deutronomie, it is said,
they Deu. 1.
must be men of wisdom, that they may be able to discern between persons
and causes, that should come before them, as Solomon did between the two 1.
King. 3 16.
harlots.

They must be men of courage, that weak affection hinder them not in the
execution of judgment: they must fear Exodus 18.
God, that they may not fear any man's person, or any man's letter, they must
love the truth, that false causes be not countenanced of them, and they must
have covetousness, that they use not them office to their own commoditye, but
to the commoditye of the common wealth. 1. Tim. 3.


As he that must be a minister in the Church must be specyallye qualified,
so he that is a maiestrate in the common wealth, must not be chosen out of
the common sort, much less of the worst sort, but of the best sort: let all
that have voices in the choice of officers look to this, that when they should
choose a wise man, they choose not a fool, they should choose one that loves
the truth, they choose not a Papist: when they should choose one that fears
God, they choose not an Athist: when they should choose one that hates
covetousness, they choose not an usurer. Let this be respected not only in
all ordynary elections, but in those that be more extraordinary, as Knights,
and Burgesses for the parliament house, and clerks for the convocation house:
where laws are likely to be made, as men are minded; therefore whosoever be
propounded, let such be elected as be religious men, and good common wealths
men.

And mark, that among the properties, that are required in a maiestrate, which
we have noted before, there is no mention made of riches, but of virtues: for
although some respect may be had to his riches, because the office of
maiestracie requires some retinue and charge, so as the former essential
virtues be in him; but if those be wanting, riches cannot nor may not
supplye the place of them: as in the choice of a wife a man may respect
riches, and beauty, so there be first religion, and modesty: but if those
virtues be wanting, Solomon says: A fair woman without understanding, is as
a ring of gold in a swines ^out. Naball was a rich man, but unfit for a 2.
Sam. 25
maiestrate because he was not a wise man but a fool, because he feared not
God, but was a drunkard, because he hated not co^tousnesse but was a niggard:
one compares an evil officer to an Ape on the top of a house highlye pearched,
but badlye qualited, for he uses his exaltation not to the good, but to the
hurt of those that are under him. Solomon says; If a Prince, and Prou. 29. 12.
so another maiestrate be given to lies, the people are wicked: men are
naturallye gi^en to be naught; but if those who should constrain them be
evil, the people will be too bad; It is reported of a king who had a wry
neck, his subjects did carrye their necks awry that they might be like him,
so if a maiestrate be of a crooked disposition, a number will carry there lives
awry to satisfy him.

They shall judge the people with righteous judgment: When a man is called to
the office of maiestracie, whether it be higher or lower, he must not think
he is come to a place of idleness or ease, but of care and pains; therefore
he is here commanded to judge the people, that is, to do the duties
belonging to a judge: he must not only bear the name, but perform the office,
as the minister must administer the word and sacraments, so the maiestrate
must administer justice: as all superiority is for inferiority, so the judge or
officer is ordained, that the people from his hand might receive justice: the
honor service, and trybute they have, is the reward of their care and pains
in government. It is reported of a king that had painted in his arms a
candle-sticke with a candle burning, and this posie written. In serving other I
waste my self; Therefore Cirus king of Persia sometime said: If a man did know
the infi(...)e cares that are under the imperial cro(...), he thought he would
not stoop to ^^e it up. And Augustus wished rather to lead a private life,
then a kingly condition, for as a maiestrate is called to a great office, so to
a great business, as he is called from apriuate to a public place, so he
must as it were lay aside private, and look to public affairs: therefore
the Senators of Rome where wont to find it thus written, in their seats in
the Senate house; Put off private affairs, and put on public when thou
co^mest hither: but I would some did not rather use their public office to
their private advantage: therefore the wife of Aristides wished that her
husbands house were the common wealth, or that the common wealth were his
house, because he cared only for that: but as it is odious to usurp
authority, that is, to deal as an officer and have no office, so to have an
office and neglect the duties of it; such a one is like G^rge on horseback,
that has a sword in his hand and never strikes, though a Dragon be before him.
As it is a great commendation to be a good common wealths man; so for a
public person, to bear public annoyance is a great infamy. The end of
maiestracie general is, that men may lead ^ Godly and peaceable life under
them: 1. Tim. 2.
first a Godly life, then a peaceable life: because the people are naturally
inclined to false religion, the maiestrate is to destroy idolatrye as Hezechias
did: to set up Gods 1. Kin. 18
true worship as Iehosaphat did: to compel the people to the profession and
practice of it 2. Cor. 20
is Esaias did: The prince or chief maiestrate must appoint synods for the
suppressing of heresy and defending the truth, he must 1. King. 2.
put down evil ministers, and set up good ministers: the maiestrate must
compel the ministers to do their duty, if any be negligent; and compel the
people to keep the Saboth, to hear Gods word, to receive the sacraments, and
to practice all other outward parts of godliness, also the maiestrate must
take order, that men may lead a peaceable life, he must defend the subjects
from invasion, and foreign enemies abroad, and for that purpose must muster,
arm, and send forth captains and soldiers for wars, sometime affectiue, and
sometime defensive, and also defend his subjects from domisticall injuries at
home, and for this purpose he must make and cause to be executed good laws of
equity and justice: for the preservation of their lives, goods, and names of
men, in which two general and chief respecte^s of godly and peaceable
government, we have cause to praise God for our most noble and religious
Queen and to 1. Tim. 2.
pray as the Apostle wills us, for her long life and prosperity. The end of
maiestracie more perticulerly, is to execute judgment and justice, for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of those that do well: Romans 13
therefore David being a good maiestrate says: He would sing mercy and
judgment; Psalm. 101.
mercy, that is countenance, compassion and comfort to those that be good; and
judgment that is discountenance, discouragement and punishment to those that
be naught: therefore Paul says; He bears not the sword for naught: Therefore
if men did evil they should fear, but if they did well, then not fear: the
maiestrate must not be such a one as a good man needs fear him, nor as an
evil man should be without fear of him: therefore it is said here; Thou shall
judge thy people with righteous judgment.

And let us mark, as the maiestrate is a public person, so that which he does
as a maiestrate, must be by a form of public judgment, by examination of
causes, by conviction of offenders before sentence or execution, which was
wanting in Saul, who 1. Sam. 22
upon secret information, and private affection executed the Lords Priests,
without any public examination or conviction, and as the maiestrate must use a
due form of justice, so when he has hard and examined the cause, he must
judge righteous judgment, for if he should then give wrong sen^ice he were
better let it alone: it were better wrong should be done without the maiestrate
then by him, it were better a matter should be seen in his own color of
private injury, then that there should be put upon it a falce color of
public justice and equity: therefore as it is not enough for the minister to
preach, but he must preach wholesome Doctrine, so it is not enough for the
maiestrate to judge, but he must judge righteous judgment, as he must draw
the sword, so he must turn the edge the right way: Iehosaphat shows a reason
2. Cor. 19
of this, when he sent judges through the land to execute judgment: the
judgment says he, is not yours but Gods, if they give wrong judgment, they
do as it were charge God with injury* two other reasons may be added to that:
first though the maiestrate be superior to those that be judges, yet he is
inferior to God; as Solomon says in Ecclesiasties: If thou see oppression in
the City, there is a higher then they; and therefore a Maiestrate must say as
the Centurion said to our Savior Christ: I am a man set under the authority
of another, Herod was above him, and Caesar was above Herod, and God is above
all, for though Maiestrates be called powers, yet it is not in respect of any
strength that is in themselves, but in respect of the many assistants that they
have to take their part: but yet they are weak in comparison of God, indeed
they be called Gods; but it is in the respect of the authority Psalm. 82
that they execute in Gods stead, and that they might so judge as God would
do, if he did give the sentence: but they shall die like men. Alexander
thought himself to be the son of Iu^iter, yet he was the son of Phillip of
Macedon, whose chamberlain every morning cried unto him: Phillip, Phillip,
remember thou art a mortal man and must die, although he said to Diogenes he
was a God of the earth, yet as Diogenes answered him truly and wittily, he was
but a God of earth. The maiestrate is highly to be esteemed of others, because
he is the ordynance of God to do justice, but he must not esteem himself
so heigh to go from justice: The third and last reason to move the
maiestrate, to execute right judgment, is, that God sits in Psalm. 82
their assembly, and beholdes what is done, and how every thing is done, for as
he is present every where, so especially in public and judicial places,
and as he beholdes all things, so especially public and judicial causes: and
if they give right judgment he will approve it, and if they give wrong
judgment, he will reuerse it: and as Nehemy did reprove and reform Neh. 5.
7.
the under Officers, that had oppressed and injured the people, which precident
is to be followed of all superior Maiestrates: so God will reprove and
punish all those that shall execute wrong judgment for which cause it is
required that maiestrates should fear God: therefore Exodus 18.
as it is a godly order of judges and justices, in many places, to hear a
Sermon before their Assizes and Cessions, so I would think it no small
increase of their virtue, if when they sit down upon the judgment seat,
they would make a short prayer themselves, that it might publicly and
evidently appear they set God before them, and desire his discretion, that he
would either by the confession of the parties, by the testimony of witnesses,
or by the demonstration of arguments, manifest the truth of all matters unto
them, and give them minds to execute judgment accordingly, that right may be
done to every man, and wrong may be done to no man: for to justify the wicked,
and redeem the just, both these are an abomination to the Lord. As the
people must give to Pro. 17
the maiestrate that which is his honor and trybute, so the maiestrate must
give to Romans 13.
the people that which is theirs, justice and equitye.

It is said of Antonius Pius, that he never demanded any thing of the
maiestrate but he had it, the reason was because he never demanded any thing
but that was just, so every maiestrate should hear those that call for
justice, yea they should do justice without calling for, and not be like the
wicked judge spoken of in the Gospel, that neither feared God nor reverenced
man, but did justice only because he was made wearye with importunity. Much
less should maiestrates be like Pilate and Potepher, that punished the
innocent, and let the gilty go free: those who are made arbytrators, and as I
may say pryuate judges, must likewise judge righteous judgment, for although
many men indeed do choose their friends whom they think sure for them,
yet they must prefer religion before nature, and judgment before affection:
for a man has as much right to his good cause as to his goods.

And those that make themselves judges, to give sentence of men and their
actions, must judge righteous judgment, to speak of men as truth and
righteousness requires: for as to be a falce witness to the judge is odyous,
to make him give wrong judgment of a man's person or cause, so is it to be a
falce witness to the world, by reason whereof many wrong sentences may pass
upon him: therefore let all men make this sentence in all their sentences, thou
shall judge righteous judgment.

Wrest not the law: So that the law is the rule by the which they must direct
their judgments, for although God has given Maiestrates authority, yet his
meaning is not thereby to infringe his own, and although they have power to
make laws, yet they must not by their laws contradict the law of God, either
to make that laweful which he has made unlawful, or to make that unlawful
which he has made lawful: as the Prince referring many things to the
discretion of under Officers, yet her meaning is not that they should do any
thing contrary to express laws: and by their discretion to condemn the
Prince of indiscretio^ in Making those laws: so God whose subjects all me^
are, has appointed laws and rules whereby he will have the people to be ruled,
and Maiestrates must not go contrary thereunto, for the rule must not be
ouer-ruled: therefore when he had said, thou shall judge righteous judgment,
he adds: Wrest not the law; therefore the Maiestrate was commanded to read
in the book of the law, and therefore they were forbidden Joshua. 1. Deu. 17.
to look to the customs of the nations, but look to the law. To go about to
show what offenders are to be punished by the maiestrat were needless, seeing
the book of the law is open, wherein every one may and must look for
direction, and not only for the matter but also for the measure, both which
must be respected unto righteous judgment: Eli did not judge righteous
judgment, because when his sons committed 1. Sam. 2
adultery which deserved death, he only reproved them, saying, do no more my
sons; which either was no punishment, or little enough for the smalest
offense. He that pays a little wages for a great desert deals not justly, so
he that pays a little punishment for a great offense, and so on the contrary a
great punishment for a little offense. I say not that the same punishment, is
always to be inflicted upon al offenders, that the iuditiall law appoints,
because circustances of times and places, in some things may put some
difference, as theft cannot be punished in England as it was in Israel, because
there is no bondage and vilenage with us as there was with the^, neither buying
and selling of men and women that are not able to make restitution, but the
same equitye must be followed generallye, and the same proportion perticulerly,
where the circumstances do agree, the law is a rule of righteousness for all
to follow, when they went from this rule, the Prophet Amos complains they
turned judgment into Wormwood, yet often it comes so to pass through the
corruption of men, as Solomon says, He had seen a vanity under the Sun, in
the place of judgment there was wickedness, therefore it is said here; Wrest
Eccle.
not the law. As the Minister must not wrest it in doctrine, so not the
Maiestrate in judgment, neither through ignorance nor through evil affection,
neither longer nor shorter, this way or that way to help or to hurt any man,
further then the meaning thereof will bear: the laws of men may be drawn
unto that, but not that to them. It is said one good Maiestrate is worth
twenty good laws, because as the law is a dum Maiestrate, so the Maiestrate
is a speaking law; and a good Maiestrate will speak according to the law, and
not wrest the law: Solomon says in the Proverbs; When the wicked bear rule
the people sigh, because of oppression and wrong carrying of matters; but if
the righteous be in authority the people rejoice, because justice is rightly
distributed. When Saul was in authority, Doeg was hard in his lies and
flatteries against the Lords Priests, and their true and just answer could
not 1. Sam. 22
he heard. When Annanias was in authority Paul was smitten on the face,
though Acts. 23. 2.
contrary to the law, the law is the rule for the people to live by, and for
the maiestrate to judge by. Now when men's causes come before the judge, if he
shall draw the law hither and thither, to do wrong to this man, and not to do
right to that man, what certainety or what safety shall there be to the
subjects; therefore Wrest not the law.

Respect no persons: Having commanded maiestrates to judge righteous
judgment, and forbidden them to wrest the law to wrong judgment, he now
gives them warning of two things, that commonly draws them the wrong way: the
first is, respect of persons: the second is respect of rewards, there is
something that mooues maiestrates to give wrong judgment, now these are the
commonest things: therefore it is said respect no persons, as if he should
say, thou shall not look to the strength, to the beauty, to the riches, or
aliance of any man, nor to the letters he brings from any man to spare him,
if he be worthy to be punished, nor to punish him if he be to be spared, but
look to his cause; therefore in Exodus it is said; Thou shall not favor the
poor nor honor the rich: in private respects the poor are to be favored
and the rich are to be honored, but not in public justice, God himself does
respect no persons, as Peter says to Cornelius, but Acts. 10.
looks to the goodness of a man, of what nation or calling soever he be: no
more must we respect persons. The Apostle forbids all Iam. 2.
Christians to prefer a man in religion because of his riches or apparel,
so it is forbidden here to Judges and Officers: the law is given for rich men
as well as poor; a rich man may no more lawfully kill, commit adultrie or
steal, then a poor man; God has done and will do justice as well on great
men as mean men, so must the Maiestrate, if a poor man come stripped of all
riches and policy to work for him, and friends to speak for him, yet if he
have a good cause the maiestrate must countenance him, and if another man comes
furnished with all these things, if he have an evil cause the Maiestrate must
punish him. Justice must not be like a Spiders web, that catches little flies
and let great flies go; nor like a wide Net that catches great fishes because
they have substance in them, and let little ones creep away, as not being
worth the fingring. It was a worthy saying of Solomon; If Adoniah his brother
were a 1. King. 1. 52.
good man, a hair of his head should not perish, but if wickedness were found
in him, he should dye. And it was a famous act of King Asa to put his own
mother from her regensie, because she had an Idol 2. Cor. 15 16.
in a grove. And it is an unworthy thing in a Maiestrate, when a cause comes
before him against a common person, to condemn it, but if it be against a
kinsman or friend to alter the case. We read of a Maiestrate when he went to
sit in judgment would bid his friends farewell, some look to the personage of
men, he is a proper man spare him, but God delights in no man's legs. I knew a
rich man and a poor man in suite, and a third man said, I warrant you the
poor man will go down, for says he, I never knew but might did overcome right;
a pitiful thing to hear, but more pitiful to see: though his speech were
too general, yet it may be it was too true. It is reported of a Judge that
would have a Curtin drawn before him when he did sit in judgment, that he
might see no persons: but it is no matter for the eye of the body, if the eye
of the mind do see rightly. As civil officers must not respect persons, no
more must eccelesiasticall officers, as Paul says to Timothy; ^. Tim. 5. 2.
Do nothing partially. And as the Judge must do nothing partially, no more
must the Jurors nor the witnesses, though he have all outward parts and
things that might commend him, yet if he have stepped into an evil cause and
course, let him be punished: and though he have no outward parts to commend
him, if he have a good cause deliver him. King Antigonus is said to have
commanded all his officers not to do that was unjust, though he wrote
letters for any man; for said he, I may be misinformed. Therefore it is said,
Respect no persons, for says Solomon; Such a Prou.
man will transgress for a morsel of bread.

Nor take rewards. This is a second mean whereby Officers are commonly
drawn to wrest the law, and judge vnrighteouslie, therefore God gives warning
of it: As a Maiestrate must not respect a man for his person, so not for his
pursse, this must be restrained to the matter Moses has in hand, to the
persons in suite, and causes in judgment, for otherwise in the way of
friendship it is not unlawful to give or receive a gift, as Jacob sent a
present to Esau: but when a suite depends, then the Maiestrate must take none;
sometime it is called a gift, but it is not a free gift, he looks for as
good a pleasure; therefore here it is called a reward, not of that that has
been done for him, but of that is to be done for him: as it is said of Balam,
he had the reward of Sooth-saying in his hand: so Maiestrates must not have
the reward of injustice in their hands, for as the Apostle condemns those that
make merchandise of the word, so here those are condemned that make
merchandise of justice. Esaias says; Woe be to him Esai. 5.
that iustifies the wicked for a reward, and takes away the righteousness of
the righteous from him because he has no reward.

As some men are not only very ordinary in sending presents and New-yeares
gifts to the Maiestrate, not because they bear such special goodwill to the
Maiestrate as those things pretend, but because they would have the Maiestrate
bear good will to them, to spare them and pleasure them when need requires,
which is dangerous: but also when a cause or suite comes to depend, then they
will present the Maiestrate with a gift, which is more then suspicious, that
either they look to buy injustice, or that the Maiestrate must be bought to
do justice, this practice is commonly found not in good men who trust to the
goodness of their cause and goodness of the Maiestrate, but in evil men, who
seek by such means to make an evil cause good, and a good Maiestrate evil:
some think if they can delay their suites till their adversary be wasted,
they shall prevail whatsoever their cause be, but judicial trials were not
ordained for men's undoing, but for their maintaining. One living in a corrupt
government said; We have such a Prince, such a Judge and such officers, but
money reigns, a thing indeed fitter to be heard among Heathens then to be
seen among Christians: as some men are much in giving of gifts, so some
Maiestrates are much in taking of gifts: but as this is a preposterous thing,
that great men who should be most in giving, should be most in taking; so it is
a dangerous thing, for it being called a reward, so he will think himself
bound to requite it, which he will not do with the like, but with a cast of
his office, cutting large thonges of other m^ns leather.

The reason why the Maiestrate must take no rewards, is because rewards blind
the eyes* and pervert the judgment, it keeps him from seeing the right of the
other side, and makes him see that side where the bribe is to glister like the
gold; put a staff in the water and it will seem crooked not that it is
crooked, but we cannot see it right for the water* so look on a cause
t(...)owe bribes, and that which is ^ght will seem crooked. If therefore we
love to be kept in upright judgment and sight, let us abhor gifts: we mislike
the^ that put out our bodily eyes, though it be with a silver Bodkin, how much
more those that put out the eyes of our mind. The Phili^ines thought they
could put Sampson to no greater shame then to put out his eyes, so it is a
great shame to a Maiestrate to be blinded with bribes, for then all men may
see his partiality: therefore though men think they are honored of them that
give them bribes, yet they are dishonored, and though they think they will
see right and do justice notwithstanding, but thereby they are blinded and
corrupted, a bribe will draw his judgment and affection like an Adamant stone.

It is with the Maiestrate and a bribe, as it is with the fish and the bayte,
if the fish take the bait, she is taken of the bait; so if the Maiestrate
take a bribe, he is taken of the bribe; as rewards do blind the Maiestrate,
so it peruerts him. It peruertes his judgment of the man that sends him
gifts, it makes him think the man is loving and kind to him, when it is not
the love of the Maiestrate, but the love of himself that mooues him: also it
peruerts his judgment of the matter, for he will think of all circumstances,
and strain and draw them to the uttermost for that part, and lend a deaf
ear to the other side, at least a slender regard.

Some Officers look not to God but to Mammon, not how they may give every man
his own, but how they may make other men's their own: not how they may
dispatch causes rightly and commodiously for the people, but how they may
either release or linger causes for their own commodity, but it is said Thou
shall take us rewards: and the Maiestrate should say to him that offers him a
bribe, what would thou put out my eyes? I suspect your cause is naught,
because you would color it with corruption, I will look so much the more
narrowly into it, because you seek thus to daube it. We are highly to thank
God that this precept is religiously regarded of our Lord chief Justice, and
Lord chief Baron, and I hope of many other superior Maiestrates, I would it
were as well of inferior officers.

I once heard a Maiestrate say to one that offered him certain Capons to
stand his friend; Why says he, do ye bring ^ee these filthy things, I will
none of them: the creatures were good, but he called them so, in respect of
the filthy working effect and end of them: If all Maiestrates did bear such
a mind, and would give like answer to such persons, they should prevent sin
and shame to themselves, and danger to other, and further justice to the glory
of God.

That which is just and right shall thou do, Whatsoever is just and right,
that is within the compass of thine office thou shall do, and not be drawn
from it by respect of bribes or persons. God will have Maiestrates precise in
Justice, and to go as it were by a thread, therefore it is said in another
place, They should not (...)ne to the right hand nor to the left.

That thou may live. This is a promise ^ade to good Maiestrates, that
execute justice right, as Solomon says, It shall establish the throne of the
Prince: whereby we may see how justice does please God, and not only because
it is a duty that he commandes, but because it is a means to keep a number
in their duties.

Contrariwise here is included a secret threatening, that if Maiestrates do
not execute justice But wrest the law and pervert judgment, either by respect
of persons, or bribes, they shall dye, and not only because they do neglect
this duty, but because a great number of sins will grow through impiety.

If Judges that be Gods debuties will not do justice, then the Judge of all
must do it himself, both upon the Judges themselves and upon the people:
therefore it is said, thou shall cut of a wicked person from the earth, and so
take evil from Israel, both the evil, that else he will do, and the evil that
the people shall suffer from the hand of God, for bearing with such things:
when Eli would not punish his sons, how did God punish, not only him and
his house, but the whole people?

When Saul would not punish Agag and the witch, how did God punish him; so if
Maiestrates love their own peace, and the peace of the people, let them
execute justice, if they do not God will, and when we see failing this way on
earth, let us appeal to heaven.

A Jewel for Gentlewomen.
1. PETER. 3. 3. Whose apparelling let it not be outward, as with broydered
hair and gold put about, or in putting on of apparel.

4. But let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt, with a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God a thing much set by.

5. For even after this manner in time past did the holy women which trusted in
God tire themselves, and were subject to their husbands.


THe Apostle Peter in this Epistle, after he has taught the general duties
of Christians that are to be performed to God, and to all men, he has
proceeded to the particular duties belonging to some, of inferiors to
superiors: and because the King is both the highest superior, and to be
honored of all, he has begun with him in the former Chapter, and has
proceeded from the public governors of the Commonwealth, to the private
governors of families, and taught the duties of servants to their masters.
And because God will have order in every society, even in the least society
as well as in the greatest, in the beginning of this Chapter he teaches wives
to be subject to their husbands, for although a wife in other places of
Scripture be called her husbands companion Mal. 2.
and yoake-fellow, because of the near conjunction and affection that is
between them, and because in some things especially in the marriage bed they
be equal, yet the husband is appointed of God to be her head and superior,
and therefore she is commanded to be subject to Genesis 3.
him in her desire and in her behauior both in words and in deeds, for since
our first parents 1. Pet. 3. 5
did exalt themselves and would be like God, all their posterity have had
pride in them, to exalte themselves one above another: therefore as the Apostle
has tied all people to be subject to their Princes and Maiestrates, and all
servants to be subject to their masters, so he tyeth all wives to be subject
to their husbands, for although some women in respect of her birth may be
superior to her husband, yet in respect of her marriage she is inferior to him.

And though the Scripture in other places shows diverse other reasons to
persuade, 1. Cor. 11
women unto subjection, namely that the woman was made of the man, and for
him, yet in this place the Apostle contents himself with this one reason taken
from the end of their subjection, that their husbands and others who were yet
Infidels, might be won to the love and better liking of religion and the
word, whereby they might be truly won to God, when they should see by daily
experience what power and virtue religion had wrought in their Christian wives,
that by nature is not found in other women, for as the bad conversation of
professors is an offense and stumbling block to Turks and Papists, so the good
conversation of Christians is a means to draw them nearer religion that are
without, and perticulerly to draw an unbelieving husband, as Paul says to the
Corinthians; What know ^. Cor. 7.
thou whether thou shall win thy husband: for as she must seek to win her
husband by words, so also by works, for if she shall persuade him to hear, to
read, to pray, etc. which be good words, and in the mean time be froward,
snappish, disobedient, and show forth evil works: what force have her
speeches to draw her husband to religion, which he shall see to have wrought
no more virtue in her self: therefore although it seemed to them that were
Christian wives and servants, an unworthy thing to be subject to Infidels and
Idolaters, yet because religion does not break the bands of civil and lawful
societies and duty (as Popish religion does) but confirm and strengthen them
rather: therefore as the Apostle has willed Christian people and servants
before to be subject to their Princes and superiors, so he wills Christian
wives here to be subject to their husbands that yet were Infidels, so far as
their more bounden duty to God would suffer them, waiting when by Gods grace
and their good means, their husbands might become Christians.

And if wives must be subject to their Infidel husbands, how much more must
wives be subject to their Christian husbands although they have faults that
yet are much more lesser and greatly inferior to gentleisme: therefore if this
precept, that wives should be subject to their husbands, who were so unequally
yoaked were of force then, how much more is it of force now?

Whose apparrelling, let it not be outward: Verse. 3.
The Apostle having required a good conversation generally, he shows them what
this behavior that he would have them use is in particular, not costly and
curious apparel, for that often time offends their husbands, through the
chargeablenesse and attendance that belonges unto it: but he would have them
moderate in their affections, reverend in their speeches, and dutyfull in their
actions, and to move them hereunto, he wills them to set before them the
glass and examples of holy women, especially of Sara, who in these virtues is
a renouned pattern to all her daughters.

Not with broidred hair: He begins to speak of their apparel, which
shows that we are by the fall of Adam become so ignorant, that we know not
how to apparel our selves, as we know not how to eat and drink nor to do
any thing well, but we must be informed of the word of God: therefore as the
saying is; Of evil manners spring good laws, so of the evil fashion of the
people in their time, the Apostles set down good rules touching this point,
and although men are not exempted but also generally instructed touching
apparel, yet women are often and perticulerly dealt withal about it, as
appears in the Prophecy of Esaias, and other places, because Esai. 1. 3. 1.
Tim. 2.
that sex is much given to costlinesse and curiosity this way: as one says;
Many things are invented by women, that neither nature, necessity nor honesty
does require, and if they were so adicted thereunto that they needed restraint
then when the Church was in persecution, what need is there of this bridle
now in the time of peace?

Some have gathered from this place, that gold and costlye apparel is not
lawful for Christians to wear, but that cannot be the Apostles meaning, for
then he should cross other places of the Scripture, and dissent from Paul,
who says to the Corinthians; All things are yours. And to 1. Cor. 3.
Titus; That to the pure all things are pure: Titus. 1. 1. Tim. 4.
and to Timothy; That every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, so it be received with thanksgiving of those that believe and know
the truth. We read of Joseph, of Hester, of Mordecai, and of Daniell, that did
wear goulde and costlye things, and if they had been evil things Joseph
would have refused them when Pharao offered them, as well as he did his
Mistress when she offered her self to him. Mordecai would have refused them
when the King offered them, as well as he did to bow to Haman. Daniel would have
refused them as well as he did the Kings meat: yea Sara her self, whose
example the Apostle propounds in this Chapter, had and used costly apparel, as
we may see by the Braslets and Jewels that Abraham's servant gave to Rebecca
when Genesis 24.
he went to procure her to be Isackes wife.

Indeed by Adams fall we have lost our interest in all the creatures, the worst
as well as the best, but by Christ we are again restored to the best as well as
the worste, as Paul says to the Corinthians; All things are yours: Therefore
Christians may as lawfullye wear fine Linen that comes from Aegipt, Velvet
that comes from Naples, and the goulde that comes from Indea, as they may eat
Sugar that comes from Barbary, and drink the Wine that comes from France, for
why has God put upon some of his creatures beauty but for us to behold, in
some creatures sweetness but for us to taste, and in some pleasantness of
voice and sound, but for us to hear: therefore we may have the use of them
all, so we glorify the creator that made them, the redeemer that restores
them, and the Holy Ghost who sanctifies them and do rightly use the^; but yet
the Scripture gives certain rules and caueats for the use of them, and as of
meat, drink, and other creatures, so of apparel, both touching the matter
and the form or manner.

Costly apparel must not be worn of all, because it agrees not with the
calling of some, nor with the ability of others, therefore our savior Christ
says, those that wear soft raiment are in Kings houses, not that it may be
worn no where else but in the court, but there ye shall be sure to find it:
If those that be of low calling wear high apparel, it must needs show pride,
for there must be some difference between the Maiestrate and the subject,
between the master and the servant, between a Jack and a Gentleman, between
Joane and my Lady. Again if those of poor estate wear rich apparel, it must
needs show folly, vanity and neglect of their family, for there must be some
difference between Cressus and Codrus. In the book of Martirs it is reported of
one of the kings of England, who commanded his man to buy him a pair of hoase
of a mark, but now a mean subject will wear a pair of hoase of twenty
mark, and even those that be of calling and ability, though they may wear
costly apparel yet they must not wear it at all times: for in the day of
humilation commanded to the people of Israel, or in the day of a public
fast, none might put on their best apparel: therefore it was wont to be a
common fault in gentlewomen when they came to a fast, they came in the bravery
and curiosity of apparel, as if they went to a feast: and as there be some
restraintes in the Sciripture touching the matter of apparel: so touching the
form and fashion of it, it is forbidden men to wear women's apparel, and
Deu. 22.
women to wear men's apparel, because it is a confusion and dangerous
occasion of sin: it is also forbidden both men and women, to wear strange
apparel like Zeph. 1.
monsters, as many now a days will have other faces or complexions, other
hair, and other bellies, then God has made them: they are not content with
the french Hoode, with the Italian Ruffes, with the Dutch hoase, with the
Indean shoes, but they must have every day new and foreign fashions, that
they are grown out of fashion. They do not only borrow the mat^er of their
apparel from diverse creatures, ^s beasts, fowls, fishes, worms, but they
borrow the form of their apparel from diverse countries, but Paul says:
fashion not Romans 12. 3.
our selves like unto this world; there are no particular rules set down in
the Scripture for the fashion of apparel, but generally the Scripture says
it must agree with com^nesse, modesty, and sobriety, a pattern whereof we must
fetch from the Churches, that is from the practice of Christian, sober, and
modest persons, for in a question of women's attyring their heads, the Apostle
1. Cor. 11
says: they had no such custom as some of the Corinthias used, neither the
churches of God: therefore when young women that should have sober minds, or
old women that have young minds, shall wear nothing upon their heads but
their hair, and that set up a fore like a forehorse top, I mean not a
little which some sober women use, but set up a great deal ill-favored hair
and immodestly, when they shall wear monstrous vardugales which as it is
said, were invented by a strumpet to cover a great belly, which requires more
stuff, and takes up more room in meeting then some of them are worth and
worthy of: when they be exceeding curious in their colors, and cuts, let them
behold and inquire if such and such that be religious, wise, sober, and modest
women go so apparrelled, and inquire why they do not, and they shall find it
is, because religion, sobriety, and modesty wherewith they are indewed, will
not suffer them to do so for shame, but they that want religion and virtue,
cannot judge of the vnseemelines and vanity of these things, whose apparrelling
let it not be outward, he opposes the outward apparel, to the inward
apparel, which is the hid man of the heart, that he speaks of afterward, his
meaning is not so much to condemn the outward apparel, as to commend unto
them the inward apparel: therefore he says to the Christian women whose
apparel, let it not be outward but inward, as if he should say think not
that your chief beauty and bravery stands in decking of the body, but in
garnishing of the mind, as our Savior Christ says: Labor not for the Ioh. 6.
meat that perishes, but for the meat that indures to everlasting life; He
forbides not labor for that, but requires the chief labor for the other, he
would not have them think their chief diet to be the food of the body, but
the food of the soul. When our savior Christ bids his disciples Mat. 6.
not lay up treasure for themselves in earth but in heaven, he would have men
think that their chief riches is not goods, but goodness, so when he says
here: Whose apparrelling let it not be outward but inward, he means they
should not think the garments of the body, but the virtues of the mind, their
chief ornaments. When Adam and Eve fell their souls were naked as well as
their bodies, and so it is with all their posterity, as it is said in the
Revelation, the Reave. 3.
third chap. to the church of Laoditia, thou see not how thou art miserable
and naked, they were not naked in their bodies, but in their souls. As God
appointed our first parents skins to cover their bodies, so he appointed his
own son, and his own image, to cover their souls, which the scripture
wills al men to put on. Paul says to the Roman; put on the Lord Jesus Romans 13.
Christ, and to the Ephesia^s put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness Ephe. 4.
and true holiness, yea the soul is more naked the^ the body, for there be some
parts of the body that have some comlines in the^ and need no covering, as the
face and 1. Cor. 12
hands, but the soul is uncomely and naked in every part, the understanding
memory, conscience, will, affection, and all, both of men and women, have need
to be apparrelled, regenerated and sanctified, therefore as when any part of
the body is naked, either arms, legs, or feet, we seek to get apparel
for it, sleeves, hoase, shoes, so much more must we do for the nakedness of
the soul. Is any proud, seek for the garment of humility: is any
incontinent, seek for the garment of chastity: is any covetous seek for the
garment of lyberality: is any malicious, seek for the garment of charity: and
as the Scripture does will us to be moderate, and incomparison carclesse of the
attire of the body, because we are too much given to it, so it wills us to be
careful, yea curious as I may say in these things of the soul, as Peter 2.
Pet. 1.
says: loyne moreover to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness love: and
to the Thessalonians, Paul wills Christians to increase more and more in
them; but in this place the Apostle sets down the attire of Christian 1.
These. 1.
women, especially of married women, and shows wherein their chief decking
should not be, and then wherein it should be, it must not be outward, for that
is the manner of the Gentiles, but inward which is the manner of Christians,
David says: The Psalm. 45
Church is all glorious within; It may be these women thought to win their
husbands being Gentiles, by apparrelling themselves like the Gentiles, but
the Apostle tells them there be other ornaments fitter for that purpose, as
weakness of mind, reverend words, and dutyfull works, that is the only
attire of true Christians.

He sets down one particular of outward attire, wherein their apparrelling
must not be, that is broidred hair which was the fashion of the Gentiles, to
let their hair which was given them for a covering, ha^g down plated or
broidred like a horse tail, and those that were rich did spangle it with
gold also; now this was so unseemly a thing for Christians, that the Apostles
banished it out of all Churches, as appears in the former Epistle to the
Corinthians. Now 1. Cor. 11
under this one kind, the Apostle comprehendes all Heathenish immodesty,
corrupt and curious fashions in attire, when he says whose apparrelling let it
not be outward, but he would have it inward, and he names also one part of the
inward attire, or new man wherein their apparrelling must be, that is
meekness and quietness of spirit, and under that he comprehendes all the
rest, for there be diverse other inward ornaments besides this: in the fifth
chapter of this Epistle, he says: Deck your selves inwardly with lowliness
of mind; whereby it seems some were proud of their outward apparel,
although there be no more cause for men or women to be proud of their
apparel that is appointed to cover our nakedness, then for a thief to be
proud of the brand in his hand, that is covered with fine gloves. Paul also
speaking 1. Tim. 2.
of the attire of Christian women, names shamefastness, modestye, and good
works, and indeed every virtue of regeneration is a necessary ornament for
Christians, but because there be some virtues more suitable to men, and some
more suitable to women, he speaking to women says: Whose apparrelling let it
not be outward, but let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt with a meek
and quiet spirit.

For that which settes out the body only must not be the attire that
Christian women do affect, but that which sets forth ^he goodness of the
mind: now these outward ornaments set not forth the ^ertue of the mind,
but the vanity of ^he mind, and if these outward things ^ee not the chief
attire for Christian ^ues, then not for Christian widows and maids.
Turtulian seeing the women of his time too curyous in their attire, which is
most incident to that sex, sa^th^* Come forth you women having your ^eartes
filled with secrecy, and your eyes ^dorned with bashfulnesse, take to your
^ares the word of God, and tippe your ^ongues with silence, put about your
^eckes the yoke of Christ, have some^hat to do in your hands, and fasten
your ^eete at home, which is a fine suite: but al^hough there be many virtues
of the mind ^^ for women to put on, yet the Apostle ^oth chiefly commend
meekness, which ^more comely then gold in a wife, as way^ardnes and brawling
in a woman is a most ^comely thing in a house.

Meekness is a grace of the spirit of God, and virtue of regeneration,
whereby a ^ man or woman is made so staide and moderate in their affections as
they can endure contrary words, and works, and quietly pass by
vnkindlinesses and injuries, the contrary whereto is wrath, waywardness,
brauling and revenge, this meekness our Savior Christ wills all Christians
to learn of him. One says; If ye did Mat. 18.
not learn of humble men, learn of humble God. The Apostle I^mes would have
Iam. 1.
men show this meekness in receiving the word that is the commandments,
admonitions and reprehentions of the word of God. So the Apostle Peter would
have Christian wives show it in receiving the commandments and admonitions
of their husbands who were Infidels, and therefore would often peradventure
cross them, and offer occasions to move them. Now those that have meek
minds may live with any man, and those that have not will live quietly with no
man: therefore says Peter: Let the hid man of the heart be decked with a meek
and quiet spirit, and then ye shall be the trimmest women in the country, but
if you want this you want your chief ornament, though ye have never so many
iewelles and aglets about you.

But in that the Apostle, does call them from the desire and endeavor of these
outward ornaments, to the regard of inward virtues, it shows what we are most
adicted unto, namely to neglect our precious souls, and to provide for our
rotten bodies, gentlewome^ often look in a glass of steel, to see if all be
well without, but seldom look in the glass of Gods word to see if all be
well within; ye shall find them often in Sturbidge fair* in the royal
Exchange, in the Goldesmithes or Mercers shops, but seldom in the Churches,
they will bestow much money to procure rings iewelles and the like, but be at
no charge to maintain a preacher: but as when men are very worldly, it is a
sign they are nothing heavenly, and as when men are much given to ceremonies,
commonly they neglect the substance of religion, so when gentlewomen are so
given to the outward attire, they regard not the inward, they have so many
partlets, fillets, fruntlets, brastlets, that they cannot attend to the chief
things. I read of one Pando who seeing a gentlewomen curious in attyring her
self, wept, ^aying, she is more careful to trim her body, then I am my soul.

But the reasons that the Apostle uses to persuade women, to prefer the
ornaments of the mind before the ornaments of the body, are not to be
forgotten, which are three: first, those of the body are corrupt, these of the
mind are vncorrupt: secondly God does set by these of the mind: thirdly, holy
women have thus tired themselves, especially Sara, the mother not only of the
maids, but of Christian wives also, for first when he says: Let the hid man
of the heart be vncorrupt; he secretly implies, that the other attire that is
outward is corrupt, as James says: Your riches are corrupt; So he says: Your
garments Iam. 5. 1.
are Moth-eaten; Now who would much affect those things that will perish,
either by natural or accidental means, but virtue is vncorrupt and shall not
perish, when he says, this inward attire of meekenes before God is a thing
much set by, he means that God cares not for the other, David says, he
delights in no man's legs, much less in his stockings; men may peradventure
esteem the other, but God esteems this, for God sees not as man sees, man
looks on the outward appearance, but God beholdes the heart: now a christian
must seek to approve himself to God, and not so much to men: some gentlewoman
when she has put on silk, velvet, fine linne^, feathers, gold, silver,
pearls and such brave things does imagine that those things do much commend
her, when they do discommend her, and show her pride, exces, wanto^nes and
corrupt mind, but if she have inward virtues, especially a meek spirit, this
is before God and godly people a thing much set by, because it is apparel of
the Lords own making, but when women have such stirring affections as they will
chat and chide it out, when any thing is spoken or done by their husbands that
they like not, God cannot abide it: therefore although infidels do in their
apparel and in all things seek but to please men, yet christians must seek
to please God. His thi^^e reason is taken from the example of holy women, as
Paul in the same point refers the 1. Cor. 11
Corinthia^s, to the example of the churches, and good women that then did
live, so Peter refers them the example of good women, that are dead, a record
whereof they might have in the scripture, God has not only given us rules, but
that we might be sufficiently encouraged to follow virtue, and be left without
excuse, if we do not, he has left us examples both of men and women that have
showed us the way of virtue. Many will allege the examples of the fathers to
follow them in their vices; but their faults are set down to show the frailty
of man, that we may take heed of them, and to show the mercy of God, that we
might learn to rise out of them, only their virtues are set down, that we
might follow them.

Therefore when we will follow any man or woman, we must look the thing be
good that we follow, secondly that it be good for us, for that may be good in
one, that is not in another, as it was a good thing in Abraham to offer his
son in sacrifice, because he had a commandment for it; but it was evil in
other that did it without warrant: thirdly we must look the thing be good
when we do follow it. The fathers did well in worshipping God, on the
mountains and high places, but when God had erected his Temple they did evil
that did so. The Papists do much urge the examples of the fathers, but they
mean Augustine, Jerome, Barnard and those: but they speak not of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob and those: but if the authority of fathers should move us, then
those that are most ancient and do most deserve the name of fathers, must move
most. Again the Papists speak of the virtues of good men and women, to move
us to worship them, and not to follow them, but if they be used to that end,
they cease to be examples, that are for immitation, and not for adoration:
when we speak of this or that virtue, some say these are good things if we
could practice them, why Abraham was faithful, Joseph was chaste, Job was
patient, Jonathan was loving, the Centurion was humble, Cornelius was
charitable, Sara was meek, why should not we. Some will say these were rare
men and women, but they are not set down to be wondered at, but to be followed:
how came they to be so excellent but by the grace of God, and the grace of God
is able to make us like them, yea like God himself if we will use the meane^
of grace as they did: those that would be like the Saints in glory, must labor
to be like them in virtue, and as in other places of Scripture, the holy Ghost
commendes to us the examples of holy men, so here the Apostle commendes to us
the examples of holy women, because he speaks to women, and if any should
desire a particular instance, he means Sara, because she was one of the most
excellent, and yet she was not alone, but there were many other like her in
this, that are gone before, and so must those that follow after: Therefore
having spoken of the inward virtues of the mind, as the most excellent
ornaments of Christian women, especially meekness, and quietness of
spirit, which they had some want of, and stood in most need of, being yoaked
with Infidels, he says after this manner, Holy women tired themselves as Sara,
we have a proverb, that which is far fetched and dear bought is good for
Ladies, who care not for common things, then let them labor for these virtues
which are far fetched in respect of time four thousand years ago, and in
respect of place, they come from heaven, and from the holy land, and as it is
far fetched, so it is ^ee^e bought, it will cost some iourneyes to Sermons,
some prayers in your chambers, some denying of your wills, yea it was not
only worn of a great woman, but it is so fine and precious a suite, that it
is never the worse for the wearing, it will serve not only the mother, but
also the daughters, it is as good now as it was a thousand year ago.

The fashion that the Apostle would have Christian women to follow, is an old
fashion, Gentlewomen are ever seeking new fashions, but says the Apostle,
Apparel your selves with that that Sara did, and rest in it, there is no
better. If Besuliel and Saholiab were here they cannot work and imbroyder so
excellent and exquisite an ornament for you as this is.

Many women will keep a thing that was their Mothers, and wear it on high
days, then make you much of Saras at^yre, that will teach you less to esteem
and rightly to use outward and corporal things both for the belly and the
back, especially make much of this Jewel of meekness, that will fashion you
to bear injuries without falling into extremities, and I warrant you your
gown will sit never the worse on your back, but you shall seem to them
that can judge, a more goodlye woman then nature has made any. After this
manner says Peter did holy women attire themselves, profane women indeed as
Jesabell who painted her face and trimmed her self that she might take Iehu
in her love, and those that Esaias speaks of have only Esai. 3.
looked to the outward attire, and not regarded the graces of God, but holy
women as Sara have principally respected the beautifying of their minds.

If any shall object Sara had outward Jewels and costlye things, it is true,
so may her daughters according as their calling and ability will suffer, but
she did not accounte those things for her most necessary, comely, and chief
ornaments, good women whatsoever outward ornaments they wear, they think
themselves naked if they want grace to do the duties of good Christians to
God, of good women to their neighbors, and of good wives to their husbands.

Some women that set their minds of gewgawes, when they would defend any
foolish or monstrous attire, they say it is the fashion, it may be the fashion
of Heathen and profane women but the daughters of Sara must look to the
fashion of holy women.

The want of religion in many women is seen in their apparel, their hearts
being as hollow as their verdugales, their minds being as light as their
feathers, and their thoughts as changeable as their fashions, Peter having
praised, and pressed this garment of meekenes, he says: Holy women and Sara
did wear it, and it made all the rest the more comely, for it made them
subject to their husbands, as Sara obayed her husband and called him sir: the
want of meekness hinders subjection, for the words of the mouth and works
of the hands, follow the motions of the mind, if the affections be
disordred, thereof grows disordred words and ^ctious. Sara being s^nctyfied
and ^neekened by the grace of God, used reue^end words to her husband, and
called ^im Lord or sir, showing herself to be his ^feriour and not Will, Dicke
and the like, as many do, speaking to their husbands as to their
kitchinboyes, and as she used reue^end speeches, so actions, she obeyed him ^s
we may see in Genesis, when her husband Genesis 18.
commanded her to provide meat for the Angels.

We use to say when any do a thing that belonges to their calling, their coat
sits never the worse to their back, so when a woman shall do a necessary or
indifferent thing at the commandment of her husband, though she be in her
Sunday robes it is nothing uncomely, but makes it seem the more holyday like,
but I mean not to stand upon the duties of wives to their husbands, seeing my
purpose was chiefly to teach Gentlew^men perticulerly in the matter of attire,
and not all women generally in other behavior.

Now as these that hear sermons use to say, that was a good lesson for such a
one, so men like well to have women taught their duties, but not to hear of
their own: therefore though I omit it, the Scripture does speak of it, and
others have written it, and the Apostle Peter also after in this Chapter does
show what be the duties of men as well as of women; Husbands (says he) dwell
with your wives as men of knowledge, that is* know what you must yield to them
as well as what ye may require of them: therefore if your wife be ignorant you
must teach her, as Paul says; Women must 2. Cor. 14
learn of their husbands, if she offend admonish her as Jacob did Rachell, if
she be heavy Genesis 30.
you must comfort her as El^anah did Hanna, if she be weak you must bear 2.
Sam. 1.
with her: and Peter says after, If she give good counsel you must hearken
to her. As God said to Abraham; Hearken to thy wife, who said, cast out the
bondwoman and her son. God give both husbands and wives wisdom, love,
meekness, and all inward graces, that they may show forth outward goodness.

A caveat for craftesmen and Clothiers.
JAMES. 5. 1. Go to now ye rich men, howl and weep for the miseries that
shall come upon you.

2. Your riches are corrupt and your garments are moth-eaten.

3. Your goulde and silver is cankered and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, ye have heaped up
treasures for the last days.

4. Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped your fields, which is
of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them which have reaped are
entered into the ears of the Lord of hoastes.


THis Epistle was written to all the Jews that professed Christ and the
Gospel, among whom as it is in all Churches, their were some that rested in an
outward profession, and neglected a good conscience and conversation, as ye
may see in the former chapters.

Those which were such hipocrites among them, that the Apostle deals against
were specially rich me^, for although it may be there were some poor among
the^ that were bad enough as it is every where, yet the Apostle saw special
cause to inuay against the rich: for in the second chapter he speaks for the
poor; Has not God says he, chosen the poor of this world that they should
be rich in faith. And speaks against the rich; Do not the rich oppress
you by tirannie says he, and in this chapter he says, The rich men howl and
weep for the misery that shall come upon you, the laborers wages that you
keep back by fraud, cries against you, and in the 7. verse he speaks to
the poor, and ^aith: Be patient therefore brethren till the coming of the
Lord, which dealing of the Apostle, I would have an answer ^o their
accusation, who challenge the Minister for speaking so much against the ^^ch,
and so little against the poor; read ^he Scripture, and ye shall find the
rich ^eprooued ten times to the other once, ^he reason is because they are
most faulty, and the reason of that is as I take it, because most corporal
discipline is used against the poor, and therefore most spiritual discipline
had need to be used against the other. He has in the former Chapters
exhorted these rich men to repentance: Now he comes to threaten them with
Gods judgments, saying: Go to you rich m^n weep and howl for the misery
that shall come upon you* etc.

Some may ask if the Apostle does condemn riches, or if he does mean all
rich men, I answer, no, for riches being gotten by good means are the
blessing of God, and there have bin diverse good rich men, as Abraham, Job, and
others, and no doubt there were some good among these people, but the Text
shows that he speaks of such rich men as got their riches evil, and used
them not well, and yet they did laugh, as appears in the fourth Chapter, but
he tells them here there is Iam. 4. 9
cause of weeping. There was cause they should weep for their sins, because
they abused their riches, letting them rust and Motheate, when the poor had
need of them, and because they defrauded and oppressed the poor, yea because
they killed the just, letting them starve for hunger and cold: but because
they were hardened in their sins, he wills them to weep for their miseries,
not for the miseries they were presently in, for they now wallowed in wealth:
But for the misery that should come on them, when they should give account how
they had used their talent, as ye may see in the example Mat. 25.
of the unprofitable servant, and in the Luke 16.
example of the rich glutton. It were a merry world if it might go always
with such men as it does now, but they shall change a copy as we say. Now
because these men were secure, and thought of no afterclappes he calls them to
consider their misery in time to come, for where sin goes before, if
repentance comes not in the midst, destruction shall be the end.

Where he biddes them howl, the word importes such a lamentation as arises
from the certain expectation of the judgment of God, as it is said of Esaias
when he saw himself deprived both of the birthright and blessing, he Genesis
27.
cried with a bitter cry out of measure.

It seems strange to some, that a man that is hayle in his body, has money
in his purse, many suites of raiment to his back, and diverse dishes of meat
on his table, and not a few poor men at commandment, should be bidden howl,
but if such ^one knew himself to be spiritually poor, blind, naked, and
miserable, one that God is angry withal, and the diuill has a commission to
carry to hell, it would quail his courage, cool his porridge, and make him
^end his clothes.

Tour riches are corrupt: Now the Apostle shows the cause why such great
misery should come upon them, because they did couetously heap up riches,
and niggardly keep them, rather suffering the poor to perish, then to bestow
them upon their needy brethren.

Some have Gold (as they will say,) have seen no Sun thus long, yet rather
then they will change a piece of Gold the poor shall starve, they have thus
many gowns, and thus many pair of sheets, but rather then they will depart
with any of them, the poor shall go and lie naked, and when they have filled
their bags with gold, and their chestes with raiment, yet their hearts are
not full. Solomon says: He that coueteth silver shall not be satisfied with
silver; and therefore will rather fill more bags and cofers, then empty any
to fill the poores bellies. One says: The rich man in the Gospel that said he
would Luke 12. 16
make his barnes bigger, he had barnes ennough before if he would have seen
it, for says he: the bellies of the poor are the barnes of the rich.

In that he says: Your riches are corrupt, it shows the nature of these
outward things that they are subject to perishing, as our Savior Christ
says: They are subject to Mat. 6.
rust, Mothes and thieves; and therefore counsels to lay up a beter treasure,
when he says, these things shall be a witness against them, he means the
abusing of their riches, shall be laid to their charge, as we see in Matthew,
when Christ says: It shall be said to such men, when I was hungry, ye fed me
not, when I was naked ye clothed me not: therefore Mat. 25.
go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

Some may think themselves without danger of this threatening, because they let
not their gold and garments rust and Moth-eate for they put forth their
money and have little in their purse, they have but one suite of apparel to
their back: but though they put forth their money, if they put it not forth
to that use they should, if their garments perish not for want of wearing, if
the poor perish for want of clothing it is all one, if men use not their
riches rightly, they shall accuse them justly.

Ye have heaped up treasures for the last days. This is the vanity of worldly
men, they think their riches shall serve them and continue till the worlds
end, but though thieves and worms should not consume them; yet they will
perish of themselves before that day: therefore in the first Chapter he has
compared riches, to Grass, and although men know in judgment they are
uncertain, yet their affection, and practice is as their should be no end of
them, and although many will confess themselves to be mortal, yet they will
live and deal as if they should never dye. In the example of the rich man,
that built his barnes bigger, and said to his soul take thine ease, for thou
have food laid up for many years, we may see the minds and manners of
other men.

Behold the hire of the labourer, etc. This now was their fault the greatness
whereof does show what great misery shall come upon them, this word behold is
not used, but when some great and strange thing is spoken of: therefore because
it is a thing monstrous and strange, that any should be so void of religion
and humainty as to defraude the poor of their wages, he says behold, they
did not only not relieve the poor with their superfluous garments, but they
did defraude and oppress the poor, to increase their wealth and augment their
wardrop, but this is an evil expressly Leui. 19. 13
forbidden in the law ^in Leuiticus it is said, thou shall not do thy
neighbor wrong, nor rob him; and presently he adds: The workemans hire shall
not abide with thee until the morning; In Deutronomie it is said: Thou Deu.
24. 14.
shall not oppress an hired servant, but thou shall give him his hire for his
day: neither shall the Sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and therewith
fastaineth his life, least he cry against thee to the Lord, and it be sin
unto thee; Yet this has been a common sin in all ages, according to the
proverb; where the style is low men soon go over, and as it was a common
sin among the people, so it was commonly reproved and threatened among the
Prophets. Jeremy says, Woe unto Ier. 22. 13
him that builds a house by unrighteousness, be uses his neighbor without
wages, and gives him not for his work. Amos says; Amo. 8. 4
Hear this O ye that swallowe up the poor, that ye may make the needy of the
land to fail; saying when will the new Moon be gone, etc. That we may buy the
poor for silver, and the needy for shoes, the Lord has sworn by the
excellency of Jacob, I will never forget their works.

Matthew says: The Lord will be a swift Mat. 3. 5
witness against them that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages, and
vex the widow and fatherless; and this sin of oppressing and defrauding the
poor, was not only committed and reproved in the time of the Prophets but of
the Apostles, as we may see in the former Epistle to the Thessalonians, where
the Apostle wills 1. These. 4.
them not to defraude one another, for God is an auenger of all such things,
and as it appears by these words of James: The laborers wages that is by
you kept back by fraud cries against you, therefore woe be unto you. As then
rich men defrauded those poor that wrought in their fields, so now they
defraude those poor that work in their shops; as this vice was then in
husbandmen and occupyers of land, so it is now in tradesmen and makers of
cloth.

The poor are defrauded of their wages diverse ways.

1. When rich men give the poor nothing for their work.

2. When they give not the poor sufficient wages, but will have them do two
pennyworth or three halfe-penny-worth for a penny; as Jacob when he had served
for fair Rahel, he was rewarded with bleare-eyed Leah.

3. When they change the wages of the poor, giving them not the same but
worse, not money but bad or dear commodities.

4. When they keep poor men's wages long in their hands, or longer then they
should to their own advantage, and the poores disadvantage all these ways,
not only some other rich men, but Clothiers do defraude the poor at this
day: some have many an hours work for nothing: some do change their wages,
and pay them with bad or dear commodities, some do keep their money long in
their hands and drive them to extremities, the most of them, I fear all, do
give the poor too little wages for their work.

There be three rules of equity, that are respected in giving of wages.

1 The first our Savior Christ himself speaks of, saying: Whatsoeur ye
would that Mat. 7. 12
men should do to you, even so do ye to them.

2 The second is that the Apostle Paul speaks of: Let him that stole steal no
more, Ephe. 4. 28.
but let him labor with his hands, the thing that is good, that he may eat
his own bread and give to him that needs or that cannot labor.

3 The third rule is that common rule of equity, that not only religion has
taught Christians, but that the light of nature has taught men of all other
trades.

First let us see the equity of these rules that we may judge whether we be
bound to them or no, and then see if we be ruled by them.

For the first, it is our Savior Christ's own rule, who having interpreted
the law, and prescribed many duties of righteousness in particular, he sets
down this general rule, whatsoever ye would by the light of nature, not by
the corruption of nature, for so through a corrupt affection, and when he is in
a temptation, some man at some time would have another to kill him as Saul, and
some man through a corrupt affection would have another too much to respect him,
as the sons of Zebedeus: but whatsoever ye would by the light of nature,
whereby a man does desire any thing that is fit for him to desire, and that
is fit another man should do to him, even so do you to another: as if our
Savior Christ should say; Would thou if thou were poor have another to
relieve thee? then thou that art rich relieve the poor: would thou if thou
were a labourer have answerable wages paid thee? then thou that have thy work
done recompense the labourer: ye see this rule cannot be excepted against.

The second is the rule of the Apostle Paul writing to the Ephesians, where he
Ephe. 4.
calls poor men from stealing and evil means, and commands them to labor
and use good means to maintain themselves, so that if he have his limbs,
his health, and cunning to do the work that the place where he lives
affoordes, and does dilligentlye labor in his calling: I take it we may
conclude from that place of Paul, that such a man may and must by his labor
sustain himself, and be helpful to others.

But it will be objected, if he have a charge he cannot do it, I answer,
we must suppose if he has children he has a wife, that is a second person
to join with him in labor: now the Scripture appointing men and women able of
body, no other means but labor, we must suppose that they may by their
labor maintain their children while they be little, until they be also able
to labor, which commonly is not many, nor any long time: And thus it is among
the Dutch folks, who do so labor and bring up their children to work that
thereby they are sustained.

Therefore I conclude from this rule of the Apostle, that if any cannot
sustain themselves ordinarilye, for I speak not but that there may be some
secret curse or punishment of God upon some man; As the Prophet Hagge says in
his Hag. 1.
first Chapter, They shall e^rne wages and put it in a bottomless bag, but
otherwise those that be such able persons of body, as I have spoken of
before, if they cannot sustain themselves, if they want not work, nor a
dilligente hand in their work, then it must follow they have not an equal
recompense for their work.

The third rule as I said, is that equity which is followed not only by
religious men by the light of religion, but also by those that have no religion
by the light of nature of all other trades, and that in the time and place
where we live now, we know that by nature men will not commonly give with
the most wages, but with the least, and if some one or some few would, yet the
multitude will not; therefore this rule also cannot justly be excepted against,
especially if the circumstances be weyed, and things be made proporcionable.
Therefore I think it evident, that these rules must direct us in the matter of
giving wages, and that all men should examine their practice therein by them:
therefore now we will consider whether Clothiers whom I do specially
endeavor to inform and reform by this treatise, do in their wages follow
these rules or no. If any should inquire why I pick out Clothiers rather the^
any other to speak of, I answer, because when I preached this sermon, my
auditory consisted of them, and because considering the greatness, variety,
and continuance of their opressions, with the multitude of those that are
oppressed, with the consequences that follows thereupon, I take it to be one of
the greatest sins that in our age has been committed in this country
against the second table of the law, also because some Clothiers have showed
deaf ears in hearing it, unwise tongues in speaking of it, I would see if
they have my better eyes to read it.

But in speaking of this matter, I would not be taken to speak against the
trade of Clothing, which I confess is a necessary, a commendable and
profitable trade, and the estate of our country considered, is in diverse
respects to be preferred before many other trades. Also I would not be taken to
speak against the persons of any that do profess and follow this trade,
much less my own neighbors, but against the common injustice that is crept
into that trade Further, I would not be taken to accuse all Clothiers this way,
seeing there be many that I know not, as I will not every way excuse any that I
know. Finally, as I appeal to God that I have no other purpose in writing
hereof, then to further his righteousness and rich men's happiness, then to
discharge my own duty, and to help the poores misery: so I wish them whom
this matter concerns, to be of the same mind in reading and practicing of it,
and therefore to consider whether they do cut, not their cloth, but the wages
of those that make their cloth, by the metwand or rules aforesaid, or no.

For the first rule, I suppose Clothiers will not say in paying their
worke-folkes wages they do as they would be done to; if some will say so, let
it be tried by God and the country, when they have read this discourse, and in
the mean season let this reason disprooue it, that Clothiers do complain of
their Markets, and find fault with their Merchants, when their pains is much
less, their gains much greater, and their usage much better then their poor
worke-folkes.

For the second rule, that those that work under them should by their labor
sustain themselves, and help those that cannot work, and therefore their
wages should be answerable that they might do so. Clothiers cannot say they
follow this rule, for experience teaches, that most of their workfolkes, except
such as have some other means to live, or be of some rare hardness of body and
resolution of mind, to work night and day, and be without charge, are so
far from being able to sustain themselves by their labor, that they must
be sustained by others, they are so far from being able to give a penny to
those that cannot labor, that except such as be before excepted, they be most
of them beggars and have need to take relief.

For the third rule, which is the common equity that all men of other trades
follow in giving of wages, whether Carpenters, Masons, Thatchers, laborers, or
any other, a workman that works by the day has at the least four pence a day
and meat and drink. But Clothiers go not this way to work to find their
workefolkes meat and drink, as in time past, they have found out a cheaper
way, therefore the comparison must be where there is no meat and drink given:
therefore let it be considered, that in other trades those that work for
wages without meat and drink, the soriest workman, and that in the shortest
days has eight pence a day, and so as the workman is better and the days
longer he has nine pence, te^ pence, and twelve pence a day; now let us see
whether clothiers follow this rule.

And first to begin with their Spinners, who commonly are women take not the
soriest but the skilfullest and the diligentest, and they cannot earne in
Clothiers work, I mean those Clothiers that are called Blew men, above three
pence or four pence a day, both toward their own finding, and their Wheel
and Cards, that do wear much in that kind of work, mark that I say four
pence a day, which is the greatest earning of a Spinner in blewe work that I
can learn, that they may bring no instance against me. And mark that I
compare the best Spinners with the worste laborers in other trades, and then
see the difference, the other having eight pence a day in other trades, and
these have but four pence. What difference is there then, if you compare the
sorry Spinner which can earne not three pence nor two pence a day, with the
sorry labourer which has eight pence a day, or the best labourer which has
twelve pence and ten pence a day, with the best Spinner that has but three
pence or four pence. If any Clothiers should say that some Spinners will earne
more then three pence or four pence a day, I disprove it by the confession of
Clothiers themselves, who say, that Spinners and Weauers earne their penny very
hardly; and by the practice of all such women who will refuse to Spinne and
choose to burle, for which work Clothiers give but three pence, and in the
best places but four pence a day, this the Clothiers deny not, but they
defend it, and object that they set the poores children on work also, it is
true, else how should they make so much cloth, if they had not many hands about
it, but children have but childrens wages, they have so much for a pound, or
they spin thu^ many knots for a penny, according to which rate the mothers can
earne but two pence, three pence or four pence at the most, what think we
can the children earne. Further, Clothiers object there must be a difference
put between men and women, this I will grant them, yet women are as
artificial and profitable in those kinds of works for the Clothier, as men
could be if they were brought up unto it; but they will further press this
objection, and say; As maid servants have less wages then men servants, by
the same reason other women should have less wages then men: but though
maidseruants have less wages, yet they have better diet and have easier work
and wears less apparel, but many women that work under Clothiers in spinning
and carding, and breaking of Woll, do toil their arms, and foil their
clothes as much as many men of other trades, and yet have so much less wages,
as I have said, the same women when they work not with Clothyers but with
other men, in other work have better wages, if they keep a woman in childbed
they have three pence a day and meat and drink, if they make Hay they have
three pence or two pence a day and meat and drink, if she reap Corn, she
has four pence and six pence a day and meat and drink, those that carry
Tankardes in London can earne six pence and seven pence a day, all which are
double the wages they have in Clothiers work, as before is said: yea if the
same women do work with Clothiers themselves in other business, whether
those before named, or any other, which yet are not so profitable to them as
the workers of their trade, they give them such wages as other men do: why
should they that would be thought to have the most Gentleman-like trade of
others, be the most base and beggarly in their wages of all others? and why
should they give for the work of their trade, which is more gainefull to them
then any other business less wages then for any other work? But let it be
granted, that the woman's sex should have less wages then men, it cannot be
granted that there should be difference more then half in half between them,
when the woman spendes as much time, takes as much pains, and does as
profitable work as men of other trades, as I have said before, but I will
leave the women that work under Clothiers, and come to the men.

And first for their Weauers, their wages is thus much or so much for a Cloth,
as it is finer or courser: but by the way mark that the Clothier sets the
price, whereas in other trades men set the price of their own work, and other
men ask their workmen either when they begin or when they have done, what they
shall pay, but Clothiers will set down what these that work shall have, as
if one man should bear two persons both of the buyer and seller.

Now the wages that the Weauers have they divide into three parts, two parts
are appointed to two men that Weaue the cloth, the third part is allowed for a
boy that windeth the Quilles, and to maintain the charge and reperation of
the Loombes and lights. Now many weauers do complain, and that not suddenly,
but often and advisedly, not bad persons that care not what they say, but sober
and honest men, that when they reckon the days that they be about their
cloth, and proportion their wages that they have for weauing it, it grows but
to six pence a day, and that it is as often but five pence and four pence a
day, when their work is at the worst, then it is either eight pence or seven
pence a day when their work is at the best, although as the order of these
workmen is, they continue at work from the bell to the bell, from four of
the clock in the morning, till eight of the clock at night, which is three
hours in a day longer then other men of other trades do work, that have
greater wages, as I have showed, which time in the morning and evening
consider, if it lesson not Weauers wages almost a fourth part, and then compare
them, and see if Weauers have much more wages then Spinners and Burkers that
are women, and so if they have any more then half so much wages then other
workmen have of other trades, in which respect I know some Weauers have
wished themselves Tailors that have four pence a day and meat and drink,
and I know some that have leaft their Weauing wherein they served a
prenticehood, and have taken a Spade and a hook, and I know some very
skillful in Weauing Clothiers work, that have left it and become learners to
Weaue Dutch work.

But Clothiers object, though this be true, yet it is tolerable, because
Weauers stroy not so much apparel as other trades men do, and their work not
being so stirring, they spend not so much meat and drink as others do.

For answer to the first part of this objection: If some men of other trades
stroye more, others do stroye less, as Tailors, Shoomakers and Ioyners: but I
see not but Weauers considering the wearing of their hoase behind, and their
dublets before, do stroye as much as laborers: if there be any difference,
the odds of their wages for one day, will mende the laborers shoes for
twentye days.

For answer to the second part of this objection, that Weauers stir not so
much, and therefore eat not so much as workmen of other trades: but Tailors,
Shoomakers, and some other, stir not so much as they, and therefore by their
reason eat less, and yet as ye have seen have more wages. But grant that
Weauers do eat less meat then laborers, that which they spare from their
belly either because they have it not to eat, or if they will have it so,
because they have not so great a stomach, they spend in their strength,
health and life, by getting cold and diseases, as we see they look not so
fresh, nor live not so long as laborers do.

But if there were nothing to counteruaile that difference in apparel and
diet, is it reason that that which is spared from the poor man's back and
bellye, should be put into the Clothiers pursse. It is not that the Prophet
complains of saying; Ye eat up my people as it were Psalm. 14. 4
bread. They keep their riding Horses and their Dogs fat, but they keep
their worke-folkes both very poor and lean.

But least any should ask why I speak not of Sheeremen, I am not privy to
their wages, but I suppose it is not great, by the littleness of their estate
that be of that trade, diverse of them being the poorest in Towns, and none
of them ritche that I know in these times: but I think Sheeremens wages is
the best of the rest, and yet not so much as the wages of workmen of other
trades, for the greatest wages of a Shereman that is hired by the day is but
ten pence, though he do work from four till eight of the clock, which is
as I said three hours longer then other tradesmen do work, that have
as much wages.

But if Sheeremans wages were not better then others that work under
Clothiers, they should live worste of all, their tools that they work with
being so costly, their work so uncertain, that must wait upon the weather,
and continues commonly but for the Winter part of the year, and as it is
uncertain so it is diuerous, and has many turne-againes and dangerous, for if
they leave a cloth on the Tainter and it be stolen they be answerable for it:
but although their wages be somewhat better then Weauers, by that time they have
forborne their money some three, some six months, by that time they have
attended about Clothiers other business many hours and half days for
nothing, and by that time the loss they sustain by taking dear commodities
be deducted, I suppose there will be no great difference, especially by that
time many of them have beaten in flocks at least, for some Clothiers to make
the cloth carry a counterfeit show, and have set and dried their Clothes upon
the Saboth day, and strayned their conscience as much as their Cloth upon the
taynter, they will be found poor sheremen, and this is the reason in my
judgment according to reason, that Clothiers grow more speedily and more
abundantly rich then other men, because their work is done for half the
valewe that other men's is: for consider with me what it is to gain by every
man that is their weauer, three pence or four pence a day, by every woman that
is their burlier, Picker, Breaker or Spinner, two pence a day and by every
child that works for them a penny or a halfe-penny a day, if it were no
more, what this amounts unto, to those Clothyers that have five hundred, four
hundred, three hundred, or a hundred working under them more or less: or if
ye will reckon it thus, that the Clothier gains but a penny in every pound of
Woll spinning, as in the least presumption they must do if it be weighed by
the weightes of the Sanctuary, it amountes to six shillings eight pence in
every cloth, there being about four score pound of yarne in a cloth, and if
they gain by the Weauer but half so much, although I have heard workmen
compare the Weauing and spinning equally together. To speak nothing of that
they gain by their burlers and pickers, who have but three pence a day, nor
to speak nothing of that they gain by breakers and sheermen, yet that they
gain by Weauers and Spinners in this smallest estimation, comes to ten
shillings in every cloth, now to what sum grows that unto them, that make a
thousand, 500. 400. 200. clothes in a year.

But they object against this, that sometime they gain not ten shillings in a
cloth toward all their cost and pains, but mark that, they say sometimes, I
grant it; but that is sildome when they are ouer-seene in the choice of their
Oade, Indeco ashes, or the like; or when their Oade setters are ouer-seene in
setting their Fattes, but otherwise Clothiers themselves have confessed, that
their ordinary gain at the least reckoning is twice ten shillings in a
cloth, not speaking of those course ones that they call Roges, but of such as
may worthily bear the name of Broad clothes, yea it is evident that
oftentimes they gain three times, four times then shillings in a Cloth and
more, it is not known what.

But they say their gains grows otherwise then by their workefolkes, as by
buiing their wool, their oade, their indico, and the like, at the best hand,
and by selling their Clothes well, I answer; first for their buying, except the
corrupt devices that some (I hope not all) do use that way which I will not
speak of, my Text only reproouing injury to the poor, I suppose their gain
is not great that way, but as it falls out in all such uncertain things,
that sometime they may gain, and sometime they may loose, sellers being as
provident as buyers: now for the gain that they have by selling, they mean by
selling of time, to this I answer. Although I would have such gain examined
by the rule and reason, whereby we condemn usury, seeing they venture not
charitably with the Merchant, but if his state crackes not their stock holds,
though his ship sinkes: yet I deny not, but as they gain sometime by their
buying, so they gain often by this kind of selling, although some time they
loose by both. But their certain, their ordinary, and so their chief gain, I
dare say in the judgment of reason, is that they get by and from the poor
people, by the more cheap doing of their work, then other men's, which is
miserable gain, as if a man should rob the spittle-house.

Now as we have seen the Clothiers gain, let us see the poores loss: in the
law when they bought men, women, and children for money, and kept them only for
their work, when the year of their freedom came, they might not send them
away empty, but in this case I have in hand, it is otherwise, that where some
Clothiers dies worth twenty thousand pound, some workman that has wrought
under him not seven, but twenty year, dies not worth twenty groates: let it
be considered how the poor can live of the wages they have, as it is set
down before what they can earne, if they be well and not hindered by sickness,
sucking children or the like: but if any of these hindrances fall unto them,
how shall they buy them and theirs bread, clothes, firewood pay their house
rent, and such like necessaries for their life.

Yea this abridgement of wages is a cause of all the misery of the poor, both
in body and soul, for by reason of their small earnings, they cannot spare an
hour in a week, but must take the Saboth to wash their clothes, to piece
their rags, to fetch a bundle of wood, when they should come to Church to
serve God, yea they do not only this way sin by occasion thereof, but are
hazarded upon dangerous temptations of pilfring and stealing, as Agar said:
Prou. 30.
give me not poverty, least I steal, which I fear is one woeful means of many
of the poores living, let it be considered Christianly and equally if it be
not so that by this means a few Clothiers in a country grow rich and many
thousands grow poor, and if the inritching of two or three in a Town, be
not the impouerishing of many, if I may not say the hindering of all the Town,
for not only those that work under them, find it those ways ye have hard,
but other Townsmen also: and not to speak of that that other men bear out,
rates according to their ability, that is seen when Clothiers go away, much
more easily in that their ability is not seen, that other men maintain the
minister of their lands and labors, when Clothiers do nothing: that they do
put away Corn, either that they buy for days, or that they have growing, to
their workefolkes at a greater rate then the market, and so are occasions of
raising the price through the country. But only to speak of that that is
pertinent, to my purpose that other men partly by compulsion, and partly by
compassion are feign to relieve those by charity, whom the Clothiers as before
do impouerish by injury, other men lend the poor money, Corn and other
things, being feign to loose it, when Clothiers if they lend them any thing
will pay themselves again in their work.

The Prophets do much and often complain of rich men's grinding the faces of
the poor, flaying of their skins, and buying the needy for silver, and for
shoes: now who may be charged with these things, in our time and in our
country, but the Clothiers that generally do deal with them.

But some will say the Marchantes deal as evil with their workmen, patching
and pressing them with commodities, if the Marchantes do so, as I know some
have done, and think still some do* they are in the same condemnation, but
who does it in any comparison of number or measure like the Clothiers, who have
all the time and all the labor and all the cunning, I will not say of all, but
of almost all the poor, for all which in the winding up the poor get nothing
but a lowse.

But as it is wisdom and justice in all controversies, to hear both tales,
so besides their particular objections that before have fallen in by the way,
let us hear further what Clothiers can aleadge for themselves, either against
this occasion, or for their own accusation.

Clothiers plead for the defense of their course in this wages, and say they
may give their workefolkes less wages then others do, because they set their
workefolkes on work all the year, when others sometime do want work, by the
way, mark that we have their confession, that they give their workefolkes
less wages then other men do theirs: now they say they may do so for this
reason, that they set them on work all the year, which say they, others do
not: but to this I answer, if they do set them on work all the year, they
have the more gain, and not the less work, is this a good reason, that
because the poor do lengthen their work, therefore they may shorten their
wages: but most Clothyers do not set the poor on work all the year, but all
Laborers and Masons do sometime want work in Winter, so do their
workefolkes in Summer, and their workefolkes in Summer do work in the fields
about Hay or Corn, and have the wages of Laborers aforesaid, that is four
pence and six pence a day, and meat and drink, but in Winter when Laborers
shall want work and shall spinne and card under them they cannot earne two
pence or three pence, toward their bread and drink, and whereas husbandmen
give better diet and better wages in harvest for their have, Winter being the
Clothiers time of harvest and have, they give no more then their former
pittance.

The Clothiers say we can have our work done thus, and if one will not another
will. I answer, necessity has no law, the poor must work sot little rather
then sit still for nothing, for among the Clothiers themselves there is this
proverb; Of a hard earned penny a man may live, but of none he cannot: in
other cases they can see, and would say men must not look what they can have,
or what they can do, but what they may and what they should.

They have another objection much like the former, the poor were better do
thus then do nothing, because (for that must follow) that half a loaf is
better then no bread, true, but if they themselves always should give a
pennye for a half penny loaf, it would in time make them have a thin purse
and thin cheeks. That I may omit nothing that they can say for themselves, it
is further objected, that trial has been made, and the poor will earne more
in Clothiers work, then they can do in any other work. But if they mean by
poor men of other trades, as Masons, Shoomakers, Tailors, Thatchers,
Laborers, etc. Then it is untrue, for I have showed before, that all these
have much more, and many of them double their workfolkes wages: therefore they
must mean women and children, and then I answer; though this that they say
of them were true, yet this does not justify their giving of small wages,
because in no other work they can make better earnings, for that woll in our
country is the commonest commodity whereunto the poor have been most used,
because woollen cloth is most vendable at home and abroad, and the poor have
not bin used to work in hemp, flax, or any thing here aboutes but wool:
therefore it is no marvel, though being tried with those things they are
unacquainted withal, they can earne little, specially at the first, but yet
their objection so far as it concerns women and children, namely that they
can earne more in Clothiers work, then in other work in untrue, except our
clothiers mean to join with the^ under Clothiers work, those that make
White, Bays and Says, etc. Which my purpose is to divide from them, and to
accuse only Blew men, especially in the greatest part with this injustice, for
those that spin Dutch work do earne more the^ they can in Blew work, for they
that make Baies and Says, some give a penny for the spinning of six knots,
some a penny for seven knots, and some a penny for eight knots, we will take it
in the midst, that the poor have a penny for seven knots: our Clothiers that
put out their work to be spunne by the knot, give but a penny for nine knots,
now this is the difference between their knots the Bay men or Dutchmen, they
have eighty yards spunne for a knot of their work ready carded or co^bed, and
our Clothiers have forty else spun for a knot vncarded, now account the
carding, as it is full half the work, waying the wearing of their cards, and
count the two knots that Clothiers have done more then the other, and account
forty quarters, that makes ten yardes in every knot which is nine times ten
yardes in every penny, which makes two knots more, and then you may see that
those that spinne for Clothiers do four knots in every penny more then those
that spinne Dutch work. If the Clothiers will say they may spin their work
faster, I answer that is not always so, for some Clothiers sending their
work half broken and half seamed, does much hinder them, and yet if it were
always so, the handsomeness and cleanelinesse of the Dutch work in
comparison of theirs will recompense that differene, besides when women spinne
wool for other men, either to make stockings or such like, they have three
pence for the worst, four pence, and five pence a pound, which is duble
Clothiers wages, and men that be Linen Weauers can earne twelve pence in a
day, when their weauers cannot earne above six pence, those that weaue country
work as they call it, our huswifes cloth can earne 12. pence in a day, when
if they weaue for clothiers they cannot earne six pence, those that weaue
Pouldauis can earne nine and ten pence a day those that beat hemp and such
like in bridewell can earne ten pence and 12. pence a day, finding themselves,
yea if women and children can find any thing else to do, they will not work
under the Clothier, if they can have either Crabs, Slowes, Pescodes, gleaning
broom, birtch, or rushes in the fields, they will not do their work, as
themselves will confess, that in sometime of Summer they can get no spinning,
what is the reason but this, they give so little wages, Clothiers object and
say, there can but few in comparison be set a work otherwise then under them;
grant that, and grant withal that Clothiers have the time, cunning, and
strength, as I said before of those multitude, and that the more work under
them, the more they gain by them: will either equity, charity or humanity
suffer, that they should have their work without answerable wages. Clothiers
ask how the poor would live if they did not set the^ on work, as well they
might ask how Sailors would live if merchants or owners of ships did not
employ the^, or how any other whose liuelihood stands upon their cunning and
labor would live if they were not set a work, but woll as has bin said,
being the chief commodity of our country, there must be cloth making to serve
not only our own but other countries and much people must be employed that way,
as in France they be (...) ways should give a pennye for a half penny loaf,
it would in time make them have a thin purse and thin cheeks. That I may omit
nothing that they can say for themselves, it is further objected, that trial
has been made, and the poor will earne more in Clothiers work, then they
can do in any other work. But if they mean by poor men of other trades, as
Masons, Shoomakers, Tailors, Thatchers, Laborers, etc. Then it is untrue, for
I have showed before, that all these have much more, and many of them double
their workfolkes wages: therefore they must mean women and children, and then
I answer; though this that they say of them were true, yet this does not
justify their giving of small wages, because in no other work they can make
better earnings, for that woll in our country is the commonest commodity
whereunto the poor have been most used, because woollen cloth is most
vendable at home and abroad, and the poor have not bin used to work in hemp,
flax, or any thing here aboutes but wool: therefore it is no marvel, though
being tried with those things they are unacquainted withal, they can earne
little, specially at the first, but yet their objection so far as it
concerns women and children, namely that they can earne more in Clothiers
work, then in other work is untrue, except out clothiers mean to join with
the^ under Clothiers work, those that make White, Bays and Says, etc. Which
my purpose is to divide from them, and to accuse only Blew men, especially in
the greatest part with this injustice, for those that spin Dutch work do earne
more the^ they can in Blew work, for they that make Baies and Says, some give
a penny for the spinning of six knots, some a penny for seven knots, and some a
penny for eight knots, we will take it in the midst, that the poor have a
penny for seven knots: our Clothiers that put out their work to be spunne by
the knot, give but a penny for nine knots, now this is the difference between
their knots the Bay men or Dutchmen, they have eighty yards spunne for a knot
of their work ready carded or co^bed, and our Clothiers have forty else spun
for a knot vncarded, now account the carding, as it is full half the work,
waying the wearing of their cards, and count the two knots that Clothiers have
done more then the other, and account forty quarters, that makes ten yardes
in every knot which is nine times ten yardes in every penny, which makes two
knots more, and then you may see that those that spinne for Clothiers do four
knots in every penny more then those that spinne Dutch work. If the Clothiers
will say they may spin their work faster, I answer that is not always so,
for some Clothiers sending their work half broken and half seamed, does
much hinder them, and yet if it were always so, the handsomeness and
cleanelinesse of the Dutch work in comparison of their will recompense that
differene, besides when women spinne wool for other men, either to make
stockings or such like, they have three pence for the worst, four pence, and
five pence a pound, which is double Clothiers wages, and men that be Linen
Weauers can earne twelve pence in a day, when their weauers cannot earne above
six pence, those that weaue country work as they call it, or huswifes cloth
can earne 12. pence in a day, when if they weaue for clothiers they cannot
earne six pence, those that weaue Pouldauis can earne nine and ten pence a day
those that beat hemp and such like in bridewell can earne ten pence and 12.
pence a day, finding themselves, yea if women and children can find any thing
else to do, they will not work under the Clothier, if they can have either
Crabs, Slowes, Pescodes, gleaning broom, birtch, or rushes in the fields,
they will not do their work, as themselves will confess, that in sometime of
Summer they can get no spinning, what is the reason but this, they give so
little wages, Clothiers object and say, there can but few in comparison be set
a work otherwise then under them; grant that, and grant withal that Clothiers
have the time, cunning, and strength, as I said before of those multitude, and
that the more work under them, the more they gain by them: will either
equity, charity or humanity suffer, that they should have their work without
answerable wages. Clothiers ask how the poor would live if they did not set
the^ on work, as well they might ask how Sailors would live if merchants or
owners of ships did not employ the^, or how any other whose liuelihood stands
upon their cunning and labor would live if they were not set a work, but woll
as has bin said, being the chief commodity of our country, there must be
cloth making to serve not only our own but other countries, and much people
must be employed that way, as in France they be employed in gathering of
grapes, and treading of wine-presses. But as Clothiers ask how the poor would
live if they were not set a work by them, so I ask how the Clothiers would
live and have their work done without them, they will answer; they would
keep servants in their houses to do it, they could not have the tenth part
done that is now, and yet it would be more then double the charge to them it is
now. Clothiers aleadge further for their defense, it was thus before we were
borne, I answer, it is like the saying that some use in the case of Tithes,
there was never more paid say they, when their knowledge reaches but to
yesterday in comparison of ever, or never: but if it were so as the Clothiers
say, prescription is no good plea in an evil thing, yet though it might be
thought equal then when all things were at a lower rate, it cannot be equal
now when all things are doubled, and some things trebled in price.

If the poor shall pay very dear for the things they must live by, as their
come, their white-meate, their wood, and the like, and take very cheap for
that they should live by, that is their work, tell me what a harmony this
will make. And if it were so, will Clothiers hold the ancient wages for the
poores work, and not the ancient prices for their Cloth: but Clothiers say
their wool and other commodities cost them dearer then in old time; of their
own mouth we will condemn them, for shall the price of all other things been
increased and not the price of the poores work, is it equal that they should
give more for that they receive of the rich, and not give more for that they
receive of the poor.

They say they follow the common course, that all other Clothiers do in this
point, true indeed, if it were but the abuse of one or two, I would have
thought it my duty to rest in a private admonition, but because it is so
common a thing, it requires a public reprehention, but the more the worse, as
Moses says; Thou shall not follow Exodus 23. 1
a multitude to do evil: they aleadge they can give no more wages, to live
themselves. Let Clothiers themselves answer this alegation, some of them, have
in other communication confessed, that their gain sometime have been too
great, when they have doubled their stock in one year, other have confessed
they have gained almost so much by making out one load of Wool, as their
wool cost them, others have said, if they meet with sure merchants, it is the
best trade under heaven. Let the weight of this public cause obtain pardon,
for this rehersall of private speeches, specially meaning no man, further let
the state of Clothiers answer this allegation, who for their wealth may be
preferred before all other yeomen, and compared to many, if I may not say any
Gentlemen.

Let the manner of their living answer this allegation, besides that which
they spare, they spend some 300* some 200. some 100. pound, some a hundred
mark a year, when their poor workefolke spare nothing but spend their
cheeks. Some clothiers say they give a farthing or a half penny in a pound
for spinning more then was wont to be given, other deny this and say it was as
much thirty year a go, but grant this that some do so, yet those that do so
their work is not so well broken as is was wont, and therefore it is worse to
card, it is not so well seimed as it was wont, and therefore they have not
only more Wool to the pound, but also it is worse to spinne, and the Clothier
will have it drawn much smaller then in time past, for in time past they put
five score and four score and sixteen pound in a cloth, and now they put but
four score or four score and four, that is as long as the former, and so it
is a longer thread and is worse to reele, which things laid together, it
appears for this half penny or farthing, the spinners do a penniworth of
work at the least, and so gain by it as Dickins did by his dishes, some
Clothyers also say they give twelve pence and two shillinges in a Cloth more
fore Weauing then was usual in ancient time, but I have heard others affirm
the clean contrary, that the clothes they were wont to give twentye shillings
for, now they give but foreteene or fifteen shillings.

But some Weauers do confess that some Clothiers for some course clothes do
so, but for that they take away the thrums that Weauers were wont to have, they
will have their Cloth stopped at least at one end, and for that the yearne of
those course clothes is drawn almost as small as of their fine clothes, the
hindra^ce they have with knitting of knots through the often breaking of their
loose and twittered yarne, stands the weauer in four shillings or five
shillings, for that twelve pence, and this proves it to be so, because
Weauers could in time past weaue three of those clothes, in the time that they
can weaue two now: and as this is the loss of the Weauer, so it is the gain
of the Clothier, for the smalnesse of the yarne makes it go much further, and
makes the cloth finer, though never the better. So that ye see that the
increase of their wages that Clothiers speak of, is the deminishing of their
wages, and that work folks get by it over the shoulders: and that it is so,
appears by this, that worke-folkes of these trades cannot live so well by
much, under the Clothiers now, as they have done in times past.

If they will say, that is because they have not so much work as in time past,
I answer, that is not all the cause, for those that have work enough have too
much a do to live, for ye may conceive in reason what a portion of living the
former proportion of wages will affoorde. Therefore these allegations of giving
more wages then in times past, when they know that there is more time spent,
and more work done then in time past, cannot but proceed from an evil
conscience.

The Clothiers say though they should give more wages for their work, the
Merchant would give never the more for their Cloth, but the reason of
Marchantes sticking at prises, is as I take it, because their Cloth* commonly
is so bad, and Clothiers gains so sufficient, but if their Cloth were good,
and they could not afforde it so good cheap, Merchants must and would give a
greater price; but if Marchantes did not increase their price, Clothiers might
increase their wages, that the poor might live better, and yet themselves live
well enough.

Clothiers object that some that work under them grow rich, but I have showed
before that of their wages, except some rare person, that keeps himself
single, and be of extraordinary hardness and disposition of sparing, and if
he be married has a special help by his wives portion and painful labor,
and no hindrance by any charge, or some other furtherance by some friends, to
keep a cow or two they cannot live, but if any of those workefolkes which I
have anotomized before, except peradventure some that God will specially
bless, as he makes good his promise of blessing in all degrees that way, as
in some he makes good the threatening of his curse, otherwise for the common
sort, if they attain to any wealth, if it be not by stealing, it is by buying
of flocks and course wool, by making of remnants and climing to it by
Clothiers steps, and not by their work and wages.

Clothiers say there will always be poor, as the Scripture says: it is
true, there will always be blind, sick, and lame, that cannot work, and
there will be some other poor that God will punish with poverty for their
sins, and some that God will exercise with poverty for their trial, though
it commonly comes to pass by means of the oppression of the rich: but
because there will be poor, can that excuse them that make them poor. It is
in this case as it is in that our Savior Christ speaks of offenses; Necessary
it is that offenses should come, but woe be to that man by Math. 8.
whom they do come.

Clothiers say they would be poor though they had never so much wages, so
some would be lean though they had never so much meat, shall men therefore
with-holde from them compitent food, but though some would be unthrifty, yet
others no doubt are as careful to thrive in their calling, as Clothiers be in
theirs, if they had means for it.

Clothiers say the people be as poor in other countries as they be in this
country, it may be so, for the estate of some countries is more hard and
homely then ours, as it is said the Mayiors and chief men of some Towns and
corporations have been Thatchers, but if the people be poor by the
providence of God and not by the oppression of men, it is not the thing that I
meddle withal, but those that shall have the labor and sweat of Gods people,
and not reward them according to the rules of equity, this is the matter that
I reprove, and if in those countries they speak of there be any persons of
trade that give so little wages for so much work, yet if they themselves be
of mean estate, and the work whereabout the poor are employed will yield
them no such gain or advantage as to give any greater recompense, and so do
proportionably, though not equally, bear the hardness of the time and place
with the other, this is not the thing that I condemn, but when any that set
poor on work shall be of great ability, and the labor of the poor
affoording them great profit, as it is with Clothiers, and yet they shall not
reward them competently for their labor, but by defrauding or abridging their
wages, they grow rich by others poverty, this is the woeful gain that
James speaks of here, and that they are like to pay dear for at the last.

And as Clothiers say, they be as poor in other countries where be no
Clothiers, so they say there be as poor of other trades in this country,
but observe it, and you shall find, there is no comparison between the number
of poor of other trades, put them all together, and those that work under
Clothiers: and yet those that be poor of other trades, how grows it
ordinarilye, not from the littleness and likeness of their wages with the
Clothiers workefolkes, for ye have seen the difference between them before,
but it seems to grow from hence, that their wives and children who work
under the Clothyer for such trifling wages as I have spoken of, do eat up
that the men do earne.

Clothiers say the poor do steal from them, it is like many of them do,
though themselves be the occasion of such temptation: it is a fault in those
poor that do so, and the Scripture reprooues it in other places, and appoints
punishment for it, but it is the other kind of theft that Clothiers use to
them, that James controules here, as one says; There be some thieves do
wear chains of Iron, and some do were chains of Gold: if the poor had as
good means to punish this kind of theft, as Clothiers have to punish the
other, I would never have set my Pen to Paper for them.

Notwithstanding all this, the Clothiers say, it is a good thing to set the
poor a work: True it is, so as the poor in working may have a convenient
refreshing, a comfortable expectation, and equal satisfaction for their work,
otherwise a man may do evil in setting the poor a work, as Pharao did evil
in setting the Israelites to make Brick, and as these men did that set the
poor to reap their fields, when it tends to injury and oppression.

Yet some of them think it their virtue thus to set the poor a work, but if
it be a virtue, it must be a virtue of the second Table, and must either be
equity, or charity equity: it is not as I have showed before, because it
agrees not with any of the rules of equity, and charity it is not, for that
is over and above equity.

But let us in a word of two a little consider of some Clothiers charity,
which I speak of not as the Apostle says to the Corinthians, to shame them,
but as my beloved brethren to admonish them, and to take away the shadows that
use to blind them: for I know not my self if I have any other purpose in
this discourse then to profit them one way, and those that I plead for another
way. Some Clothiers do give four pence, some six pence a week to the
poor, but one or two of their Spinners do bring it them home again by
Tuesday night in their work, then what do they and the rest of their
workfolkes bring and give them, some a penny, some two pence, some three pence
and four pence every day in their work, and so the Clothiers fill their
houses with spoil, and where they would be ashamed to take an alms of any
rich man, they are not ashamed to take an alms of every poor man: they bid
their poor workfolkes at Christmas to a dinner, but what is that when they
dine with the^ twenty times in a year. Let Clothiers pay the poor competently
for their work and keep their pottage, and if they did so, some of their
moth-eaten garments would be of the poor folks backs, and some of their
fattie platters of the poor folks tables: but a word or two more of Clothiers
charity. Some of them will at their death give the poor five pound or ten
pound; indeed somewhat is better then nothing, and better late then never: but
those Clothiers that have lived in any great occupying but ten year, if when
they dye they should give to the poor ten score pound, in my judgment they
should dye in their debt.

But that I may omit nothing that may be said for Clothiers, and that by their
best friends it is objected, that many Clothiers be religious men, and the
specialest men in Towns, and such as have bin special instruments to further
the gospel. It is true; The grace of God has appeared, and brings salvation
Titus. 2.
to all men, that is, all sorts of men, and so to Clothiers as well as others,
and God forbid that I should deny them all the good opinion of religion, more
then to any other men of any other lawful trade. And but that I will not
speak perticularly against any, I could speak perticulerly for some.

But for all that, let us judge of religion not as we conceit it, but as the
Scripture 1. Tim. 3.
speaks of it: Paul says, Religion has Godliness joined with it, and it
has Justice Job. 1.
joined with it: as it is said of Job, Cornelius, and other religious men, they
were just and feared God: It has mercy joined Iam. 1.
with it, as James says; Pure religion and undefiled before God. Is this to
visit the fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world.

But what contrary things are there in most Clothiers, I speak not of all,
but yet of some that pretend religion, what unholiness and breach of the
Sabbath day is there among them, and that ordinarilye by themselves, their
servants, their workefolkes, their cattle in iournying, sending and receiving
of clothes too and from Mill, setting their Fattes, setting their Taynters
drying their Wool, etc. AS if theirs were such a Goulden trade, that
Godliness it self must give place unto it.

What usury, yea what biting usury do most, may I not say all Clothiers
commit in putting out their clothes to Merchants not for ten in the hundred,
but for twenty, for thirty in the hundred, which doubtless is one cause of the
breaking and undoing of many Merchants at this day. What extreme deceit do
Clothiers use, not only to the poor, as I said before, but to all the Queens
subjects, yea to the people of other countries, in setting a counterfeit gloss
upon their cloth at one end, and straining it from end to end, so that it is
not that within that it seems to be without, it is not so long nor so broad,
so just nor so strong as it seems to be, but will shrink unreasonably, which
I speak not only in answer to the former objection, but in the way of an
admonition to join practice of religion unto profession. For considering the
number of the poor, the manner of their living, and that by occasion of the
uneven proportion of the Clothiers dealing, I cannot sufficiently pity it in
the poor, nor mislike it in them, and I do verily think if Jeremy had seen
such a thing as this, he would have put it among his Lamentations. I pray God
move the Maiestrates by some means to consider how it might be reformed,
either some other way that may seem good to their wisdom, or by appointing
Clothiers to put out all their spinning by the knot, and that they may give a
penny for so many knottes of course work, and for thus many of fine work, as
shall be thought compitent for the poor, and to allow so much for the Weauing
as is given for the spinning, which is thought to be proporcionable. These two
things in my judgment would amend all this disorder, though there were no
meddling with the wages of their pickers, burlers, breakers, or any other, for
then if they did not increase the wages of burlers and such women, they would
not do that work, but spinne, and if they did not give competent wages to
other men that work under them, they would not do that work but Weaue.

And where the Clothiers will object, then the poor will not do their work
well, if they be tied to give them certain wages: the answer is, they have
the same bridle for that which they have now, to change their workefolkes. But
considering the multitude of poor, the Clothiers have gotten the law into
their own hand, as we say, the liberty that they have, and practice that
they use to abridge the wages of their workefolkes, is a cause of all the
misery of the poor people in our country at this day. But until there be a
law to bind them that be evil in this trade, let every good man, as Paul
says to Timothy, be a law to himself, and labor to do well, and well
will come on it Although there be some good men Clothiers, yet most of them, if
I may not say all of them, do want either conscience or consideration. Now
to help them in this, I would have them diligently mark what the Apostle
James says here; Go to howl and weep for the misery that shall come upon
you, the laborers wages that have reaped down your fields which is of you
kept back by fraud cries against you, etc.

When I preached this Sermon, and urged these words against Clothiers, some
objected that James speaks not against them, but against husbandmen, but so a
man may put all doctrine from himself, because the Scripture speaks not of
his name, of his country or trade, but we must know if if be the same fault,
thought it be in another person or trade, it deserves the same reproof and
punishment.

It was further objected, that the Apostle speaks not against those that gave
too little wages, but against them that gave none at all. By which kind of
caueling we see how loath this devil is to be cast out: but shall we think
they were so inhumane and barbarous, being of the Church, as to give them
nothing at all for their work: if that had been so, the Apostle needed not
have said after in the eight verse to the poor; Be patient therefore brethren
till the coming of the Lord; for they must have dyed quickly, but he speaks
of such an injury as was a continual exercise of their patience. To conclude
the Apostle says: The cry of the poor is entered into the ears of Genesis 4.
the Lord of Hoastes; the like is said: That the blood of Abell cried for
vengeance against Caine, so it is said, the cry of Sodom was exceeding great:
the stone in the wall Abac. 2. 11.
and the beam in the house shall cry against those that set them up by evil
means.

It is true that all sins do come to the ears of the Lord, but some sins
be so monstrous and prodigeous, that he does vehemently witness his
knowledge and misliking of them then others, God is called the Lord of Hoastes
or God of armies, because he has al creatures at commandment to execute his
judgments, he had Bears to devour the children that mocked the Prophet
Elisha, he had dogs to devour Iesabell, he had Flies, Frogs, and Lice, to
devour the land of Egypt, and he has an host of Angels to take vengeance of
wicked men, it is said, Defraude not one another 1. These. 4.
in any matter, for God is an auenger of all such things; and it is said: No
unrighteous 1. Cor. 6.
person shall inherit the kingdom of God, meaning if he continue so and
repent not, to leave his unrighteousness.

Lay these Scriptures to your course, and then do that that belonges to your
comfort, look without parciality into it, and I hope ye will see it look
far enough unto the time when ye must answer it, and then I doubt not ye
will reform it. Now if the sin be so great to keep back the wages of those
that labor corporally, what is it to keep back the wages of those that
labor spiritually? for Christ says of those, The Labourer is worthy of his
wages; and the more excellent the labor is, the greater wages is due unto it:
but I would have the indignitye and iniquity of this considered, by comparing
it with the former, and so will end with this prayer to God, that he would
draw us and keep us from both these euilles, and teach and strengthen us every
way to do well.

FINIS.

