Vade mecum.

Go with me: Dear Piety, and rare Charity.

Whose flame is stirred up, to dispell the cold out of the mind.

By Otho Casmanne, Preacher at Stoade.

Translated out of Latin, by H. T. Minister.

The Contents appear in the Page following.

Duc me nec sine me per me Christ optime duci,
Nam duce me pereo: Te duce saluus ero.
Guide me sweet Savior Christ, The way,
Let not my self me guide:
If thou me guide, I shall be safe,
If I my self, I slide.
LONDON Imprinted for Thomas Charde.

1606.

The Contents of this Book.
The Epistle Dedicatorie of the Translator.

The Epistle Dedicatorie of the Author.

A Synopsis or view of this Book.

A Prologue sententious.

Four members. 1. Incipe. Begin. 2. Ne desice seu re gredere. Faint not, or
go not backward. 3. Sed profice. Go forward, or profit. 4. By denying
unrighteousness, and By follewing of righteousness.

An Epilogue sententious.

Prayers framed to the parts and members of this Book.

To the three Right worshipful, The Epistle by the Translator.
and religiously virtuous Gentlewomen, Mistres Anne Osbourne, widow of the
Right Worshipful Master Peter Osbourne, Esquire Mistress Dorothie Osbourne,
the wife of M. John Osbourne, Esquire. Mist. Grace Chapman, the Widow of M.
William Chapman, Citizen, Increase of grace in this life, with assured hope of
glory in the world to come.
Having had long experience (Right virtuous Gentlewomen) of your Christian
Piety and Charity, grounded upon a true knowledge of the word of God, I have
thought good to present unto you, this short Treatise of a learned Writer,
Translated by me, for the good liking I had thereof.

Wherein he directs every Christian how to begin, to go forward, to
persevere in the way of Piety and Charity, till he have attained the mark,
which is eternal life.

Not that I thought you, to have much need of any such direction to be
prescribed you, who have long since both found the way, and practiced the
course of a Christian life, and by Gods grace shall so persevere: But yet I
judged it might be a good confirmation to you, that you have not hitherto
wandered uncertainly in your course, as also that it might be some
encouragement unto you to persevere.

But unto other, who have not yet either sound the way, or begun to walk, or
have but slowly or faintly gone forward in this course, to such, this book may
be both a guide to direct the^ in the way of Pity, and Charity, and also a
spur to stir them up to go forward.

I have been bold to join you three in the Inscription of this Epistle, as my
three Charites or Graces, of whom the Poets make mention, Three loving and
bountiful sisters. And sure I am, that grace is in every of your Names: and
Nature has joined you in Consanguinitie and near Affinity (as also GOD has
united you in Piety. Now as in the Etymology of your Names ye carry Grace, so
I doubt not but in your hearts ye possess the three Christian Graces, Faith,
Hope, and Charity: which by Gods mercy shall never leave you, till they have
brought you to the expected end of your Faith and Hope, even eternal life.
Which God for his son Jesus Christ's sake grant to you, and all true
Christians. Amen. So fare ye well.

Your unworthy Pastor, H. T.

To the whole body of the College of S. Mary, at Stoad: Otho Casmanne, The
Epistle Dedicatorie of the Author.
Preacher of the said College, wishes salvation in Christ.
YOu venerable and Reverend men, and Brethren, greatly beloved in Christ, unto
whom, by the favorable will and providence of Jesus Christ (whose unworthy
Minister I acknowledge my self) I do execute the embassage of the Gospel, who
also for that purpose have chosen and called me, to teach among you the word of
Christian verity and sanctity: Are not to be passed over by me. The tongue
serves to teach: but give me leave I beseech you, by writing to warn those
whom with mourning I daily wish to teach, by example, life, and work: would to
God I might perceive, that it were in my power to perform it.

It is a great matter certainly to be a Minister of the Word, but to be a
Worke-maister aunswerable to the word, is (by Christ) a far greater matter.
We love a frequent Hearer of the word of God, but a diligent Doer of A dooer
of the word hard to find.
the word heard and kept, we admire. These are my groans, these are my wishes
in this calling, which by the will and grace of God I maintain (pardon me I
pray you, if I unburden these things into your bosom, with that Charity and
Faith that is meet) to wit: That I be not a monster, having a larger tongue
than hands: For that saying of my master Jesus Christ does sound in my
ears: He that teaches and does, he shall Mat. 5.
be called great in the kingdom of heaven. He will have me, not only to be the
salt of the earth, in soundness of doctrine: but also the light of the world,
in holiness of life, and example of virtue: Otherwise of mine own mouth will
he judge me, as an ungracious servant: And Luc. 19. Ibid. 12.
I shall be beaten with many stripes: If I bind together heavy burdens, and
lay them on other men's shoulders, and I my self scarce touch them, or move
them with my little finger.

Every man must show his faith by his works, as a tree is known by her
fruit. Let us all hear that saying of Aurelius Numerianus: Be that which thou
art reported to be. Or that of Horace; Tu recte vivis, si curas esse quod audis:

Well do thou live, if thou endeuer
To be the same, thou hear ever.
We are called Christians, let us live a Christian life: We are called
spiritual, let us live in the spirit, and mortify the deeds of the flesh. Let
us join in wishes, and mingle mournings, that by begging, and getting the
help of the holy Ghost, we may rather be, than desire to seem good: For as
one says; It skilleth more what thou art, tha^ what thou art accounted. Let us
I say on all sides, endeavor with joint forces, to be the same before God,
that we would seem to be before men. That shall we do, if joining Charity with
Knowledge; and Holiness with Verity, we lead a godly and Christian life.

Surely God is holy, and we his servants ought to be holy, that we may be
united to him: We are not our own men. Why then should our own Reason and
will bear the sway in our counsels and actions? Let us labor in all the parts
of our life, to enjoy God, as the chief end, having a respect unto his will
to do it.

We are in the Church, the holy City of God, whom he has consecrated to
himself: Let us count it a wickedness, Motives to godliness.
to profane it with our impuritie: Christ, who has reconciled us to God, is a
pattern set before us, let us express his example in the actions of our life:
God does show himself a father unto us: Surely we are too unthankful, if we
show not our selves as children to him. Christ has cleansed us by the lauer of
his blood, let us shame to defile our selves with new stains or filthiness: He
has also inserted us into his mystical body, let not us fall away from that
body, by sprinkeling our selves with foul blots. The holy Ghost has
dedicated us to God, as holy temples, let us, by his help, who dwells in us,
make Mat. 5.
our light so to shine before men, that they may see our good works, that our
heavenly father may be glorified. We have the Angels our guides and watchmen,
let us not, by the filthy stink of our sins drive them from us. Our souls
and bodies are destined to heavenly glory and mortality: Let us labor
earnestly to keep them pure and undefiled, against the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

What is therefore for to be done by us? I have with a good meaning, for our
mutual edification in Christ, gathered like a Be, and framed out of all the
best Authors (this fire of Christian Piety and Charity, that stirring up one
an other brotherly, and enflaming one an other in the way of a godly
conversion, and holy conversation, we may attain to the true felicity of
eternal life.

Take ye this of me, your unworthy Minister, with all favorable countenance:
read it with me, with a mind desirous of Christian holiness: Let it go with
me and you, all our life long: He alludeth to the title, Vade Mecum.
Favor with good will, the labors of your servant, studious of your
salvation, tending to Gods glory.

Well then ye reverend men, and beloved brethren, let us enter the way of true
happiness: by a true conversion, and godly conversation: Let us not faint in
the way, for any difficulty or burden of temptations, but let us go forward
in a continual study of continency, and obedience, unto righteousness, and by
righteousness, unto the glory of eternal life.

And before all things, let us do our endeavor to learn to deny our selves: O
how hard and difficult a matter is it, for a man to forget and forsake
himself, A hard thing to forsake our selves.
and to apply his whole soul to the obedience of God: How unpleasant a thing
is it, for a worldly man, not to seek his own, but by doing all things
according to Gods will, to seek the glory of God. Let us by denying our selves,
patiently bear the cross that God does late upon us, that we may be conformed
to Christ, and by humility acknowledge our own infirmity, and beg the
grace and help of God.

When we have thus forsaken our selves, let us not neglect our neighbors, From
our selves, to our neighbors. From both to God.
but rather prevent them with honor, and in good earnest employ our selves
wholely to procure their commodity: From our selves and our neighbors, yea and
from all things, let us cast our eyes upon God, and resigning our selves, and
all that is ours, to his will, Let us yield all the affections of our minds
to be subdued by him. If any thing fall out prosperously, let us ascribe it to
God, and not to our selves: If any thing succeed not according to our wish, let
us not be dismayed with impatiencie: but if any evil happen unto us, let us not
therefore reckon our selves unhappy, neither let us complain against God for
our estate.

Almighty God grant, that by his holy spirit, working effectually in our
hearts and minds, we may with careful industry search out the way of Truth and
Charity, and with ardent desire long to come to our heavenly Father: and
having found out and known the way, we may with good courage enter it, and
with godly care walk in it: fleeing the vanity and inconstancy of the world,
that we neither go backward, nor decline, either to the right hand, or to the
left.

The God of mercy and sanctification, so frame the course of our lives, in the
use of earthly things, that we pamper not our selves too much, but that we use
the world, as if we did not use it: That 1. Cor. 7.
we may learn no less to bear penury meekly, than abundance moderately: That
we may restrain Luxury, our deadly enemy, least we turn the helps of our life
into hindrances. Let us remember, that these earthly things, are by the
goodness of God, appointed for our commodity, that they might be as pledges,
whereof we must one day yield an account.

In all the actions of our life, let us carefully look unto the special
calling, To look to our calling.
whereunto God has called us, to do those things which beseem it, and to
shun whatsoever is unseemly for it. To conclude, the eternal Father grant
us to contemn this wicked world, and whatsoever appertains unto it, and as is
meet, to meditate on the life to come, and the incorruptible Crown in heaven.

These things, ye Reverend men and brethren, I wish to you and my self, which
my wishes and studies, if I shall perceive not altogether to be unpleasing
unto you, I shall seem to have reaped sufficient, and plentiful fruit for my
labor in this Book: and peradventure shall be stirred up to perform some
greater matter. The Lord Jesus bless you all, and every one, abundantly from
heaven. Amen.

Fare ye well, and live ye happily,
At Stoade, Idibus, October, 1604.
Seneca Epist. 116.
YE command us say they, too hard matters, We are frail men, we cannot
abridge our selves of all things. He Answers,

Because we love our vices, we defend them: And we had rather excuse them, than
excusse Shake the^ off.
them: we pretend we cannot, the truth is, we will not.

Epictetus. Lib. Dissert. Cap. 31. Of Diog. Cyn.
I have no guard, no swords, nor pomp, nor outward terrors: In stead of those,
A good conscience, gives me boldness and arms me with power: I esteem Honesty
for very love, without law or penalty. Other men are harbowred within walls,
doors, or couertures: I live under the broad sky, and wide world, in the eyes
and view of every one: I desire only to please God.

And yet whiles I do thus, it falls out that I am railed on, yea and beaten:
but what marvel? Of boys and fools, that cannot abide to be rubd on the
gaul: yet will I neither change my mind, nor leave my manner: And even those
that beat me, I love, as a father, or as a brother.

A Synopsis, or view of this little book, whose Title is, Vade mecum: Go
with me.
Dear Piety, and Rare Charity.
This little book has six parts.
1. A Prologue sententious. Four members 1. Incipe. Begin. 2. Ne Defice seu
regredere. Faint not, or go not backward. 3. Sed profice. Go forward or
profit. 4. By denying unrighteousness, and By following of righteousness.

An Epilogue sententious,

1. The sum of the Prologue.

All men desire to Know and Live.

LEt us first learn to know, that we know how to live godly.

Let us learn to know God, and To know
Our selves.

For he that knows himself; knows God. He that knows God, shall be made
like to God, etc.

Let us so live here, that hereafter, we To live.
may live with Christ for ever.

For this life is not to be desired for it self; but for another life, unto
which we must come by the gate of death.

Therefore that we may ever live with Christ;

Let us learn both to Live and well.
Dye

We learn to live well, by meditating on death.

We learn to dye well, by living godly.

We leare to live godly, by dying happily,

To this way there is a mark set, vz. Eternal life: And the way to this mark,
The mark and the way. Ioh. 14. How to know the way.
is Jesus Christ our Savior, who says: I am the way, the truth, and the life,
we attain to the knowledge of this way.

1. By a right understanding of the holy Scriptures. 2. By Illumination of the
holy Ghost. 3. Whereof arises an experience, feeling God himself working in us.

Begin therefore O man, Know and Live.

Begin, faint not, but go forward.

1. Begin to enter the way of life, The first member.
which leads to the mark of salvation.

The entry is made by a conversion.

The Conversion is made by,

An auersion from sin the worst Conversion twofold. Auersion from sin.


Evil, and by

A Reuersion to God, the best good.

1 In turning from sin, consider O sinner, thy miserable estate, while thou
art yet in thy sin.

Thou art an enemy to God, and he The miserable state of a sinner
to thee: A friend to Satan, nay a slave both to Satan and sin: Beggarly,
filthy, and guilty of eternal death.

Beg therefore the grace of God, which may prevent thee, accompany thee, and
follow thee.

Now Gods grace in the Conversion of a sinner, uses two means.

The knowledge of sin, and knowledge of sin.
A consternation of the mind.
1. We come by the knowledge of sin, by the law, which is the rule of
righteousness: By knowing how sin is bread, vz.

1. Four ways inwardly, in the heart: How sin is bread.
By suggestion: delight: consent: defense.

2. Four ways also is it performed in work: First privily: next openly
without shame: Then it grows to a custom: At length it comes either to
security, or desperation.

Consider also the heinousnes of sin, vz. It is an injury to God: A grievous
weight, casting us headlong: A tyranny of satan: A gilt not pardonable, if
Christ had not died: The son of God must needs dye to purge it.

2. After the knowledge of sin follows Co^sternation of mind.
a consteruation or casting down, sorrowing for sins committed: And fearing
Gods wrath.

Hereof arises A fear, and A sorrow,

A fear threefold: Least we be forsaken of grace: deprived of the sight of
God: Fear.
and tormented in Hell.

A sorrow twofold: The first for fear of punishment, which is called a worldly
Sorrow.
sorrow.

The second, for sin and offending of God, which is called a godly sorrow.

Either of them is wrought by the spirit of GOD, but by diverse Instruments, vz.

The first by the Law, The second by the Gospel.
2. In returning to God, we must consider Reuersio^ to God.
the nature of God: That he is the chief good, etc.

We return by faith, resting in the By faith.
mercy of God the father, in the merits of Jesus Christ his son.

This faith arises in our hearts. First How it rises.
the Illumination of the spirit: with an inward sense of our own wretchedness.
Secondly, succeeds a hope of pardon: that although we feel not our sins
yet pardoned, we hope they are pardonable. Thirdly, we shall perceive an hunger
and thirst, of the grace that is offered us in Christ.

Fourthly, thou shall come to the Throne of grace, that there thou may find
favor.

Now in this access, thou shall perform Two things in returning
two things.

Thou shall confess thy sins, generally, and specially. Thou shall ask
perdon of thy sins, with groans, which cannot be expressed.
Fifthly, thou shall by an assured persuasion imprinted in thee by the holy
Ghost, apply the premises of the Gospel specially to thy self.

Here look to the practice of David's David's practice. Delays dangerous.
repentance.

And beware of delays and long lingering: meditate the shortness of thy life:
And the manifold dangers of delays, vz.

The treasuring up of wrath: The alienation from God. An evil conscience: The
offense of the Angels: The engladding of Satan: The tragical ends of
impatient sinners.

Faint not, neither go backward. The second member.


When thou have in some sort learned and entered the way of life, walk in it
with thanksgiving: take heed thou faint not, neither go backward.

1. Resist therefore temptations, for Temptations. God te^pteth, and why.
God to whom thou art returned, will try his new soldier.

Both to stir thee up, to long for the rest of thy heavenly country: And to
draw thee, from the love of the world.

And that thou may know, from dines. whence thou have power to resist. Here
thou must have these helps in a rea. Ardent Prayer: Constant Hope, A strong
Patience.

2. Satan thy adversary, from whom Satan tempts.
thou art fallen, will sift thee.

Though he be most subtle as a Serpent, yet listen not to him: Neither yet
trust thine own judgment.

Though he be very strong as a Lion: yet resist him: being armed with a true
faith in Christ, whereby thou shall quench his fiery darts.

3. Often times we tempt our selves, Domestical enemies.
for we have our domestical enemies: for every one is tempted, when he is
drawn away and enticed, with his own concupiscence.

Against this inward enemy, we must make war continually by mortificatio^.

4. Without us, in the world, many External enemies.
temptations are offered: which may disturb our wits.

But thou O man, shall overcome them, By shunning or removing the occasions of
evil.

5. To conclude, thou shall meet with manifold temptations, vz. Manifold
temtations.


1. The memory of former sins which grief is biting, but it is not
unprofitable.

2. Sometime the remembrance of former sins, with a delight, which is very
hurtful.

3. The troubles and vexation of a Christian life.

4. The contempt of the world, striking a certain shame of our profession into
us: or alluring us by his love: to these temptations are set down their
remedies.

And the danger of Relapse is showed, least the last be worse than the first
Relapse dangerous. Dangers of relapse.


Relaps is dangerous in three respects.

1. On the devils part: who seeks to return to his house, from whence he
went out. 2. On Gods part: whose spirit is grieved, and he as it were deluded.
3. On man's part himself: who getteh a custom of sin hardly to be
recovered.
Go forward, or profit.

To go forward in the way of salvation, it is the gift of God: we must
therefore The third Member. Two parts 1. The denying of unrighteousness.
beg it of him by prayer.

Now we shall profit herein, by denying unrighteousness, and following
righteousness.

1, We shall deny unrighteousness, if we deny our selves.

Thou shall deny thy self, by mortifying sin.

Of sinnes' Some be light, and Some be more grievous.

2. Let us make our beginning, by declining Lighter sins.
from lighter sins: which though they seem to be of small account: yet they
bring with them many mischiefs.

For every sin deserves punishment: Manifold inconveniences.
defiles the soul: diminishes the heat of Charity: weakeneth the powers of
the soul: hinders our glory: disposes a man to greater sins: withstandeth
a new grace: weake^s our prayers: hinders our proceeding in the way of life,
etc.

Therefore O man, search daily every day all the corners of thy conscience, and
fight daily against sin, be it never so little, by continual faith and
repentance. More grievous sins. Four chief heads.


2. Let our next care be to mortify, and avoid more grievous sins.

And first, Immoderate self-love, which is carnal, must be cut off.

2. Carnal Appetites, and Concupiscence must be tamed.

3. Unbridled affections, and perturbations must be restrained.

4. Wicked habites must be plucked up by the roots.

For as evil inclinations engender evil affections: so evil affections,
breed evil habits: The rooting out whereof, require a greater force of the
spirit.

Concerning evil habits. Evil habites to be mortified.


The faculties of the soul are,

Some Superior, and

Some Inferior.

The Superior faculties are the Understanding, and Will.

In the understanding, must be mortified the vice of Curiosity: Temeritie:
Pertinacie. The understanding. Cogitations.


And because the understanding is the fountain of infinite cogitations, which
the memory receives and keeps, as committed to her trust.

These therefore must be mortified, whether they be idle, earthly, unclean, or
curious.

In the will we must mortify, whatsoever The will.
repugneth the will of God, revealed in his word.

In the Inferior faculties of the soul, vz.

The Senses and Appetites. The concupisible, and Irascible parts.

Wherein many evil habits are engendered. Evil habites in the inferior parts


First gluttony and drunkenness, are to be mortified. Next Luxury, or Riot.
Thirdly, Covetousness. Fourthly, anger. Fifthly, envy, Sixthly, Pride. Seue^tly,
Sloth, which breeds

Dullness and Coldness in spiritual exercises.

Lastly, we must avoid cowardlines, and Pusillanimitie.
cast off fear: for many times the mind is troubled, when we are entered the
way of life: either with expectation of evils near at hand: or with despair
of deliverance from present evils.

But what is it that thou need fear? 1. Whether the cross, or afflictions?
2. Whether Nothing to be feared.
sickness or griefs? 3. Whether loss of earthly riches, or penury? 4. Whether
the horror of death at thy end? 5. Whether Satan's fury, and assalts? 6.
Whether the number or heinousnes of thy sins? 7. Whether the terror of the
last judgment?

He shows that none of these are to be feared, and sets down reasons of
comfort.

2. Go yet forward in the practice of The forth member to follow
righteo^snesse.
Righteousness.

For after the denying of unrighteousness, we must go forward in the practice
of righteousness and holiness.

Proceed In virtues and In a good courage. A double care.


The first care must be to attain them.

The second to keep the^ when they are gotten.

Thou shall both get them, and keep them. How to ^ get, and how to keep.
By frequent use of devout prayer: By pursuing them with a good courage: By
loving them ardently: By a continual use and practice of them.

Thou shall go forward with a good courage.

1. If thou have a firm purpose at the first. How to go forward.
setting foot, to go forward. 2. If thou persevere, and suffer not thy self
to be plucked away by any impediments. 3. If thou reckon virtue to be sweet and
amiable, and not sower and sharp.
Concerning virtues to be embraced. Virtues to be embraced. Justice gives each
one his due. To God, glory.


Justice comprehends all virtues in it self, it gives every one his due.

To God, that which appertains to him. To man, that which appertains to
him.
1. Justice gives to God Glory, and Religious worship.

We owe glory to our God, in respect of

God himself, and our own selves.

Gods nature is most glorious, most excellent, most beautiful, etc:

We are his Image, after which we were created, and regenerated, etc.

True religious worship, consists in Religious worship.


The true knowledge of God, and The true serving of him so known.
The true God, is truly to be known, according as he has revealed himself
in the books of Nature, and holy Scripture.

God being rightly known is to be served with a Religious worship: Religious
worship What it performs.
gives to GOD due reverence: Submission: Obedience: due fear: and Love: due
Hope and Confidence: due Adoration and Invocation: due Honor in swearing by
his name: due Thankfulness: due Exercise of Religion, private and public:
due Patience under the cross: due Constancy in faith, and Obedience.

2. Justice gives to every man his due. Justice toward men. Toward our selves


To himself first, and then To his neighbor
Thou ought to love thy self, and not to hate thy self: But in an holy
sort, first therefore learn to know thy self: And after thou know thy
self, have a care to compose thy self to holiness and integrity.

Let thy first care be for blessings or goods

Of the soul, then Care of the soul.
Of the body.
1. In the soul are faculties. Superior, and Inferior. Superior faculties.


Superior, the Mind, Conscience, and will.

1. Give to the mind or understanding, Wisdom and Prudence. 2. For thy
conscience be careful: to prepare it: to preserve it: to reform it. 3. To thy
will, thou owe an holy government to refrain it by Prudence.
2. In the soul, are inferior parts. Inferior faculties.


The Irascible or angry part, Concupiscible or lusting part.

1. Thou shall moderate the angry part, and rule it by these virtues, vz.

Christian Fortitude: Magnanimity: Patience: Constancy: Meekness: Humility.

2. Thou shall moderate the lusting part, and rule it by these virtues, vz.

Temperance: in Abstinence and Chastity.

Have a care of thy body, vz. to preserve Care of the body.
thy Life, and thy Health, as much as in thee lies.

And if thy health be impaired, use medicine to recover thy health.

Provide also for external goods, which we Care of external things. Honor.
call the goods of fortue, vz.

Honor and Wealth.

Let modesty moderate Honor, that thou pursue it so farforth, as is
convenient and lawful.

In getting them, use a godly industry, possess Wealth. Justice toward our
neighbor. Living.
them holily: use them frugally.

Now because we are not borne to our selves, but we ought to love our
neighbors as our selves, we must give to our neighbors their due, both in
Giving and Recompencing.

To our Neighbors,

Whether living Or dead.

To every man generally,

To certain men specially.

To all and every man, we owe both an Toward all.


Inward affection, and Outward effects of love.

To nourish familiarity and society in common conversation.

1. Carry therefore a loving affection toward A loving affection.
thy neighbor: with a study of Christian Concord. 2. Show also the effects
of a loving affection Effects of love.
in word, and deed.
In humanity: civility: and liberality,

To certain degrees, or states, thou owe also To certain states. To the
miserable.
special duties.

1. To thy neighbors being in misery, compassion, and commiseration, or the
bowels of Piety.

2. To certain degrees also and states, yield To certain degrees.
their due, both in affection, and effects, vz.

To thy Superiors, give reverence, and obedience.

To the poor, Alms, and relief.

3. To Strangers or Pilgrims, entertainment by Hospitality.

These duties to the living.

We owe also a duty to our neighbors being To the dead.
dead.

Let us therefore perform unto them the last duty of Charity, vz.

Mourning and Burial.

We must also have a respect to our neighbors Retribution.
desert, to recompense good turns, vz. Friendship, for friendship: And
gratitude, to them that deserve well of us.

In this manner then denying unrighteousness, and practicing righteousness:
Entering A short Recapitulation.
to walk in the way of life in the Lord and not fainting: but by Gods help
going forward and profiting; yea

Perseuering in the same way, at length we shall come to the end of our way,
even to the Lord, with whom we shall enjoy glory and immortality, by Jesus
Christ our Lord, etc. Amen.

The Epilogue, containing,

An encouragement, or spur to virtue. Encouragement to virtue.


First by reasons taken from Christianity. Secondly, by wise sentences and
examples, taken from Heathen men.
FINIS.
Vade Mecum Go with me.
DEAR PIETY and RARE CHARITY. Whose Flame is stirred up, to expel the Cold
out of the minds of many. To all that profess the Name of Christ, and call
upon his Godheade.
A sententious Prologue.
TO know and live [O ye Christians] is all our Desires, Let us learn first to
know, that we may know how to live. for

No^ qui multa quidem sed quae sunt commoda vitae.

Is dici sapiens, cur meriatur habet.

Not him that knows much always.
A wiseman will I call:
But he that knows his life to rule,
What so shall him befall.
This world has much science, but little conscience, least therefore our
knowledge To know
if it go alone do puff us up, let charity be joined with it, with
christian prudence: God and our selves.
let us endeavor to know God and our selves, But at this day many know many
things, but scarce any knows himself well: for to know our selves, is an A
gradation
hard point, and not for every one to attain; Let us therefore learn first
this divine precept, Every one to know himself, for he that knows himself
shall know god, he that knows God shall be made like unto him: he that is made
like unto God: is worthy of God: he that is worthy of God, commits nothing
unworthy of God, but Acceptable.
thinks on divine things, and what he thinks he speaks, what he
speakerh, he Displeasing
Godly works. (ergo) caetera si vis noscere, te ipsum noscere discas. caetera
si vis vincere, teipsum vincere discas.

Noscere se ipsu^, vincere se ip su^ Maxima virtus.

If ought thou do desire to learn,
Learn first to know thy self:
If ought thou would overcome,
First then subdue thy self.
Thy self first know, and first subdue,
All other virtues will ensue.
Let us live (O ye christians;) that we To live.
may live with Christ; This life is to be desired not for it self, but for an
other, whereunto we must come by the gate of Death.

Therefore that we may always live with Christ, let us learn to live and die
well.

We learn to live well, by meditating on Death.

We learn to die well, by living Godly.

We learn to live Godly, by dying hapily.

The end of this life, is a happy Death,

The end of Death is a blessed life:

We shall live blessedly, if we be dead to the world. Ergo.

Viue diu, sed viue deo: nam viuere mundo,
Mortis opus est, viua est, viuere, vita deo,
Viue sed vt seper viuas, sic ergo beatus,
Viue deo moritur, qui sibi viuit, homo,
If long to live thou do desire,
Then long in God to live:
The worldly life does work to death,
For God true life does give.
So live that thou may always live,
And happiness attain.
Who lives unto himself does die,
Such death will be his baine.
Let us not therefore reckon how long, but how well we do live: he has lived
Not how long but how well.
long who in few years, has gained many Talents, by living well: for not many
years and days make a long life, but a lively mind, he lives not that
thinks on nothing but how to live, he that has nothing in his life more
pleasant then this A miserable life.
mortal life, can never in his life embrace virtue. Many times therefore, he
that lived long, has lived but a while, because he lived not well: And many
times, he that lived well, has no long life (to wit in this world) full ill
live they that think to live always. Let us not always be beginning to live
well, for he lives ill, who is always beginning to live well. Oh, believe me*
many have ceased to live, before they ever began to live: therefore let us
diligently consider, not so much how long, but in what manner we have lived:
for not to live, but to live well is better.

Non est creed mihi sapientis dicere viua^,
Sera nimis vita, est crastina, viue hodie.
It is no wise man's part to say,
To morrow I will live:
To morrows life may come too late,
If God no life do give,
Therefore Oh man to know and live, begin, go not backward but proceed. There
is a mark set thee, even eternal life in heaven, the chief perpetual happiness.
1 Mark.
Choose the better part with Mary: Lay up treasure in heaven, where rust nor
moth corrupts Math, 6
not, nor thieves can break through nor steal. And God shall give to thee over
Apoc.
coming, to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God.

This is the mark of life. This is true life, strive to this, from hence is
banished all ill, here abounds all good.

Here shall thou rest again from thy Commodities in the end.
labors, being delivered from all evils: God shall wipe al tears from thine
eyes, there shall be no more death nor mourning, nor cry, nor sorrow.

2 Here shall thou enjoy the most pleasant company of thy God, thy creator,
conseruer, Redeemer, sanctifier, whom beholding face to face, thou shall rest
in his joy, who shall be all in all unto thee. Thou Cor. 13
shall be with Christ, the fairest among John: 12
men, and shall see his glory which the father has given him.

3 Here shall thou bear the Image of the heavenly man, and with open face 2
Cor. 3.
thou shall behold the glory of God, and shall be transformed into the same
Image from glory to glory: There, that which is perfect comes in place: and
that 1 Cor. 13 Math. 13. Luk 20 1 John. 3.
which is imperfect shall be abolished, and thou shall know, even as thou art
known. Thou shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of God the Father: Thou
shall be as the Angels of God, and as the sons of God are. Thou shall be like
to God who appears unto thee.

4 Here shall thou be gathered to the company of the holy Angels, and to the
Heb 12
Congregation of the faithful, who are recorded in heaven, where is mutual
knowledge, perfect love, perpetual praising of God. 1. Pet. 3.


5 Here thou shall be replenished with all joy without tediousness, in an
heritage immortal, undefiled, incorruptible. To those that love him, God has
prepared 1 Cor. 2.
such joys as the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither the
heart can conceive in the heavenly Paradise.

2 The way to this mark is laid open to The way to the mark. Ioh. 14. Ibid.
6. Act. 14,
us. First our Savior Christ says: I am the way the truth and the life; next
it is said by him, Every one that sees the son and believes in him has
Eternal life: and thirdly, by many tribulations must we enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore Christ is the way, we must enter by faith, we must walk through
tribulations, For straight and narrow is the Matthew. 7
way that leads to life.

This way of life to the just is good, holy, right, immaculat, elect, It is
unknown What manner of way
to man's reason, few enter, into it, there are few walkers among so many
talkers, and unpleasant and difficult is it to the flesh, because of the
companions that accompany the Travelers, even the cross, and denial of our
selves.

Yet this is the way which God has set before us, which is pleasing to him,
wherein he directs us, and which leads to him:

3 This way is to be learned out of the Where this way is to be learned.
holy Scriptures rightly understood, by the illumination and schooling of the
holy Ghost, confirmed by use, and frequente meditation: till by experience we
feel the Spirit of God to work in our hearts and by practice we perceive a
cheerfulnes to walk in the way of Godliness.

The first member. Incipe begin. Ierem, 6

Enter O man the way of life and look diligently about thee, where that way
is, and walk in it. Begin, the mark is life, there is a way that leads
unto it, set thy longing to attain to thy heavenly father, from whom thou art
declined after the world and the Devil. The first entry by conversion.
Conversion in 2. points. 1 Acursion from evil.


Make thy beginning or entry by conversion: let thy conversion be, by auersion
or turning away from evil, even the worst evil, and by a reuersion or return
to good, even the best good.

Turn away therefore from evil, even the worst evil, which is sin, and
turn Ierem 25.
unto good, the best good, who is God.

Let every man turn away from his wicked way, and from his ungodly desire,
Motives to turn from sin. Alienation from god.
Consider O thou sinner, thy miserable estate whiles thou art yet in thy sin.

1 Thy sin does turn thee from God, and God from thee, whom it grievously
offends and makes thee his utter enemy Now what can be more grievous, then
to have and feel, God to be thine Enemy.

2 Thou becommest worthy by thy sin to be forsaken of God, and after a sort
to Deprivation of graces.
be brought to nothing, being brought to extreme beggary of the Spirit, to
wit, being deprived of Gods grace and glory: To be without the chief Ens and
good is either to be miserable, or else to be nothing at all.

3 Thy sin makes thee of a man, a friend to the Devil, yea his servant and
Consorting or serving of the Devil.
slave, and the heir of hell fire. Every man by sinning sells his own soul
to the Devil, taking the sweetness of temporal pleasures as a price for it:
Again on the other side also thou driuest away from thee As much as in thee
lies.
by sinning: the good Angel thy keeper.

4 Sin is a most filthy thing as the scripture sets it out: like mire
wherein The filthiness of sin.
swine wallow: like dreggs, rottennes corruption, leprocie. Behold the prodigal
Luke 15.
son wallowed in the mire of Luxury, at the last living among an heard of
Swine Look also if thy soul stink not by the putrefaction and corruption of
the wounds of thy sins.

5 If thou wax old in thy sin, O thou Custom of sin dangerous least
impatienie follow.
sinner it will exercise a great Tirannye over thee by custom, and by custom
of sin, Satan, so that thou shall not repent, though thou sometimes desire to
repent, For sin is barbarous and exercises tyranny over the Soul that is
once taken captive, to the ruin of th^se that receive it: chrysostom
I confess I sighed not being bound with yro^ chains, but with mine own iron
will, mine August lib: 8:
enemy had possessed my will, and had of it made a chain for me, and had
bound me fast: I strugled with my self and was overthrown of my self.

6 Whilst thou continuest in sin thou do sustein ye gift of eternal
punishment that is, you art, deprived perpetually of the Eternal punishments
vision or sight of God and art tormented with everlasting pain of most ardent
fire. Epilogus-


Call to mind therefore with me the miserable state of a Sinner: thou art Gods
enemy, deprived of gods grace: most beggarly, most filthy, a slave to the
Devil, under the tirrany both of Sin, and Satan: an heir of Hell, Turn
therefore from this worst evil.

But that thou may convert, by turning from evil, and returning to God, Gods
help to be craved
thou had need of the help of Gods grace to prevent, accompany, and follow
thee, For it is God that gives Repentance by Grace threefolde. 2. Tim 2.
the knowledge of the Truth, that we may recover out of the snares of the
Devil who are holden Captive at his will; It is God that works in us both to
will Phillip. 2.
and to perform Say therefore with ioying: Convert me O Lord and I shall be
Ierom. 31. de voc gent Lib. 2. The working of gods grace.
converted: after thou did turn me I repented. The grace of God says
Prosper is above all iustifications or instructions, persuading: by
exhortations, warning by examples: terrefieng by dangers, enticing by miracles,
guiding by understanding, inspiring by counsel, illuminating the heart it self,
and induing it with affections of faith.

Now the grace of God in turning man from sin uses two means. Two means of
Auersion from sin.


First the knowledge of sin.
Next the Consternation of the mind.
Thou may come to the knowledge of thy sin by the Law of God. For by the
Law is the knowledge of Sin: For the Law is the rule of righteousness
showing what is just, and what is unjust. 1 The knowledge of sin Romans 3.
Whatsoever therefore is either in us, or is done by us, which is not agreeable
to the rule of Gods Law, that same is sin By this rule try both thy Internal
and External actions, and thereby judge of thy life. And that thou be not
deceived in the use of this rule. Observe these two things

Whatsoever is contrary to the Law of God and our neigbour, is forbiden by 1
Two Rules whereby to know sin.
the Law of God, and is repugnant to the rule of justice. And contrariwise
whatsoever agrees with the Law of God, and our neighbor, is commanded by the
Law of God, and consonant to the rule of justice: Although by express words
it seem to be neither commanded, nor forbidden.

The Law is spiritual requiring a pure, perfect, spiritual, and perpetual
obedience: whereby thou may understand that al men are guilty before Gods
tribunal, as transgressors of his holy Law, Thus then thou will acknowledge
thy self a Sinner

2 Then learn to know how Sin is conceived and fashioned in the heart, and
How Sin is conceived
afterward brought forth in work.

1 Four manner of ways sin is conceived and framed in the heart, by
Suggestion, In the heart four ways.
delectation, consent, and defense.

The Suggestion is wrought by the adversary: delectation by the flesh: consent
by the will, bold defense by pride: whiles the fault which ought to terrify
the mind, does lift it up, but the more it swells, the more it supplanteth
it.

2 Four manner of ways also is sin performed in work: First we are ashamed
In work four ways.
to sin openly: After a while we can let our faults be known without
blushing: Heerevpon sin grows to a custom; and at the last it is
confirmed, either by a false hope of mercy, or by a desperate fear of misery.

Finally, learn to know the haynousnesse of sin: for sin is an injury
offered The hainosnes of sin
by the sinner to God: A contempt of his high Majesty, while we despise his
will preferring the love of our selves and the creaturs: Sin is a most heavy
burden depressing a man in the basest manner, and casting him headlong except
he repent from one wickedness to another: Submitting him to the Tiranye of the
devil, and last of all throwing him down to Damnation.

This mischief was so unrecoverable by any humane wisdom, virtue and
Aremedie,
strength: that it was necessary that the Son of God should become man to be
Crucified and die that we might be delivered from it.

2 After the knowledge of sin, follows Co^sternation or compunction. Two
fould. Psalm. 88.
a consternation or casting down of the mind sorrowing for the sins
committed, and trembling at the wrath of God and punishments due for sin:
heareof thou shall say with David. Thy wraths are gone over me and thy
terrors have troubled me, And again: Mine iniquities are risen above my head
and are like a Psalm. 38.
sore burden to heavy for me to bear.

This consternation or sorrow or sense of Gods wrath will be stirred up the more
How it is stirred up.
in thee, If thou think on the Law given to our first parents in Paradise: In
what day so ever thou shall eat of this tree Genesis 2.
thou shall die he death, If thou call to mind that Thundering of God in mount
Sinai: Cursed is he that abides not in all things which are written in the
Law to do it.

If thou look to the hand writing of thy Conscience, testifieng of thine own
heart, both the sin and sentence of damnation pronounced by God.

If thou view the signs of gods wrath: whether thretned or executed, as
plague, famine, sword, etc. or such as prognosticate punishment iminent or
near hand.

Hereof rises fear and and sorrow.

Fear is three fould as Bernard says: Two effects of the Law
Fear to be deprived of the grace of God: Fear to be excluded from the vision
or 1 Fear three fould.
sight of God; and fear to to be tormented in hell.

This fear does Bernard stir up in his own heart in this wise: Way well How
it is stitred up. Bern: in Cant 16
Oh my soul what a fearful and horrible thing it is to have contemned thy
maker, to have offended the Lord of Majesty

Majesty is to be feared, Lord-ship is to be feared, especially such a
Majesty such a Lordship.

He even he is to be feared, who after he An enumeration of terrible things al
to be feared of impenitent sinners
has killed has power to cast down headlong in to Hell, I tremble at hell, I
tremble at the Judges countenance, which may make even the Angels and heavenly
powers to tremble. I tremble at the wrath of his power, at the thought of the
violent ruin of the World, at the flaming of the Elements, at the mighty
tempests, at the voice of the Arch-angell, and the sharp word, I tremble at
the teeth of the Infernal beast, at the belly of Hell, at the roaring beasts
prepared for a pray: I am afraid of the gnawing worm, the scorching fire, the
smoke, the vapor, the sulphur, the Spirit of storms, the outward darkness: Who
will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to mine eyes, that I may
prevent by tears, weeping wailing gnashing of teeth? and hard manacles and
fetters and weight of Cheynes, pressing down, binding, burning and never
consuming. Woe is me O my mother, why did thou bear me, a son of sorrow,
bitterness, indignation, and eternal weeping? 1 Sorrow two fould


2 Sorrow of compunction which arises out of the consideration of the
heinousnes of sin is two fould,

1 The first sorrow is for the punishments Sorrow of punishments
deserved, it is called worldly sorrow or a sorrow to death.

The efficient cause of this sorrow is 2. Cor: 7 Eficient cause.
even the holy ghost, who in this case is called the Spirit of Bondage to
fear: who testifies unto us our servile and miserable estate while we are
strangers Romans spirit of bondage.
from Christ, and therefore does strike a fear and horror into us.

Now the Instrument where^^ the holy ghost does work this sorrow in our
Instrument
hearts is the preaching of the Law, the some whereof is comprised in this
Sillogisme or reason: Cursed is every one that abides not in all things that
are written in the Law to do them* From hence the conscience gathers, but I
have not a bidden in them (whereupon it concludes Ergo I am accursed.

Heerevpon arises that sorrow or rather horror of mind, not so much for sin,
which is in the assumption: as for the punishment of the Curse, which is in the
conclusion.

This Terror of the Law (if the grace of the Gospel come not between) would
drive a man to desperation.

2 The second sorrow is for Sin it Sorrow of offense. 2. Cor. 2.
self, and for the Offenses committed against God, it is called Godly sorrow,
or a sorrow to Salvation.

The Efficient cause of this sorrow is Efficient cause.
the holy Ghost: who in this case is called the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry Spirit of Adoption.
Abba Father: This opens our mouth, and enlarges our heart to call God our
Father and to call upon him familiarly,

Now the Instrument whereby the Holy Ghost does work this sorrow, or Instrument
rather love in our hearts, is the Preaching of the Gospel, the sum whereof
is comprised in this Sillogisme or reason.

He that believes shall obtain remission A Sillogisme.
of sins: shall be justified, and saved: From hence the heart by Faith
gathers, but I believe; Ergo I shall obtain remission of my Sins, I shall be
justified and saved. In this conclusion, as their is matter of unspeakable joy?
So also there is in yt same matter of sorrow, which is conceived (upon the
knowledge of Gods mercy) for offending so merciful a father.

Of this sorrow the same Bernard says: Bernard
When I bethink me how I have offended my heavenly father, I have good cause to
be ashamed: Sorrow
though I be not terrified: He has voluntarily begotten me by the word of
Truth: He spared not his only begotten for me so begotten: So he has showed
himself a Father to me, but I have not again showed my self a Son to him:
With what face do I now lift up mine eyes to behold so good a Father, being so
bad a Son? I am ashamed that I have committed things unworthy my begetting:
Iam ashamed that I Or my kind
have lived so degenerate from such a father: O let mine eyes gush out with
water: Let confusion cover my face: Let shame ouerwhelm my countenance, and
darkness possess it: Let my life languish in sorrow, and my years in mourning,
fie for shame: whatfruit Rom: 6:
had we of those things whereof we are now ashamed, If I have sown in the flesh
I shall reap nothing of the flesh but corruption: if in the world that also
passes, and the lusts thereof, what? I have not been ashamed wretched man to
prefer transitory and vain things, whose end is death, before the love and
honor of my Eternal father: I am confounded, I am confounded to hear: If I be
your Father, where is my honor. etc. Reuersion or return to God. A descriptiof
God.
2 Having turned from sin y^ worst evil return to God ye best good, whom you
have forsaken Take a view of God who calls thee, to whom you must have
recourse: He is Ens Complete absolute of himself, ye cheifest good, most
simple, most perfect, and therefore divine, Eternal before all things, in all
things, after all things and in the highest degree, within all things, not
included without all things not excluded above all things, not lifted up under
all things not cast down, to this Ens return thou.

He is the chief good, most actual. most liberal, indefficient and perfect,
in him all goodness Essentially, and above all Excellency is found: from him all
goodness is derived, to all creatures, without any diminution to himself: By
cleaving unto him by Faith and Charity, all the Saints are made good and
happy. whom by communion and participation of his goodness, he does fill, and as
it were, make drunk with plenty. To this most excellent and most bountiful
good, return, that being delivered from evil, thou may be made pertaker of
good.

Now thou do return by Faith and How to remine.
confidence of mind, wholly resting in the mercy of God the Father, through
Jesus Christ and his merits.

This is a wonderful and supernatural faculty of the heart, apprehending and
receiving of Christ, by the holy ghost, and applying him to our selves.

Heareof rises an internal and effectual An Internal persuasion
persuasion, by the forcible working, or certification of the holy Spirit,
concerning the mercy of God the Father in Christ. Verily, verily, I say unto
you: he Ioh: 6.
that believes in me has Eternal life. Item believe in the Lord Jesus, and
thou Act: 16. Ephesians: 3. Ephesians: 1.
shall be saved. Item, By Christ we have an entrance through confidence. Item:
In whom ye have hoped, after that ye hard the word of Truth, even the
Gospel of Salvation: In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of promise. Item: Which spirit, testifies to our spirit, Romans 6.
that we are the sons of God.

But that this Faith which is the free The practice of Faith.
gift of God, and is not given: to every one may arise in thy heart.

First thou shall do thy endeavor to The knowledge of the Gospel.
attain the knowledge of the Gospel by ye illumination of the holy Ghost: My
just servant by his knowledge shall iustefie many. Especially thou shall labor,
by an inward sense of thine own wants, to consider the promises of the
Gospel, whereby thou shall give an assent to the Gospel hard, that thou be
not in that number, of whom it is said: That the Word hard, Heb. 4.
did not profit them, because it was not joined with faith in them that hard
it. For God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
Truth.

Secondly, thou shall conceive Hope of pardon, whereby thou shall believe, that
Hope of pardon.
thy sin is pardonable, though it be not yet pardoned* thou shall say with
the prodigal Luke 15.
son: I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him: Father I have
sinned against heaven, and against thee, neither am I worthy any more to be
called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

Thirdly thou shall eagerly hunger and Hungring and thirsting for grace,
thirst, for his grace, whieh is offered thee in Christ, and shall earnestly
beg: that He who is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, will give thee
of the fountain of living Water, freely, When thou art proceeded thus far,
Christ does count thee happy. Blessed are they that hunger and Math. 5.
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.

Fourthly thou shall come to the throne Access to the throne of grace. Heb. 4.
of grace, that by apprehending Christ, there thou may find mercy with the
father. Now in this access thou shall perform two things.

First thou shall humbly, purely, and Confession of sin.
faithfully confess thy sins, generally and in particular. Whereupon shall
follow remission of them before God: According to that: I will make my sin
known Psalm: 32.
unto thee, and mine iniquity will I not hide: I said I will confess my
defaults unto thee O Lord, and thou tookest away the punishments of my sin.
Say with the Prodigal son, Father I have sinned against Luke 15.
Heaven and against thee, neither am I worthy any more to be called thy son.

Secondly, thou shall entreat for pardon Entreating for pardon. Romans 8.
for thy sins, with groans that cannot be expressed, and that with
continuance. In which case the spirit will help forward our infirmities: For
we know not what to ask as we ought: but the spirit entreats for us.

Finally to conclude, a certain and special persuasion, must be sensibly and
effectually A certain persuasion.
imprinted in the heart, whereby the promises of the Gospel must be applied to
thy Faith, that Christ may speak inwardly to thy heart: Be of good comfort my
Son, thy sins are forgiven thee. See therefore O man, thou that returnest
to God, that thou give thine assent, unto the Word of God, and withstand
doubting and distrust, and then by experience, thou shall feel a sense of joy
and comfort.

A pattern of the practice of David's repentance
David after his fall repenting, gives the first place to the knowledge of his
Knowledge of sin.
sin: Have mercy (says he) on me O God, after thy great mercy, And upon
Psalm. 51.
which Psalm Gregory says, I should despair of the healing of my wound, If
I did not presume of the omnipotency of my Physician: Let others seek for
small mercy that have sinned ignorantly, I as I have grievously fallen, so have
I greatly offended: But thou O omnipotent Physician, do both correct the
contemners, and instruct the ignorant, and pardon the confessors. I do know
mine own wickedness, and my sin is always against me: Here is present
(says Gregory) the miserable Gregorye.
man, let mercy also be at hand: I know my own misery, if I did not
acknowledge my self miserable, I should not labor in mourning.

1 I acknowledge that I have sinned of Manifold acknowledgements
mine own accord, and wicked will, therefore I do not hide mine
unrighteousness: I know from what I am fallen and what I have incurred, I know
to whom I have inthral'd my self by sin, even to the Devil, the enemy of
all goodness, I know the blot that I have gotten by sin, and the filth
wherewith I have horriby defiled my self.

2 I acknowledge that I have sinned against Manifould ways against God.
thee only, and done evil before thee, against thee my Creator, whom I
unhappy creature have not served, but have rather cleaued to the creature, then
to the Creator, Against my Lord, against whom, I as a most wicked servant
have rebelled to obey thine enemy, against thee my Law giver, whose will while
I should have followed, I have shamefully despised, and to satisfy my lust, I
have transgressed thy Laws. Against thee my most loving Father, for whose
innumerable benefits, I have been so long unthankful, yea with whose
benefits being fatted and pampred, I have kicked against thee my Father, and
being forgetful of thy love, I have preferred mine own Love, and the Love of
the Creatures before thee, Finally against thee my good God, most mighty, most
just, have I sinned, whiles I have departed from thee on whom I should wholly
have depended, and in whom only as my end I should have rested.

2 After the knowledge of sin, came A consternation. Psalm: 6.
a fear or co^sternation of his mind, which did invade his mind: Lord says
he rebuke me not in thy fury, neither chasten me in thy wrath.

3 Here upon a great sorrow possessed Sorrow for sin. Ps: 38
his heart, Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are like asore burden to
heavy for me to bear: my wounds are putrified and corrupt through my
foolishness, I am racked and vexed exceedingly, my heart pants, my strength
has Ps: 51.
forsaken me, etc but an humble and contrite heart thou will not despise. Hope
of pardon psalm: 6.


4 Hope of pardon succeeds: Turn thee O Lord and deliver my soul, save me
for thy mercy sake: because in death no man remembers thee, and in Hell who
will confess thee:: As my soul, says Gregory, is turned to thee, by the
storm of repentance, so turn thou to Gregory,
me, by the calm of mercy, and being turned to me deliver my soul. And
therefore David says to his soul, why art Psalm. 42
thou cast down O my soul, and why frettest thou within me: Trust in God for
I will yet praise him.

5 After hope of pardon David communeth Faith. p^al 25.
with God, and rests in him, O my God in thee do I trust, let me not be put
to confusion: The Lord is my salvation: In thee O Lord do I hope, let me
never be confounded.

6 Out of this Faith breaks out from Confession
the soul, a confession watching to heaven: I said I will confess my sins
unto the Psalm: 32.
Lord, and thou tookest away the punishment of my sin. My sorrow is ever
Psalm. 38.
in my sight, for I will open my iniquitye before thee, and be careful for my
sin.

7 A purpose of amendment of life follows: Purpose of Amendme^t Psalm: 6. Psa:
39.
Depart from me, all ye that work iniquity: For the Lord has heard the
voice of my weepin^: I said I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not
in my tongue.

8 Finally he rejoices, with an inward Inward joy and peace. Psalm: 103.
sense of joy and peace: Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits, who forgiueth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases, he
will not always be striving or chiding, neither keeps in his anger for ever,
etc. Return into thy rest O my soul, because God has been bountiful to
thee.

Thus do we depart from evil, not Counersion not without grief
without a sorrow of evil: that is we are sorry we have been evil: neither
do we approach to good as to God, without Faith in him: For he that will come
to Heb. 11.
God must believe that God is.

Now this departing from evil, and approaching to good, imports a certain
Conversion imports a change, vnde, et alio. Threefould
change, which has two terms or bonds, vz: from whence, and whether.

This change is in the mind, will and heart.

An the mind there is a change of the 1 In the mind
Judgment and counsel The mind disaloweth the evil that is done, and
allows the good that is to be done. 2 In the will.


In the will the change is on this wise, the will refuses the evil, which
hitherto it committed, or at the least way declineth from it, and chooses
hereafter the good that is to be done, or enclineth to it.

In the heart the change is thus wrought: 3 In the heart.
The heart hates and detesteth the evil hitherto done, and loves and pursues
the good hereafter to be done.

Cease therefore to do evil and learn Conclusion Esai. 1. psalm 34. Romans 13.
or else study to do well: or depart from evil, and do good: Item: Cast away
the works of darkness and put on the armor of light: Item: Walk in the spirit,
and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh: Item: Put ye one ye Lord Jesus Christ,
and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, And Christ
himself says, deny thy self and take up thy Cross and follow me.

Begin therefore, being turned from evil and returned to good, to bring
forth Fruits of Conversion
fruits worthy of amendment of life, and apply thy self to the study of
holiness or new obedience.

1 Thou art bound as a creature to the Obligations between God and us.
Creator, I wish thee often to pay the debt of gratitude.

2 Thou art bound as a servant to his lord. If I be your Lord, where is my
fear.

3 Thou art bound as a child to his Father, thou art a child by creation, and
regeneration, reverence therefore Almightye God as thy best Father.

4 Thou art bound as a client to thy benefactor, the benefits of God toward
thee are exceeding great, therefore exceeding great thanks are due to him.
What fruits.


Begin therefore to show thy good life, and obedience to God, in loving God
and thy neighbor.

1 The love of God is conceived in thee, by the knowledge and consideration of
The love of God.
the fatherly affection, of God toward thee: It is brought forth by a
confidence in Christ: it grows by the spirit of faith: it is strengthened by
the cogitation of the heap of Gods benefits, both corporal and spiritual: it
appears in our obedience under the Cross and holiness of life.

2 The love of our neighbor is brought forth and maintained, by the love of
God, The love of our neighbor 1 John.
by the commandment of God, by the bond of nature and grace, He that says
he loves God and yet hates his Brother, is a liar, and the love of God is not
in him.

But begin the holy study, of either love, to testify, that thou art turned
from The end of godliness.
sin and returned to God: that thou have renounced Satan, that thou have
submitted thy self to God, that thou art a companion of the most chaste
spirits in heaven: That thou art a fellow of all that fear gods name on earth:
That thou art the Temple of the holy Ghost: wherein whole burnt Offringes and
incense is offered, and the horns of the Alter are decked with boughs, and
flowers of obedience.

Begin to day defer not, make no long Dangers. of delay Uncertainty of life.
delays, for fear of these dangers ensuing.
1 Meditate with thy self, the uncertainty of thy life. Surely thou must
watch and pray, for thou know not, either the day or hour, wherein the Lord
will come: take heed thou be not overtaken by gods judgment at unawares.
Heaping of sin is tresuring of wrath. Rom: 2.


2 Know thou ye by dangerous delay, the tresure of many sins, of gods wrath and
grievous punishments, is gathered together.

Thou by thy hardness, and heart that cannot repent, doste treasure up to thy
self wrath, against the day of wrath, and declaration of the judgment of God
The angels grief. Luke 15


3 Be you afraid to offend the holy Angels: who verily rejoice at ye repentance
of sinners eue^ as doubtless they sorrow at their security in heaping sin
upon sin. Induration by alienatio^ from God.


4 Call to mind the dangerous alienation from God, which is procured by daily
increase of sin: way moreover, with a secret ^ serious consideration, in thy
soul, ye induration that will follow, for the longer thou deferrest thy
conversion, the harder it will be: A young man walking after his own way. when
he is old will not depart Proverb 22
from it. Thou know thy saying: Late repentance is seldom true Repentance

5 As much as in thee lies, take heed of an An evil Conscience
evil conscience, which custom and continuance in sin, does breed and
nourish: There is no grief bitterer then a gnawing Conscience.

6 The longer thou stickest in thine old Depriuatio^ of Grace.
sin, the longer thou art deprived of the sweet joy of the holy ghost, and
spiritual consolations.

7 Thou shall increase the joy, and Satan's Joy
pleasure of Satan thy enemy, by drawing after thee along cord of inueterate
or old gr^wen sins, Think it a true saying: Sins are the delights and
dainties of the Devil. Examples Tragical.


8 Finally view the Tragical ends of all such as have ever drawn along the
day of there Conversion: Call to remembrance the horrible destruction of the
old world the Sodomites. Egiptians, and Jews, The Churches of the East, and
other that were impenitent Be not flack Syrach.
therefore turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day thy conversion:
for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengeance he will Ierom.
to Cilantius.
destroy thee. Too long custom of sin makes the way of virtue, rough and
unpleasant.

After any vice, says Bernard, is confirmed Bernard.
by many years custom, a particular, and as it were a miraculous assistance
of Gods grace, as needful for the ouerco^ming and rooting out thereof. A
question to a secure sinner. Both ways catching.
The same Bernard says; Thou that make so unequal a reckoning we thy self,
perseuering in thy evil and ungodly life, tell me: Do thou believe that the
Lord thy God will pardon thy sins, or do thou not believe? If thou believe
that thou shall find no place for pardon, what greater folly can there be;
then to sin without hope of pardon? But if thou think that he is good,
gentle, and merciful: who although he have bin offended, yet he is ready
always to pardon thy sins: Tell me I pray thee, what greater frowardness
can there be, then to take occasion to offend him the more, whom there is cause
thou should love the more. And S. Augustine, we must prevent Augustine
the day, which is wont to prevent us. And the same. He that is first forsaken
of his sins, before he himself do forsake them: is not freely condemned,
but as it were of necessity: late repentance deceives many. And Ambros. Not
to sin is only proper to God, Ambrose
but it is the part of a wise man, to amend and correct his error, and to
repent him of his sin. And Cassiodorus: A mischief, the longer it
continues, the more it increases, but a speedy correction of sin, is a
curable good. And Saint Augustine. Though God have promised pardon to him that
repe^teth, yet he has not promised leisure to live till tomorrow, to him that
sins.

The second member.
Nedifice. Faint not: neither go backward.
THou know and have found the way of life, thou art entered into it, walk in
it with thanksgiving. No man, Transitio^
by only knowledge of the way, has attained to the end, except he also walk
in it. Thou art entered the way, hold on thy purposed course, approach every day
cheerfully to thy GOD, by faith in heart, by study of godliness, by true
love; depart further daily from Satan, the world, and thy self. But in
fleeing, beware of vanity and inconstancy, that thou faint not, or go
backward. Thy repentance, and thy life, are determined Repentance and life, one
end. August.
by the same ends: for the whole life of a Christian man, is a continual
exercise of repentance. The action of the second repentance (which follows
the first) through our whole life, which we lead in this mortal flesh, must be
vndertake^ with perpetual supplication, of humility, 1. because no man desires,
the eternal, incorruptible and immortal life, except he repent him of this
temporal, corruptible, and mortal life. Secondly, howsoever every man does
glory, that he has tamed his body, so y^ being crucified to the world, he
does chastise his members from all evil works, having brought them in
subjection: yet let him understand, that all these things are given him, he
has them not of himself: Not only therefore because of our very mutabilitie
and ignorance, and for the malice of the day: but also because of the very
contagious dust of this world, we ought to repent us daily.

Here therefore is need of a continual Mortification and vivification.
Mortification of the flesh, and vivification or quickening of the spirit: Faint
not, bear it out, and be stout, thy labor will one day avail thee.

The greater thou art, the more laborious The greater, the greater conflicts.
shall thou be: being delivered from Satan, and made the son of the highest,
thou have gotten an high pitch of glory: thou shall therefore have the greater
conflicts with labor and dangers. Nothing Alexander
was more Kingly in Alexander, than his labor. And to thee being a great Kings
son, now reconciled to thy father, nothing ought to be more glorious, then
this spiritual labor. Life (life I say eternal) gives nothing to men without
great labor: no man attaineth to the highest without labor. Sometimes thou
Preoccupation.
shall be in danger, what then? he that attempteth great matters shall be in
danger: and great things will be enterprised with great perils, and the
greatest good things, are not without some great evils: Spare not therefore to
bestow thy labor, though there be danger, where honor and reward are to be
hoped for: But be wise: A mind that knows how to fear, knows how to
adventure warily, be well advised of the danger, and thou shall be wary to
avoid it. Two branches.


Here two things are to be done, We must resist Temptation. We must take heed
of Relapse.
When thou art entered the journey of Temptations.
Christian Piety and Charity, thou shall not be free from temptations: But
take a good courage.

1. For God to whom thou art returned Causes of temptations. God and why.
will try his new soldier: But God would never suffer thee to be shaken in
the sieve of temptations, were it not for his own greater glory, and thy
greater profit, who art tempted: Both that thou might be stirred up to
desire the rest of our celestial country, and be drawn away from the love of
this present world: and also that thou might know, from whence strength to
resist is ministered unto thee. Here thou must have these aides in a readiness.

First, be fervent in prayer, that thou may Aids. Prayer. Psalm. 6. Hope.
say with David: Let thy hand now cease: Item; Lord reprove me not in thy fury.

Secondly, stir up thy hope of Gods mercy, for he that now chasteneth us is
our father: who therefore does now show himself a father, that he might not
hereafter show himself a most severe judge: God 1. Cor. 10.
is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are
able to bear, but will with the temptation give succes yt ye may be able to
bear it.

Thirdly, let invincible patience strengthen thee. Whereupon Bernard Patience.
on ye Psalm. He that dwells, says: Glorify and bear Christ in your body: A
Psalm. 9^.
pleasant burden, a sweet weight, a wholesome farthel: though it seem sometime
to press us down, though it punch our sides, though it whip us when we winch
again: though it pinch our chawes with bit and bridle, yet it does very
happily restrain us. Be thou as a yoked Iumentum.
or drawing beast, that thou may say with David, I am become as a beast used
to the yoke. This similitude consists not in brutishnes, but in imitation of
patience.

2. The devil, an adversary and a tempter, will sift thee, and vex thee, whom
The devil, and why.
thou have forsaken: He seeks the ruin and destruction of thy soul, and by
infinite engines and great force labors to overthrow thee: But resist and
faint not.

Though he be most subtle: yet thou Aides. Subtle.
that art a tender plant of God (as Bernard speaks) not having as yet thy
senses exercised to discern good and evil: follow not the judgment of thine
own heart, abound not in thine own sense, least that crafty huntsman entrap
thee, being unwary. Humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, take
counsel of the holy Scriptures: hear the advice of holy men, who know better
the wiles of that hunter. Solicit God by prayers, and knock at heaven gates.

Though he be very strong, and as a roaring Lion: yet be thou armed with
Strong.
faith in Jesus Christ, whereby thou may daunt the force of Satan, study
to lead a godly life, as much as thou can, by Gods grace.

In all things, or above all, says the Ephesians. 6.
Apostle, take the shield of faith, whereby ye may quench all the fiery darts
of that wickedone. And S. Peter says. Resist the devil, being strong in faith.
1. Pet. 5.


Though he be most cruel: yet since the triumph which Christ crucified got
Cruel.
over him, he is become most cowardish.

Resist the Devil, says Saint James, James. 5.
and he will fly from you: And Gregory. He is strong against them that consent
to him: he is weak against them that resist him: if consent be given to his
suggestions, he is as a Lion: if he be resisted, he is as an Ante.

3. Oftentimes we our selves do tempt Our selves.
our selves, being domistical or privy enemies to our selves, by our carnal
lusts: Every one, says Saint James, is tempted, Iam. 2.
when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and snared, as a fish with
a bait.

Against this inward enemy, thou must Aides.
wage privy war continually, and shake the weapons, by a daily denial of thy
evil affections, and wicked inclinations, which we perceive in our selves: Let
ye purpose of thy mind be constant to follow good, detest inco^stancy, idleness,
and sloth, with earnest endeavor, repunge the pricks of noisome cogitations,
and delectations, as soon as they rise.

4 Without us, in the filthy world, The world.
many things do offer themselves, which by some means contain in them
something, which may allure thine appetite, and lead thee from right reason:
yea, as Solomon says; The creatures of God, are many times as a snare, and as
a trap to the feet of the unwise. For the corrupt nature of man, as a spider,
does draw out of the sweet flowers of Gods good creatures a iouyce, which it
turns to poison.

But thou O man shall get the victory, Aides.
if thou shun or remove all occasions of sinning. Bernard. The true note of
compunction, is the fleeing of opportunities, and the withdrawing of occasions.
O thou that art a Champion of Christ's, if thou be wise, arm thy self with a
most patient enduring of the temptation, when it is present, and with a
Christian perseverance in the conflict or encounter.

When thou art converted, and reconciled to God, and have entered the path of
piety; Special temptations.
certain special se^ptatio^s will assail thee.

1. But let it not dismay thee, that after thou art reconciled, the memory of
thy Remorse of sin.
former sins has recourse, sharply assaulting thy mind: Hear David saying:
My sin is always before me. Hear Psalm. 51.
Saint Paul. I am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the
Church of God. The remembrance of sin, as it is sin, is profitable: for
thereby the force and weight of sin, A profitable remembrance
whereby God has bin injured and provoked, is represented to the eyes of our
mind: from whence arise a most wholesome fear and sorrow, from whence shame and
blushing, as of a child before so good a father from whence a love is enflamed
toward our loving or beninge God, who has pardoned our sins. Hear worthy
Dangerous-remembrance?
Augustine. Set not before thine eyes the delectation of thy former sins: but
set before thine eyes the damnation of thy sin: It is dangerous, when the
filthy imaginations of sin, and impure fantasies have recourse, and do with
importunity thrust in them selves, for they show, that the remnants of the old
sores do yet rest in that man's soul. Whereupon Bernard says: Therefore our
memory must be purged from these, and this sinck must be thoroughly scoured:
Hear the Apostle S. Paul. This is a faithful saying, and worthy by all means
to be accepted. That Jesus Christ came to save Comforts
sinners, among who^ I am the chief. Take therefore (my brethren) from the
blessed Apostle this consolation and comfort, that the conscience of former
sins, after we be returned to God, do not overmuch torment us, but may only
humble us, as it did him: I am the least of the Apostles, and am not worthy to
be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God: Even so let us
humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and let us have trust, because
we also have obtained mercy.

2. Moreover, this cogitation, not without Troubles of temptations.
great danger, does trouble thy mind, to wit: That while yet thou did live
after thy own will, and gave the rynes to thy appetites, thou did not feel
so many cares and troubles (as in this state of grace, even in the first entry
of Christian piety thou art sharply shaken with. But when this Aides.
cogitation comes to thy mind, hear what Christ does cry to thine ears: He
that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me.

Nunqua^ bella pijs, nu^qua^ certamina desu^t
Et quocu^ certet, men's pia semper habet.
The godly always warriors are,
To them are conflicts rife:
The godly mind has enemies,
Who move continual strife. use of temptations.

There is great use of temptation, which God will not have thee to lack: He
that is not tempted, what knows he, says the wise man? All the Saints have
trodden this path: will thou exempt thy self from this lot? Christ himself the
best beloved son of God, is the standard bearer of this warrefare, whose
steps we must follow: He was in all things tempted like unto us. Heb. 4.


When thou wast called to a new life, thou wast not called to delights and
pleasures, but to labors and temptations, to persecutions, yea if so the case
required, to undergo death.

1. When this cogitation afflicts thee, Aides. Satan most busy to tempt in
our conversion.
then think, that Satan does search all the corners of thy heart, to try
after thy conversion how thou hold friendship with God, with whom thou have
newly entered amity, whether it be stable or wavering, he has no need of
this trial toward those, who are at utter enmity with God.

2. Think thou that Satan will More busy with a convert, then with a wilful
sinner.
move every stoane (as they say) to remove thee from godliness: but he has no
cause to set upon a wilful sinner in such sort: for he possesses and uses
him, as he lists. Whereupon Chrysostom says; Satan does ever assail the first
beginnings of good, he tries the rudiments of virtue, he hastes to
extinguish holy things in the first springing, knowing that he cannot subvert
them when they are surely founded, or grounded.

3. Finally think thou, that the seeds Seeds of sin lurking.
of these temptations do lurk, or lie hid within our selves (for either being
addicted to some peculiar vice, or being drawn away with the care of worldly
business, they appear not but when opportunity serves, they lift up their
heads: and bewray themselves, even then, when we begin to live to God.

3. Many times the way of Christian The way hard.
life will terrify thee, as being hard and rough for the flesh, says Bernard,
hitherto untamed, does not willingly suffer it self to be chasticed, and
brought into bondage, but being as yet mindful of late lost liberty, does more
earnestly lust against the spirit. This temptation, says he, is called Night
fear.
in the Psalm, The night fear, not night it self, because not every
affliction, which is signified by the night, but fear of affliction, is the
temptation.

But to overcome this cogitation of the Aids.
flesh, which by the help of Christ thou shall. Thou must take pains in the
way of godliness and charity: for the way of virtue is hard: it will not be
gotten, but by enduring every hard and rough thing, sorrow, yea infamy, if need
be. Have not the Heathen who knew not Christ learned this by natures direction.
Difficilia, qua pulchra. Beautiful or excellent things are hard to be
attained. Nature it self has proposed or set many difficulties before things
of estimation: virtues are wrapped up in labors, and great expenses, that thou
should get to them by many difficulties: Careful labors, or laborsome
cares, prepare the way to the attaining of fair and honest things. Thou have
striuen to enter at the narrow gate, proceed in the way, give not thou place
to evil, but throng on more boldly. Pray and take pains, and thou shall
overcome all difficulties: Labor improbus omnia vincit: untired labor does
overcome al: But nothing is so easy, that seems not hard, if we go about it
with an ill will: we clime to honor by virtue: nature has placed nothing so
high, whither virtue cannot reach.

They are deceived with the error of a Virtue has her delights.
false opinion, that think, that a godly life is full of trouble, labor, and
pain: so that it is altogether void of sweetness and pleasure: when as
virtue is not without delight, and Christ's yoke is sweet, and his burden
light: Let us hear David's experience: I have delighted as much in thy
testimonies, as in all manner of riches. Item. The judgments Psalm. 9.
of the lord are to be desired, above gold and precious stones, sweeter tha^
the honey and the honey comb. God himself in his covenant promises present
help. I will give them a new heart, and a new spirit will Gods aid promised.
I settle in their bowels, and I will take away their stony heart, and give
them ^ fleshie heart, that they may walk in my precepts, and keep my
judgments, and do them, that they may be my people, and I may be their God.
He therefore, who is true and mighty, will bring it to pass, that thou may
say with the Apostle: Our old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that we might no more serve sin: Fear not, says
Esaias, because Esaias. 40.
I am with thee: shrink not, because I am thy God, I have strengthened thee,
and have helped thee, and sustained thee, by my right hand. Behold, all they
that strive against thee, shall be confounded, brought to shame, and be as
though they were not, etc. I am thy Lord God; who take thee by the hand, saying
unto thee: Fear not, I have helped thee.

When Jesus our Savior comes: And every valley is exalted, and every
mountain and hill is humbled, and the rough ways are made plain: That which
thou can not, that shall the holy Ghost abundantly perform, in thee: The
Lord thy God shall circumcise Deuteronomy. 30.
thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Say with
Saint Augustine, Lord give that thou biddest, and bid what thou will: Be
careful to keep the love of God, and that will Love endures many troubles.
make thee to swallow al troubles without pain. For this is the love of God,
that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not burdensome:
for all that is borne of God, overcomes the world. And Saint Augustine. He
that loves, labors not, for all labor is contrary to them that love not:
only love it is that blusheth at the name of difficulty. Temptations of the
world.


4. The world also, either with his glory, and bravery, will allure thee to
love it; or by his contempt and embacing will discourage thee, when thou art
entered into the way of piety, and charity: or will strike into thee a
certain (I know not how to call it) impudent shame to profess the truth. No
small impediments in the way of godliness. But learn with me O Christian.

Spernere mu^^u^, spernere nullu^, spernere to met,
Spernere te sperni disce, beatus eris.
Despise the world, despise no man,
Except thy self perdee:
Learn to despise, to be despisde,
So shall thou happy be.
Consider with me, I pray you, how Aids against worldly felicity.
short and transitory the felicity of this world is: How many and great
miseries are mingled with worldly delights: How many and great dangers and
snares lie in their way, that walk through the parching heat of this world.
Consider the horrible blindness and Egyptian darkness of worldings. Look on the
world, and thou shall look on a filthy dunghill of sin and uncleanness. Look
on the world, and thou shall look into a shop of fraud and deceits, yea
into the house of death.

Contemn therefore the contempt of this world: which being despised, despises
thee: but thou shall be commended of him, that is most to be commended, even of
God, from whom all true praise proceeds.

But if thou be ashamed of the truth; Aids against shaming at truth.
and blushest at the ways of Gods holy Commandments: Remember O man,
remember, that thou must shortly dye, and be presented before Christ: how great
shame shall thou then be covered with? If Christ were not ashamed to hang naked
on the Cross for thee, why art thou ashamed to keep Christ's sayings? So many
thousands men and women, have powered out their blood with their life for
Christ's sake, and art thou ashamed for love of him to do any good? What will thou say in the day of the last judgment? what will he thy shame? what
confusion of face? If thou be ashamed to do well, thou shamest to be a
Christian: what shame can be more shameful* Thou know what Christ says: He
that is ashamed of me before men, of him will I be ashamed before my father,
and all his Angels, Thou know also that of the Apostle: If I endeavored to
please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. And one says: Why do
thou respect men? why do thou delay to do those things which are acceptable
to God and good men? Did thou not promise in thy Baptism to renounce the
devil and all The vow of Baptism.
his works, and only to love God, into whose name and Godhead thou wast
baptized. Shame therefore to do the works of the devil, rejoice to do the
will of God: It is a shameful madness to blush at well doing, for the which we
shall be despised both in heaven and earth, and not to blush or be ashamed of
evil doing which has a curse following it, and punishment, both in this, and
in the world to come. Thou art not ignorant of that saying of our Savior; The
servant Luc. 12.
knowing his Lords will, and not doing it, shall be beaten with many stripes.
What is it, I pray thee, that thou praiest daily, that Gods will might be done,
and yet to please the world, thou do it not? Consider I pray thee, that it
cannot be, By the world, understand the wicked.
that it should be well with thee concerning God, and also concerning the
world, that thou should please God and the world. If other should laugh thee
to scorn, whiles thou seek for treasure, yet thou would not desist from
thy purpose for their scorning: why then do thou give over to seek the
treasure of divine grace and glory? View one the one side, God, and and
Paradise, which is the dwelling of the blessed, and on the other side the
world, and the conversation of worldlings, and tell me whether estate is more
to be desired? O how great joy shall thou be filled with! when by death thou
shall depart hence, if for humane favor or displeasure thou were never
hindered, or ashamed to live to God.

2. Take heed of Relapse, that is, Relapse dangerous.


Fall not back into thy former sins. The memory of thy life past, which before
thy conversion, thou did lead (as it seemed) sweetly, in the fulfilling the
lusts of the flesh, is wont to draw with it a certain sadness in the will,
because thou perceiuest that thou art perpetually excluded from that pleasant
life by thy conversion to God.

But know thou, that this Relapse (as they call it) or falling back into
sickness is dangerous: Our Savior Christ threatening us: that of a man falling
back to Understand, fall: or end.
his old sin, the last shall be worse, than the first: And that in three
sorts.

1. In respect of the devil, who does assault, the man lately delivered from
the In respect of the devil.
sins wherewith he held him in slavery, more cruelly, he attends him: more
watchfully, he inuadeth him: more sharply, as a pray recovered out of hie
hands, or as a morsel snatched out of his Jaws: And not finding rest, he
says: I will return into my house, whence I came out: And leads with him,
seven other spirits worse than himself. The man therefore relapsed in respect
of Satan, is in worse case than before he was.

2. In respect of God also, because such a sinner as a dog to his vomit, In
respect of God.
or as a swine to her wallowing in the mire, is sooner forsaken of God: We have
healed Babylon (says the Lord by the Prophet) but yet she is not Ierem. 51
sound: Lo let us leave her. Item, Who will have pity on thee, O Jerusalem?
Ierem. 15
or, who will go to entreat for thy peace? for thou have forsaken me says
the LORD, thou art gone backward. And Christ says to the man cured of the
Palsy: Behold thou art made whole, sin no Ioh. 5.
more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. Item, Thou ungracious servant;
Mat. 12.
I forgave thee all that debt when thou desiredst me, should not thou have
had compassion on thy fellow-seruant, even, as I had pity on thee? And the
Lord being wrath, delivered him to the Iaylors, till he should pay the whole
debt. Ye know how it said: He that loves danger, shall perish in it.

3. In respect of the sinner himself, who often falls back into sin, the
last In respect of the sinner.
is worse than the first, for sundry causes: First, because in every sin,
there is a turning from God, by the transgression of the commandment, and a
turning to the devil, by the delight in sin. And out of this delight, by
custom of sin, are engendered evil habits, which make our return to God
hard: So that we get as the Prophet says: A harlots forhead, Ierom. 3.
that cannot blush. And Saint Augustine. Out of our perverse will rises lust,
and while we serve our lust, we breed a custom: and while we resist not
custom, it becomes a necessity. And Solomon says: The wicked when he is
come into the deep, make light of it.

All other sinners do war against three enemies, but he that often falls
The three enemies. The Devil, world, flesh.
back into sin, must war against a fourth enemy, to wit, custom, the
hardest enemy among all.

Secondly, he that is reconciled to God, and is delivered out of the power of
darkness, even the devil, and is restored to The fourth Custom. Sin in a
Christian, more heinous than in an infidel. 2. Pet. 2.
the free liberty of the spirit, does sin more heinously by Relapse, than
he that is by nature a child of wrath, and lives in slavery to sin, having
never received faith, nor the grace of Christ. It had bin better for them not
to have known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to
fall back from the holy Commandment which was given unto them. And Basil. As
the air which is drawn in pestilent places, does breed privy diseases in the
body; so out of evil custom, many mischiefs arise, though they be not by and
by felt and perceived.

Thirdly, consider with me, what a great indignity is in this matter. For
what can be imagined more absurd, than even now, to have wept and mourned, An
indignity.
and to have entreated Gods infinite mercy, to obtain remission of thy
sins, and suddenly changing thy purpose to forget thy self, to set light by
Gods grace, to renounce godliness, to be clearly an other man, and to think
otherwise, than eare-while thou wast, and desire always to be.

Fourthly, when we often fall back Hard to obtain. Gods favor.
to the same sins, it is an harder matter, (no doubt) to return again into
Gods favor, both because the injury is greater, and Gods displeasure iuster,
and because we our selves have hardened our hearts: and finally, because Satan's
power and dominion over our souls is increased: For this cause are we Heb. 10.
taught: That to those that sin wilfully, after the knowledge of the truth
received, there remains no more a sacrifice for sin, but a fearful
expectation of judgment and devouring fire, which shall consume the
adversaries. But this place is rather understood of Apostasy, and sin
against the holy Ghost.

Be not therefore negligent in avoiding Exhortation.
such cogitations, as solicit thee to return again to thy old life: yea the
more often and earnestly that they thrust themselves into thy mind, the more
speedily and strongly, let them be cast out. We must says Ciprian, meet with
the suggestions of the devil, and not nourish a snake, till he become a
serpent: And Hierom. Kill thy enemy, while he is small, and dash iniquity in
pieces, even in the seed. Be seruent in prayer, and often use that prayer,
which was so familiar to Saint Augustine. Da quod iubes, and iube quod vis,
Give o Lord, that which thou biddest, and bid what thou will.

The third member.
Profice: Go forward, or proceed.
IT is the gift of God to proceed in the God the cause of profiting. Iere. 10.
way of Salvation: For God gives the increase. I know O Lord, that the way of
man, is not in his own power, neither is it in man to correct his own way.

We must therefore ask this gift of Prayer the means.
God, by prayer, in whose hand it is. And David, Lead me O Lord in thy
righteousness, because of mine enemies, make thy way plain before my face.
We must therefore pray: That according to the riches of his glory, he will
strengthen us by his spirit, in our inward man, that Christ may dwell in our
hearts by faith, that we may be rooted and grounded in love. Saying, Thy will
be done O father, as in heaven by thy Angles; so in earth, by us.

Laying therefore aside, all malice, Exhortation. 1. Pet. 2.
and al guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and all backbiting, As newborn
babes, reasonable, and without deceit, desire ye the milk of the word, that ye
may grow thereby to salvation, if ye may taste how gracious the Lord is. And
strive to enter in at the strait gate: Exercising thy 2. Tim. 4.
self unto godliness, which is profitable to all things, with great zeal and
endeavor, taking upon thee the yoke of Christ. Go on in the way which thou
have entered: for the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent
catch it. Say unto Satan, that would draw thee back: Go behind me Satan,
for thou art an offense unto me.

The way of the righteous, proceeds Prou 4.
as a shining light, and grows to a perfect day. Be not therefore wanting to
the Heb. 12. Psalm. 119. Not to profit.
grace of God: but run the way of Gods commandments. If to profit be to
run, says Bernard, then thou ceasest to profit, when thou ceasest to run:
and when thou ceasest to run, then thou beginnest to faint: Hereof we may
plainly gather, not to profit is nothing else but to fall away. The spirit must
ever either profit or fall back. And Augustine; How much soever we live here:
how much soever we profit here: let no man say; It suffices me, I am
righteous: He that says, I stay in the way* cannot tell how to come to the end
of the way; And the same August. Go forward my brethren, examine your selves
always, without fraud or flattery: dislike always what thou art, if thou will
attain to what thou art not: for where thou please thy self, there thou will stay.

Observe diligently thy going forward. Four things to be noted in profiting.
In profiting, persuade thy self assuredly, that thou art daily beginning.

2. Be not discouraged if thou perceive that thou have not yet profited so much
as thou could wish.

3. Let the purpose of thy race in profiting be God, and too God: Therefore in
the beginning of every action, first examine thy action diligently, and
afterward, look to the progress and end of it. Then whatsoever humane praise
might happen to thee, by thy well doing, tread it under foot, in respect of the
glory of God.

4. Look to the pattern of all virtues, even Jesus Christ: who is the son
of righteousness, the light of the world, the way, the Truth, and the Life:
Through patience run to the mark: that is, set Heb. 4.
before thee, looking to Jesus the captain and finisher of thy faith: In all
things grow in him. Ephesians. 4.


First and above all things, labor earnestly to subdue thy self, and to flee
vices; then follow virtue, and seek after righteousness. These things are to
be observed generally: now of things specially, wherein we ought to profit or
go forward.

First, in denying unrighteousness. Two branches.
Secondly, in attaining righteousness.
1. Touching the abnegation or denial of unrighteousness.
Thou shall deny unrighteousness, if thou deny thy self, and mortify the
flesh.

Thou shall deny thy self, and mortify the flesh, if thou first foresee that
thou sin not, and after sinning, that thou speedily repent, and beware not to
commit the like sin.

Now among sins.

Some are lighter, and Two sorts of sins.


Some more grievous.

Let us make our beginning, by shunning and declining, the lighter sins.
Surely all sin offends the Majesty of God, and makes the sinner guilty of
eternal death; but it is evident that there All sins offend God. Lighter
sins to be subdued.
are certain degrees of sins, and one sin is more heynons than an other:
He therefore that will profit, must make his beginning by subduing the lighter
sins.

Though they seem of small account, yet I would wish thee, not to make small
account of them. For remember:

1. All sin whether great or small, does Manifold inconveniences.
wrap thee within punishment, because it is a breach of Gods commmaundement.

2. They defile the soul with their contagion: They do so deface our beauty,
says Augustine, That they separate us from the most chaste embracings of our
Spouse, who is more beautiful than the children of men.

3. As water quenches flaming fire, so do they diminish the seruer of
Charity. They weaken the faculties of the mind in the exercise of holy
virtues: as a load laid on an horse, makes him go the slower.

4. They hinder our own glory by hurting Gods glory, and do abate the
blessing of our eternal glory.

5. They dispose or prepare a man to greater sins: and bar up the way from
receiving new graces: They hinder the true devotion of holy prayers to God,
and are an impediment to our progress in a spiritual life.

6. They spoil us of many heavenly graces. And as thieves, who pilfer many A
Similie.
small things by little and little, are not of long time perceived, because the
things are of small value: yet in the end the theft is perceived, when the
owner perceives that he wants many things. So do these pilfering sins by
little and little bereave us of many graces.

7. They weaken the soul, and make it apt to fall into all evil infirmities:
And though they seem to be but small hurts, yet are they not to be neglected,
but speedily to be healed.

8. They are as dust, or as a cloud before the eyes, which hinder the sight, so
that we cannot cheerfully behold God, nor purely love him.

He therefore that despises small Ecclese. 19 Ephesians. 4.
things, shall decay by little and little, says ye Preacher. Grieve ye not the
holy spirit, says the Apostle. And Saint Augustine;

Despise not small sins: though thou Small sins to be despised. Similes
make light account of them, yet be afraid at least, when thou numbrest them.
And the same. No sin is so small, that by contempt becomes not great. For the
sea sands, though they be very little, and so likewise the drops of water: yet
being multiplied, grow to great floods, and do much harm: and the water that
leaketh into the ship will at the length sink it. The same. There is no
sin so small, that is not able to destroy a man, if he take pleasure in it.
And Hierom. Way not how little thy sins are, but how great God is, who is
displeased with thee.

Therefore O man. What is to be done to avoid small sins.


1. Search diligently, and daily, all the starting holes of thy conscience, and
strive continually against every sin, be it never so small: by new repentance
and, exercise of faith, we ought daily to cure our maladies, not only by
acknowledging our sins, but also by searching the root of the^.

2. Call to remembrance otherwhiles, that sins, otherwise small, in a man
endued with great graces, are recokned to be great. For by how much the person
that offends is more famous, by so much is the blot, that he is stained with
by offending, more shameful.

3. Think seriously, that every sin, be it never so little, is an
impediment to him, that goes forward in the way of salvation, especially, if
it be now grown to an habit, or custom, whereto little sins do make a
way. If it hinder, being once or twice committed, what will it do, think you,
when by daily custom, it is confirmed? for every evil is easily suppressed in
the first springing, but not when it is waxen old. We must therefore
withstand the beginnings. For though such sins be thought to be as thorns,
To withstand beginnings A Similie.
which when they be young, prick gently, yet when they are grown more
stubborn, stick faster, and wound sorer, so that though they kill not the
inner man, yet they pearce him through to the quick, and weaken him, and make
him to halt ilfauouredly in the way of life. Let thy first care be therefore
to overthrow small sins.

2. Next, let us endeavor to shun, pluck up, and cast away greater sins,
even Greater sins to be avoided.
wicked affections, which by custom are grown to an habit, which are
fourefold.

1. Immoderate self-love, which is carnal, must be cast off. 2. Carnal
appetites and concupiscences, must be tamed. Euilles fourefold
3. Unbridled affections and perturbations, must be refrained. 4. Wicked
habites must be pulled up by the roots.
1. Concerning self-love.
The love of our selves being carnal Self-love above all to be mortified.
and immoderate, must be denied and mortified.

The height of the denial of our selves, is the mortification of the perverse
love of our selves. Which passing through all other vices, does give as it were
a spirit and life unto them, and therefore has the pre-eminence above all
other vices: Bernard*
Whereupon Bernard.

There is a carnal love, whereby a Hom. 4.
man loves himself, for himself above all things, whiles yet he sauoureth
nothing but himself. And S. Augustine. in Ezech.


The perverse love of our selves, depriueth the swelling spirit of the holy
Lib. 11. De Genesis ad Lit.
society, and wrappeth him in misery, now longing to be satisfied with
iniquity: The contrary to it is Charity, which seeks not her own: that is,
rejoices not in her private excellency, and therefore worthily is not puffed
up. And the same. Two loves made two Cities: Lib. 14 de Ciuit.
to wit, the love of our selves, the earthly City, to the contempt of God: The
love of God, the heavenly City, to the contempt of our selves.

The carnal love therefore of our selves, Why to be mortified.
is to be mortified, because it does not only defile the action, but also
peruerteth it, and bends it to thy self: so that it causes, that although
thou seem to thy self, to do that thou do for Gods cause, yet indeed not
respecting God, but thy self, thou seek nothing in thy purpose, but only
thy self.

Convert therefore thy whole study and care, to an earnest denial of thine
own carnal love: for no small heat How to mortify it
will serve, to dry up so great a fountain of evils.

Oppose against the head of all wickedness, the mother of all virtues,
Charity, that thou, who did perish by loving thy self, may revive by
denying thy self. For man, says Augustine, who perishes by loving himself,
recouereth by denying himself.

The force of this abnegation, or renouncing Five heads
of our selves, is by Saint Basil reduced to five heads: First, to renounce
our riches, possessions, and all our worldly goods. Secondly, our parents,
kindred, and worldly friends. Thirdly, all our carnal and earthly affections.
Fourthly, our own honor and glory. Fifthly, even the love of our life, and
that for the love of God and Jesus Christ.

This do therefore: Be thou upright: What is to be done
He is upright says Gregory, who is not cast down in adversity, who is not
inclined to carnalitie, who is wholely lifted up to heavenly things, who is
wholly subjected to Gods will: Direct all thy doings to God, and by love to
enjoy God, who is always present: As much as thou may, endeavor to be
united, and likened to God, that thou seek only and affect his honor, his
will, and his good liking, both in prosperity and adversity. So shall thou be
happy.

2. Concerning carnal lusts and appetities.
The inclinations to evil, to wit, carnal lusts and appetites must be tamed.

For we are by nature more prone to evil than to good: The thoughts of man's
heart are prone to evil from his youth: yea General inclination to evil Genesis
6. and 7. Romans 7.
all the cogitatio^s of his heart are inclined to evil at all times. In our
flesh dwells no good, but sin, which makes that we understand not what we
do, and that we do not the good that we would, but the evil, that we hate:
For the law of our members in us, resists the law of our mind, and captiueth
us to the law of sin.

There are also certain inclinations, which follow the nature of particular
Spciall inclinations
persons, and the constitution of certain bodies. And there are which by
custom are engendered, by some habit gotten.

O how unhappy does a man that is going forward, feel himself, by being
hindered by these inclinations and lusts? and how great a labor is it to
subdue them?

1. But thou O man, take a good courage, and strive by Gods help to go
forward, Means to tame them.
as thou have begun, in the way of godliness: The continual exercise of
godliness avails much in this case: Concupiscence says S. Augustine, is
daily diminished in those that profit, and are continent. That therefore thou
may restrain evil inclinations, either common, or proper: exercise thy self
in those virtues, which are most contrary to them. And to repress lust,
contain.

2. With great vehemency resist the inclinations of lust, and the first
motions Withstand beginnings. Romans 6.
thereof: strive, repunge, consent not: go not after thy lusts: Let not sin
reign in thy mortal body, to obey the lusts thereof. Let thy humble and
fervent prayer to God, break the force thereof when it arises.

3. When the motions of those appetites arise, let not thy heart be moved, but
continue immovable in thine advised purpose to please God, as if those
perturbations were altogether without thee: neither did thou work any thing
in them, but rather did suffer. According to Bernard. Now peradventure I do
not these things, but suffer of them: they are done in me, but they are not
done by me, if I do not consent. I may call them mine, not because I do them,
but because I suffer them.

4. Search diligently to what evil thou How to discern inclinations.
art inclined: that thou may meet with them, and strangle them as enemies.
Mark the constitution of thy body, whereof follows the inclination.

Will thou know, says Fulgentius, Fulgentius
what thou love, mark what thou think: for the frequent and often
recourse of any thought uncalled, is a sign of a liking or desire of that
thing. Rip the inclination of thy childhood, and youth: It is a rule that
things that are very pliable may suffer of a weak agent: To be eastly moved
therefore either in mind or sense, at the sight, voice, or fame of any light
matter, is a token of an inclination to that thing. Examine thine own
experience, what things they are, which have hitherto either furthered thee to
virtue, for thy good, or drawing thee back to vice, for thy hurt: and hereby
apply thy self to pursue the one, and to avoid the other.

3. Concerning affections and perturbations. Evil inclinations and carnal
lusts, engender vicious perturbations and affections of the mind, which are
called passions: Those if they be immoderate, must be weeded out with the hook
of mortification.

1. Watch carefully in the very rising Rules how to mortify them.
of the affection, that thou check the violence of it even in the beginning,
before it come to a perfect habit: Blessed is he that takes the little ones
and dasheth them against the stones: As S. Augustine interprets the Verse of
the Psalm.

2. After this thou shall not be idle, Cutting off.
but shall continually cut off the branches of untamed perturbations, which by
hereditary corruption spring up in the mind, with the are of abnegation. It is
not enough, says Bernard, once to have cut them off, we must ever be pruning,
yea if it be possible ever, because if thou will not dissemble, thou do ever
find some thing, that ought to be cut off: How much soever thou have profited,
while thou abidest in this body, thou art deceived, if thou think that sin
is dead, and not rather suppressed in thee. The Iebusite will dwell within thy
borders, will thou, nill thou, he may be subdued, he cannot be utterly driven
out.

3. Thou shall not only labor to lop Planting in.
the branches of evil affections: but also shall endeavor contrariwise to
plant or griffe in, the graffes of good affections: For the mind is never free
from motions, either stormy and evil, or calm and good, let it therefore be
occupied with good, that it be not overwhelmed with ill: to wit, Let thy mind
be occupied in divine and spiritual things. The inward man's labor, is the
outward man's rest: And the seruer of the spirit, is the chillness of the flesh.

4. Moreover, if thou will cure thy passions, thou shall toil much, to turn
away thy mind and will from the love of earthly things, that thou may wholely
apply thy mind to heavenly things, cleaving fast to God. That thy life may be
hid with Christ in God.

4. Concerning wicked Wicked habits.
habits.
As evil inclinatious bring forth evil affections, so evil affections
engender wicked habits, the rooting out whereof, require a greater force of the
spirit.

Now the faculties of the mind, are some Faculties of the Mind. Superior.
superior, and some inferior.

The superior faculties, are the understanding, and will.

In the understanding, these vices following are to be mortified.

1. The vice of Curiosity: whereby the In the understanding. What is to be
mortified. Curiosity
understanding does search those things which either exceed our sapacitie, or
which appertain nothing to us to know. Hear the wise man: Seek not out
things too high for thee: And be not curious to search out superfluous things.

2. The vice of Temperitie or rachnes. Temeritie.
When by doubtful conjectures and uncertain signs, we presume to judge of
the life and manners of an other man, against charity: and not only to judge,
but to condemn our neighbors. Where that of the Apostle may be justly returned
many times upon us. Thou art inexcusable O Romans 2.
man, whosoever thou be that condemnest an other: for in the same thing,
wherein thou iudgest an other, thou condemnest thy self.

3. The vice of Pertinacie or stubbornness, Pertinacy
when we cleave so stiffly to our own opinion, that we admit no man's counsel
or persuasion in deliberating. Aganst which Solomon says: Lean not to thine
own wit, and be not wise Prou. 3.
in thine own conceit.

Distrust therefore. O man thine own judgment: and apply thy judgment
Dagerous to trust our own judgment.
to the rule of Gods word, and of wise men.

Saint Basil says: As it is far from right reason, wholely to rely upon
our own will and judgment: So not to stand to the judgment of the greater
part, is to incur the danger of contumacie, and wilfulness, (at the least
other circumstances being equal). And Cassian.

It is impossible for any man, trusting in his own opinion, not to be deluded
by the devil. And Bernard. How long will ye be wise in your own eyes? God
commits, and submits himself unto mortal men: and will ye walk yet in
your own ways?

And elsewhere. What greater pride can there be, than that one man should
prefer his own judgment before the whole congregation, as if he only had
the spirit of God? It is like the sin of Idolatry not to assent: to wit, to
sound judgment. And like the sin of southsaying, to repunge. And again: If
the love of thy friend, do diminish and cover his fault, in thy judgment: how
much more shall ye love of thy self deceive thee, when thou should judge
against thy self.

4. The understanding, is the perpetual fountain of infinite Cogitations,
Thoughts to be mortified.
which being laid up in the memory, are there preserved and kept: These if
they be faulty must be mortified. Whereof some are idle: some are earthly:
some are filthy: some are curious.

1. Those that be idls must be reformed: Idle thoughts.
For if we shall give an account of every idle word: why not as well of every
idle thought? Call to mind, that thou stand always in the presence of the
Lord of heaven and earth, who seeing the heart, does secretly reprove the
idleness and vanity thereof.

2. Those that be earthly and worldly, Earthly.
are more violent, and cleave faster unto us, which if they settle awhile,
cannot be removed without great difficulty. Put the axe therefore to the
root of that delight, which begins to affect thy will, by such cogitations.
This carnal appetite, springing up in the beginning of our life, we must
repress or keep under in us, though we cannot extinguish or quench it.

3. Those that be filthy or unclean, are suggested by y^ wicked spirit:
Whereof Bernard says: We ought, if we will preserve our souls pure, whiley
et the unclean thoughts are a far off, to prevent Unclean
them, and to drive them from us, that they may have no access unto us. The
same Bernard says, We must set so fearce a keeper at Reasons Chamber door, as
will spare none, but whatsoever enemy shall presume to enter, whether privily,
or openly, he will drive them away. And let that be, The remembrance of Hell
fire.

4 Those that be curious (as before) Curious.
in seeking the hidden things of God, and man, are to be avoided: For as thou
must not be careless in searching thy self: so thou must shun curiosity.
The soul says Bernard, while it is drousie, through carelessness in vewing it
self, becomes In searching other. In the will what is to be mortified.
curious in examining others.

2. In the will, all that is to be mortified, that is proper to our selves, and
not common with God, and his Saints. For as in the will, the principle of good,
is to submit our selves to God, and to commit our selves to be ruled by him: so
the mischief rises thereof, that the will is guided, by her own beck and
counsel. Our own will therefore is to be denied: which seeks it self,
delights in it, and neglecting all other by self-love, wherewith it is
wholely snared, is bent to her own commodity. Our own will says Bernard,
Our own will dangerous.
does impunge the Lord of Majesty, with her own fury: for it withdraws and
conueieth it self from his government, whom it should serve as her Author,
while it will be in her own power. And again, What does GOD hate or punish,
but our own will? Let our own will cease, and there shall be no Hell: Against
whom does that fire rage, but against our own will?

Marvelous things fall out in the abnegation Marvelous effects.
of our own will: whiles by the spirit of God, the will rises against it self,
and is turned against it self, by envy it self.

1. The will is carnal, and blind by nature, How to be mortified.
therefore it needs a guide, that it err not. If the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the pit.

2. The will is licencious by nature, therefore it has need of a bit or
bridle, that it pass not the bounds of reason in her affections: Restrain
their jaws Psalm. 32.
with a bit and bridle.

3. The will by nature, is like a shameless strumpet in her appetites: who
prostituteth her self under every shadowy Ierem. 2.
tree: therefore it must be restrained and kept, that it become not a pray to
her lusts: Go not after thine own concupiscences, Sirach. 18
says the son of Syrach, and turn away from thine own will, for if thou
give thy soul her lusts, she will make thee a scorn to thine enemies.
Whatsoever, says Seneca, thou withdrawest from thine own will, that only A
double leprosy.
thou addest to virtue. And Bernard; There is a double Leprosy in the heart:
our own will, and our own counsel, surely an evil leprosy, and so much the
more dangerous, as it is more inward. And Basil, whatsoever any man does by the
arbitrament of his own will, that, as it is the doers own, so is it far
from the rule of godliness. Ephrem. Nothing is more grievous, than to be
overcome of our own will.

2. Inferior faculties of the soul, are the Inferior faculties.
Sense and Appetites in the Concupiscible and Irasible parts.

Here are also evil Habites to be mortified.

1. First, we must labor to avoid gluttony; Gluttony to be mortified.
For it is impossibl^ says Cassian, that a full belly should withstand the
temptations of the inner man: for he that could not stay his superfluous
appetites; how shall he be able to quench the heates of his carnal
concupiscence. And Gregory. We cannot prevail in the conflict of the
spiritual combat, except we first tame the enemy that is within our selves:
to wit, the appetites of gluttony. And Basil. The moderation of the belly, is
the repressing of the perturbations of the mind, the repressing of the
perturbation of the mind, is the peace and tranquillity of the soul, the
tranquillity of the soul, is the plentiful fountain of virtues.

1. Apply as a remedy to this disease, Abstinence, Remedies. Abstinence.
for co^traries, are cured by co^traries: by usual temperance, not only the
mouth, but much more the desire or appetite is restrained and is made obedient
to reason, and to God.

2. Thou must no less abstain from other vices, Neighbor vices.
then from noisome meats, if thou desire to suppress ye appetites of
gluttony. For as the immoderate lust and use of one vice is the breeder of many
others: so by pampering thy belly, many vices are ready as it were to render
mutual thanks. Again: They, whose belly is their God, savor of earthly
things. Phil. 3.


3. That thou yield not to gluttony, Labor, and spare not to take pains, do
that Labor.
thou do earnestly, for to escape y^ snares, and to prevent the trappes of
the Devil, be always doing some good thing, and even to day.

4. Be you occupied seriously, in meditation Meditations.
of divine matters: It is true says Greg. That Gluttony is weakened by
abstinence, but no man can have the virtue of Abstinence, that does not fill
his mind with spiritual food.

5 Look on the example of our savior Christ's example.
Christ, whom thou ought to imitate: He endured hunger and thirst with
wonderful patience: And when meat was brought him, though he were hungry,
Ioh. 4.
yet would he not eat, to put away hunger, taking his opportunity to win
souls: yea, in the midst of his torments they gave him Wine mingled with
Gall to drink.

6 Finally, thou shall profit in mortifying Rules of moderation.
Gluttony: if thou take heed least under a pretense of natural necessity,
thou pass the bounds of reasonable moderation: If thou encounter the very
delight of gluttony: If thou prepare thy self to eat, as if thou should
take a medicine: If while thou eatest, when variety of dishes does whet the
appetite afresh, thou check the appetite, and repress thy greediness.

1 From hence proceed to mortify Luxury to be mortified
Luxury, or Riotousnesse, with a serious care.

The chariot of Luxury, is rolled Bernh. in Cant.
upon four vices, as upon four wheels: the cramming of the gorge: the lust of
the flesh: delicacie in apparel, excessive idleness or sleep: It is drawn
even with two horses, Prosperity of life, and Abundance of wealth. And these
have two riders; sluggish Drowsiness, and envious Security.

Luxury must be abandoned by him Greg. in moral.
that will go forward: for after this vice has once possessed any man's mind,
it will scarce suffer him to think any good: for our lusts are like birdlime. Of
suggestion, rises cogitation: of cogitation, A gradation.
affection: of affection, delectation: of delectation, consent: of consent,
operation: of operation, custom: of custom, desperation: of desperation,
defense of sin: of defense, gloriation: of gloriation, damnation.

Pleasures, as says Chrysostom, are like A description of pleasures.
the Sirenes, which outwardly appear very beautiful, with long yealow locks,
gray glancing eyes: round full pappes: a pretty small mouth: rosy cheeks: the
neck, breast, hands, and other parts, as white as Alablaster: but with an
horrible tail, like a Serpent, sharp pointed, full of teeth, and venomous.
Therefore Aristotle persuades him that will escape the snares of pleasures, to
view them on the back part, and not in the face: when they go from us ward,
and not when they come toward us.

But look thou on the judgments of Gods judgments, against Luxury.
God, against luxurious persons: consider the universal flood: the destruction
of Sodom, the slaughter of the Isralites and Beniamites, the co^fusio^ of
David's house.

Read the Histories of all ages, reporting the miseries which came by Luxury:
and mark what destruction Luxury and Lechery have brought, not only upon
particular persons, but also upon whole nations. As Troy, Sodom, etc.

When this vice assaulteth thee, the first and chief remedy is prayer.

Without humility, says Gregory, no triumph is gotten against any vice. The
Remedies Humble pra^er.
mind that cannot submit it self humbly to God: cannot prevail against the
lusts of the flesh, but strives in vain to ouermaster them, and pressing
them, cannot oppress them. Ask of God with Solamon, continence or chastity:
For I knew says he, that otherwise I could not be chaste, except God gave it:
And even this was a point of wisdom, to know whose gift it was: therefore I
went unto the Lord, and made my prayer to him. He loves thee not at all o God,
says S. Augustine, who loves any thing with thee, which he loves not for
thee.

2. Abstinence from stirring meats, Abstinence.
is an effectual remedy against this vice, for if lust be a fire, thou take
matter from that fire, when thou withdrawest wine and delicates. For in wine,
says the Apostle, is Luxury, if it be in excess.

Wine and youth says Herod, are two Rivers of voluptuousness.

3. Keep thy heart carefully: for The custody of the heart.
out of the heart proceed evil thoughts. The heart therefore, says Cassian,
is first to be cleansed, from whence springs life and death. And Solomon
says: With all diligence keep thy heart, for out of it proceeds life.

But that thou may cleanse and keep thy heart: expel evil cogitations
forthwith as soon as they rise: And in the stead of wicked cogitations, occupy
thy mind about honest and chaste things.

4. After the custody of the heart, The custody of the senses.
keep thy senses: Hear Saint Augustine. Whatsoever appears beautiful to thy
sight: whatsoever sweet to thy taste: whatsoever flattereth thy hearing:
whatsoever enticeth thy smelling: whatsoever is soft in touching, in all these
if we be unwary, evil concupiscences creeping in, we suffer the virginity
of the soul to be corrupted, and that is fulfilled which is spoken by the
Prophet: Death entered in by our windows: to wit, our senses.

Here thou shall have profited O man: Notes of profiting.
If by Gods grace thou have attained so far, as that if thou feel the
pricks of the flesh, thou suffer them without thy fault. If thou prevent every
evil thought, or if they offer themselves to thy mind, thou suddenly strangle
them: If thou perceive that lust is abated: and though it cannot here be
utterly taken away, yet it may be subdued.

3. Study then to mortify covetousness: For it is an outrageous mischief:
whose Covetousness to be mortified.
greediness to possess always more and more, cannot be satisfied with any
plenty or store of riches, which is wont to be accompanied with savage
cruelty, which they exercise toward other, that they may fulfill their
unlawful greediness, with other men's goods, Flee therefore covetousness, worse
than a dog, or a snake, which takes away the use of things, envying them, to
themselves, and other. Mark, I pray you, if a covetous man be not more vile
than any slave: for he is The miserable state of a covetous man.
an Idolater, a thief, a murderer, an infidel, a profane person, an
Atheist, inhumane, execrable, the cause of all mischief, a fool, miserable,
sordide, insatiable, poor, pensive, a band, an Adulterer, blind, and
altogether unhappy.

Expel, and explode with clapping out this vice from thee.

First, by true knowledge and holy reverence Remedy and means.
of God.

Secondly, by greater gain, I mean godliness, with a mind content with her
lot. For nature is content with few things, live not by opinion, but according
to nature.

Thirdly, know thou that vnsastable Incommodities of riches.
covetousness cannot defend hers in time of adversity.

Fourthly, remember that the love of riches does bring men into many dangers.
And that only, the enemies of learning and virtue, do greatly esteem them:
and that they are the cause of all confusion.

Fifthly, view rather the worthy examples of such as have used their riches
well and conveniently.

Sixthly, thou know that thou should first seek the kingdom of God, to
whose providence thou ought to commit all thy business and affairs.

Seventhly, mark me the riches of this world, which are such as can make no
satisfaction, nor bring any peace or tranquillity to the soul.

Finally, look on the pattern of perfection, Christ's example.
even our Lord Jesus, who being poor in this world, was an utter enemy, both
in word and deed to covetousness.

4. Moreover, we must endeavor to Anger to be mortified. How great a mischief.
mortify Anger, and to restrain wrath: for wrath is an horrible monster: it
does extinguish the light of reason, it burieth outward fury, though thou
cannot so easily, nor so soon bridle the inward motions: If thou be ashamed so
to be moved, or to be seen angry before wise men: If thou can recompense
other men's evil sayings and deeds, toward thyselfe, with good deeds and
words: If when wrath arises, it do not prevent reason, but follow it.

5. The poison of envy must be purged Envy to be mortified.
out of thy soul: for this is a pestilent wickedness, which changes a man
into the state of the devil, and an unmerciful fiend: For it is sorrow of the
prosperity, What Envy is.
and good success of our neighbors affairs. So that as Chrysostom says; An
envious mind is ever sad. And Basil. All the blessings of his neighbor,
both inner and outer, both of body and mind, do grieve an envious man, and his
good success, he counts his own calamity: Envy is so foul an evil, that
the envious man dares not bewray himself: therefore he counterfeits gladness,
but he bursts inwardly.

Flee therefore envy O man: horrible is the nature and disposition of envy:
for it is stricken with sorrow: and in stead of praising the bounty, mercy,
and goodness of God, it becomes an enemy to God and man, to whom nothing is
so heavy and troublesome, as to enjoy the blessings of God.

View the picture of an envious man, described by Gregory: The rankor of A
picture of Envy.
envy, says he, when it has corrupted the heart, the outward parts bewray
the madness of the mind: the color becomes pale, the eyes cast down, the
mind enflamed, the members wax cold: the cogitation is enraged, the teeth
gnash, and when the hidden hatred grows in the hidden corners of the heart,
the enclosed wound festereth the conscience. To mortify envy,

1. Be thou so minded, that thou admire no humane thing at al, as being called
Remedies
to the participation of true and eternal blessings, not to vain and
transitory things: set thy desires and affections on the actions of virtue,
and Envy shall not surprise thee.

2. He that desires to be free from Lib. 5. Moral.
the plague of Envy, says Gregory, let him love that heritage, which the
number of heirs does not straighten, which to all is one, and to every one is
whole, which appears to be so much the larger, by how much the more the
multitude of them that enjoy it, is enlarged.

3. Consider that the gifts and graces of our neighbors are so proper to
themselves, as that God many ways does communicate the use of them to others.

4. Call to mind often the mischiefs which flow from the fountain of Envy,
the greeuousnes of the sin, and how hardly it is cured. Take thou away envy,
says S. Augustine, and then that which I have is thine: I will take away envy,
and then, that which thou have is mine. And Ambros: Flee envy which is wont to
rent, not so much other, as him that does possess it.

6. Pride, which is detestable in a Christian Pride to be mortified.
man, is to be mortified: The beginning of all sin, says the son of
Syrach, is pride: which being the root of all vice says Gregory, is not
content with the overthrow of one virtue, but raises it self against all the
faculties of the mind, and is as it were a general infection, corrupting the
whole body.

See it, and shun it: for a proud and ambitious man, can neither endure a
superior, A proud man.
nor an equal: He hunteth after false honor, and neglects true honor: he
sets himself against God, whom he robs of his honor, that he may convey
it to himself, against all right and duty: he never wayeth the miseries of
such as are like himself: he never considers his own weakness, nor Gods
power: he never observes nor fears the sharp threats of God against proud
men: to conclude, he has lost all knowledge of himself.

Now to the end thou may deny and Remedies against pride.
overcome this vice of Pride:

1. Dwell with thy-selfe, and know thine own wants: Know thy self, O how
many things shall thou find, that shall offend thee!

2. Set before thine eyes the example of the Son of God himself, who being
declared to be Lord of men and Angles, yet whiles he was conversant in this
world, he was a perfect pattern of humility, and contempt of worldly glory,
and consider the dangers that are wont to accompany great prosperity.

And will thou get a perfect knowledge How to come by the knowledge of thy
self.
of thy self, and a true humility, which are the deadly enemies of pride?
Read and meditate diligently the sacred holy truth: Confer the state of us,
who are men, with the condition of other creatures: Examine and enquire
rigorously into thine own life: Consider how many things thou lackest, which
are infinite in number, above those thou have: Compare this state of ours, with
the state of our first parents before they sinned: Mark who they be that
praise thee, and who they be that dispraise thee: Take a lively view of the
tribunal, of the most wise, just, and omnipotent God. So shall thou abate thy
pride, and be humbled.

7. Sloth is to be mortified, and the drouzie weariness of the mind, dullness
Dullness in spiritual exercises to be mortified. What it is
and coldness is to be shaken off: I mean

The drowzie weariness wherewith the heart is burdened and depressed, so that
it can do nothing willingly: whereby the whole man is cast down with a
sluggish laziness, and a continual tediousness occopieth the mind, whereby
the mind is swallowed up and possessed with a faint languishing, so that it is
hindered by a cloudie darkness and confusion of it self, that it is no: able
to frame a speech. Whereof rises a lukewarmenesse, or frozen coldness.

Luke warmenesse in this place, is acertaine dullness in him that is going on
Lukewarmenes what it is.
in the way of life begun, now being already, either weary, or else
discouraged with the load of the burden, or difficulty of the journey, and
as it were, fainting in the way, he sits him down, and goes no more
forward.

This lukewarmnesse, makes a man to pray, without attention, and feruencie of
Effects.
the spirit: deeds:

Therefore to take away this tediousnes, heaviness, and dulnes.

Pray to God to deliver thee out of these necessities. Say unto thy spouse:
Draw Remedies
me after thee, and we will run after the odor of thy ointments or perfumes.

2. When thou feel, says Bernard, an heaviness or dulnes upon thee, do not
yield unto it, or cease from a study of Godliness: By resisting, thou shall
overcome: thou shall resist, by returning to thy labor again.

3. Consider the dangers in the which Dangers of lukewarmnes.
a lukewarm man does stand: There is danger, to fall back unto his old
sins: There is danger, to leese the fruit of the labor bestowed, in the life
well begun: There is danger of a greater fall, if that dulnes be not shaken
off: There is danger never to recover out of the gulf of that languishing and
fainting.

4. Remember the unhappy state of the lukewarm man: wherein he can no long
while be quiet, but he shall be vexed with the cogitations and scruples of his
own conscience: yea the very lothsomnes it self, (if there were no other
thing) wherewith he is holden, cannot but grieve him and wound him.

2. Coldness is an affection, whereby a man loves indeed, and chooses a better
trade of life, but he has no power to dispatch Coldness, what it is.
himself from those businesses and occasions, which either hold him in sin, or
stay him from the race, and rule of virtue: or casts him into such sins, as
can be by no means excused. And so much the greeuouser is the fall, as the
degree of holiness, from whence we fall, is higher.

1. First therefore thou must deliberate Remedies
of a new kind of life, more earnestly to be pursued, by a renouation of
serious repentance and faith.

2. Meditate with thy self on thy end, which may be sudden, and cannot be
avoided, and other the last things which follow death.

3. Consider, that Hypocrisy and dissembling, is most odious to God. A simple
nature says Bernard, such as God is, requires simplicity of heart: woe be to
the sinner, that enters the land two ways, for no man can serve two masters.

4. View and weigh the life of lukewarm, and frozen cold men, that knowing
it, thou may dislike it, and disliking it in others, thou may amend it in
thy self.

5. Cowardnesse and fear must be Pusillanimitie to be mortified.
mortified: for when a man is entered the way of Christ: the mind, many times,
is assailed with grief, either by expectation of some evil, or danger
approaching: or by desperation of safety or deliverance from some evil, or
danger present.

But be not dismayed in thy mind: Hear and pray to him, who says: Say to
the faint hearted, be of good courage, and faint not. And say with David, I
Esaias. 35. Psalm. 54.
did weight for him, who saved me from my pusillanimitie of spirit, and from
the tempest.

Why fear thou O thou coward? Fear argues a base mind: conceive a firm
hope of the providence of God: when Exhortation.
thou striuest with the anguishes of Pusillanimitie, thou must lift up thy
mind to Gods providence. Resist with a good courage, and set thy self, by the
help of Gods spirit, against the whole rout of fantasies. Discuss, says
Gregory, the mistes of mourning, least thou, who in the time of tranquillity,
did think greatly of thy sefe, in the time of perturbation, do confound thy
self, with the terrors of thy base thoughts. Peradventure God will bring thee,
by this Good effects.
Pusillanimitie, to a study of humility, that by it, that lofty pride (which
even in good actions, lies in weight, even for holy men) may be laid flat, or
he has a purpose, to purge thy soul, of that affection of selfeloue, whereby
oftentimes thou art wont to please thy self, more than is meet.

How be it; what is it, that thou need Comforts against sundry sorts of
fear. The cross
greatly to fear, or be amazed at?

1. Is it the Cross or Affliction?

If thou be godly, the cross and affliction is to thee inevitable, or not to
be shunned: it is profitable, honorable and glorious: it confirms thine
adoption, it renowneth thy virtues: it banisheth vices. Bear therefore the
cross with a good courage.

2. Do thou fear the anguish of Sickness
sickness? Thy body is mortal, there is no cause then that thou should fear
sickness, which leads to death: Sickness breeds hollome Philosophy: to wit,
A meditation of death: the vices of the mind are cured by the diseases of y^
body: thou learnest to abandon selfeloue, and the love of the world, and to
hope for a better life: Faith, Hope, and Invocation of God, becomes more ardent.

3. Art thou afraid of the loss of worldly things? Loss of earthly things.


Trust in God, lean on his most holy promises, surely Gods truth is
immovable, his power impregnable, his bounty immeasurable, he will not leave
thee, nor forsake thee.

4. Does the terror of death trouble Death.
thy mind?

Cast off the fear, which incredulity that is to be banished, does strike
into thee: compare the course of this life, with the last period or end
thereof. Art thou not tossed with perpetual misery? If thou be wise, with the
wise man, thou Eccles. 1. Commodities of death.
wilt say, Vanity of vanities, al is vanity. Be not afraid of death, whereby
thou shall be delivered from the tyranny of sin; from the snares of the
world; from the temptations of Satan; from the rage of false brethren; and
shall come to the port of felicity, out of the sink of evils, eternal: death
shall not touch thee, because eternal life is prepared, promised, sealed and
confirmed to thee in Christ: Believe and thou shall have eternal life.

5. Do thou tremble at the assaults of Satan?

God does furnish his with strength, to resist Satan: Being vpholden by the
wisdom, vigilancie, and invincible power of Christ thy head, call upon God,
take unto thee christian patience and co^stancy, with the shield of faith, and
the sword of the spirit, and by Gods grace and perseverance thou shall be safe.

6. Art thou astonished with thy many, and great sins; Sin.


Behold the remission of all thy sins purchased by Christ, promised, given,
and sealed unto thee: why tremblest thou? Behold the love and mercy of God the
father, the satisfaction and intercession of Jesus Christ, and admit the
comfort, and assistance of the holy Ghost.

7. Thou quakest for fear of the last The last judgment
Judgment and Tribunal.

Be of good comfort, and settle thy self thoroughly on the promises of
salvation, so often repeated in holy Scriptures: The love of God the father,
and the covenant of his grace, through the satisfaction of his son Jesus
Christ, is immutable, and he shall be our Patron, and Advocate in that
judgment. Thou for thy part as often as thou sinnest, so often return to
Daily repentance.
God, by a renewed repentance and faith: apprehend the grace of God the father:
the merits of Jesus Christ: the consolation of the holy spirit, who is the
earnest of our inheritance: hear the manifold afflictions of this world, with
a patient mind: and seeing thou have access unto the Throne of grace, power
out thy prayers to thy God: sigh and send up thy affections, and thy hope shall
not be confounded, but thou shall enjoy unspeakable felicity in heaven. Amen.

The fourth member.
Profice vlterius. Go yet further forward in attaining righteousness.
When we have denied unrighteousness, we must proceed to A transition.
attain righteousness: According to that, Cease from evil, and do good: virtue
must succeed in the place of vice.

Now in seeking after the way of righteousness and life, beware thou decline
not, either to the right hand, or to the left.

Let us then go forward In virtues, and with a good courage.

In virtutibus and In virtute.
Concerning virtues, know y^ they are Virtues Gods gifts
great goods, to be desired for themselves: that they are the gifts of God most
precious, and with most earnest prayer and desire to be begged of him: And if
thou obtain them, God is to be thanked, who has endowed thee with so great
graces. The first care must be, to attain them.

The next is, to keep them when they are gotten.

Thou shall both get the^ and keep them. How virtue is gotten and kept.


First, by the frequent use of godly prayer: for God does both give, and
increase his gifts to those that ask of him.

Secondly, by a good courage, which we must bring to the attaining of justice,
for virtue of it self is laboursome, and the nature of man if it be not
vpheld, is very prone to evil.

Thirdly, by an ardent love of virtue: for Love ouercomes all difficulties, and
is strong as death, as Saloman says.

4 By perpetual use and exercise: for they are as the talents, which God by no
means will not have to lie idle: he that does not go forward, in ye race of
virtue, does go backward. But in this practice look one thy Master Christ
Jesus, who is the perfect pattern of life and death.

Now by gods grace working with thee, thou shall walk from virtue, to virtue:
thou shall exercise virtue, for virtues sake: thou shall practice virtue, for
the love of God, and to his glory.

2. Thou shall go forward in virtue, with a good courage and willingly.

First, if when thou set thy first step How to go forward.
on the threshold of any virtue, if thou have a resolute purpose, in thine own
will, to follow that virtue, and upon every occasion to put it in practice.

Secondly, if thou so firmly persevere in the purpose, and practice of that
virtue, that thou suffer not thy self to be drawn from it, by any temptations.

Thirdly, if where as our corrupt nature esteems the countenance of virtue to
be sower, and her service bitter, thou on the contrary, do esteem her so
beautiful, and her service so sweet, y^ not only any thing cannot pluck thee
from her: but also thou Virtue, beautiful and sweet.
do fulfill all her duties, with great cheerfulness and alacrity. Thou
shall proceed therefore: First from a firm purpose to practice, from practice
to a perfect habit, being able to resist impediments: from thence thou shall
ascend to an alacrity, and cheereful delight to be ever Degrees or steps.
Satan.
doing some good.

Justice or righteousness.

Justice or righteousness does comprehend in it self, al virtues: So that this
is y^ very head of al christian virtue, of religion, charity, holiness: which
discerns exactly, and practices cheerfully al holy and honest actions: This
gives to every one that is his The property of Justice. To God glory. Why.
own: To God, that which is his own. To Man, that which is his own.


1. Concerning Gods due.
Justice gives to God Glory, especially, by study of holiness, and Religious
piety: therefore glorify God, for thou owe unto thy God, glory.

In respect of God himself. In respect of our selves. Gods nature. Tim. 1
Psalm. 113. His commandments. Promises there as His benefits.

Consider God himself: The nature of GOD is most glorious, the best, the
greatest, the fairest: Thou art bound by his commandments, to glorify him:
Embrase his sweet promises, tremble at his horrible threats; contemplate his
actions and works, wherein his virtues, promises and threatenings, do notably
shine, to wit: The benifits of our creation, Conservation, Redemption,
Intercession, Sanctification, and Glorification: His wonderful judgments,
rather to be reverenced then searched, yet always right and just. Judgments
Romans 11. Miracles,
His miracles, may be added: Is not ye end of all his divine virtues,
commandments, promises, judgments, that he should be glorified. Let us
consider our selves? behold the Image of God, to the which we were created,
and are regenerate, and The image of God.
whereby we have a fellowship with God and a partaking of his virtues, does
allure us to glorify him: The vow which Vow in Baptism. The Sacraments.
we made in our Baptism once, and in receiving the Sacrament of the Supper, we
often renew, does bind us to glorify God, many excellent commodities which
we enjoy do force us.

Give therefore glory to God, and thou shall have peace of conscience, which
passes al man's understanding. His blessings Effects.
shall cheer thy heart in all things: thou shall receive the testimony of a
true faith, thy death shall be precious: thou shall carry with the a pledge of
thy resurrection and glory, which is to come.

Assure thy self, there is nothing that can return from us to God, for all the
graces which we receive from him, but only this homage, to glorify him: Which
while we do, we declare our love to our neighbor, whom by thy example, thou
do win, by stirring him up to glorify God. Now we give glory to God,
especially as I have said, by the study and practice of religious piety,
whereby, in believing Religious Piety.
rightly of God, thou do also worship him rightly.

Minister, says the Apostle, in thy 1. Tim. 6.
faith, piety, and follow O man Gods righteousness, faith, piety, charity,
patience, modesty. For godliness or piety, is great gain, with a mind
content with his estate or lot. And Seneca says: A good man must be very
religious toward God.

Now Religion standetb in two points: In the true knowledge of God. In ye true
worship of God so known


First therefore thou must learn to know Trust the true knowledge of God.
God aright, as he is revealed in the book of nature, which is the frame of
the world, and in his word, which is the holy scripture: and herein consists
christian wisdom. Let not the wise man, says Jeremy, glory in his wisdom, nor
the strong man in Ierem. 9.
his strength, neither the rich man in his riches: but let him ye glories,
glory herein, that he understands and knows eue^ me, who am Jehovah, who
exercise mercy and justice in the earth, wherein also I delight. In the
visible creatures says Paul, the eternal power and divinity of God is
seen. And the Prophet Esaias sends us to the Law and Esaias. 8.
the Testimony: And Christ our Savior to the holy scriptures, saying: Search
Ioh. 5.
the Scriptures.

This wisdom must chiefly be learned out of the holy Scripture; which
enstructeth Holy Scripture
the rude or unlearned, counsels the ignorant or doubtful, corrects the
sinners or offenders, comfort the heavy or sorrowful, brings back such
as err or wander, into the way of truth: briefly, it frames aright the whole
life of a Christian man. All Scripture, 2. Tim. 3.
and every part thereof, says Saint Paul, is inspired of God, and is
profitable to Teach, to Reprove, to Correct, and to Instruct in righteousness,
that the man of God may be intyre, prepared to every good work. It is a sure
word of Prophecy, says Saint Peter.

Secondly, God being rightly known, 2. True worship of God.
must also be religiously worshipped of thee. Religious worship yields unto
God. First due humility, fear, love, hope, confidence.

Secondly, Invocation by prayer, attention by hearing his word, and service in
the public exercises of religion.

Thirdly, patience under the Cross, and constancy in the profession of
Christian truth.

1. Be thou therefore religious toward Humility toward God.
God, giuinge him such humility, as is due to him. Submit and subject thy
self reverently to the Majesty of God, both in mind and body, and confess
thy self unworthy of his benefits.

Thou shall be humbled to God ward, if thou consider him, to be thy Creator,
and thou his creature. Him to be immortal, and thy self mortal. Him to be
the Lord, and thou his servant. Him to be the best, and thy self the worst.
Humble your selves, says S. Peter, under the mighty 1. Pet. 5.
hand of God, and he will exalt you in due season. Say with Jacob the
Patriarch: Lord I am less or unworthy of all the benefits and truth, which
thou have showed unto thy servants. Genesis 32.


This humility will breed in thee an obedience toward God: for it is not
enough Obedience
to know the will of God, except thou do obey him, and endeavor to put in
practice the commandments of God, which thou have learned: He that does the
will of God endures for ever. And 1 Ioh. 2.
if ye know these things, says our Savior, happy are ye, if ye do them. Not
Ioh. 13.
every one that says unto me, Lord Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom Mat. 7.
of heaven, but he that does the will of my father, who is in heaven, even he
shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Yield unto God a due fear: acknowledging Fear.
the mercy, and Justice of God; Fear to offend God, whom to offend is the
chief evil. Conceive a terror of sin, and the punisher thereof, and yet so
fear God, as that thou love him, as a child does his father: for we must both
fear God as our Lord, and love him as our father. The Lord has a delight
Psalm. 147. Psalm. 112.
in them that fear him, and yet put their trust in his mercy. Blessed is the
man that fears the Lord, and has great delight in his commandments. Yet
have ye not received the spirit of Romans 8.
bondage, to fear, vz. such a fear, as cannot stand with the love of God. 1
Ioh. 4.


Render therefore to God the love that Love.
is due unto him: that is; In acknowledging the goodness and love of God
toward thy self, love thou God; again above all things, Love the Lord your
Esaias. 28.
God, and serve him, with all your heart, and with all your mind. He that
loves father or mother more than me, says Christ, is not worthy of me.

6. The love of God is very diligent in working: This is the love of God, that
ye keep his commandments.

1. This love does unite the lover and 1. Ioh. 5: The properties of the love of
God.
the thing loved; so that we say with David: Like as the heart desires the
fountains of water, so longs my soul after thee o my God: It brings a
mutual conjunction with it: for God is love, and he that abides in love,
abides 1. Ioh. 4.
in God: It so rauisheth a man with the love of God, that forgetting himself,
be seeks not his own, but the things that are Jesus Christ's.

2. This love, makes us co^tinuallie to cast the eyes of our mind upon God.
Man by love sets his affection upon God, because the mind thinks on
nothing else: this love is strong as death, it ouercomes all things, and is
overcome of nothing.

3. It so feeds the mind, that it is never satisfied: it never thinks or
seeks any thing but God; and him, the more it finds, the more it wishes.

View the creatures, all are yours says the Apostle: view thy self, thou
art Christ's; view Christ, he is Gods: So by love thou ascendest to God.

Fix thy hope upon thy God, as is meet, calling to mind his love, and Hope.
truth in things past, and expect with patience, his presence and help for
things to come.

Cast thy care upon God, and hope in Psalm. 37.
him, and he will bring the matter to pass. Item. Tarry the Lords leisure,
Psalm. 147
be of good courage, expect the Lord, and he shall comfort your heart: The
Lord has a pleasure in them, that put their trust in his mercy.

Hope confounds not: But hope Objects of our hope.
thou from God, such things as fall under a Christian hope: to wit, eternal
happiness, and all things that are necessary and profitable to further us in
the attaining of that blessed felicity: hope for Gods Mercy, with his
effectual blessing in all things, and that by thy Savior Christ Jesus. Yea
hope many times contrary to hope, and strive against the spirit of distrust
and desperation: And hope thou strongly, constantly, cheerfully.

Rest thy confidence upon God as thou Confidence.
art bound: Acknowledging the power and mercy of thy God, and firmly repose
thy self therein, against whatsoever dangers happen. Blessed is he, says
Jeremy, that trusts in God, and Ierem. 17
whose confidence is in the Lord. And the son of Syrach. In all thy Syrach. 33
actions put thy trust in God, for so shall thou also fulfill his
commandments.

2. Be thou also religious toward God, giving him due worship: In adoring
Adoration or Invocation of God.
him, and calling upon his name: Call upon him religiously, acknowledging him
to have all power, all knowledge, and to be present every where.

But call thou upon God, with a present intention of mind; with an Rules of
Invocation.
acknowledging of thine own unworthiness; with a true affection of heart,
with a desire of Gods blessings, submitting thy will to Gods will: with hearty
repentance; with a consideration of Gods commandments; with a meditation of
the divine promises, with assured faith to be heard, with confidence in Christ
the Mediator.

These things being thus prepared, entreat the mercy and favor of God, both
to obtain things necessary for soul and body, and to turn away all evil.

Now, the best form of prayer for every Christian man, is the Lords prayer,
taught by the son of God to his Disciples, containing all things briefly,
which are to be prayed for.

When need requires, give God the A religious oath.
honor of a religious oath, and call God himself to be a witness of thy speech,
as the only searcher of the heart, and if thou do wittingly deceive or lie,
^et him revenge the lie or deceit. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and shall
swear by Deuteronomy. 6.
his name.

Thou owe unto thy God a reverend Gratitude
thankfulness, way therefore Gods benefits, with an admiration and joy,
rehearse them, commend them, celebrate them, extol them. Acknowledge all good
things, as received from him only, both spiritual and corporal, and
therefore give him only the glory. Say with the Psalmist: I will praise the
Lord at all times, his Psalm. 34.
praise shall always be in my mouth. Offer unto God the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and say, Praise the Lord o my Psalm. 103.
soul, and forget not all his benefits.

Be not thou either ashamed, or weary, Exercise of the word private. Psalm. 1.
or cloyed with the word of truth; exercise thy self rather in the word of
God, by reading, meditating, talking, and conferring with other. Let thy
delight be in the law of the Lord, and meditate therein both day and night,
let the word of Colloss. 2
Christ dwell in thee plentifully in all wisdom, teaching and exhorting one
another, Apply thy reading. 1. Tim. 4.


Being asked a reason of thy faith at any convenient time, or otherwise being
provoked, defend Gods truth out of the holy Scriptures, and be not ashamed to
confess it. Be ready, says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3.
always to give an answer, to every one that asks a reason of the hope that
is in you, for every one that confesses me before men, him will I, says Matt.
10.
Christ, confess before my father, who is in heaven.

Be not slack to serve God in public Exercise of religion public.
exercises of Religion. At appointed times, but especially on the Saboath,
repair to the Church, where the Christian Congregation is assembled in unity
of mind, forsake not such meetings, neither despise thou the communion of
Saints, but attend the word of God, as it is meet, use the Sacraments, and
pray devoutly with the Saints. Let us not Heb. 10.
forsake the mutual assemblies, says the Apostle, as is the the manner of
some. Do all to the glory of God: Let all things be done to edifying. 1. Cor.
10. and. 14. Ecclesiastical rites


Moreover, observe the public Ecclesiastical rites, attending on Religion,
that all things may be done decently and in order, in convenient time and place.

3. Whatsoever cross it pleases God Patience under the Cross.
to lay upon thee, thou ought to bear it patiently, for this is our duty
to God. Carry therefore the cross, wherewith God does try thee his child, or
chastise thee in this vale of tears: carry it I say with patience, stoutly,
and with an invincible Romans 12. Prou. 3. Heb. 12.
mind: Be patient in afflictions: My son says Saloman, refuse not thou the
chastening of the Lord, neither grudge when thou art reproved of him: For whom
the Lord loves he chasteneth, etc.

God does chastise thee, lest thou should Uses of the cross
think thy self without all fault. He would have thee more and more to
return to him, to cast off sin, and to embrace virtue, that the old man
might be crucified, and the newe-man revived. He would have thee to prevent
further lapses, and not to rush into security. He would also stay other from
wickedness by punishing thee, and that they might spedily return to good.

Moreover, the servant and disciple, must be conformed to his Lord and master.
Christ is our Lord and master, with whom we must suffer, if we will reign with
him.

God tries thy faith, thy hope, thy obedience, thy patience, thy feruencie in
prayer: He will have his power and mercy to appear, in strengthening, and
delivering thee. He would make thee weary of this earthly life, and to be
stirred up with a desire of thy heavenly love. Therefore bear that is to be
borne: patience will have the victory.

Be constant in faith, and yield to God the obedience of thy faith: Persist in
this Constancy.
religious worship of God, by perseuering unto the last breath of thy life, in
a lively faith and love of God: neither do thou suffer any thing, either
prosperous or adverse, to remove thee from that heavenly truth, or godliness,
which thou have learned. Be faithful unto death, says the Apoc. 2. Mat. 10.
spirit, and I will give thee the Crown of life, for he that perseuereth unto
the end, shall be saved.

2. Concerning man's due.
Justice gives to every man his due; man must give, first unto himself that
which is due to himself.

And next to his neighbor, that which is due to his neighbor.
Give to thy self that which is due to thy self. Thou ought to love thy
self, To thy self thou owe love.
and not to hate thy self, but this love must be holy and moderate, that
knowing thy self, by the help of Gods grace, thou may frame thy self, to
an holiness and righteousness, conformable to the Law of God. Thou shall love
thy Romans 13. Ephesians. 5.
neighbor as thy self. And never yet did any man hate his own flesh, yea he
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord does the congregation. Auselme
says.

Justice is a liberty of the mind, giving What justice is.
to every man his proper right; to our Superior reverence, to our Equal
concord, to our Inferior discipline, to God obedience, to our selves holiness,
to our enemy patience, to the needy mercy. And a man becoming judge of
himself, must search himself, without partiality. Enter therefore into thy
self: Dwell with thy self, and seek not thy self without thy self. And as
Plautus says: Ever persuade thy self it is best, that thou thy self be best,
if thou cannot attain to that, yet at the last, that thou may be next the
best.

First therefore thou owe to thy self, The knowledge of our selves. 1. Cor.
11 and 13.
the knowledge of thy self: Surely it is a very hard matter to know our
selves; but hear thou the Apostle, who says: Let every man examine himself,
Item, examine your selves whether ye be in the faith. Hear other wise
Christians, as Ayapetus for one: We must first learn this divine precept, that
every one know him self: for he that knows himself knows God: He that
knows God, shall become like to God, but he that shall become like to God,
must be worthy of God, he becomes worthy of God, who commits Acceptable to
God.
nothing unworthy of him, but thinks on divine things, and speaks what he
thinks, and does what he speaks. Chrysostom says: It is the part of a
wise man, first to know himself, to view what he himself is: what is
beneath him, what is within him, what is above him, what is over against him,
what before him, what behind him. For this consideration has a fourefold
fruit, Our own commodity, our neighbors charity, the worlds contempt, and
the love of God. And Bernard says. No man is saved without the knowledge of
himself, out of which rises humility, the mother of salvation, and the fear
of God, which as it is the entrance to wisdom, so is it the entrance to
salvation.

Being known to thy self, Care of our selves
thou owe of good right to thy self, a diligent care of thy self,
concerning integrity, and holiness, to the composing and decking of thy self.

Now thou shall frame thy self to integrity and holiness: if thou study to
use and order aright, the things which God has committed to thee,

Whether they be Inward, or Outward.

First therefore, when thou know Care of goods. Of the mind.
thy self, reform all the inward goods of thy mind and body, to a rightnes
pleasing God.

Justice therefore, yielding thy self thy right, commands thee, above all
things, to be careful in enforming rightly, and repairing the faculties of thy
soul, both Superior, and Inferior.

The superior faculties of the soul, Superior faculties.
are the mind, the conscience, and the will: Have a good regard of these, and
thou shall not be in danger.

Concerning the mind.
Give therefore to thy mind or understanding, that which is due to it. What we
owe to the mind


Now thou owe to thy mind or understanding, wisdom: to thy Judgment,
Prudence.

1. The mind attaineth wisdom, Wisdom
by applying it self to the knowledge, and consideration of divine and humane
things, which are profitable and necessary to the use of our life.

This is obtained of God: For all wisdom, How we obtain wisdom. Out of the
word. By prayer
says the son of Syrach; is from God, but by his word, for his word is the
fountain of wisdom, and his commandment, the original and entrance
thereunto. It must be asked by prayer, saying with Saloman. O Lord give me
wisdom and understanding, that I may go in and out before thy people. By
companying with the wise. Prou. 13. Syrach. 6.
It is learned also by conuersing with wise men, according as it is said: He
that keeps company with wise men, shall become wise: Therefore my son, says
Syrach: Apply thy self to the instruction of wisdom, from thy youth: for
wisdom aduanceth her children, and receives those that love her, and goes
before them, in the way of righteousness, and purchases them the love of God.

2. Prudence is gotten by due observation, Prudence
what is meet to be done, or left undone, what is to be desired, or shunned,
that thou may foresee to choose the good, and refuse the evil, and search
the means to perform honest actions: that both before and after thou be weary.
For Prudence, is like two-faced Ianus, in every thing observing, what goes
before, and what follows after: Remember what Aristotle says: That man is
borne to two things, vz. to understand, and to do, or work.

Thou shall atchieue it, next the grace of God, by use and memory of things,
according How prudence is gotten. By experience.
as it is said,

Longo Prudentia surget ab vsu, Prudence rises, by long practice or
experience.

When thou do deliberate, says Isocrates, of things to come, consider the
examples of things past; For if thou remember things past, thou shall the
better deliberate of things to come. Always give ear to that of Syrach:
Whatsoever thou take in hand, do it advisedly, and keep a mean in all
things.

Now in laboring for Prudence, in How to be perfect in Prudence Counsel.
this sort shall thou proceed.

First, take counsel of the matter that is to be done, or not done: try all
things before hand by counsel.

1. Let the rule of thy counsel be the Law of God: according to it, let all
thy cogitations and deliberations be directed: Thy Law says David are my
counselors.

2. Then let thy prayer, powered out to God, crave his help, that thou may
both think, and determine those things that are agreeable to his will: saying
with David; Teach me to do thy will O God, for thou art my God.

3. After prayer let a diligent inquisition and meditation of those things
whereof thou have consulted, follow. For as Saloman Prou. 10.
says: The lips of the just consider what is acceptable.

4. Do not attribute too much to thy self, and to thine own determinations,
according as it is said: Lean not too much Prou 3.
to thine own wit, especially in thine own matters, wherein men are wont to be
blinded. Therefore in weighty matters take advise of other: I, says Wisdom,
Prou. 8.
dwell with Counsel, and am present in all wise consultations.

Secondly, when thou have taken counsel, discern aright between all those
reasons, Discretion.
that are brought in consulting.

Here therefore is need of discretion, whereby truths are discerned from
falsehoods, certainties from uncertainties: unprofitable things, from
profitable: unseasonable, from seasonable: honest from dishonest: pleasant, from
unpleasant, and to conculde, good from evil. And of these which are more or
less good, and which are more or less convenient, for time, place, person, or
for the matter in hand. And to discern not only what is to be determined,
but also how much, and how farreforth we ought to proceed in every cause.

2. Concerning the conscience.
Give unto thy conscience, that which What is due to the conscience.
is due unto it.

Thou ought not to wound and vlcerate our conscience, but to keep it sound
and entire.

Now thou shall get, and keep, a good, Three means to get a good conscience.
Preparation.
and a sound conscience, by three means.

By diligent preparation, by speedy application of remedy: and by reformation.

2. That thou may diligently prepare thy conscience: Learn by the law what
is commanded to be done, and what is forbidden and to be left undone: Learn
the judicial sentence of the Law, pronouncing men accursed for every sin:
Then examine thine own conscience seriously, according to this rule of the
Law, whereby thou shall understand, what thy state is before God; hereof a
sorrow will strike thy heart, for fear of the punishment due to thy sins
which thou have committed.

2. A better Remedy for a sorrowful and wounded conscience, can I not Remedies
show you, than the blood and merit of Jesus Christ our Savior. For the
applying whereof unto our selves, we have need: First, of the preaching of the
Gospel, which is as it were the hand of God, offering his grace unto us. And
then of faith, which is as our hand, receiving the graces offered. But here thou
must remember to humble thy self truly, and to resist all doubting.

3. The conscience is then reformed, Reformation.
when it cease to accuse and terrify thee, and contrariwise, begins to
excuse thee, and by the holy spirit does testify unto thy spirit, that thou
art the child of God, and that thy sins are forgiven Two means to Keep a
good conscience.
thee. When thou have gotten a good conscience see that thou preserve it, and
keep it in safety: by removing impediments and applying fit remedies.

Impediments, some are with in thee; Impediments to be removed.
some without thee.

1 Within thee are thine own sins: take away therefore ignorance, seducing
thee from the knowledge of Gods word: take away unbridled and untamed
affections, by inuerting their course from thy neighbor against thy self, or
thine own sins: or by inclining them to God, and our Savior Christ: take
away worldly desires of riches, honors, and pleasures.

2. Without thee the devil, and the wicked world are impediments to a good
conscience, these must be withst^^d.

Remedies to be applied for the preserving of the conscience are two: First,
Remedies to be applied.
thou shall conserve and nourish a lively faith: Secondly, thou shall retain a
constant purpose and ardent desire to obey God in all things, so shall thou
provide for thy conscience.

3. Concerning the will.
Moreover, give unto thy will that which What is due to the will.
is due to it.

If thou love thy self, thou owe unto thy will an holy government, to bridle
it by a godly prudence: that being guided, not by the flesh, but by the
spirits, it may earnestly will that which is good, and niil that which is
evil: Now it is God, says Philip. 2.
the Apost. who works in you, both to will, and to perform according to his
undeserved favor.

Here thou may use the sylogisme, as Prudence Sylog.
they call it, of Prudence: whose principles or propositions are fetched from
Counsel and Judgment, and the conclusion from the election of the will.

Counsel searches out things which are Counsel.
a furthera^ce to attain the purposed end.

Judgment discerns among many Judgment
things purposed; which are chiefly to be chosen.

By election the will desires and chooses Election.
those things, which by right reason we have learned to be most profitable for
our use: whereunto if the command of reason and prudence, illumined, be joined,
it makes the purpose ready for the action, or to the hand: so that there
wants nothing but execution, or putting in practice.

But see thou propound nothing to thy will, but that which may agree with the
will of God, and does tend to his glory to the knowledge of whose will, and
to; the advancement of whose glory, thou ought with all diligence to frame
thy self. Thus shall thou sanctify the superior faculties of thy soul, by
giving them that is due to them: wherein thou do a right to thy self.

The inferior faculties of the soul; to wit: The Irascible or angry part, and
the Co^cupiscible or lusting part, are to be brought in order, that thy
affections may be moderate and holy.

1. Concerning the Irascible or angry part.
Thou shall moderate or rule that Virtues moderating the Irascible part.
part of thy soul which is prone to anger, by these Christian virtues, vz.
Fortitude, Magnanimity, Patience, Constancy, Meekness, Humility.

1. Furnish thy soul with Fortitude, wherewith it may be armed and prepared
Fortitude
to enterprise and endure labor, yea even the perils of death, with a
Christian courage, so that it may expel cowardly fear out of the mind, and
may settle a constant trust in it. Be of good courage, Psa. 27.
says the Psalmist, and God shall comfort your hearts. Ye that put your trust
in the Lord: Be strong in the Lord, and Ephe. 6. 1. Pet. 3.
in the might of his power: Fear not their threats, neither be thou troubled.
And Saint Paul to Timothy, says: My son, be thou of good courage. 2. Tim. 3.


Saint Ambrose says: Fortitude of the Lib. 61. Offic.
mind is no mean virtue, or severed from the rest, as if it were at defiance
with other virtues, but it is such a virtue as only defends the ornaments of
al virtues, and preserves their right, and is at deadly enmity with all
vices, it is invincible in labors, courageous in dangers, rigorous against
pleasures, churlish against enticings, whereunto it cannot tell how to listen.
And Christ. Fortitude of mind is to us from him Lib. 63. De vita Contempt.
to whom with the Prophet we sing; The Lord is my fortitude and my praise, and
he is become my salvation: He is our fortitude, because he does so strengthen
us with his invincible protection against all vices, that neither flattering
prosperity can make us dissolute, nor frouning adversity desperate. And now
the Lord be our praise.

Now thou shall be reckoned a valiant man if thou have such power over Who is a
valiant man.
thine affections, that thou can master them, so that not thou art so stirred
and provoked by them, as they by fortitude are ruled and governed at thy beck:
For the valiant man uses his anger as a whe^stoane to sharpen his courage in
aduenturing perils, yet as an underling, not as a commander, neither is his
reason thereby disturbed, but his affection inflamed.

2. Magnanimity or greatness of courage is occupied in great matters, and of
Magnanimity.
honorable account, wherewith also the soul must be endued: that we seek not
honor for it self, nor greatly esteem of humane honor.

He is a man of great courage says Gregory: who desires eternal things. Who
is Magnanimous.
Thou shall be magnanimous, if thou contemn humane honor, and enterprise
great things for the glory of God, and exercise all virtues which tend to
eternal felicity. If thou increase daily in courage, and wish earnestly, and
perform valiantly whatsoever may further the glory of God, and the salvation
of men, if thou stand invincible against all injuries and calamities, which men
can lay upon thee.

3. Possess thy soul in patience, whereby Patience.
thou may endure with a willing mind, and stoutly bear all evils that come
upon thee, and all troubles which thou take upon thee, and all adversities
and crosses which thou can not with honesty and godliness avoid.

Arm thy self with patience, says Syrach. 2.
the son of Syrach, whatsoever happens, bear it patie^tly, and endure
whatsoever calamity patiently. And our Savior Christ says: Possess your
soul, Luke 2.
in patience. And S. Peter: Minister in your faith patience, etc. 2. Pet. 1.


No man can escape misfortunes, but to bear misfortunes patiently, is only
the part of a godly man: for mortal men are bound to bear mortalities: endure
the harder things, then shall thou more easily bear light things.

Nobile vincendi genus est patie^tia, vincit punctum.
Qui patitur, si nis vincere disce pati.
A noble kind of victory.
Is patience: Learn to suffer.
For he that suffers, ouercomes all wrongs that men can offer.
S. Crysostome makes nine degrees Nine degrees of patienc.
of Patience.

4. Thou owe unto thy soul constancy, Constancy.
or perseverance in well doing: that is, to persist in an honest and laudable
purpose, to retain always in one rate, the same mind and will, that thou be
not lifted up by prosperity, nor cast down by adversity, or decline from
good to evil.

Hereby thou may overcome the difficulty of long lingering, or fault of
defectio^, whereunto the action of virtue is in danger, when it is drawn out
by length of time. Get this grace, by Gods help unto thy soul: ye thou may
have a will to persevere in the action of virtue begun, till thou have fully
perfected it: Pray unto God, and he will say unto thee: I am the Lord thy God,
taking thee by the Esaias. 41.
hand, and saying to thee: Fear not: I have helped thee: Fear not o Jacob,
that art a worm: He will strengthen thy weak hands, and thy feeble knees, and
make thy feet to step aright.

But let thy will be firm to persist in faith, and the works of faith, and
to resist those things which hinder them. First Satan is an adversary, whom
thou must Impediments.
withstand, being steadfast in faith. Secondly, the very length of time, often
breeds a vain fear, but in thy God thou may do all things. Thirdly, the
world many times affrighteth us with his bugges, or turns us aside by his
examples: But labor thou, and thou shall have thy hyer, after wearines
follows rest: hope, and thy hope shall not confound thee.

5. Indue thy mind with meekness, which may so appease the angry force
Meekness.
thereof, that it offer not violence to reason, or remove her out of her state,
but may make thee readier to pardon, than to revenge.

By meekness therefore anger must be Anger to be refrained. Ephesians. 4. Tit. 3.
refrained or brideled: Walk says the Apostle, in all meekness and
humility, forbearing one an other, and forgiving one an other, in modesty
showing meekness to all men. Item, Let us behave our selves in much patience
and long suffering and mildnes, in the holy Ghost.

By meekness desire of revenge Ephesians. 4. Colloss. 3
which rises of anger must be restrained or cut off. With patience support ye
one an other, forgiving one an other, if any man have a quarrel against an
other, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you: not rendering evil for
evil. Romans 12. The effects of meeknes Psalm. 147. Judith, 9.


If thou be meek, thou shall be acceptable to God: The Lord receives the
meek, he hears the prayers of such as be gentle: The prayers of such as be
humble and meek have ever bin acceptable to thee, says Judith: To such he sent
his son: To preach to the meek he sent me: To such he gives his grace: To
the meek he gives grace: Such he directs in all their actions. He shall
Esaias. b 1. Prou. 3.
guide the meek in judgment, he shall teach the gentle his ways.

6. Thou owe humility to thy soul Humility
which may make thee not to wax proud of the store or worth of any graces, but
in acknowledgement of thine own infirmities to prefer every one before thy self.

In humility embracing one another, Item, Deck your selves inwardly, with
lowliness of mind: for GOD 1, Pet. 5.
resists the proud, and gives grace to the lowly. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, and he shall exalt you in due time. My
son says Syrach, behave thy self humbly, apply thy self to the lowly: for
this is Syrach. 3.
better than all that which the world esteems so highly: The greater thou
art, the more humbly behave thy self, and the Lord will love thee: for the
Lord is the most high, and yet he works great things by the lowly and
afflicted. And Chrysostom says; Nothing is to be compared to the virtue of
humility: for it is the root, the nurce, the prop, and band of all goodness.
And Saint Augustine, If we will attain to the height of Charity, we must
first think of the foundation of humility. And Basil: Humility is the safest
treasury of all virtues.

Anselme reckons seven degrees of humility: The first is, to know thy self
to Seven degrees of humility.
be contemptible. The second is, to be sorry for it. The third, to confess it.
The fourth is, to persuade the same to other in time and place. The fifth is,
to bear it patiently when other report it. The sixth is, to take it in good
part when thou art used contemptibly. The seventh is, to accept, desire, and
love the same.

It must needs be a great strength in the mind that shall ascend to these
degrees. Though thou do never so great matters, yet count not thy self great:
Thou shall become humble, if thou contemn all worldly and humane things, and
do consider the beginnings of thine own being.

2. Concerning the concupiscible or Virtues moderating the concupiscible part
lusting part.
Thou shall moderate thy soul, which is prone to lust, by these Christian
virtues.

3. Temperance, Abstinence, and Continence.
1. Thou ought to keep thy soul in Temperance.
Temperance: whereby thou may refrain and restrain thy lusts, thy
pleasures and delights of the body, from which, because they be natural, we are
the more hardly drawn.

Sundry reasons there are, which ought to stir thee up to moderate the
appetit^^ Motives.
of just.

First, because the voluptuousnes of the body, does hinder that God by his word
cannot enter into the soul of man, to draw and convert it to him.

Secondly, because bodily pleasures are vain, slipperie, momentanie: even
vanity of vanities: leaving behind them, remorse, sorrow, repentance, not
easily removed.

Thirdly, because even in the very moment of time, wherein carnal pleasures
does entangle us with her allurements, it does so bewitch our minds: with her
poison (shall I call it) or sweet charm, that it wholly subdueth us. Let not
sin Romans 6.
therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should thereunto obey
through the lusts thereof: But strive against the tyranny of pleasures, which
a^ it were certain cruel beasts do devour the soul, and strangle reason, if
in time they be not prevented. Seneca says: It is an easier matter to hinder
the first motions of the affections, than to rule their violence: set thou
therefore upon the root of lust as it were with a sword.

2. If thou love thy self, challenge to thy Abstinence and sobriety.
self abstinence and sobriety, and yield them to thy soul: that thou may
keep the nutritive power thereof in an holy temperance and moderate use of
meat and drink. Use sparingly, says Ecclesiasticus, Syrach. 31 Eccles. 10
those things that are set before thee, that thou be not odious for thy
greedines. And the Preacher says: Blessed are thou O land, whose princes eat
in due time for refreshing and not for riot: for he that is moderate in feeding
shall prolong his life. Item, Wine moderately drunk is a cheering to the soul
and heart: And strong drink soberly taken is health both to soul and body.
Let not therefore your hearts Luke 21.
be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life. etc.

Thou must therefore strive earnestly with thy self, against thy bodily
appetities, which as it is hard to overcome, so it is glorious to overcome: for
the devil uses the necessity of the flesh as a just patronage to an inward
temptation.

3. If thou wish well to thy flesh, see Continence and Chastity.
thou retain Continency and Chastity, and embrace them: that thou may
keep the generatiue power of thy soul in a holy temperance and lawful use
ordained of God. Call to mind often these warnings.

This know ye, says the Apostle, and Ephesians. 5.
understand, that no fornicator, or unclean person, or Adulterer, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of God and 1. Cor. 6.
Christ. And again: Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ,
the Temples of the holy Ghost, Vessels of honor? shall I take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid? Item. If any man
defile the Temple of God, him will GOD destroy. Item: This is the will of GOD,
even your Sanctification, 1. These. 4
that ye should abstain from fornication, and that every one of you should
know how to keep his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lusts
of concupiscence, as do the Heathen which know not God. And our Savior
Christ says; He that looks on a Mat. 5.
woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his
heart. And Ierom. It is a great gift of faith, and a great grace of virtue, to
keep the Temple of God pure, and to offer our selves a whole burnt offering to
the Lord, and to be holy both in body and spirit.

2, Thus must thou provide for graces of the mind: Take a care also for goods
Cares for goods of the body.
of the body, by a lawful endeavor to preserve the health of the body.

If therefore thou love thy self, have a care of thy bodily health, maintain
as Health.
much as in thee is thy life and welfare, that it may be whole and sound: It is
marvelous how much the former temperance through abstinence and continence do
help to preserve health.

If thy health be endamaged, apply medicine to recover health, and to avoid
Medicine Sirach. 38.
sickness: My son, says Ecelesiast. consider diligently what is good for
thy body and what hurts thy health, and abstain from it: Honor the
Physician with due reward, and use him for necessity sake. Again: Health and
a good habit of body is better than gold, and Cap. 30.
an able body than great riches. Read more, Chap. 38.

3. Thou must provide for external Care for goods of fortune.
goods, which they call the goods of fortune, (if thou love thy self) such as
are Honor, and Riches.

Let a godly contentment and sufficiency, moderate and govern both these
sorts: that thou rest content with thy portion and estate, both of honor and
wealth, which God has allotted thee, with a thankful mind to GOD, not
desiring or carefully seeking more.

For godliness is great gain, with a 1 Timothy 6. Syrach. 31.
mind content with his lot: And a moderate man is content with few things:
Be content therefore with present and. 42.
things. Learn with the Apostle to be content with thy estate: I have
learned, says he, In whatsoever estate I am, Philip. 4.
therewith to be content: I know how to be humble, and how to excel every
where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to hunger, both to
abound, and to suffer penury. Having 1. Tim. 6.
food and clothing, let us be therewith content, etc.

1. Concerning honor.
Let modesty be the moderator of thine Honor.
honor: whereby thou may desire, pursue, and maintain thine honor, so
farreforth as is convenient, lawful, and seemly: Let your modesty be known
to all men: Through modesty, Philip. 4. and. 2.
let every man esteem an other better then himself: The greater thou art, the
more humbly behave thy self, says the son of Syrach.

Endeavor in the mean while, by godliness, virtue, and honest arts, to get
thy self a good report among men: for honor is an honest estimation,
conceived of us by other men, for virtues sake. If it may be, procure an Romans
12.
honest report in the sight of all men. Item, Whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever Philip. 4.
honest, just, pure, lovely, or of good report, if there be any virtue, any
praise, think on these things: for a good name is better the riches, says the
wise man.

2. Concerning riches and wealth.
Let godly industry be thy guide in Riches. Getting.
getting thy riches or wealth: I say godly, that thou should pray. For

Omnia cu^precibus ferivda cura potest: Prayer. Labor.
Isay industry, that thou should labor.

Labor omnia vincit improbus. As prayer with care does much avail
So earnest labor does prevail.
Perform therefore the duties of thy calling diligently, expecting an heavenly
blessing by calling upon God, and labor earnestly to get thy living, that thou
may eat the labor of thine own hands.

In the use of thy riches govern them Using.
by a godly possession: that being justly gotten, thou may hold them
lawfully, and may be master of them as long as it shall please God: Be thou
alone owner Prou. 5.
of thine own fountain, and not strangers with thee.

Use them and enjoy them, frugally Using.
and thristily: by making thy expenses according to thy ability, tolerable,
honest, and necessary, answerable to thy degree. The just man says Solomon,
uses Prou. 10.
his riches for the benefit of his life. And the son of Syrach says, Take
Sirach. 14
benefit thy self of thy wealth or goods. And David; God shall fill thy mouth
Psalm. 103.
with good things.

Thus must thou exercise righteousness by loving thy self in a godly sort,
giving to thy self thy due: to thy soul that which is due to it: to thy body
that which is due to it: to thy external goods that which is due to them.

But thou art not borne to thy self, thou ought to love thy neighbor as
thy self: thou must be conversant with him. To him thou owe love, to use him
familiarly, nourishing society in a civil life. Here observe two things. Who
is our neighbor. Luke 10.


First, that every man is thy nighbour, whether thy friend, or thine enemy:
whether rich or poor: whether domestical or a stranger: whether known or
unknown: especially if he stand in need of us. But among Christians he
chiefly Gal. 6.
is our neighbor, who professes the same religion with us, and therefore
chiefly to be beloved.

Secondly, let this be ^^ common rule, whatsoever ye would th^^ men should do
to you, do ye the same to them again.

2. Let justice therefore both give and Justice toward thy neighbor. To every
man living.
retribute unto thy neighbor that which is due to him, whether A live, Ordead.

To every man living generally, and to some special persons especially.

To every man living, bear inwardly ^ Christian affection, and show outwardly
the effects thereof.

1. Thou ought to bear a Christian Benevolence in-affection.
affection toward thy neighbor: that is to say a good will, embracing every
man as he is a man, and Gods Image, with a welwilling affection of mind: being
willing and ready to help, or further thy neighbor in his business no less
than thy self in thine own: Endeavor as much ^^ thou caust to preserve
Christian Concord, and peace toward all men. Concord.
According to the Charge of the Apostle. If it be possible, as much as is in
you, Romans 12. Effects of benevolence.
line peaceably with all men.

2. Thou must also show the effects of thy wel-willing in deed and work, to
perform toward him in conversation. Humility, Civility: Liberality.

1. Concerning Humanity.
Deny not the right of Humanity unto Humanity.
any man, being thy self a man. But signify thy inward good will toward all
men, in outward gesture and words: for justice wills thee to be courteous and
gentle to thy neighbor. Showing thy self easy and tractable in speaking, in
hearing, in answering, in companying. Be ye gracious or amiable, says the
Apostle. Collos. 3. Ephesians. 4. Romans 15.
Be ye courteous one to another. Let every man please his neighbor in that
which is good.

2. Concerning Civility.
Be not unmindful of Civility in meetings, let thy behavior be quiet, thy
conversation Civility.
seemly: Let mistress Civility rule thy speech and gesture: for thou owe
unto thy neighbor, both convenient speech and gesture.

1. Let her so govern thy speech, that Silenc. and speech.
first thou may learn to keep silence, seasonably, and seemly. Next, that
thou may know when to speak wisely and rightly.

1. Some time a comely silence is seasonable, Circumstances. of silence and
speech
whereby we conceal our meaning, or what we know: Bethink thee therefore
aforehand, whereof, and to whom, in what words, in what place and time, with
what sound or voice any speech is to be had, or not had: what, to whom, where,
and when it is meet to keep silence. Weigh thy words, says the son of
Syrach, as in a balance, and Syrach. 8
make a door and bar for thy mouth, and beware thou slip not at any time,
and fall before him that lies in weight for thee: Pray with David: Set a watch
Psalm. 141
O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.

2. Sometime it becomes us to speak unto our neighbor, and to utter our mind,
but yet in due sort: See therefore Circumstances.
that thou consider the things whereof thou speak: weigh thy words. Observe
time and place, temper thy pronuntiation decently.

3. Let truth especially season thy talk Truth. in our speech. Ephesians. 4.
with her attendants: for thou ought to speak the truth to thy neighbor.

Be therefore most studious of truth, and utter things to thy neighbor as
they are in deed, according to the meaning of thy heart, and the instruction of
reason. Let every man speak the truth Zach. 8.
to his neighbor, says the Prophet. And David testifies, that He that
speaks the truth to his neighbor from his Psalm. 15.
heart, and has used no deceit in his tongue: he shall dwell in Gods
Tabernacle.

With truth, join first gentleness, next fidelity, both which thou owe
unto thy neighbor.

Deal plainly and freely with thy neighbor, what thou conceiuest aright
Truth.
utter; what tbou hear interpret favorably in thy word, and couenantes with
thy neighbor. Keep thy promise firmly. Keep touch with thy friend laith
Solomon: And be not carried about Prou. 27. Syrach.
with every wind, but be constant in thy words.

Let Christian gravity order thy gesture Iestures.
toward thy neighbor, that they may be framed toward every one, as is
convenient, with comely behavior: let A^ule.
this be thy rule: Show thy self in behavior and gesture, such as thou
would be counted: And be thou inwardly such indeed, as thou labourest to
appear outwardly.

3. Concerning liberality.
Thou owe unto thy neighbor good Beneficence, or liberality.
turns and benefits, therefore according to thy ability thou shall help thy
neighbor* both with thy purse and pains, thou shall communicate with him thy
goods, what thou may and ought: Let thy Prou. 5.
fountains says Saloman, flow forth, and let the water stream in the
streets, but be thou still owner of the springs. Do good unto al, but
specially to those Gall. 6. Mat. 5. Syrach. 5. and 14.
of the household of faith. But do good to the^ also ye hate you, etc. Item.
According to thy power help the poor, give cheerfully: for God loves a
cheerful giver.

To thy Beneficence add Christian Gratification.
gratification, whereby through thy courtesies and good turns, thou do
encourage thy neighbor in well doing, that he may go on to the end of that he
has well purposed: Light thou therefore an other man's candle by thine: teach
the way to the wandering: give faithful counsel: communicate willingly wholesome
doctrine: further thy neighbor in the attaining of some honest function, and
other things necessary. These things thou owe to every man.

To some special persons we owe also To special men.
some special duties. Both in hearty affection, and willing effects. As,

1 To our neighbor being in misery, To such as are in misery.
we owe, Compassion and Commiseration, or the bowels of mercy: sorrow
therefore with thy neighbor in his misery, out of an earnest affection of
love and desert, and study to relieve him. Put upon Coll. 3.
you as the elect of God, holy and beloved, the bowels of compassion. Item, Be
ye at concord; have a feeling of one 1 Pet. 1.
another miseries: love as brethren, etc. Item, Remember those that are in
bonds, Heb. 13.
as if you your selves were in bonds with them. Have compassion of those that
be in affliction, as if you your selves were afflicted in the body. Item,
Rejoice Romans 12.
with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep.

To certain states of men, we owe also Affection and Duties. Give therefore to
every one their due.

To our superiors, Reverence, and Obedience.
To the poor, Relief, or Alms.
To the Pilgrims or strangers Hospitality and Entertainment,

1. Concerning our superiors.
Give unto thy Superiors, first, reverence The superiors. Reverence. Romans 13.
or worship. That is, see thou give due honor and reverence to such men as
either in age, state, gifts, or otherwise, are thy betters. Give to every one,
says the Apostle. his due: Fear, to who^ fear: Honor, to whom honor
belongs. Rise Leuit. 19.
up before the gray head, and honor the person of the aged. Item. Fear God,
honor the King, For he that fears God, Syrach. 10
honors his Prince. says Eccles.

Secondly, we ought to yield obedience Obedience
to those that lawfully rule over us: so that we must not only hear the
lawful charge of our superior, but also study to perform it. Obedience,
says Samuel, is Sam. 15.
better than Sacrifice. And Greg. By Sacrifices were offered the flesh of other
creatures: by obedience our own will is mortified: in that our will is
subjected to the will of another for Gods cause. And Bernard, Christ rather
than he would loose his obedience, lost his life.

2 Concerning the poor. To the poor alms.

Give alms to the poor, that thou may relieve their want by thy supply.

No precept is more usual says Cyp. among the precepts of Christ, than that
we should insist or be deligent in giving of alms, and not be greedy of
earthly possessions* but to lay up treasure in heaven: S^ll your possessions
says he, and give it in alms, And again, Lay not up treasure for your selves
on earth, etc. If thou will be perfect, go, sell all that thou have, and give
to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven. To conclude, He calls
them Abraham's children, whom he sees to be diligent in helping and feeding
the poor.

3. Concerning Pilgrims or Strangers.
Thou ought to harbor Pylgrimes To pilgrims, Hospitality.
or Strangers: Such good gests shall thou receive, cherish, and refresh, as may
no way empeach thy good name, or breed thee any mischief. Exercise therefore
Romans 12. 1. Pet. 4. Heb. 13.
Hospitality. And be ye ready to harbor one another without grudging.
Item. Be ye not unwilling to harbor strangers: for by this means some
unawares have lodged Angels. And Saint Augustine says. Learn O thou Christian
to give entertainment, least peradventure, he against whom thou shuttest thy
door, and to whom thou deniest entertainment, be God himself. Or at least,
one of Gods Saints, of who^ it is said: whatsoever ye did to one of these
little ones which believe in me, ye did it to me. And contrariwise, whatsoever
ye did not, ye neglected to do to me. These things give to thy neighbor
while he is yet alive.

And remember that thou art a debtor Duties to the dead.
to the dead: Perform to them therefore the last duties of piety: to wit,
mourning and burial: for as these who are sick, and at the point of death,
are to be visited and comforted: so those that be dead must have their right
(which are called just) for we ought both to mourn for them, and to bury
them. Whereupon the son of Syracb says: If any man dye, bewail and lament
him, as if Syrach. ^8*
thou had suffered some great loss, and then wind his body, according to
the custom, and see that he may be honestly buried.

These things, shall thou perform as a man, but much rather as a Christian
man, both to the living and dead.

Now moreover, thou must have a regard what thy neighbor has deserved
Retribution, or recompense.
of thee, and what good turns thou have received, that thou may recompense
and requit them: For justice requires, that thou retribute and repay the good
turns thou receiuedst, with good turns, as being a due debt.

Retribute therefore or return to thy friend, friendship: and at the least
thankefulnes, for his well deserving of thee.

1. Concerning friendship.
Thou do return friendship, if in good will and curtesse thou do render
Friendship.
mutual love to thy friend: Recompense therefore hearty good will, with hearty
good will, enterchange courtesies, such as be honest and possible.

But thou shall be careful to set thy affection on such as thou perceiuest to
be With who^
bent earnestly to true godliness, and a serious study of virtue, that ye
may grow up together in godliness, as it were one heart. Therefore Eccles.
says; Join thy self to good men, and rejoice with them. Item; A sure friend
is Syrach. 9. and 6.
a strong hold, he that has such a one possesses a great treasure. And
Cassian says; That is faithful friendship, and a conjunction indissoluble,
(or a joint that cannot be dissolved) which is founded upon equality of
virtues: for the Lord makes men that are of like manners or conditions, to
dwell together in one house. And therefore in those only love can continue
without breach, in whom there is one purpose and will, who will, and nil the same
thing, or one thing.

2. Concerning gratitude or thankfulness.
Thou do return thankfulness Gratitude
to thy neighbor who has deserved well of thee, when thou do render unto
him, a thankeful remembrance of a benefit received, with a willing declaration
of thy good will, both in word and deed.

Carry therefore toward thy benefactors, a mind or desire to recompense
benefits rrceiued, or at the least a heart most ready to wish well: But if
thou can requit good turns received, with gifts and courtesies. Chrisostom
says; The best guardian of benefits is the memory of benefits, and a
continual confession of thanks. And Bernard, Nothing can be returned more
acceptable by the receiver to the giver, than if he show himself thankful
for that he secretly received, for he does reproach to the spirit of grace, who
does not take a good turn, from him that gives it, with a grateful mind.

Thus having abandoned unrighteousness, labor to attain righteousness.

1. Begin I say, to enter the way of salvation; by Converting from evil to
good. 2. Faint not for any temptations which are in the way. 3. But go forward
by denying thy self. 4. And following Christ in the way of holy virtues: by 1.
A firm purpose to attain to virtue: by 2. A fortitude ouercomming all
impediments: by 3. A sweet contentment in virtues possession: by 4. A daily
examination of our profiting in the way of virtue.
The Epilogue or Conclusion, containing.
An encouragement, or spur to virtue: That thou may o man be enflamed, in
the study of Piety, and Charity. First by reasons taken from Christianity.
Consider at large these short sayings.


LEt the most holy and most glorious God, allure thee by the perfection of his
virtues, whose glory thou ought earnestly to further.

2. Let the eternal knowledge of God whereby thou art foreknowne, provoke thee
to holiness.

3. Let the undeserved and free love of God, wherewith thou art loved, the
mercy and grace of God wherewith he preuenteth thee, draw thee.

4. Let thy holy predestination to life, first holy or blameless, next
eternal, procure thee.

5. Remember that thou art created by thy Creator to walk in holiness and
righteousness.

6. Let the Image of God thy father and Creator, whom thou ought to
resemble, and not to be a degenerate or unkindly son, inuit thee.

7. Let the wonderful benefit of Gods preservation and government: whereby
thou art maruellously kept, even unto this hour, exhort thee.

8. Let the unspeakable love of God the father, who gave his only son to
thee, and to death for thee, incline thee to godliness.

9. Let the inestimable or invaluable benefit of thy Redemption, bring thee to
an holy obedience: for thou wast redeemed, that thou should be thankful.

10. Let the pattern of perfection and charity, Jesus Christ, whose steps
thou must follow, inflame thy heart with the love of charity.

11. Let the dignity of thy calling lead thee to holiness of life: for thou art
called not to uncleanness, but unto holiness.

12. Call to mind how thou wast reconciled to God, who was offended with thy
sins, by Christ: that thy sins were forgiven thee, that thou might live to
God, and righteousness.

13. Let the gifts of the holy Ghost, which are given thee, to sanctify thee:
who is offended with thy sins, induce thee to the study of godliness.

14. Let the commandment of the most best, and most greatest God, who wills
thy sanctification, compel thee to the practice of Christian charity.

15. Let the regard of thy duty due to God, call thee to an obedience of
holiness, that thou may testify thy gratitude toward him: for thou art
Gods debtor.

16. Let thy renouation begun, whereby thou art become a new man, stir thee up
daily: for he that is borne of God sins not: And a good tree brings forth
good fruits.

17. Let thy faith if it be lively, bring forth, stir up, sharpen, and
maintain the study of virtue: For without works faith is dead: show
therefore thy faith by thy works.

18. Let the light and knowledge of the will of God and his mysteries, kindle
in thy mind holiness. Thou know Gods will, do it.

19. Thou owe to thy God a sacrifice of worship, to be seasoned by the f^^^
of faith: to be enflamed by the fire of the holy Ghost: to be sanctified by
the merit of Christ.

20. Thou art the Temple of the holy spirit wherewith thou art anointed and
endued: keep this Temple holy, set forth the praise of God, with thought, word
and mind, mouth, and life.

21. Let the comforts of the holy Ghost, whereby thou art refreshed, running in
the race of virtue, and comforted in thy prayers, be as spurs unto thee in
the course of godliness.

22. Let that sweet franquillitie of a good conscience, and the inward joy of
heart, which thou enioyest by virtue, minister fire unto thy devotion.

23. Let the manifold commodities which accompany Piety, prick thee forward:
for Piety has the promises of this life, and of the life to come.

24. Let the hope of fruit that comes thereby move thee: for thereby thou
shall relieve thy neighbor: thou shall glorify God: thou shall stop the mouth
of thy adversaries.

25. Let the uncertainty of thy life, and death every where, and at all times
lying in weight for thee, warn thee: Live well, that thou may dye well.

26. Let that glorious Tribunal of Christ, and the fearful judgment of the
last day, before whom thou shall be presented, and at which time thou must give
an account, terrify thee.

27. Let the terror of ii. fernall torments wherewith all the wicked shall be
tortured, compel thee to the obedience of faith.

28. Let the reward of life and glory eternal, which with great joy thou
shall enjoy, in Gods own presence, in the midst of all celestial happiness,
illure thee.

29. Be earnest to follow righteousness, for by attaining thereto, thou shall
obtain the commendations of a wise man: who is as the apple of Gods eye.

30. If thou be just thou shall be happy, even as that thee, which being
planted by rivers of water, fructifieth in due season, and remains
vnwithered: As a flourishing Palm tree, or as a Cedar planted in the house of
the Lord.

The praises and privileges of the just.
First, thou shall be noble in deed: being the son of God, borne of God.

2. Thou shall be the very Image and lively similitude of the living God.

3. Thou shall be the beautiful and beloved spouse of Christ: Thou shall be
called the joy and delight of ye most highest.

4. Thou shall be the Tabernacle and living Temple of the living God, and a
certain Chapel for the holy Ghost.

5. Thou shall spring forth as a bright light, and increase to perfect day.

6. Thou shall mount to heaven, despising and treating underfoot, all earthly
and transitory things.

7. Being assured of Gods help, thou shall always hope for salvation without
doubting.

8. Thou shall bear injuries patiently, and pardon wrongs willingly.

9. Thou shall enjoy true peace and tranquillity of mind: thou shall be filled
with true godliness and pleasures.

10. Thou shall be worthy of all manner of sound honor: thou shall be glorious
in worship and praise.

11. Thou shall be adorned with Christ and piety, with most beautiful
ornaments.

12. Thou shall be very rich: for thou shall want nothing at any time. And for
thy sake the Lord will bless the City and other.

13. No creature shall hurt thee, if thou be just: but every creature shall
serve for thy good. For all things were made for thy behoof, and are preserved.

14. Thou shall have the kingdom of God within thee, and shall be a King.

15. All things shall prosper happily with thee: Even adversity shall make
thy state most happy.

16. Thou shall have God to be thy protector, thy guardian, and revenger.

17. God will have a special care of thee: whom thou shall have to be thy
teacher and guide.

18. Thou shall only serve God and Christ, being a perfect freeman.

19. Thou shall have God thy friend, and whatsoever thou ask, thou shall
obtain. And whatsoever thou give him, shall be most acceptable to him.

20. Thou shall be a fellow citizen with the Saints, being admitted to the
heavenly City: And being an heir of the eternal kingdom, as the son of
God.

21. Being a soldier of Jesus Christ in the Christian warfare, thou shall
^^ght manfully and valiantly.

22. Thou shall be in God and Christ, and God and Christ shall be in thee.

23. Thou shall live a long and blessed life in Christ the son of God. And
all manner of blessedness shall be in thee.

24. Death shall not be fearful unto thee, and thou shall expect it joyfully:
for dying, thou shall not dye, but live for ever.

25. Thou shall obtain assured victory against all thine enemies.

26. When thou shall enter into heaven, thou shall be crowned with heavenly
glory and honor.

27. In the general judgment, thou shall be adorned with praises by Christ
the Judge.

28. Thou shall sit with Christ to Judge the world, and shall triumph
gloriously with all the blessed.

Secondly, be thou stirred up O man, by exhortations and examples of Heathen
men: Hear and blush.
I use says Seneca, this authority against my self, and every day I arraigne
my self: when the candle is taken away, and my wife is silent (who now knows
my manner) I begin to examine with my self the whole day past, I view over
all my deeds and words, I conceal nothing from my self, I pass over
nothing: for why should I fear any my errors? when I may say, See thou do it
no more, I forgive thee for this time. Again he says: What is better than
this custom, to examine the whole day? How sweet is that sleep, that
follows this surviewe of our selves? how quiet, how sound and free, when the
soul being either commended or admonished, becomes an especial and privy
censor of it self, judging of her own meaning? Therefore, says the same
Seneca, enquire into thy self: first perform the part of an Accuser: next of
a Judge: lastly, of an Intreator: Sometime also offend or displease thy self:
For he does willingly err, who knows not that he does err, he does
ouerloue himself, who is content that other should err, that his own error
may be hidden.

1. Concerning Piety toward God.
The same Seneca saitb.
1. A good man ought to be very devoutly given toward God: And to worship God
for his excellent majesty and singular nature.

2. The first service of the Gods is, to He speaks in the plural number, as
a Heathen man.
believe in them, or to believe that there are Gods. Next, to give unto them,
their honor and goodness: To know that it is they that govern, and rule all
things by their power, that take the charge of mankind.

3. He worshippeth God, that knows God, neither shall any man profit
sufficiently, except he conceive aright in his mind, what manner of one God is:
having all things, bestowing all things, giving benefits freely. And Epictetus.

If we be well advised, what else should we do, either public or private,
but celebrate, and praise, and give thanks to God: should we not both while
we are digging, and while we are ploughing, sing this hymn unto God? Great is
God, who gave us these instruments wherewith we till the earth: Great is God,
who gave us our hands: who gave us power to swallowe, who gave us our stomach,
who makes us to grow secretly: to breath sleeping: these things are to be
sung in every thing, and a divine hymn to be sung, because he has given us
understanding of things, and power and reason to use them. And soon after he
proclaims. If I were a Nightingall, I would do the kind of a Nightingall:
If a Swanne, of a Swanne: Now that I am a reasonable creature, I must praise
God: This is my duty, this I do, neither will I leave my station, as long as
I may, and I exhort you to use the same song. And Seneca.

The Godhead is a great thing, I wot not what, and greater than I can conceive:
which while we live, we endeavor to know, and to approve our selves unto him.

Thus speak these Heathen men: Shall we be astonished at these things? or shall
we not rather be ashamed? Again, Seneca.

The end i^ to follow God: But to follow God, is to submit our own minds to
the mind that gouernes all things: as good Citizens submit themselves to the
Laws of the City. And again the same Seneca. I do ever will rather what God
will, than what I my self, I will be joined and cleave to him, as his servant
and attendant: with him I desire, with him I cease to desire, and simply and in
one word: That that God wills, I will.

O Words bred! proceeded from heaven. O Epictetus, says Lipsius, that I were
so affected with thee. Again the same,

I dare lift up mine eyes to God and say, Use me hereafter where thou will, and
how thou will: I have good cause to consent with thee: I am of one mind with
thee, I refuse nothing that seems good to thee: Lead me whither thou will,
cloth me with what garment thou will. Will thou have me bear office in a
commonwealth? will thou have me live a private life? will thou have me to bide
by it, or to flee? to be poor, or rich? I do not only agree to be and do
what thou will have me, but in all these things I will defend and maintain
thee against other. Again the same.

We must so conform our selves that we may obey God, and be content with all
things that happen, and willingly follow. As which are ^^don, and proceed from
the best mind, even God: This is an high courage, that yeeldes it self to God.
Again; A wise man, if any thing happen, knows it is the Law of nature: he
will call to mind that old rule, Follow God. Again: We are borne in a
kingdom, to obey God is liberty.

Seneca out of Epictetus.
Duc mo parens,
celsique dominator poli.
Quocunque libuit,
Nulla parendi est mora,
Adsum impiger, fac nollo,
comitabor gemens,
Malusque* patiar,
quod pati licuit bono,
Sic vivam^^,
sic loquamur.
Guide me O father,
Lord of the highest sky:
Whether it shall please thee,
to thee will I hye.
Be it thou deny me,
I will follow sadly.
And will suffer evil,
as a good man gladly:
Let us so live,
and so speak.
We enter unto the Temple, says he, soberly: coming to the sacrifices, we
cast down our countenance humbly: we take our gowns with us, and frame our
selves to all signs of modesty.

2. Concerning knowledge of our selves.
The same Seneca.
1. The beginning of salvation, is the knowledge of our sin: And it skilleth
much more what thou seem to thy self, than what thou seem to other.

2. Surview every corner of thy mind, and though thou know no evil by thy
self, yet sometime, (as the said Seneca often says) it behooves thee to
forget what thou art, and it is a good thing and profitable for some men to be
ignorant or himself: that is, not to know his abilities: that he may rather in
fear, lead a moderate life, than in pride an insolent and immoderate.
Otherwise as Socrates said: The knowledge of our selves is the cause of much
good, and the ignorance of our selves, is the cause of much evil.

3. Concerning wisdom.
The same Seneca.
1. The exercise of wholesome studies is commendable, though it bring no present
fruit.

2. Study not to know more than other, but to know better: ye is, with more
fruit: To desire to know more than is sufficient, is a kind of intemperance.

3. A wise man must not go always in one pace, but in one way.

4. A wise man is skillful to overcome evils, but a fool is weary of
himself.

4. Concerning Prudence.
1. Prudence is a present notion or understanding, forecasting things to come,
or that may happen.

2. If thou embrace Prudence, thou shall be ever the same, and as variety of
time and causes do require, so thou shall apply thy self: not changing thy
self at all, but rather fitting thy self to every occasion: As the hand which
is the same, both when it is stretched to a spanne, and when it is pressed to a
fifth.

3. If thou desire to be prudent, intend thy foresight to things to come, and
propose to thy mind whatsoever may fall out: Let nothing be sudden to thee,
but foresee all aforehand, for he that is provident never says, I did never
think this would have been so, because he stands not in doubt, but
expects, he does not suspect, but auoideth.

4. If thy mind be prudent, dispose thy actions according to three times: Order
things present: foresee things to come: Remember things past. For he that never
thinks of things past loses his life: he that never forethinketh of
things to come, falls unawares into all dangers. The heathen esteemed their
Philosophy. Christians must esteem the word of God.


5. Concerning true liberty.
1. To obey God, says Seneca, is true liberty, and that true liberty may
happen to thee, thou must serve Philosophy: That only study is called
liberal, because it brings liberty.

2. It is true liberty, not to fear men, nor fortune* nor to will dishonest
things, nor excess, but to have a great power over our selves.

3. Liberality does bring our mind to that freedom, wherein it was created of
God our father and Author, so that it fears nothing, nor sorroweth for any
thing, nor serves a baser. For a good man is always free, though he be a
slave: an evil man is a slave, though he be a King: a slave I say to so many
Lords, as he is to vices.

I am free, says Epictetus, because I am purposed and have conformed my mind
to Gods will: He would have me shaken with an ague, I am content: he would
have me to enterprise a matter, I will: he would have me to obtain a thing, I
will endeavor: he would have me not to obtain, I cease: he would have me dye,
I yield. Who can now therefore hinder me, or force me besides my will: no
more than God himself.

6. Concerning Fortitude and Magnanimity.
Seneca says;
1. If thou will put off all carefulnes whatsoever thou fear least it
happen, forecast that it will happen, and whatsoever evil it be, measure it
with thy self, and abridge thy fear. He is not a valiant man, whose heart
grows not in courage, in the midst of difficulties.

2. It thou be of great courage, thou will never think that any man can do
thee a reproach: Thou will say of thine enemy, It hurts not me, that he had a
purpose to hurt me. And when thou have him in thy power, thou shall think it a
sufficient revenge, that thou could have reue^ged, and have not: for assure
thy self it is a great and honest kind of revenge, to pardon.

3. It is the measure of Magnanimity, neither to be faint hearted, nor
brainlesse bold. Thou shall therefore be Magnanimous, if thou neither thrust
thy self into dangers rashly, neither shun them dastardly: And nothing does
daunt the courage so much, as the conscience of a wicked life. It is the
property of a man of good courage, to contemn great things, and not to
encomber himself with too many things, but to hold a mean.

4. There is nothing great in humane things, but a mind despising great
things. A Magnanimous man stands upright, equally poised on both sides:
Nothing does cast him down, nothing that is to be borne does displease him. He
complaine^h not of any thing fallen on himself, that may fall to another man,
he knows his strength, he ouercomes fortune by virtue.

7. Concerning Patience.
Seneca.
1 We mortal men are borne to this lot, or bound to this condition, to bear
mortality.

2. I would be loath to endure torments, but if I must suffer them, I wish
that I may behave my self in them honestly, stoutly, and courageously.

3. He that can beware fortune, can bear it: Neither skilleth it what thou
bear, but how thou bear: If he that do thee wrong be weaker then thou,
spare him: if he be mightier than thou; spare thy self.

4. Thou art not yet happy, if the vulgar sort do not deride thee: If thou will be happy, make thine account, both to contemn, and to be contemned: It
is hard to suffer, but sweet to remember.

8. Concerning Constancy:
Seneca.
1. Go forward, and above all things take heed that thou be constant. As
often as thou will try whether thou have done any thing or not, mark whether
thou will the same thing to day, that thou did will yesterday: The change of
the will, shows that the mind does sometime swim, and sometime floate, as
the wind blows.

2. Account it a great matter, to be still one man, No man is still the same
man, but a wise man. all other are of many shapes. This require or exact of thy
self, that what manner of man thou purposest to show thy self, such one thou
keep thy self to the end.

3. There is nothing that constant labor, and diligent earnest care, will not
overcome. Virtue and Felicity are placed on high, but godly perseverance will
reach and pearce to them.

4. The greatest token of an evil mind, is wavering, and a tossing between a
show of virtue, and a love of vice.

9. Concerning meekness, moderating anger and revenge.
Seneca.
1. The chief remedy against anger, is delay: will thou not be angry, be not
curious: The multitude of offenders, appeaseth the anger of a wise man.

2. The less thou suppressest anger, the more shall thou be suppressed by it:
for then we begin to be angry with other, when we leave being angry with our
selves: And the end of anger, is the beginning of repentance.

3. Anger dies quickly in a good man, as a short passion, and even the memory
of anger.

4. No free or honest man, can bear reproach. A grievous crime, even when it
is lightly reported, does harm. O how miserable a thing is it to be injured by
him, of whom I cannot be believed:

5. Forgetfulness is a remedy against wrongs, in an afflicted man, laughter
is an injury: that is; It is an injury to scorn a man that is in misery: He
that does wrong to one, threatens many.

6. It is the part of an high courage to despise injuries, and it is a
reproachful kind of revenge, not to seem worthy, of who^ to seek revenge: for
some have settled the wrong more deeply, while they have gone about to revenge
them. He is noble and valiant, who like the great wild beasts despises the
barkings of curres.

10. Concerning Humility.
Seneca.
Let no man be too confident in prosperity, let no man faint in adversity;
For the course of things is changeable.

And the other Seneca, the Tragedy Writer.

Quoquo fortuna altius.

1.
Euexit atque leuavit humanas opes:
Hoc se magis supprimere foelicem decet.
Item.

2.
Ima premutat brevis hora summis
Quem dies vidit veniens superbum:
Hunc dies vidit fugieus iacentem.
Item.

3.
Nemo confidat nimium secundis:
Nemo desperet meliora lapsus:
Miscet hac illis, prohibet que Clotho
Stare fortuna^, rotat omne fatum.
Nemo tam Divos habuit fa^e^tes,
Chrastinum vt possit sibi polliceri.
Res deus nostras celeri citatas.
Turbine versat.
Item.

4.
Dominari tumidus* spiritus altes gere:
Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo deus.
1.
How much the higher fortune has,
Lift up a man to wealth and power.
So much the more he ought to stoop,
Least fortune chance on him to lowre.
Item.

2.
One hour turns all things vpside down,
Changing the lowest with the highest:
Whom one day saw coming proudly,
The same day saw flying cast down.
Item.

3.
Trust not too much prosperity,
Hope better in adversity:
For Clotho mixeth this with that,
Nor suffers fortune keep one state,
None is so high in Gods favor
That has to morrow in his power,
For men's afflictions, as with whirle wind,
Are still turmoild, and stay none find.
Item.

4
Go on to rule in tyranny:
Swell still with proud and lofty state:
Yet God who hates pride, at back
Pursues the proud with deadly hate.
11. Concerning Temperance, Abstinence, and Sobriety.
Seneca.
1. We may not set our chief felicity in the flesh.

2. An Ox is fed within the compass of a few aker^ of ground: One wood or
forest is sufficient for many Elephants. But man is fed by the land, and the
sea, How then? Has nature given us an insatiable belly, when as she has given
us so small a body, that we should exceed the greediness of most vast and
hungry beasts? Surely no: for how small a thing is it that is given to nature,
with how little is she sent away? The hunger of our belly costs us not much, but
our ambition and riotousnesse: Let us therefore reckon men that serve their
belly, not among men, but among beasts. And some not among beasts verily, but
among the dead.

3. Nothing shall so much profit thee to temperance and a moderation of all
things, as the often remembrance of the shortness of thy life, and
uncertainty thereof: whatsoever thou do, remember death.

4. It is a shameful thing not to know the measure of thine own stomach, or
not to exceed it. The belly is content with a little, if thou give it not what
thou can, but what thou ought. Seneca says of himself.

I use such a pallet, being an old man, wherein no print of my body can be
seen: I go down into a cold bath, afterward I eat dry bread, I dine without
a table, after which I need not wash my hands.

12. Concerning Chastity, and Continence.
Seneca.
1. We must also war, and surely, with a kind of war, whereto no truce is
ever given: Pleasures or lusts, must above all be subdued, which as ye see
have ravished fierce natures, or valiant minds: If I give place, or yield to
voluptuousness, I must give place, or yield to sorrow: I must also give
place, or yield to labor: I must give place, or yield to poverty.

2. The lover knows what he desires, what he savors he sees not: or how ill
advised he is, he sees not: The lover what he supposes, dreams waking: Love
cannot be wreasted away, but it may slip away. Redeem the anger of thy lover
with tears: It is a commodity for ^ young man to be beloved, but in an old
man it is a crime: Love is an idle cause of care.

3. Bashfulnesse is to be nourished, which as long as it lasts in the mind,
there is some place for good hope.

13. Concernig Contentment.
Seneca.
1. Let all thy cogitations bend hither, this care, this wish, remitting all
other wishes to God: that thou be content with thy self, (that is, with thiue
own estate) and with the goods that spring of thy self, (that is, with thine
own ability) what felicity can approach nigher to God?

2. Rest content with thine own, to be so much the happier, as thou art freer,
from much business: for as the body is more ready in health, so is the mind
being free from cares: and as weakness wringles the body, so cares dry up
the mind: And it is an evident sign of weakness, to want many things.

14. Concerning Modesty, which is content with mean things.
Seneca.
1. It is the token of a great mind to contemn great things, and rather to be
content with a mean, than to covet too much,

2. It never did satisfy him that got it, that seemed too much to him that
wished it: And the other Seneca.

3. Whatsoever exceeds measure, hangs in a tickle or uncertain state.

4. He that would have his virtues published or proclaimed, labors not for
virtues sake, but for glories sake.

5. Will the strong man glory in his The application is left coniecturall.
strength, when sickness has weakened his body? Does the rich man glory in his
riches, when thieves or tyrants have spoiled his hope? Shall a man boast of
nobility, when he is reproachfully used, and many times brought in bondage to
base persons.

15. Concerning frugalitie, and sparing.
Seneca.
1. If thou live according to nature, thou shall never be poor: if according
to opinion, thou shall never be rich. Nature requires but little: Opinion has
no measure.

2. Hunger costs but little, surfeting is chargeable: A small care will provide
necessaries, delights and dainties ask great labor.

3. Buy not all that thou lackest, but that which is needful and necessary:
It is easily provided y^ nature desires, there is much toil about superfluous
things.

16. Concerning the care of health.
1. Hold this sound and wholesome manner of life, that thou so far nourish and
cherish thy body, as is convenient for thy health: It must be handled somewhat
the more hardly, least it be the destruction of the soul. Let meat satisfy
hunger: let drink quench thirst: let garments hide nakedness, put away cold,
serve for comeliness.

2. I confess that we have a certain inbred love to our selves, to provide
for them: I do not deny but that we may nourish them, I deny that we must
serve them.

3. We must so carry our selves, not as though we were to live only to the
body, but as though we could not live without the body.

4. He esteems little of honesty, who loves his body too well: Let us take
diligent charge of it, but yet so farforth as reason requires.

5. We are greater, and borne to greater things, than to be bondmen to our
bodies: The contempt of his body, is a man's own liberty.

17. Concerning liberty of manners.
Seneca.
1. As he that is tossed hither and thither with storms, and yet goes not
forward to his Port, has not sailed much, but has been much turmoiled: So he
that has lived long, and has not profited in good manners, has not lived
long, but has bin a long in the world as it were tossed too and fro.

2. Every man may frame his own manners, but service or offices, fall by
chance.

3. Nothing does better endue honest minds, nor sooner reclaim a mind
enclinable to evil, than the conversation of good m^n.

18. Concerning Justice.
Seneca.
1. Whosoever desires to attain, or practice Justice: first fear and love
God, that thou may be loved of him: Now thou shall love God, it thou imitate
him herein, that thou do good to all, and hurt no body. So all men shall count
thee, and call thee a just man, they will follow thee, reverence thee, and
love thee. For being just, thou will not only, not do harm thy self: but
also thou will hinder other from doing harm.

2. Look to receive from other, that thou do to other: Thou shall perform
piety to thy parents: love to thy kindred: thou shall have peace with all men:
thou shall have war with vices: thou shall keep fidelity with thy friends,
and equity toward all men.

19. Concerning liberality and bounty.
Seneca.
1. It is the property of a wise man; both to owe where he ought, and to pay
where he ought: to owe always thanks, to repay good turns as he may.

2. This is the law of friendship between two: The one must by and by forget
what he gives, or what good turn he has done, the other always remember what
he receives, and how much he is indebted: He that does a good turn, must be
silent, he that receives it, must declare it.

3. Benefits must be given silently, that they may only be known to them who^
they profit. Sometime also even he that is relieved must be deceived, by having
a benefit, not knowing from whence he receives it.

4. Although thou ought to give to every one that asks: yet in him to whom
we give, we may respect his manners, his good affection toward us, his near
dwelling, his society with us, and the good turns and curtestes aforetime
done for our behoof.

5. A benefit that sticks long in the giuers fingers, and which he seems loath
to depart with, and so gives, as though it were wreasted from him, is not
acceptable: But those good turns which are ready, east, occurrent: where
there is no delay but in the bashfulnesse of the receiver, are most acceptable.

6. The often vpbraiding of benefits deiecteth the heart, and casts down the
courage. Let us give our benefits freely, and not let them to usury. He is
worthy to be deceived, who thought of receiving again when he gave.

7. There is no benefit so great, that a malicious mind may not embace: there
is none so small, that a good Interpreter will not advance.

20. Concerning Truth: Sincerity, and Fidelity.
Seneca.
1. Truth is like her self in every part: A lie is slender and thin: if ye
look into it diligently, ye shall see through it.

2. A man that has done a shrewde turn, may fortune be hid: but though he be
hid, his conscience will not be flattered.

3. Counterfeit things do soon return to their nature, but such as are
grounded on truth, and rise from a sound foundation, proceed to greater, and
better.

4. I had rather fail of success, than fail in my promise: He that has
faith in his dealing, will deal uprightly even with his enemy: He that leeseth
his credit; leeseth the uttermost that he can: when single hearted faith is once
gone, she seldom returns from whence she went: No man ever lost fidelity,
but he that never had it.

5. Both points are faulty: both to believe every body, and to believe no
body: That thou will have another man not to disclose, that do not thou
disclose first.

6. An evil man speaking fair, count as a snare laid for thee. For he has
his poison, which is his fair speech.

7. As a modest gate or pace is fit for a wise man: so should his speech be
grave, and not bold or rash: Be therefore slow in speech.

8. And let this be our chief rule, what we think, to speak: what we speak,
to think: That the man and his speech may agree.

21. Concerning friendship.
1. Bethink thee whom thou will receive to thy friendship, but when thou have
taken aliking, embrace him with thy whole heart, talk with him as boldly as
with thy self. Reveal all thy secrets to him, if thou think him faithful,
thou shall make him faithful.

2. The remembrance of my friends deceased, is sweet unto me: for I held them
as if I should loose them: I have lost them, as if I had them.

3. It is to no purpose to seek a friend only, in the markets or concourse of
people, if thou look diligently, thou shall find him at home: for he is
deceived that seeks a friend in the common walks and assemblies, or that
makes trial of him at a feast: For thou shall find thy friend within thy
breast, and not on the Exchange.

4. It is troublesome to have all men as friends, it is enough that they be not
our enemies.

5. Dissimilitude in manners: distance in manner of life, and contrariety in
nature, dissolueth friendship: Approved friendships, desire earnestly, retain
constantly, keep perpetually: Enmities which happen, use honestly, believe
slowly, lay down speedily.

6. With our friends we ought to have short reckonings, and long friendships.

7. First setle thy self to be good, and then seek another like to thy self.

8. Admonish thy friend secretly, but praise him openly: If thou bear with thy
friends faults, thou make them thine own: So trust thy friend, that thou
leave no place for an enemy.

9. It is a march an^ising, not a friendship, that respects commodity. For
he detracteth or discrediteth friendship, who provides for good haps.

22. Concernng Gratitude, or Thankfulness.
1. This surely is agreeable to Justice, so be thankful for every benefit
received.

2. Some give thanks by stelth, in a corner, or in the ear: they are afraid
to do it openly, that they may be said to have a benefit rather by their own
virtue, than by others help.

3. Let us therefore think nothing more honest than a thankful mind: And he
that accepts a good turn thankfully, has paid the first pention.

4. He that willingly owes thanks, does recompense a good turn: And he that
means to be thankful, forthwith when he receives, does acknowledge it.

5. To recompense a good turn, and to be thankful, requires time, and
ability, and a prosperous fortune. Nothing is so necessary, or with more care
to be learned, than to requite a benefit, and to give thanks.

23. General precepts: note them well.
1. It is the triumph of Innocence not to sin: And where we may do most harm
to forbear.

2. Thou sinnest twice when thou appliest thy self to obey sin. The eyes
offend not, if the mind command not the eyes.

3. Vices do creep, and hurt by touching, and the sinful lives of offenders
do pass to every one that is next.

4. No possession, no weight of gold or silver is more to be esteemed than
virtue.

5. Virtue is thankful to every one both dead and living: if we follow it in
good sooth.

6. All benefits would be bestowed in light, or openly: but there is no stage
or theater greater to virtue, than a good conscience.

7. We must so live, as if we lived in the sight of all the world: we must so
think, as if every man might see into our inward breast, (or as if every man
might see our heart).

8. Regard thy conscience, more than same, for same may be deceived many times:
but by thy conscience never.

9. Fear no man more, that is weeting of thy sin, tha^ thy self, for thou
may escape another, but thy self never. For sin is a punishment to it
self.

10. Learn this one thing, to despise this life: No man ever ruled it well,
but he that despised it: Think still of what manner thy life is, and not how
long: for not to live long, but to live well, is a good thing.

11. It is a good thing to finish our life before death, and then to expect the
time that remains in security.

12. None of us knows, how near the Lord is: Let us therefore frame our
minds, as if we were come to the last home. No man receives death
cheerfully, but he that has prepared himself thereto long before.

13. Whatsoever thou do, look to death. Every day must be ordered, as it
were the last.

These are out of a Heathen man; Hear them, ponder them, blush, and follow
them.

Except thou walk and continue in this way: Thou shall be odious to God, The
conclusion.
who hates the workers of iniquity: Thou shall be offensive to good men, and
even to the unbelievers: because for thy sake the name of God is evil spoken
of among the Gentiles: Thou shall be cursed every where, and procure grievous
punishments upon thy self: Thou shall be holden captive as a slave in Satan's
snares. To conclude, thou shall have no part in Gods kingdom, but shall hear
that fearful sentence of the most high Judge: Go thou cursed one into
everlasting fire. O homo.

Mors tua, Mors Christi, Fraus Mundi, Gloria Coeli.
Et dolor Inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.
Remember man thy dying day, General. restraints of sin.

And Christ, who for thee did:
Remember Satan's subtilties,
And how this world does slide.
Remember joys celestial,
And pains that are in hell:
Let not thy flesh seduce thy soul,
Remember these things well.
FINIS.
Certain short Prayers, framed to the Argument of the parts and members of
this book, for the use of such as desire to profit by calling for the
assistance of Gods grace, in whatsoever they shall be instructed by this book,
to be needful for them.
1. A Prayer to prepare us to enter the way of Christian Piety and Charity,
fitting to the argument of the Prologue.
O Almighty God and most merciful father, who have engrafted in all men a
desire to know and live: And To know
from whom all true knowledge and life proceeds: Grant me true knowledge,
whereby I may know thee, and my self aright: Least by knowing much, and yet
not knowing thee, and my self aright: It may be said of me, (as of many
other) that I have much knowledge and little conscience. And am puffed up with
knowledge, but void of Charity.

And seeing this life is not to be desired To live.
for it self, but for an other, whereunto we must enter by the gate of death.
Give me grace that I may so live here, that I may always live with Christ:
that I may learn both to die and live aright: That I may study not to live
long, but to live well: That I be not suddenly taken out of this life, before I
have begun to live well.

Moreover, O Lord: for as much as thou have set a mark to such as will live A
mark.
godly, to wit: Everlasting life, and have showed the way to this mark, Even
by The way.
Jesus Christ, who is the way: the truth: and the life.

Grant me O Lord, the knowledge of The knowledge of the way.
this way: by the right understanding of thy holy word, and by the instruction
and illumination of thy holy spirit: That at the length I may feel thy grace
working in my heart: That by beginning in thee, and not falling from thee, but
profiting, and going forward in godliness, I may walk in faith and charity,
till I come to the mark, by Jesus Christ, etc. Amen.

A prayer for the entrance of the way The first member.
of Christian Piety and Charity, fitting to the argument of the first Member:
Incipe: Begin.
O Almighty God and most merciful The end and the way.
father, who have proposed a happy end to a Christian life: and have showed us
a good and right way, whereby we might attain the same: yea, and have set us
in that way, by the Sacrament of Baptism: and have instructed us by thy holy
word: and confirmed us in the same by the blessed Sacrament of thy Body and
Blood.

Give me grace, that I may earnestly bend my whole study, and desire, to
attain that end or mark: And that my heart may long after thee my God, from
whom I have long time bin wandering: Grant me now at length, seriously to
meditate my conversion, by turning from sin, the worst of all evils: and by
returning to thee my God, the best of all goods.

And that I may truly turn from sin, Turning from sin.
give me grace to consider the miserable state of man, living in sin. vz. How
grievous a thing it is, to have thee his The miserable state of a sinner
enemy: and thereby to be deprived of grace in this life, and of glory in the
life to come: How grievous a thing it is, to grieve the holy spirit, and the
holy Angels our keepers: How grievous a thing it is, to become a slave to sin
and Satan, and so an heir of damnation.

I crave thy help therefore O God, to lead me to repentance: That I may
Repentance
search my self, and examine all my actions, both internal, and external,
according to ye rule of thy Justice, eue^ thy law: whereby I may discern how I
have in Degrees of sin inward.
heart, grown: from suggestion, to delight: from delight, to consent: from
consent, to a defense or justifying of my sin. How Outward
I have grown in action, from secret sinning, without fear before thee: to
open sinning, without shame of men: from thence to a custom, without
compunction, deceiving my self with a vain hope of mercy, with danger of
despair in the Fear of God.
end, strike therefore O Lord a fear of thee into my heart, and astonish my
mind, that I may fear to be forsaken of thy grace: to be deprived of thy
sight: to be tormented in hell: prick my heart, not so much with a sorrow
Godly sorrow.
of thy punishments, as with a sorrow of offending thee, my good and merciful
father: that the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.
may succeed the spirit of bondage: And the sweet comforts of thy Gospel, may
suceede the terrors of thy Law: Through Jesus Christ our Savior, etc. Amen.

Now in our conversion, as there is Returning to God.
Terminus a quo: so there is Terminus ad Quem; As we must turn from sin, so
we must return to thee: who art the chiefest good, most simple, most perfect:
Grant me therefore thy holy spirit, which only can work this conversion
Effects of our conversion.
in my soul: By illuminating my understanding, that it may judge aright: By
directing my will, that it may choose aright: and by inspiring my heart, that
it may desire that which is good.

That in the end I may bring forth the fruits of holiness and obedience
toward thee my God: to whom I am infinitely bound, etc. And the duties of
charity toward my neighbors: As in the practice of the holy Prophet, David's
repentance we are taught.

And because delaying of returning is dangerous: as by thy holy word, and
Dangers of delay.
sundry examples we are taught: Give me grace not to defer my conversion unto
thee, but even this day at the least, to begin: Least by continuing in sin, I
treasure up for my self wrath, against the day of wrath: Least I be restrained
from thee: Least I be deprived of joy and comfort of the spirit* Least my
conscience be seared up by hardness of heart.

Give me grace therefore O Lord, speedily to return to thee: for what is the
certainty of my life? Or who knows the day and hour when thou will come to
judgment? Blessed is that servant whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching. Verily, he shall be crowned with immortal glory, with Christ Jesus
our Lord. Amen.

A prayer not to faint or go backward, fitting the argument of the second
Member: Ne defice, Faint not, nor go backward.
O Almighty God, and most merciful The second member.
father, forasmuch as through thy grace I have in some sort attained the
knowledge of the way of life, and have also by thy grace entered the same: give
me increase of thy grace, that I may walk in it.

For there are many stumbling blocks, many snares: many temptations in the
Temptations in the way of godliness. By God.
way, so that we had need of thy help to stay us, that we faint not, or fall
away.

1. If it be thy good will to tempt me O Lord, I know it is for my good, not to
cast me down, but to draw me from the love of this present world: to stir
me up to the love of our heavenly country, and that I might know from whence I
have power to resist temptations. Give me grace therefore by faith and
patience, to humble my self under thy mighty hand.

2. If satan tempt me, I know it is to overthrow me: yet though he be very
strong By Satan.
give mestre^gth to resist him: though he be very subtle, give me wisdom to
beware of him: though he be cruel, give me courage to triumph over him,
through Christ our Captain: who has spoiled him, cast him out, and led him
captive.

3. If the flesh do tempt me, it is so much the more troublesome, as it is By
the flesh. Memory of sin with sorrow.
more domestical.

1. For sometimes the memory of my former sins has recourse with sorrow,
which makes me to doubt of my true reconciliation with thee, which though it
be troublesome, yet it is not unprofitable: That I might thereby consider the
heynousnesse of sin, whereby I have provoked thee: that thereby I might
conceive a fear and sorrow for the same: that I might blush and be ashamed
before thee our father, and be stirred up to love thee so much the more, who
have pardoned our sins, by thy mercy in Jesus Christ.

2. Sometimes the memory of my Memory of sin, with delight.
former sin, has recourse with delight: whereby it appears, that there
remains some remnant of the old wounds, which memory is dangerous, because
it brings with it a certain heaviness, whereby I am excluded from the
sweetness of my conversion to thee, by delighting in the former lusts of the
flesh, before my conversion.

Give me therefore O Lord thy special grace, that I may remember my former
sins with sorrow, and not with delight: with detestation, and not with desire:
with condemnation, and not with justification. Purge my memory from unclean
fantasies, draw out that filthy sincke: Make the purpose of my mind constant
in good. Grant me to detest inconstancy, idleness, and sloth: As soon as I
am provoked with wicked cogitations, grant me earnestly to withstand them: that
with a clean heart I may receive thy holy spirit.

3. Some times, even in the entry of the way of life, my mind is troubled, to
The cares of a Christian life.
think how many cares and troubles* Christian life is tossed with, which it
seemed to be void of, while I gave the raines to my lusts: whereby the way of
godliness seems hard and difficult.

Give me grace therefore O Lord according to thy commandment to deny my self,
and to take up my Cross and follow thee: Denial of our selves*
Thou O Christ our guide and standard bearer have gone this way: This way have
all the Saints trodden: The way of life is not so hard, and difficult, where
Christ is our guide, where he is our speed: Thou have promised that thou will
give us a new heart, and a new spirit, that we may walk in thy precepts: give
us that thou command, and command us what thou will.

4, If the world either by allurements would draw me to his love, or by
contempt By the world.
would drive me from my profession, with a certain shame thereof: Give me
grace to despise the world, and not much ^^ care to be despised: for how
transitory is the felicity of this world? how many troubles is it mixed with?

Give me grace to remember, that shortly we shall all be presented before the
tribunal of Christ, of whom whosoever shall be ashamed before men, of him will
Christ be ashamed before his holy Angels: Grant me grace therefore never to be
ashamed of any good: but to be ashamed of sin, which brings shame and
confusion: from which vouchsafe to deliver us through Jesus Christ. Amen.

5. Moreover, for as much as all relapse into sin is dangerous, least our
last be worse than the first: Both in respect of Danger of Relapse.
God, into whose favor to return, it is harder after we have despised his
grace, than God, into whose favor to return, it is harder after we have
despised his grace, than before we have received it: Secondly, in respect of
the devil, who returns with seven worse spirits: Thirdly, in respect of our
selves, who by custom engender wicked habites, hardly to be cured.

Grant me therefore grace O Lord, that I return, not as a dog to my vomit,
least I may seem to despise thy Majesty, whose mercy I have so often begged,
that I might obtain pardon: Least I give opportunity to the unclean spirit
to enter again, with seven worse spirits. Least by custom of sin, I grow
to an hardness of heart, to commit sin with greediness, without repentance.

From those so dangerous evils of relapse, stay me O Lord by thy mighty hand,
through thy mercy, in thy son Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer to profit and go forward, fitting to the Argument of the third
Member. Profice seu pergredere. The third Member.
Profit or go forward.
O Almighty God and most merciful Ourbackwardnesse in profiting.
father, I acknowledge that it is not in a man's power to direct his own ways,
or to reform his own life: But either we stick in the beginning of the race,
or we go not forward so well, or so fast as either we ought or desire.

Grant me therefore O Lord according to the riches of thy grace, that I may be
strengthened by thy spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in my heart
by faith, that I being rooted and grounded in love: may go forward in the way
of salvation.

First in denying of my self, and Next in practicing righteousness.
And because all sin, be it never so small, does make us guilty of
punishment, Care of lesser sins.
and defiles the soul: does diminish the seruor of Charity, and weaken the
force of the spirit: does dispose to great sins, and hinder increase of
graces: does spoil us of spiritual gifts, and deprive us of glory, etc.

Grant me grace O Lord to withstand the first motions of sin, and diligently
to examine every corner of my heart* and by speedy repentance and faith to
purge every sin, seem it never so small: that I may not only cut off all
occasions of sin, but also pull it up by the root, through Jesus Christ.

Notwithstanding O merciful father, forasmuch as through thy long suffering,
Care of grievous sins.
thou do not only as it were wink at our lesser sins, but art also wont,
through thy mercy, to pardon our more grievous sins: so that though they be,
as purple or scarlet, by repentance they become as woole or snow.

Grant me grace so to profit in the way of godliness that I may daily more
and more deny my self: By mortifying the love of my self: By taming the
appetites of the flesh. By refraining the affections of the mind or will: But
especially in rooting out all wicked habites.

Both in the Superior and

Inferior faculties of our soul.

Mortify O Lord in my understanding, Wicked habites in the understanding.
Curiosity Rashness.
the vice of curiosity: whereby I am too curious to search those things which
exceed my capacity: or which appertain nothing unto me: The vice of
rashness, whereby I presume to judge of other men's lives and manners: besides
the rule of charity, either by uncertain, and doubtful conjectures, or else
by envious, or malicious rumors. The vice of pertinacie, whereby I do stand so
stiffly in my Pertinacy
presumed opinion, that I will admit no man's counsel, or persuasion above mine
own.

Free my understanding O Lord, from Cogitations.
all idle, worldly, unclean and curious cogitations: in stead whereof, give me
grace, that necessary, spiritual, holy, and profitable cogitations may
occupy my mind: That I may contemplate heavenly things, laying a foundation
for the time to come, that I may obtain eternal life.

Mortify O Lord in my will, whatsoever The will.
is repugnant to thy will, that I may neither will, nor desire any thing, but
that which is agreeable to thy will revealed in thy word, and is acceptable to
thee.

And because in the inferior faculties Wicked habites in the appetites.
of our souls, in our appetites and senses, many wicked habites do prevail,
which without a mighty force of the spirit cannot be subdued; As Gluttony and
Drunkenness: Luxury: Avarice: Envy: Anger: Pride: Slothfulness in godly
exercises: Cowardlinesse, or Pusilanimitie in temptations.

Grant me O Lord by thy grace, to overcome all these evils, whereunto either
al, or to some one more than the rest, either by nature I am inclined, or by
custom subdued: that being delivered out of the snares of sin, and Satan, I
may serve thee in such righteousness and holiness, as is acceptable with
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Prayers against each particular evil habit, as every man shall think most
befitting his own estate.
O Almighty God and most merciful 1. Against Gluttony or drunkenness, pray
thus.
father, I confess and acknowledge that thou have forewarned us, to take heed
of surfeting and drunkenness: and have threatened by thy holy word, to exclude
Gluttons and Drunckards out of the kingdom of heaven.

Give me grace to avoid this sin, by a moderate abstinence: by flying
idleness: by Restraints of gluttony.
a meditation of heavenly things: by a practice of Christian virtues: by an
imitation of Christ, in hungring, thirsting, and praying: Grant me grace that
in eating and drinking I be not carried too far beyond the bounds of
natural necessity. And that I may come to take my food, as to take a
medicine: that I may repress in feeding a new appetite, stirred by variety of
dishes: that I may receive my corporal food with prayer and thanksgi^ing, and
with a desire of spiritual food, that being refreshed with bodily food, I
may return more cheerfully to the offices of my calling, through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

O Almighty God and most merciful father, forasmuch as the vice of luxury or
Against Luxury, pray thus.
Riotousnesse is never alone, but is carrier, as it were in a Coach on four
wheels, vz. Pampering of the belly, and lusts of the flesh: Niceness in
apparel, and lastnesse of sleep: And is drawn as it were with two horses,
equally matched, vz. Prosperity of life, and abundance of wealth, whereon
also do sit as it were two driuers, Slothful dullness, and Envious security.

Give me grace O Lord, to profit day, by day, in the mortifying of this vice:
or rather vices: By humble prayer, craving continency of thee: By withdrawing
from the fire of lust, the fuel of wine and delicates: By a watchful ear:
expelling out of my heart all evil cogitations forthwith as they rise: And by
keeping my senses, least death enter by them as by the windows: Grant that by
thy grace I may warily avoid whatsoever is beautiful to the eye: whatsoever
is sweet to the taste: whatsoever is pleasant to the ear: whatsoever
delights the smell: whatsoever is soft in touching. That at length by thy
grace I may so profit in mortifying Luxury, ye though I feel the prick of the
flesh, yet I may suppress it without sin, and may perceive lust to be so
abated in me, that though it cannot wholly be taken away, yet it may be
subdued: Through Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Almighty God and most merciful ^. Against covetousness, pray thus.
father, forasmuch as thou have forewarned thy children to beware of
covetousness, which is an insatiable desire to possess more and more, and is
accompanied with many mischiefs:

Give me grace to expel and expulse this vice, by a godly contentment:
depending always upon thy providence, and promise: and setting before our eyes
the example of our Savior Christ, who when he was Lord of all, became poor
for us: Grant me therefore in whatsoever estate I am therewith to be content,
either in plenty or want, in fullness or penury.

Remembering that riches cannot help in the day of temptation, nor give
tranquillity or rest to the soul: but rather do wrap their possessors in many
snares. Grant me therefore to cast all my care upon thee, etc. Through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God and most merciful 4. Against Wrath, pray thus.
father, forasmuch as thou have forbidden us to be angry, rashly, and do
make it as murder, to be in danger of judgment: I beseech thee by thy grace,
to free me from this sin: which extinguisheth the light of reason, disguiseth
the countenance, and changes a man into a Monster.

Grant me by thy grace to overcome this savage beast, by removing the procurers
of anger, which are Envy: Pride: Curiosity: Suspicion: Credulity: and love
of our selves: By restraining, by the wisdom of the spirit, the first assaults
of anger. By Christian patience suffering wrongs, and not seeking to revenge
our selves: That observing thy commandments, and following thy example, I may
through patience inherit the promise, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Almighty God and most merciful 5. Against Envy, pray thus.
father, who have commanded us to love our neighbors as our selves, the poison
against which love, is Envy: which sorroweth at the prosperity of our
neighbor, and ioyeth at his misery.

Give me grace therefore O Lord, to shun this plague, which hurts more the
possessor, than him that is envied: For the avoiding whereof, Grant me grace
to contemn all humane things: and to long for that heritage, which multitude
of heirs does not strengthen: that I may reckon the gifts of my neighbors as
mine own, and communicate my gifts with them: that Envy being set apart, we
may reckon that ours which they possess, and that we possess may be theirs,
as Members of one body, whereof Christ is the head.

O Almighty God and most merciful father, who resistest the proud, and give
Against Pride, pray thus.
grace unto the humble, For as pride is the root of all evil, so it is the
overthrow of al virtues, and as an infectious disease, corrupts all the
faculties of the soul. Give me grace therefore O Lord to beat down this great
evil: By taking a diligent view of my self, that finding mine own wants, I
may lay down my Pride: By conferring my state, with the first estate of our
first parents, I may see from whence I am fallen: By knewing the law, I may
know my own infirmities: And by setting before me Christ's example, I may
learn Humility: who when he was Lord of Men and Angels, yet became a
perfect pattern of Humility, and Contempt of the world: that we being humbled
in our selves, might ^e exalted of thee: Through Jesus Christ, Amen.

O Almighty God and most merciful Against dulnes in (...) exercises, pray
thus.
father, I acknowledge my dulnes and lukewarmnes, in going forward in the way
of life: whose effects daily I feel in my self. For.

How often do I pray without attention and feruencie of spirit: How often do
Ill effects.
I meditate divine things, without affection of my mind, and therefore without
fruit? How hardly do I rid my self from idle company? How seldom do I
return into my self, to gather my spirits, to examine my own state? I look
into my self as it were through a Lattice, without repentance or amendment of
life: I talk freely of other men, and severely censure their deeds and words:
O how willingly do I pass my time in vain shows, or outward things; to
relieve my wearines? How often do I seek comforts here and there, and solace
my selt with idle thoghts? How grievously do I bear discipline and correction?
I obey laws but for a fashion, with lothsomnes and unwillingness O how often do
I avoid labors, which are necessary, and profitable to salvation. I seek to
be gracious, and in favor with men: How do I neglect the use of the
Sacraments? How seldom, and negligently do I hear godly Sermons? How
careless hitherto have I been, to avoid sin? How presumptuous of mine own
strength? How much have I pampered my self, making provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof? I call to mind my old manners, and the pleasures
of sin, not with grief and disliking, but with a delight and liking.

Grant me therefore, O Lord, thy Dangers of Lukewarmnes.
grace, that I may overcome this root of vices. I acknowledge the danger,
wherein a Lukewarm man does stand: whom thou have threatened to vomit out:
whose state is miserable, and end searefull: Give me grace therefore not to
fall back into mine old sins, that I be not in danger of a greter ruin: but
that recovering out of the gulf of these mischiefs, I may with a more
cheerful mind, run the way of life. Stir up in me O Lord, an Remedies
ardent desire of newness of life: make me continually to meditate on my end,
which if it should happen to be sudden, and I unprovided, the things that come
after will be more grievous, which my end that it may be blessed, I beseech
thee for Jesus Christ his sake, etc. Amen.

When thou art entered, O my soul, In case of Pusillanimitie or fear, a
co^municatio^ with the soul.
the way of life, thou art perhaps grieved, either with the expectation of some
evil at hand, or with distrust of deliverance from some evil present: But
pray O my soul with David; I expected him who delivered me from my fear, and
from the storm. Conceive an assured hope in Gods providence, and flee to him
in the time of trouble.

Peradventure he will humble thee, by this temptatian, to beat down thy pride,
which assaulteth the godly, even in holy actions, or be purposes to purge thee
of self-love, whereby thou please thy self many times, more than is meet.

But what is it O my soul, that thou need fear?

Do thou fear the Cross and affliction? The cross not to be feared.
If thou be godly, the Cross and affliction as it cannot be shunned, so it is
profitable, and glorious to the godly: It abateth vices; it increases virtues:
it confirms our Adoption, etc. Bear it therefore patiently and courageously.

2. Do thou shrink at sickness: Thy Not sickness.
body is subject to death, why then do thou so grieve at sickness, which
prepares to death, which to ye godly is a passage to life? Moreover, ye
sickness of the body, does many times, cure ye diseases of the soul.

3. Do thou grieve for the loss of Not loss of worldly things.
worldly things. Believe in God, and take hold of his promises: He will not
leave thee, nor forsake thee.

4. Does the terror of death astonish thee: Not death
Cast off fear, which rises of infidelity: Compare the course of this life,
with the last periode thereof. Art thou tossed with continual miseries? Fear
not death which shall deliver thee, from the tyranuy of sin, from the deceits
of the world, from the temptations of Satan. Eternal death shall not touch
thee, because life is prepared for thee in Christ.

5. Do the assaults of Satan terrify thee? Remember that God does arm, Not
Satan.
such as be his, with power to resist Satan: Thou shall overcome by Christ our
Captain: Call upon God, and arm thy self with the Shield of faith, and the
sword of the spirit, etc. And by Gods grace thou shall overcome.

6. Art thou amazed with thy many Not many or great sins.
and great sins? The remission of thy sins is sealed, and confirmed to thee, by
many and great promises by Christ, and in Christ, therefore thou ought not
to 1. Ioh. 2.
fear, If any man sin, we have an Advocate to the father, even Jesus Christ,
the righteous.

7. Does the terror of the last judgment, Not the last Judgment.
make thee tremble? Cast off this fear, call to mind the love of God the
father, in his son, and that the same Son of God, is both thy redeemer, and
Judge. And thou O my soul, as often as thou sinnest, so often by faith and
repentance be thou renewed: Take hold by faith on Gods grace, acknowledge the
love of Daily repentance.
Christ, embrace the comfort of the holy spirit: who is the earnest of our
inheritance: whereby it will come to pass, that thou coming with confidence
unto the Throne of Gods grace, shall find comfort against temptations, in due
season: Through Jesus Christ, etc. Amen.

Prayers framed to the Argument of the fourth Member.
Proceed further, to attain Righteousness The fourth Member.
and Virtue.
O Almighty God and most merciful Gods long suffering.
father, I acknowledge thy infinite grace and mercy toward me, who have been
hitherto so patient, and long suffering toward me, that thou have not only
endured me, having all my life long provoked thee, by my many and great sins:
but also have now at the last, prevented me, by thy grace, that I might come to
the knowledge of my sins, and turn from them, and return unto thee, by
hearty repentance, and denial of unrighteousness: So that I seem, in some
sort, to have proceeded in forsaking the love of my self: In moderating my
carnal desires: In mortifying the Affections of my mind: In rooting out evil
habites.

But because I must not stay here, but from the denial of unrighteousness, I
Grace to proceed.
m^st proceed further, to the attaining of righteousness, which I cannot do,
except thou O Lord, do give grace, and power: therefore I come unto thee O
Lord, beseeching thee, to give me grace both to attain to virtues, and to
keep them being attained: And because they be best both attained, and keept:
by frequent use of godly prayer: By an ardent love of virtue: and by continual
exercise.

Give me grace O Lord, never to faint Means.
in prayer; with hearty affection to embrace virtue, and not to hide my Talent,
but that occupying with the same, I may make a good account to thee thereof.

And that I may grow from virtue to A purpose to persevere.
virtue, Grant that I may have a firm will and purpose, not only to enter,
but also to persevere in well doing, that no storm of temptation may remove
me, that being in love with virtues, I may cheerfully do the offices due to
her: yet not for any other respect than for thy glory: Always beholding our
Master Jesus Christ, as the perfect pattern of life and death. Amen.

We must begin at Justice.
O Almighty and most merciful father, A prayer to attain Justice.
who art just in all thy ways, and holy in all thy works: I acknowledge that
I am infinite ways bound unto thee, for thine unspeakable benefits: which I
can no way recompense, but by glorifying thee, according to the rule of
Justice, which thou have prescribed to us, that as thou art just, so should we
be just also: By giving to every one that which is due to them; To thee, that
which is due to thee: To men, that which is due to men.

Give me grace therefore O Lord, to worship thee, according to the prescript 1.
Toward God.
rule of thy word: that is, to call upon thy name, with a true affection of
heart, and a lively faith: To submit my self obediently to thy Majesty: In a
true fear of thy judgments, avoiding effences: And in an earnest love of thy
promises, embracing thy mercies: To rest upon thee, by a firm hope, and
constant trust: To testify my thankfulness, by a cheerful obedience of thy
will: Never to be ashamed of thy truth, but to profess it constantly: To
endure the cross, with an invincible courage: Looking for that blessed hope,
and appearing of the glory of the great God, even thy son Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

O Almighty God, and merciful father, 2. Toward our selves
thou have allowed us to love our selves, to have a moderate care of our
selves, by maintaining those good things, which thou eitheir in soul, or body,
have bestowed on us.

Give me grace therefore to be chiefly 1. The soul
careful for the good of my soul, by repairing and reforming, both the
superior and inferior faculties of my soul.

Grant me grace therefore, O Lord, to Superior faculties. The mind Wisdom
apply my mind to the knowledge of Divine, and humane things, which either may
further me to the life celestial, or make me profitable to humane felicity.
Which is wisdom.

Grant me Prudence, to choose that Prudence
which is verily good, and to refuse that which is verily evil: to mark what
is to be desired, and what is to be shunned.

Grant me discretion, which is the companion Descretio^.
of true Prudence, that I may discern, truth, from falsehood: certainties,
from uncertainties: that which is profitable, from that which is unprofitable;
that which is seasonable, from that which is unseasonable: things honest, from
dishonest: things pleasant, from vnpleapleasant: and to conclude, good from
evil. And among these, what is moore or less good, what is convenient for
time, place, and persons.

Give me grace O Lord, to remove all The conscience.
impediments, whereby my conscience may be wounded, and grieved, which are
only my sins, which bring sorrow, and inflict wounds.

Grant that I may so restrain my conscience, Knowledge of the law
by the knowledge of thy law, and awe of thy judgments, that I may not dare
any thing contrary to thy will.

And if my conscience chance to be A remedy.
wounded, that I may speedily seek my remedy, which only is, the redemption
by the bleed of Jesus Christ: apprehended by a true and lively faith: whereby
our consciences are secured before thee, if therewithal we abstain from our
sins, and serve thee with a pure mind.

Give me grace O Lord, to will nothing, but that which is agreeable to thy
will, revealed in thy word: that cleaving only thereunto, I may both will, and
do those things, which are good and acceptable to thee, which grace we
obtain, by the assistance of thy holy spirit, who works in all men the
power, both to will and to perform, according to thy free grace: Through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior, Amen.

Give me grace also O Lord, to rule Inferior faculties. The Irascible part.
the inferior faculties of my soul, Anger and Lust. And that I may moderate
Anger: grant me fortitude, whereby my soul may be strengthened, stirred up,
and armed, to endure labor, and danger, yea of death, for Christ's sake, with a
good courage: that I may be able to moderate and subdue my affections, and not
be subdued of them: That I may despise worldly honor, and seek the glory of
God, and eternal felicity: that I may patiently bear all troubles, and
adversities, and crosses, which cannot with godliness and honesty be avoided.

Grant me constancy, that I may persevere, in honest, and godly purposes,
Constancy.
retaining one tenure of mind, and will: that I be not puffed up in
prosperity, nor cast down in adversity, to fall from good to evil.

Grant me meekness, whereby my Meeknes
soul may so appease the rage of Anger: that it prevail not above reason, and
put it out of place: but that it may incline, rather to pardon, than revenge.

To conclude, grant me humility, that Humility
I wax not proud, in opinion of my gifts, or graces, above other: but truly
acknowledging my own infirmities, I may, not only, not prefer my self
before other, but also prefer every one before my self. So shall not my
Angry part, break forth like a wild beast into rage, but be a furtherance to
me in the course of virtue. Through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Give me grace O Lord, to moderate The concupiscible part.
my lusts, by Temperance, in Abstinence, and Continence.

Grant that I may restrain the desires, pleasures, and delights of the
Temperance.
body, which being natural, are the more hardly restrained: Let my soul
therefore strive against them, by temperance, in using moderately meats, and
drinks, ordained for the nourishment of the body, that whether we eat, or
drink, we may do it to thy glory.

Grant me Chastity, to contemn my Chastity.
Lusts, in a holy moderation of the parts, given for generation, that I may
keep the^ within the bounds of the lawful use, ordained by thee, in holy
wedlock.

That my Lusts by thy grace being Chastised, they may not rage, to make me
brutish, nor defile my soul, to make me odious to thee, but being by thy grace
and spirit subdued, my soul and body may be an holy Temple, acceptable to
thee: Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, and most merciful Goods of the body.
father, thou have given us leave to take care for our bodies, ^o that the same
be moderate.

Give me grace therefore, so to provide Life, and health.
for my body, that I make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts
thereof: but that the care of life and health, which we seek to preserve, may
by thy goodness be so blessed, that I may be the better able to perform the
duties of my calling.

And if my health be impaired, grant O Lord, that the means which I shall use
to remove diseases, may by thy goodness In sickness
take good effect. And that, whether in sickness, or health, I may be both
content, and thankful to thee who know best, what is best for every man:
and turnest all to the best, for them that love thee: Through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

Thou also have commanded us O Lord, to content our selves with our estate, 3.
External goods
whether in poverty, or riches, whether in contempt or honor.

Give me grace therefore, with a thankful mind toward thee, to content my
Contentment.
self with my lot, and not to seek, by greedy care, to increase.

Grant that I may by godly industry Godly industry.
get my living, neither enriching my self, by unlawful means, nor eating the
sweat of other men's brows: but eating the lawful labor of mine own hands:
Possessing riches holily, and using them frugally.

Grant that I may by virtue, godliness, Honest fame.
and honest arts purchase a good estimation and report, with the good and
honest: that, as far as is lawful, I may regard the estimation among men:
and where it is not attained, but with evil circumstances, I may contemn it:
together with all false reports and contempt of the wicked and malicious, so
that there be always, within my self, the testimony of a good conscience
toward thee.

That finishing the course of this life, in an holy calling, whether through
penury, or abundance, through contempt, or honor, I may attain the celestial
crown: through Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Almighty God and most merciful 3. Toward our neighbors.
father, thou have taught us, that we are not borne to our selves: but that we
should love our neighbors, as our selves.

I acknowledge therefore, that Iew^ unto my neighbors, the duties of Justice,
both to all in general, and to some specially; both to the living, and to the
dead: both in inward affection, and in outward effect.

Give me grace therefore, to embrace all men, as men: yea as thy Image, with To
all men.
a loving affection wishing unto them all good, as to my self, and as much as
lies in me, to be at peace with all men. Yielding due benevolence unto all
men, in countenance, gesture, word, and deed; helping and furthering them, to
the uttermost of my power.

Grant that I may through true charity, To some special.
have a feeling of other men's misery, to suffer with them that suffer: and
through true love, to relieve them, to give alms to the poor, to harbor the
strangers, etc. That I may be partaker of that blessing: Come, ye Blessed, in
herit the kingdom, etc.

Give me grace to yield unto my superiors, reverence, and obedience: as unto
thee, and forthee: To my Inferiors humility, and beneficence: in conference
and conversion: To my friends mutual love, and gratitude: in affection of
heart, and signs of thankfulness.

And because thou have commanded us To the dead.
to do good even unto the dead: Grant that I may be ready to perform unto
the dead, the last Christian duty: in moderate mourning over them, and decent
burial of their bodies, in hope of the Resurrection, not forgetting to show my
good will, and liberality toward their posterity, their widows, children,
and kindred. etc.

That in this wise, performing the duties The conclusion.
of Justice, required of every Christian, having by thy grace O Lord;

Entered the way of godliness, and charity. And

Fainting not in the same, but going forward, not only:

To the denial of all unrighteousness: but also

To the practice of righteousness, even with perseverance,

I may in the end, attain the crown of glory, by Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Epilogue consisting of Reason, and Sentences, both of Christians, and
Heathens, to stir up our endeavor, and love to Piety, and Charity: Is
referred to the Members of the former treatise: Therefore they are easily
converted to our use, by the prayers above framed. God grant this book, and
labor, may have good success, according to the Authors wish, in his Epistle
Dedicatory.

Amen.
FINIS.

