The abridgment of Camden's Britan^ia With The Maps of the several Shires of
England and Wales.

EUCLIDE PTOLEMIE

Printed by John Bill Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty. 1626.

engraving of two men, two cherubs, two globes

TO HIS MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
SIR,
THe Divine Power that inspired the breath of life into man, infused the life
of Authority into the King. This inspiration makes man the image of God; that
other makes the King in particular the Lieutenant of God. And therefore humane
right no sooner styles one with the name of a King, but divine Heraldrie
graceth him with the title of a mortal God, thereby intimating that it is his
chiefest glory, within the sphaere of his Royalty to imitate the singular
government of that power, whose Substitute he is, and with whose name he is
honored. Now the vnparalleled excellency of divine government over the world
is grounded upon that distinct knowledge which the Creator has of the nature,
condition, and use of all creatures subject to his government. And surely the
readiest way for an earthly Potentate to make his government exactly
analogicall to that Jdea, will be by getting an accurate knowledge of the
nature and quality of the Land and People over which God has made him his
Lieutenant general. But the Metropolis and the Royal Throne require such
frequencie of the Sovereigns presence, that such knowledge cannot be gotten by
his own observations. Our Maps therefore (especially being joined with
discreet observations) as they are delightful unto all, are especially useful
unto the King: for by this means, though residing in his Princely Seat, he may
as the eye from the head, contemplate with much delight and profit the remotest
Territories of his Kingdoms. And because affairs of a higher nature take up
the principal of his time, longer Descriptions are not for the purpose; the
more compendious, so as accurate, are most suitable to the calling of a King.

Upon these grounds (most dread Sovereign) am I bold humbly to present these
small Chorographicall Descriptions unto the greatness of your Majesty. Their
compendiousnesse will free them from being thought troublesome or tedious to
your Majesty, and their exactness (I trust) will gain them acceptance.
Howsoever, shadows they are of your Royalty, and therefore they desire that
they (as does that Body which they represent) may safely repose themselves
under the wings of your Sovereignty; To which he commends them, and his loyal
service, who is

Your Sacred Majesty's most humble, and most faithful devoted Subject and
Servant, JOHN BIL

To the Reader.
OF all moral knowledge, the knowing of our selves; of all Mathematical, the
knowledge of our own Country is the most useful and profitable. Yet had most
men rather spend themselves and their precious hours in the most difficult
trifles in the world, than once to enter into themselves. And most Students in
Geographie take more delight to contemplate the remotest and most barbarous
Countries of the earth, than lightly to examine the Descriptions of their own.
So that (as if like those Lamij in Plutarch, they had eyes abroad, and enclosed
them in boxes in their own homes) they are accurate in the Descriptions of the
smallest village in a foreign Kingdom, when they scarce know how the
Metropolis of their ow^e Country is situated. The excuses that are ordinary for
this common neglect, are, either that accurate Descriptions are wanting, or
that they are so voluminous, that they are prejudicial both to time and purse.
But behold (courteous Reader) thou have here exhibited unto thee such exquisite
compendious Surueyes of thine own native Country, as will at once take away
these excuses, and ease thee of this double grieuance. The Country described,
both in regard of Commodities wherewith it is fraught, and places of note
wherewith it is graced, is a perfect epitome of the World; these Maps and
Descriptions are a complete epitome of it, and therefore in a double regard
worthy thy perusal. And because no Maps can be rightly understood without some
insight in the general terms or notions of Geographie, I have prefixed a
compendious Delineation of the same. If thou read them, and profitest by
them, I have the principal of my desire; If thou do both, with a candid
approbation of the Labor, I have it with Interest.

A DELINEATION OF the universal Notions of Geographie.
GEographie is a Science which teaches the description, distinction, and
dimension of the Earth; and according to the common division, is either
general, or special; or (as some of our late Geographers have more fitly
divided it) it is either Sphaericall, or Topographicall.

The General or Sphaericall part of this Science is that which sets forth
the natural constitution of the Terrestrial Globe.

The Terrestrial Globe is a round body comprehended within the superficies of
earth and water, and situated in respect of the other Globes or Stars of the
world, according to Ptolemy and Tycho Brahe, in the Center; but according to
Copernicus, between the Orbs of MARS and VENUS.

The parts whereof it consists, are either Real, Imaginary.


Real, are such as agree to the Terrestrial Globe by nature.

Imaginary, are such as agree to it by virtue of our understanding.

The Real parts of the Inferior Globe are Earth. Water.


The Imaginary parts are certain lines which are not, but (for the better
understanding of this Science) are supposed to be in the Earth.

These are either Straight, Circular.
and of this kind is only one, viz. the Axell.

The Axell is a strait line passing through the midst or center of the Earth,
the extremest points whereof are termed Poles: the North point is called the
Articke Pole, and the South the Antarticke.

The Circular Lines are divided into the Greater, Lesser.


The Greater Circles are such as divide the Globe into two equal parts, each
whereof contains in it 360 Degrees, every Degree being 60 miles; so that the
Earth by this computation is 21600 English miles about, and almost 7000 miles
through.

The Greater Circles are three in number, Meridian, Horizon, Equator.


And these are either Mutable, viz. Immutable, as the Equator.
with the mutation of the place, as Meridian, Horizon.


The Meridian is a Circle drawn by the Poles of the world, and the vertical
point of the place. Of these (though the number set down in the Artificial
Globe at the most be but 180) are there to be supposed in the Real Globe as
many as there are Zeniths or vertical points from East to West. So places
distant East and West have diverse Meridians, (and in this respect it is called
a Mutable Circle) but places different directly North and South have the same.

Among these one is of special note and use, which Geographers commonly call
the first and chief Meridian.

The first Meridian is that from which the longitude of places from West to
East is reckoned. This Meridian (according to Ptolemie and the Ancients)
passes through the Canary Islands, but according to our latter Artists, upon
better reasons, through the Azores.

The Horizon is a Circle comprehending all that space of the Earth which is
visible, and distinguishes it from the rest which lies under and is invisible.

The Horizon is either Sensible, Rational.


The Sensible Horizon is the Circle that terminateth a man's ken looking round
about him in an open place; and therefore is greater or lesser, according to
the conueniencie of the place wherein a man stands.

The Rational Horizon is a Circle passing by the Center of the Earth, whose
two Poles are the point directly over a man's head, which is called the Zenith,
and the point directly under his feet, called the Nadyr.

The Rational Horizon is that which Geographers reckon among the greater
Circles, and not the Sensible; but both change according to the change of the
place which way soever it is.

The use of this is to discern the diverse risings and settings of the Stars.

The Equator is a great Circle passing through the midst of the Earth, and
dividing it exactly into two equal parts or Haemispheres, North and South. The
use of it is to show the latitude of any place; for from it both the Southern
latitude betwixt it and the South Pole, and the Northern latitude betwixt it
and the North Pole is to be reckoned.

The lesser Circles or parallels, are either named with peculiar names, as the
Tropicks of Cancer. Capricorn.
Polar Circles.
want such, and they are commonly called Parallels.


The Tropicks are Parallels bounding the Suns greatest declination, which is
either toward the North, and from the Celestial Sign is called The Tropicke
of Cancer; or toward the South, and is from another Sign called The Tropicke
of Capricorn.

Both of these are 23 degrees distant from the Aequinoctiall, the one
Southward, and the other Northward.

The Polar Circles are Parallels compassing the Poles. That which compasses
the North Pole is termed from the sign of the Bear the Arcticke Circle; that
which compasses the South Pole is termed the Antarcticke Circle, because it is
just opposite to the former.

A Parallel compasses the Earth from East to West, and divides it into two
unequal parts.

These four nominated Parallels or lesser Circles serve to describe the Zones
so much mentioned in the writings of Ancients; the unnamed Parallels to set out
Climates.

A Zone is a space of earth contained betwixt two lesser Circles: the number of
them is five, whereof two are ouer-cold, one ouer-hot, and two temperate.

The two ouer-cold Zones are those parts of the Earth which lie betwixt the two
Polar Circles and the Poles.

The two temperate Zones are betwixt the Tropicks of Cancer and the Articke,
and betwixt the Tropicke of Capricorn and the Antarticke Circles.

The Torrid or ouer-hot Zone is that which lies betwixt both the Tropicks.

Both the Torrid and Frigid Zones (though the Ancients thought them to be
altogether uninhabitable) are in many parts at this day well inhabited.

Again, the Inhabitants in the burnt Zones are called Amphiscians, for that
they have the meridian shadow on both sides of them, some part of the year
Northwards, and sometimes Southwards. In the temperate Zones, Hetoroscians,
having the shadow but on one side; and the frigid Periscians having their
shadows run round about.

Also the Inhabitants in the same parallel and opposite part of the Meridian
are called Periaecians.

In the like parrallel on the other side of the line and same meridian
Antiaecians. In the like parallel on the other side of the line and opposite
part of the meridian, Antipodes.

A climate is a space of earth contained betwixt two parallels, distant from
the Aequinoctiall toward the North or South Pole: the use of climats is to
distinguish the length and shortness of the days in all places, for places as
they differ North and South, so have they unequal days and nights; the more
Northerly climats and places having longer days in the Summer, and longer
nights in the Winter than the more Southerly do enjoy.

Thus much of the general or sphericall part of Geography.

The special or Topographicall part hereof is that which sets forth the
description of the Terrestrial Globe so far forth as it is divided into
distinct parts or places, and is either 1 The description of some great
integrating part of the Earth. 2 Or of some one Region, and so it is properly
termed Chorography. 3 Or of some particular place in a Region.


According to the greater integrating parts thereof, the Ancients divided the
whole world into three parts (no more being then discovered) namely Asia,
Africa, and Europa; but now of late all the world being in a manner found out,
the rest is divided into other three parts (viz.) Atlantis, or America
Septentrionall, Meridionall, and Terra del Chasdi or the South Continent.

Asia is bounded on the North with the Hyperborean Seas, on the East with Mar
del Zur or South Sea, on the South with the Indian Seas, and on the West with
the Red Sea, part of the Mediterranean Sea, the Helespont, and the Rivers Don
and Duyna.

Africa is environed with the Midland Seas North, the Red Sea East, and the
Ethiopian and Atlantic Ocean, on the South and West.

Europe is bordered on the East with Don and Duyna, on the North with the
Frozen Seas, on the West with the Atlantic Ocean, and on the South with the
Mediterranean Sea.

North America is termined on the East with the North-Sea, on the West with the
South Sea, on the North with the Hyperborean or Frozen-Seas, and on the South
with the Isthmos at Panania.

South America is confined on the North with this Isthmos, on the South with
the Straights of Magellane, on the East with the Ethiopian Sea, and on the
West with Mar del Zur.

The South Continent is accosted on the North with Mar del Zur, the Aethiopick,
and Indian Seas. But how it is on the other parts is not yet discovered.

Each of these more spacious parts is again subdivided into many Regions, as
Asia is divided into these Regions, Chyna, Tartaria, Muscouia, Georgia,
Armenia, Natolia, Syria, Caldea, Arabia, Persia, Magora, India, and
Cauchychina, with innumerable Islands called the Moluccoes or Spicerie Islands
and Iapan, etc.

Africa into Egypt, Abyssina, Monomotapa, Magadoxo, Quiloa, Mozambigue,
Manicongo, Guynea, Byledulgerid, Barbary, Cyrenaica, and Nubia, with the
Islands of the Canaryes, Cape-verde, St. Helen, and Madagasar.

Europe into these Kingdoms, Crymea, Polon, Sweden, Denmark, Germany, both
the higher and lower, Greece, Hungary, Bohemia, Austria, Italy, France,
Spain, with the Islands of Candy, Corsica, Sardinia, Maiorca, and these most
famous Islands of Great Britain, and Ireland,

North America into Noua Britannia, Noua Albion, Noua Anglia, Virginia, Noua
Francia, Florida, Calfornia, Noua Granada, Noua Hispania, Nicoragua, etc.

South America into Castilia del-Oro, Peru, Chily, Guiana, Ouram, Chicas,
Brasilia, and Pantagones, with the Antellar Isles.

The South Continent (so far as is discovered) into Noua Guinea, Luchach,
Maletur, with the Islands of Solomon.

Again every one of these Regions is subdivided into Provinces, Hundreds, or
Counties. These three kind of parts make up the perfect subject of Topographie.

Again every part and place of the earth is considered either in it self.
according to its adjuncts.


In it self, and so it is Continent Island.


A Continent is a great quantity of land in which many kingdoms and
principalities are conjoined together, none of them being separated from the
rest by any Sea.

An Island ( quasi an eye of land, called in Latin, Insula quasi in salo) is a
part of land compassed and environed round about with waters, of which Great
Britain and Iapan are the most spacious.

These again are obseruable parts both of Continents and Islands, Peninsula.
Isthmus. Promontorium.


Peninsula (quasi pene Insula) is a tract of land, which being compassed almost
round with waters, is joined by some little neck or Isthmus to the firm land,
as Peloponesus in Greece.

An Isthmus is a narrow piece of land which joins the Peninsula to the
Continent or greater Islands, as the straights of Dariene and Corinth.

Promontorium is a high mountain shooting it self much farther into the Sea
than the Adjacent land. The extremest point or nooke hereof is called a Cape,
as Cape-verde in Africa, etc.

The adjuncts of a place are either such as respect the earth it self. the
heavens.


Those that agree to a place in respect of the earth, are three in number, viz.
1 The magnitude or extent of a Country. 2 The bounds and limits. 3 The quality.


1 The magnitude comprehends the length and breadth of any place. The length
of a place is measured East and West, what figure soever the place is of; the
breadth thereof North and South.

It is to be observed that those places that are under the Aequinoctiall have
no breadth, because that the measuring of latitude is begun from this circle.

2 The bounds of a Country is a line terminating it round about, and
distinguishing it from the bordering lands or waters.

3 The quality of a place is the natural temper and disposition thereof.

A place in regard of the heavens is either East. West. North. South.


Those places are properly said to be Northern, which lie betwixt the
Aequinoctiall and the Arctick Pole. Those Southern, which are betwixt the
Aequinoctiall and the Antarcticke Pole.

Those places likewise are said to be Eastern which lie in the Eastern
Haemisphaere, terminated by the first Meridian which passes through the Azores,
and those the Western which lie within the Haemisphaere which lies Westernly
of the same Meridian. And thus much of the universal Notions of Geography.

map of England A TIPE OF ENGLAND


OF ENGLAND.
THis far famoused Kingdom is bordered on the North with Scotland, on the
South with the British Sea, on the East with the German Ocean, and on the West
with the Hybernian Seas. It is situate in the temperate Z^ne and eighth
Climate; watered with a multitude of Crystal streams, Currents, and Nauigable
Rivers; the banks whereof are crowned with Flowrie Meadows, the Meadows
replenished with abundance of Cattle, and accosted with all manner of fertile
fields, of all manner of Corn and Grain; and besides all these affords many
other both Commodities and Rarities, which hereafter are particularly expressed
in their proper places.

This kingdom was first inhabited by some Colonies which transplanted
themselves from the neighboring coasts of France and Lower Germany, as the
affinity of their Language, Policy, Religion, and Manners, do unquestionably
prove; being the offspring of Gomer of Iaphets progeny, as their own
appellation does witness, calling themselves Komery, who possessed and
governed this Island above one thousand years. About fifty four years before
the Nativity of our Lord and Savior, Julius Caesar entered this land, which
within one hundred and fifty years after was subiugated by the Romans, under
whose commands they lived till the 430 year after Christ, when the Roman
Empire declining, was forced to call home their Garrisons, and having before
exhausted the strength of this Kingdom, left it a prey to the enemy,
whereupon the Picts assaulting this land thus disfurnished and weakened, they
were compelled to crave the aid of the Saxons and Anglies, a warlike nation,
inhabiting near the confines of Denmark; who being arrived, chased away their
enemies; and allured with the temperature, fertility and pleasantness of the
Country (flowing in great numbers) expelled the Britains or Komeros, that
would not live under their laws and subjection, and so held it till the year
1066. when William the Conqueror with his Normans subdued them, whose
successors have continually enjoyed it to this present time.

It was anciently divided by the Romans into three parts, Britanniam primam,
from the South parts to Trent; Maximam Caesariensem, from thence Northward; and
Britanniam secundam, which we call Wales.

After by the Saxons it was divided into an Heptarchie, which at last (reduced
to a Monarchy) was by Elfred divided into Shires, Wapentakes, and Tithings;
with Justices and Sheriffs appointed for ministering of justice, which partly
confirmed, partly altered by William the Conqueror, was at last divided into
39 Shires of the English, with the addition of 13 of Wales. In which are at
this present two famous Universities, the Seminaries of virtue and learning; 26
Bishoprics, 641 Market Towees, 186 Castles, 9725 Parish Churches, 555 Rivers,
956 Bridges, 13 Chases, 68 Forests, and 781 Parkes. Tribunalls, or Courts of
justice temporal, nine, viz. Parliament, Starchamber, Chancerie, Kings Bench,
Exchequer, Common pleas, Court of Wards, Admiraltie, and Court of Requests,
besides Court Leet and Baron. Spiritual seven, of Convocation, Synods,
Audience, Arches, Prerogative, Faculties, and Peculiar Jurisdictions. Ranks of
Nobility nine, that is, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons,
Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen. And of Inferior Rank or
Communaltie three, Yeomen, Husbandmen, and Tradesmen.

The Battles by Sea and Land since the Conquest, fought by the Kings,
Nobility, and Commons, against foreign invasions, and Domestique and
Intestine wars, 76. The last and most Admirable, being in the Chase of the
Spanish Armado, Ann. Dom. 1588.

A Table containing the provisions of the Spanish Armado against ENGLAND in
Anno Domini 1588. and Anno ELIZ. REGINae XXX.
Leaders. Provinces aiding. Galliasses and Gallions. Ships and Hulks. Pinaces
and Carauals. Great Ordnance Sailors. Soldiers. Galley-slaues. D. Medina
Sydonia. Portugal. 10 2 300 1300 3300 Diego de Mandranae. Portugal. 4 20 360
888 Io. Martynes de Richaldes Bisca^. 10 4 250 700 2000 Michael de Oquendo.
Guiapusco. 10 4 310 700 2000 Pedro de Valdez. Andolozia. 10 1 280 800 2400
Martyn de Vertendona. Italy. 10 310 800 2000 Diego Floris de Valdez. Castile.
14 2 380 1700 2400 John Lopez de Medina. Medina. 23 400 700 3200 Hugo de
Moncade. Naples. 4 200 460 870 1200 Antonio Buccade. Mendoza. 22 193 574 488

ESPECIAL NOTES worthy of observation.
13 H. 1. The first Parliament was in Anno 1112 19 H. 2. Ireland was conquered
in Anno 1172 4 Ioh. Normandy was lost by King John and the title thereto
released Anno 1202 43 H. 3. Normandy was lost by King John and the title
thereto released Anno 1258 11 E. 1. Wales was subdued Anno 1283 19 E. 3. The
order of the Garter devised Anno 1344 14 E. 3. England first quartered the
Arms of France Anno 1339 21 E. 3. Calice was won in Anno 1346 5 Mariae.
Calice was lost Anno 1557 5 H. 5. Normandy was won in Anno 1416 8 H. 5. King
Henry the fifth was proclaimed heir Apparent and Regent of France in Anno 1419
10 H. 6. Henry the sixth was crowned King of France in the City of Paris Anno
1431 27 H. 6. France was lost in Anno 1449 28 H. 6. Normandy was lost in Anno
1449 31 H. 6. Acuitaine etc. were lost in Anno 1453 4 R. 2. Wat Tylors
Rebellion Anno 1380 29 H. 6. Jack Cades Rebellion Anno 1450 4 H. 8. Navarre
surprised by the Spaniards Anno 1512
At the time of the first dissoluing of Religious Houses in ENGLAND there were
ARchbishopricks and Bishoprics 21 Deanries 11 Archdeaconries 60 Dignities and
Prebends in Cathedral Churches 364 Benefices 8803 Religious Houses 65
Hospitalls 110 Colleges 96 Chauntries and free Chappells 2374 Their Rates were
per annum 320180
In the Province of Canterbury, Dioceses Parish-Churches, Churches appropriated
In the Diocese Of Canterbury 257 140 Of London 623 189 Of Winchester 362 131 Of
Couentrey and Lichfield 557 250 Of Salisburie 248 109 Of Ba^h and Well^ 388 160
Of Lincoln 1255 577 Of Peterborough 293 91 Of Exeter 604 239 Of Gloucester 267
125 Of Hereford 313 166 Of Norwich 1121 385 Of Elie 141 75 Of Rochester 98 36
Of Chichester 250 112 Of Oxford 195 88 Of Worcester 241 76 Of Eristol 236 64 Of
S. David's 308 120 Of Bangor 107 36 Of Llandeffe 177 98 Of S. Asaph 121 19
Peculiar in the Province of Canterbury 57 14 The sum of the Province of
Canterbury 8219 3303 In the Province of York, In the Diocese Of York 581 336
Of Durham 135 87 Of Chester 256 101 Of Carlisle 93 18 The sum of the Province
of York 1065 592 The total sum in both Provinces, 9284 3845

Shires in ENGLAND.
COrnwall. Devonshire. Dorcetshire. Somersetshire. Wiltshire. Hampshire.
Barkshire. Surrey. Sussex. Kent. Middlesex. Essex. Hartfordshire.
Buckinghamshire. Oxfordshire. Glocestershire. Worcestershire. Warwickshire.
Northamptonshire. Bedfordshire. Huntingtonshire. Cambridgeshire. Suffolk.
Northfolke. Lincolneshire. Rutlandshire. Leicestershire. Staffordshire.
Darbishire. Nottinghamshire. Yorkshire. Durham Bishopric. Northumberland.
Cumberland. Westmerland. Lancaster. Cheshire. Shropshire. Herefordshire.
Shires in Wales
RAdnorshire. Brecknocksh. Monmouthsh. Glamorganshire. Carmardenshire.
Pembrookeshire. Cardiganshire. Montgomerishire. Merionethshire. Carnaruanshire.
Anglesey. Denbighshire. Flintshire.
THE MAPS AND DESCRIPTIONS OF THE SEVERAL SHIRES OF ENGLAND AND WALES.
Deuon-shire.
DEuon-shire, which the Cornish-Britaines named Deuinan, and the
Welsh-Britaines Duffneint. signifying low Valleys, abbutteth on the West upon
Cornwall, being divided from it by the River Tamar: On the South and North
sides it is walled with the Sea, and on the East with Sommerset-shire. The
Dimension being from Canshere North, to Salcombe South, 55. Miles, and from
Thornecombe East, to Hartland-point West, 54. Miles, the compass being about
200. Miles: It is divided into 33. Hundreds, wherein are contained 394. Parish
Churches, and it is interspersed with 29. Rivers, being fitted with 166.
Bridges. It has the foundations of 9. notable Religious Houses and
Monasteries, which now remain but ruins. It is well traded with 37. Market
Towns for commerce, the principal whereof is the famous City of Exeter,
which is seated upon the River Ex, and thereof has the name: but by Ptolomy it
was called Isea, and by the Welsh Pencaer. It is very pleasant situated on the
rising of a Hill, adorned with stately buildings, and is plentifully furnished
with all kind of provision, as well for pleasure as necessary use. It was
compassed about by King Athalstane, with a circular wall, except on the side
toward the River Ex, where it is built in a strait line, and is beautified
with fair Battlements, diverse Towers, and 6. Gates, for passage. On the East
side of this City stands the Castle, which in former times was the resident
seat of the West Saxon Kings. In it also are many fair Churches, but the
chief is Saint Peter's the Cathedral, which was made a Bishops Sea by Edward
the Confessor: It is governed by a Mayor, 24. Brethren, and a Recorder, having
Latitude 50. 45. degrees, and Longitude degrees 20. 39. This Shire has many
hills and dales, having store of woods: And though the soil be somewhat
fruitful of it self, yet it is very much amended by the industry of the
Inhabitants, with the sand that they fe^ch from the Sea side. The Air is sharp
and healthful, the commodities are generally Wool, Cloth, Kearsies, Lead,
Corn, and Cattle, with abundance of Fish and Foul. This Country has many
fitter Havens for intercourse of ships, than Cornwall, whereof Totnes,
Plymouth, and Dartmouth are accounted the most famous. In Exmore in this Shire
are sandy stones set in diverse forms, some circular, and some triangle wise,
which are said to be the ancient memorable marks of Victories obtained there
by the Romans, Saxons, and Danes. And at a place called Hubstow, not far from
the mouth of Tawe (in the year of Christ 879.) was the Dane Hubba (who in many
places persecuted the English) encountered, slain, and buried.

map of Devon DEVON SHIRE


Dorset-shire.
DOrset-shirs, the Inhabitants whereof (by Ptolomy) were called Durotriges, by
the Brit^ines Dur-Gwgr, and by the English Saxons Dor-Seddar; It has Sommerset
and Wilt-shires on the North, Deu^n-shire and another part of Sommerset-shire
on the West, Hamp-shire on the East, and the British Seas on the South. It is
extended in length 44. Miles, in breadth 24. and makes his circumference about
150. Miles. It is shared into five divisions, viz Sherborne, Bridport, Shast^r,
Dorch^^t^r, and Blanford, and these are subdivided into 34. Hundreds, which
contain in them 248. Parish Churches. It is interlaced with the currents of
many clear and fresh water Springs, having 4. Rivers, and 24. Bridges, and in
former times has been guarded with 8. strong Castles, which time has now
almost quite devoured. It has intercourse and trastique with 8. Market Towns,
the principal whereof is Dorchester, which in the Itinerarium of Antoninus was
called Durnouaria, signifying the Ferry: it is seated on the South side of the
River From, and Fosse-way the Roman Cawsy. In times past this Town was
walled, and much greater than it is; but by the Danes who quite rased down the
walls, it was brought low, and of a less quantity. It is now governed by two
Bayliffes, one Alderman, and a Recorder: The height of the Pole being there 50.
38. degrees for Latitude, and the Longitude 21. 51. degrees. Not far from
this Town on the South side is a small plot of ground raised some 30. paces
higher than the rest of the Plain, and compassed about with 5. Trenches,
containing 10. Acres in quantity, and is called by the Country people, The
Mayd^ Castle: having entrance into it but only at the East and West sides; it
is now tilled, and bears Corn, but it is thought in times past to have been
some fort of defense for the Roman Garrisons. The soil of this Country is very
fruitful, producing many necessary commodities: the Air very wholesome, and
the situation most p^eas^^t both for Champion and Woods, having in it 2.
Forests, 12. Parks, and one Chase. The chief commodity, being here Wood,
Wool, and Corn. This Shire has also been beautified with many fair
Monasterie^ and Religious Houses, which are now transformed to heaps of Ruins,
like that old decayed Castle of Badburg, which was environed with a triple
Trench, and had been sometime the seat of the West Saxon Kings.

map of Dorset DORSET SHIRE


Sommerset-shire.
SOmmerset-shire is so called of an ancient Town named Sommerton, which in
former ages was the chiefest and most famous in all the County. It is bounded
with Deuon, and Dorset-shires on the South, the Seuerne Sea on the North,
Wilt-shire and Gloucestershire on the East and North-east, and Deuon-shire on
the West. The length of it, from Brackley East, to Our West, being 55. Miles;
and breadth, from Chard South, to Porshut-point North, about 40. Miles, the
whole circuit containing much upon 204. Miles. It is divided into 42. Hundreds,
wherein are 305. Parish Churches. It is furnished with commodious Havens and
Ports, having 9. Rivers, and 45. Bridges. It is strengthened with 4. Castles,
and has been fairly adorned with many Religious Houses, whereof the Abbey of
Glastenburg was of greatest note, both for quantity and quality, the
antiquity whereof was deduced from Joseph of Arimathea, whole body (as the
report goes) was there interred. So likewise was Witham Nunnery erected by King
Henry the 3. and Hinton, which were afterward the first and second Houses of
Carthusian Monks that ever were in England; but now with diverse other like,
they lie pressed with their own ruins. This County is traffiqued with 24.
Market Towns, and 3. famous Cities, namely Bristow, Bath, and Wells, the first
whereof, though unequal in bigness to some others in England, yet for beauty
and pleasant situation, will hardly yield unto any. The next is Bath, so called
from the Hot-Bathes, and medicinable springs, which to the exceeding comfort
and wonderful cures of infinite diseased persons of all sorts, by Gods
providence do there continually boil and bubble up. The third is Wells, which
(as some hold) has the name from certain Wells which there spring up,
insomuch as in former times that Sea has been called Fontanensis Ecclesia. It
is governed by a Mayor, 7. Magistrates, 16. Burgesses, and a Recorder. The
Latitude being there 51. 12. degrees, and the Longitude 21. 36. degrees. This
County as it is most delightful in Summer, the Air being mild, temperate, and
pleasant, yet is it as myry, moist, and wet in Winter, insomuch as it is then
exceeding troublesome for Travelers. But the soil is most fruitful and
fertile, yielding in abundance most of our necessary commodities: yet chiefly
does it excel for the goodness of Corn, and fatness of Cattle, wherein it
exceeds the most of our other Provinces. Neither is it without rich Mines of
Lead, which have been and are very gainful to the County; and at Saint
Vincents Rock are gotten great store of Diamonds, which for beauty and luster
do parallel the best, but are defective in the hardness. In this Shire have
been fought many bloody battles, as that near Pen, when King Canutus was
pursued by Edmond named Ironside; and that which was performed by Ealstaw
Bishop of Sherborne upon the Danes, near to Bridge-water, with diverse others.

map of Somerset SOMERSET SHIRE


Wilt-shire.
WIltshire, which the old English-Saxons called Wilsetta, has Barkeshire on
the East, Gloucester and Somersetshires on the West, Glocestershire alone on the
North, and Dorset and Hampshire on the South. The length from Burgate South to
Ingl sham North, being about 40. miles, and the breadth from the Shire-stones in
the West to Buttermer East (which is the broadest part of the Shire) spreads
29. miles, making the compass of the whole Shire much upon 140. miles. This
County is divided into 29. Hundreds, wherein are 304. Parish Churches; and it
is well watered and irriguated with 5. Rivers, over which is convenient passage
by 31. Bridges. It has been fortified also with 8. Castles of strength, viz.
Malmesbury, Castlecombe, Lacocke, The Devises, Lurgishall, Warder-Castle,
Salisbury, and Marlingsborough. It is traffiqued for commerce with 21. Market
Towns, the chief whereof is the City of Salisburie, which in time past was
placed some what higher than it is now, but was changed to a far fitter
place, where it is plentifully accommodated with pleasant Riuerets of fresh
running water, passing through many of the streets. It is adorned with many
beautiful buildings, having a most sumptuous Cathedral Church, wherein are as
many doors as there are months, as many windows as there are days, as many
marble pilla^s as there be hours in the year. This Church was begun by
Richard Poor a Bishop, being 40. years before it was finished: And (as my
self have read in an ancient Record yet remaining in the Treasury there)
amongst all the workmen that were at the building thereof, he that had the
greatest wages, had but three half pence a day and found himself. This City
is placed for Latitude 51. 5. and for Longitude 22. 35. Not far from this,
but somewhat higher, stands old Salisburie, which was anciently the seat of the
Romans, but now is transformed to ruins. This County is decked with many fair
edifices, and in times past has had the foundations of many Monasteries and
Religious Houses, whereof that at Malmesburie was of great note for William the
Monk of Malmesburie, who with great industry recorded the history of this
our Land; and another at Ambresburie, where Queen Eleanor wife to King Henry
the Third spent her widowhood as a Nun; besides diverse others which would be
here too tedious to recite. This Shire is both pleasant and fertile, being
situate in a temperate clime, and most wholesome. The North part (commonly
called North-Wiltshire) is both hilly and wooddie, which besides many other
delectable Riuerets, is watered with the famous River Isis. But the South being
not so hilly, through which pass the Rivers W^ly, Adder, and Alton, is
enriched most plentifully with grass and corn: And the middle part, situate
between them both, very level and even, called Salisbury Plains, whereon do
graze an infinite number of sleecie sheep. At a little village in this County,
called Calne, Ann. Dom. 977. was assembled a Synod about the marriages of the
Clergy, where by the sudden breaking of the floor of the room wherein they
were, very many both of the Nobles, Prelates, and Commons, were slain and sore
hurt; but Dunstan the President was only untouched.

map of Wiltshire WILT SHIRE


Hamp-shire.
THis Shire by the Saxons was called Handerchyr, having his North side butting
upon Barkshire, his East upon Survey, Sussex with the British Seas bounding
his South side, and Dorset and Wilt shires with the I Will of Wight opposing his
West. The length of this County from Bascomb South to Bla^kwater North
contains 54. Miles, and the breadth from Petersfield East, to Tedworth West
about 29. or 30. Miles, making about 155. the whole circumference. It is
divided into 37. Hundreds, wherein are contained 253. parish Churches. It is
watered with 4. Rivers, over which for passage are 31. Bridges, and it is
commodiously furnished with fair Havens for ships, as at Southampton,
Portsmouth, Tichfield, and Hamble, etc. It is fortified with diverse strong
Castles, as at Southampton, Calshot, Hurst, Saint Andrews, Porchester, Worth,
and the South Castle, with diverse other places of strength which are situate on
the Sea coast, for defense of the County: Besides at Winchester, Malwood, and
Odiam, which are seated within Land. Marker Towns for commerce are in this
Shire 18. whereof the City of Winchester is the chief, which by the Britans
was called Caer Gwent; by the Romans, Venta Belgarum, and the Saxons
Windanearder: it was built by Rudbudibras, before our Saviors nativity 900.
years, and after it had been twice consumed by fire in the time of the
Saxons, was reedified, the walls raised, and made the chief seat of the
West Saxon Kings, and the Metropolitan Sea of their Bishops: wherein were
crowned Egbert, and Elfred, and Henry 3. was borne. In the time of King Edward
3. this City was made the staple for Cloth and Wool, and in the Cathedral
Church of this City have diverse English Kings been interred. The situation of
this City is in a bottom under hills, very pleasant and fruitful, having the
Castle on the one side, and the River on the other, the walls which ingirt it
containing near two English Miles, having 6. Gates for entrance, and 7.
Churches within it besides the Cathedral; but heretofore it has been adorned
with many others which now remain nothing but Ruins. The graduation of this
City for Latitude is 51. 5. and for Longitude 23. 10. The next to this in this
Shire is the Town of Southampton, from which the whole Shire has the name; it
is both beautiful and rich, walled with a strong stone wall, wherein are 7.
gates, and 29. Towers, and two fair Havens for ships, 5. Churches, and an
Hospital; and on the West side of this Town stands a fair^ strong double
walled Castle, upon the Top of a very fair high hill, making a most
delightful prospect both by Sea and Land. The air in this Shire is very
temperate, though sometimes somewhat foggy, which proceeds from the Seas
adjoining to it, and the Rivers passing through it, which notwithstanding do
store the Country with plenty of fish. And for the soil it is both rich and
pleasant, producing plenty of Corn, Cattle, Woods, and Pasture, bountifully
storing the Inhabitants with Woolls, Cloths, Iron, and almost all kind of
profitable commodities, both by Sea and Land.

map of Hampshire HANT SHIRE


Barke-shire.
THe English Saxons called this Shire Berrocscyre, which on the North is
divided from Buckingham and Oxford-shires by the River of Thames, on the South
it butteth on Hamp-shire, the East is bounded with Surrey, and the West with
Wilt-shire and Gloucestershire. The length from Inglesham West, to old Windsor
in the East, being about 40. Miles, and the breadth from Inkpen South, to
Wightham North, 24. Miles, makes the compass much upon 120. Miles. This
County is parted in 20. Hundreds, which contain in them 140. Parish Churches.
It is interlaced with 3. Rivers, which for convenient passage have 7. Bridges.
13. Market Towns are also dispersed in it for the commodity and commerce of
the Inhabitants, whereof Reading is the chief, where the Danes An. 866. settled
and fortified themselves. But it was built by King Henry 1. who adorned it both
with a fair Monastery and strong Castle, which the first Henry raised, and
the 2. Henry razed and turned to Ruins. The Latitude here is 51. 31. degrees,
and Longitude 23. 34 In this Shire is seated that famous and stately Castle of
Windsor, which sometimes did belong to the Abbot of Westminster. till William the
Conqueror by composition obtained it, and made it his Regal Palace. In it was
borne King Edward 3 who afterward held there (as his prisoners) John King of
France, and David King of Scots. In this Castle is also celebrated the famous
and memorable institution of that most honorable order of the Garter, and in
the Chapel thereof lie interred the bodies of K. Henry 6. Edward 4. and Henry
8. Wallingford, Watham in the East, and Sinodum in the North, in this Shire
were all places of residence for the Romans, as appears by their moneys which
very often are found in those places. And Mr Stow writes, that at Finchamsted
in the year of grace 1100. did a wonderful spring boil up for the space of
15. days sending forth streams of blood. This County is adorned with many
fair and stately buildings, 6. fair Castles, 3. of his Majesty's houses, and
in times past had diverse Religious houses and Monasteries, at A^^^gton,
Reading, Bysham, Bromhall, Hernly, Hamme, and Wallingford. The air is
pleasant, temperate, and wholesome, the soil bringing plenty of Corn and
pasturage, yielding an abundance of increase, especially in the Vale of
Wh^^ehorse. But generally the whole County both for profit and pleasure
(producing Corn and Cattle, with woods, waters, and very delightful
prospects) is inferior for the quantity to no other Shire in England.

map of Berkshire BARK SHIRE


Surrey.
SVrrey was called by the Saxons Suthrea, and by Beda Suthri. It is bounded on
the North with the Counties of Buckingham and Middlesex, and divided from them
by the River of Thames: Sussex and Hampshire enclose it on the South, Kent on
the East, and Hampshire and Barkshire on the West. This Shire is as it were
square in form; yet the length (extending from Frensham to Redrith) contains
34. miles, and the breadth (from Aufold Southward to the Thames by Stanes
Northward) is 22. miles, which makes the Shires circuit about 112. miles. It is
divided into 13. Hundreds, which contain in them 140. Parish Churches, and 8.
Market Towns for traffic and commerce. In this County is no City nor great
Town, and yet may it compare with any for fair buildings and stately houses,
whereof 5. are his Majesty's magnificent Palaces. Ptolemy affirms, that in
this County an ancient people called the Regni had their residence, and after
that Ella with the South Saxons made it their Kingdom. At Lambeth (which was
founded by Archbishop Baldwin, and is now a Palace for the Archbishops of
Canterbury, and famous for being the seat of the Metropolitans of England)
Canutus died, who was the last King of the Danes. And at Kingston in this
County were crowned King Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethelred. And at the ancient
Town of Guildford (whose Pole for Latitude is elevated 51. 15. and Longitude
24.59.) was seated the royal Palace of the English-Saxon Kings. This Shire
has been adorned with the foundations of many fair and rich Religious
Houses, as at Shene, Chertsey, Newarke, Rigate, Merton, Wauerley, and diverse
others: And also 8. strong Castles, at Brenchingley, Goseford, Guilford,
Farnham, Rigate, Darking, Starburg, and Addington: but of most of them is
naught now to be seen, but heaps of old ruins. This County is seated in a
very delectable, pleasant, and wholesome air; and though it be not large, and
altogether so commodious as others for profit, yet is it pleasurable and
healthie, yielding sufficient store of corn, fruit, and pasture.

map of Surrey SURREY


Middlesex.
THis County was so called for being seated between the East and West Saxons
and is bounded on the East by the River Lea, where it butteth upon Essex, and
on the West by Colne is divided from Bu^kingham. The Thames parts Surrey from
it on the South, and Hartford-shire incloseth it on the North. The length from
Stratford in the East to Mo^ehall in the West, contains of our English Miles
19. and the breadth from Hampton Court South to South-Mines in the North about
16. measuring the whole circumference about 90. Miles. It is distinguished into
these 7. Hundreds, viz. Edmonton, Osulslon, Finnesbury, G^re. Is^eworth,
Spelthorne, and Elthorne, in all which are contained 73. Parish Churches
besides those in London. This County (though smaller in quantity than many
other) is the chiefest of all the Land both for beauty and ability, wherein are
2. Cities, and is watered with the most famous River of Thames, being
plentifully stored with Ships of great burden, which continually send out and
bring in all manner of wealthy commodities, for the abundant enriching of all
these his Majesty's Dominions; which River carries her course all along the
South side of the far renowned and ever famous City of London, which for
antiquity has almost worn out her Records; yet we read she was first called
Troy-Nouant, from Bru^e, and Ludstone from King Lud, by the Britans Londaine,
by the Saxons London Cearder, and now by us London. It is the rich Seat and
Royal Chamber of the English Kings, whereto from all parts of the world are
brought all sorts of commodious Merchandise. She was first compassed with
walls by the first Christian Emperor Constantine the Great, wherein besides
other passages, are now built 7. most Magnificent Gates for entrance, and in it
with the Suburbs are contained 121. Churches, besides the Cathedral of Saint
Paul, which (as by tradition is received) was first the Temple of Diana. This
Cities graduation is 51. 32. of Latitude, and in Longitude 24. 27. It is
divided into 26. wards, which by a Lord Mayor, two Sherifes, and 26. Aldermen,
is most religiously in all good order governed. In the time of King John was
the stone Bridge built over the Thames, which for strength, length, breadth, and
beauty, exceeds all others in the world. Close adjoining to this London is the
City of Westminster, famous as well for the seats of Justice, as for the rich
and stately Sepulchers of many Kings, Queens, and other the Nobility of
England. But if I should insist any longer in the particular descriptions of
these Cities, I should exceed my limits, and therefore generally for the County
thus. It is adorned with very many rich and magnificent edifices, whereof 5.
are his Majesty's princely Palaces. The form of this Shire is square-like: The
Air delightful, pleasant and healthful, and the Soil rich and fruitful,
yielding great plenty of full Corn of all kinds, an^ fat Pasture in abundance.

map of Middlesex MIDDLESSEX


Kent.
THis County of Kent, which by Ptolemy and diverse other Writers was called
Cantium, is bounded on the East with the Germane Sea, on the West with Sussex
and Surrey, on the North with the River of Thames, and on the South with the
narrow Seas and Sussex. It runs in length from Langley West to Ramsgate
East, about 53. Miles, and from Rother South unto the Northern Isle of Grain,
about 26. Miles, whereby the whole circuit contains much upon 160. Miles. It
is divided into 5. Lathes, and they into 66. Hundreds, wherein are counted 398.
Parish Churches. The Inland of it is watered with 11. fair Rivers, over which
is passage by 14. Bridges, and diverse of them are nauigable, whereof Medwey
which divides the Shire in two parts is principal. It is fortified with 27.
Castles, and has in it 2. Cities, 2. Bishops Seas, and for commerce and
traffic 24. Market Towns; b^ing besides garnished and fairly adorned with
diverse stately and sumptuous buildings, whereof 8. of them are his Majesty's
Houses. The chiefest City is Canterbury, which is the Metrapolitan and
Archbishops Sea. It was built 900. years before the birth of our Savior, (as
we read in the ancient British Histories) but afterwa^d it became most famous
by Austen the Monk, his converting the Saxons to Christianity, and for the
Cathedral Church wherein is the Tomb of Thomas of Becket, which in the time
of Idolatry became infinitely rich by superstitious offerings. In it was King
John with Queen Isabel his wife crowned, King Henry the 3. married, and Henry
the 4. buried. Henry the 3. granted it afterward privileges and Charters
Richard the 2. fortified and entrenched it, and Archbishop Sudbury walled it.
The graduation for Latitude being there 50. 18. and the Longitude 25. 41. This
Shire is well stored with fair Havens for ships, some of them being strongly
fortified, as Winchelsey, Rumney, Sandwich, and Dover, which with the Castle
there is accounted the Lock and Key of the Realm. The Inhabitants of this
County do account themselves the freest of any other in England, because they
were never conquered, but by Conquering Willi^m were compounded withal. The
Christian faith was first planted in this County, and (as ancient Records do
testify) the first Church dedicated to the service of Christ was founded in
Dover Castle by Lucius the first Christian King of the Britains. In this
Shire have been seated 23. Religious Houses, which now by time are converted
to Ruins. The Air of this County is temperate and healthful, though
sometimes mist-clouded with vapors from the Sea. The East side of the Shire is
Hilly, but the West more plain, even, and woody, yielding generally great
store of all profitable commodities, but is most remarkable for Broad cloths,
fruits, and feedings for Cattle.

map of Kent KENT


Sussex.
THis Shire which of us is called Sussex, was written by the Saxons Suthrex,
s^gnifying as if it were their South Kingdom, in the time of their Heptarchie.
It is confined on the North with Surrey and Kent, on the West with Hampshire,
the British Seas ingirting both the East and South. It is formed long and
narrow, stretching in length from West-harting in the West to the Ditch that
diuides it from Kent, called Kent Ditch, 64. Miles, but where it is broadest it
contains not above 20. making the compass of it about 158. Miles. This Shire
divides it self into 6 Rapes, viz. Chichester, Arundell, Bramber, Jews,
Peuenscy, and Hastings; and every of these have several Hundreds, an cunting
in all to the number of 65. which contain in them 312. Parish Churches.
Industrious Mr. Speed also writes that every of these Rapes contain in them a
River, a Castle, and a Forest. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the
Regni in time of the Romans, who were subdued by the Lieutenant of the Emperor
Claudius, and after the Romans departure, this Shire and Surrey became the
Kingdom of the South Saxons. Diverse places of note are registered in this
County, but the chiefest of all is the City of Chiches^er, which by the Saxons
was written Cissan-Ceasder, built by Cissa the South-Saxon King, who therein
kept his Court. It is large, fair, and well fortified with a wall, and was
made the Bishops Sea by William the Conqueror. The Pole being there elevated
50. 52. and has Longitude 23. 50. This Shire has been both strengthened and
beautified with 10. Castles, and many Religious Houses, which were built for
pious uses, but are now dissolved into Ruins. 18. Market-Townes for tr^ffique
of the Inhabitants are fitly seated in this County, whereof Chichester formerly
spoken of is the chief, although Jews both for bigness and fair buildings
seems to compare with it. The air in this Shire is both temperate and
pleasant, though sometimes darkened with mists arising from the Seas. The Soil
is rich, yielding great plenty of necessary commodities, though in Winter it
is both unpleasant and unsafe for Travelers by reason of the deep and
dangerous ways in it. It yields great plenty of Fish and Sea-Fowle, with
Co^ne, Cattle, and Woods; and so does it of Iron and Glass good store, which
are the two deuourers of those fair Woods. The midst of this Shire is decked
with many fair Meadows, Pastures, and Corn fields. But toward the Sea side
are seated diverse Hills called the Downs, which produce abundance of Corn and
Grass: The rest of the Shire being yet stored with plenty of pleasant Groves
and Woods.

map of Sussex SUSSEX


Essex.
THis County (which by the Saxons was called East-seaxa, by the Normans
Exssesa, and now by us Essex) contains in length from Horsey Island East to
Haydon West 40. Miles, and from Sturmere on the River Stow North to East-ham
upon Thames South 35. Miles, making the form somewhat circular, and the
circumference to bear about 146. Miles. It is confined on the East with the
Germane Seas, on the West with Hertfordshire and Middlesex. The Thames diuides
it from Kent on the South, and Suffolk and Cambridgshires bind it on the
North. The division of it is into 20. Hundreds, which contain in the^ 415.
Parish Churches. It has 7. Rivers, over which is passage by 28. Bridges: and for
delight is furnished with 46. Parkes and one Chase well stored with game. The
Inhabitants here have intercourse for traffic and commerce in 21. Market
Towns, the chiefest whereof is now the City of Colchester, which was built by
the British Prince Coilus, Ann. Dom. 124. and in it was borne Constantine the
first Christian King and Emperor in the world. It is seated on the South side
of the River Colne, and thereof bears the name. It has been fortified with a
wall, wherein are 6. Gates, besides 3. smaller Posterns for passage, and 9.
Towers, and within and without the walls has it 10. fair Churches, besides
diverse other foundations of Religious Houses, which are now utterly decayed as
well as the old Castle, which by the Ruins appears in times past to have
been of very great strength. This City is governed by 2. Bailiffes, 12.
Aldermen, and a Recorder. The Latitude being there 51. 52. and the Longitude
25. 37. In the ancient Town of Malden in this County Cuno-belin that was King
of the Trinobants, held his Court about the time of our Saviors birth, and was
afterward a garrison for the Romans, till Queen Budo with the slaughter of
70000. Romans laid it level with the foundation. This County is very populous,
and has been beautified with many fair and rich Religious Houses, and
strengthened with 5. strong Castles. It is accommodated also with 5. convenient
Havens for ships. The Air (except by the Sea side) is both temperate and
pleasant, the Soil most fertile, yielding very many excellent commodities, as
Corn, Cattle, Woods, Fish, Foul, and that rich merchandise of the best
Saffron, which where it grows so fatneth the ground, that after three years
gleabe thereof, the land for 18. years after brings forth Barley in abundance.
Here are also many fair flocks of fine fleeced sheep, which in this County
they use to milk as they do their Kine, whereby is made much cheese, which
(besides the furnishing of their own Country) is transported and uttered in
diverse other parts abroad.

map of Essex THE COUNTY OF ESSEX.


Hartford-shire.
HA^^ford-shir^ (so called from the Shire-Towne Hartford, which some have named
Herudford) is of a circular form, making 2. Diameters almost of an equal
Longitude, cross each other in the Center; for the one giving the length from
Cheston Nunnery in the East to Putnam West contains but 28. miles, and the
other North and South, measuring the breadth from Ro^ston to Totteridge, is full
27. making the whole circumference to contain near about 130. Miles. It is
bounded on the East side by Essex, and on the West with Buckingham and
Bedford-shires; the North butteth upon Bedford and Cambridge-shires, and the
South upon Middlesex. This Shire is watered but with one River, yet has it
many Riuerets, and 24. Bridges, and 120 Parish-Churches are contained in these
8. Hundreds, Odsey, Edwinstree, Branghing, Brodewater, Hitching, Dacor,
Hertford and Ca^sho, whereinto this Shire is divided. And it is traded for the
utterance of commodities, and traffic amongst the Inhabitants, with 18 Market
Towns, whereof though Hartford be the Shire-Towne, and has gotten her Officer
in chief to be altered from a Burgess to a Mayor, (who associated with nine
Burgesses and a Recorder does govern it) yet is Ware and others for ability
the better, by reason of the continual passage of people, that make therein
their thorow-fare almost into all the Northern parts of this Realm. Here in
this Town was sometime seated a fair and strong Castle, which now appears to
have tasted the scourge of Time, as well as diverse other famous and richly
endowed Relig^ous Houses that in former times have gorgeously adorned this
County. The Longitude is here 24. 25. and the Latitude 51. 22. ^. Near to
Saint Albans (that ancient Town, made famous for diverse Battles there fought)
in this Shire was seated that strong and magnificent City of Verulam, which
was overcome by the Romans, and endowed with the privileges of Rome, but now
lies dead and buried under the heaps of her own ruins. The air in this
County is temperate, delightful, and healthful; the soil commodious, rich,
and fruitful, plentifully producing store of Cattle, Corn, Grass, and Wood,
with diverse other commodities most useful for the Inhabitants.

map of Hertfordshire HARTFORD SHIRE


Buckingham-shire.
THis Shire is supposed to derive the name from the Saxon word Bucken, which in
that language signifies Beech-trees, whereof this County is plentifully
stored. It reaches in length (from Bradfield in the North to Waisburie the
furthest part South) 39. miles, and the breadth (from Ashridge East to the
Forest of Brenwood West) 18. miles, whereby the whole circuit is about 138
miles. The bounds of this Shire are Northampton and Bedfordshires on the North,
part of Bedford and Hertford-shires on the East, Barkeshire on the South, and
Oxfordshire on the West. This Province is parted into 8 Hundreds, which are
furnished with 185 Parish-Churches. It is watered with two Rivers, which have
14 Bridges for passage: And for convenient traffic of their commodities, it
is interspersed with 11 Market Towns, whereof the chief is Buckingham the
Shire-Towne, which is situated upon the River Ouse, which compasses the Town
on all sides but the North. In times past it has been fortified by King
Edward the elder with Sconces on both sides of the River, over which are built
three fair stone Bridges: and upon a high hill in the midst of the Town was
sometime raised a strong Castle, which is now utterly rased to dustie ruins. A
Bailiffe with 12 Burgesses do now very orderly govern this Town, where the
elevation of the Pole is 52. 2. and the Longitude 23. 30. At Stony Stretford an
ancient Town in this Shire, standing upon the Causey called Watling-street,
which passes through England, is a Cross, built by King Edward the first for a
memorial of Eleanor his Queen, because there her dead corpse rested, as it was
brought from Herdby in Lincolne-shire, to be buried at Westminster; and the
like did he do in every place where it rested. This Shire has been
strengthened with 4 Castles, viz. at Buckingham, Newport, Launden, and
Hampsleepe, and was also beautified with many Religious Houses, which time has
now ruined, and converted to other uses. The Air in this County is temperate,
wholesome, and pleasant; and the Soil (by reason of his fatness) is both rich
and fruitful, yielding Corn, Grass, and Marle in abundance. The middle part
of the Shire being high, called the Chilterne Hills, has been and still is
well stored with woods; and the Valleys lying plain, are very fruitful for
meadows, tillage, and pastures, feeding infinite numbers of fleecie sheep.

map of Buckinghamshire BVCKINGHAM SHIRE


Oxfordshire.
THe Histories of our English-Saxons say, that the City of Oxford deriueth the
name from the Foord of Oxen, from which City the whole County is called
Oxfordshire, which is environed on the North side with Warwick and
Northampton-shires, on the East with Buckingham, the West with Gloucester, and
the South by Barkshire. It contains in length, from Cleydon North-west to
Cauersham South-east, near forty miles; and in breadth, from the aforesaid
Cleydon North to Farringdon upon the River Isis in the South (which is the
broadest of the Shire) almost 26. miles, causing the circumference to come
near to 130 miles. This County is divided into 14 Hundreds, and they have 280
Parish Churches contained in them. It is interlaced with 3. Rivers, which are
fitted with 26. Bridges. Four Forests and 9 Parks do also beautify this
County; and for commerce and traffic of commodities there are dispersed 10
Market Towns, the chief whereof is the fair City and ever renowned
University of Oxford, which for the infinite numbers of most learned,
reverend, and famous Fathers, Doctors and Scholars it has produced, and
enriched this Kingdom withal, has made it self not only glorious in this our
Nation, but purchased an everliving fame and memory through all the Kingdoms
of Christendom. This City has been walled, and strongly fortified with a
Castle, which though time has now utterly ruined, yet is it adorned with 17
most stately Colleges, 8 Halls, and many other most beautiful buildings. The
Pole is there elevated 51. 47. and the Longitude 23. 15. About six miles from
this City is seated Woodflocke, where King Hen. 2. built a Labyrinth to keep
his fair Concubine Rosamond, who was afterward poisoned by the Queen, and
buried in the Nunnery at Godstow near thereto adjoining. This County is
adorned with many fair Manors and beautiful buildings, wherein (as by their
ruins does appear) have been many stately and richly endowed Religious
Houses, as Oseney, Godstow, Tame, Burchester, Euisham, Beuerne, and diverse
others. The Air in this County is both sweet, pleasant, and healthful; The
Soil rich, commodious, and fruitful, yielding to the Inhabitants great plenty
of Wood, Wool, Cattle, Corn, Pasture, and (in a word) almost all useful
commodities in abundance.

map of Oxfordshire OXFORD SHIRE


Gloucestershire.
GLocestershire in the Saxon tongue was called Gleaucesderschyre, fetching the
name from the chiefest Town the City of Gloucester. It is ingirt with
Worcester and Warwickeshires on the North, Somersetshire on the South, Oxford
and Wiltshires on the East, and H^refordshire on the West. The length of it
(reaching from Bristow upon Auon South, to Clifford upon Auon North) is much
upon 48 miles; and the breadth (extending from Lechlad East to Preston West) 28.
which causes the whole compass to contain about 138 miles. The ancient
Inhabitants of this County were the Dobuni, and in some part the Silures. This
Province is divided into 30 Hundreds, which contain in them 280
Parish-Churches. It has three fair Rivers, over which a man may pass by 22
Bridges; the chief whereof is Seuerne, which for store of Fish, breadth of
Channel, and swiftness of Stream, excels any other in the Land. It is
conveniently sprinkled with 25 Market-Townes for trade and traffic, whereof
two are famous Cities, whereof the first and most ancient is Gloucester, which
about the middle of the Shire is situate upon the River Seuerne. It was built
by the Romans, and was the Garrison Town for their Colonia Gleuum, It has
been strongly walled on all parts but that toward the River, as may appear
by the ruins yet remaining in many places. There was the stately Nunnerie
built by Osrick King of Northumberland, wherein three of the Mercian Queens
succeeded one another, being Prioresses. The Cathedral Church (first built by
Edels^ed, King Edward the elders sister) was ruinated by the Danes, but
afterward reedified, and dedicated to S. Peter, where King Edward the second,
who was murdered at Barkley Castle, lies intombed. The Graduation of the Pole
in this City is 51. 54. and Longitude 22. 17. The other City, which stands
but part in this Shire, and part in Somersetshire, is Bristow, seated upon the
two Rivers Froome and Auon, and, as is formerly said, (the quantity excepted)
for quality is parallel to the chiefest in England. In the Island Alney near
Gl^cester, Edmund Iron-side combatted hand to hand with Canutus the Dane: And
at Barkley Castle King Edward the second had a red hot spit thrust through his
fundament into his belly. The foundations of many Religious Houses have been
both raised up, and rased down in this County, where the Air is very pleasant
and delectable, the Soil being so fruitful by nature, that the very
Hedge-rowes of their own accord bring plenty of excellent fruits, and in times
past has yielded abundance of most pleasant Vines; but now it produces store
of Corn, Fruits, F^ne Wools, and Iron, and is most pleasantly accommodated
with Woods and Pasture.

map of Gloucestershire GLOUCESTER SHIRE


Worcestershire.
BY the English Saxons this County was written Wirceasderscyre, which we call
Worcester shire, which being inuerged on the East with Oxford and
Warwicke-shires, is on the West divided from Herefordshire by Maluerne Hills:
the South is environed with Gloucestershire, and the North with the County of
Stafford. It reaches in length (from Ridmerly South to Yardley North) 32
miles, and the breadth (from Church Honyborne East to Tenbury West) about 28.
which makes the whole circumference to amount much upon 120 miles. Into 7
Hundreds is this Shire divided, and those contain in them 152 Parish-Churches.
It has but one City, one Bishopric, but is pleasantly watered with four
fair Rivers, as Auon, Tame, Salwarpe, and Seuerne, which passes almost through
the Center of the Shire: and these may be passed over by 13 Bridges. This Shire
also is delighted with one Chase, two Forests, and 16 Parkes; and for concourse
and commerce is fitted with 10 Market Towns, whereof the City of Worcester
(whence the County is so called) is the chiefest, which is a fair, rich, and
populous City, most delightfully situate on the East side of Seuerne, being
built somewhat like the whole Shire, in a triangular form. The old Saxons
called it Wireceas^er, the Latins Vigornia, and we Worcester. It was founded
(as is supposed) by the Romans, to oppost the Britains* It is compassed with a
wall, which gives entrance through seven gates, and both for defense and
ornament has five Turrets. This City has diverse times tasted of diverse
fortunes, having been sometimes almost quite consumed by fire, and otherwise
grievously oppressed by enemies, and yet is now again become a famous and
magnificent City, which has a fair Cathedral Church, first founded by
Sexwolfe the Bishop, in the year 680. wherein are interred the bodies of King
John that was poisoned by a Monk, and Prince Arthur, King Henry the Seuenths
eldest son. The government of this City is orderly menaged by two Bailiffes,
two Aldermen, two Chamberlaines, and two Constables, which being chosen out of
24 Burgesses, are annually changed. The Pole is here elevated 52. 19. and the
Longitude is 22. 17. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Cornauij,
who in Claudius Caesar's time were overcome by the Romans, after whose departure
it became part of the Mercian Saxon kingdom. Vpton in this Shire in the Romans
time was a place of Garrison for their Legions, and to this day are many of
their moneys found there. In this County have many famous Religious Houses
been founded, but by King Henry the Eighth were they rased down like the
rest, and nothing now remaining for their memorial, but huge heaps of pitiful
ruins. And with diverse strong Castles also has this County been fortified,
whereof the most of them have felt the heavy hand of fortune, to suppress them
as low as their foundations were laid. In a most temperate and pleasant air is
this Shire seated, and for fertility of Soil may be accounted comparable to
the best in the Land. It is plentifully stored with all kind of most necessary
commodities, yielding abundance of Corn, Cattle, Woods, and Pastures; having
the fields and hedges set full of Pear trees, wherewith they make much Pe^^y.
Besides all which, in this Province are many Salt Springs, and diverse other
profitable commodities, which yield welcome gain to the Inhabitants.

map of Worcestershire WORCESTER SHIRE


Warwicke-shire.
WArwicke-shire is so called from the Shire-Towne, now vulgarly named Warwick,
but was ^^armed by the Saxons Warringwicke, as our ever famous Historian M.
Camden records, which he also judges to have been the Romans Garrisons Town.
By Ptolemy they were called the Cornauij, wherein after were seated the Mercian
Saxons. It is environed with the County of Stafford on the North,
Watling-street and Northamptonshire on the East, Oxford and Glocester-shires
on the South, and Worcestershire on the West. It is extended from Newton in
the North to Long Compton in the South, 33. miles, and is spread in wideness
from Hewell Grange in the West to Hill Morton in the East, 25 miles, the whole
circuit thereof being 135 miles. It is divided into five Hundreds, viz.
Hemlingford, Couentry, Knightlow, Barklichway, and Kington, wherein are 158
Parish-Churches. This Shire is interlaced with eight Rivers, as Auon, Anchor,
Blyth, Bourne, Leame, Sherburne, Sow, and Tame, being fitted with 29 Bridges.
It is traded with 16 Market Towns, the chief whereof are Couentry and
Warwick, Couentry being stately adorned with fair buildings, well fortified
with a Wall, wherein are 13 Gates, and 18 Towers, by the grant of King Edward
the Third, whereby also they might elect a Mayor and two Bailiffes; but by King
Henry the Sixth it was incorporated a County of it self, and the names of
Bailiffes turned into Sheriffs, by which at this day it is governed. At
Goffard Gate in the East end of this City, hangs the shield-bone of a wild
Boar, slain by Sir Guy of Warwick, as the report goes. Warwick is built
upon the North-East bank of Auon, by Gurgustius the son of Belinus, 375
years before the birth of our Savior. There is a very sumptuous Castle lately
repaired by Sir Fulke Greuill; and from the Town over the River is a very
fair strong stone Bridge, the passage into the Town being hewed out of the
Rock. It has two fair Churches, and is governed by a Bailiffe, 12 Brethren,
and 24 Burgesses. This Shire is beautified with many fair Edifices, having had
sometime 12 notable foundations of Religious Houses and Monasteries, 20 Parks,
and one Chase. The River Auon has on the North side the Woodland, and on the
South side the Feilden, with the Vale of Red-Horse. It is abundantly fruitful,
producing plenty of Corn, Wools, and Wood, with Mines of Iron and Cole. At a
place called Shugborow in this Shire is found the precious stone ^storices. At
Offchurch is the Palace of the great Norman Commander Offa. At Lemington (far
from the Sea) is a Spring where Salt water continually boyles up. And at
Newnham Regis is found a Well, the water whereof is very medicinable for many
diseases, and turns wood into stone. At Guyes Cliffe near Warwick the
famous Earl Guy (after many worthy exploits achieved) lead an Hermites life
unknown.

map of Warwickshire WARWICK SHIRE


Northamptonshire.
THis Shire, by the Saxons termed Northafendonscire, and by us
Northamptonshire, is long and narrow, seated very near the Center of England,
and is bounded on the East by Huntington-shire, having the River Nene to divide
them; on the West by Warwick and Watling-street: the North is severed from
Lincolne-shire by the River Weland; and Oxford and Buckingham-shires enclose it
on the South. It contains in length (from Cherwell to Weland River near
Crowland) 46 miles, and at the broadest (between the Rivers of Ouse and Auon)
near 20, the whole circuit being about 119 miles. Into 20 Hundreds is this
Shire shared, which contain in them 326 Parish Churches: and with five Rivers
is it watered, which are passeable by 24 Bridges. Moreover with three Forests
and 23 Parkes is this County delighted. For Traffic and Trade amongst the
Inhabitants, there are seated severally 11 Market Towns, whereof the
Shire-Towne Northhampton (whence the County carries the name) is of most
account, being both large in quantity, and beautiful in quality; for it is
adorned with many fair and stately buildings, it is pleasantly seated on the
River Nene, and (excepting on the Rivers side) was anciently strongly walled
with stone; but Suen the Danish King first fired it, and after that in King
John's time the disloyal Barons afflicted it, since when has it not been free
from cruel Fortunes bitter blasts. The ruins of (her sometime strong defense)
the Castle stand weather beaten upon a mount on the West part of the Town, to
show what it had been. This Town is ciuilly governed by an annual elected
Mayor, two Bailiffes, 12 Magistrates, and a Recorder; the Pole being elevated
52. 16. and the Longitude 23. 44. In this County also is seated the City of
Peterborough, which by the Saxons was called Meddeswell, where was a
magnificent Monastery built and dedicated to S. Peter by the Mercian King
Wolphere; which though it be now ruinated, yet is there a most fair and
stately Cathedral, having a large Cloister, in the glass windows whereof the
history of Wolphere the Founder is most curiously figured. This County has
been fortified for defense with ten strong and famous Castles, and likewise
plentifully stored with the foundations of many fair and rich Religious
Houses, which for their magnificall state in time of their standing, were as so
many beautiful ornaments to the Shire; whereas now their dust and ruins are
but motives of pity to all that pass by them. The Air in this Province is
temperate, pleasant, and healthful; and the Soil fat, rich, and fertile,
producing all kind of the best Corn: And for delightful Meadows, cheerful
Woods, and pleasant Pastures, the Inhabitants are so plentifully furnished, as
their herds of cattle and fair flocks of sheep (which both for flesh and
fleece cannot be bettered) do so infinitely multiply, as thereby the Country
is befitted with all kind of useful and necessary commodities in an abundant
manner.

map of Northamptonshire Northamton Shire


Bedford-shire.
THis Shire takes the name from the Shire-Towne, called by us Bedford, from
the Saxon name Bedenford, but by the Britains it was called Lettidur. This
County is bordered on the North side with Huntington-shire, on the South with
Buckingham and Hartford-shires, on the East with Hartford and Cambridge-shires,
and upon the West with Northampton and Buckingham-shires. It is but a small
Continent, being in length (from Tilbrooke North to St^udham South) about 24
miles, and the breadth (from Turney West to Hatley Coking in the East) scarce 14
miles, which causes the circumference to make in all not above 73 miles. It is
distinguished into nine Hundreds, wherein are 116 Parish-Churches. Only one
River (which is Ouse) waters this Shire, which is ouerpassed but by six
Bridges. It has intercourse for the traffic of commodities with ten Market
Towns, whereof that at Bedford (the most famous) is most pleasantly seated, in
a most fruitful soil, having the River Ouse dividing the Town in the midst,
over which is built a fair and strong stone Bridge, with two Gates, for the
prevention of passage if need should require. And here on the brinke of this
River sometime stood a little Chapel, wherein (as ancient Writers record) Offa
the Mercian King was buried, whose Monument a long time there remained, till
the ouerflowing River washed it clean away. This Town has a Mayor, two
Bailiffes, two Chamberlaines, and a Recorder, to govern it: the Longitude
there being 24. 0. and the Elevation of the Pole for Latitude 52. 11. At
Dunstable in this Shire, and Sandey, which were then called Magintum and
Selenae, lay the Roman Legions, where to this day are found diverse sorts of
their Coins. And afterward hence did the Saxons drive out the Britains, and
seated themselves in their room. At a place near Harwo^d (Anno 1399) the
River Ouse stood suddenly still, so as men went three miles in the bottom of
the Channel on foot without any danger. This Shire also has been beautified
with diverse fair Castles, as at Woodhill, Temsford, Eaton. and Amphill, and
many famous Houses of Religion, which are now utterly abolished and laid level
with their foundations. The Air here is very temperate and pleasant bringing
both delight and health to the Inhabitants. The Soil is rich and fertile, but
especially where the River Ouse by the moistening of her banks makes the
meadows send forth their increase in abundance. And although the other parts
of the Shire are somewhat more barren, being for the most part a Champion, yet
by the industrious Inhabitants it is well stored with Barley, and plenty of
Pasturage, and is not wanting for some store of Woods.

map of Bedfordshire BEDFORD SHIRE


Huntington-shire.
HVntington-shire, which was called by the Ancients Hundedumscyre, is environed
with Lincoln and Northampton-shires on the North, Bedford and Cambridge-shires
on the South, the I Will of Ely on the East, and Northamptonshire on the West. It
reaches in length (from Tetworth South to Woodstone North) not above 20 miles,
and from Erith East to Keston West (where it is broadest) much about 16. In the
time of the Romans it was part of the Iceni, and under the Saxons part of
Mercia, which till Canutus time was all Forest. This Shire in ancient time had
5, but now is distinguished into but 4 divisions, called the Hundreds of Norman
Cross, Huntington, Leightenstone, and Tosland, which are subdivided into 79
Parishes, which are measured by Hides and Carucks or plowed lands; and they are
interlaced and irriguated with the River Ouse, and diverse other Riuerets
besides, the Fens and Marsh grounds stretching toward Lincolne-shire and the
I Will of Ely. And for commerce and traffic amongst the Inhabitants, this County
(being not very big) contains but six Market Towns, whereof Huntington the
Shire-Towne and denominator of the whole County, is accounted the chief, which
in old time was called Hundendun, or The Hunters Down, and is situate on the
North bank of the River Ouse, on the rising of a hill, and in former ages had
in it 15 Churches, which are now suppressed with their own ruins, except S.
Mary's and 3 others. This Town in the time of the Conqueror was divided into 4
Wards, wherein were contained 256 households: and here was money coined, having
on the one side the image and style of the King, and on the other side the name
of the Earl or B shop then being in the time of the coynage. The Castle also
is now utterly ruinated, which by some is thought to be built by Edw. the
elder, and the seat of the great Saxon Earl Waltheol, but rased down by Hen.
2. Here David Earl of Anguise built the Hospital of S. John Bapt. and with
many other Monasteries and religious houses was as well this Town as the whole
County adorned. The River to this Town was once nauigable, till Gray the Kings
Favorite stopped up the passage: and by Charter from K. John is the government
hereof committed to 2 yearly elected Bailiffes and a Recorder, with some other
Assistants. The Pole being elevated 52. 23. and the Longitude 24. 21. The many
rich and stately Monasteries and Religious Houses in this County were by K.
Hen. 8. laid level with their foundations, and in their own ruins entombed.
This Province on the West side is more hilly and healthful than the other
toward the Fenns and Marshes, and yields store of corn and other useful
commodities: and the lower watery grounds are equal to any part of England for
goodness of feeding, and the best pasturage, besides plenty of Turfe and Fuel
from the Moors and Marish grounds. So, as well as any other Shire, is this
County accommodated with Corn, Flesh, Foul, and Fish, and wants almost
nothing that is necessary.

map of Huntingdonshire HVNTINGTON SHIRE


Cambridge-shire.
THe English Saxons called this County Grentbrig-scyre, which we call
Cambridge-shire, and is bordered upon on the East with Suffolk and Norfolk,
on the West with Huntingdon and Bedford shires, on the North with Norfolk and
Lincolne-shire, and on the South with Essex and Hartford-shire. The length of
it (from the furthest of the Fenns in the North, to Royston South) contains 35
miles, and the breadth at the broadest from East to West, is scarce 20. and the
whole compass being measured with her many turnings, amounts to 128 miles. It
is but a small Shire, and yet is divided into 17 Hundreds, which have in them
165 Parish-Churches, and eight Market Towns, whereof the most famous and ever
flourishing University of Cambridge is the principal, which is situate on the
East side of the River Caine, from whence (as some hold) she has her name;
although other Histories of antiquity derive it from Cantaber, who 375 years
before the Incarnation had there settled the Muses seat. And albeit in many Ages
this City (like many others) has tasted many woeful fortunes, yet now is it
beautified and fairly adorned with sixteen most magnificent Colleges and
Halls, full stored with painful Students, and as ever it has, so still it
does with abundant increase of most learned and famous Docto^s, Teachers, and
Professors of all Arts and Sciences, enrich not only this our Land, but all
others whereto they are dispersed. The Elevation of the Pole is here 52. 17.
degrees, and Longitude 24. 46. Another City in this Shire was sometime also of
great note, called by the Saxons Elg, but now by us Ely, which grew first
famous for one Audrey a Princess, and wife to Egbert King of Northumberland,
who there built a Nunnery, and leaving her husband, was the first Abbess of it
her self. Yet this also escaped not the fury of misfortune, for afterward by
the Danes was it utterly ruinated, till Ethelwold the Bishop of Winchester
repaired it, and built there a Monastery for Monks. And though it be now also
dissolved, yet is there remaining the stately Cathedral of that Diocese. This
County has had many fair foundations of rich Religious Houses, as at Beach,
Barnwell, Charteres, Denny, Elsey, Shengey, Swasey, and Thorney: but these as
well as the rest were suppressed and deprest with the weight of King Henry the
Eighths hand. Amongst the remarkable things in this County, Gogmagog Hills is
one, which is near unto Cambridge, and was a Fort with a Treble Trench raised
there by the Danes, whose Station it then was. And another was a long and large
Trench, passing quite through Newmarket Heath, which is commonly called The
Devils Ditch, but at first was made there to defend the East Angles against the
Mercians, as our ancient Histories do record. The Fenns on the North of this
County do make the Air neither so pleasant nor wholesome as it is in other
Shires: but more Southerly it is much more delectable. And as in it, so is
there a difference in the Soil, which on the South is Feilden, and being
watered with the River Came, is fraught with fair Meadows and Pastures, and
yields plenty of Corn, some Saffron, and Woods: The Fenny part being
exceedingly replenished with abundant store both of Fish and Foul.

map of Cambridgeshire CAMBRIDGE SHIRE AND ISLE OF ELY


Suffolk.
THis County was termed by the Saxons Suthfole, and is bounded on the East
with the German Seas, on the West with the County of Cambridge; the South side
by Stowre is severed from Essex, and the North from Norfolk by the Rivers of
Waueney and the lesser Ouse. The length (being from Easton point East to the
River of great Ouse West) 45 miles; and at the broadest part (between North
and South) has but about 20. which causes the whole compass to contain much
upon 146 miles. The division of this Shire is in three parts, viz. Celdable, S.
Edmunds, and S. Audries, which are subdivided into 22 Hundreds, and contain in
them 575 Parish-Churches. Besides small Streams, it is watered but with two
Rivers, which have over them 32 Bridges. The Inhabitants do trade for
commodities in this County in 28 Market Towns, the chiefest whereof is
Ipswich, a fair and stately Town for buildings, being seated most pleasantly
in a fruitful Soil, and well traded with all kind of merchantable
commodities. It seems to have been walled about in times past, and to have
had Gates for entrance, where is now but small appearance thereof, being cast
down by the Danes, who rased the whole Town to the ground; but afterward it
revived, and was beautifully rebuilt, with many large streets, and diverse fair
Churches, whereof 12 do yet remain, besides those that are dissolved. It is a
Corporation orderly governed by two yearly elected Bailiffes, 10 Portmen, 24
of the Common Counsel, and a Recorder. And the height of the Pole is there 52.
4 and Longitude 25. 52. And their ancient Town of note in this County is that
which ever since the burial of King Edmund (who was shot to death at Hoxon) is
therefore called S. Edmunds Bury, where for that Kings perpetual memory was
built one of the most magnificent Abbeys that ever was founded; yet now (like
the rest) it lies overwhelmed with the huge heaps of her own ruins. Between
Alborough and Orford, Anno 1555 (in the time of a violent famine) miraculously
sprung up great plenty of Pease on the Rocks, without either sowing or tillage,
to the wonderful relief of the distressed Inhabitants of this County. Diverse
most magnificent and fair Religious Houses have been in diverse places situate
in this Shire, which are depressed. And many other places and accidents
remarkable does this County afford, which to keep my self within my limited
bounds, I am forced to omit. The Air is here fresh, pleasant, and healthful;
the Soil rich, fat, and fruitful, producing Pasture, Corn, Cattle, Woods,
Wools, Cloth, and Fish and Fowls in abundance.

map of Suffolk SUFFOLK


Norfolk.
BEcause this County was the furthest North part of the Kingdom of the
East Angles, it was termed Northfolke, which we call Norfolk, and is bounded
on the East and North with the German Seas, on the South it is severed from
Suffolk with the Rivers of Waueney and the lesser Ouse, and on the West it
butts upon Lincoln and Cambridge-shires. It stretches in length (from
Yarmouth East to Wi^bitch West) near 50 miles, and the breadth (from Wells to
The^ford) 30, making the circumference to contain much upon 242 miles. It is
divided into 32 Hundreds, and these are subdivided into 660 Parish-Churches.
Besides, many good Harbors and diverse fair Rivers and Streams interlace this
County, which are passable by 15 Bridges. And for traffic of merchandise and
other commodities, it is conveniently fitted with 30 Market Towns, whereof the
fairest is the famous City of Norwich, which though like others it has tasted
variety of fortunes, yet is it now for beauty and ability counted the best
next LONDON of any other City in England, being delectably placed in a pleasant
bottom upon the River Hierus, and yet upon the ascent of an hill, which on the
East side mounts so high, as to ouerlooke the whole City. In King Stephens
time it was made a Corporation; Edward the first fortified it with a wall,
except on that side next the River; and Henry the fourth made it a County, and
changed the government from four Bailiffes to a Mayor: and though many of the
ancient Churches and Religious Houses lie now wasted in their own ruins, yet
still does it contain about 30 Parishes. On the East side of this County is
situate Yarmouth, at the mouth of the River Year, from whence it has the name;
and by King Henry the Third was walled and made a Corporation. It is strongly
built, and well fortified, being the chief of the Cinque Ports, where about
September every year is great fishing for Herrings, as the like is not in any
part of Europe, whereby the Town for the present, and the whole Land (with
diverse other) all the year after is both enriched and refreshed. Another
remarkable Town in this Shire is Lyn, which was made a Corporation by King
John, who gave them a Cup, which still remains there as a memorable
testimony of his bounty: but afterward by King Henry the third was their
Charter enlarged, and their Bailiffe altered to a Mayor, by whom (with
Assistants of twelve Aldermen and a Recorder) it is at this day governed. About
Thetford in this County, by Hungar and Hubba the Danes was good King Edmund
overthrown, who afterward was martyred at S. Edmunds Bury. By reason of this
Shires so near neighboring to the Seas, the Air is somewhat sharp and
piercing. The Elevation of the Pol^ being there 52. 46. 1/2. and the Longitude
25. 57. The Soil as in some places it is lean and barren, so is it in other
parts fat and fruitful, but in all places very commodious to the Inhabitants,
for Marsland is excellent good for Pasture, and Flegg for Corn. The West part
along the Coast is their Champion, and yields great store of Sheep, Corn,
and Conies: and that part more within Land (being more wooddie) is their
Woodland, which is so stored with grass, as it furnishes the Country with
plenty of Cattle, and yet is not wanting for Corn or Sheep. And generally
all over does it abound both for Fish and Foul, with many other useful
commodities.

map of Norfolk NORFOLK


Lincolne-shire.
THis Shire was called by the Saxons Lincollscyre, by the Normans Nicolshire,
and now vulgarly Lincolne-shire. It is a very large County, extending in length
(from Barton upon Humber in the North, to Stanford on the River Nine in the
South) 55 miles, and in breadth (from Newton in the West to Winthorpe in the
East) 35 miles, the whole circuit being about 180 miles. It is environed on the
North with the River Humber, on the East with the German Sea; on the South it
butteth on the Counties of Northampton and Cambridge, and on the West upon
Nottingham and Yorke-shires. It is divided into three principal parts,
Lindsey, Kesteuen, and Holland; Lindsey containing 17 Hundreds, Kesteuen 11,
and Holland 3, in all 31 Hundreds, wherein are 630 Parish-Churches. This Shire
has also in it nine Rivers, and fifteen Bridges: and though on the East and
South sides of it (by reason of the Fenns) the Air is somewhat foggie, yet is
it temperate. And it is elevated to the height of 53 degrees. This County is
somewhat unsafe for Travelers, for the Sands and Salt waters which in many
places make incursions into the Land. It is traded with 31 Market Towns,
whereof the City of Lincoln (the denomination of the County) is the chief.
The antiquity of the City appears as well by the still remaining ruins, as
by the ancient Records. In one whereof is read, that this City had in it 1007
Mansions, 900 Burgesses, and 12 Lage-men. In the Normans time it was the most
populous of any City of England, and in it did King Edward 3 ordain his staple
for the mart of Wools. Leather, and Lead; in whose reign it was adorned with
50 Parish-Churches, but now (besides the Chathedrall) it has but 15. It is
governed with a Mayor, 2 Sheriffs, 12 Aldermen, and a Recorder. It is seated
^n a hill, and has for Longitude 23. 48. and for Latitude 53. 17. This County
toward the North and West is very pleasant, rich, and fertile, both for
Arable, Pasture, and Meadow; and on the South and East it excells all other
parts of this Realm for plenty of Fish and Foul. Learned M. Cambden reports,
that at Harlaxton in this Shire (in the time of King Henry the Eighth) was
plowed up a Brazen Vessel, wherein was an Helmet of gold of a very ancient
fashion, beset with many precious stones. This Shire has heretofore been
adorned with many Religious Houses, which are now converted to ruins. And the
chief commodities of this County are Cattle, Corn, Fish, Foul, Alablaster,
and Flax.

map of Lincolnshire THE COUNTY OF LINCOLN


Rutland-shire.
THis Rutland-shire, which (as some hold) bears the name from one Rut, that
rod about the whole Shire in one day; but others affirm it was first so called
by the old English Saxons, for the re nesse of the earth, seeing the word Ru^
or Roet in their language, is as much as (...) in ours; and for that the
natural soil is indeed so red, that it often colors the wool of the sheep
into a reddish die. It i^ the least of all the rest of the Shires in England,
which on the East and South by the River Wel^rd is divided from
Northamptonshire, the West side being bordered upon by L ^caster- h^^^, and
the North by Lincolne-shire. It contains in length (from Caldecor South on the
River E^, to the farthest part North at a little Town called Thistleton) not
altogether a dozen miles; and from Timwell in the East to Wissenden West (which
is the broadest part) near unto nine miles: so as the whole County is much
about forty miles compass. It is divided into 5 Hundreds. viz. East, Allstoe,
O^^ham, W^anged, and Martinsley; and these are subdivided into but 48 Parishes.
There are four Parkes in this County, and but two Market Towns for commerce
of commodities; which causes the Inhabitants (for their better advantage) to
travel to others in the Shires next adjoining: but of the two, Ok^ham is the
best and fairest, which stands not far from Burley, that famous and stately
house of the right honorable the Lord Harrington, who in this Lordship of
Okeham had such an extraordinary Royalty, that if any Noble man came at any
time within the precinct of it, he was to forfet an homage horse-shooe from the
Steed whereon he rode, or else to redeem it at a price in money: and for a
true confirmation thereof, a man may see many horse-shooes fastened on the
door of the Shire-Hall, whereof some are large and of ancient fashion. The
Town is large, and the Church fair. And here also has been a Castle of
defense, which seems by the ruins to have been of great strength. The
Eleuati^n of the Pole is here 52. 45. and the Longitude 23. 48. King Edward the
Confessor gave this County to E^dg^th his Queen, and after her death to the
Monastery at Westminster: but William the Conqueror cancelled it, and bestowed
the lands upon others. The Coritani (according to Ptolemy) were the ancient
Inhabitants of this County, which for air and health is as good, pleasant and
delightful, as any other place of the Land, and (for the quantity) has as
fertile a Soil, which for tillage may compare with the best. Woods are here
good store, and both hills and pleasant bottomes watered with many fresh
Springs, are not wanting, which bring forth abundance of Corn, and with stocks
of sheep and herds of Neat are plentifully stored.

map of Rutland RUTLAND SHIRE


Leichestershire.
THis Shire for the bounds has Lincoln and Rutland-shires on the East, and on
the West the way called Watling-street diuides it from Warwicke-shire;
Nottingham-shire imbordereth on the North, and Northamptonshire on the South.
It is near as broad as long; for the full length in her greatest Longitude
(from East to West) is not altogether thirty miles, and the breadth (from North
to South) is twenty four, which makes the whole circumference much upon 196
miles. The division of it is into six Hundreds, namely, Sparkingho, Framland,
Goodlaxton, Gartrey, East Goscote, and West Goscote, which do contain in them
200 Parish-Churches. This Shire is watered but with one River of note, (besides
small brooks) namely Stowre, yet has ten Bridges; and in it are also
contained two Forests, and fifteen Parkes. A dosen of Market Towns are here
and there dispersed in this County, for the Inhabitants traffic and commerce,
whereof the chiefest is the Shire-Towne Leicester, which (as our old Histories
record) in ancient times was called Legecestria, and by Ninus, Caer-Leri^n,
being built 844 years before the birth of our Savior, by King Leir, who there
erected the Temple of Ianus, and in it placed a Flamine, and after (as it is
recorded) was therein himself interred. But long after this did Ethelred the
King of the Mercians make it an Episcopal Sea, wherein he made Sexwulph the
first Bishop. But in process of time, the Bishopric being thence translated,
and the Town brought to a low ebb, Edelfred repaired and fortified it with a
strong wall, whereof there is now no memorial but by some of the old ruins;
for Henry the second both utterly rased the Castle, and fired the Town. It is
situate on the River Stowre, near the very midst of the Shire. And the
Elevation of the Pole is there 52. 41. and the Longitude 23. 32. In the year
1485 the 22 day of August, near Market Bosworth, was King Richard the Third
slain, with 4000 men, in a battle fought by King Henry the seventh, who
thereby happily ended the long and woeful contention between the two Houses of
York and Lancaster: and the Usurpers body despightfully mangled, laid naked on
a horse back, and so carried to Leicester, and was there buried in the Gray
Friars. The Air in this County is mild, pleasant, and healthful: The Soil
toward the South and East (which is most Champion) is not so wooddie as the
North, (where Pit-cole for fuel is gotten in abundance) yields great store
of Corn: So as the chief commodities here are Cattle, Corn, and Pit-cole.
And yet for other necessaries, they are nothing wanting.

map of Leicestershire LEICESTER SHIRE


Staffordshire.
THis County, which we call Staff^rd-shire, was so called also by the English
Saxons, and is enclosed on the East with the Rivers of Dow^ and Trent, which
divide it from Darby-shire; and on the West with Shro^shire: Ch^shire and
Da^by-shires confine it on the North, and Warwick and Worcester-shires on the
South. The length is measured (from North to South) 44 miles, and the breadth
(from East to West) 27, making the whole circumference to contain 140 miles.
It is divided into five Hundreds, and they are subdivided into 130 Parishes.
There is in it also one City, one Chase, one Forest, and 38 Parkes. Thirteen
Rivers do irriguate this County, which have over them nineteen Bridges. And
for commerce and traffic, it is traded in thirteen Market Towns, whereof
Stafford the Shire-Towne is accounted one of the chiefest, which was anciently
called Beth^ney, from the holy Hermit Bertlin, that there lived. It has in
times past on the East and South sides been fortified both with a Wall and
Trench, and on the opposite sides had a st^ange defense of water, which now by
time is transformed into fair and pleasant meadows. Four Gates (according to
the four Cardinal points) do make way for passage into this Town, which is
seated on the North side of the River Sow, and is ciuilly and orderly governed
by two yearly elected Bailisses out of the Common Counsel, consisting of 21
Assistants. The Pole is here elevated to 52. 53. and the Longitude 22. 29. In
this Shire also is seated Lichfield, which is both of greater antiquity, and
far more famous than Stafford; and which by Beda was called Licedfeld,
signifying a field of dead carcasses, which (as some hold) was so termed of a
great number of Saints there slain by Dioclesian. In this City did Oswn King
of Northumberland build a Church, and made it a Bishops Sea, which afterward
was by means of King Ossa, and Adrian the Pope, advanced to the dignity of an
Archbishopricke: and in this Church were the bodies of Wolphere and Celred, two
Mercian Kings, interred. This City at this day is governed by two Bailiffes,
and one Sheriff, which from 24 Burgesses are annually elected. By Ptolemy, the
ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Cor^a^ij, but afterward it became
part of the Mercian Saxons possession, whose Kings palace was then seated at
the Town of Tamworth. Many famous and fair Religious Houses, that a long time
flourished, have been raised up in this County: but in continuance of time (as
well as others in other Shires) have been rased down and buried in their own
^uines. And with thirteen strong Castles also was it once guarded, whereof now
but few remain so much as for an ornament to the County. The ^ire here (though
toward the North somewhat fresh and sharp) is very healthful; and the Soil
on the South fai^e and ^^uitfull, but on the North more barren, by ^eason of
Moors and Hills there seated; yet is the middle both well woodded, and watered
with many pleasant Rivers, yielding great plenty of Fish, as well as the whole
County does of Flesh, and other necessary commodities, as namely of Corn,
Cattle, Woods, Pit-cole, Iron, and Alablaster.

map of Staffordshire STAFFORD SHIRE


Darby-shire.
DArby-shire (which the old Saxons called Deorbyrscire) is on the East enclosed
with Nottingham-shire, on the South with Leichestershire, on the West with
Staffordshire, and with Yorke-shire on the North, the River Derwent (as it
were) dividing it, falls into Trent, which ouerthwarteth the South point of
the Shire. The East and South parts are very fruitful, having many Parkes in
them; but the West (called the Peake) which is hilly, stony, and craggie, is
more barren, yet has it much Lead, Iron, and Coals, and is very good for the
keeping of sheep. On the West side of Derwent is seated Darby the chiefest
Town of the Shire, which by the Danes was called Deoraby, of the River
Derwent, contracted from Derwentby, as ancient Athelward records. This Town is
of a reasonable bigness, having good trade and resort unto it; the River
having a beautiful stone Bridge over it in the North-East of the Town,
whereupon was erected a fair Chapel, which is now decaying, besides which
there are five Churches in the Town, the greatest whereof (called
All-Hallowes) is famous both for the height of the Tower, and the excellency
of the workmanship. And close by it the Countess of Shrewsbury has founded an
Hospital for the maintenance of eight men and four women. This Town is
governed with two Bailiffes, chosen out of 24 brethren, and as many Burgesses,
and a Towne-Clarke: The Elevation of the Pole being there 55. 5. and the
Longitude 23. 7. This was the Rendeuous for the Danes, till Ethelfleda the
Mercian Lady by surprising and slaughtering of them, became Mistress of it.
And in the time of King Edward the Confessor it had 143 Burgesses. This Shire
is in form of a Triangle, the length (from North to South) containing 38
miles, and the breadth in the broadest part near 29 miles, the circumference
being about 130 miles. It is divided into six Hundreds, wherein are 106
Parish-Churches. It has commerce with eight Market Towns, and has had seven
Castles, with eight foundations of Religious Houses and Monasteries. It has
store of Woods, Cattle, and Corn, with Mines of Lead, Millstone, Cole, and
Stibium. At a place called Buxtons, in eight yards compass arise nine Springs,
eight warm, and one cold, near which also is another hot Spring from a Well
called S. Anne of Buxtons, and close by it another cold Spring; the waters of
all which are reported to perform many strange Cures. Not far hence is a
place called Elden Hole, being of a huge wideness, very steep, and of a
wonderful depth. And about seven miles from it is an old Castle, called The
Castle in the Peake, under which is a hole termed The Devils Arse, which in
the entrance is very wide, having many turnings and retiring rooms in it, and
is accounted for one of our English wonders. In Peake Forest near Buxtons is a
Well which ebbeth and flows four times an hour.

map of Derbyshire DARBY SHIRE


Nottingham-shire.
NOttingham-shire is so called from Nottingham the chief Town, and it is
bounded on the North and North-west with the County of York, on the East with
Lincolne-shire, the South side being confined with Leichestershire, and with
Darby-shire on the West. It is extended from Fimingly North to Steanford in the
South, 38 miles, and from Teuersall West to Beesthorpe East, about 20 miles,
the whole compass being 110 miles. This Shire is divided into two parts,
called by the Inhabitants The Sand and The Clay; and these are subdivided into
eight Wapentacks, which contain in them 168 Parish-Churches. This County is
traffiqued with eight Market Towns for commerce, whereof the best and greatest
is Nottingham, which is most pleasantly situated on a high hill, adorned with
stately buildings, and for many fair streets much excelling diverse other
greater Cities. The Marketplace is large and fair. Many Caves and Vaults are
in the Town, which are hewn out of the Rock, but the most famous of them are
those under the Castle, whereof one has the story of Christ's passion engraven
on the walls by David the Second King of Scots, being there held prisoner; and
another wherein Lord Mortimer was surprised by King Edward the Third, for which
cause it is still called Mortimers Hole. The Rooms and Stairs of these are
made out of the Rock, the Castle it self being strong. King Edward surnamed
the Elder compassed this Town with a Wall, whereof but a little does now
remain, the rest being turned to ruins. The compass of this Town (according
to M. Speed) is 2120 pases. And it is governed by a Mayor, two Sheriffs, two
Chamberlaines, and six Aldermen: The Pole being there elevated 52. 58. and
Longitude 23. 35. This County is pleasant, and wholesome for Air; Clayie,
Sandy, and rich for Soil; very fruitful both for Corn and Grass, being
plentifully stored with Wood, Water, and Cole. In this Shire grows a Stone,
which being not so hard as Alablaster, makes a Plaster harder than Plaster of
Paris, wherewith they use to floor their upper rooms. At a place near
Worksopp in this Shire is planted much and very good Liquorice. And at Stoke
near Newarke was fought a great Battle by John de la Poole in the reign of
King Henry the Seventh. This County has 5 Rivers interfluent to water and
fertilize it, of which Trent is the greatest. It has also 17 Bridges, and 18
Parkes.

map of Nottinghamshire NOTINGHAM SHIRE


Yorke-shire.
THis is the greatest County in all this Land, and by the Saxons was called
Effroc-scyre, and Eborascyre, but now by us Yorke-shire, which is bounded on
the East with the German Seas, on the West with the Counties of Westmerland and
Lancashire, on the South with Cheshire, Darby, Not ingham, and Lincoln shires;
and on the North it is parted by the River Tees from the Bishopric of Durham.
In length (from Harthill in the South to the beginning of Tees in the North) is
contained about 70 miles, and the breadth (from Flamborough head to Horn Castle
on the River Lun) 80, making the whole compass much upon 308 miles. It is
divided into three parts, called Ridings, viz. the East, West, and North
Ridings; and they are subdivided into Hundreds, whereof the West Riding
contains ten, the North Riding twelve, and the East Riding five, making in all
27 Hundreds, which contain in them 563 Parish-Churches, besides very many
Chapels of ease. It is interlaced with 36 Rivers, over which a man may pass by
62 Bridges. It has but one City, and one Bishops Sea, but is delighted with
four Chases, eight Forests, and 72 Parkes. It has been fortified with
fifteen strong Castles, and for traffic and commerce amongst the Inhabitants
is traded with 45 Market Towns, whereof the most famous is the ancient and
renowned City of York, which by Ptolemy was called Brigantium, and by the
Britains Caer Effrock. It is accounted the second City of England, and for
beauty of building, and other ornaments, it far surpasses all others in the
County. It is large, fair, rich, and populous, being made a Metropolitan City
by Honorius, where King Henry the Ei^hth established a Counsel, consisting of
a Lord President, with diverse Counselors at the Kings pleasure, and a
Secretary to hear and determine all causes in those Northern parts. In this
City both lived and died the Emperor Seuerus, whose ashes were afterward
carried to Rome, and there shriued. Here also (we read) was sometime seated a
Temple dedicated to the Goddess Bellona. And here died the Emperor
Constantius, surnamed Chlorus, who in this city kept his royal Court. It was
most famous also for a long time, in the English Saxons time, till the Danes
suppressed and destroyed it, yet afterward it recovered it self, and by the
Citizens was strengthened with a Wall, adorned and fortified with Towers and
Bulwarks, and is now governed by a Lord Mayor, 12. Aldermen, diverse
Chamberlaines, and a Recorder. The latitude being here 54. 3. and the longitude
23. 48. Diverse other fair, famous, and remarkable Towns are seated in this
Province, as Richmond, Hul, Halifax, and many others, whereof I am abridged
particularly to discourse, by the straightness of my limits: As also am I
restrained from relating of many strange ra^ities, wherewith this County is
plentifully stored; as the dropping Well at Knausbrough, the Giggleswicke
springs, Saint Wilfrids Needle, Constantius his Lamp, the Mountain Co^les, and
Seafish stones; as also those at Whitby, which are formed like wreathed
Serpents; of all which I must refer you to our former and most famous
Historiographers, Mr. Camden, Mr. Speed, and others. With very many Abbeys,
Monasteries, and Religious houses, has this Shire been adorned, which are now
subverted and utterly decayed. The Air here, though it be more sharp and
frigid than in other parts of the land, yet is it very healthful; and the
Soil, though in some places sterile and barren, yet in others, fat, rich and
fruitful; so as what is defective in one part, is supplied by another, the
whole Continent feeling no want, because it is generally sufficiently stored
with Corn, Cattle, Fish, Foul, and has many mines of Copper, Lead, Cole,
Stone. Allome, Coperasse, and other rich commodities.

map of Yorkshire YORK SHIRE


The Bishopric of Durham.
THis Province, which we call The Bishopric of Durham, is confined on the
East by the German Seas, and on the West is parted from Cumberland,
Westmoreland, and Stainesmore, by the River Tees: Yorke-shire bounds it on the
South, and Northumberland on the North. It is shaped in the fashion of an
Hoscedes Triangle, having two sides containing much upon thirty miles a piece,
and that by the Sea side but about 23 or 24, making the whole circumference to
contain near to 103 miles, within which compass are dispersed 118
Parish-Churches. In this Shire are interfluent eleven Rivers, which are
passable by twenty Bridges: and because the quantity of the County is but
small, there is in it but one City, one Bishopric, and but six Market
Towns, whereof the chiefest is the ancient City of Durham, which was called
by the Saxons Dun-holm, of the word Dun signifying an Hill, and Holme an Island;
for indeed it is almost circularly ingirt with the River of Were. It was at
first erected (as we have it by tradition) by the Monks of Lyndisferne, who
by Oracle were commanded to do it. And here did William the Conqueror upon an
high hill raise a strong and stately Castle; and not only so, but made it a
County Palatine, whereof the Bishops in times past have had the Royalties of
Princes. And here was the Tomb of S. Cuthbert, whereto King Egfrid, Aelfrid,
Athelstane, and others of our English Kings, came in Pilgrimage (and some of
them barefooted) in humble devotion, and to give great gifts and offerings to
the Church, in the West part whereof is still remaining the Marble monument of
the Reverend Beda, that learned Monk of Wermouth. And here is the Pole
elevated 54. 56.. and the Longitude 22. 54. The Inhabitants of this County in
Ptolemies time, were the Brigantes, whom the Romans conquered, and after that,
by the Saxons was this Shire made a part of the Kingdom of Northumberland,
which the Danes subdued, and was lastly overcome and possessed by the Normans.
About a mile from Darlington in this County, have I seen 3 round Ponds of
water, which the Country people call Hell-Kettles, which are in form
circular, the water always temperately warm, and (as they say) never seen to
be frozen. They likewise affirm them to be bottomless, because by no means
they could ever be sounded. But of their strange beginning, with other
particulars of them, as also of the salt stones in the River Weere at Batterby
(considering the strictness of my bounds) I must refer you to the learned
Works of our ever famous Antiquarie M. Camden. With diverse rich Religious
Houses has this County been beautified, which are now defaced and subverted;
and with seven strong Castles was it fortified, sed tempus edax rerum. The Air
is here sharp, subtle, and healthful; and Soil on the East side well stored
with Pastures and Arable Grounds, but moorish on the South: and though other
parts be more barren, yet are they so well stored with Cole-pits, that besides
their own abundant expense, they vent so much to other parts, as is a constant
annual and exceeding great benefit to the Inhabitants.

map of Durham THE BISHOPRIC OF DVRHAM.


Northumberland.
THis County was called by the English Saxons North-Humberland, and is bounded
on the South with the Bishopric of D^rham, on the North with Scotland, on the
West with part of Scotland and part of C^mberland, and on the East with the
German Sea. It is fashioned in a triangular form, containing from the
South-East to the South-west, about 40 miles; and from the South-west to the
North point, much upon 60 miles; from whence to W^llinton by the Sea Coast, 45
miles; whereby the whole circumference amounts to the measure of 145 miles or
thereabouts. In which circuit are included but 46 Parish-Churches. Many Rivers,
over which a man may pass by 16 Bridges. It has one Forest in it, and eight
Parkes. And for trade and traffic amongst the Inhabitants, there are
dispersed in this County but five Market Towns, whereof the principal is
Nowcastle upon Tine, so called of a new Castle built there by Robert the son
of William the Conqueror: but before the Conquest it was called Monke-Chester,
as a strong defense for Monks that it seems were resident there. It is now
rich and famous, and very populous by reason of the plentiful vent of
Sea-Coles, which from thence are uttered in f^rre more abundance th^n from any
other part or place in E^gland besides. Richard the Second granted, that a
Sword should be carried before the Mayor; and Hen^y the Sixth made it a Country
within it self. It has a strong wall, with eight G^tes for entrance about it,
and half so many Churches within it. And from thence, or rather from Ty^e
M^^th, begins that famous wall called The Picts wall, built first of earth,
but afterward of stone by the Romans, containing (as Be^a says) eight foot in
breadth, and twelve foot in height, reaching in length from the German Seas
East to the Irish Seas West, cutting through the County of Cumberland, as well
as this Province. Another chief Town here is Barw^cke, the furthest and
strongest of all this Land of England. It is situate on the Sea side, and on
the North of the River Tweede, between England and Scotland, and has many
times been tossed by Fortune, sometimes to the subjection of the Scots, and
then again to the English, till Edward the Fourths time, who with his
Successors from time to time so fortified it, as it has ever since remained in
the possession of the English. The Pole being there elevated 55. 51. 1/^ and
the Longitude 23. 0. In Ptolemies time the Ottadini were the Inhabitants of
this County, which then were, since have been, and still are a stout, hardly,
and warlike people, being very excellent Light Horsemen, as they have often
tried themselves in their many Battles and Encounters between them and the
Scots. Very many remarkable and notable Roman Antiquities, as old decayed
Altars, Inscriptions, Coins, etc. have been and yet are found as well along
the Wall, as in other places of this County. The Air here, as well as in other
Northern parts, is sharp, cold, and piercing; The Soil sterile and barren,
except in those places next the Sea, and on the banks of the River Tyne. Their
chiefest commodity being Sea-Cole, wherewith they not only profit and pleasure
themselves, but do the like to others abundantly, by transporting them to
other remote places.

map of Northumberland NORTHVMBER LAND


Cumberland.
THis County of Cumberland, which is situate in the North-west part of this
Realm, and is the furthest part of the Land on that point, was named Cumber of
those Britains that called themselves Cumbri and Canbri. It is bordered upon
on the North side with Northumberland and part of Scotland, on the South with
part of Lancashire, on the East with Westmorland, and on the West with the
Irish Sea. It is long and narrow, containing in length 54 miles, and at the
broadest is not much above 30. And though (as other Shires bordering on
Scotland are) it is exempted from Subsidy, and therefore wants the division of
Hundreds, yet are there (besides Chapels of ease) 58 Parish-Churches contained
in it: and also there are 20 Rivers in it, having 33 Bridges. There is one
City, one Bishopric, three Forests, and eight Parkes. And for traffic and
commerce amongst men, there are dispersed in it nine Market Towns, whereof the
ancient City of Carlisle is the principal, which by the Romans was called
Luguuallum, by Ptolemie Leucoipibia, and by Ninius Caer-Lualid. It is situate
very commodiously and delectably, between the Rivers of Eden, Petterell, and
Cand. It was strong, fair and famous, in the time of the Romans, but was
ruinated by the Scots and Picts after their departure, till Northumberlands
King Egsrid reedified and enclosed it in a wall. And afterward, when again
the Danes had destroyed it, King William Rusus built the Castle and restored
it, so as now (besides the natural helps of the Rivers which encompasse three
parts of it) it is fortified with a strong stone wall, a Castle, and a
Citadell, between which almost in the midst stands the Cathedral Church. The
Elevation of the Pole being there 55. 18. and the Longitude 21. 41. In
Ptolemies time the Brigantes were the ancient Inhabitants of this County, but
afterward those Britains that were called Cumbri possessed it. And when the
Danes had sore troubled the Saxons, this County of Cumberland was accounted a
Kingdom of it self, which King Stephen (in his time) gave to the King of
Scots; but Henry the Second both claimed and got it again from that Crown. In
this Shire there have been and still are found many Antiquities of the Romans,
whose furthest bounds are accounted no further than this County, as witnesses
the tract of that admirable wall called The Picts wall, which was built by
Seuerus, and whereof diverse parts do yet remain, where (as also in diverse
other places) are still remaining the ruins of Altars, and Inscriptions of
several Colonies and Captains, etc. At Salkelds in this County are 77 stones,
containing ten foot in height above ground, and one of them fifteen, which a^e
commonly called Long Megg and her Daughters, but were erected there for the
memorial of a victory there obtained. This Province as it has been
strengthened with 25 strong Castles, so has it been beautified with many fair
Religious Houses, which by King Henry the Eighth were utterly suppressed. The
Air (though bitter and sharp) is yet healthful. The South part of the County
is hilly; the midst level, and more populous, and yields sufficient
provision for the Inhabitants; but the North is hilly, wild and desolate. The
commodities here are Corn, Grass, Sheep, Cattle, Fish, and Foul, with
black Lead and mines of Copper, which yield much profit to the Country.

map of Cumberland CVMBER LAND


Westmorland.
THis County, called in Latin Westmorlandia, and Westmaria, we in English call
Westmorland, for the store of Moors and Hills contained in it. It is bordered
upon on the East side by Yorke-shire and The Bishopric of Durham, on the West
and North sides with the County of Cumberland, and Lancashire on the South. It
extends from Kirkland North to Burton South, 30 miles, and stretches in
wideness (from Eden East to Dunbalrase stones in the West) 24 miles, making
the measure of the whole circuit much upon 112 miles; in which compass are
contained 26 Parish-Churches. This Shire is well watered with eight Rivers,
which have fifteen Bridges over them. And in it also are two Forests, and
nineteen Parks. And for intercourse of people for commerce and traffic,
there are but four Market Towns, whereof that of the greatest account is
Kendale, which is also called Kirkby Kendale, being situate on the River Can,
and for that cause so called. It is famous for the making of woollen clothes,
whereby it is become very populous and very wealthy, having good utterance for
them through all the other parts of this Land. It is ciuilly and orderly
governed by an Alderman annually elected out of his twelve brethren, which are
his Assistants, and are known from others by their Purple Habits; with whom is
joined a Recorder, and two Chamberlaines. The Pole is here elevated 54. 40. and
the Longitude 21. 53. The Brigantes were also the ancient Inhabitants of this
County, where at a place called Apleby are often found pieces of antique Coin,
and some Inscriptions showing that the Aurelian Maures kept there a station in
the time of the Romans. The Records of this County speak but of one Monastery
founded in it, which was built by Thomas the son of Gospatrick, near to the
River Loder, where is a Spring that diverse times a day both ebbes and flows.
And there are also a row of stones set equidistant, reaching a mile in fashion
of Piramides, whereof some of them are nine, and some thirteen or fourteen
foot high, which are supposed to be the memorable monument of some notable act
performed in that place. In the River Can near Kendale are two such violent
Water-falls, where in the descent it makes such a noise, that the Inhabitants
adjoining can thereby fore-iudge of the weather; for if that which is North
from them sound clear and loud, they expect fair weather: but if that on the
South do so, they then look for and find the contrary. The Air is cold and
sharp but very healthfull^; and the Soil also but barren and unfruitful.
Their chiefest commodities consist upon Clothing.

map of Westmorland WESTMOR LAND


Lancashire.
THis in the Saxon language was called Loncasderscyre, which we call
Lanc^shir^, and The County Palatine of Lancaster. It is bounded on the East
with Darby-shire, on the West with the Irish Seas: Cheshire confines it on the
South, and Westmorland, Camberland, and Yorke-shire, border on the North. The
full length of it is (from Hallwood South to Brathey North) 57 miles, and the
wideness (between Denton East and Formby near Altmouth West) 31 miles,
making the measure of the whole compass to contain about 170 miles. The
division is into six Hundreds, containing (besides many Chapels of ease) 36
Parishes, so large and populous, as the like are not in any other part of the
Land. In this County are interspersed 33 Rivers, where over a man may pass by
24 Bridges: and one Chase, and 30 Parkes. And for concourse of people for trade
and traffic, in this Shire are seated fifteen fair Market Towns, whereof
that of greatest account is the Shire-Towne Lancaster, which is most pleasantly
situate on the South side of the River L^n, and is adorned with a fair Church,
a strong Castle, and a stately Bridge. Ciuilly and orderly does a Mayor,
yearly chosen out of twelve of his Brethren, with the assistance of two
Bail^ffes, 24 Burgesses, two Chamberlaines, and a Recorder, govern this Town;
where the Elevation of the Pole is 54. 18. and the Longitude 21. 36. The
ancient Inhabitants of this County were also the Brigantes, of whom I have
spoken in other former Shires, and whom the Emperor Claudius subiugated to the
Romans: But afterward was this County made part of Northumberlands Kingdom,
till the Danes (and after them the Normans) conquered it. In this Shire
Manchester is notable for the Church, College, and Marketplace: And
Riblechester (sometimes the seat of the Romans) for that it was once held to be
the richest Town in all Christendom. Here also near Furnesse Fills is
Wynander-mere, being very deep, and ten miles in length, accounted for the
greatest standing water in all this Land, and yet is all paued with stone in
the bottom. This County is also famous for the four Henry's, viz. the Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh, which descending from John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, were all afterward renowned Kings of England. Diverse Castles, and
four Religious Houses, are now suppressed, that sometimes adorned this County.
The Air is here healthful, though cold and searching; And the Soil, though
not so fertile as in other places, yet produces large Cattle, good Corn,
with Grass, Ilax, Cole, and almost all other necessary commodities.

map of Lancashire LANCASHIRE


Ches-shire.
THis Shire, which we call the County Palatine of Chester, was by the Saxons
both called and written Cestenscire, and is divided from Darby and
Stafford-shires on the East, by the Rivers of Goit, Dane, and Mercey; and on
the West, by Dee, from Denbygh. On the Northside lies Lancashire, and the South
is confined with Flint and Shrop-shire. It contains in length from East to
West 47. miles, and at the broadest between North and South 26. which causes
the measure of the whole circumference to contain about 142. miles. This County
is divided into 7. Hu^dreds, which contain in them (besides 38. Chapels of
ease) 86. Parish Churches. It has also in it one City, one Bishopric, and
is watered with 9. Rivers, over which men do pass by 19. Bridges. Two Forests
and 18. Parkes are also in this Shire. And for traffic and commerce amongst
the Inhabitants, there are dispersed in convenient places 15. Market Towns,
the chief whereof is the fair and famous City of Chester, of which the whole
County carries the name, and was sometimes the strong Fort of Ostorius, who
was Claudius the Emperors Lieu-tenant. It is pleasantly situate on the North
side of the River Dee, over which a fair and strong stone Bridge, built on 8.
arches and beautified: two fair gates at each end: give passage to the Town,
which is incircled with a high and strong wall, containing (besides seven
Towers and three Posternes) four fair Gates at the four Cardinal points of
the Compass. On the North side of this City, Earl Leofrick built the
Minster, which by Hugh the first Normaine Earl of Chester, was afterward both
repaired and fairly beautified. And in it (as we have it by tradition) Henry
the fourth, Emperor of Almane, after he had there a long ^ime led a Hermits
life, was interred: and on the South side stands the Castle, encompassed with a
circular wall. This City was first ruined by the Northumberland King Egfrid,
who there slew 1200. Monks, and afterward by the Danes, but by Edelsteda was
both reedified and beautified. In this City King Edgar was towed from Saint
John's to his Palace by eight other Kings, who did him homage, and himself as
Supreme steered the Helm. And Henry the seventh made it a County of it self,
which is now governed by an annually elected Mayor, two Sheriffs, four and
twenty Aldermen, and a Recorder. It has had in it diverse Religious houses,
which time has now transformed to ruins. The Pole is there elevated 53. 15.
of Latitude, and the Longitude 21. 27. This Shire has been fortified with
eight other Castles, and as many famous Religious Houses, which were suppressed
by King Henry the eight. The Air in this County is both pleasant and
healthful; the Soil fat, rich and fruitful, bringing abundance both of
profit and pleasure to the Inhabitants. And for Commodities, it yields
plentiful store of Corn, Cattle, Foul, Fish, Salt, Mines, Metalls,
White-meats, and most of all other necessary and useful commodities.

map of Cheshire CHESSHIRE


Shropshire.
THis Shire by the old Saxons was written and termed Sciripscyre, which at this
day we call Shropshire. It is bordered upon on the East with Staffordshire, on
the West with Denbigh and Montgomery: Radnor, Hereford, and Worcester-shires
do bound upon the South, and the County Palatine of Chester on the North. From
Wooferton South, to Over near Trent on the North, (which is the full length)
it contains 34 miles, and at the broadest (between Tongue in the East and
Oswestre West) 25, making the whole circumference to contain about 134 miles.
The division of this County is shared into 15 Hundreds, whose subdiuision into
Parishes is 170. It is well watered with 18 Rivers, which have 13 large Bridges
for passage. And in this Shire are found 7 Forests, and 27 Parks. In 14 Market
Towns have the Inhabitants commerce and traffic, whereof that of most note is
the ancient Shire-Towne of Shrewsbury, which is both large and wealthy,
containing many fair Streets, adorned with beautiful buildings, wherein are
many rich and wealthy Inhabitants, who honestly attain thereto, by their
trading for the most part in Wools, Cloth, and Freese. It is strongly walled,
having a Bulwark descending from the Castle to the side of Seuerre, on the
North bank whereof is the Town most pleasantly situate: and for passage, on
the East and West sides are built two fair Bridges of stone, and another
entrance on the North, over which stands the ruinous remainder of the old
Castle. The government of this Town is committed to two annually elected
Bailiffes, with 24 Burgesses, and a Recorder. The height of the Pole is here
52. 49. and the Longitude 21. 38. This County in times past has been much
troubled with many grievous broiles, which caused the Inhabitants to fortify
themselves with diverse walled Towns, and 32 strong Castles, whereof now most
of them are utterly decayed, but that at Ludlow was made by King Henry the
Seventh the Court of his eldest Palace for the Lord President, who with diverse
Counselors, a Secretary, Attorney, Solicitor, and four Justices of the Welsh
Counties, he appointed in their Terms to plead, hear, and determine of
causes. Near Clune Castle in this Shire is yet remaining the Fort of
Cara^tac^^ a Prince of the S^lures, about the year of our Lord 53, which was
won by P. Ostorius the Rom^n. In which Town of Clune, amongst other memorable
passages, I saw a Pardon for one John Clune Esquire, servant to King Henry the
Eighth, for reservation of his name and blood, who accidentally slew one of the
Burgesses thereof in the Churchyard: which Pardon was granted and signed by
Pope Julian the second, and was showed to me by m^ good friend Master Edmund
Clun^, the son of Maurice Clun^, of the same House and Family ^^ eally
descending. The A^re in this County is both healthful and pleasant; the So^le
rich and fertile, y^^lding Wheat, Barley, Pit-cole, Iron, and Woods in abundance.

map of Shropshire SHROPSHIRE


Hereford-shire.
THis County (which we call Hereford-shire) was named by the Britains
Ereinuc. It is bordered upon on the North with Worcester and Shropshires, on
the South with Monmouth-shire; on the East it is divided from Gloucestershire
by Maluerne Hills, and the West is bounded by Brecknock and Radnor-shires. The
form of it is circular, containing in length (from Maluerne Hills on the East,
to Michael Church West) about 26 miles; and in breadth (from Lanruthell South to
Over Sapie North) 24 miles, causing the whole circumference to amount to 102
miles, or thereabouts. It is divided into 11 Hundreds, and those are subdivided
into 176 Parishes. It contains one City, one Bishopric, thirteen Rivers
passable by eleven Bridges; one Chase, two Forests, and eighteen Parks. And
for commerce and trade the Inhabitants have eight Market Towns, whereof the
principal is the City of Hereford, which worthy M. Camden is of opinion to
have sprung from the ruins of old Ariconium, but is delectably seated amongst
pleasant Meadows and plentiful Corne-fields, and almost round about encircled
with the River of Wye, and another on the North side whose name is not known.
It grew first famous for the supposed sanctity of King Ethelbert, who was
there entombed after he had been murdered by King Offaes wife, when he came
to woo her daughter: and in honor of him did Mildred a petty King of that
County build the Cathedral Church, which afterward was consumed by fire, but
reedified by Bishop Reiuelin, and the Town enclosed in a wall, with six Gates,
and fifteen Towers: and is ciuilly governed by a Mayor (yearly elected out of
13. Citizens) and his Brethren, whereof four of the ancientest are Justices of
Peace, and a Recorder. The Latitude being there 52. 7.. and the Longitude 21.
50. In this City King Athelstane (as Malmesbury reports) caused the Lords of
Wales to pay an annual Tribute (besides Hawks and Hounds) of twenty pounds of
Gold, and 300 pounds of Silver by weight. The ancient Inhabitants of this
County were the Silures, a fierce, hardy, and valiant people, as appears by
their nine years opposition to the Romans. And afterward the Saxons made this
County a part of their Mercian Kingdom: and Sutton was their Royal Court kept
of their great King Offa. Before the Conquest this County was accounted with
those of Wales against England; but when it was joined to the English, with
diverse Castles was it fortified against the Welsh: for we read that in times
past it has been strengthened with 28 strong and fair Castles, most of which
are now low buried in the heaps of their own ruins. Of remarkable things in
this Shire, the Spring called Bone Well, near Richards Castle, is famous for
Fish-bones and no Fish, which though it be clearly cleansed thereof, will
shortly after be furnished afresh with the like. But the great wonder was the
admirable motion of Marcley Hill, containing about 26 acres, within our own
memory, Anno 1571, which with a great noise removed it self from its own
place, and went continually for three days together, carrying with it sheep
in their coats, hedge-rowes and trees, and overthrowing Kinnaston Chapel, and
diverse trees, turning two high ways near 100 yards from their usual Road,
and bearing the earth before it the space of 400 yards. With very many
Religious Houses has this Shire been adorned; but in the time of King Henry
the Eighth were utterly ruinated, as many others in all other Counties. The
Air is here pleasent, healthful, and temperate; and the Soil as fertile and
fruitful as any other in England, yielding Corn, Cattle, Wool, Wheat, and
almost all other necessary commodities, for the use of the Inhabitants.

map of Herefordshire HEREFORD SHIRE


Radnor-shire.
RAdnor-shire, in the British Sire Maiseueth, being in form threesquare, is on
the South side separated from Brecknok-shire by the River Wy; on the North it
bordereth upon Montgomery-shire; on the South-east upon Hereford-shire. The
East and South parts of this Shire be far more fruitful than the rest. It
has in it two and fifty Parishes, and three Towns of note, the principal
whereof is Radnor, in British Maiseueth, which in times past was firmly fenced
with a wall, but after that Owen Glendowre had burnt it, it began to grow to
decay. It is probable that this Maiseueth or Radnor, was that ancient City
Magi, which Antonine the Emperor calls Magnos, where the Governor of the
Pacensian Regiment lay in garrison under the Lieu-tenant of Britain, in the
reign of Theodosius the younger: for Writers of the middle age call the
Inhabitants of this coast Magesetae, and make mention of Earls Magesetenses;
also the distance, if it be counted from Gobannium or Abergeuenny, or from
Brangonium, (i.) Worcester differs not from Antonines computation. Three
miles Eastward from this Town lies Prestaine, in British Lhan Andrew (i.) St.
Andrews Church, which of a very little Village, by the means of Richard
Martin, Bishop of St. David's, is of late years grown to be so great and fair
a M^rket Town, that it dimmeth the light of Radnor. Scarce four miles from
Prestaine stands Knighton, a Town not inferior to the former, it is called
in the British Trebuclo, in stead of Trefyclaudh, of a famous Ditch lying under
it, which Offa, King of the Mercians, caused to be cast from Dee mouth to Wye
mouth, to separate the Britains from his Englishmen. In the South-west of
this Country lies a wide wilderness, into which Vortigerne (whose memory the
Britains may wish damned) withdrew himself, when he had called the Saxons
into this Land, and in horrible incest married his own daughter; and here was
he, with his City Treguortig^rn, burnt with fire from heaven. And not far
from the place where this Vortiger^, the last absolute Monarch of the
Britains, perished, was Lhewellin, the last Prince of Wales of the British
race, slain by Roger Francton. The Mortimers, not long after the Conquest,
won a great part of this little country, and after that they had been a
long time eminent above others in these parts, King Edward the Third created
Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, Earl of these Welsh limits, or according to
the common speech, Earl of March.

map of Radnorshire RADNOR SHIRE


Brecknock-shire.
THis County of Brecknock was called Brechineau in the British tongue, of one
Brichauius, a Prince, that as the Inhabitants report, had four and twenty
daughters, and all of them Canonized for Saints. It is bounded on the East with
Monmouth and Radnor-shires: on the West with Carmarden and Cardigan: on the
South with Glamorgan; and the North side by the Rivers Wye and Clarwen, is
divided from Radnor. The length of it from Istragunles South, to Llanuthel
North is 28. miles, and the extent of the broadest part from Pentrisso East, to
Llywell West 20. the whole compass containing much upon 102. miles. Into six
Hundreds is this Shire severed, and those are subdivided into 61. Parishes:
with 27. Rivers is it interlaced, over which in diverse places are 13. Bridges
for passage. And for Traffic and trade amongst the Inhabitants, it is stored
but with three Market Towns, namely, Hay, Bealt, and the Shire Town
Brecknock, which is now accounted the principal, though the other two in
former times would have been preferred. Hay, pleasantly seated on Wye and
Dulas, in Owen Glendowrs rebellion was utterly ruinated; and Bealt, though
still in some frequencie, yet is now nothing to what in antique Ages it has
been; but Brecknock at this time is the best, which being pleasantly seated on
the Rivers Vske and Howthy, is fortified with a fair strong wall, that besides
ten Towers, has 3. Gates for entrance, with a stately Castle, situate on the
West part of the Town, and is moreover beautified with diverse fair buildings.
It is ciuilly governed by two Bayliffes, fifteen Aldermen, two Chamberlaines,
two Constables; where the Pole is elevated. 52. 8. and the longitude 21. 11.
The Inhabitants of this County, that anciently possessed it, were the Silures,
who greatly opposed the Romans, whereto they were much aduantaged by the huge
Mountains, wherewith the Shire is replenished; one of them near Brecknock,
which in Welsh they call Mounch-denny, is of an incredible height, in so much
as nothing, without it be some metalline substance or stone, can be cast from
the top of it, but with the air and wind it will be blown up again, and never
fall to the ground. Llynsauathan also, which is near to Brecknock, is also
admirable, for there (by report) stood a sumptuous City, which suncke down in
an earthquake. And with nine Castles has this County been accommodated. The
Air being cold, sharp, and piercing; and the Soil though for the most part
hilly, sterill and barren, yet the fresh Riuerers issuing from the Mountains,
make the Valleys so fruitful, as they yield both Corn and Grass in
abundance.

map of Brecknockshire BRECKNOCK SHIRE


Monmouth-shire.
FOr the River Mounowe is this Town Monmouth so termed, and from that Town we
call this County Monmouth-shire: which on the East is bordered upon by
Gloucestershire, on the West by Brecknock and Glamorgan-shires. The South is
bounded by the Seuerne Sea, and the North by the River Monnowe, divided from
Hereford-shire. The extent of the greatest measure between North and South, is
about twenty four miles in length, and at the widest between East and West,
not above nineteen, the whole circumference being much upon 76. miles. The
division of it is into six Hundreds, wherein are contained 127. Parish
Churches, and with the pleasant streams of fifteen Rivers, passable by
fourteen Bridges is it interlaced; besides which, for more delight in this
Shire is there one Chase and eight Parks: and for Trade and Traffic of buying
and selling, six Market Towns, whereof that of the greatest note, is the
ancient Shire Town of Monmouth, which between the two Rivers Wye and Monnowe
is very delectably situate: wherein is yet remaining a fair Church and
thirteen Gates, besides the Tower upon the Bridge. But that which was called
the Monks Church, and was in times past most curiously edified in the East end
of the Town, is now utterly ruined, as well as the Castle on the North, which
yet will be ever memorable for the birth of the famous and victorious King
Henry the Fifth. The government of this Town is committed to a Mayor, two
Bayliffes, fifteen common Councillors, and a Town Clerk. The elevation of
the Pole being there 15. 53. and the Longitude 21. 39. The Silures were the
ancient Inhabitants of this County, who had Caerwent for their principal
place of abode, where the British St. Tathaie made an Academie. And at
Caer-Lion lay the second Roman Legion called Augusta, whereof yet are found
many antique Roman testimonies. And here also did the great King Arthur keep
his Royal Court, which then was a most magnificent City, but is now intombed
in the heaps of her own ruins. And so also are diverse Religious Houses
sometime that beautified, and fourteen strong Castles, that some^^me fortified
this famous Province: where the Air is pleasant and healthful, and the Soil,
(though hilly) yet rich, fruitful, and full of Woods; yielding plenty of
Corn, Grass, Cattle, and many other nenessary Commodities.

map of Monmouthshire MONMOUTH SHIRE


Glamorgan-shire.
THis Province which is called Glamorgan-shire, is supposed by some to derive
the name from one Morgan, a Prince that possessed it; but others hold, that it
has it from the Abbey Morgan, which on the South side of this Shire, near the
Sea, did Earl William of Gloucester build. And it is severed by the River
Remner on the East, from the County of Monmouth, and on the West, by the River
Loghor from Caermarden-shire. The South is enclosed with the British Sea, and
the North is bounded upon by Brecknock. It contains in length, from East to
West, almost forty miles, and in the breadth, from South to North, almost
twenty, making the whole compass to contain 112. miles, which are
distinguished into twelve Hundreds, and those are subdivided into 118.
Parishes. This Shire is well watered with sixteen Rivers, and contains for
Commerce and Trade six Market Towns, whereof the chiefest is Cardiffe, which
the Britains called Caerdid, being pleasantly situated on the East side of the
River Taue, and in King Rufus time was strengthened with a wall, having four
Gates, and a strong Castle built by Fitz-Haimon: but afterward the Normans wan
it, and Rufus made it his Royal Court. This Town is Governed by a Mayor,
annually elected out of twelve Aldermen, who are assisted with as many other
Burgesses, a Town Clerk, and four Constables. The elevation of the Pole
being there 51. 32. and the Longitude 20. 21.. And near to this is the City
Landaffe, where nothing but the Cathedral Church and Castle is worthy
observance. Minyd-Margan is a Hill in this County, on the top whereof is a
Monument, that has such strange Characters, that (as the country people
report and believe) he that reads them shall shortly after die. This County
in times past has been strongly fortified with five and twenty Castles,
whereof the most part are quite consumed to ruins, as are also some Religious
Houses, which in former ages did adorn this Country. The Air is cheerful,
pleasant and temperate. And the Soil, though the more North, the more Hilly,
yet Southward, is plain, even and fruitful, yielding to the Inhabitants good
store of Corn and Cattle.

map of Glamorgan GLAMORGAN SHIRE


Caermarden-shire.
THis County of Caermarden has the name from the Town of Caermarden, which
the ancient Britains called Caer-Firdhin, and is environed on the East with
Brecknock and Glamorganshire, on the West with Pembrook-shire; on the South
with the British Sea, and on the North with Cardigan-shire. The length of it
from point to point, in the longest part, being not above five and thirty
miles, and the wideness from the broadest part twenty, so as the measure of
the whole circumference contains about an hundred and two miles. It is parted
into six Hundreds, which are again divided into 87. Parishes. It is irriguated
with eight and twenty Rivers, which may be passed by sixteen Bridges: and it
contains two Parkes and four Forests. In six Market Towns have the
Inhabitants Traffic and Commerce, the chief whereof is the Shire Town
Caermarden, which in Ptolomies time was called Maridunum, and is very
delectably situate on the Western side of the River Towy, which divides the
whole Shire in the midst: over which water is a fair strong built Bridge of
stone, for passage to the Town; wherein upon a Rock is seated a large Castle,
from whence a wall enuironeth the Town, where (by report we have it) was
borne the famous Welsh Prophet Merlin, being the son of an Incubus spirit.
This Town has formerly bin the Exchequer for all South Wales. The government
whereof is now committed to a Mayor (who ever after is a Justice of Peace) with
two Sheriffs and sixteen Burgesses. The Pole being there elevated 50. 50. and
the Latitude 20. 16. The ancient Inhabitants of this County, were the
Dimetriae, yet some think they were part of the Silures, and that this Shire
was afterward the strong Fort of the Romans, where lay their Legions, as
appears by their Coins lately found at Kilmanlloyd. Some seven or eight mile
Eastward from Caermarden are the ruins of Castle Carreg on the top of an high
Hill, which is famous for spacious holes and wide Caves that are within it, and
also for a Well which ebbes and flows twice every four and twenty hours.
The Air is here pleasant, temperate and healthful. The Soil not so Hilly,
and more fertile than in some adjoining Shires. And for Commodities produces
Corn, Cattle, Grass, Woods and Pit-coale, with plenty of Foul and Fish,
whereof the Salmon is there caught in very great abundance.

map of Carmarthenshire CARMADEN SHIRE


Pembroke-shire.
THis Shire which (as learned Mr. Cambden reports) was in old books named the
Lawful County of Pembroch, is bounded on the East side by the County of
Caermarden, on the West and South by the Irish Seas, and on the North with the
Rivers Keach and Tyuy is divided from Cardigan. And the length of the Shire
from Cardigan North, to St. Gowers point South, contains 26. miles; and the
breadth from Landeny East, to St. David's point West, about twenty; whereby the
whole compass is accounted much upon 93. miles. The division of this Shire is
into seven Hundreds, wherein are dispersed the number of 145. Parish Churches.
There being interfluent in this County six Rivers, that have seven Bridges. In
it also are two Forests and three Parkes: And for the Inhabitants intercourse
for Trade and Traffic, they are furnished in this County with sieve Market
Towns, whereof that which is accounted the chief, is Pembroke, the Shire
Town, and Denominator of the County, which is pleasantly seated on the Bank
of a Creek, where the water ebbeth and flows even up to the walls: which
having three Gates in a long form (and now decaying) do enclose the Town,
which on the West end has a Castle, that has been large and strong. And a
Causey locked, which is the way to Monton Priory, now suppressed. Within the
walls are two Parish Churches, and the Town at this day governed by a Mayor,
assisted with Bayliffes and Burgesses: the height of the Pole being there 51.
47. and the Longitude 19. 40. Another Town note-worthy in the West of this
Shire, is ancient St. David's, which is barren and unfruitful, standing open to
all kind of ill weather, and yet from thence came St. Patrick the Irish
Apostle, whose parents were the British Priest Calphurnius and his wife Concha,
that was Sister to St. Martin. This City, though ill stored with houses and
Inhabitants, has yet a fair Cathedral Church, in the Quire whereof is
intombed Edmund Earl of Richmond, King Henry the Seuenths father, for whose
sake King Henry the Eighth spared the pulling down of this Church in the time
of Suppression. The ancient Inhabitants of this County were the Dimetriae, but
long after King Henry the First planted Flemings there, Monto Priory and St.
Dogmells were the Religious Houses that I find were erected in this Shire, and
in the dissolution were suppressed; yet with sixteen strong Castles and two
Block-houses at the mouth of Milford Haven was it well fortified. The Air
being temperate and wholesome, and the Soil fat, fertile and full of Marle,
yielding plenty of Corn, Cattle, Foul and Fish.

Pembrokeshire PENBROKE SHIRE


Cardigan-shire.
THis County of Cardigan, called by old Latin Writers Geretica, and in
British, Sire-Aber-Tius, is bordered upon on the East by Montgomery and
Brecknock-shires, on the West by the Irish Sea, on the South by Towy and Tiuy
is divided from Caermarden-shire, and on the North by the River Douy, from
Merioneth-shire. It contains from Cardigan Town in the South, to the River
Douy on the North, 32. miles, and stretches her widest part from Clarwen head
in the East, to Aberystwyth on the West, but fifteen; the whole content of the
compass being about 103. miles. It is divided into five Hundreds, which are
subdivided into 64. Parishes: 26. Rivers and Riuerets, with nine Bridges, are
pleasantly interspersed in it. And for negotiating of business for the
Inhabitants, four Market Towns, whereof Cardigan the Shire Town is the
principal, which on the North side of the River Tyuy, on a high bank is
pleasantly seated, which Gilbert de Clare, to whom King Henry the First gave
this County, encompassed with a wall that has three ways for passage into the
Town; and built there also upon a Rock, a fair large and strong Castle,
which the bitter storms of time have now transformed into a monument of
ruins: under which Castle is the Bridge, which is the only passable way over
the River Tyuy. The elevation of the Pole is here 52. 16. and the Longitude 19.
55. The ancient Inhabitants of this County, that Ptolemie makes mention of,
were the Dimetiae, who under the conduct of their King Caractacus, were most
valiant opposers of the Romans, till Julius Frontinus overcame and subdued
them. This small Shire, I find was furnished with few Religious Houses, namely
at Cardigan Istradfleet, Llan-Badern-Vaur, which sometime was a Bishops Sea,
and yet these few could not escape the force of Fortune, and Time the deuourer
of all things. The Air is here open, sharp, and piercing, and yet withal
wholesome. The Soil hilly and uneven, except toward the Seaside, where it is
more plain, having pleasant valleys and rich pastures. And the chiefest
Commodities of this County are Corn, Cattle, Foul and Fish; and in some
places are Mines of Lead.

Cardiganshire CARDIGAN SHIRE


Montgomery-shire.
THis County which we call Montgomery-shire, by the Britains was called
Sire-Trefaldwin, and on the East is enclosed with Shropshire, on the West with
Merioneth-shire: Radnor and Cardican-shires border on the South, and the North
is bounded with the County of Denbigh. The measure of the length from
Hyssyngton East to Machenlett West, is about 26. miles, and the broadest
between the Rivers of Dulas South, and Riader North, much upon 22. The
division of it is into seven Hundreds, wherein are in diverse places dispersed
47. Parish Churches: and with many sweet Rivers that have six Bridges for
passage is this County accommodated, whereof Seuerne, the second of all the
Land, has the head rising and issuing from the high Hill Plymllymon, whence
also descend from their heads, the Rivers of Wye and Rydall. The Inhabitants of
this County have for Commerce and Traffic six Market Towns, whereof the
chiefest is the Shire Town Montgomery, which upon the side of an hill is
pleasantly situated in a very healthful Air, near to which upon a higher
mount is seated a fair and strong Castle, that is yet kept and maintained in
very good repair, having a most pleasant Plain under it: It was built by
Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury, and called by the Latins Mons
Gomericus. The Pole is here elevated 52. 43. and the Longitude 21. 17. The
hardy Ordouices were the ancient Inhabitants that possessed this County, who
were a warlike people, that valiantly a long time withstood the Roman Forces,
and held out from the subjection of the English, till the reign of King Edward
the First; but since that time have ever been found most firm and faithful
to the Crown. The Air is here very delightful and healthful; The Soil
Hilly and uneven, but plentiful of fair and fresh water Springs. The East
part of this Shire being as fruitful as any part of England, and the West
breeding abundant store of Cattle, but especially of excellent Horses.

Montgomeryshire MOUNTGOMERIE SHIRE


Merioneth-shire.
THe Latins call this County Meruinia, which the Britains termed
Syre-Verioneth, and we now call Merioneth-shire. Which boundeth thus:
Montgomery-shire bordereth the East, and the Irish Seas do wash upon the West.
Cardigan-shire is divided from it by the River Dowy on the South: and the North
is limited by the Counties Carnarnan and Denbigh. It contains in length, from
Aber-Dowy South-west, to Llansansfred North-East, about 33. miles, and in
breadth from Maynlloyd South-east, to Bethkelert Bridge 22. It is divided into
six Hundreds, wherein are contained 37. Parish Churches, and 26. Rivers
passable by seven Bridges. And for Commerce and Traffic in this County, are
but three Market Towns, viz. Bala, Dolgelhe and Harlech, which is accounted
the principal, though it be much defective both of building or any other
ornaments befitting a Shire Town, for in a barren place it stands, but bleake
and cold, where there is little plenty of any thing but of Foul and Fish. Yet
is there a strong and fair Castle, situate upon a Mount encircled with a
double Bulwark, which is a sure defense against the entrance there of any
foreign inuaders. And though the Constable of this Castle by Patent is also
Mayor of the Town, yet does the want of repair thereof threaten a sudden
decay. The Pole is here elevated to 52. 58. of Latitude, and the Longitude 20.
9. Near Bala is a great Pond, called Pimble-meare, containing 160. Acres in
quantity, which never by any land-flouds falling into it, is any whit
increased, but by storms of violent winds ouerfloweth and rages in a
wonderful manner. The Ordonices were the ancient Inhabitants of this County,
who very stoutly opposed the Romans. And after they were subiugated to the
English, (by the means of Owen Glendour) made many rebellious quarrels, to
free themselves again from the English yoke. Many Wolves in ancient times did
abound in the Mountains of this County, which by means of King Edgar were
utterly destroyed. The Air here may be healthful to the Natives, but it is so
continually troubled with violent winds, as it is nothing pleasant. And the
Soil so rough and mountainous, that though Corn can thrive there, yet for
Grass and feeding for sheep, and other Cattle, it is no way defective.
Herrings are caught also on those Coasts in abundance; and the whole County
sufficiently stored with Fish and Foul.

Merionethshire MERIONYTH SHIRE


Carnaruon-shire and Anglesey.
HEre am I confined to a narrower limit than in the former, being to describe
two Provinces in this one page. Briefly therefore thus: The Britains called
this County Caer-aruon; the Bounds whereof are Denbigh-shire on the East,
M^ri^^ on the South, the Irish Seas on the West and North. The length from
South to North contains 40 M^les, the breadth 20, and the whole compass 110.
There are in it 68 Parishes, one Bishopric, 17. Rivers, with 6 large Bridges.
And for Commerce and Traffic 5 Market Towns, whereof the chiefest is the
Shire-Towne Carnaruon, situate very pleasantly on the Sea side, and enclosed
with a Wall, having been both beautified and fortified also with a strong
fair Castle, which now even droopeth for age, and the violent force of the
Sea, wherewith it is continually undermined and battered: The Constable of
which Castle (by Patent) is ever Mayor; who with an Alderman, and two
Baylisses, do govern this Town; where King Edward 2. was borne, and where
the Pole is elevated 53. 26. and the longitude 19. 57. The Bishops Sea Bangor,
where Hugh Earl of Chester built a Castle, is another Town of note in this
County, where the Ordo^^^es were the ancient Inhabitants, who by reason of the
mountains, (wherewith this Shire abounds) did long and stoutly withstand the
Romans, amongst which Snoden Hill is both the greatest and highest; but for
more particulars of it, and other places of note in this Shire, I must refer
you to Mr. Camden, and Mr. Speed, who will fully resolve you. The Air here is
sharp and cold; the Soil barren and hilly, and yet yields Milk, Butter,
Cheese, and Honey, in a plentiful manner.

Anglesey.
THe Romans named this Mona, which we call Anglesey Island, being divided from
Britain by the River Menoy, and the rest round bounded by the Sea: it
contains 20. miles in length, and 17. in breadth, the whole compass being
about 70. miles. Into six Hundreds it is divided, and these are subdivided into
seventy four Parishes. It has eight Rivers, and but two Market Towns for
Trade and Traffic, the chief whereof is Beau-Marish, built by King Edward
the first, who first brought the whole Island under the English yoke, and
fortified it with a strong Castle; the fair situation whereof, being in a
Moorish place, gave the name that it has unto it: which is now governed by a
Mayor annually elected, who is assisted with two Bayliffes, and a Town Clerk.
The Ordouices also were the old Inhabitants of this Island, who were subiugated
to the Romans by Julius Agricola. I read but of one Religious House in this
Province, namely Lhaan-vais, which though it be now quite rased, is yet
memorable for the bodies of King John's daughter, the Danish Kings son, the
Lord Clifford, and diverse other eminent persons there interred. The Air is
piercing, and healthful; and though the Soil seem dry and barren, yet is it
plentifully stored with wheat, and produces Corn and Cattle, wherewith it
not only furnishes it self, but is a good help to the neighbor Provinces.

map of Caernarfonshire and Anglesey CARNARVAN THE ISLE OF ANGLESEY


Denbigh-shire.
THis County, in British called Sire Denbigh, is bounded on the East with
Ches-shire and Shrop-shire, on the West with Caernaruon and Merioneth-shires:
Montgomery-shire encloseth the South; the Sea and Flynt-shire the North. It
stretches in length from East to West one and thirty, and in breadth from South
to North about seventeen; the whole compass containing much upon an hundred
and fourteen miles. Into twelve Hundreds is this County distinguished, and
they contain in them seven and fifty Parish Churches; four and twenty
Rivers, passable by six Bridges. And for Traffic and Trade amongst the
country Inhabitants, three Market Towns, whereof the Principal is the Shire
Town Denbigh, which Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln fortified with a wall, and a
strong Castle: And yet is it famous for the fairest place in all North- Wales.
The Government whereof is committed to two Aldermen, and two Bayliffes, which
are every year chosen out of five and twenty Burgesses, who with a Recorder
and a Town Clerk are their Assistants. The elevation of the Pole being there
53. 18. and the Longitude 20. 51. The Ordouices were the ancient Inhabitants of
this County, a strong and warlike people, who of all others continued the
longest free, from the Roman or English subjection; but first by Julius
Agricola to the one, and then by King Edward the First to the other, were
subdued and conquered. The Vale of Cluyd being both pleasant and fruitful,
passes the space of seventeen miles long, and about five miles broad, through
the heart of this Shire, being walled about with high Hills, where on the top
of the highest, called Moillenlly, was in former times entrenched a strong
Fort, having a clear Spring of fair water. And in Llan-sanan Parish, in this
County, are four and twenty seats cut in a circle out of a Rock, which the
Inhabitants do call King Arthurs Round Table. The Air is here (though sharp
and bleake) healthful, and the Soil in the middle most fruitful: though the
East and West sides are but barren and mountainous, yet yields it good store of
Sheep, Goats, and Neat; besides plenty of Corn, and other necessary
Commodities.

map of Denbighshire DENBIGH SHIRE.


Flint-shire.
FLint-shire is in form long and narrow, being bounded on the East side with
Cheshire, from which it is severed by the River Dee, on the West with Cluyd is
divided from Denbigh; the South is bordered upon by Shrop-shire, and the North
is limited with the waves of the Sea. The length contains in all not above 26.
Miles, and in the broadest part scarce 8. Into 5. Hundreds is it divided,
wherein are dispersed 28 Parish Churches, and a Bishopric. With many small
Rivers is it well watered, but only Cluyd and Dee are two of the greatest note.
And for Commerce and Traffic, have the Inhabitants of this County but only
one Market Town, namely Flint the Shire Town, where Henry the second laid the
foundation, and Edward the first built a fair strong Castle, at which King
Richard the second was by Henry Earl of Northumberland circumuented, and
surprised; and by Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford induced to resign his
Crown and Royal Dignity: which when he had done, he was conveyed to the Tower
of London, as a prisoner there deposed, and afterward at Pomfret lost his
life. The elevation of the Pole at this place is 53. 19. and the Longitude 21.
8. The stout and sturdy Ordouices, who so long and valiantly withstood the
Romans, were the ancient Inhabitants of this County, which has been fortified
formerly with 7. fair Castles, which with their Hills, was a sure and strong
defense against their enemies. At a little Town named Halywell in this Shire,
is that famous fountain, called commonly St Winefrids Well, of a fair Virgin
of that name, who by a Lord of that Country was in that place both by force
ravished, and afterward beheaded; about which Well is Moss growing, of a most
odoriferous and fragrant smell: and over the said Fountain is built a fair
freestone Chapel, in the windows whereof is the picture of the injured
Virgin, whereto poor Pilgrims were used in abundance to make their repair.
And at Kilken in this County is another little spring, that at certain times
does both ebb and slow like the Sea. Diverse Religious houses have been seated
in this Shire, which are now subverted and turned to ruins; amongst which that
at St. Asaphs the Bishops Sea, is memorable, for having 663. persons in the
brotherhood. And near to that Monastery which was at Basingwarke, began King
Offaes Ditch, which cross cutteth this County: where the Air is pleasant,
temperate and wholesome, and the Soil fruitful, yielding many commodities, as
Corn, Grass, Cattle, Milk, Butter, Cheese, and Honey, whereof they make
Metheglin: besides which is there plenteous store of River Fish; and in some
places good Milstones and Grindstones are wrought out of the Rock.

map of Flintshire FLINT SHIRE


FINIS.

