A spiritual purgation sent unto al them that labor of Luthers Error, as
touching the bodily presens of Christ our savior in the Sacrament, and to al
them that have espied the liberty of the gospel as touching their flesh, yet
seek not the liberty to make free their spyrite from this before said error:
Ihon. xviii.

Every one that is of truth hears my voice. Cum Priuilegio ad imprime^dum
Solum

To the right worshypfull and godly Knight, Sir Thomas wyat, thee Auctor
hereof wysshet health and increase of grace to perfection in christ our Lord.
Amen.
FOr as much as the accostumable use of this our realm after the long absens
of our fre^des returned into their natyue co^tre, we seemed than with gifts and
presents the only signs and tokens of their affectyon toward them, right
worship full knight. I unable to be a friend, yet of like affectyo^ will, and
heart, as friends are, have addressed this poor and rude present to welcome you
with all, which coueteth not fame or estimacion that commonly tells the
minds of men, but that thing only, who^ I know you to be to your power, a
defender and maynteyner namelye the glory of god and truth of his most sacred
words the earnest of our salvation. Partly therefore moved by affection and
duty for your benyuole^s toward me, and chieflye for the hartye zeal you
bear unto the most sacred gospel of Christ Jesus I am so bold to dedicate
this, rude and unlearned, yet simple and true lucubration.

Whom I hartelye desire you to accept at my poor hands, not lokynge unto the
gift, but unto the mind of thee geuer, not forgetting the ge^tylnes of
Artaxerkices King of Percia who refused not a draughte of cold water at the
hands of a poor labourer, considering his heart and not the baseness of y^
gift. Thus doing ye shall sharpe^ any desire hereafter, to vysyte you with
soche like, my poor exercyses. Thus y^ lord god of might and everlasting
power encreace you with his grace and augment your knowledge in his glorious
Gospel, AMEN.

The book to the Christian reader wissethe health grace and understanding in
the Lord Jesus.
Like as the child does sore lament
And greuouslye take his mothers lake
Eue^ so am I not well co^te^t
Mine authors hands thus to forsake
And as the child cannot wythstand
His parents will, but must obey
So lies it not within my hand
My author will, to again say
But the proverb in very deed
This dout briefly does so discuss
Needs shall y^ must with haste and speed
The matter in no case can refuse
Syns, the^ there is no remedy
But forth to troge and have to make
To slack the time it were but folly
In this y^ I have undertake.
Help have I none me to uphold
In this grievous perplexity
But god which bids me be bold
His truth to speak and verity
Which is of force I know right well
Me to mayntayn in every case
Against y^ clergy and bishops cruel
That thus gods word still do deface
Whose tyranny and fylthy pride
Whose doutfull table Epicuriall
Whose welthines and myters wide
Whose gold ringes most cynedicall
Has gods own word i^ soch disdayn
And there at does so swell and freate
That it to color they cannot refrayn
It casts naught therein to sweat*
Their supposal and groose conjecture
Not ruled by the testament
They place instead of y^ scripture
Against the Lords spiritual intent.
Which thing amongst the multitude
As a Scorpio^ most cruel and fell
Has stong their hearts both blind and rude
And drawn their faith from the gospel
So that they now in places clatter
Authority has taught us so
As for the gospel it makes no matter
Be it well, or be it woo
Thus recheles in destreinte of mind
They prefer men's blind fantasye
Contrary to the nature and kind
Of gods word and verytie
Wherefore as one y^ does lament
This sore disease and malady
My brothers conscience to have rent
And filled it with mysery
I have prepared through gods goodness
For this unkind perturbacyon
To the mind a gentyl releasse
Called a spiritual purgatyon
Whose nature is to mudyfy
And clean eschoure the conscience
Of them whom luthers heresy
Has infecte with the bodyly presens
Of christ's body in the sacrament
Under form of bread still to remain
Clean contrary to the hole concent
Of gods holy sperit and word certain
Wherein they may as in a glass
Their error try and take away
Pla^ti^g their hearts i^ liberty and grace
Of our high god the assured stay
Of all mankind that faithfully
Upon him call with fear and tre^blyng
He is their lord and guide truly
That will the^ lead in this good lerni^g
So that error and fantasye
And gredy lucre apt to reach
Shall not seduce the^ so fondly
Against y^ truth, this untruth to teache
Wherefore good reader I y^ require
In perusyng me be pacyent
Syns that the prophet is my desire
And gods glory is my hole intent
Who has me framed verily
For this purpose an instrument
Only to publyshe his glory
And the truth of his holy Testament.
And not to please the carnal eye
Or satisfy the unkind lust
Of our pote^t and mighty clergy
Which ar nothing but ashes and dust.
That so stoutlye in every place
Defend their wicked tradicyon
Dishonorynge the sperite of grace
To their most shamfull confusion
Except they do forsake their sin
And repent of their wyckednes
Their ware to the^ will never win
Any yote of the lords ryghtuousnes
Which is our fort and saving health
Our strong tower and tresorye
On who^ depends al our wealth
Exempting us from myserye
Under whose holy protectyon
Mekely to walk is a solas
which leads to the blysful ma^sion
Of endless joy and lasting grace
Through christ our lord and savior
Our sacrifice and satisfaction
Of Israel the only redemer
In who^ the faithful have salvation
To whom be praise glory and honor
Judgment dominion continually
which reyneth with ye father of equal
From age to age perpetually power
AMEN
Grace mercy and peace of conscience be unto all them from god the father,
through our lord Jesus Christ, which faithful ye without color obey the truth
in setting forth gods glory. Ame^.
BRother, for asmoch as our heavenly father by the mouth of his true servant
Paul, has comanded al his adoptiue heirs planted in him by y^ precious
death and cross of our savior christ, to exercise their tongue (who^ God has
created to magnyfie his name) in Gods holy and most sacred word, willi^g us ye
no other word should proceed out of our mouth, but that which shall edifye when
neade is to give grace to thee hearers, and grieve not the holy sperite of god
by who^ we are sealed in y^ day of redemption: Our disobedience ca^ not Ephe,
iiii,
be hid from the ryghtuous judge, which wayeth ye thoughts, and sercheth ye
reins of ma^s heart, if we which covet this fellowship and society of the
eternal testament of god, go about not only to burden weakelinges with
errors dampnable, but also to grieve y^ holy spirit of god through our vayn
dreams or Imagina^cio^s, beleui^ge creatures before ye creator, wherefore good
brethren dylige^tly mark you my words and not mine, but the words of the
living god, which are not sent to you at this time for rebuke rebuke or
occasion (God I take to wytnes) but for love, yt you should not be pertakers
with the Ipocrites whose porcyo^ is Apoc, xxli
leyed up in the lake of hell, burning with fire and brymstone, but for this
cause they are sent unto you assuredlye, y^ like as you which entende to leave
in gods fear have sought a redemye for the imperfectyon of y^ flesh, and
frail nature of gods word, if ye have learned to satisfye it according to
his will without sin: even so to help your weak judgments, and your
vnperfight sperit (as touching the sacrament of the blessed body and blood of
Christ our savior, you may repair unto his word of him seking and prayenge
with the prophet, that he will establyshe your judgments in his truth and
make your paths save from wicked me^, that they overthrow the^ not. For when
ye sought a phecision to ease your sick flesh, and to dischardge you of a
careful burden and paynful yocke, that a law papistical had laid upon your
neck, you councelled not thee children of the world were they never so famous,
no not marten Luther, who^ to be nothing else, of the^ self, but vanity and
lies the prophet bears you witness saying. Man is upon the waughtes lyghter
tha^ vanity it self. And in another place. All me^ ar liars, but you
councelled him who^ you knew could not lie, because it is truth it self, and
conde^pneth liars saying. I will destroy all them Psalm. v
y^ speak lies, and therefore you were sure that y^ liberty which ye now
possess, was good, because he granted it that could not be reproved: Now
much more ought ye, for the disceate that troubles your soul, namely false
judgment and error which is the best part of you, unto who^ your bodi must
both obey and serve not to stick to flesh and blood, which by ungodly lyui^g
ar robbed of true judgment in the misterye of gods truth, but as y^ sperit
being the best part of your body, who being lyghtened, your body ca^
persevere in darkness: Even so goo ye unto him, which is most chiefeste and
mighty in operacio^ able to make y^ blind to see, the deffe to hear, the do^
me to speak, and to heal the wou^des that error has maimed you wtal, nameli
gods word, for hit al things were created, and without it nothing was created
no not luther, whom al though gods sperit ruled to speak some things right, yet
wha^ he began to love him self and set forth his own dreams not ruled by the
sperit of god, he erred as some other of his forefathers has done, so yt this
sower leue^ being but little in quantity, yet in quality poison sharp, has
as the scripture says, sowred his hole lompe of dowe. But good brethren syns
ye stand fre, as touching ye flesh, and that by gods word, be ye not bound
in y^ sperite to the judgment of me^, call rather to your remembrance, yt as
the potter excedeth ye pot, the workema^ the work, and thee creator thee
creature: Even so the wysdo^ of god our creator and not only ours but luthers
also excedeth our wysdo and Luthers too. Whose folyshnes is more wyser than the
wysdom of me^. Wherefore as wisdom would let us repair unto him which is hole
wise, hoole good, and truth it self, that he may by his word open your eyes,
that you may know your disceate and be healed by the Gospel, Which as paul
says is y^ power of god i, Corin, i.
unto salvation to all the^ that believe it. And who so denyethe Johan, iii
it, he is already conde^pned for therefore are we called the sons of god
because we have be Gala. iii
leued in Christ Jesus, whom god the father has by his holy sperite sealed as
witnesses Esaye the prophet to preach Esaye. li.
unto this gospel namely deliverance unto the captive and healinge of the sick
men's wounds, only that al they which believe this most sacred word denying
ungodliness should be made a rightuous plantinge wherein god should rejoice. For
god has called us by his most glorious gospel not to allow the Imaginacion
of flesh either to acquyet our conscience according to their opinion,
polluting our faith whom has chosen to be his spouse with y^ adulterynne
dregs of carnal wysdo^ who^ we know leads unto death. For Paul says to
be carnally Rom, viii
minded is death: but to be spirituallye minded is life: For carnal wisdom
sauoureth not of god which is a sperit and worshipped in speryte and truth, and
therefore it is unable to judge of the word which is sperite and life to them
that stick thereunto with faith unfeignedly, and therefore let it not defyle our
sainctuarie and faithful sperite unto who^ god will declare the se mysteryes
that are above y^ grype of flesh, for as a loving husband possessing a
faithful wife, whose propertye is to be silent, doubts not to communicate his
secrets unto her, because his love should appear Even so our messiah has not
feared to communicate the mysteries of his truth unto a lowly sperit and
simple heart, whom he has married unto him self, by the lively faith which we
have in the merits blood and wou^des of the anointed savior to this
witnessing y^ prophet Ose as, says in the person of god I Osee. ii
will marry the to me in faith, and thou shall know, ye I will be the lord,
Without faith, therefore as it is impossible to Esaias, vii. Hebre. xi
please god, as Paul writes: so is it impossible without it, to enter, to enter
y^ depth of gods truth. And therefore says ye prophet. The wrath of ye lord
came upon Israel, because they believed psalm, xviii
not in God, nor trusted in his saving health. Again woe be to ye dissolute
heart, ye believes not god, nor trusted i^ his saui^g health, and therefore,
shall thou not be defended of him: But unto y^ apostels which in faith were
moved to him, he said with his own mouth. It is given unto you to know y^
secrets, mysteries of the gospel. Why? because ye have not taken y^ wysdo^ of
me^ to be your scholemaster, but by a simple heart, forsaking syn, have taken
the sperite of god to be your guide. As for an example what scholemaster had
Nathaniel wha^ at y^ first sight he said Rabbi, tu es ille filius dei, tu es
ille Johan, i*
Rex Israel, that is to say. Good master, thou art that son of god, thou art
that king of Israel. What moved Peter to confess Christ to be the son of y^
living god, contrary to the opinion of flesh and blood, sondrye ways
Prophesyinge of him. Doubteles men taught them not this doctrine, but the
sperite of God, which spoke in them, and to this Christ him self bears
wytnes saying. Blessed art thou Simon Peter. Quia caro et sanguis non math.
^^i.
reuelauit tibi, sed pater meus qui est meus qui est in celis. For flesh and
blood has not reueiled unto the: but my father which is in heaven* Contrary
wise what in structour had the high prestes and Pharisees when they called him
Carpe^ters son Samaritan and Beelzabub, saying in thee name of Beelzabub he
did cast forth deuyls. Doubtless flesh and blood, which possess not (as Paul
says) thee Kingdom of God. Quia carnalibus ad est zelus and contentio and
ambulare secundum hominem. Because flesshiynges ar full of i. Cor. xv. i, Cor.
iii.
conte^tion and strife, to walk after man's doctrine* Therefore say I that god
has not called us by his holy Euangelion to determyne our faith upon the
dreams of men, for faith is a perfect gift, and al gifts that are perfect
and good done, come from god which is perfyghte, and therefore they are not to
be establyshed upon me^, which are without the grace of our heavenly father al
imperfect and sin, but rather upon gods truth. For what a blyndenes were
it (good brethren) to persuade our conscyens to know the mysteryes of gods
truth, thinking that we possess a verity infallible: wha^ we so openly
sticki^g unto the judgments of earnall men, blaspheme the truth, what greater
blasphemye, I pray you can there be more, tha^ wha^ ye opynions of me^ which be
for y^ most part with the sperite of god more lies and fables, shall out of the
bosom of his creatures, shutt out the truth of our most hye god, in whose
lips David faith, there was never foundgile, and seal up their ears lest
they should hear the comfortable embassage of peace who^ Paul calls in the
epystel unto Tim. profitable doctrine, saying. Euange lium gloria dei, quod
creditum est Timo. 1
mihi sana doctrina est. The Eua^gelions of thee glory of God, which is
delivered unto me, is an wholesome doctrine. And also unto the Thessalonia^s he
writes Verbum accepistis a nobis, non vt verbum homine^, sed si Thessa, 1.
cut est Vere verbum dei. (that is to say) Ye have received of us the word, not
as y^ word of men but as it is in deed, the word of god. Again unto Tite he
writes thus, encoraginge him in his endeavor. Verbu^ sanu^, irreprehensible
loquere, quod non blasphemetur omnia, that is to say, Titum. 2.
Speak the wholesome and faurelesse word which will not blaspheme at al. Now
brethren derely beloved, if ye obey unto ye truth, Even as Ezechiel was moved
of god, notwithstanding the stubbernes of the Israelites, to preach and teach
this his word, and sharply to reprove the^ of their frowardnes, in yt they
saw his wonderful work, and yet believed not, neither turned from their
wyckednes, to declare his unmeasurable mercy that he would all to know and no
man to perysshe thoroughe error, says. Verba mea loqueris ad eos, si forte
audiant and quiescant, quoniam irritarores sunt, (That is to say). Ezeche. 2,
Thou shall speak my words unto the^, that if it will be, they Ezech. ii.
may give ear, for they are men that provoke me Even so moved by the sperit, I
will if god be pleased, set his word before your eyes, y^ thereby you may
perceive the mercy and grace of our heavenly father, that he is not wylling to
se you perysshe through this your abominable error, even the word that is of
power able to save your soul. Cast away therefore these mystes and cloudie
pha^tasyes of carnal judgment, as touching this word (For god has said, my
thoughts are not your thoughts, nether yours ar mine,) And desire hartelye
with me that the holy on of Israel may open your gates, that the king of glory
may enter in there at to discuss by his holy spirit the truth of this your
doubt, that your weak co^scyens may no longer waver and be compelled to hang
upon imperfection. But that you may not only have understanding in this, but
to seek his glory which has to al them that believe the gospel reveled life,
and ii, Tim, i.
immortality, the power of Satan, hell and death, being vaunquyshed, if you
shall se for his truth sake both confute your error, and break in sonder thee
bastelio^, whose walls ar built with vnte^pered claye, and therefore as a
tottering wall must come to naught: Frayte not your hearts with disdayn,
willingly through malice procuring your own destrucito^, but as the word
loui^gly exhorts you, be meke and lowlye to hear thee word of God, that you
Eccle, v.
may understand, and bring forth a wise and true answer. For every word of
God is pure (as the wyseman says, and Prou, xxx
a shyld of defense to them that put their trust in hit. For assure thy self
that he cannot be of God, which prefers the durtye dregs of men's brains,
before gods word, for as Johan says, every one that is of Johan, 19
God, hears the truth, and every one that hears truth, hears god. For
my sheep hear my voice, and I know the^ and they follow me, nether shall any of
them perysshe, nor no man shall take them out of my hand. Jeremy the prophet,
because he would not have us seduced by any fond Imaginacion, forbids not
only to Ierem. 23
hear those prophets, that prophesye their own dreams, but also says in the
voice of our heavenly father, Take heed, Ierem, 7
that ye harken not to councels which i^deuour to disceaue you, and to do you
no good. Now if you will try your selves to be as ye would be reported, abide
in the word, and then shall ye be partakers of y^ promise that god has made by
his word, that is, ye shall know the truth and it shall make you fre, for he
Johan, 8,
yt is of God, hears his word.

THe disciple the first Exodi, 12,
day of sweet bread came unto Christ saying, where wilt you that we prepare
for ye, the easter or passover la^be to eat, for it was accostumed amongst y^
Israelites, that they y^ first month and. xiiii. day of the same at night the
household of thee Isralites should through out all their costs and borders
eat no leuened bread, but unleavened until seven days were clearly expired?
And further that in the day of sweet bread a la^be necessarely should be
killed, whom they eat, the night luke, xxii, Exodi, xii
before their delyueraunce out of bondage, which being a perpetual sign and
token of their deliuerau^ce was continuallye observed among the^ which in very
deed was a shadow and figure of gods mercy and favor toowardes his
creatures, wha^ we were yet his enemies, that like as they which were sealed
with the blood of the la^be were preserved from dangerous plages y^
overwhelmed the first borne of Egypt, and were couerd with the mercyful wings
of god, and set their flesh, which served in most vile servitude, or cruel
bondage, under the unbelieving king Pharao, in fredom, whereof to assure the^ he
gave the land of Canaan for their habitacio^ vtterli, therout expelling y^
enemies of his people, that freely without check, they might possess the
promised land, that flows with milk and honey: Eue^ so that al souls which
were in the iron cheynes of damnation bondaged to death, and perpetual darkness
through Adams transgression, should by the means of this anointed savior,
appointed of god the father before the foundacio^ of the world was leyed, be
made fre from dampnacion which unfeignedly trusted in him. For this was the
simple lamb, of whom Esaias the Prophet speaks, Esaias, liii.
saying, that he should not strive for his flesh. Yea, thee very same, that
the Evangelist has appointed all burdened consciences to go unto, for a
dischardge, saying. Ecce agnus dei Christus qui tollit peccata mundi. That is
to say. Behold the Johan, i,.
la^be of god. Christ that takes away the sins of the world. Wherefore that
thou may by thee scripture be assured that y^ passover lamb eaten at the
deliverance of their bodies, from a temporal bondage preached the death, and
passion of christ our lamb, that made him self obedient to the most
reprochefull death of the cross, by whose strypes as the Prophet says we
were healed, and also the eternal delyueraunce of our souls from death,
mark well what is written in the scripture. Agni statuuntur in testimoniu^
veritatis and federis promis. that is Gene, xxi,
to say. Lambs ar appointed for a wytnes of the truth, and the covenant
promised. And therefore Johan says. Agnus occisus ab origin mundi habet librum
feder is, in quo scripta sunt nomina Apoc. xiii.
sanctorum, That is to say. The lamb that was killed from the beginning of
the world: has the book of covenant, wherein be written y^ names of the
saints. Now to make his disciples to be more apt to receive this mystery,
and to open their eyes to perceive the peace offeringe promised by the
prophets, and now come to do the will of his father that sent him, a la^be to
be slain, to appease his wrath, conceived through Ada^s fall. That, as Adam
covered al flesh by his disobedience with damnacion, eue^ so the obedience
that was in christ, should cover it with salvation: He said unto the^, go ye
into the city to a certain man whom ye shall mete, and say you unto him.
Magister vicit, tempus meum prope est Math, 24
apud te facio pasca cum discipulis meis, that is to say. The Master says, my
time is at hand, I will keep mine easter at thine house with my disciples. As
who should say, the time is come that the heavenly will of my father should be
fulfilled, and by my passion wrought for the comfort and consolation of Adam,
and his posterity, whose frowardnes, in yt he disobeyed his will, plucked his
indignatyon and wrathful vengeance upon his head. But now behold the
acceptable time that god my father through love, lo^geth for an attonemente, and
as a loving father glad to receive the sheep, that were lost for sin, has
not spared me, his only begotten son to throw me from his imperial trone,
into the bottom of the earth, that whosoever believes in me should have life
everlasting, I am he, promised by the prophets to make this agreement of whom
Esaias speaks. Ecce virgo concipiet and pari Esaye. vii
et filium and vocabitur nome^ eius Emanuel, that is to say. Behold a byrgyn
shall conceive and bring forth a son, and his name Math. i.
shall be called Emanuel. And as matthew says. Qui saluum faciet populum suum
Israel, that is to say. Which shall make false his people Israel. I am the
sacrifice, yea, the only sacryfyce that must in my blood wash away man's
iniquity and dregs of corruption, and none but I alone. For where the priest
and leuite has passed by the wounded man, unable to help him I am come to
bind up his wou^des, yea to make hi^ hoole, I am the mediator appointed
between god and man, even the man Jesus Timo. 2
christ, for this purpose chosen of God my father to heal the sick that need
a phesyssyon, and preach beliuerau^ce unto the captive, without me there is no
mediator, for I am come into the world for no other purpose, but to save
sinners. I am that spiritual rock sent into i, Corin, ^
this wyldernes, of whom your fathers have drunk, and so must you or else ye
perysshe for thyrst I am that pure and lively vine, whose leaves never wyther
Johan, 1^
nor fall away: whosoever is not planted in me, my father will pluck him up by the
roots. I am the Johan, vi
bread sent down from heaven who so is replenyshed with me shall never taste of
death, I am y^ Johan, x.
door an open enter to my father, unto whom no man comes but by me. For he
that clymmeth over the walls is as the scripture says, a thief or a robber.
I only do give life unto my sheep. I am the God of Abraham, Abraham Isaac and
Jacob, even their sauegarde and mercy seat* Math, xxii,
I am he, which puts a way your iniquities even for mine own sake, and
being the lord your creator, for love will remember them no more, for I am the
Lord, and without me there is no savior, the pathe truly have I trodden to god
my father, Esaye, 43
that you seeing my foot steps should at no time err.

Thus good brethren, when he had by preaching of his death and merits,
instilled into his disciples hearts, understanding that they might perceive
their salvation, and not theyrs alone, but also of the hole world, because he
had even from the beginning chose the^ witnesses of his afflictyons, that after
thee thing was fynished which they personallye beheld with more fyrme and
stable faith, they might preach this desire sight and unmeasurable comfort of
al flesh among the gentyles and unbelieving nations: He did not only with
express words declare his goinge into Jerusalem, his euel intreature
amongeste the high prestes, Pharisees and cruel blood suckers, and finally his
death, that they hearing these words might with more diligens attend to mark
the experiens thereof: but also wha^ the passover lamb should be eaten, which
as I before said, was the token of their delyueraunce out of Egypt, and of ye
fredom of their flesh, by y^ which delyueraunce their souls were not
exempted from the tyrannos gulffe of hell, sin, and death, neither y^ fathers
wrath pacyfied dew unto the^ for tra^sgression, but continually hanged, most
terryblie over their heads, so that they yet were ye subjects if death, and
da^pnation: he therefore to preach unto them a perfect delyueraunce or fredom
of both body and soul, to be no more under the banners of death, but of life
and salvation, at this his last supper, when the toke^ of this body ly
delyueraunce should be eaten which was but the sygnificatio^ of this lamb, that
was now present among them, by whose death al ma^kynd should be lowsed from
utter darkness, and vnque^cheable fire, to satisfy this mysterye, and to make
it euydent, he took bread and after he had given thanks to God his father, he
brake it, saying. Take, eat, math, 26. Luke xiiii
this is my body which shall be broken for you, likewise he took the cup,
saying, this is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for many in
the remission of their sins, For if the arm of god and his mighty power was
so hyghlye esteemed in ye delyueraunce of their mortal bodies, from a mortal
tyrau^t, that it vouchsaued him to establyshe it with this sign or token, for
a memorial of his grace toward the^, being yet not taken out of the cheynes
of darkness, than when soever the devil assaulted them captyuating their
wits with sensuality, to make the^ forget the lord, that the wytnes of his
benignite should always accuse their ingratitude, and move the^ to repent, how
much more ought this sign or sacrament of the Lords death to be hyghly
reregarded among us Christians, which preaches unto us a thing far better
tha^ a bodyly deliverance, from a bodily tyrant, namely the delyuerau^ce from
eternal dampnacion and the kingdom of darkness, tha^ whansoeuer the ramping
lion Satan seeks to devour our souls, by ye enti^arg unto syn, and
desperacion, we by this holy sacrament ar put in remembrance that our savior
Christ was the promised sede of the woman which should break the serpents
head, which moved our father to bannisshe us from his sight, and has in his
death, and bloudsheding, slain the leuia than that had power over death
Wherefore as the lamb was y^ sign appointed to continue till the everlasting
savior, even Christ our la^be came, to preach the deliuerau^ce of their body
from the paynefull servitude, of the Egiptians: Even so this bread and wine is
the sacrament, appointed by christ to preach his most precious death, our
redemption till he come to judge the quick and y^ dead. And therefore good
brethren after the immolacion of Christ Jesus, our passover la^be the
Israelites sign ceased, because the innocent lamb in very deed, appointed of
god before the creation of the world (to be slain) was come, whom it
sygnified and has to assure us of his death, and coming again, left unto us
bread and wine, as a sign and token to confyrme us weakelynges in faith, that
he has died for our sins to pacifye the wrath of his father, and is risen
for ou^ justification, thee iron bands of death, brast in sonder, and he with
triumphante victory, by the power of god, has penetrated the clouds to give
salvation. So that the ryghtuousnes (as Paul says) that pleased Roma, iii
god was the redemption that is in christ Jesus, thorough who^ the terrible
vengeance of god is passed over us, and we sealed into rede^ptyon, and that
ye should not doubt, but that God by him is won to be our friend, mark well
this his own testimony. Hic est filius meus dilectus in quo mihi been
co^placui, ipsum audite, that is to say: This math. iii, mark, ix
is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. As the lamb
therefore was appointed by Moses their leader chosen of god, a memorial or
sign of gods goodness, in that he made them fre men, as touching their
bodies from pharaos yocke the night before, it came to pass: Eue^ so this
bread and wine was assigned, a perpetual sign by our Moses, chosen of god by
his precious blood to lead us from everlasting death, and dampnacion as a
sign of gods mercy toward us, in that he has sent his only begotten son
Jesus, in the shape of sinful flesh being without syn, to co^dempne syn in the
flesh, and to co^quere death for their sake, yt of a pure love trusted in hi^,
eue^ y^ night before his death, now by this sign bread and wine, christ to
instruct his Apostles whom he had chosen to support steadfastly among the
Jews, the delyueraunce of our souls from death exhibited plainly before they
eyes, that, that followed, namely his passion, and the comfort of the same,
saying. Take eat, this is my body which shall be given for you, do this in
remembrance of me. That is to say, even as ye se this bread broken for the
comfort of your outward man, and this wine drunk for the co^solatio^ of the
same, being so necessary, y^ without it your outward man perishes, for honger,
and having it, the body is defended from staruing. Even so I, mine own self
personally whom ye se, feel and know, being the mynyster of this which ye do
receive, eue^ as surely as ye behold the brekyng hereof and know king hereof,
and know that ye have received hit, so sureli shall be crucified, re^t, and
broken for your sins, and in hit shall deserve fre remyssyon of al your
iniquyties by whose merytes, thy unrighteous soul is made rightuous, for ever,
if thou forsakest sin: for this was given for the comfort of your inward man,
whom god hated for sin, for to reconcyle it to thee fathers favor again, and
to defend it from death eternal. Therefore, for asmoch as by necessity we are
enforced daily to comfort our body, with bread and drink Even so are we daily
enforced to comfort our soul with the eternal Testamente in Christ's blood,
so that now wha^ soever our sperit, begins to faynte for ho^ger, that it
behooves us to break this bread, and drink this wine in the remembrance of
christ's death and of his comfortable testame^te to feade our soul wtall. Hoc
enim est bibere de plenitudine misericordie sue that is to say. For this is to
drink of the fulness of his mercy. And this opened their eyes and confyrmed
their faith to perfection to preach that which they afterward saw come to
pass, according as y^ bread was broken. Paul therefore i^structed by y^ sperit
of god to understand this mystery, said, y^ which I received I deliver unto
you, o ye Corinthians, The night before he was betrayed, he took bread, and
brake it, saying, this is 1, Cori. 11,
my body, which is broken for you, also by y^ cup he said, this is y^ new
testament in my blood, as often as ye eat of this bread and drink of this cup
ye shall preach y^ lords death till he come: If now ye the personal bodi of
christ, flesh and blood had been there (as ye dream) than would not paul have
said, ye shall preach the lords death til he come But rather he would have
said, behold corinthes, here is christ personal body among you, but paul
assuredly taught by y^ holy ghost ye this was not y^ body, but the sacrament of
y^ body, therefore he said, as often as ye eat and drink of this bread and wine,
ye shall preach his death, which is exalted above y^ clouds, till he come again,
for he is departed hens to be our attorney before the trone of Majesty of the
of the which departure ye scripture bears us wytnes, spoken by his own mouth,
saying. Vado ad patrem paraturus vobis locum, that is to say, I go to my
father, to prepare you a place. And again. Veritate^ dico, expedit vobis vt
abeam, Si non abiero co^solator ille non veniet ad vos, Sin abiero, mitta ad
vos, that is to say, I say for truth. It is nedeful that I go hence, if I goo
not hence that comforter shall not come unto you, but if I go hence, I will send
him unto you Which sperite is not sent to cloak our wyckednes, or to suffer
us to dwell in darkness and in error, but as Johan says, to reprove the world
of syn, of unrighteousness and of judgment. De peccato, quia non credidit Ioh,
viii
in me. De iustitia, quia ad patrem vado and post hac non videbitis me. De
iudicio quia princeps huius mundi iam iudicatus est.

That is to say. Of syn, because it believed not in me. Of justice, because I
go to my father, and after this you shall not see me. Of judgment, because the
prince of this world is now judged. And therefore says christ I have many
things to tell you, but ye are as yet unable to bear them away, But I go
unto my father which has sent me, that according to my promise I may send you,
ye sperit of truth which shall without doubt lead you into all truth, to do
the will of my father. The sperite received Paul when his eyes were opened,
Which moved him to testyfye in this wise of our mediator, saying. Christ is
the bishop of our souls, which with an oblation of his own Hebre. 10,
precious body, has offered up him self ones for all on the altar of y^
cross, whereon he has made the^ perfect for ever who^ he has sanctified,
being soche an high bishop which has gone through the heavens and sytteth on
the right hand of the trone of Majesty, there being the admynystrator of the
everlasting tabernacle, whom god has made and not man: Whose sperite has
taught paul this doctrine, that so far differs from yours. Did not the
sperit of god, whom christ promised to lead al his, in all truth? Who taught
you then this doctrine that thus rebellethe against truth? the contrary unto
thee truth? Which is a lie of whom the devil is father as witnesses the
scripture. Come hither all ye* that so stoutlye stand in this Lutherian
error, and reprove (as ye are shameless) thee sperit of truth, which speaks
in Paul. Debate the matter with him. Try your selves, as ye most fondely
endeavor, to be more wyser than the sperite of God, which has manifest said
that christ sytteth on the right hand of the trone of majesty, to be an
advocate for man's imperfection, you say that his body is in the sacrament,
under form of bread, flesh and blood even as he was borne of the byrgyn
Marye: O good brethren hit would pytye any Christian heart to see, how with out
shame ye goo about with your deuylyshe sophistrye and deceauable dreams to
dysorder the works of thee living god, who has commanded his son to sytte
upon his ryghthand, according to the testimonies of the prophet David, saying,
Dixit dominus domino meo sede a dextris meis, donec posuero inimicos tuos
scabellum pedum tuorum, that is to say. The lord said unto my Lord, sit at my
right hand, until I shall make thine enemies thy footstool Alas what mean you
thus willinglye to rejoice in darkness, syns gods word, being y^ light of our
feet, has openly showed us that no jot of the law or testymonyes of y^
prophets, should escape undone in christ, the end mathe, v:
of the law, and prophets, whose mouths were not open to speak things in
vain, wherefore, syns their testimonies ar true, which of necessytie must be
fulfilled by Christ, for asmoch as god had so ordained hit, how dare ye again
say the sperite of truth, which affyrmeth him not only to be there personallye
on the right hand of his father, but also has appointed him to come again, in
the confyrmation of the hole world, even in the same, from that he departed to
gather the corn into the barn, and burn the chafe with unquenchable fyere,
and yet say you that he is here in the sacrament, horribly with your lies,
blasphemyng the sacred Testament, sanctifyinge in the blood of thee lamb,
being the law in deed, whom he has delivered unto his people, to direct
them in their way to perfection no more written in the table of stone, but in
his beloved temple the simple hearts of the faithful, as he him self
affyrmeth, saying. I will give my laws Hebre, 8
in their mind, and in their hertes will I write them, I wylbe their god and
they shall be my people, even this law unadvisedly as I suppose, ye despyce,
and frowardly deny this truth whom the sperit of truth has therein written,
being sealed with the precious blood of christ Jesus, but it is manyfeste in thee
scripture, that he which dispyseth Moses law, dies without mercy under two
or three witnesses: Of how much more sorer punishment (suppose ye) shall he be
counted worthy, which treads under foot the son of god, and counts the
blood Hebre, 10.
of the new testament (whereby we are sanctified) and ungodly thing, and does
dishonor the sperit of grace. Alas what dishonor can there be more to the most
hiest, that of mercy and of faythfulnes has send unto us selye wretches his
holy sperite to guide the starne of our senses y^ at no time they should fall
upon the dangerous rocks of error and false doctrine: than little regardyng
his mercyful kindness, not only to speak manyfeste heresye against this truth,
but also most arrogantly to judge our weak sperite able to confound the
wysedom of God mynistered unto us by his blessed word and most stoutlye
dysdayne to be ruled thereby* Could a ship being tossed hither and hither
and thither in the te^pestuous sea, and ready of y^ unmercifully water to be
overwhelmed, be scotfre from danger, if y^ rude and unlearned marynors should
again say, the wysdom of their pilate unto who^ god has reveled the craft and
polycye through his gracious aid to lead her from perels? No truly. Verily
no more is your wysdo^ able, in these troubelous opynyons or disceatfull gynnes
of Satan where with he purposethe to overthrow the ship of your
understanding, to rule her dangerles, if ye again say the wisdom of your
lodesma^ or sterer, whom God by his almyghtye power has instructed to lead
you from error to knowledge, from darkness to light, and finally from a lie to
infallible truth Therefore as the willing marynors that covet the sauegarde of
ye ship (partly for the owner sake, whom they love, and chieflye for their
lives sake which stand upon the ship) diligently do mark, and obedie^tly do
follow the counsel of their pylate, neither add they, or dymynysshe they any
jot of his will, lest the ship perysshe. Even so good brethren, if ye love
god which is the owner of your souls, if they be faithful, or if ye have any
respect to your own lives, which stands in the fulfyllinge of his
commandments, diligently both hear and follow gods word, who^ he has
given the to lead thy understanding into al truth, to whom nether add thou or
dymynysshe any thing, lest thy understanding perysshe by error. For it is
written in the scripture. If any man add any thing to the word of prophecye,
I will add unto him the plages that are written in this word. And if apoc. xxii
any man shall dimynysh any jot of this word, god shall take his part out of the
book of life and out of the holy city. Alas why then run ye this hedlong
into your own confucion, loving your own fantacyes so well y^ in comparison
unto the^, ye most unkindly vylypend the truth of this his most sacred word,
which teaches us that Christ's natural body, according to the prophetual
testimonye, was crucified, dead, and buried, and the third day rose from
death to life, and assended into heaven there sytting on the right hand of god
his father, and yet contrary to this truth: ye have added your opinion, eue^
poison unto your own souls, except ye repent, that this natural body, whom
the holy ghost affyrmeth to sit on the hand of god, has transubsta^ciat it
self into bread and wine. Thus philantia has be wytched you in soche sort that
ye think truth to be a lie, and your abominable lie, truth, but I will tell you
one thing, which the holy ghost would in no cause should be forgotten. That
Christ came not to do his own will, but the will of his father, which sent him*
But his fathers will was that the natural body of christ, which was crucified
dead and buried, after his resurrection should assende into heaven and sit on
his ryghthande, therefore must it be granted (if your lie should be the truth,
as ye suppose it) that christ has not only preuaricate his fathers will, for
that he has, (as you say) disobediently forsaken his fathers side, and trone
of celestial bless and transubstanciat him self, being of a nature
incorruptyble, into bread and wine that shall peryshe, (For the scripture says)
that all thing seen with our eye, shall consume, peryshe, and wyther a way, and
that nothing is for ever but ye word which continually preaches christ our
savior, but also he has (as your truth testyfieth of him) openly dissembled
in that he said he came to satisfye the will of his father and that he had
sent us the sperite of truth, and now your truth has both accused him of
disobedie^s for transubstanciatinge of his natural body into bread and wine
contrary to his fathers will, and also proved the holy ghost a liar, which
has testified all flesh, that faithfully believed in the son of god to be
saved by the obediens of Christ Jesus in whom god almyghtye is satysfied. But
suppose you (good brethren) that god can suffer his son this to be reported
of you of who^ he has so well disserued or his word thus to be sclaundered
which is pure and truth, and that without any cohercio^ or tellyng you of your
fault, no no, judge not him to be a shrinking god, or one that sets price,
by your stout looks that thereby he should fear any foot at al to stand in
trial of his truth and tell you of your heresy: for his long sufferans which
lusts for repentans yt his kyndnes might apere, is not so slender toward
you, that he will thus see you peryshe by error Whose conspiracy busylye
seeks your da^pnatio^, all though to you his most wicked purpose is unknown,
yet has gods mercy espied hit, and reioyseth not in your death, wherefore behold
the grace ye it offered unto you by y^ holy ghost which entendinge to stand in
trial of gods truth, by gradacio^ refuteth your da^pnable error and
disorderi^g of gods will, and proves y^ natural bodi of christ our savior
after his resurrection to sit on y^ rightha^d of god his father, and for y^
proffe of this matter we call Luke th^ee Evangelist to witness, where he
writes that y^ Mary's yearly in the sabothe day came, according to the
costume to embrace y^ body of Christ, but wha^ they came to y^ monument, they
found the stone rolled a way, when they entered to se, the body was away
wherwt they were maruelously astonished, but in this sudden traunse and
fayntynes of heart, two men in whyt aparel apered unto the^ saying. Quid queris
viuentem in mortuis surrexit no^ est hic. That is to say Why seek you him that
lives among the dead? He is risen, he is not here. And also accusing them of
forgetfulness, said unto the^, have ye forgotten what he told you in Galilie,
y^ it was expedient for the son of man, to be under thee poor of sinners, to
be crucified, and rise again the third day, and so to enter into glory, Yea,
and because he would not have his dyscyples inexpert of this his resurrection
and what should become of this his body, a little before his death to reuele unto
them the mysery of his impassible body now glorified, he took certain of the^,
with him, and said some of you shall math 17, mark. ix Luke ix.
not se death, until ye se the son of man in his glory, and forth with upon
the hyl thabor in the presens of Peter, James, and Johan, he transfigurated his
natural body by the power of his godhead, not as ye dream into bread and wine
which shall putrify, but into an immortal shape, the phisnamy of a
ma^remaynyng, Apoc. i. Dan, xvii
co^maundynge them that it should be unknown, till after the testymonye of the
prophet, were fulfilled which spoke in Christ to his father, saying. Thou
have taken my soul out of hell, and have not suffered thy sayncte to se
corruption. And after this, they were called to testify of Christ crucified
and preach even upon the house top the resurrection of our savior being the
first fruytes of them i: corin: 15:
that slepte in him, of the which resurrection Paul speaks in this wise,
saying. Resurrexit Christus a mortuis per gloriam patris Roma, vi
iam non moritur mors illi vltra non dominatur, that is to say Christ is risen
from among the dead, through the glory of the father. Now dies he not, death
shall hence forth have no more power over him. Now good brethren syns that the
sperite of truth has assuredly taught, y^ the same body which was crucified,
dead, and is risen again according as y^ apostels have witnessed of him, if you
dilige^tely atte^d, and awake out of your sleep he will also reueyle unto you,
what bodi this was after his resurrection, and what became thereof so evidently
that except you repent, and turn from your wicked Imaginacion, and all other of
your faction of the clergy, which thus spurneth against gods truth, it will
pluck a hoode over your heads furred with fearful judgment and
unquenchable fire, Wherefore give ear unto thee Evangelist which more plain
liar expresses this body than ye have cause to doubt. After these women had
thus talked among the disciples, that at their coming his body was absent out
of y^ monument there arose among the^ a sudden wonderyng how this might be, and
behold. ii. of y^ company that thus talked of Jesus, went from Jerusalem until
a certain vyllage, called Emaus, unto who^ Christ apered being even the last
man they talked of, asking the^ what communication this was, etc, as follows
in the text. Read and judge In conclusion night drew on, they compelling him
to tarrye with them. And it came to pass as he sat at thee table with the^
personally he took bread brake it, and gave it them, where upon they knew him,
and so he vanisshed away, here note good friends, that the scripture speaks
as yet of no transubstantiation, For the body that brake this bread was a
personal body, having flesh and bones; and the senses of a natural body. As
you shall manyfeste perceive hereafter, appointed without any alteration to
enter into glory. They here upon calling to mind this sign, wherein before
his death he vouchsaued to preach his precious death, the delyueraunce of our
souls from eternal captivity, strayte forth they knew him, saying. Did not
our hearts burn wtin us, wha^ he thus talked with us of the scripture. Now
good brethren, because the subtyle serpent shall not by error deceive your
wits, to surmyce that which is not, bringing upon your selves swyfte
dampnatio^, it has to confyrme you in this truth made plain what body this
was, far otherwise tha^ ye dream, no soche body that was willing to
tra^substancy at it self into a dead thing, which could nether feel, taste,
se, go nor speak, in whom there is nether life, nor soul, mark therefore how
the holy ghost handeleth this matter, by his holy Euangely on. After these
two me^, that were at Emaus, knew him by the breakyng of bread, they returned
unto Jerusalem from whe^se they came, where there were gathered together of the
disciples aleuen in number coming and talkinge of their Master christ,
lately rysed from the dead and seyn of Peter, whose talk to confirm, these
two began to declare what had be fallen them in their journey to Emaus as
touching his resurrection. And while they thus talked of him, he apered again
amongst the^, saying. Peace be with you: But they somewhat fearful with this
strange syghte, supposed him to be some sperit, whom to put out of doubt, he
spoke in this wise, saying. Why are ye thus troubled or what moves your
hearts thus foundly to Imagyne fantasyes, be hold my hands, my feate, am I
not eue^ he, that has cast your account and dischardged your det between my
father and you, as my sperit at the hour of my most bitter affliction, uttered
saying. Co^summatu^ est, etc. Man thy matter is at issue, thy salvation is
made perfect, if thou abide in me. If you mystruste me prove handell me, and
ye shall no less do but confess my body far to dissent from a sperite, which
has neither flesh, and bones as ye se me have, when he had thus destorbed
his natural body unto them to confyrme their faith he showed the^ both feate
and hands: Yet not wythstanding this manifest demonstratyon, some of them
doubted, partly for joy and partly for the strange sight whom to set fre
without suspytion, he demanded of them, we there they had any meat to eat,
unto whom, sone after his demand, they offered part of a broyled fysshe and
an honycombe, and in presens before their eyes he eat it. Thus you see that he
had not only flesh, bones, and a personal body, like unto them, but also
all the senses of a natural body namely felyng, seeing, hearing, tastynge, and
goyinge. Et hec omnia que scripta sunt ad nostra^ doctrinam fo, 15,
scripta sunt vt per patientiam scripturarum spem habeamus that is to say, Al
these things that are written, are written for our learning, that through the
patience of thee scriptures, we should have hope. Which always wylbe of force
strong enough to confute this error, which by enchauntement would have there a
fantastical body, y^ is a body by conjecture who^ ye say, can nether be felt
with hand neither seyn with eyes of the body, but only with y^ eyes of your
faith. O good brethren how long will ye play the part of Iamnes and Iambres
which with most disceatful sorcerye have resysted the will of god think you
that the wrathful vengeance of god, which fell upon them, can mysse you
playinge the same part, no truly, for against soch thar stouburnely wythstande
the truth without repentance, god sharpeth his sword and bends his law,
and shall look narowly with his eyes, that he mysse not his mark, but that he may
hit the^ a right for I am sure that ye are not ignorant, How that moses rod
Psalm, viii
has devoured their feyned serpent and that dangerles, eue^ so shall truth
vaunquishe your error and conde^pne your folly, in that ye love your wits
so well, that shameless ye wythstande the glorious gospel and openly accuse truth
of a lie, has not Christ even with his own mouth, lynyally descrybed his body
to be flesh and blood, and also to possess all the senses of a natural body
and that to the eyes of his disciples, yet contrary to this truth, say you,
that his body is in form of bread, which is dead, and vade of senses, also he
showed him self after his resurrection in the shape and stature of a man, and
yet against his own will, ye will compel him to transubstanciat him self, into a
new shape, brynging a man with all his members into the strayte room of a piece
of bread, or synging cake (as ye better allow it) Judge you now how your
Sophistry, and the sperite of truth agrees* But with your pacie^s suffer me,
(I pray you) to reason with your fa^tacye, that ye may perceive the buylding of
your opinion unable to stand in trial with the scripture because it lacks a
groundfyll. Answer me therefore Luther and your adherentes, would ye that
Christ's natural body, borne of ye vyrgyn Mary very flesh and blood should be
tra^substanciate into this bread or no? if ye so would, manifest unto me, I pray
you the time of this alteracio^, for asmoch as nothing can be without insta^ce of
time. If ye say it was done at this his last supper, when he instituted this
sacrament by this text. Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradituru^. That is
to say. This is my body which shall be given for you. Tha^ the scripture blanketh
you, for it teachethe us y^ the natural body of Christ which brake this bread,
afterward to be slain upon y^ cross, and buried Again, if ye affirm this
alteration of his bodi to have cha^ced after his resurrection, than the
scripture replyeth again geuinge you a fair checkmate, saying, that after he
was risen, he bracke bread amongeste his apostels, in the form of the
crucified body, having nothing thereof altered, saving that now it was
immortal no more subdued to our carnal passions. Then to conclude if neither
before his death, nor after his resurrection he entered into this bread, tha^
is your Imaginacion false, But now paraduenture ye will demand of me, which
have disproued this magical transubstanciation, What became of this body thus
risen, ye scripture makes you this answer After he has continued in the
earth. xl. days when he was risen, the disciples, but then gathered together
at Jerusalem, abiding as they were appointed, ye coming of y^ promised
co^forter, as soon as he had repeted unto the^ the comfortable promise of y^
Testament, suddenly, eue^ in their sight he entered into his glory, a cloud
taking him out of their eyes. And while they yet stood wo^dering at the mighty
arm, and incomprehensible power of god: to take from the^ all occasyons of
doubting or supposal what should follow of Christ thus taken from their eyes
Behold an angel apered unto the^, instructi^g their sperit with this
co^solatio^, saying, Ye me^ of galilie, why stand ye here gasi^g, the same
christ which is nowtake^ from you, into heaven, shall in y^ same manner apere
again, wherefore what is he y^ dare boldelye usurp the name of a Christian and
hates to be reformed by y^ holy ghost, whom god has left unto us to instruct
us in Christ, by who^ we hear openly y^ his body is not only in glory w^^he
his father, in the everlasting kingdom, exempt from trouble and mysery, in who^
reygneth nothing but ryghtuousnes and peace, where it shall reygne in power
and glory until he has brought all his enemies into subjection, which
stouburnly upon a froward spyte, with hold his truth in unrighteous, but
also according to the scripture shall come again, to judge the quycke, and the
dead, as daily we lay in our creed, of whom y^ prophet david thus speaks*
Deus manifest veniet deus noster and non silebit, Ignisin conspectu eius
exaudestet and in circuitu eius tempestas valida quia deus iudex est. That is
to say Psalm. 49*
The god that is our god, shall come openly, and shall not keep silence. In his
sight shall fyere consume, and round about him shall be a mighty tempest: because
god is a judge. And Paul says also in this wise testifying of his coming.
Ipse dominus cum hortatu and voce archangeli, ac turba dei, descendet Math, ^^
Johan. 5 Thessa: 4 2: These: ^
de celo and mortui in Christo resurge^^ etc. That is to say. The lord him self
shall descend from heaven, in the encoraging and voice of an Archangell, and
with the trumpe of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise. etc. And this coming
was also reveled unto daniel the prophet in a vysion by night where he saw
one like to the son of man coming out of the clouds, unto whom the aged man
gave power and dignity regal, that all people, trybes and Dani. vii apoca, i.
Philip, ii
tongues should serve him, whose power is an everlasting power which shall never
be put down, and his kyndgom endures in corrupt. Because therefore that we
should assuredlye pronounce him to be the end of the law, and of the
Prophets, that nothing testified in them should be left undone, but
fulfilled by him, to assure us that he would come, that we might at no time be
careless, and unprovided as were the foolysshe vyrgyns, and so through our
negligens be shut out, he gave us certain signs, and tokens that Joel,
xxxii Math, 24 Ierem 25, Esaias, xiii mark, 13, luke. 21,
should come to pass, before the day of his coming euydently testified by
thee prophets and the Evangelist as the alteracion of the son and moon, and
the decay of the bryghtnes of the stars with soch like, many testified in
the Scriptures: For like as the lyghtening goes from the East, and shyneth
math, 24
into the West, so shall the coming of thee son of man be, and wha^ be
comes, he will not tarry. Que^ quide^ aduentum (vt refert Paulus) narret
te^poribus suis beatus and solus potens Rex regu^ and Timo.
dominus dominantiu^, qui solus habet immortalitatem and lucem habitat in
accessibile^, que^ nullus videt. That is to say, Which coming (as Paul
declares) the king of kings, and Lords of rulers, who only has
immortality and dwells in light, y^ noman can come to, who^ noma^ sees.
Paul therefore seeing the imperfection of our flesh, which is given to feade y^
lust of our corrupt afflictions, exhorts to look diligentli for his coming of
our savior saying* Conuarsatio vestra erit in Celo
celis vnde faluatorem aduenturum spectatis. That is to say. Your conversation
therefore shall be in heaven, whence ye look for a savior to come, If he be to
come, he is not yet come, for when he comes he will not tarrye, If he be not
yet come, he is not here, If he be not here, than it follows y^ his body is
not reallye in y^ sacrament. Now good brethren ye have hero y^ doctrine of gods
sperit, what it has taught of y^ natural body of christ Jesus, how it was not
only crucified dead and buried, and rose again y^. iii. day, but also that ye
should fantasye nothing of this body with your groose carnalitie it has
expressiuelye showed, what body this was, wether it went, where it is and from
whens it shall come, for as much therefore as this is y^ sperit of truth, who^
christ at his departure promised to his faithful folowers as a governor to
lead them into al truth, we y^ covet to be called Christians, must of
necessite believe it, if with christ we do entend, to have any societye, for who
so believes not this his soul shall not prosper, but y^ a^at. ^^ Gal. ^3 Roma.
^^
just shall live by faith. Christ therefore thus speaks in Ioha^ Verily,
verily I say unto you, whosoever hears my word and believes him that seen me,
has everlasting life, and comes not into damnation, but is passed through death
unto life. Judge you now what shall beco^e of those which dispyce, and beleaueth
not this truth. Now as touching Luthers error, if that under the form of
bread the natural body of christ should be, it apereth his civility to be very
slender for as much as he has so irreverently handeled this body not
according unto his worthiness, but unkindly robbed him of his honor which is
his, as natiuelye, as the bryghtenes is the son, and as dangerous to be
disceuered, Quia ipse est glory Hebre, i
sple^dor and figura substancia patris, That is to say. For he is thee
bryghtnes of the glory, and the Image of the fathers substance What is he
therefore that will say Christ's body to be inglorious lyns he is the brightness
of his fathers glory, for in ye scripture it is called y^ glorious day star,
and therefore Peter knowing assuredly, glory to belong unto this body said.
Gloria 2. Pet. 3.
Christo, nunc and in die^ eternitatis. That is to say, Glory be to Christ,
now and ever. Again Johan not entending to wythdrawe any thing from this body
said. Gloriam honorem and virtutem dignus es accipere insecula, apoca. 4.
seculoru^. That is to say, Thou art worthy to have glory, honor, and power
for ever. Christ also has said by the mouth of his Euangelyste, that who so
honors not the son, the same honourethe not thee father, for this cause
verily has god given al judgment to his son mathe, 11 luke. 10, Johan. 5.
that all men might honor the son, even as they honored the father. Syns then
y^ ye dream christ's natural body to be here presently ^n the Sacrament, why
shall we not then fall down, and worship it. For if at the name of Jesus al
knyes shall bow (as says the scripture) both in heaven and in earth, how much
more ought they to bow, if they se his body (as ye say) in the sacrament. for
this we se even among us mortal creatures daily in experience, that when the
name of a prince or emperor in any civil matters apperteyning to a commonweal is named among his subjects, they al vncouet their heads: But when the
person or body of the king is present, they fall down upon their knies and
honor him? How much more ought we, if it were true as ye say, Which as is
a very lie in deed, to fall down and worship the everlasting prince and
immortal body of Christ Jesus But Luther him self has forbid the worshippyng
of this body, ergo, he must of force either deny the bodily presens of christ
not to be in the sacrament or else robbed the body of his nature and
dishonor the sperit of grace, for glory does wyllingly follow this simple and
innocent body of Christ, because he humbled him self to death, for the
sauegarde of his, as it becomes a good shepeherd, whereof y^ wysema^ has thus
testified saying Gloria^ precedet humilitas. That Prove-15
is to say, Humility goes before glyrye, Towhom subscribeth the prophet in
this wise saying Gloria dominum magna est, quia Psa, xviii Prou-15-
excelsus dominus. That is to say* Thee glory of the Lord, is great, because
he is high* For his body now is a glorified body, reuere^tly to be worshypped
of Christians. Therefore to conclude, it were very absurd and out of frame to
say, that there is his bodi, and deny him that, that his body has deserved of
us unto whom belongs thee kingdom, power and glory for ever, and ever. Amen.
Again Luther would have the letter to be symplye understand, without any
interpretacion or troop, that because Christ said. Hocest corpus meum, That
is to say. This is my body. Therefore it is his body. Surely if the will of God
had refuced the interpretacion of his word: than was he much to blame to send
his holy sperit to mynyster soch gifts unto men. But who is he that accuses
the majesty of god, or reproves him in his doyinges, therefore they are not al
fautlesse that reproves the interpretacion which agrees with the will of God,
For if ye stand upon this narowe ebb, that otherwise than the letter, there
should be no interpretacion, ye should not only accuse christ him self, which to
his discyples mystically speaking many things very hard, for them to
understand according to y^ letter, to make it plain unto the^ diverse times
and often expounded unto them: But also y^ sperit of truth, for we read that
where as Matthew and Mark the Evangelists have written of this Sacrament in
this wise. Drink hereof al, this is my blood of the new testament, Luke and
Paul are so bold by the same sperit to enterpret and make playner the same
words saying, this is the new testament in my blood, not that the sense
differs, but too interpret thee words more playner, to y^ flesh and blood
which always not led by y^ speryt of God, by false judgment is a sto^bling
stock to her self. If thou by the same speryt has manifestly declared the same
body, being now in glory with his eternal father, not to he in the sacrament,
but has by his chosen mynister paul, interpreted the words of the
eua^gelistes saying, as often as ye eat of this bread and drink of this cup,
preach ye y^ lords death, till he come, why rebelleth Luther and his
adhere^tes against y^ will of god, or why prefer they their Imaginacio^s,
before the the purpose of our heavenly father, seeing yt he unsealed Paul's
lips, for this cause to preche this saying, unto the rude corinthia^s, ye
thereby they might understand, for what co^sideracio^ this visible sign bread
and wine, was instituted of christ our savior, namelye to preach this
inuisyble grace y^ the breaking of Christ's body and shedinge of his precious
blood, has pacified y^ vengeance of his father which was devised against Adam
Johan. ^*
and his of spryng, and cle^sed us from our sins, so ye to the^ ye with assured
affiance without waueri^g are planted in this his body, Rom, viii
there remains no da^natio^, for he came to seek, and save that was lost,
that all that believed ^uke. ix.
in him, should have life everlasting, according to the testy Johan. 3.
to the testymony of the prophet Oseas. Thy dampnation o Israel, came of thy
self* but thy salvation of our lord Jesus christ If the letter, good brethren,
should be simple understand. Alas what should our carnal wysedo^ and dulle
senses, make of christ our mercy seat and living savior which daily
noryssheth us with his abundant grace has he not called him self in the
letter, a door, a vine and away with soche like phrases, in the scripture, ye
truly I pray the the^ good congregation, Answer me, Wherefore has he thus
called him self. Because thou should judge him a material door, a vine or
way? no truly, wherefore than? doubtless Osee. 14:
because thy mortal eye perceaueth that the property of a door is to open the
way into the mansyon place, and without the door noma^ can enter dangerles
Even so it vouchsaued Christ by his holy sperit to instruct the immortal eye
of thy soul, namely thy faith, that christ is the only door that leads us
unto god his father, with who^ as many as believes in his only son shall
^a^tifye the everlasting sabbath of endless joy, for he alone has made this
enter by whom al christians must enter, and who so clymmeth over the walls,
and goes not through the door, surely he is a thief and a robber, and as a
thief or robber, for his transgressyo^ is subject unto judgment. Eue^ so shall
that soul be enda^gered in judgment that seaketh in any otherway to god the
father that christ Jesus, for by him we have knowledge of god, and without him
we shall never know god, verily thus has he spoken with his own mouth. If
any man knows me, the same knows him that sent me, wherefore as the door is
the entery to the ma^sion place. Eue^ so Christ is our door to y^ father,
again: as thou daily by experience seeste the branches of the vine which takes
moosture of y^ body out of who^ they issue never to dye, but continually
according to his nature, grow grene, and floryshe bryngyng forth y^ fruit of
y^ vine. Even so as many as ar unfeignedly graffed in y^ precious body of christ
our savior shall never taste of death, but perpetuallye by his abundant grace
grow and florysshe in virtue and bring forth fruit in him, agreing to his
nature, that is, the denyinge of ungodliness and doing good, as y^ prophet
writes, Declina a malo and fac bonum That is to say. Declyne from evil, and
do good. Last of al, as the way leads the pilgrim or wayfaring man to his
journeys end that he may there rest from werines: so does this our advocate and
mediator christ Jesus lead us which here ar but pilgrims in this strange
land compassed about with all myseryes and death to our own country whom
he has purchased, for his faithful flock with his holy and santyfyed body,
offered ones for all, for ye remissyon of our sins, which country endures
for ever exe^pt from all trouble, wherein reynethe the peace of god for ever.
where we shall enjoy the fruit of our labor, and atteyne the goole whereat all the faithful eue^ from the beginning that has been, are, and shall be to the
co^fyrmation of the whole world has wyllingly directed thee course of their
life, namely life everlasting, the port of christian, traueyle without werynes
through Christ our lord as says the evangelist Johan. Hec scrip si vobis qui
creditis in nomine filii Johan, v,
dei, vt sciatis, quod vitam habetis eternal. That is to say. These things
have I written unto you that believe in the name of the son of god: that ye may
know that ye have everlasting life. Now to conclude christ is not a material
door, way, or vine but has in him y^ qualities of these vicible things, and
thus it pleased his most glorious Majesty to inform us in the knowledge of
the virtue of his most precious body by this visyble signs to augment our
hope to salvation. Eue^ so has he done in this his sacrament saying. Hoc est
corpus meum, That is to say. This is my body, not that hit is his personal
body, no more tha^ hit is a door or vine, but as he has y^ qualytye of a door
or vine, so like case^ has he y^ property of this bread, for bread by nature
norisheth the body, so christ by nature norysheth y^ soul. If therefore the
letter should be symplye understand without interpretacion, how much should it
abhor the sperit of god, which teaches us that Christ is our everlasting
priest, according to the order of melchisedeck, without beginning, and without
end Alpha, and Omega, yea how much should it make faint our hope to believe y^
incorruptible body of christ our savior to be transubsta^ciat into a massy
peace, of bread without life or soul and made of corruptible elements But here
may you se good brethren as it were in a myrror or glass y^ groose capacity
of our indocible judgment of froward flesh which seeks not heartily to be
instructed in y^ truth or savor of the light, but rather to be wise in his own
co^ceyt and worder at the wysdo^ of god, namely y^ truth of his word. As y^
malicious pharaces or stubborn Jews among the^ selves wondered at y^
comfortable words of christ, wha^he said his flesh was meat and his blood
drink and that it gave life everlasting, groosely po^dering the letter and not
the spiritual intent of christ, ente^di^g to preach remission of their syns by
the offering up of his precious body, whereby y^ tyra^nous works of cruel
satan were lowsed and hell syn and death clearly vanquished: said how ca^ this
man give his flesh to eat and his blood to drink supposing as Luther and his
adherentes yt they with their teth should eat the flesh of christ, and drink
his blood esteming it only meat to feade the belly wtal, but christ to
co^de^pne their fond suspicion and to make plain his meaning as touching the
eati^g of his precious body being y^ foread sent down from heaven to give life
unto all the world, said. Spiritus est qui qui viuificat, caro no^ prodest quic
quam verba que loquor spiritus and vita sunt. That is to say. It is Johan. vi
the sperite that quickens, the flesh profyteth nothing. The words that I
speak unto you are speryt and life. As who should say it is a spiritual matter
that I speak of, nothing apperteyning unto the flesh, for the sperite of god
of nature endeavors to instruct the selye poor and faint speryte of man, to
be apt to comprehend the will of his creator, for this speryt feadeth the
soul, and makes the heart of man joyful, and therefore may it very well be
assembled unto this word meat, for as an hungrye stomach being by long
fasting febled in streyneth and out of courage, reioyseth when it is satisfied
with meat Even so the heart, and soul of man, being long febled with y^
wrathful displeasure of God, unto whom it was subject by disobedience: after
the abundant mercy of Christ freely offered her self, to appease this wrathful
indignacion, by who^ it was noryshed, it joyfully looked up, and praised his
savior. And therefore it is a spyrytuall meat which I speak of, given only of
y^ sperit, which feadeth nothing but man's mind. And thus answered he the
error of the Jews, which understood him to speak of his personal bodi,
because we should not dream, as Luther has done any thing of this corporal
presens to be in the sacrament. But in this opinion, Luther, and you all which
most vnaduysedlye have subscrybed unto his error, have with your carnal
wisdom exceded the policy of the wicked worldlinges, which put christ to
death. For if they either by power or prosuacio^ could have the multitude or
comme^ sort of people believe y^ his bodi had been amongst the^ in form of
bread they would never have brybed y^ knights of y^ sepulture with money, to say
yt his body was stole^ away by his discyples in thee night: but because they
were unable to prove his body to be in their possession: therefore they fyed
the^ with largition to bleare the peoples eyes yt they might never se but still
stand in unbelief. Eue^ so you with might and mayn have endeavored to save
their eyes from the light of gods word, lest paraduenture they might
happily see and conde^pne your heresy and for this ye think it no shame to set
this detestable error as a curtayn between the peoples eyes, and the spiritual
eating of this body, wherefore understand you all that labor of this phrenesy
so that ye wax wroth with ye sperit of the most highest, for speakinge truth,
understand I say, what is meante by the eating of this spiritual body, verily
not thee tearing with the teth, nor dysme^bring of Christ's body, but only
that we should assuredlye trust that by his own blood he entered ones for all
into the holy place and has found eternal redemption and also being perfect,
became the cause of everlasting salvation unto al the^, that obey him by the
sacrifice of his precious blood through the sperite offered without spot, unto
god, he has given remissyon of al our sins if we repent, hatyng ungodliness,
and holy trust unto this anchor of our soul, sure and sted fast by hoope which
leads us to take this hold, that where as our imperfect flesh was unable
to do or satysfie the will of god the father, he has by his precious death
and cross, not only fulfilled the will of god, appeased his wrath, and become
life everlasting to the^ that trust in him, but also is become the entrye of
the eternal kingdom of endless tranquillity, the place daily received of the^
that are santified in him, for here on stands the law and thee prophets,
Wherefore wha^ soever ye break this bread and eat it, wherwyth ye assure your
co^sciens ye being turned into your substance, it norysheth your body, so at
the breaking hereof ye must assure your conscience, that if ye forsake sin
and unfeignedly believe that thee breaking of his body has pourged away our syn
by the which we have possessed all the merytes of his precious body, namely
remyssyon of al our sins and life everlasting, He is turned into the immortal
incorruptyble and impassyble substance of soche a faithful soul and without
dout continually norysheth it. Quicu^que ergo pane^ hunc co^mederit and ex nouo
testamento in sanguine suo sa^ctificatio, hoc exhanserit, morte no^ morietur
sed viuent in aeternum, That is to say. Who soever therefore shall eat this
bread, and shall drink of this new testament, sanctified in his blood: y^ same
shall not dye the death but shall live for ever. For when he says whosoever eats
my flesh and drink my blood has life everlasting. And whosoever believes in me
has life everlasting. What dullard is there that perteyneth not the eating of
this body, and faith in his blood shedi^g to be both one, except he would most
wickedly appoint us. ii. ways unto salvation one by eating of the Sacrament,
another by faith, but if by eating alone the dyscyples should have had life
everlasting, as soon as they had received this body at y^ supper, what had
the cross and death of Christ auayled, But god forbid that the minds of
godly men should at any time be entankeled with soche strange lerninge and
comberous doctrine: which I fear me would sone come to pass, if y^ words of
our redemer should carnally according to the letter be understand, but Christ
calls him self both health and life to al the^ that trust in the co^summate
sacrifice of his body ones offered for all sin and unto them will Hebre. ix
apeare again without syn unto salvation sendinge unto the^ by his bou^tuous
grace ye only and most beautiful ambacetor of peace, the importible crown of
everlasting glory which with a sure hope dylygentely look for the aperaunce of
his most glorious face, Who will draw us with him to the immutable kingdom of his
father with who^ we shall with joy inexplicable live eternally, for he has
said this word, which retourneth not unto him emptye. Vbi ego sum ibi erit
minister meus That is to say. Where I am, there shall my mynister be, for he
enjoys glory, and lives for ever, and so shall we do that trust in him for
this is the will of God, As Johan says. Vt qui vidit filium et credit in eum
habeat vitam aeternam and Christ's resuscitabit eu^ in nouissimo die. That is
to say That he that sees the son and believes in him, may have eternal
life, and christ shall raise him in the last day, Christ's flesh therefore,
that it was delivered unto death for our fredom, is called the meat of our
soul and his blood, forasmoche as it was shed upon the cross is called
therefore thee drink most helthful and necessary of our soul, without who^ our
soul could not have been saved, but in this doctrine of the sperit of truth is
found no tra^substa^ciation into bread nor wine, nether yet a personal body,
therefore ye must needs grant al though it before against your wylles yt your
Imaginacion comes of your selves, and not of god, therefore it must be untrue.
Na^ oi^s homo mendax, deus verus est in cuius labiis nu^cqua^ inventus erat
dolus. That is to say. For every man is a liar, but God is true, in whose
lips was never found deceit. Good brethren yet ones again pacie^tly suffer me
to ask you a little question y^ knowledge of who^ ca^ by no means hinder you,
proffer you it may, to discern your grief and be healed by the gospel, Have ye
forgotten good brethren how yt our savior christ in his perigrinacio^ in y^
earth to certify his faithful disciples of y^ will of his father and of his
favor toward the^ in yt he had sent y^ promised salvation to al the^ y^ would
receive hi^ and believe i^ his name, left, if. sacraments to preach his
precious death y^ lauacre of our souls, by who^ alone we were purged from syns,
nameli baptyme, and y^ sacrament of his body, for this case only y^ we always
should have before our eyes and firmly print in our hearts his death and passion
by whom we were sealed into redemption no more under ye danger of y^ law which
offered unto our co^scie^s for tra^sgressio^, nothing but da^pnatyo^ but under
liberty and grace, lest paradue^ture y^ ra^ping lyo^ which buseli seeks our
destruction should at any time, snatche this christ out of our remembrance (as
he is always redi) by sundry inchynes yt he leyeth to snare our minds
wherebye they might forget their salvation, therefore of, ii. necessary
things he made the^ of who^ we have in this our mortal life, soch necessary
use, y^ without the^ we cannot sustain our mortal bodies nameli water and bread,
whereby he showed us yt as often as we sought by this outward things to comfort
our body to maynteyn life and y^ vital sperites thereof, eue^ sow ought by
seeing of this to preche unto our souls ye most glorious death and passion of
christ our savior which susteyneth, comforts, and co^tinualli causes it to
live, Wherefore for asmoch as he before his death istituted these, ii sacraments,
I dema^d of you which of the^ ye think most honorable or metest to be
preferred before the other paraduenture ye would say, the sacrament of the body
is most hiest to be esteemed, but if ye stand to that, ye ar like to have a
sodayn fall, for the scripture affyrmeth the^ to be equal in this wise saying,
their ends are one, and the promise annexed unto them both, is one and
therefore the sacraments ar of equal forse, that they are of one strenght the
scripture proves in this wise, saying, Quicun^ credit and baptizatus fuerit
saluus erit. That is to say, He that believed and shall be baptized: shall be
Johan. 6
safe. Again Qui manducauerit carnem meam and bibit meum sanguinem habebit
vitam eternal. That is to say. He that shall eat my flesh, and drink my
blood: shall have everlasting life. Now ye see y^ life everlasting, is the
end of them both, therefore they are of one strength, and differ no jot, as
touching their end. If ye grant them both to give one gift, and to preach one
thing, whereby according to the doctrine of y^ scripture to be equal, tha^ I
demand of you, why bit stands not with truth to call the water blood, as well
as the bread thee body, but that ye judge to be far out of frame, and very
absurd to be spoken and no meruel at al though ye so judge, forasmoche as ye
understand the one, and not the other, for if ye understood y^ breaking of
bread to be thee sign that preaches to our conscience the breakyng of his
body, as ye understand the water to be a sign yt we are washed in christ's
blood, then would ye not thus ymagine, but because ye will not admyt the
sacrament of y^ body to be a sign or toke^ of the crucified body of christ but
rather the very body it self making the sign to be y^ thing signified,
therefore y^ mysvndersta^ding of this word sacrament is y^ cause of this your
forged lesynge, favor not so much your enemy which more deliteth at your
death, tha^ to so you live and enjoy good days, suffer him not thus to
corrupt both your ground and y^ good sede offered thereunto with his most
pestilent and infectuous tares of unbelief his treasure that furnissheth the
stynki^g gulffe of hell, his inheritance, lest ye at the coming of the
husbandma^, whose intent is to purge his corn and gather it together into the
garnard be with chafe and weed burned in vnque^cheable fire, Receive the light
that ye may walk therein, for he that walkethe in darkness knows not wyther
to goo. S. Austyne has given you this glass to pluck out y^ moote out of
your eyes, tha^ causes you to wynke at truth, and thus craftily to shut it
up in hoodymocke, because the perel should not so ouergrow your eyes, that
when shame compels you to see, ye cannot see, so much is this godly father
and ancient writer your friend, saying. Sacrame^tu^ est visibile sign um
inuisibilis gratiae. That is to say A sacrament is a vilible sign, of an
invisible grace, that is, a sacrament is visyble, a sign of an invisible grace
and in another place he calls it Signu^ sancti rei. That is to say. A sign
of an holy thing, the sign of an holy thing. As for an example water is a
visible thing subjected to the senses of man to see, feel, and taste, whose
property is to mundify and scour the corruption, and froth that hangs upon
our visyble flesh, and to make pure our outward man, so y^ our eye being
judge thereof is certifyed yt it is clean and with out spotte, which water for
these native qualities, being a thing seen with our eye is instituted of god to
be a sacrament or sign to preach an invisible grace not seen with our bodily
eyes, nameli y^ property of christ's precious bloodshed for our redemption,
and salvation, y^ only lauacre of our soul by who^ it is escoured from syn yt
so has festered it to death? our only hyloe which has cleansed our leprosy that
had so enfebled our weak sperit so y^ we are now regenerate into the lively
hope of life everlasting by the blood of this undefiled la^be in soch sort now,
yt if ye devil would lay assault unto our conscience with his instruments of
disperacion to make our hope faynte y^ we have broken the law, and therefore
must of force be co^de^pned, or yt god is unable to remyt our iniquities if we
repent never so sore, we have to va^quishe his tyrannous persuacio^s this
promyses annexed unto these visyble signs or sacraments, which are only seen
with y^ eyes of our faith and tasted with soul, nameli that Roma. x*
christ is y^ fulfilling of y^ law to justify al y^ believe, again, christ has
put out y^ handwryting y^ was against us conceived in y^ law written, and that
has he taken out of the way, and has fastened it to y^ cross, and has
spoiled rule C^l^, ii
and power, and has triu^phed over the^ in his own person. And last of al
paul says, that we are Roma, vi
not now under the law but under grace, for it is written, to the only
consolation and comfort of al afflicted co^scie^ces, that willingly repent the^
of their wickedness That christ for no other purpose i, Timo. i
came into this world but to save sinners. For he has confessed him self to be
soch a god, so mercyful so kind, and louinge to the^ yt repent their wickedness,
yt he will not remember their iniquities which they have wroughte but they shall
live because of y^ ryghtuousnesse that he has wroughte. And therefore, thus
writes Ezechiel the prophet of of him even in his own person speaking. As
truly as I live, I Ezech, 33
have no pleasure in ye death of a sinner, but much rather y^ y^ wicked turn
from his way and live, and to declare his mercy how it lusts to see al me^
saved behold how frendely he speaks unto Ierem. ^,
Israel saying. Return o thou rebel from syn, and I will not turn my face from
the, for I will not the^ be angry with the for ever. Thus ye se good brethren,
how mercifully y^ almyghtyest has wrought with us mortal creatures* being but
dust and ashes, that it has pleased his divine majesty, so much to tender
our weak sperites compassed about with the prison and infectuous dongion of
flesh and blood, that in the receyte of this vysyble signs, we have
wherwyth to comfort strengthen and augme^t augme^t our hope to salvation,
namely y^ promises of his most sacred word, which never fails y^ faithful y^
assuredly trusts therein, for god is y^ word, and the word is god, And as god
is an everlasting god without beginning and without end, eue^ so this word is a
perpetual word, and endures for ever: For he has said y^ heaven and earth
shall perisshe and come to ruynne, but y^ word of y^ lord endures for ever
Wherefore as y^ lord in this visible sacraments has preached unto us y^
invisible grace mercy and favor of his sperit, eue^ so with his spiritual
co^solacio^ unseen with our flesheli eyes has he co^fyrmed y^ hope of our
forefathers in the promyses of his holy word by visyble signs or sacraments.
As for an example it pleased our heavenly father to leave unto Abraham and his
posterity circu^sitio^ with certain sacrifices in moses law to be sacraments
and tokens, by who^ they should be led, as it were by y^ hand to Christ of al
flesh, you trusts in him y^ only savior. That as the sacrifices of y^ Jews
done with blood wherwyth al things in the temple was sprinkeled being a
visyble sacrament unto their mortal eyes, preached the invisible grace of the
promise y^ Esaye prophesied, namely that god would send a lamb so pure, innocent
and simple into the earth that butter should not melt i^ his mouth, neither yet
he should be able to break a read, who^ his will was to be slain, a
satisfactorye and perfyghte sacrifyce, for man's transgressio^ and remyssion of
his syns. Eue^ so circu^sytion was a visible sacrament to co^fyrme the^ in this
inuisyble grace. That god the father had prepared for the^ an instrument to cut
away y^ froth and corruption of Ada^, and of the^ all that issued out of his
loins, which instrument is Romans iiii
Christ the promised seed to Abraham in whom all nacyons be blessed. Therefore
as it is euyde^t by the scripture their sacraments were of equal force with
ours, saving that theyrs preached unto them the coming of Christ, and ours,
that christ is all ready come and is assended above the clouds to give
salvation unto men, but all according to truth has taught Jesus to be our
peace offering and satisfaction. Thus is marten Luthers opinion with all his
scholars in this point chieffely reproved that if the body of Christ should
really be in the sacrament of the alter *as featly ye name it, then were not
the sacraments of equal force, But we only possess this Christ of whom their
sacraments testyfyed and not they, and consequently that we only ar saved,
because we are only pertakers of this body, and not they, for their sacraments
led unto christ, and our Sacrament is (as ye say) Christ him self, O
blasphemye most horrible, that the precious blood of Christ our savior
vnyuersallye shed for all flesh, shall thus by your most deuylysshe
Imagynacyon, be made insuffycyente? Think you that truethe can thus be thus be
outfaced of your heresye, no it will co^de^pne your wickedness justly and prove
you as ye ar untrue in deed. And for y^ proffe of this. What means the mercy
seat to be placed upon the arc, and y^ two cherubins to be set upon this
mercy seat one against another, and both loking down into the mercyseate But
that our forefathers, abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which slepte many a day
before christ's incarnation by faith assured themselves to be purifyed in the
precious death and cross of christ our savior and of their wretchedness, in him
to have fre remission, so that there by euydently it is declared, that their
sacraments and ours are of one force, and as touching their end they dyffer
not for as well their sacraments as ours preach Christ crucified, which with
the only sacrifyce of his body has made al them perfect for ever, whom he
has sanctified. That ye may therefore understand this example of the law,
mark diligently what it signifies that thereby your hearts may be opened to
believe thee most sacred word of God thee ioyefull tidings of your
delyueraunce from death through. Christ Jesus. The arc fygured the law, which
without parcialitie condempnethe all flesh for sin, so that thereby could
no man be made ryghtuous, nether yet safe from the vyalles of Gods wrathefull
indignacion whom he powered as a just reward, upon Ada^s dysobedyence for
after that he had preuaricate this law. Eat of all y^ fruit within this
garden, only excepted the fruit of knowledge, of good and evil, straythforth
with the appel, he devoured death and dampnacion, and could no longer be
herbored under the pleasant shadow of the fruteful trees of Eden, but was
bannysshed thee presens of y^ lord his god with glistering swords of flaminge
fire as a traitor most rebellious, and disobedient against his law. Now wha^
y^ law being by nature an exact judge and one y^ uses no percialitye in
rewarding every one according to his deserts, had for syn dishereted Adam, and
throwe^ him into this most wretched vale of all mysery, where the curse of god
with out all resystaunce came upon his head, he could not for shame seek
frendshyp of the law* whose straytenes he had tasted and so well knew to
abhor, hate, and condemn sin, for the law entreats no man fre^dely,
but him which diligently observes all thing written therein, to whom it has
made this promise, that if he shall do all things contained therein he shall
live in them and see good days, but if he break this law and let the
couenauntes thereof be undone, then will the Lord beuyse against him this
plages followynge for the abbreache thereof, he will vysyte him shortly with
fevers and swellings which shall destroy y^ eyes and ^etif, xvi^^ and, xxvi
Ez^^: xviii Deut^. 28.
consume away the heart (y^ is to say) ye soul which has sinned against this
law, shall dye y^ death, Ada^ therefore for asmoche as he dysobeyed the statutes
of this law was now overwhelmed with death, and darkness having no frynde
that would or could be found that was able to bruste thee intolerable and
most paynefull yocke of thee law, which had so greuouslye wounded his
conscye^ce, until soche time that God of his mere benygnytye, (not wylling
that the adueysarye should possess the creature, whom he had made to magnifye
his name,) spared not his only begotten son Jesus Christ, to make him
partaker of our vile flesh and all natural infyrmyties thereof sin
except, that by his glorious death and ressurection, he might tread him
under foot which had power over death, and deliver them that sat in
darkness and in thee shadow of death from this terryble captyuyte, and bind
up the wounds of Adam and his posterity because therefore that the law by the
mean of disobedience had covered all mankind with dampnation, he came as a
lamb most innocente and by his obedience unto the death of the cross he
exempted not only al men from the curse of the law, but also he covered them
with salvation that without wauerynge trusted in him, and therefore he is
called the mediator of God and man in thee holy scripture, because he being
both God and man not only satisfied the law, but also mollyfyed the anger of
God his father, conceived against Adam for thee trangressyon of the law, for
it was not one nature I mean man, that was able and of power too observe this
law of his proper strength, syns that the law has confounded sin from the
beginning, under who^ Adam an al flesh that issued out of his loins, was
shut in, but of necessity there must some soch one be found, which being
coupled together two natures and without spot of sin, should satisfye for
sin and please god for tra^sgressio^. Mercy therefore pytyfully lame^ting the
fall of Adam and very Loath to see thee Image of God thus bondaged to death, by
the subtle entycemente of thee cruel serpente, and an outcaste by the law,
for asmoche as it perceived in earth, thee impotencye of flesh and blood, how
weak and unable it was to break this serpents head, it anointed eue^ Christ
Jesus to preach good tidings unto thee poor, healynge up the wounded
hearts and deliver thee captyues from Esaye, 61,
death destroyng that had power over death, that ma^kynd might be made a
ryghtuous planting of the Lord for him to rejoice in. Christ therefore nothing
rebellious unto the will of his father, who through his favorable mercy had
appointed him a savior before the fou^dacio^ of the world were leyed, came and
was incarnate for our sake subjected unto all our myseryes without sin that
by the sacrifyce of his most precious body might become a refuge and bastilio^
unto al faithful and penitent sinners, that believed in him so sure and
strong, that the deuyce of the law should not hurt them, that were marked
with his blood, neither yet the locustes whom the star let out of the
botomles pyt, should work their commyssyo^ upon them nor spue out the devised
vengeance of thee God of Jacob against Apoca, ix.
them, which he has devised to fall upon al flesh that had not the seal of
this lamb in their fore headdes. Therefore is he called in y^ holy scripture,
our mercyseat for asmoch as all they that believe in him, are defended by his
bloudsheddynge, Now is christ become our peace offering and perfect
sacryfyce: our mediator and only advocate, which has delivered us from under
the law, and graffed us in lybertye and grace, being so fyrmely and stable a
mersyate, that he not only stands between us and the law, but also assures
the Cherubyns of an everlasting seat which never shall decay because they have
hooped in him, for these Cherubyns sat face to face upon the mercyseate,
sygnyfyeth the fathers, and their ofspryng that have slept from the creacion of
the world until the most glorious death of christ Jesus. And all these that
shall sleep till the apperaunce of the son of man in his glory at the
consummation. And their lokynge down into thee mercyseat, sygnifieth the
confession of their faith, that they in him are both holy and ryghtuouse for
asmoch as unfeignedly they believed that, that the prophets have testyfyed, that
as ^e^u, 13
many as trust in him shall have remission of their syn, for there is no health in
any other, nether is there any other name given under heaven unto me^, whereby
they might be saved, but only y^ name of Jesus Christ, In conclusion the fathers
and we, holy cleue unto this christ, for asmoche as in him we have life
everlasting and without him there ca^ come no salvation unto me^, for he is y^
geuer thereof as wytnessethe his own sperit, saying. Ego do vita^ ouibus meis.
That is to say, I give life to my sheep. Wherefore paul to declare yt the
fathers which sleep in y^ lord, to have eaten y^ same body and have drunk of
the same cup which is preached unto us in this Sacrament whereof we also are
partakers says, we have al dronke of one spyrytuall rock, and ar partakers
of one bread, by who^ we are made one body. Et hic erat ille panis qui de celo
desce^dit ex quo, Si quis ederit viuet in aeternum. That is to say. And this
was that bread that came from heaven, whereof, if any man shall eat, he shall
live for ever. Which is the head of the faithful congregation, Even Christ
the mediator between god and man, in whom as many as faithfully believe ar
buried from their sins, and risen again with him in newnes of life, and he
that doubt the not this, but with an assured affyaunce hops thereafter,
has already eaten his body and drunk his blood and has in him life
everlasting. Contrary he that believes not the most sacred and eternal
Testament, sanctified in his most precious blood, but castethe it behind his
back as a word doubteful and not to be trusted, let him eat this sacrament
five thousand times where in ye feign more like infydels tha^ faithful
christians the body of christ our savior to be contained really, it shall
asmoche auaylle him to saluatyon as a dyrgies penny or a mass of requiem, for
it is not thee sacramental eating that gives the salvation, but to believe
gods word, that is the sauegarde of the soul, neither is it the Sacramental
eating that condempnethe thy soul, but the unbelief of gods word covers
the with death. For the eating of the Sacrament without faith in the promise
aduexet there unto, profytethe nothing, but to eat the sacrament and
stedfastlye to believe the promise, he receaueth not only the Sacrament,
worthelye, but has also life everlasting not for eating the Sacrament but
because he believes in him whom the sacrament fygureth, who is life
everlasting as Johan witnesses saying. God has given us life everlasting
and this life is in his son, he that has the son, has life, and he that
has not the son of God, has not life in him, Wherefore to eat this
Sacrament i, Ioh, v.
reverently according to the holy scripture, is in breaking of the bread to
preach, unto our conscience the lords death, by whom we are sealed unto
redemption, And in drinkyng of the cup, that is in obeyng to his word, to
have remyssyon of all our iniquities, and life everlasting. Now good brethren,
because I will not be tedious, I hartelye desire you in the Lord Jesus, and if
by his death and bloudshedinge ye have received the hope of salvation do also
require you not, as one having any auctorytye of him self, but as an instrument
nowstered by the loving kindness of god to call you from your heresye, to
consider the Embacetour and hye pressed of our profession christ Jesus being y^
brightness of gods glory and the very Image of his substance, bearyng up al
things with y^ word of his power how he has in his own person purged our sins
and is set on ye rightha^d of the majesty on hye, being eue^ as much more
excellent the^ y^ angels, and also how he has sanctified ye testament in his
precious blood to ye comfortable health and spiritual reioysinge of al these y^
covet y^ immutable or everlasting heritage attained by christ, for the^ who^
steadfast faith in his blood has made y^ adoptiue heirs of god, in the which
testament ye may euyde^tly perceive, if the burden of syn has not seduced you
from y^ grace of god, how this adulterian lerning, I would say, Lutherian
doctrine is reproved thereby, being the promised sperite of truth sent of god
to the consolation of the^ yt trust in his name, the dispicing of who^ kills
the souls drawing upon the^ the curses of god and his hateful vengeance as is
manifest in the holy scripture spoken, both in the law and by the holy
prophets, for what a grieffe was it unto Moses, when the children of Israel
would not hear him, neither believe the m^ssiage from thee Lord their God,
which he brought, think you that it petyed him not to se the word of his
majesty in so little regard, yea truly but how much more shall it grieve
thee living God which of favor humbled his only son christ Jesus unto
death, for the sauegarde of ma^kynd to se the blessed Testament of his kyndnes
toward us, and most heavenly speryt so little esteemed pronu^ced by him, which
far excedeth Moses in worthynes and honor even Jesus Christ. Think you that
he* ca^ suffer truth thus to loose his honor and be euel entreated at the
hands of flesh and blood, no truly he can, for it abhors his nature, and
therefore he withdraws not his indignacio^, but suffers it, root the^ out
of the earth that dispyse it. And to this deareth the Prophet Esaias. ii^^
Esaye wytnes, saying. Because they have offended the law, changed the
ordinance and made the everlasting Testament of none effect. Therefore shall y^
curse devour the earth for they that dwell thereon have sinned and kyndled the
wrath of the holy one of Israel, which shall so smite the hills that y^
karcases of the ungodly shall lie in y^ street for because they have neglected
this word (says Ieremye) the Lord will send upon the sword, honger and
pestile^s for he has already prepared him self against Ierem, 29
the^ to battle, and set up y^ power of his voice to declare his terrible
arm, with his angry countenance, yea and the flamme of the consumyng fire,
whom he has made both large wide and deep the noryshing whereof is wodde
innumerable, who^ the breath of the almyghtyest shall kyndle as Esaias, 30,
a smatche of brymstone, what moved the lord to threaten the ungodly that he
would make heaven unto them as Iron, and the earth as brass that it should not
bring forth her increase to their sustentacion? thee dispysyng of his word,
what provoked him to send wild beasts to devour them, and make wayst their
lands? the despysynge of his word, what caused him to to send a sword, and a
consuming pestylens upon thee stubburne to avenge his Testament, the contempt
of it, what drew the wonderful plage of penure upon them, so that they eat
the flesh of their sons and daughters and causes the soul of the lord to
abhor them, The despysyng of gods word: wherefore as Paul says, we ought
to give the more head unto things which we have herd, lest we perysshe, for
if the word which was spoken by angels was steadfast, and every trangression
and disobediens received a just recompense, how shall we escape if we despise so
great a salvation, which (after it was begone of the Lord him self to be
preached) was co^fyrmed upon us by the^ y^ herd it, god heari^g witness
thereunto, with tokens wonders and diverse powers and gifts of the holy ghost
according to his own will, forget not good brethers, how sore y^ lord was but
to reueng the disobedie^s of the cruel Pharao, and the wonderful plages that
his soul had dyuised against him so heinous they were and intolerable, that
y^ poor beasts of the fylde and fysshes of the sea, yea the hole land was
laid wast and became a wyldernes, for y^ syn of this king Egypt most horrible
in y^ sight of god, namely the despycynge of his word. Call to your
remembrance the continual captiuytie and most fylthy death that happened to
passure the son of Emmerchief in the house of y^ lord for the contempt of gods
word Ierem, xx
preached of Jeremy the lords Prophet, where Iosyas, Iconias, and the false
prophet Hana^nas which with soch vyolence reproved the prophet, and cast the
word of the lord behind their backs preserved from perell, no truly, for the
lord commanded the earth by the mouth of his prophet that their names should
be written among the outlawes that in their life they might have no prosperity,
and that none of their seed should be so happy as to sit upon the leate of
david, or bear rule in Judah, but should most shamefully dye among the
Babylonians. Syns therefore god of his mere benignite has left in his most
blessed word, y^ intreature of soch rebellions ye has so frowardli despised
their own salvation, and wyllingly for sake^ their lord, and creator in that
they have presumptuously set y^ wytles Imaginacion of dust and ashes to
contempne the wysdo^ of the god of Jacob, the creator of the whole world, in
whose hands stands the borders and coostes thereof to rule it as his most
godly will is: only for love sake, that we thereof shuldbe nor tered, and take a
dissiplyne not to commit any soch offense against Christ our savior, lest as
they came to naught, so we perysshe in our giltines, Turn therefore good
brethren from your stubburnes and resyst not his holy word, which is of power
so mighty and strong that he is able with the breath thereof to consume you as
lightly as fire does dry kyckes or stubble but rent and tear your hearts and
daily bewail your syn, magnifieng the living God through your advocate and
mediator Jesus christ that his long sufferance which loves not to see your
destruction, but rather that ye repent, and live has so long wythhold the
violent arm and wrathful, displeasure of our heavenly father from you that
sodayn destruction had not devoured you in your wyckednes, suffer not this his
merciful favor to cause you to be more careless than the fowls of the air
for the storke knowethe his apyoynted time, the Turtyl, the swalowe, and thee
crane, consider the time of their travel, should not then the people of God,
both know and fear y^ time of the lords vengeance? Now therefore if ye wylbe
thee sheep of his pasture, and be be fed of his ple^teousnes, harde^ not your
hearts as the heddi people did in y^ wyldernes provoking through your
disobediens the God of al mekenes in his heavy displeasure to swear unto you as
he did unto them, which there were overthrown for their sins, ye shall not
enter into my rest, but gentyllye hear the voice of your sheperde, (as is
thee prophecy of his chosen sheep) so lovingly speaking thus unto your
conscience. Children if ye will receive my words and keep my commandments,
the^ shall you understand the fear of the lord and find out the knowledge of
god, the^ shall thou understand righteousness judgment and equity and every
good pathe, for thereby wysedo^ enters into your hearts, who Prove, ii,
by counsel, and understanding preserves you from the evil way and from the
man yt speaks froward things. And therefore the prophet david says, Blessed
is y^ man which seeks after the testymonyes of the lord and diligently obeys
the word of god, whom he has sent to heal them and to Psalm, 17,
deliver the^ from destruction that delyghteth therein. To this staf did Abraham
and al his posterity, (than were sanctified in the promised seed even Christ
Jesus) leave unto, in all aduersytye, and never were dysceaued of their hope, nor
forsaken of the lord in time of trouble, for this word causes a fountain of
living water to flow out of their bellyes that trust therein and for this have
many taysted of mockynges scorgynges, of bonds of of prysonment were stoned,
were hewn a sonder, were tempted, were stayne with thee sword, And these all
through faith in this eternal testament, attained in this life not only a
good report but have received y^ promise of the word, life everlasting Wherefore
deny sin and all ungodliness, and without doubt ye shall not only have the
understanding of this word whereby ye shall be able to vanquishe all assaults of
our mortal enemy the devil, but also shall be able by it to dyscerne this your
wicked error and condemn it and with a pure heart magnifye the truth of our
heavenly father which through his son Christ our lord has perdoned al
our sins and in him given all them that faithfully believe the breaking of
his precious body, and most glorious bloudsheddyng upon the cross to be the
perfyghte sacryfyce of our redemptyon, and the only attonemente between God
the father and man's consciences thee importyble crown of everlasting
glory, with him to rejoice in thee heavenly Kingdom contynuallye, and this
is thee true and infallyble eating of his body and brynkynge of his most
precious blood thee endeles comfort of our souls, which will never suffer
them to see death neither corruption, but to be incorruptible and of the same
immortal substance that christ our sauyoure is, not wythstanding Luthers
error, whom he has already condemned with the promised brethe of his mouth,
namelye the sperit of truth, whom he promised all his faytheful, to lead them
into all truth being the Testament sanctified in his precious blood the soul
and only effect of our redemptyon.

Wherefore the God of peace that brought again from ye dead our lord Jesus
Christ y^ great sheperde of the sheep through y^ blood of the everlasting
testamente, make you perfect in all good works, to do his will, workynge in
you, that which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ our lord, to
whom be praise, honor and glory forever and ever. Let all people say.
Amen. Amen.

God save the King.

Grace be with you.

Yours as charytye byndeth. T. C:

Imprynted at london by Hugh syngelto^ at the sign of saint Augustyne in
paul's church yearde


