A DISCOURSE HAPPENED.

BETWEEN AN HERMIT called Nicephorus and a young lover called Tristan, who for
that his Mistress Petronilla entered into Religion would feign become an
Hermit.

All faithfully drawn out of the History of Petronilla, composed in French
by the Right Reverend Father in God JOHN PETER CAMVS Bishop of Belley.

And Translated into English by P. S. P.



Printed with Permission.

1630.

Academioe Gantabrigiensis Liber


TO THE CATHOLICS of Irland.
RENOWNED Catholics the Histoire of Petronilla Coming to my hands, composed by
the Right Reverend Father in God John Peter Camus Bishop of Belley a man of
Known learning, eminent He vvrate many books.
piety and of an Apostolical life, the fancy took me to employ some time in
the reading of it, not doubting but coming from so famous an Author, I should
find some thing in it worth my labor. Going then forward in the reading
thereof, amongst many other good things, I lighted upon this Treatise, which
when I considered, I said thus to my self: it might be thought, that this man
had revelation, or some notice given him of the emulation and varia^ce which is
between the Hierarchicall Clergy and the Regulars in Irland, and that in
consequens thereof he framed this Discourse. For it is said, that the Regulars
there, thinking thereby to magnify and extol themselves (for I know no other
reason they can have for it) make no conscience nor scrupule both in their
public sermons, and in their private co^uersations amongst you, to say and
affirm, that Priests are but mere Seculars, that themselves are true
Pastors, that it belongs to them only to be called Fathers, that they are the
choice and best part of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and which is more
absurd, that their Regular Superiors are more worthy then Bishops. All which
assertions manifestly false, and ill becoming men whose institution is chiefly
grounded in humility and contempt of worldly honor and respects, being
touched and discussed in this Treatise, I thought in my love and natural
affection toward you, my dear Country men, that I was in a manner bound,
fearing these things should give you some erroneous impressions, to impart it
unto you. Whereupon I took the pains to translate it out of French into
English and to have it printed. And if I shall understand that it takes effect,
and cause the Delinque^ts reflect upon their error, herin and upon that saying
of S. James the Apostle: If any man think himself to be Religious Iac. 5. v. 26
not bridling his tongue, but seducing his heart, this man's Religion is vain,
then will I think my labor well employed. And that which is most to be desired
of them is, that they do consider first, that such assertions and comparisons
do more hurt then good, do rather destroy then edify, rather pervert then
convert the people from their evil courses, and rather breed hate and envy,
then love or charity: and secondly that they consider, that Priesthood, which
is the fontaine and fondation of all Ecclesiastical functions, is the same in
Secular Priests (as they term them) and in Regulars, whence Priests may
justly say to the Regulars with saint Paul, that if they be Hebrews so are
they, if they be 2. Cor. 11. v. 22.
Israelites so are they, if they be the seed of Abraham so are they, if they
be Ministers of CHRIST so are they; yea more, that they are their elders and
have higher offices and dignities in the Church then they have. And for you
worthy champions I shall desire you not to be scandalized to see one Catholic
write against an other, believing that Catholics as Catholics do agree in
matters of Faith, but as men that they may vary in other opinions. S. Peter
and S. Paul, S. Austin Gal. 3. Act. 15. Hieron. ep. 86. Aug. ep. 8 and sequ.
Eus. lib. 5. cap. 24. and 25 Bedal. 3. Histor. Angl. cap. 24. and 25. lib. 5.
c. 16. Dan. 20.
and S. Hierome disagreed in some opinions without breach of faith or charity.
About the observation of Easter there was great debate betwixt Saints and
Saints till the Church decided the controversy; yea Angels have dissented in
opinions. But this you may note in this controversy, that learned Doctors in
these Countries, and some of them Religious men, with whom I did co^fer of the
same, do much admeere that the Regulars in Irland do co^test with the Clergy
for the said points, whereas in no Catholic Countries do the Regulars speak of
the like, but co^taine themselves within the precinct of their Monasteries, and
the observance of their Rules, which teach the quit contrary of all that they
do in this kind And if they will allege that having no Monasteries in Irla^d
they must go up and down amongst you, like other Priests, me thinks they
should the less claim any perfection or respect over other Priests, and my
warrant for this is S. Hierome, who speaking of such Monks and Religious men
says: Sicut piscis extra aquam caret vita sic Monachus extra Monasterium. As
fish being out of the water does want life, so does a Monk or Religious man
being out of his Monastery. For the life of a Religious man, as such, is to
observe his Rules, and keep his vows, which he cannot do so well, if he do
it at all, being couersant in the world, and not doing it, what prerogative can
he claim over others? To conclude if the Regulars be true Pastors as is above
said, how can they excuse themselves that they take no more care of their flock
then some odd times like passingers to preach unto them, God knows with little
fruict? Who will not say but the good Priest is more like to be the true
Pastor: Who gives his life for his sheep, serving them, not by starts but
all the year long, by day and by night, in heat and in cold, in rain and in
tempest, with much misery and little profit? Lastly who can believe that the
Regulars are true or proper Pastors whenas they cannot take any such chardge
upon them if first they be not dispensed with all in their vows. Add that in
Catholic Countries, where all Clergy men get their due, they cannot preach
nor Minister any Sacrament out of their own Conuents without the express
leave of the Bishop of the Diocese, and of the Pastor of the place,
conformable to the Council Sess. 24.
of Trent? Howsoever they will answer to all these things, I make no doubt but
after their accustomed manner, some of them will say (for I Know that many
good men amongst them do not approve such things) that he is no friend of
Religious men that does propound them. But God is my witness, I do honor and
respect all Religious men, and vvish all others to do the same, as long as they
contain themselves within the limits of their Rules, and that they do not
prefer the honor of their order, as many seem to do, to the honor and
service of God, to whose divine protection I commit you, and pray him, to give
us all the Spirit of union and charity, and so rest

Your devoted servant in CHRIST JESUS P. S. P.

A DISCOURSE HAPPENED.
Betvveene an Hermit called Nicephorus and a young lover called Tristan, who
for that his Mistress Petronilla entered into Religion would feign become an
Hermit.

OMitting the history of all that past between Tristan and petronilla, and
the tragical end which came of their love, I will only rehearse the discourse
past between Tristan and Nicephorus, containing many points much disputed of
in these our days. Tristan a proper and well bredd young gentilman much grieved
that his mistress petronilla whom he pursued so long time (of displeasure that
she could not obtain her parents consent to marry him) went into Religion,
resolved also to retire himself from the world in some religious Monastery;
but after communicating his resolution therein to several Religious men of
diverse orders and getting their opinions thereof, at length he follovved his
own fancy and inclination, which was to go to the wilderness and lead an
Heremiticall life; and the Perinean mountains which separate France from
Spaigne being the nearest unto him, he went thither, taking with him a good
purse of money and his lute, at which he was very skillful. But neither his lute
nor his solitariness did any thing assuage his passion, or make him forget the
creature which brought him to that anxietie of mind, but rather inflamed him
more, especially the lute conformable to the old proverb, which says, that
music is an importunat gest to a heart afflicted. Being then in this
perplexity he was told that not far from him there was a deuote and well built
Hermitage wherein dwelt a venerable Hermit whose sainctitie of life gave a good
odoure to all the Country about, and who by long experience did learn how to
guide himself to perfection by the way of solitariness in that wilderness.
His good Angel made Tristan draw toward this sainctly old man, who received
him with the same charity wherewith he was accustomed to receive and intertaine
other passing Pilgrims (for he was in pilgrims weed) who straying from their
way in those dreadful deserts, fell sometimes upon the little path which lead
to his sell. Tristan beholding him did take him for an Angel of God, and
believed that he was the Raphael which would conduct him to Rages, I would say,
to the perfection of the contemplative life. Having then briefly declared his
intent to the good Hermit, he gave him for answer, that to love a thing it
is necessary to know it before, and that the Heremiticall life as well as the
Monastical does require a good approbation of a man before he be admitted to
it. Tristan having submitted himself to him in all things. My child, quoth
father Nicephorus, for so they called this religious man, it is nothing for a
man to undertake such a life if he be not called to it by God, and amongst many
that are called, few are choosen. I know well that it does not appertain but to
God, to know perfectly and weigh justly the hearts of men, yet his will is
that his servants do see and try whether they be of true or false coin: the
touchstone of such as are called to the service of God is, the renunciation of
all things, and of themselves also. Father, quoth Tristan, if that be the mark
of the elect I have it; for I do freely quitt the world, the subject which
retained me in it being separated from me, and it will be easy likewise for me
to forsake my self seeing I have relinquished an object of which I did esteem
much more then of my self.

My child, quoth Nicephorus, the wars seem sweet, according the proverb, to
such as did not try it, do not triumph before the victory, and do not
proclaim victory before the battle; none shall be crowned, says the word of
verity, that will not reasonably and valorouslie fight, and the battle which
we have with our self Self love engraven in our nature.
love does last as long as our very lives: for that error is so deeply
engraven in our nature, as it does subsist after we renounce our selves; we
may mortify it, but not make it die, contrary wise it seems like the fabulous
Giant, to take new forces from it prostration and overthrow, and like great
trees, the more they be shaked, the faster the fix their roots. It may be
assaulted but rarely ouercommed, and never rooted out: the walls of that
rebellious Hiericho, although they be undermined and sometimes razed to the
ground, yet do they get up again of themselves. I do not say this to
discourage you, nor to imitat those timorous spies, which would feign dissuade
the children of Israel from undertaking the conquest of the land of promis; I
know there be difficulties in it, but I tell you with Iosue and Caleb, that you
may boldly enter in the power of our lord, who, if he be for you, nothing can
prevail against you, for who can resist the will of the highest power, of this
Lord of armies, who is terrible over all powers, if he undertake to fight with
you? But you must not hope that he will put himself of your side, if you do not
put all your trust and confidence in him, by a perfect distrust of your self,
which may not consist with those lofty terms, which promis meruailes, and
carrying you upon the wings of the wind make you aspire to great matters, which
surpass the reach of a man that is not yet a Nouice. It is not, that I do
lightly judge of your soul, which I believe is more perfect then my own, who
serves God so negligently and love him so coldlie, nor that I am ignorant but
in the confusion of the Babylon of the world, God has servants and secret
disciples, which do not bow their knees to Baal, and that keep their hearts
pure amongst the impuritie of the world, of which number you may be; add that
the extraordinary effects of grace do produce in an instant admirable
conuersions, which puts those that are replenished with it, in a state of great
perfection, conformable to that which is written, that the works of God are
perfect and without repentance, that is to say, without defect.

Tristan, who believed that this discourse of the Hermit did tend to deferr and
put of his reception, esteeming (as he was full of worldly maxims) that the
Hermit did fear that chardging himself with him, his alms would be too short
to furnish him a portion said, Father the time will make known whether I be
touched with true or fained charitle, and the trial will make manifest the
force or the weakness of my vocation. but to the end that you may not think
that I come hither to incommodat, or importune you, I will show unto you that
it is rather to occommodat you, and to draw you from the pain of going here
and there to search your living, which must bring much interruption to your
contemplation, which require repose and silence, and may not be had but in the
wilderness. Know then that being left an orphan without father and mother I
was emancipated by public authority a little before the term of my maioritie
and consequently put in the possession of my goods which are not so small but
they are sufficient to nourish twenty Hermits as you are, and I believe that
not making the vow of poverty in any Religious order, that I may keep them
and dispose of them as God shall inspire me. We shall then live together and
what reuersion we shall have we will bestow it in alms, and in such other
pious works as you shall think good, without troubling our selves to beg for
our maintenance. And to show that it is true, that I came not hither with
empty hands, or unfurnished of things necessary to nourishe and cloathe my
self, behold a scantlet of the matter.

Then did he show the Hermit a great purse full of pistolls, and also some
precious stones more worth then gold, and yet did occupy less place. Good
Nicephorus, who did not see while he kept in this wilderness such great
quantity of this yealoue metal, whose luster does dazzle the eyes of many men
in the world, did firmly believe in his mind that he was the Tentator, who
under a human shape came to divert him from the way of perfection, which is
that of holy poverty, which he traced for many years within his little cave.
Whereupon arming himself with the mark of our salvation and uttering the name
of our Savior with a low voice, seeing that Tristan did not vanish away, to
clear himself of his doubt, he took him softly by the arm and said to him;
If I had not known that spirits have neither flesh nor bones, as I do feel
you to have, I would say that it is the Devil that came to solicit me to my
ruin, offering me richesse, as he did to the son of God when he assaulted him
in the wilderness. But I fear that not taking upon him the form of man he
does possess your hearr to produce in mine the same effect, and to slide into
it the death of grace by the venime of avarice. I will then say unto you the
same that the Apostle said to Simon Magus, away with your gold and silver from
me, which I know are the I dolls of the world, to which they are like, that do
adore them, and that put their confidence in them: that man is abondantly rich
that is poor in JESUS CHRIST. I love my begging, by which I co^quer heaven for
my self (and make others to conquer it for them, making them to merit
everlasting goods when they give me of their earthly goods) better then all
your treasure: It is long since I have put of that shirt of earthly possession,
and how should I putt it on again? I have washed my feet and chased from my
mind those gross affections, and how should I contaminat them of the new? I
will never call back again what I have once quitted and renounced with a good
will for the love of my Master; he has nourished me so many years in these
deserts, both with the dew of heaven, which is the Manna of his consolations,
and with the fatt of the earth, which is the daily bread of the necessity of
the body, as I have all subject to bless his providence, and to confirm my
self in this truth that such as seek for God and his kingdom can never want
any thing. For my part, I will promis you no gold nor silver, but that only
which God will send me by the hands of such as he shall inspire to do me
charity, I will impart it to you. In the mean time I will tell you, that if
you will do as Jacob did, quitt the house of the traitor Laban, which is the
world, to inioye the embracing of Lia and Rachell, to wit, Action and
Contemplation, it is necessary that you bury those Idols at the foot of the
Terebinthe of the cross, and that glorifying in nothing but in JESUS CHRIST
crucified, you will imitat him in his nuditie, gloriously ignominious, by
depriving your self of the care of temporal richesse, according the Counsel,
which he gave to that young gentilman, who was like to you, to quitt all, that
Matt. 19. v. 21.
he might be perfect, not admitting him of his train if first he would not
distribut to the poor all that he possessed. But my son quoth the good
Hermitte, I fear you resemble too much this young man, and that like unto him
you will retire your self with a heavy heart, not being able to digest the
bitterness of this drugg, which make men forsake all the goods of the earth,
that they may aspire to heavenly goods, and that you will not so easily
dispossess your self of them as Jacob did putt of the skins which covered his
hands, and good Joseph his cloak.

That I may not lie unto you, quoth Tristan, I could never believe that for
being an Hermit a man must have renounced the inheritance of his forefathers,
but well I knew it to be necessary for to be admitted of those religious
orders, in which is made the solemn Vow of poverty; a thing not only
necessary, but also very easy in those great Communalties whether they be
rich The vovv of poverty very easy in Communalties.
or begging Communalties because the Religion does oblige it self to
intertaine the Religious as they do consecrat themselves to the observance of
the rules of the Religion. But an Hermitte that lives alone without support is
oftentimes trusting to a badd dynner while he exspects Manna or larks to fall
from heaven to him; as they did to the Israelites; for God does not show such
favors to all nations nor work such miracles upon all occasions. Such as putt
their trust in God, quoth the Hermit, are not shaked no more then is Mount
Sion: He that dwells in Jerusalem, which is in the protection of the God of
heaven, and whose very gates he does love, is no more moved when he is in want,
then when he has plenty of all things, being assured that the hand of God is
not shortened, nor his power diminished. He that has care of the croes little
ones being abandonned by their Dames, and of the least sparrow; yea, of the
least fly, will never abandon him that lives just before him all his life
time. The sun will sooner fail to lighten the world, then his providence to
shine upon such as he loves; he that spreds his beams and pouers his rain
equally upon the just and the unjust, that gives nourishment to all flesh, and
that need do no more but open his hand to replenish all creatures with
benediction.

All that may be good, quoth Tristan, in the pulpet but the practice is quitt
otherwise. For my part, I would make no difficulty to renounce to the
inheritance of my forefathers, nor to make a vow of poverty in a good Convent,
which should be well rented, or being of a begging order, that should be
situated in a good city, where they eat the sins of the people, where all
men labor for you while you pray for all men, where they find the bread ready
baked, the wine all pure, the meat ready dressed, where they have no care of
any thing, nor think of tomorrow, practicing, simply and in good earnest these
words of the Scripture: Ask and thou shall Matthew. 7. verse. 7.
have, seek and thou shall find; But without, that, to renounce my own, it is
a thing that all the eloquence of men and of the Angels may not persuade me to
do, for I do see but too much every day how sottish and ridiculous it is, to be
a poor priest.

So it is without doubt according It is a glorious thing before God to be a
poor priest.
the world, said the Hermit, but before God it is a glorious thing, yea,
before that great God, who makes but folly of the wisdom of the world, and of
the folly of the cross wisdom, and who does confound the fast and pomp of
richesse by humble poverty, before him that came to euangelize the poor, who
does hear their prayers, who calls himself their father and tutour, who does
extol them in his judgment as much as they are vilipended and held abject in
the judgments of worldlings. But those that are instructed in the school of
the cross, which is folly to the Gentiles, and scandal to the Jews, but the
virtue and sapience of God to the faithful are of an other belief, they hold
the poor to be very happy, according the sentence pronounced by the proper
mouth of the son of God: but the children of the word do not understand that
problem of strong Samson, because they do not glory but in the multitude of
their richesse. I must for all that grant unto you, Monastical poverty very
easy.
that the poverty of Monastical persons has this advantage of the poverty
of Hermites and secular priests (as they call them) that it is well shrouded
from all pressing necessities within a well governed co^monaltie. You know I
speak of begging orders, for to speak of Conuentuall friars which live by
their revenues, they are not poor but in particular, in common they are
rich, and they are poor enough in as much as they have no propriety of any
thing; in this fashion then may they be said to be poor in the midst of
their richesse, and rich in the midst of their poverty. But the others
albeit they be poor not only in particular but also in common, yet their
poverty is always supported, succored and applauded, or at leastwise honored
and esteemed, in sort that their sufferances are regarded, and their wants
glorious; they are rich in honnour, yea, in the midst of their sufferances.
In stead that a poor Hermit is despised by every body, his complaints are
rejected, his wants unknown, his necessities do not appear to any but to God:
He is all alone, he is foresaken, and abandoned, having no body to comfort him,
nor to take compassion of his miseries, none to cast him into the pond wherein
he might fish some relief.

The same, I say of a priest that is in necessity, every body does laugh at
him, and in stead of succouring him they vpbraid and flood him, they chardge
him with false reprochesse and calumnies, so that he may well say with the
Psalmist: O lord the reprochesse of those that Disdain your dear Virtue of
poverty, with which you have been borne, you lived and died, making your self
needy and poor to replenish us with the inestimable richesse and treasures of
your merits; these reprochesse o Lord are fallen upon me, and confusion has
covered my face: I am Psalm. 68.
made a stranger to my own brothers; and a vacabond to the children of my
own mother.

Father, quoth Tristan, that is the thing which I find least supportable of the
infinite euells, which acco^panie poverty: for honor of all the goods which
does inuiro^ us being most precious, I would sooner suffer that they should
touch the ball of mine eye, then engage me in that point. And. I do grant unto
you that I am not yet come to that point of mortification, that I may suffer
and endure jests and contumelies no more then did the Prophet Eliseus, much
more holy and more patient then I am, that could not endure the little children
to reproach unto him that he was bald, an imperfection very light and natural.
and which as it should seem he should acknowledge, and mock the weakness of
those little souls, rather then destroy them by the imprecation and curses
wihich he fulminated against them.

My son, quoth Nicephorus, you take this example by a bad bias, and handle
the brone where it burns. The Prophet did not regard the outrage which those
children did unto him, as an injury done to his own person, he was too
humble to take it in that sort: but he did it to magnify his office, for he
would be esteemed of men as the Minister of God, and the dispencer of his
Mysteries; and because he carried the ambassade of God, and that an affront or
disgrace done to an Ambassador does hurt the honor of his Master, and
return to the prejudice of his glory that sent him, according that which is
written: He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises Luca
10. v. 16.
me. For this reason the Prophet prayed God that he would chastise those
insolent boys with exemplar punishment, to teach great men what the fire of
Gods choler would do being once kindled in dry wood, if it did consume the
green wood with so great ardour; and what do you know but the corporal evil
which he procured to them boys was cause of their spiritual good, and of the
Salvation of their souls, making them to taste of death in an age more capable
of innocence then of malice, and consequently more susceptible of Gods grace
then of his wrath? in stead that had they in an age more reepe filled up the
measure of their sins, and gone forward in their vice, they might perchance
acquire their damnation. In this sort did S. Paul deliver to Satan the body
of that fornicatour, who made the living temple of God the members of a lecher
to save his soul from everlasting damnation. O my child how young thou art yet
in the warfare of the cross, which in it self is no more dolorous then
ignominious and shameful, yea, execrable, according that saying: Cursed is
every one that ha^geth on a tree. How far you straie from the standard of him
who for us was Gal. 3.
laden with reprochesse, who did not turn his face from those that spett upon
it, nor his cheeks from those that did buffet them, nor his chinne-from those
that pulled of his beard; how far, I say, you go from him who was made a
spectacle before his eternal father, before the Angels and before men, who was
exposed to be a mocking stock to those that saw him nailed upon the cross, to
be iested by them and to nodd and shake their heads on him? How badd a disciple
would thou be to those great Apostles, those high montaignes whereon is laid
the fundation of the city of God, who departed frolike and joyful from the
great assemblies where they were flouted and contumeliously handled; for the
publicatio^ of the sacred name and holy doctrine of JESUS CHRIST? Verily you
must change your style and language, and also your thoughts and maxims, if you
persevere in that holy desire of a religious life, especially that which
regard the mortification of honor: for as I have already told you, the
Conuentuall poverty is respected and reverenced, but our poverty is mocked
and flouted.

So I believe, quoth Tristan, that you Hermites are not poor but of
necessity; and not of free will, by reason of which your poverty may not have
the glory of the voluntary which the Evangelical poverty does deserve. This
is the cause why men putt you not in the rank of regular but of secular
beggars, who are reduced to necessity by the desaster of fortune, which if
they support with patience, I believe they shall have honor befote God who
sees their hearts, but not before men. And that I do not lie unto you, I would
not esteem it an act of prudence of him that has a patrimony and makes
himself an Hermit, to renounce to that which he does possess, to make himself
afterward by begging odious and importune to the common wealth, persuading my
self that a man should drinck of the water of his own cesterne, and draw the
last drop of it, before he would go to the well or fontaine of his neighbor,
being that it is reasonable that every man live of the goods which God gave
him, or at leastwise, that he eat his bread by the sweat of his brows.

Dear sir, quoth the Hermit, the holy Apostle does say, that being a little
one he spoake according his age but coming to be more great, he had thoughts
and discourses of a higher kind. I know well by your song that you are yet in a
spiritual infancy, but when you shall be more advanced in it, you will change
those human maxims into Evangelical axioms, which are of a higher note,
and of a more excellent accent; if thou had been a Religious man thou
would learn to speak according the precepts of Religion, which consist in
the practice of the Evangelical counsels.

That is good, quoth Tristan, for those Religious men which oblige themselves
by vows, but not for you Hermites, who do nothing but what you please, who
live after your own fancy, and who are your own masters. I will reply unto
you, quoth the Hermit, that which an ancient painture said to a great lord,
who The saying of an ancient painteur.
took upon himself within his shopp to discourse of the art of painting, as
many words as you speak are so many solecismes against my art, hold your peace
or else my apprentices will mock your ignorance. It is true that your ignorance
is pardonable, considering that being a soildiour (for Tristan had a swerd at
his side) you speak of Religious affairs, even as a Churchman would speak of
matters of wars. But if thou will inrolle thy self in the holy and spiritual
warfare of Religion you will discourse more netely and more correctly of these
things. Father, quoth Tristan, I told you already that I desire much to be an
Hermit, but not a Religious man. And I, quoth Nicephorus, do answer unto you,
that that is as if you would say, I would feign be a reasonable creature but
not a man, or otherwise, I would feign be a Monk and no Religious man; or
thus, I would be a Religious man and no Monk, considering that a Monk and a
Religious A Monk and a Religious man is the same thing.
man is the same thing, as is a man and a reasonable creature. But many, says
Tristan, do not understand it so, for I have seen many Religious men which
would take it for an injury, and for a kind of disgrace to be called Monks,
and such as confess themselves to be Monks and are so named in their rules are
glad to be called Religious men, so much this holy mame of Monk, so venerable
The name Monk now out of request
in ancient time is become disagreable to the ears of this our age, and that
without doubt, through the fault of those that did profane and dishonor it by
their badd lives.

You say true, quoth the Hermit, and this imaginary distinction has been
invented of late years, and that only in France, because of the heresy which
defamed that holy name of Monk, as she did open her vnpure mouth against the
church, corrupting that which she knew, and blaspeming that which she knew
not, or was ignorant of, and lancing out quippes and tants (in which she putts
all the force of her arguments) against the most sacred mysteries of our holy
faith. And when I say that this distinction of a Monk and a Religious man is
of a new impression, and came lately out of the brains of some which ground
themselves upon imaginations distilled. I know not how, I do not say it of any
contempt of their subtilitie, but to maintain the truth, of which I have for
witnesses all those that are beyond the Alps and the Perinean montaignes, as
the Italians and Spaniards, The word religious is not used in Spain nor in
Iralie.
among which the word Religious is not known, albeit those Countries do abound
more with Monks, then does our Country of France. The Italians do call
Religious men 1. Monachi, or 1. Fratti, the Spaniards call then Los Monyes, or
los Frayles, which is as much to say, as the Monks or Friars of such an order.
As for the name Father, which the vulgar sort do give to the Regulars, who are
honored with the Sacerdotall character, and with the dignity of priesthood, it
was not attributed in the beginning of Monastical institution but to the
Superiors of every Monastery, who as such, were called Abbotts, which is as
much to say as father, and all the rest that were their children and subjects
were called brothers. And to speak as I think, if those that are married folk
have not the quality or title of Fathers and mothers but when they have issue,
and that the heavens do favor, them with the benediction to have children; so
this appellation of spiritual Fathers does Pastors only are to be called
Fathers.
not seem to appertain but to Pastors only, be they Prelates or inferior
priests, who have chardge of souls, and watch over them, as being bound to
render an account of them to God. who is the Prince of Pastors, the Bishop of
our souls, and the grand Master of the vinuersall flock of the world. Which
appellation of Father, if it be appropriated to simple priests, principally in
the administration of the Sacraments, it is because that in the dispensation of
the Divine mysteries they hold the place of the Pastors, who can not do all
things by their own proper hands and in proper person; and to speak with the
Canons, who do administer the Sacraments by the allowance and permissio^ of the
proper Pastor, leaving to our Doctors to decide who that is properly
speaking, for there is a controversy of it, which should not be decided by a
poor Hermit as I am. Nevertheless such as I am, in my youth, I made some
voyages, and principally into Italy, and made some stay and seiour in the
Court of Rome, following a great Cardinal, I say great in rank, as they are
all, and greater in blood and sanctity, as they are not all. You know the
eminency of the quality which those famous Seigneurs have, and to which the
sea Apostolic has raised them: Yet when the Popes do draw them out of
Cloisters, taking their lamps from under the bushel, and putting it upon the
candlestick, to the end that the light of their merits do lighten all the house
of God, which is the church, they never forsake the quality of brothers, or
Friars, as the mark of their regularitie, no more then they forsake the color
of the habit of the order wherein they made their profession. Their titles are
most renowned lord and right reverend father in God, if he be a Bishop, brother
such a one, Cardinal of the holy church of Rome, Bishop of such a place, or
priest or Deacon of such a title.

As for Bishops, when out of Religious Orders they are assumpted to Episcopal
dignities, for a mark of their ancient regularitie, from the observance of
which they are exe^pted passing to an other obedience and discipline, they
carry always the color, and in some sort, the form of their habit, albeit
they pass from the state of perfection to be acquired, to the state of
perfection acquired, Bishops the successors of the Apost.
as the successors of the Apostles, yet be it of humility, or of affection to
their oder, to the title of Right Reverend father in God, they add that of
brother or Friar such a Bishop, of such a church: in which is seen that they
take the name Father as they are Pastors, and the name brother as they are
Monks or Friars. Whence it may be concluded that the name Father does not
properly Of what should Friars be called fathers.
belong to Friars or Monks as such, but to Pastors and Priests who have Chardg
of souls. Add that the vulgar sort speaking of a Bishop that has been a
Religious man do say; that Bishop is a Friar or Monk, and those Prelates do not
take it to scorn to be called Monks or Friars, as do in those parts some
simple Conuentuall Friars, otherwise called Religious men.

I confess unto you, quoth Tristan, that I have as little skill in those
Monastical matters, as I have experience in that kind of life, which is
sequestered from the world; Wherefore I went still with the common opinion, which
as I perceive is a popular error. Yet cannot I well yield or assent to what you
propose, when I consider that this word Monk does signify a man who of
devotion does lead a solitary life, which Conuentuall friars do not, living
in Community, and if I may so term it, in troops within their Co^uents,
having all their exercises in common, and being almost still together, be it in
the quire, or in the Refectorie, at their Chapter, or at their corporal
labors, at their lessons and at their conferences, and also at their
conuersations with the neighbors, in sort that me thinks they have reason to
call themselves Religious men, as it were men tied together by a society
Reason why they may be called Religious me^ drawn out of the french word
rely.
of an uniform life, which makes, that albeit their companies consist of
diverse members, they are nevertheless conducted by one and the same spirit and
mind, which is the plaster and mortar by which they are tied and joined in God
the one to the other, according to that which is written of the first
Christians, that they had not amongst, them but one heart and one soul. And the
most pressing knots which bind them together, besides the knot of charity,
which bind the most perfect of them, and is the great tie of perfection, are
the solemn vows, by which those that be professed do oblige themselves to the
order in which they are incorporated, and the order in like manner does oblige
it self to such as it receives. And the are those vows, as far as I could
learn of learned and deuote Religious men, that put them Their solemn vows
putts the^ in the state of perfection.
in the state of perfection: in which are not the Anacorits who make not these
vows; at leastwise solemn, but lead a private and particular life, without
having any other society with their neighbors, but that which tie all
Christians one to an other, as children of the same church.

In the time of our Savior, says the Hermit, Martha murmured against Marie.
I see well that you have learned all those things out of the mouth of some
Conuentuall friar animated by a kind of zeal, which if it be not indiscrite
and without science, at leastwise, it is sharp, and bitter against us poor
Monks, the outcast and sweeping of the world, and who are nothing else but
voices, which by their groans and sighs do make the Ecchos of these deserts
ring and sound. But blessed by God, who in this quality made us, at leastwise
imitatours and followers of that great forerunner of the Messiah declared to
have been the greatest amongst the children of men by the proper mouth of the
son of God, and placed us upon Mary's portion, which he said to be the best,
notwithstanding the complaints and going about of Martha. There is Friars
approve nothing but their own actions.
nothing more iniust then those kind of people which approve nothing but their
own actions, and find nothing good but what they do themselves. Happy is he
that can escape their censures. In the mean time there is no charity in these
reprehensions, for that virtue is not jealous, and in those kind of people
nothing is seen but emulation, not of the best grace, as the Apostle says,
but such as tend to certain particularities, which breed partialities and
these partialities ingendreth false imaginations of devotion, which has but
the bark and not the true pith of piety: for true piety is good for all
things, and all these co^tentions are good for nothing. Charity does no idle
nor evil thing, and the effects which are engendered of those subtle
questions, of those states of perfection, of these comparisons of lives, and of
Comparisons of lives and orders are good for nothing.
the diversities of rules and Orders, are good for nothing, but very hurtful
some times to the reputation of many. Charity is not puff up with pride, nor
ambition, but humble and respective of all men, never preferring herself to
any. The heart which she does possess is never puffed up with presumption,
never lifts up it brows with scorn of any body, nor make it aspire to great
things; albeit she be herself very perfect, yet does she apprehend this great
word of perfection. She never seeks her own proper intrest nor profit, but
that of JESUS CHRIST, and in him that of the neighbor. Notwithstanding it is a
disease common enough within Cloisters, and I dare say, in a manner contagious
(not to despise those of other orders; for that had been manifest folly) but
so to esteem of the order wherein they are themselves enrolled, as if there
were none but it worthy of consideration in the church of God. It is a
Pharisaicall speech to say, I am not like other me^, especially like this
Publican. I do not say but a Monk or Friar may, yea ought, as he is tied in
body and habit to his Order, so ought he to have a particular inclination to
it, and to love it with a love of preference, and singular prefere^ce: But this
esteem should remain with in his own breast, without suffering it to pass
out of his mouth, in sort that the account which he makes of it may not
obfuscat the merits of other Regular companies. For even as all particular men,
so all societies have received of God diverse graces and favors, some this way,
and some that way, as they received so many liniaments of their visages, as do
distinguith them one from an other, and so many allurements to call them from
the world that would give themselves to piety with more perfection. But, that
they should think to exclude, either from the state of perfection, or from
pretending to perfection (which is most desirable) such as do not make
profession of that kind of Conuentuall and Monastical life, it would not be
only to offend our faith, but also to swerve from the common opinion, and fall
into absurdities which may not be admitted by any of solid judgment. For if
the state of perfection by tied to certain observations without which men may
not be perfect; or depend of an habit made after a certain fashion, and of
vows, yea solemn, more then of the practice of those heroical virtues, which
are counseled in the Gospel, who does not see that it must be concluded that
our Savior himself, the pattern Our Savior did not make the vows of
Religion.
of the mountain, and not the model only of perfection, but perfection it
self, has not been in this state, considering that we do not read that ever
he made those vows in which they put the essence of the state of perfection?
The same may be said of his holy mother, who by the imitation of her son
having perfectly observed obedience, poverty and chastity, ought necessarily
to be held very perfect, albeit we do not read in express terms, that by
vows solemnly made, she promised to practice these Counsels. But if the
church does piously believe with S. Hierosme, that by these words, which she
said to the Angel who saluted her, how shall that be which thou say, that I
shall be a mother whenas, I know no man? She does witness that she resolved
in her heart to keep her integrity, and promised to God perpetual
virginity; it is certain that this interpretation is not yet proposed to the
faithful, as an article of faith, no more then is to this present her
immaculate Conception, but well is proposed, that she was a Virgin before,
during, and after her childbirth, and in sum, that she remained always a
Virgin until her death. It would follow also that the Apostles, Apostles and
Patriaches did not make the vows of Religion.
and if we please to ascend higher, the Patriaches and Prophets, and he that
participated of the graces and qualities of the one and the other, S. John
Baptist the greatest amongst the children of men, should not have been in the
state of perfection, because we do not read that ever they made these vows in
which they put the essence of the Regular life, albeit they had the practice of
those virtues in an eminent and high degree. It would follow moreover that so
many millions of Monks which peopled the deserts, and whose actions almost
inimitable we cannot read without admiration, should not have been in this
blessed state, being that they were many years before these two great
lawmakers of Regularitie, S. Basile in the Orient, S. Basile, and S. Benet the
first authors of Regular cemmonalties.
and S. Benet in the Occident, who first established laws and rules, for the
government of those whom the desire of perfecting themselves in the
Monastical discipline made to live together in common. And then the vows of
these two rules were but simple vows, dispensable according Solemn vows
introduced but of late day as,
the will of the Superiors, the solemn vows being not introduced in the
church, but in those later ages, for a more sure bond and tie of Regular
Orders. Even so did the Popes decide in our days in consideration of the
regular Clarks of the society of JESUS, that simple vows are sufficient to
put him that makes them in the state of perfection which Regularitie does
promis, to the end that the young Nouices of this holy society, who make but
the first vows should have the consolation to believe that they are in this
honorall state. But to diue more deeply into the matter, if the vows which
give precepts to such as observe the Eua^gelicall counsels put them in the
state of perfection, how shall the Monks of S. Benet, S. Bernard and the The
vows of Benedictins, Bernardins and Carthusians.
Carthusians, which make but vows of stabilitie, and of correcting their
manners, without specifying the vows of chastity, poverty or obedience, be
in this state of perfection? I know that the school Doctors do answer, that
the promises of these three Counsels are implicit, as they speak, contained
in the two vows aforesaid. But if so be, that in a contract there is no more
force, according the proverb, then such as men put in it, and that words are
worth no more then as they sound, how shall the state of perfection be amongst
the Benedictins, the Carthusians and the Bernardins? We may say, that properly
speaking, that happy state is not descended from heaven but since the
Conuentuall Friars are divided into more branches then ever Xerxes divided the
river Gindes, and that as many as will not put themselves within their Arc
shall remain in the Deluge of imperfection. I know well they will reply, that
for calling themselves Regulars they do not hold that all other Christians are
irregular, that for calling themselves brothers, they do not separat themselves
from the Fraternity of Christianity, nor do not take from the laity that
title which the In the primitive Church all Christians were called brothers.
first Christians in the primitive Church gave to themselves, that for calling
themselves Religious they do not hold other men to be irreligious and impious,
that for being enrolled in particular Orders, they do not hold that other
children of the Church do live in disorder; but that their vows putting them
in a state which does oblige them to tend to a higher perfection, then that of
the common sort, they have reason to think that they are in the state of
perfection. To which I answer, that the state of perfection is that, which
approach nearest to the imitation of the son of God, of his most holy mother,
and of the holy Apostles, and that this imitation consisting rather in the
practice of the Evangelical Counsels then in the vows of them, that such as
are most advanced in those virtues are most perfect, and in a more perfect
estate then those that only make vows of them, and not practice them. And if
they will say that a vow does oblige him that makes it, to embrace also the
practice of it, and to run in that sort, as the Apostle says, that he may
arrive to the butt of perfection; I will reply that oftentimes it had been
better not to have vowed, then after vowing to perform so ill their promise,
as many do, for they may not mock God, but in the end they shall be punished
for it: and the punishment which he takes is so much the more severe that it
comes but slow. But they will say, that a vow added to the practice of the
Counsels has the same advantage that fair apparel, and precious stones
have being added to an excellent beauty, which is never so excessive in it
own nature but the art of garments does always bring it more luster; so a vow
besides the grace which it gives to a man, gives him also a certain stablenesse
and firmness, when he sees himself engaged by these holy bo^ds to the
service of God, from which he may not withdraw himself without incurring, or
as S. Paul says, without acquiring his damnation. And I confess so much,
that a vow is a most holy and Religious action, and that it is a strong motive,
and a pressing sting to make a man run the race of perfection: but for a man to
Many did practice the Evangelical virtues as well without vows as with
vows.
deny also that many men did as perfectly practice these virtues without
vows, it would be to draw upon his own back the examples, which we have
already produced of our Savior, of his holy mother, of the Apostles,
Patriarchs, Prophets, and of the first Christians, who were so perfect without
that vow being before the fundation of Monachisme and Conuentuall life.
Witness that ancient Monk, who having consumed many years to perfect
himself in the exercise of the Evangelical Counsels, had revelation that the
Emperor Theodosius was equal to Theodosius perfect without vovv.
him in merit, albeit according the Rule of Regulars he was not in the state of
their perfection: but he was a good Prince in the perfection of his own estat,
and whosoever is so, according my simple judgment may be said to be in the
state of perfection. And that which does fortify me in this thought is, that I
do not find that the Scripture does attribute perfection but to the practice of
poverty where it says: If thou vvilt Matt. 19. v. 21.
be perfect, go, sell the things that thou have, and give to the poor, and
come, follovv me. And S. Peter saying to our Savior that he had executed the
counsel which he gave to him and to his Condisciples, does not speak of any
vow, but of the effect of it by these words: Behold we have left all tbings,
and have follovved thee: what therefore shall we have? To whom for reward our
Savior did promis a hundred fold in this world, and everlasting glory in the
other. I know well that a vow does oblige a man to the practice of it, and also
that it does deprive a man of all propriety, leaving him nothing but the
simple use of things necessary, according the saying of the Apostle: Having
food, and vvhervvith to be 1. Tim. 6.
covered, with these we are content. And also I grant that practice made in
virtue of a vow, is like unto trees graffed, whose fruict are more sweet, and
sauorous, then that of other trees, but I know also, that as he that vow and
effect it, shall be much rewarded, so he that does not execute what he
promises shall be doubly punished for having engaged himself in a combat
which did not succeed with him, or to speak with the Apostle, for having
broken his word. And he that follows the Counselles without obligation, if he
be but simply rewarded, he is not at all punished when he fails, in sort that
it is written: Let him take it that can, he that imbraceth it does well, and
he that does not, does not ill, in which consists the difference between
Counselles and precepts. And meditating with my self upon this subject, I did
often admeere, how it happened that perfection was attributed in express terms
to poverty, and not to chastity, nor to obedience, considering that these two
last virtues seem to be so much the more excellent, by how much their subject
and object does excel that of poverty: for there is no doubt among men of
judgment, but that corporal goods, which are the pleasures, to which men
renounce by chastity, and the goods of the soul, to which men bidd farewell
by renouncing themselves and their proper wills, are of far greater
esteemation and worth then are the goods of fortune, whereof men deprive
themselves by poverty: for who will deny that the soul is more precious then
meat, and the body more worth then it apparel without he contradict, not
only the Scripture but also common sens? But if perfection consist in following
our Savior, does not he say? He that will fallo vv me let him renounce Luca
9. v. 23.
himself, take up his cross and follo vv me? And who is he that would not
easier quitt what he does possess then himself? toothe for toothe, and eye for
eye, says Job, will man give in counterchange of his soul, whose Sacrifice is
made by obedience, obedience, which is better then all the Sacrifices of body
and goods? That the practice of chastity is a most perfect thing, it is very
evident by that which the wisman says: That there is no price which can
equalla chaste Sap. 4.
and continent soul. O what a fair and excellent thing is, a generation full
of purity! And he that is more then Solomon, speaking of those voluntary
Eunuchs who gelded themselves that they might the easier aspire to heaven,
does not he say: That fevv Matthew. 19 v. 11.
does understand, and fewer does exercise this word, showing by the raritie
of the practice the excellence of this virtue? In like manner, if I durst say
so, it seems that the vow and exercise of poverty which is made out of a
Commonaltie (which otherwise A vovv of poverty made out of a Commonaltie what
it.
has great merit, because of the obedience which double the goodness of the
action by the force of her influence) is more complete, as she is more
difficile and hard, then that which is made within a society, where the one
carries the burden of the other, where they encourage and comfort one an
other, and to speak with the Scripure, where the one does heat the other in
devotion, and succor his brother in his necessity by a mutual aid; in
stead that a solitary Monk, who sells all that he has, and distribute it in
alms, and renounce all that he had, or might pretend in the world, to follow
our Savior in that nakedness, remaining with this proppe without any other
proppe but the eternal providence, does exercise more according the letter (I
cannot tell what he does according the Spirit) the Counsel of poverty after
the manner that it is laid down in the Gospel, then the other, where it is
said, that a man must quitt all that he has and follow the son of God in
this absolute nuditie, which has no proppe in earth, and makes a man cast all
his thoughts on God. And who does not see that he who renounceth his
patrimony, and puts himself into a Monastery well rented, or to a Convent of
begging friars, which probably has her maintenance at the gate for demanding
it; does not often times pass from a little and poor secular family into a
rich and well supported regular Monastery, where he is more assured that he
shall want nothing that is necessary for his maintenance, then if he had
remained in the world, where such as are most favored by fortune, and that are
most advanced in honors The state of fauorits.
and richesse are subject to overthrows, to great falls, and to strange
desasters, and are like unto those false stars which fall and never get up
again? In one word, it is very clear to such as have eyes, that as
Conuentuall poverty has a luster and an advantage because of the vow of it,
so is she also well rampared against the assaults of all misfortune, well
refresched by the help of many assistances, though those many times may be more
cerimonious then compassionat. True poverty is that which endure with patience
True poverty what is it.
the want of things necessary; and to desire to have the glory of this virtue
without feeling the other points of necessity, it is to desire triumph and
victory without combat, laurel and palm crowns without putting himself to
any hazard. Every body knows that Ananias and Saphira for having ambitiouslie
desired the honor to seem poor like other Christians, who did cast all their
goods without reserving any thing, at the feet of the Apostles, were stricken
with the anatheme of death by the Spirit of God passing out of the mouth of
the Prince of the (...). I know that the subtilitie (...) hoole divinity,
where the virtues, are refined as within a cruset, has found out a number of
fair reasons to color with a lively, and precious enamel the Conuentuall
poverty, which, when all is said, does consist in disappropriating a man of
the possession of the goods whereof he retains the usage: but it happe^s often
that these determinations so distilled, do ressemble those quintessens which
turn into vapors as soon as they see the air. For in No man in this world
has but the use of things.
fine who in this world can say that he is proprietaire of any thing,
considering that life it self, without which all other goods, mouable and
immouable are unprofitable, is not given to us but in vsufruict, and not in
propriety? And to say that a man does renounce to his life, but keeps only
the use of it, is it not to say that he quits that which he keeps, seeing that
life as well as richesse does not consist but in usage?

By this reconing Princes (...) lords who are inglutted in (...) and wealth
over head and shoulders should be without vow in the state of poverty, seeing
that like unto the Conuentuall friars they have but the use of their treasures,
and that they do not handle it but by the hands of their treasoriers, and such
other officers; and the greatest kings of the earth what have they but their
living in this world, and the use of the same sun and the same elements which
the simplest Countryma^ does participat equally with them? Yet for all that
the regular Doctors do not grant unto them to be in the state of perfection,
albeit that in the Scripture the sovereign powers of the earth are putt in a
state of sublimitie. O how the first Monks proceeded after an other fashion, if
not in vow, at leastwise in the practice of poverty, for after having sold and
distributed to the poor their patrimony, they did cast themselves into the
deserts, flying from the world as well in body as in heart and mind, and there
afflicted, necessitous and miserable, to use Apostolik terms, they retired
themselves into caves and holes within the earth, imitating our Savior, who
during his life had not a place to put in his head, having no house of his
own, no Cloister, no cell, no Convent nor any other thing, which he might call
his own, but the cross, which he carried upon his shoulders to Mont Caluaire.
Alas! when shall that happy time come, in which the Monks, Anacorites and
friars will resuscitat in themselves the Spirit of that great Apostle, which
may induce them to gain their living by the labors of their hands, and to
eat their bread with ashes, by the sweat of their brows, without molesting
Monks and friars should rather work for their living then beg
this man or that man, some times by begging of alms from door to door, some
times importunatlie demanding fundations for their Monasteries, and some times
taking dowries, as they do in Nunries; and to speak in sacred terms, and
therefore irreprehensible, making lucre of piety and busying the simpler sort
to Titi 1. v. 12.
draw profit to themselves and doing like the liver, which does not become
fatt, but by the leanness of other members? I have not been a burden Act. 20.
to any man, says S. Paul glorifying 1. Cor. 4.
himsef in God, but teaching, preaching and laboring, I have by 1. These. 2.
the work of my hands provided what 1. Cor. 9.
was needful for me. So did, so lived these ancient Anacoretes, who made
basketts and other small works which they carried to the market to be sold, to
nourrish themselves with the price of them, and to give the surplus to the
poor. So did also the ancient Regulars, as may be easelie seen in Ancient
regulars lived by their labor.
the Chronicles of the Orders, who lived in the service of God, and in the
observance of their rules, tilling the earth, digging and laboring the
vine-yards, gayning their daily wages during the harvest and the ventage, and
bringing all to the co^monaltie, without reserving any thing to themselves in
particular, under pain of excommunication, and to be buried, if they were
found dying, possessours of any thing whatsoever, in the sepulchers of beasts*
cutting the woods, drying up marrish grounds, playing the joyners, and the
carpenters, building of houses, keeping of cattle and doing all other Country
husbandry: the weaker sort giving themselves to those arts which are less
painful, as to play the taylours, the paintures, working, of wool, and
coppying of books, before printing became so common. In this sort every one
did co^tribut his pain without any other reward to himself, but the abondance
which is promised in heaven. The millions of Monks which lived in Monasteries
did infinite good to the neighbors about them, in steed of incommodating and
oppressing them as now some do, they made themselves by their labourious
industries the Fathers of the poor, being themselves poor in all respects. I
do not intend by this to blame the revenues of the church (knowing that all
extremities are vicious and incline to error) so they be moderat: for if
moderation in all things is to be esteemed, in this kind it is not only praise
worthy, but in some sort necessary, the experience of so many ages making us
to see and feel that excess does carry men to abuses and licentiousness,
that I say no worse; and as S. Bernard says, that if so be devotion does
engender richesse, these bad daughters when they become great does suffocat and
stifle their mother, and induce her to sin, as Loath that was so holy was
induced by his own daughters. Much less do I intend to blame mendicitie or
begging, considering that my self does make profession of it, and knowing that
it has been devoutly permitted in the church, and that such as cried against
the begging Orders of S. Francis and S. Dominick when they were newly
instituted, were constrained to embrace the silence which was imposed to them
by the sovereign Bishop the Pope. But it is to be wished, that this me^dicitie
should not be used but to supply the default of manuel labor, when Begging is
to be used when men cannot get their living by their labor.
after a diligent employ they should find themselves short of means to nourish
the Commonaltie: for in that case they might use the priuiledg of the law of
nature, which permit every man to ask his living when he cannot labor for
it. But to reduce that to a form or fashion, which is ordained by the rules of
the Monastery touching corporal labor, toward the enclosures of gardens,
which they till rather, for the health and pleasure of particular persons, then
for the profit and utility of the house, and rather to have flowers to deck
and adorn the altars then to have fruict to putt upon the tables; is in my
opinion to make a delicat Sabath at the chardges of the common wealth, whom it
concerns that every body labor, and make use and profit of his talent, and
industry, in manuring the vigneyard, that is to say, in following the vocation
which fell to his lot, according the line of divine distribution. The Emperor
Diocletian having putt of The Emperor Diocletia^ did work
the Empire, took great pains to trim and dress his little garden, passing
sweetly his time in the innocent employ of tilling the ground, and after that
fashion he saw himself as rich in his poverty, as before being in his
Imperial dignity, he found himself poor in the midst of his richesse,
having not always whereby to recompense worthelie such as served him well, nor
to pay his armies. It is not that in this occasion, I would justify my self,
considering that I was conceived in iniquity, and that I am all rotten with
vicious cicatrices, and much less would I prefer my self to those whose shoe
latchets, I am not worthy to loose. But I may assure you, that I do not beg in
these quarters but in as much as my infirmities do take from my arms the pouer
to travail, having seen my self sometimes of that force and vigor, that I
had by my own industry the means, not only to intertaine my self without
chardging any other, but also to intertaine others that came to visit this
cell. And if now necessity does constrain me to have recours sometimes to the
charity of those to whom, I gain heaven through the good which they do unto
me, my age and my weakness does plead my cause before their piety, and make
them harken to my petition.

Here Tristan, as in a place which to him seemed very proper to offer his goods
to Nicephorus, breaking the course of his long discourse; Father, says he, the
providence of God has conducted me hither, and to speak otherwise, has lead
me by the hand of his will, to draw you out of all pain, and your old years
from care and labor. I have by the grace of God abondantly to maintain you
without suffocating your Spirit by bodily labor, and putting your self to
trouble to search your living. Sir, quoth the Hermit, if I had not known in
your face your ingenuitie, and the sincerity of your intention in the offer
which you make unto me, I would make you the same answer which our Savior
made to S. Peeter, who would feign dissuade him from going to suffer to
Jerusalem whereof he heard him speak to Moses and Elias upon mont Thabor:
Retire from me Satan. What? you are then come hither to tempt me to descend
from the cross of holy poverty, in which I desire to die, in the nuditie and
nakedness of my Savior. Ha! not so Sir, nothing shall separat me if I can
from the charity of JESUS CHRIST, not death nor life, not hunger, not cold,
not nuditie, not poverty nor want, not me^ nor Angels, not the powers of the
earth nor that of hell, not the time past, nor the time present, nor the time
to come: For I am certain with the help of his grace to remain constant in my
resolution, and never to relent in any one point of it: I mean to die poor
with him that being rich made himself poor for our sakes, to the end to
inriche us by his want. Labor taken for him is no labor, for he made the yoke
of his cross so sweet and easy by the oil of his blood which is baulme
shedd for us, that his burden is rather a solagement then a chardge,
resembling the feathers of birds which lift them up to the air in steed of
waighing them down to the earth. There is no pain where there is love, or if
there be any, it is but a dear and desirable pain; for to labor for that
which a man loves, of all delices it is the sweetest. And if you think that
manuel labor does dissipat the Spirits (that which some delicat fellows
said, unworthy members of a head all torn with thorns) co^trarywise, I hold
that it does rather fortify it, witness the Apostle 2 Cor. 12. v. 10.
saying, that his Spirit was then most vigorours and strong when his body was
ouercommed and weakened by infirmities, or by voluntary mortifications; and I
fear much that such as say that manuel labor might cause the dissipation of
their Spirit do apprehe^d more the dissipation of their bodies, and as S. Paul
says, the dissipation of this machine and terrestrial habitatio^ which
inuirone the soul. For eue^ as the nobility which in peace time do reserve
for themselves sloth and idleness, and in war time the exercise of arms. In
like manner it seems that these fathers more conte^platiue then active do
confine themselves to the singing of Psalms, as if it were a function very
laborious to sing, or that it had been the harp of David to chase away the
Devils of vice by her melody, which possess sinners, or that it had the
force of the Sacerdotall tro^petts, at whose sound did fall the walls of
Hiericho, or of the hands of Moses which gave victory to the children of
Israel against Amalec. Certes, if by the effects we may judge of the vigor
and force of the cause, we may well say of their Congregations that which the
sacred Cantique does say of the Sulamite, what will you see in her but Quires
of combattants and squadrons of Choristers? It is there they take that sweet
and pleasant sleep upon the breast of our Savior, from which, no less then
the Amant and lover of the same spouse would they be drawn or waked, until it
please themselves to pass from the ease and contentment of this sacred
contemplation to the action, and from the sweet attentio^ of Marie to the
tumultuous labors of Martha; in the mean time the little ones demand bread,
and few do break it unto them; the neighbors do groan and wail, and few do
succor them: many are wounded upon the way of Hiericho and there are but few
Samaritans that would solace Joan. 4. v. 34.
and comfort them. The Countries are white to harvest, and there are but few
haruest-men: the vigne-yard is desert and untilled, and there are but few
venteners, much work and few workmen. The three principal functions of an
Ecclesiastical person.


Of the three principal functio^s of the Ecclesiastical state, which are to
preach, to administer the Sacraments, and to pray, be it in particular
mentally, or vocally; be it in public by singing of the public office, the
greatest part of the friars took this last, which is the most speciouse and
less profitable, for the lot of their inheritance, and for their imployme^t
saying with the Psalmist: I will sing your justices o lord, in this sejour of
my pilgrimage. And in effect, when all shall be well counted, for three or
four which announce to the people the word of God, which is the bread of life
and understanding, for the administration of which the Apostles themselves did
cease from distributing the sacred communion, which the holy text does call to
serve to the tables, there are fifty or three scoare in great Conuents deputed
only for the Quire, and fifteen or twenty lay brothers tied to the
domestical functions. But perchance they will say that they employ the Friars
according the talents which they received from God, it being very reasonable
that in the Church which is a terrestrial Paradis, the trees do bear fruict
according their kind, and that men do work according their qualities, and that
the tallent of preaching or of helping souls, which require great science and
prudence in discerning of Spirits, being given but to a few, there are many
more that are capable of the Quire then of the chair. To which I answer that
such as are proper for the Quire cannot be improper for manuel labor, and that
percha^ce the weal public would be as much content and solaged by their
labor as by their singing. It is not that I call in doubt the excellency of
prayer, and that I do not know that men may say of her what that ancient
painteur said of his own work, that she labors for the eternity, and that
she has this advantage over mechanical things, that these being visible are
consequently te^porall as the Apostle says, and that the other which is
invisible, as that of prayer; is eternal. But if in this age men esteem more
of sinsible the^ of spiritual things, none being in it which does not prefer
almesdeeds to prayer, and also to fasting; it may be said that manuell labor
which does necessarily nourishe a poor man, as he is, that work of
necessity, shall not be less estimable then prayer, and that the work of
those hands whereof the great Apostle did glorify himself, shall not be less
estimed then was his rauishment to the third heaven, a favor which served him
rather for recompense then for merit. Hence is it, that he does name himself in
the one and not in the other, as having some part in the one and none in the
other, which arrived to him by a gratuit grace, such as revelation is, and the
gift of Prophecy. By reason of which the Psalmist does call happy, not those
that are euerie-day in ecstasy, but those that maintain themselves by the
sweat of their brows.

Peradventure some will say that the particular office of Monks, according The
particular office of a Monk.
S. Hierome, is to weep and to pray, and that the functions to preach and to
administer the Sacraments are not for them but in way of supererogation, that
they might not fall into the reproach which is made in the Gospel to the
priest and Leuite, who did not succor him that was left for dead by the
thieves that thought to murder him in the high way. But seeing that the
difference which men put between Monks and Religious men, is drawn from that,
that Monks do not apply themselves, or ought not to apply themselves by their
institution but to the solitary and pure contemplative life, and that the
Religious do not apply themselves to prayer only, but also to co^templation,
making as our Savior and the Apostles did, a kind of life called a mixed life,
of action and contemplation, by which, as by Jacobs ladder, some times they
lift themselves up to God by prayer, sometimes they descend toward the
neighbor by the works of mercy; a life which the scholasticall divinity,
grounded upon great reasons, esteems the most perfect; it should follow that
such as call themselves Religious men, and that obtained of the sovereign
Bishop so many exemptio^s and privileges, that they might exercise Clericall
or Ecclesiastical functions for the service of souls, should attend more to
sow the sacred word, and to administer the Sacraments, then to the exercise of
the Quire, which is more convenient for Monks then for them. And seeing that
none does enter their Orders, but by the choice and trial which they make of
such as present themselves to them, they should not receive any but such as
should have the talents necessary for the functions of the mixed life, which
they say, as the most perfect, to be conformable to their institution, and to
their state of perfection. In this manner the commonwealth should be more
solaged by their labors then by their clamours; for to tell no lie, it
seems, as said great S. Charles of his own time, that as the Church of this
our age tormented by Libertins and Heretics, has more need of good Pastors
then of good Religious The church has more need of good Pastors then of good
Religious men.
men, so has she more need among Religious men of those that are people of
action, then of singers and contemplatiues, and of Champions then of
Choristers: for albeit Marie choosed the best part for her, it is not for all
that the best always for the neighbor, and albeit it is the most eminent
part, yet is it not the most profitable. And if they should allege Moses
praying, and Iosue with so many thousands Israelites fighting, the objection
will carry it own answer with it self, seeing that for one that lift up his
hands praying, thousands of others do exercise their hands against the enemies.
Which is contrary with the Regulars, who for a hundred that sing in the Quire
have not two that take pains to descend to the succor of the neighbor and of
the church, forsaking the mountain of prayer, a fatt mountain, a mountain of
cream, a mountain all of honny, where it pleases them to remain with God in
peace, rather then in war among the incombrances which are found in the
Regulars would not take the pains that Pastors do.
tabernacles of seculars and Pastors. Even so some sinners who cannot draw
themselves from their badd habitudes, and who deferr their conversion till the
time of their death do make a badd buckler of the example of the good thief,
who converted himself upon the cross, and the very same day entered into
Paradis according the promis of our Savior: because, that for that one man
that was saved in that point, thousands and thousands are lost and damned, it
being very reasonable says S. Austin, that he does forget himself dying, who
living did not remember to return to God. Even so the Spaniards in their
Solemnities, because that David danced once before the Arc by an excess of
piety, and by an extraordinary motion of the holy Ghost, would not think to
make a good procession if there were not dancers in it.

That is the same thing, quoth Tristan, which some Religious men said to me, to
whom I did communicate the dessigne which I had to retire my self to an
Hermitage; that Monks were not good but for themselves, but Religious men are
necessary for the Christian common wealth, which is the church. To which
Nicephorus replied, if by Monks they understand the Hermites which apply
themselves soly and simply to contemplation, and of which men call Anacorites,
they have some appearance of reason, but if to preach, to catechize, to visit
the sick, to attend to the conversion of the strayed, to administer the
Sacraments of penance and the Eucharist, and to do all things according the
command of the Ordinary, and under the employ of the Pastors, do make a
Religious man, many Hermites will be found, which will be no more Monks, but
Religious men, and many Conuentuall Friars, which do nothing of all these
things, shall be no Religious men but Mo^ks. And to show unto you that it is
not in that point that this blessed distinction of a Monk and a Religious man
does consist; But in I know not what imagination, which I conceive as little as
I do the Ideas of Plato, and the atoms of Dimocrites; The Benedictins, the
Bernardins, the Celestins, the Fueillantins, and those of the Order of S.
Basile, to whom they give the name of Monks, as being attributed to them by
their rules, do not they live in Conuents, do not they preach, do not they
teach the Christian doctrine, do not they administer the Sacraments in virtue
of so many indults and so many immunities, and Bulls as they have from the Sea
Apostolic? in sort as I do not see, neither in their lives, nor in their
Monks do not differ from Conuentuall Friars.
functions in what they differ from the Conuentuall Friars who call themselves
Religious men. The difference is not in mendicitie for there are Conuentuall
Friars which call themselves Religious men who are not beggars: it is not in
abstinence from meat, for in that the Minimes are more austere then the
Benedictins or Celestins, yea, or the Carthusia^s themselves: it is not in
mendicitie and abstinence together, for in that the Reformed Dominicans and the
bare The Reformed Dominica^s differ much from the Mitigate.
footed Carmelits are admirable in abstayning from the use of flesche, they
living but by alms. And to say what I think, I see so little difference,
between those whom they call Monks above named, and the Conuentuall Friars be
they beggars, or not beggars, shodd or not shodd, that I think men may call
Monks Religious men by as just a title, as they call Religious men Monks; and I
must grant unto you that, I am not so subtle nor so penetratiue as he that
found seventeen essential differences between the habit of the Capucins and
that of the Tertiarians which men call Regular Penitens of the third order
Seue^tin^ essential differences found betvveene the habit of the Capucins and
that of the Tiertiarians.
of S. Francis of strict Observance. To say that the difference does consist in
the vows, I see no appearance of it, because the three essential vows of
Religion, which are the three Evangelical consells, are common to all orders
as well Monks as Religious men. In this sort I do not see that the name Monk
may be properly attributed to any but to the Carthusians, to the Friars of the
Congregation of Camaldoli, and to some shutt up Anacoretes, because of their
silence, of their enclosure, and of their solitariness, which interdicting
them the commerce of men, does also take from them all Clericall functions, for
which the Conuentuall Friars called themselves Religious men. And for the word
Regular, it is certain that as many as make profession of any rule do assume
it to themselves, as do these new Congregations of Clearkes which are called
Regulars to the imitation of the Chanon Regulars which live under the rule of
S. Austin, Whereof I remember being in Rome, which is the nurcerie of all these
Orders as being the matrice of the Church, to have observed seven sorts,
without counting the priests of the Oratorie, Seue^sorts of Clekes Regulars
called of our lady of the white-well, or of Vallicelles, instituted by saint
Philip Nerio Florentin, and the Oblats of S. Ambrose, founded by S. Charles,
and the priests of the Oratorie of JESUS, whose Congregation sprung up in
France are almost all Frenchmen, power out a sweet odoure of sainctitie and
virtue throught all the French Church, and begins to extend it branches, like a
vigne planted near the Olives of grace, to foreign Countries.

Is it possible, quoth Tristan, that there are so many sorts of Regular
Clearks, whereas there are but four sorts of begging Orders? I told you that I
observed seven several institutions of them while I was in Italy, and I know
not but since there is some other new fashion sprung up. If my memory does not
fail me, I believe I shall name them well yet. The Theatins are the first for
the date of the time, instituted by the right Reverend Father in God John
Peeter Carraffe Bishop of Thiette, who renounced his Bishopric, to lead a kind
of life truly Apostolical, with some priests which did associate themselves
to him, renouncing all things as well in common as in particular, adding this
point to the strict poverty of begging Orders, that albeit they live only by
alms, yet do they never beg A strange institution of the Theatins.
neither by themselves nor by any interposed persons, casting all their
thoughts upon the paternall care of the providence of God concerning their
maintenance, and putting in practice according the litterall sens this
Evangelical Counsel, not to think of to morrow, nor of that which is
necessary for food or clothing, imitating therein the Lyllis of the fields,
and the birds of the air, which God does cloathe and feed without that they
spinne or labor themselves for it. This Bishop, institutour of this holy
Congregation, after having illuminated and seasoned all the Court of Rome with
the light and salt of his Doctrine, and of his good life, was elevated from the
preambular dignity of Cardinal to that of the sovereign Bishop, possessing
the Sea Apostolic under the name of Paul the third. The vulgar sort named
these Regular Clerks Theatins, in steed of calling them Thietins, as who would
say, the Clerks of the Institution of the Bishop of Thiette. They have many
houses in Italy, and I know not if they exte^d themselves elsewhere, this much
I know, that as yet we have not seen of them in France, where it is to be
thought they should be ill addressed if they would not ask or beg,
considering that such as do beg do often find their alms very short, such is
the humor of our Nation, which have their hands open for vain expenses and
prodigalities, and shutt up to just and holy liberalities, by which does
appear that the end of the world will come by that way seeing charity is
grown so cold in it. Which is not in Italy, where men believe more firmly
then we do, that sin is redeemed by almesdeeds, and that by this lauor or
font all their filth and ordure are cleansed. The second institution of Regular
Clearkes is that of the priests of the society of JESUS, of which, as that
ancient writer said of the magnifice^ce of Rome, it is better say nothing then
say little, being sufficient that this holy society is praised by the mouth of
the holy Counsel of Trent, which is that of the holy Ghost, saying that their
institution is praise worthy. The Barnabites does make the third institution;
this Order took it origin in Millan, the ordinary reside^ce of their
General, and they are so called, because that the first Church where they did
assemble together was called of saint Barnabe, even as the Friars Preachers of
the Order of saint Dominick are called Iacobins in Paris, because of a
Chapel of S. Iake, otherwise James where they first loadged. The Clerks
Mineurs, which are of the institution of Pope Sixtus V. who was of the Order of
the Friars Mineurs, do make the fourth sort. The fifth is of the Sommasques, a
name somewhat strange to such as do not know the origin of it, which is, that
this Congregation of Regular Clearkes was instituted by a gentilman of Venise
in the march of Treuisane, in a bourg called Sommascha. So that as the
Chartreux or Carthusians were so called of the place called Chartreuse, where
they made their first aboade, and where is the Capital house of their Order,
as the Cluniacenses were called of the town Clugny, the Cistercienses of
Cisteaux, Camaldulenses of Camaldoli, even so did the Sommasques receive their
nomination from the place where they were first established. These do extend
themselves in Italy and in France under the title of Fathers of the Christian
Doctrine whose houses are renowned in Prouance, Languedoc and Guenne. The Sixth
institution is of Regular Clearks surnamed the Infirmes, because their chardg
is, to serve the sick, be it within the public Hospitalls or in private houses,
and also to succor such as are most miserable and forsaken. The seventh is
that of the Regular Clerks of the mother of God, called the Congregation of the
priests of Lucques, whereof Father Franciotti, who wrote so deuotely, has been
one of the principal pillars.

And that which is admirable in this variety of institutions is, that they are
all particular rules, which level at some particular mark; the Theatins do
apply themselves to study and to lead a retired life; the Jesuits to
instruict youth; the Barnabites to the Quire and to hear Confessions; the
Clearks Mineurs to the rigor and austeritie of mortifications; the So^masques
to keep S. and maintain forsaken Children, and Orphans, and to teach the
Christian Doctrine; The Clearks of the infirm to look to the sick, and the
Clearkes of the mother of God, to direct deuote people to spiritual things.
This notwithstanding they have all but the self same habit, which is that we
see the Jesuits carry. All of them make profession of a certain rule with the
solemn vows, and call themselves Religious men, differing in this from the
Conuentuall Friars, that these under different habits do make but the self same
thing, and the other do make different functions under a like habit. In sort
that the one and the other coming to the succor of the Pastors do exercise
All those Regular Orders came to succor the Pastors.
Clericall functions, which heretofore was not affected or ordained but for the
priests of the Ecclesiastical Clergy, some of them may be called Religious
Clearks, others Clearks Religious, and all of them are comprehended under the
Name of Regulars. Besides, all the Chanons, which live under the rule of saint
Augustine, who are very many, do call themselves Clearkes Regulars, as those of
the Order of saint Anthony, of saint Ruf, of Val de Choux, of Val des
Escoliers, the Trinitarians, the Friars de la Mercy, the Hieromites, the
Dominicans, and so many other Military Orders which have this rule for the
line of their direction and observance.

Why do you put the Dominicans, says Tristan, among the Chanons, or Regular
Clearks, whereas they are one of the four begging Orders? If you number, quoth
the Hermit, the begging Orders according their rules there are but three sorts
of them, for the Dominicans and the Austin Friars have but the self same rule,
albeit their habits and constitutions do differ; the Friars Mineurs have the
rule of S. Francis, and the Carmelits that of saint Basile, or of the
Patriarche Albertus. But if you take them according their Congregations, the
begging Orders do far exceed the number of four; Of the rule of S. Francis
there are ten sorts.
the only rule of saint Francis does fournish ten sorts of them: The
Cordeliers called Obseruantins; the Conuentualls called the great Friars, which
beg almost every where, albeit they may have rents; the Recolects of strict
Observance, the Capucins, the Becquins, the Tertiarians; the Religious women of
S. Clare, who has a particular rule framed by S. Francis, which are subdivided
into Damianists and Vrbanists, besides the Capucin women and the Hospitalists of
saint Francis, in sort that men may say the ten begging Orders of Francis. Add
to this the Dominicans, as well the Mitigated as the Reformed; the Friars
Hermites of saint Austins Order as well the Mitigated as the Reformed, the
shodd as the vnshodd: In like manner the Carmelits as well the Mitigated, and
the vnshodd of the reformation of S. Teresa, as the Reformed shodd; the Friars
Hospitalists of the Charity instituted by S. John de Dieu; the Iesuates
instituted by saint John Colomban; the Minimes, which are put among the
begging Orders, as are also the professed Jesuits of the last vow, the
Theatins, the Clearks Mineurs, the Clearks of the Infirm, the Friars de la
Mort, and the most part of the Hermites; besides many others which are seen in
Italy begging after diverse manners, as those that are called Fate ben Fratelli,
and those that cry asking alms: Faciamo been mentre che hauemo tempo, and
such like, in sort that according the count which we have now made, not
speaking of that whereof we are ignorant, we should not say the four but the
nine and twenty Mendicant Orders. To which if you will add such as live by
rents and fundations, you shall find a little army of Regulars, of which men
may say what Jacob said of the Angels, these are the squadrons of the God of
battles. Now to know among so many people, who are they whom we may call Monks
without offending them, and who are to be called Religious men, it is no small
matter, and to do it without danger of mistaking, a man must know many
particularities and many histories, which is cause that men, to eschew all
those formalities, do call all Regulars Religious men, and that the rather that
all true Mo^ks are very glad to be so called, and that such as hold themselves
to be Religious men, do take it for an outrage and inciuilitie, when men call
them Mo^ks. Which make me call to mind our gentilwomen who are very glad when
men through error do call them Dames, and our grand-Dames who could not endure
that men should call them Gentilwomen, no more then those priests who will not
have themselves called Clearks. In what then, replied Tristan, does consist
this state of perfection of which all Monastical and Conuentuall persons,
Monks or Religious men, call them as you please, do make so great account, and
from which they say you Hermites are so far, as you can never pretend it?

For my part, quoth Nicephorus, I believe they are as well grounded in the
possession of the state of perfection, as they are in the title of Religious
men. Those that are called in the Acts of the Apostles, Religious men, were
deuote persons in the primitive Church, which were neither Monks nor Regulars;
and all Christians which live according the precepts of the Gospel, and of
the Catholic Religion, established by JESUS CHRIST seems to me to have right
to call themselves Religious All good Christians may be called Religious men.
men, though they be lay and married men, and what other trade they be of. And
that it is so, who does not know that S. Francis wrote a third Rule of
penance, in which all faithful people of what sex or condition soever they be
may be enrolled, and carry the quality of Religious men of the third Order of
this Seraphicall Father? Yea but, replied Tristan, those Religious men are not
in the state of perfection, as the others are which make the three vows
conformable to the Evangelical Counsels: for me thinks the said Fathers said
to me, that it is in that that this state of perfection does consist, from
which the Hermits are excluded. At this word excluded, the blood mounted to the
Hermits face, and colored it, if not for spite and cholar, at leastwise for
confusion and emotion. This then made him reply in this sort: if we be
excluded, it is with good company, for besides that we do not read, as I said
already, that our Savior, his holy mother, and the Apostles ever made the
said vows, well we read that they practiced the holy vertus counseled in
the Gospel; and by this practice they arrived both to the perfection of their
estate, and to te state of an eminent perfection; they must exclude with us all
the Chanons of the Cathedral and Collegiall Churches, all the Pastors and
venerable Priests which are in the Church and have no other rule but the rule
of rules which is the holy Gospel, to the line and square of which all other
rules should be framed to be made right. Behold then we are in good company,
the Pastors, Doctors, and Preachers, if they do not vow under a certain
rule, they shall not be in the state of perfection, they that are the salt of
the earth, and the light of the world. And a lay Brother that A hard censure.
beggs yp and down, that plays the Cook, and the gardener in a Convent,
shall be in a more eminent state in the Church of God then all those people. A
man without doubt must be well versed in the subtilities of the schole to
comprehend this Divinity, very hard to be inculcated to ignorant men. Let us
mount our string to a higher note, and say that the Bishops, the Cardinals
and the Pope himself shall not be in this state of perfection, having not vowed
the observance of any of these rules approved by the Cburch, under which the
Regulars are enrolled.

To this the Regulars do reply, quoth Tristan, that those Pastors are in a
state of perfection more eminent then that of the Religious, in so much as they
call it the state of perfection Bishops are in the state of perfection acquired.
acquired, and the other but a state of perfection to be acquired. So that they
are the sun which comprend in their light all the light of the lesser stars:
and the firmame^ts of the earth lifted up over the topp of the montaignes of
perfection, whose fruict do extend it self far over mount Liban, where these
puissant Gods of the earth are strongly placed, because they are the children
of the highest, and his arrows in the hand of the Omnipotent, which flee out
with impetuositie. This is the estate which is called the supreme amongst men
in the militant Church, which correspond to that of the Seraphins in the They
correspo^d to the Seraphins in the Hierarchy.
first Hierarchy of the Angels. In sort that as the rodd of Moses did
swallow up the rodd of the Magitia^s, even so in the estate of Prelatship and
Pontificat are contained all the perfections of all the Regular Orders, in the
same manner that Priesthood does contain in it self the inferior Orders. But
my difficulty is to know in what does consist this distinction between
perfection acquired, and perfection to be acquired; for I believe that the
greatest part of the world are in the last, and but very few in the other. For
to say a perfect man, is to say a man without sin, and he that says he has
no sin, is a liar and has no truth in him, according the holy Scripture:
Who thinks to be without sin does seduce himself, for we are all
conceived in iniquity. To say also with that Bishop of the Apocalypse lo: I am
full of grace, and have no need of any thing, is to say, I am in the topp of
perfection, and consequently to get this reproach: Thou art naked, poor and
miserable, and foolishlie you esteem your self rich. For I hold that man to
be very imperfect that thinks himself to be perfect; it is in a manner to say
as said the father of the proud: I Will lift up my throne of the North side,
and I shall be like to the highest. Behold so much for the perfection acquired,
and for the perfection to be acquired, it is a condition wherein are those that
are most imperfect, seeing that at the most it suffiseth them to have the will
to arrive some time to it when they shall be purged of their faults, and for
men to vant themselves to be rich, either by the goods, which they desire to
have, or pretend to gather, is express vanity. And by this estate to think to
draw themselves from all paritie, and to be separated Friars in their own
estimation are not like other men.
from the rest of the lay or secular people, it is in some sort to sing that
song blamed in te Gospel: I am not like other men.

Sir, quoth the Hermit, I see well that neither you nor my self are too well
versed in these scholasticall subtilities, this is a wrangling point which is
not good but to intertaine disputations upon the stools; it is properly
according the proverb to contest with the Bishop for his crosiers staff. But
as I heard say heretofore, they put great difference between the state of
perfection acquired, or to be acquired, and perfection it self, be it acquired
or to be acquired. I know that this distinction will astonish you at the first
sight, as it did terrify me the first time that it sounded in my ears: but
our masters the Doctors have far more subtle distinctions which would
divide the very atoms. They say that he may be in perfection or perfect, that
is not in the state of perfection, and that some are in the state of perfection
which are far from being in perfection or perfect. And that it is so, we see
but too many Monks, Religious men, and Pastors of very scandalous and badd
lives who are nevertheless in the state of perfection, and many lay men of
very holy conversation, and most complete in their own profession, and as it
were perfect in their oeconomie, who are not for all that in the state of
perfection; yet our Doctors after many debats do conclude, that it is far
better to be in perfection without the state, then in the state without
perfection: Which do much comfort the simpler sort who go more round to work,
and prefer their salvation to their reputation; in sort that it is much better
at all adventures to be in the perfection of his estate, then in the state of
perfection, having nothing more sure in all that matter then to search his
perfection in his own profession, and to live in peace according the Counsel
of the Apostle. This makes me think of those Politicians, who seeing themselves
balanced betwixt reasons of state, and the consideratio^s of Religion, as it
were between the tree and the bark, do leave sometimes to support Religion,
and run to succor the state; or else they let the state perish to conserve
Religion, whenas they should maintain Policy and Religion are the two poles
of all well governed common wealths
the one and the other if it were possible, as being the two poles, and the two
hinges of all well ordered common wealths, giving to Caesar what belongs to
Caesar, and to God what belongs to God. Even so among these co^testations,
sometimes a man does quit the perfection of his estate to run to the state of
perfection, sometimes he does not care for the state of perfection to aspire to
the perfection of his estate: but it happens often to such bad Politicians,
desiring to conserve the state at the cost and chardges of Religion, that they
loose the one and the other, as it does happen to unskillful Pilotes who, to
preserve their shipp and merchandise do make shipwrake of both together: those
that omit to perfect themselves in a laicall state thinking to advance
themselves more in spiritual things in a Religious state, dissipating their
atte^tions, do not prosper in the one nor in the other, like Romain Senator
unto that Romain Senator, who being a very good man in his chardge of
Senator, did believe that in making himself a Monk he would become an Angel,
but he had such bad success in the Monastical exercises, that his Abbot one
day said unto him: My friend you left of to be a good Senator Many that are
good in the world may be badd in Religion.
to make a badd Monk. An example which makes me remember an other very
remarkable which is rehearsed in the life of saint Philipp Nerio fundator of
the Oratorians of Rome; he brought up a young Polonian Priest, called Francis
Bassus, who remaining for certain years under his discipline became a great
preacher, and full of rare qualities; at length a temptation surprised his
thought, persuading him that being but of the Oratorie, which is a Congregation
of reformed Priests, who have no other vows, but such as the Church annexed to
Priesthood, that he was not in a state of so great perfection, as if he had
made himself a Monk in one of the begging Orders. Notwithstanding any
exhortation that S. Philipp made unto him he yealded so much to this
impression, that he never ceased to pursue his purpose till such time as he
was admitted to the Dominicans. Saint Philipp did assist at his reception, and
at his profession, and albeit the Friars did think to have purchased a great
deal of honor to their Order, by the organe of a subject which seemed to them
so worthy of consideration, yet the good Father, who loved him tenderly, did
nothing else but weep during the solemnity of these actions; and whereas the
Dominica^s thought that it was because he lost one of the most famous work men
of his vigneyard: Ha! says he, it is not that, for charity is not jealous,
nor subject to it own proper intrest, I deplore only the evident loss of so
many vertus. He was a Prophet, for he that was so prudent, and of so good
edification in a Congregation, in which he did not believe to be in the state
of perfection to be acquired, much less acquired, did committ so many
scandalls after in the Regularitie, that he gave much pain and discontent to
his Order. It is not always the best to aspire to the sublimest degrees, the
most dangerous trades are those that are exercised in eminent places; the
higher the ascension be the heavier is the fall. You must not look to be
eminent wise, says the holy word, but keep your self in an humble fear: Do
not affect sublimitie, says the Apostle, but accommodate your self to the
little ones. Let us remember Jacob, who whould not hasten to go with Esau, nor
go with a great pace toward his Fathers house, but choosed rather to go soft
and fair after his children and his lambs, meanly, but surely.

I do not intend by this discourse to divert any man from embracing the Regular
life, contrariwise I do counsel it as much as I may, as did the great Apostle
counsel chastity, wishing that all had been Virgins like himself. I know
with what anathemes they are threatened that divert faithful people from these
paths of peace, and from the way of It is not lavvfull to dissvvade any from
Religion.
the cross, and that it is in this point most of any other. that the Talion
law should be executed with rigor, rendering to God in himself servant for
servant, and soul for soul. Also I know it is of this state of life that it
is said, whosoever can embrace it let him take it; yea, that it is good to
press sweetly, without constraint, such as be doubtful and staggring to put
themselves in it, to see and taste how sweet our Lord is. It is good I say to
give them courage to lift themselves up upon this sacred Palm, to gather of it
fruict: for no man can deny without offending our holy faith, and the
discipline of the Church, that which S. Ambroise said heretofore of voiled
Virgins, such as are now our Nuns, but it should and may be also said of the
Regulars, that they are a famous portion of the flock of JESUS CHRIST. That
which is to be desired in all this matter, according my judgment, (which is but
a small thing) is, that such as are in this state of perfection, either to be
acquired as are the Regulars, or acquired, as are the Pastors, do not look
disdainefullie, and as it were over the shoulders on those that are at their
feet, no more then does the horse troops of an army despise the foot
companies, because that Every man in his own profession may work his
salvation
these foot men, I would say these whose secular condition does not oblige
them to so great points of perfection, may make themselves perfect and
agreeable to God in their own profession. And reciprocally, it is not fit
that such as are not in the state of perfection do insolently loose the respect
which is due to those that dedicated themselves to God by holy motions, and by
the profession of a life sequestered from the world. This is near the opinion
of that great Apostle, who would not have him that fastes to despise him that
eats nor tax him of gluttony, much less would he have him that eats mock him
that fastes, and reproach him of hypocrisy. And albeit those that lead a
chaste life are in an eminent condition, as says the holy word, that
continence cannot be duly prized: Yet is the state of marriage holy and
blessed by God, and therefore ought to be respected, by Virgins themselves. It
is good for a man to humble himself in all things, says the holy Ghost, and
not to aspire to things which are too great, or too sublime. They must be
honored that are in the state of perfection, but those that are in the
perfection of their estate, do merit far greater commendation, according that
which the Apostle says, that Good Pastors are worthy of double honor.
those who in the Pastoral chardge have learning joined to good life, are
worthy of double honor: for to that honor which is due to their quality
should be joined that which is due to their proper merit.

All those fair considerations, says Tristan, do not satisfy my desire,
which is to know in what does consist properly this state of perfection
acquired, or to be acquired. That I may not lie unto you, quoth the Hermit, I
am so badd a scholasticall Divine, that those very terms, which are not so
well known to me as they are to such as have them every day in their mouths,
and dispute hard of the^ upon the Bench, do seem very savage and strange to
me. This word of perfection attributed to men does astonish me, considering
that the very Angels, which are in the state of subsiste^ce do not attribute it
to themselves but turn their wings over their eyes before the throne of God,
who is only good and perfect, without evil and without fault. But that I do
not blame, or it may be blaspheme that which I do not well understand, without
censuring the Authors, or authorizing the censurers of a Doctrine whereof I
understand so little, that the same little is nothing; (if none upon earth be
without spott, not a child of one day, says the sacred Text; if the stars be
not nete before him, who found disorder amongst his Angels) who can justly
allege that he is in the state of perfection, considering that to be perfect
and to be just is the same thing, and that no man living can justify himself
before God? There is a certain generation, says the holy Ghost Prou. 30. v.
12.
which seem to it self, clean and yet is not washed from their fithlynesse: I
know not which it is, but whatsoever it be, we may compare it to the Peacocke
which atte^d so much to the looking glass of her round tail, that she
forgetts the deformity of her feet. Those kind of people putts me in mind of
that ancient Hermit who imagined that he was an Angel, and so The imagination
of an ancient Hermit.
threw himself into a well wherein he had died miserably if his fellows had
not drawn him out, and cured him of his folly. Notwithstanding, that I may
not take the firebrand where it burns, I will tell you my opinion with the
simplicity of a poor Monk, who knows better how to make Images then to
decide a point of Divinity: I do think that the Regulars do say they are in
the state of perfection to be acquired, in as much as they have choosen the
Evangelical Counsels as the shortest way to arrive to perfection, or else, be
(...) Why are Regulars said to be in the state of perfection to be acquired
and Prelates in the state of perfection acquired.
there state does oblige the^ to search for that perfection which is proposed
unto them by their Rules, which is, as it were, the cream of the Evangelical
Doctrine: in sort that their life should be nothing else but a perpetual
combat, a study and exercise that aim at the acquisition of perfection. And
they say that the Prelates and Pastors are in the state of perfection acquired,
because they are in eminent conditions, whereunto none should be called but men
consummated in Virtue and science: Or else because they are the successors of
the Apostles whom we may not doubt Prelates the successors of the Apostles.
to have been both very perfect, as being confirmed in grace, and also in the
state of perfection: or otherwise because they are obliged by the greatness of
their dignity, to be a pattern to the flock which are committed to them, by
their good example: or also because they ought in this state, to exercise not
simple and common vertus; out heroical and important vertus, whereof the
greatest according the judgment of the Gospel, is to give his own soul for
the salvation of his flock. This was also the Rule by which our Savior
measured the charity of saint Peter, before making No charity goes beyond
that of the Pastoral charg*
him his Lieutenant in earth, when he demanded of him three times if he did
love him more then the rest, and that to his affirmative answeares CHRIST
replied; feed then my sheep, finding no greater proof of love then the
exercise of this Pastoral charge.

If Monastical and Conuentuall persons, quoth Tristan be not in the state of
perfection to be acquired but in respect of the obligation which they have to
make themselves perfect, and that the Prelates are not in the state of
perfection acquired, but because they are obliged to be exemplar, me thinks the
state of all Christians in general is such, considering that our Savior in
the Gospel said unto us: Be perfect as your Celestial father is, who does
make his sun shine equally upon the good and upon the bad, and power his
rain without distinction upon the land of the just and the iniust. And what?
Kings and Pote^tastes, who as Constantin the great said, are the exterior
Bishops, Magistrates, Goodmen of houses, and all those that are in sublimitie
and Superiority, are not they bound to give good example to their inferiors,
and to be a good odor to all men in JESUS CHRIST? After this manner they shall
be in the state of the perfection of Prelates, who are the Princes within the
Church. And all Christians that pretend to come to the perfection of their
estate shall not they, by this desire, as well as by vows be in the state of
perfection to be acquired, as well as the Regulars?

I would be near of your opinion in that, quoth the Hermit, if I did not
fear to offend our Masters the Doctors, who have in their hands the kees of
the doctrine, who do open that which no man durst shut, who do shutt that
which no man durst open, and who have, the Empire of science. But the respect
which I bear to their opinions, which to me are Oracles, to which I submitt my
own judgment, do make me renounce to my own particular reason; and follow the
most common opinion, considering that the Apostle do forbidd us all
contentions. But yet when I consider with my self that the The Angels were at
varia^ce sor the body of Moses.
Angels of heaven were at veriance between themselves for the possession of
the body of Moses, I do believe that men consecrated to God, either by the
Sacerdotall character, or by the Monastical habit, who are called in the
Scripture the Angels of the God of armies, may a little contest about the state
of perfection, every one being glad, without prejudice to humility and
charity, to magnify his own ministry, according the counsel of the divine
Apostle.

Pass for magnifying their ministry, but to despise others and to pull from
those who according God and man do both appear, and are in effect more worthy
then they; that is the thing which I cannot approuue, quoth Tristan, for had
you known how the Conuentuall Friars did deschiffer unto me the
Ecclesiastical Clergy whom they call Seculars; how they did depresse this
condition, and represent it unto me not only to be base but also dangerous,
and above all the rest, how they did tear in pieces the condition of you
Hermites, I believe that had you had the patience of Job you would break out
in choler against them.

For why should they take from the Pastors, Priests, Pteachers, Doctors,
Confessors, Vicars, Chano^s, Deanes, Abbots, and Priours called
Commendataries, and from you Hermites the pretention to the state of perfection
to be acquired? Sir, quoth Nicephorus, I did wind my self expressly about this
subject without entering into it, to shun this rock against which you force me
now to strick, all that I can do is, to say with S. Paul, that you constrain
me to pass through this danger and exceed a little the limits of moderation:
Be angry, quoth the Psalmist or according an other version: Stir and frett a
little, but do not sin. Under this permission Psalm. 4.
I will say to God: Lord put a sentinel to my mouth, and a door of
circumstances to my lips, to the end that my tongue may not utter words of
precipitation, or of malice. I know it is written, thou shall not speak ill
of the Gods: That is to say, of eminent persons, either in quality or
sanctity, because that greatness and piety do make men approach to the
Divinity. But albeit Socrates and Plato are my friends, and that I do
perfectly honor the Regular Companies, yet the zeal of the truth has more
power over me then all that. I will then say this word of liberty, not for my
self who am the meanest of all men, and the most contemptible (a title which
one of the Prophets gave to our Savior) but for so many grave and venerable
Ecclesiastical persons which are in the rank of the Clergy, and compose the
true Hierarchy of the Church instituted Who are of the Hierarchy.
by JESUS CHRIST, and whose mission and vocation is altogether divine, that it
is to pull away the fairest rose of the crown of so many sacred Priests, to
take from them the honor to be in the state of perfection, at leastwise to be
acquired, in which the Regulars do not stick to put their servants, and the
very Nuns, as well those that sing in the Quire, as their maids servants that
look to the business of the Convent. Ah! where shall Priestly vnctio^ be
placed, which make those that are adorned with it a holy and Royal people, if
they make the state of it inferior to the state of a simple girl, who has
command to hold her peace, and no right to speak within the Church, or to
some porter or gardener of the Convent? Those that approach to the Altar, to
whose words God does make himself obedient, who have the kees of the kingdom
The function and power of a Priest orderly laid down.
of heaven, who do bind and loose, who are the Magistrates of the Church, who
sit upon the seat of judgment in the house of David, and judge the twelve
tribs of Israel, that is to say, all the world; whose sentences given upon
earth are confirmed and ratified in heaven, whose hands blessed and consecrated
do handle the most dreadful mysteries of our Religion, and who do that thing
which the Angels do adore; who have power over the Devils, who dispense the
Sacraments, and confer the grace of God to all mortal men; those Divine men
which S. Francis preferred S. Francis prefered Priests to the very Angels.
to the Angels, because that one only man of them does make every day that
which all the Angels in heaven cannot do. For to whom of the Angels was it
ever said, consecrate my body, and what thou shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven? those men that are almost to be adored, and that the Angels
do reverence and call their fellow servants to God, shall they be the
underlings of those which do not merit (in consideration of their dignity) to
loose the lachets of their shoes? Ah! Regulars, pardon me, it is the zeal of
the house of God which does gnaw me, it is the desire of his glory and of his
beauty which I see dried up in his principal members, which does transport me
to tell you, that you use very discourteously your elders the Ecclesiastical
Clergy, whom (forsooth) you call Seculars, notwithstanding that by their
Clericall habit they have deposed Secular is no fit Epitetho for a priest.
the ignominy of the secular habit, and that by the reception of their holy
Orders they have renounced to the desires of the world, and to all that is
profane in it. It seems that you would imitate Jacob, and supplant them as if
they were all Esaus, but know; that if you be Hebrews, so are they; if you be
Israelites, so are they; if you be the seed of Abraham, so are they; and I
will say more for them, that they are both more ancient in the Church, and of a
greater rank (witness the processions) and of a higher dignity, and of more
emine^t functions, I will say so much (for it The Church may be without Monks
but not without Pastors.
is no time for a man to hold himself up when he is shaked and falling down)
that their employments are more vtile and more necessary then yours, for the
Church has been and may be without Mo^ks, but it cannot be without Pastors,
without Vicars, without Priests, without Doctors, without Preachers: for if
the salt be molte^ with what shall men salt? if the candle be quinched how
shall men have light? Perchance you will say that you do the same actions
which It does not properly belong to Regulars to administer the Sacraments.
the Pastors do, but in you it is but in way of accessarie, in them
principally; in you it is pleasure, in them pain; in you it is of free will,
in them of necessity; in you by way of recreation, and as passingers, in them
it is of duty and office; in you it is without chardge of souls, in them with
chardge, which make them to be answerable for the souls, and so far
answerable that they shall give soul for soul, and blood for blood; in you it
is but in some things, in them in all things; in the^ at all times, in you when
you please, and that your commodity does permit it; in you so that the service
of your commonaltie does march before that of the neighbor, in the^ there is
no exception; in you it is at certain hours, in them at all moments; you
fight as voluntaries, they as necessaries; you march but in the wings of the
battle, they make the body of the army; they carry the weight of the heat of
the day, and the cold of the dew of the night, in summer and in winter, in
spring time and in harvest, without rule in their diet, without assurance in
their sleep. Of seven Sacraments you administer but two, and the one of them
which is the Eucharist, but at your ease, within your houses, without carrying
it to the sick in the heat of the sun, in frost, in snow, in rain and in Th
life and exercise of poor Pastor exactly described.
tempest, at all hours of the day and of the night, and all days of the year
through the dirt and inco^bra^ces of the cities and towns, through the woods
and the mere, through the mountains and the vallees, through the stones and
the moors of the fields. And the other Sacrament which is that of penance you
administer, when you are prayed, and particularly called upon, and as pleases
your Superiors, who have as great care of the conservation of their own
subjects, as they have of the sick, for whom they are not answerable. But the
Pastors by obligation ought to keep still near the sick, to press them to
enter in favor with God by the Sacrament of reco^ciliation, to preach unto
them in season and out of season, to the end to make them think of their
salvation, which is part of their own salvation, as being bound to give
account to the Prince of Pastors the Bishop of our souls JESUS CHRIST, of his
sheep committed to their Vigilance. As for Marriage, Baptism and
Extreme Unction, they are things which you do not meddle with all (they are for
the gleaners) no more then you meddle with Confirmation and Order which you
leave for the Bishops. This you show your prudence, and declare that you have
eaten both butter and honny, which make you reject the least and choose the
Isaia 7. v. 15.
best, and that you know how to make use hansomely of the fan which separate
the corn from the chafe, and precious things from vile and base things. You
do not snuff your lamps but with golden snuffers, and you do not take the
coals as the Seraphim of the Prophet, but with gilt tongs. The rodd of Moses
does not please you, because sometimes it is turned to a serpent and devour,
or does work dreadful and rude effects: The rodd of Aaron fitts you best,
because it ingenders nothing but flowers and fruict. Even so you know Friars
take the profit and leave the pain for the priests
how to pull the rose without touching the thorns, to gather the honey without
feeling the sting of the be, to eat the kernel of the nutt and cast away the
shell, and to do as children do when they get bread and butter, lick away
the butter and leave the bread. To cooperate to the salvation of souls
without taking chardge of them, is properly to take away the cream and leave
the curd. It is an admirable thing to see that such as govern the people will
not take chardge of them, and such as have chardge of them and are answerable
for them, cannot have the government of them. And with all these delicatnesse
and spiritual allurements, they are in the state of perfection, and those who
like Giants do groan under the waters, that is to say, under the chardge of the
people, who are the waters of the sea of the world, shall be out of perfection?
Truly I am faithful, and believe all that the Church does believe, and if the
Church believe that, I believe it also, but not without captiuating my
understanding to the obedience of faith.

Would not you think that those good people vould feign add a cubite more to
their stature, or to speak otherwise, would feign extol their own estate
putting betwixt the^ and the Pastors inferours to Prelates, their lay brothers?
For if those be in the state of perfection, and not the Chanons, Pastors and
other Ecclesiastical persons of the Clergy, to what height do they raise
themselves, placing their servants and their cooks before those that are the
Masters, the Fathers, and the Doctors of the people? What? and if they
prefer to them simple veiled girls, yea the lay sisters, is it not to destroy
the law of nature, and the government of the Church, which in all kind of
fashion has declared women kind inferior to men? If the iniquity of a man is
preferred to the well doing of a woman, what good can a woman do, suppose she
made miracles, which may be compared to the greatness of Priesthood? Would
not men laugh at the impertine^ce of him that would give the title of
Excellence to a poor man that asks alms from door to door, and would but
thou a gentle man of note, or a Magistrate. The Regulars, and principally the
begging Orders have baggs which speak daily for them asking alms, and yet
they must have so many Paternities and so many Reuerences given them; and the
Pastors and Priests shall be without honor, and unworthily treated so far
forth as Great inequalities.
to be putt in a rank and state in the Church, more low then that of the Friar
servants of the Reverend Fathers. But yet amongst themselves they know well how
to keep the best place for Priesthood, and keep the Conuers or lay Brothers
in the humility and baseness of servitude, distinguishing themselves by these
terms Fathers and Brothers, albeit all of them are Brothers and children of
one Order and of one habit, making profession of one and the self same rule,
living under the same observance and the same vows, and all of them as well
priests as others not permitted heretofore to take any other title but that of
Brother, which is well observed by the most humble and most Friars heretofore
had no other denomination but that of Brother.
moderate of them. And I pray you, is priesthood another thing in the Regulars
the^ it is in the Clergy? Is it an other charracter, an other Order, an other
power, for being under a Capuce, under sandales, under a scapular, or under a
claspe? Is it more eminent so then under a surplice, under a sutane, and under
a corner capp? Certes we are now come to the time wherein the last are the
first, and the first are put in the last rank. In your opinion to plant
cabbage, to wash dishesse, to carry a bag, to keep a door, to snuff lamps,
to patch, habits, the ordinary exercise of the lay brothers of the Conuents,
are they employments comparable to that of the Pastors, who do consecrate the
The functions of Pastors.
body of the son of God, who dispense the merits of his blood in the
Sacrament of penance, who do baptize, who do annoinct the sick, who do marry
those that are called to that holy yoke, and do such other Pastoral functions?

Verily, quoth Tristan, you restore them well what they lent you, and their
bill of exchange is well paid in the same coin. If I had not known that you
are well versed in these matthers in controversy, I would say that you are a
Prophet, and that you have heard part of that which they said to me, to divert
me from being an Hermit, or of the secular Clergy, so well you rehearse the
particularities of that which they insinuated to me. For me thought I heard
them say, that all devotions compared to Religious devotion is but orpin
compared to gold, and glass compared to a diamant, and that they are like to
those Roman scarlets, which seemed all stained and decolored, when they were
put near that piece of purple of Tyr and Sidon, which for the excellency of
it was The functions of Regulars inferior to that of Priests and Pastors.
sent to the Emperor. For ought I see then their state of perfection does not
proceed from their functions, which are inferior in greatness, in eminency,
in utility, in necessity to that of Priests and Pastors, but from their
vows; it is so held commonly in the schools, quoth the Hermit, School
divinity disputes of all matters, and moves as many questions as it does
decide.
but seeing this sort of Theology does maintain as much dispute and
controversy as it does decide, and stirrr up as much as it does resolve, no
point of faith so sacred on which she does not move questions and frame
difficulties; of this point which is but of government, I think that without
offending Religion, we may speak problematically, submitting always most
humbly and most absolutely our particular reason and judgment to the judgment
of the universal Church, and to the holy sea Apostolic, the firm and
fundamental stone, against which errors, which are the gates of hell, may not
prevail. I say then after this protestation, which may serve me as a buckler
against the plotts of calumny, that if the state of perfection to be acquired
does consist in vows, the Priests of the Clergy, who are in the Hierarchy of
the Church, ought to be admitted to it: For they make two solemn and
indispensable Priests make two solemn vows.
vows of chastity and obedience, annexed to their holy Orders. And if they do
not make the vow of poouertie, it is because that being not in Commonaltie, as
the Regulars are, but as the Apostles were, dispersed Priests dispersed amongst
the people do imittat the Apostles.
amongst the people as the salt of the earth, it would be impossible for them
to observe it in that manner that the Conuentualls do. But if it pleased them
to go to the Country, and to see in the villages to what extremity of
necessity are the poor Pastors brought, they would have occasion to say that
it is much easier to vow poverty, as the Regulars do, then to practice it as
the Pastors do. The Regulars cannot sing but in very close Quires, they cannot
say Mass The pleasant life of Regulars in these Countries
but with silver challices, with nete vestments and with parfums, they cannot
sleep but in hoate celles, they cannot eat but very nete meat, proper and
well seasoned, in gilt and painted Refectories, accompanied with pleasant
lecture, having after every refection a full hour of recreation, they cannot
walk but in fair garde^s all laced with flowers and arroused with fontaines,
they cannot go but under Cloisters and well covered from sun and rain, they
cannot make their assemblies but in Chapters well polished and very lightsome,
they cannot study but in fair and ample Bibliothekes, in sum he that would
learn a thousand little secrets for the commodity of man's living, let him take
the pains to consider the Monastical and Conue^tuall life. Insteede that the
Pastors of the Country The life of a Country Pastor.
(for those of the city are a little better provided, but yet are they also in
trouble over head and shoulders) are loged in cabanes, like the grott of
Bethleem, exposed at all times to the injury of the air, they lie upon the
straw and upon the ground, they are nourished like clownes, without
conversation, without consolation, they have much pain and little Unction, they
are ill loged, ill attired, ill paid, ill assisted, miserable in their
Churches, in their ornaments, in their loadgins, in their houshould-stuffs, and
in all other things. And for all this, the Regulars amiddest all commodities
Priests held to be rich though otherwise more poor the Friars.
have the glory of the state of poverty, and the Pastors in all necessities
and want are held for rich, and to be dispossessed of the state of perfection,
which properly does not consist so much in the vow of poverty, as we said
before, as it does in the practice of voluntary, and Evangelical poverty,
which is when a man selling all that he has does give it to the poor, without
assurance of any prop or the help of any commonaltie, of which we see very few
examples. For, to forsake thirty or fifty pound rent to cast himself into a
Monastery that has a thousand pound rent, and to have his part of the same
with thirty or forty other Monks, I do not see that such a leap is any thing
dangerous: but to leave great revenues in the world and distribute them to the
needy to put himself all alone, and without aid in a naked me^dicitie, as did
the Apostles, who reserved nothing of all the goods which the first Christians
brought and laid at their feet, is a practice that is as rare as it is
excellent, and some Regulars might be found which would call it temeritie,
although it be the true manner of the poverty counseled in the Gospel, in
which our Savior, who did counsel it, did place perfection. But let us make
this matter agree, a Religious man that is proprietaire shall be deeply in
imperfection, because he does contrary to his vow, and yet in virtue of the
same vow, he shall be said to be in the state of perfection: It is not all one
to be in the state of perfection and to be perfect.
and a secular man who does distribute all his goods in alms to follow our
Savior, by this renouncement of his goods shall be without doubt well advanced
in perfection, and yet shall not he be in the state of perfection? For my part
I must acknowledge at one time both my ignorance, and the grosenesse of my
understanding, that cannot get out the connection, of this admirable
distinction, which me thinks cannot subsist but by this, esse rationale, whereof
there is such great debate between the Philosophers, and by separating by the
thought the state of perfection, as they separate in man, the animal part from
the reasonnable. But perchance I shall expound my self better by this example.

A good Pastor of a village, who An example of a poor Pastor.
was (as almost all of them be) in the perfection of poverty in his own
estat, received to his poor cabane a Conuentuall Friar, that should be a foot
by his rule, but in effect was well mounted he entertained him according the
short exte^tion of his power and of his means. Wodden and earthen dishesse
were his best mouables, new straw was his best bed, the ground was his most
assured bedstead, two brones made his fire, and the midst of the place was
his cheminie, a block was his chair, his table was two pla^ks ill ioinct
together, held up by some sticks made in form of a trestle, ill fastened; for
the rest he was so austere that scarce he did wear any lynnen: he found
nevertheless some napkin; for the use of table-cloathes were as much unknown
to him, as they are to the Capucins. The Religious man who had occasion to
esteem more of his good reception then of his good cheer, and of the Pastors
goodwill then of the effects of it, drew a purse out of his sleeue, well
furnished with a kind of metal which is the rule and measure of all things,
yet forbidden in the rule of Conuentuall Friars; With this he thought to
entertain himself in all places: but this village was as ill furnished with
things necessary, as was the house of the good Pastor. He was therefore
constrained to content himself with a kind of pottage and some pulse, but to
take this lean refection he used many fashions, and disposed himself with
much delicatnesse and proprieties; he drew from his pocket a case wherein there
was a silver spoone, a forke of the same metal, and a knife with a haft also
of silver. The good Pastor who had a pleasant wit, and knew a little more then
his Prosne or sunday Sermons seeing this Regular sumptuositie said to the friar,
Father, you and I would make one good Monk, for you would make the vow of
poverty, and I would keep it. This blow of the beck or mouth did not hinder
the good Friars teeth, who did not loose a whitt of his appetit for it. Now
tell me, I pray you, who before God had the merit of poverty, he that was
really poor, and used hospitality, or he that was not poor but in vow, with
so much delicatnesse? For my part, quoth Tristan, I believe that as he is much
commended in the Scripture that might transgress, and do evil, and did it
not: Even so he, that putting himself in the state of perfection, and does not
tend to it, but let himself fall into imperfections, shall be whipped with many
stripes. And as the merits of Regulars, are very great when they do their duty
well, so are their faults very notable when they fail therein. They are like
the figgs of the Prophet, either all good, or all badd, which makes me remember
an other example.

A man of quality that lived very An example of a man of quality and of his
servant.
dissolute, being touched with repentance of his sins did cast himself into
a Monastery: and a servant of his much fearing God following him in that
retrait of the world, was received in the same Monastery in quality of a lay
brother. What happened? the Master that knew his own iniquity, and that saw
without cease his sins before his eyes, became so humble by that
consideration, that he became a good Religious man, and the servant
contrariwise seeing himself entered into the portion of Saints in a good rich
Monastery, became so insolent and so delicate that nothing could content his
vanity and delicatnesse: He that was his Master in the world serving him with
all sort of charity and cordialitie he did check and rebuke him like a slave;
which the other did endure with incredible patience, by which he gained heaven,
and the servant became so arrogant and so presumptuous, that in the end his
sottisnesse and disorder did oblige the Co^monaltie to take the habit from his
back and chase him away ignominiouslie like a knawe, that became as
insupportable as he was incorrigible. Even so the same sun which melt wax,
does harden dirt, and Regularitie which is instituted as a holy Academie, to
giude those that put themselves in it, as becomes, to perfection, was cause
of the imperfection of this servant, who had done far better if he had remained
in his first state of life. And indeed solitude, which the Scripture and
experience does teach us to be so proper to draw to it the Spirit of God, is
often cause of the ruin of such as cast themselves into it without judgment.
Loath, that was so wise and so chaste in an infamous city infected with the
most horrible disorder that sensuality could commit, became dissolute and
incestuous in the desert. And some Regulars do say that they find none so
tractable nor so humble as those that were before eminent in dignity in the
world, nor none so arrogant and harder to be governed then those that coming
from base descent, do see themselves as the Ass of Isis in the Emblem,
honored because of the reputation of sainctitie which there The Friars much
honored by their habits.
habit does get unto them, and that without it, neither by their birth, nor by
their merits should they be any thing esteemed. It is to those that it belongs
to say with the Psalmist, my cords or knots, that is to say, my vows do me
great honor, and they are the most excellent portion of my inheritance. And if
ease and commodity do carry them to immoderation, then may they say that
their iniquity does proceed from their fatness and from the abondance of
their bread, being no more subject to the labor and travail of other men.
And if propriety do slide amongst them, then is all lost, for that is the
sin of Achan which draw malediction, upon their heads.

For ought I can gather out of your discourse, quoth Tristan, the state of
perfection acquired in which are all Prelates does consist in the eminency of
their dignity and character: and the state of perfection to be acquired,
wherein are the Regulars, does consist in their three vows, in which they put
the essence of Regularitie. That is the opinion of some Doctors, says
Nicephorus, but in this subject all are not of the same opinion. And that it is
so, the Regulars themselves do make distinctions of the state of perfection
amongst them, and although their Prouincialls and Generals who with the^ do
hold the place of Bishops and Archbishops in their particular Hierarchy, are
but simple Priests for Superiors of Regulars are but simple Priests.
their character, and for these dignities unknown in the Church four hundred
years ago, nevertheless do they repute them to be in the state of perfection
acquired as Prelates are, and they give them also the name of Prelates, which
does pass to the Abbots by they Titulars or Co^mendataries, and to many others
in the Court of Rome, which have no Prelatship but by name only, having no
chardge of souls nor any function in the Church. Some Regulars do make this
state of perfection acquired to descend yet more low, to their Priours,
Gardiens, Ministers, Correctours, Rectours and other Superiors of particular
Conuents, although they deny it to Curats and Pastors of Parishesse, it may
be with as little reason as they do attribute it to themselves. For I do not
think that I should swerve much from the judgment of the truth and of the
Pastors as great as the Superiors of Regular houses.
Church, if I should say that the Pastors are at the least as great and
greater then the Superiors of Regular houses, as having many more souls under
their government then they have; for where is that Monastery which has
forty or fifty thousand Friars in it, as there is a Parish that S. Eustase in
Paris for one.
has so many Parisioners within it precinct, and which is more, holding The
Hierarchy of the Clergy is the principal and most ancient of the Church.
the same ra^ke in the first, principal and most ancient Hierarchy of the
church, which is that of the Clergy, that the Claustrall Priors and
Superiors do hold in the second and new Hierarchy, of Regulars? There do not
want also some famous Doctors The Regulars make a new Hierarchy by
themselves.
which have placed the Pastors in the state of perfection acquired; as the
Prelates are, because they have the same obligation which they have (and in some
sort more strict then they, because they are the immediate Pastors of the
people that put their lives in hazard for the salvation of their flock. For it
is in that that the high point Perfect charity in the Pastoral chardge.
of perfect charity does consist, and consequently the topp of acquired
perfection. Wherefore then says Tristan, do they cast you so far of (I speak
of you Hermites) from the state of perfection to be acquired? It is without
doubt, because you do not make the vows nor the profession of any rule. Sir,
said Nicephorus, I did always divert my self from that blow, desiring rather
to speak of those that are of some worth in the Church the^ of us poor
solitary people, who live in obscurity, among the dead men of the world, of
which there is no mention in the Catalogue of the living: but seeing you, by
your inquiries do present them upon the stage, who by the profession of their
life ought to hide themselves, to imitate our Savior in his hidden life, it is
requisite that I speak unto you of a thing that is not, as of a thing that is.
Know then that as there are Conuentuall friars and Conuentuall friars, so are
there Hermites and Hermites. There Good and bad friars as there be good and bad
Hermites
is not almost any Order of Regulars whereof there is not a Reformation, in sort
that such as live according the strict observance of their rule are called the
Reformed, and the others the Mitigate, a name truly too mild, which does
iniustly flatter their disorder and relaxation. For mitigation does presuppose
some temperature of austeritie in the rule by Apostolical authority: But not
so manifest infraction of the vows of obedience and poverty, as that which is
known to be, and which the holy sea did never authorize. In like manner there
are Hermites vacabonds and voluntaries, who have neither house nor home,
children of Belial, who will have no yoke nor subjection, who live after their
own fancy, and as the Psalmist says, who do walk in their own desires, and
pass their lives according the inconstant affection of their hearts: Clouds
without water Ep. Iudae.
carried about of vvindes; and for whom the tempest of darkness is reserved,
and perpetual unquietness in punishment of their instabilitie. These kind of
people are Hermites only by habit, and not by life, by appearance and not by
effect, people without approbatio^, slaves to their proper wills, and not only
far from the state of perfection, but also from the perfection of their
estate, if a condition so uncertain and so irregular may be called an estate.
But there are other Hermites, who are in the stabilitie of a settled life, true
followers and children of those first Anacorites, who like shining stars
lightened the heaven of the primitive Church by the lively beams of their holy
virtues, whose memory shall never perish, but will be still co^serued fresh,
in the very decline of time, and in the old age of the world They are men that
stick like Iuie to the stock and wall of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and
like the vigne that join fast to the elm tree. Those me^ do sequester
themselves from the world by a local solitude, to the end to harken more
attentively in the mental solitude that, which God shall speak to their
hearts. They have chosen the best part with Marie, but in that sort that when
the necessity of the neighbor or the service of the Church does call them,
they imitate these wise maidens, as said that ancient Hermit, who never
departed their fathers house, but to carry water when their neighbors house
was surprised with fire. Charity and necessity being the only two causes
which might and ought justly interrupt the sweet repose of their silence. These
Hermites are absolutely and entirely subject to the Ordinaries, who are the
Bishops, they may be judged by their Officialls, they are subject to the visits
of their General Vicars and Archdeacons, and they acknowledge also for their
Superiors and Pastors, the Pastors in whose Parishesse are situated their
Hermitages. These do receive their holy habit at the hands of the Prelates, or
of such as are deputed by them to cloth them with the Ecclesiastical
benedictions and ceremonies, they go not out of the Diocese without leave,
they establish themselves in their dwellings with the permissio^ and leave of
the Bishops and Pastors, and also with the consent A good example for Regulars.
of the neighboring people, they do not beg but with the license of the
Pastors; in sum they depend in all things of their wills. If they be
Priests, they make the two solemn vows annexed to holy orders, between the
hands of the most Reverend Bishop who does consecrat them, which are the vows
of chastity and obedience, and that they may not loose also the merit of the
vow of poverty, besides the practice which they make of it by begging, many of
them do vow it between the hands of the Prelates or of their Officers, bereauing
themselves of all propriety, and reserving but the simple use of the alms
which are given them, ready to quitt the same at the first command of those
whom the heavens has given them for Superiors. What think, you Sir, are those
men in the state of perfection to be acquired as are the Conuentuall friars? I
would think they are, quoth Tristan, but the Conuentualls do not think it, who
do not put the state of perfection in the vows only, but do require besides
that they be made under some of the Rules approved by the Church.

Truly, quoth the Hermit, that is extreme rigor; but I pray you, what better
rule can we have then that of the Scripture, then the examples of the
Patriarchs and Prophets, who lived in the wilderness, then that of our
Savior fasting in the desert, transfiguring himself upon most Thabor, and
passing a great part of his life upon the most retired mountains; then that of
his forerunner saint John Baptist, then that of saint Paul the first Hermit,
of great saint Anthony, of saint Hilarion; in sum, of so many thousand
Anacoretes, whose names written in the book of life are glorious in heaven,
and blessed on earth? Can any man doubt but these excellent Anacoretes were in
the state of perfection although they did not make the three vows under any
rule? In good sooth, a man must have extraordinary patience to endure these
inequalities; and to speak with the sacred Amante; The children of my mother
fought against me, and put me, in the guard of the vignes. It did not appertain
but to S. Paul to diuulge his own proper praises with good grace, because he
did know how to referr all very properly to God, when he said: Not I, but the
grace of God in me, by which I am that which I am: but I did menage it well,
and in such sort as it was not inutile in my hands. I dare nevertheless praise
my soul in God as says the Psalmist, to the end to rejoice the courteous, and
tell you, that if so be the Regulars do say they are themselves in the state of
perfection, for having made the three vows under a certain Rule between the
hands of their Superiors, The Superiors of Regulars are but simple Priests.
who are but simple Priests, I think to have right to say the same, having
received my habit by the hands of a Bishop, made profession of the same vows
between his hands, under such rules and Constitutions as pleased his charity
to prescribe unto me, and having so submitted my will to his, that I have no
other desire but to obey him: When he bids me go, I go, when he bids me come,
I come, shuning no occasion by his commandment to do service according my
power to the sheep of his fold, with the permission of the Reverend Pastors;
In this sort I do visit the sick in these quarters, I confess those that come
to me, being for that purpose approved by the Ordinary, Regulars should have
the approbation of the Bishops.
I do administer to them the holy Eucharist when they come to the Oratorie of
this house; I go from village to village teaching the Christian doctrine to
children, Catechizing the rude, Eua^gelizing the poor, instructing the great
ones, and making exhortations to them according the tallent which God gave me.
If in conseque^s of this they do me some good, it is according the Apostle, to
reepe temporal things having sown spiritual things; and what I get over and
above what is necessary, I give it to the poor. Lo how I pass over this
life, caring little if I be in the state of perfection or no, so that I correct
my self of the imperfections which are unworthy of my estate, little curious
of those titles which the Cenobiticall friars do attribute to themselves, to be
the Coadiutours of the Bishops, Specious titles which the Regulars give to
themselves.
to be Apostolical men, to lead the Apostolical life, to be men sent by the
sea Apostolic to supply the defects of the ordinary Pastors, to be troops
of succor, to be the props of the Church, to be the pillars and firm colomnes
of her which is herself the colome and fundation of truth, knowing that all
these qualities are annexed to Priesthood, since that Prelates ordering Priests
do call them their cooperators and fellow workers, the supporters of their
Pastoral Order, and many other very honorable names. The condition of a Monk
is truly very venerable, so is that of Conuentuall friars, of Religious men;
let them call them as they will, and as they please, or in one word, that of
Regulars or of Friars, (albeit the Regular Clerks do apprehend as much to be
called this last name, as they would to handle a burning cole without tongs.)
But for my part, I believe that all men of good understanding will always
esteem as much The condition of a Priest is to be estimed as much or more, as
any other state in the Church.
and more the condition of a Priest as any of those. Notwithstanding to shun
the obstinat contention which the Apostle does so expressly forbid, it is better
leave them in the arbitrable possession of the state of perfection, seeing that
by their tongues as by the tongue of Hercules Gaulois the Destinies do spinne
the reputation of men, nothing being well done, according the Castilian
proverb, but that which proceeds out of a Monk or friars head.

THE RESPECT and honor which is due to the Order and dignity of Priesthood
declared and proved by the authority both of holy Scripture and of the ancient
Fathers of the Church.
YOU have seen gentle Reader in the precedent Discourse how the Regulars to
extol themselves are not content by their rigorous censures to give a sentence
of exclusion against Hermites and Secular Priests (as they term them) from the
state of perfection in which they place the meanest of themselves, in virtue of
their three vows of poverty, obedience and chastity, but also proclaim them
to be base and of no consideration. And that you may judge whether that be
conformable to the holy Scripture and to the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers of
the primative Church, I thought good to produce here a few authorities of the
one and of the other, proving the dignity and authority of Priests.

God instructing the children of Israel how to decide all controversies that
should arise amongst them, said: Thou shall come to the Priests of the
Leuiticall stock, and to the judge, that Deuteronomy. 17.
shall be at that time: and thou shall ask of them, who shall show thee the
truth The high Priests chief judge of all controversies
of the judgment. And thou shall do whatsoever they, that are presidentes of
the place, which our Lord shall choose, shall say and teach thee according to
his law; and thou shall follovv their sentence: neither shall thou decline to
the right hand nor to the left hand. But he that shall be proud, refusing to
obey the commandment of the Priest, which at that time ministers to our Lord
thy God, and the decree of the judge, that man shall die. What could be said
more to show the dignity and authority of Priests then whosoever would not
obey them, nor stand to their judgment should die; but that is not all.

The Prophet Malachias speaking of the covenant which God made with the tribe
of Leui says to the same purpose: The lips of the Priest Mala. 2*
shall keep knowledge, and the law they shall require of his mouth: because he
is the Angel of God.

The Ecclesiasticus teaching a man how to carry himself first toward God,
and after toward the Priests says Eccles. 7.
thus: In all thy soul fear our Lord, and sa^ctifie his Priests. And after;
Honor God withal thy soul, and honor the Priests.

Saint Peter who was a Priest himself speaks thus to Priests: You are an
elect generation, a kingly Priesthood, Pet. 2.
a holy Nation a people of purchasse.

Was it not to Priests that our Savior himself said: Whatsoever you Matt. 18.
v. 18.
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever you
shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in heaven.

Many other passages might be produced out of holy Scripture to prove the
dignity of Priests, and the respect which is due to them, but these shall
fuffice at this time so you consider them well: for you see that to Priests God
gave power to judge and decide all controversies, and that he gave sentence of
death upon any that would not obey them. You see moreover that they are called
the Angels of God, that all men were commanded to honor and respect them,
that they are called an elect generation, a holy nation, and that their
Priesthood is a Royal dignity. And which is more then all that, you see how
CHRIST gave them the power to loose and bind upon earth, and that their act
therein is ratified in heaven.

Now rests to show what the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church do say of
Priesthood, and in what esteem Priests were in their time, in which there was
no speech neither of Benedictins which are the Ancie^test in our Latin Church,
and began the year 529. nor of Dominicans, nor Franciscans, which began the
year 1209. nor yet of Augustins, nor Carmelites as they are approved by the
Church, no nor of Bernardins, much less of the rest which now, flourish in the
Church under several names, but all was ruled and governed by Priests.

Saint Ignatius Martyr and the third Bishop of Antiochia after S. Peter
commanding all lay persons to be subject unto, and reverence Epist. ad Smyrn.
Priests and Diacons says thus: Diaconos reuereamini vt ex Dei praecepto
ministrantes: Honor yea the Deacons as ministering by the precept of God.
Epist. ad Ephesians.
And after: Enitimini charissimi subiecti esse Episcopo and Presbyteris and
Diaconis. Qui enim his obedit, obedit Christo. My dearest do your best to be
subject to the Bishop, and Priests, and Deacons, for he that obeys these
obeys CHRIST.

Saint Policarp disciple to saint John the Apostle says: Subiectiestote
Epist. ad Philip.
Presbyteris, and Diaconis, sicut Deo, and CHRISTO. Be yea subject unto the
Priests and Deacons, as to God and CHRIST.

Saint Clement disciple to saint Peter, says: Presbyteris si assidue in
studio Constable. Apost. l. 2. c. 8.
docendi verbum Dei laborauerint, seponatur dupla etiam portio in gratiam
Apostolorum Christi, quorum locum tenent, c. 35.
tanquam Consiliarij Episcopi and Senatus Ecclesiae. Si de parentibus secundum
c. 38.
carnem ait diuina Scriptura: Honora patrem and matrem vt been tibi sit. Et qui
maledicit patri aut matri, morte moriatur: Quanto magis de Patribus
spiritualibus Priests are spiritual Fathers.
verbis Dei moneamur, honor and charitate eos prosequi, vt beneficos and ad
Deum Legatos. Quanto anima corpore praestantior est, tanto est Sacerdotium
regno excellentius. Let there be a double portion, reserved for the Priests in
honor of the Apostles of CHRIST, which shall have labored in teaching of the
word of God diligently, whose places they enjoy, as Counselors of the
Bishop, and the crown of the Church. They are the Council and Senate of the
Church. If the holy Scripture says of carnal parents: Honor thy Father and
thy mother, that it may be well with thee. And whosoever does curse his father
or his mother, shall die: how much more shall we be admonished by the Priests
are spiritual
words of God, of our Spiritual Fathers, to respect them with honor and
charity, as beneficial to us and Legates to God? How much more noble the soul
is then the body, so much more excellent is Priesthood before a kingdom. And
S. Ignatius Epist. ad Smyrn.
adds: Sacerdotium est omnium bonorum, que in hominibus sunt apex; qui
aduersus illud furit, non hominem ignominia afficit, sed Deum and Christum
Iesum primogenitum, qui natura solus est summus Sacerdos Patris. Priesthood is
the ornament of all things, which are in men; whosoever does rage against it,
he does not dishonor a man, but God and Christ Jesus the first begotten, who
by nature is the only high Priest of his Father. The Apostles write by saint
Clements Constable. l. 2. cap. 2.
pen: Si Reges inuadens supplicio dignus indicatur, quamuis filius vel amicus
sit, quanto magis. qui Sacerdotibus insultat: quanto enim Sacerdotium regno est
excellentius, cum regendarum animarum officio praesit, tanto grauiori supplicio
punitur, qui aduersus id aliquid temere fecerit, quam qui aduersus regnum: If
he that sets on a king is judged worthy of punishment, although he be his
son or his friend, how much more should he be blame worthy that insulteth over
Priests. For by how much more Priesthod excels a kingdom, when it does by
office govern The prerogative of Pastors.
souls, by so much more greater punishment is he to be afflicted, who shall
rashly do any thing against it, then he who has offended a kingdom.

Presbyteri sunt (says saint Ignatius) Epist. ad Trallen.
concessus quidam and coniunctus Apostolorum Chorus, sine his Ecclesia electa
non est: nulla sine his Sanctorum Congregatio, nulla Sanctorum electio. Quid
Sacerdotium aliud est, quam sacer caetus, Consiliarij and assessores Episcopi.
Priests are indeed a certain Assembly, and united quier of the Apostles.
Without The Church cannot be without priests.
these the Church is not chosen, without these there is no Congregation of
Saints, nor election of Saints. What else is Priesthood, then an holy
Assembly Consellours and Assistants of the Bishops?

Saint Anacletus Pope living in this age and made Priest by S. Peter, says:
Epist. 2.
Iniuria Sacerdotum pertinet ad Christum, cuius vice funguntur. The injury
done unto Priests, appertain to Christ, whose place they supplieth.

Saint Chrysostom treating of Homil. 5. de verb. Isaiae: Vidi Dominum.
the same matter and comparing a Priest to a king, says: Ne mihi narres
purpuram neque Diadema, neque vestes aureas, vmbrae sunt isthaec omnia,
vernisque flosculis leuiora. Ne inquam mihinarres ista, sed si vis videre
discrimen quantum absit Rex a Sacerdote, expende modum potestatis vtrique
traditae, videbis Sacerdotem multo sublimius Rege sedentem. Regius thronus
rerum terrenarum administrationem sortitus est, nec vltra potestatem hanc
praeterea quicquam habet authoritatis: Verum Sacerdoti thronus in caelis
collocatus est, and de caelestibus negotijs pronu^tiandi habet authoritatem.
Quis haec dicit? ipse caelorum Rex: Quaecu^que ligaueritis superterra^, erunt
ligata and in caelis, and quecunque solueritis super terra^, eru^t soluta and
in celis. Deus ipsum Regale caput Sacerdotis manibus subiecit, nos erudiens,
quod hic princeps est illo mayor. Speak not to me of these things, but if thou will see the power given to them both, thou shall see the Priest sitting much
higher in dignity then the king. The throne of a king is chosen of the
administration of earthly things: neither has he any other authority besides
this: but to a Priest a throne is placed in heaven, and he has authority to
judge of heavenly business. Who says this? The king of heaven himself.
Whatsoever ye shall bind upon earth shall be bound also in the heavens: and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in the heavens. God has
subjected to the hands of the Priests the Regal head, teaching us, that this
Prince is greater then that. The same Author speaking further of this matter
says: Sacerdotibus datum est, vt potestatem habeant, Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerd.
quam Deus neque Angelis neque Archangelis datam esse voluit. Neque enim ad
illos dictum est: Quaecunque alligaueritis in terra, erunt alligata and in
caelo, Et quaecunque solueritis in terra erunt soluta and in caelo. It is given
to Priests, that they shall have power, which God would have given neither to
Angels nor Archangels. For it is not said to them: whatsoever you shall bind
upon earth shall be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever you shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven. The power of binding which is in Princes, is
only over bodies, that of Priests over souls, and extends to heaven.

A continuation of the same Author: Chrysostom. ibidem.
Habent and terrestres Principes vinculi potestatem verum corporum solum: id
autem quod dico Sacerdotum vinculum ipsam etiam animam contingit atque ad
caelos vsque peruadit. Terrene Princes also have the power of fetters, but of
the body only; but that which I say, the bonds of Priests touches the soul it
self, and passes unto the heavens. This is the doctrine delivered by CHRIST,
so expounded both by the Greek and Latin Church.

Item, In an other place he says: An Chrysostom. Homil. 2. super 2. ad Timot.
ignoras quid sit Sacerdos? Angelus vtique Domini est, non ex se ipso loquitur,
si despicis, non illum despicis sed Deum qui illu^ ordinauit. Art thou ignorant
what is a Priest? he is verily the Angel of our Lord, he does not speak of
himself, if you despise, it is not him that you despise, but God who ordained
him.

And in an other place: Monachorum certamen ingens and labor multus est: Verum
si confer quis volet instituti illius sudores Chrysostom. lib. de Sacerd.
cum recte administrato Sacerdotio, certe tantu^ esse inter duo illa discrimen
comperiet, quantu^ est inter priuatu^ and Regem. The conflict and labor of
Monks is great: but if any would confer the pains and labor of that
institution with priesthood duly administered; truly he shall find as much
difference between them both as between a king and a private man. Lo how far
he putts a Priest beyond a Monk or Religious man.

Saint Hierome who was himself a S. Hier. in Malac. 3.
Religious man says: Sacerdotibus ac Leuitis honorem debitum deferamus: quod
qui non fecerit, Deum fraudare and supplantare conuincitur. Let us give due
honor to Priests and Levites: which, who will not do is manifestly proved to
defraude and supplant God.

The same Author in an other place Epist, ad Heliod.
says: Mihi ante Presbyterum sedere non licet, illi si peccauero licet tradere
me Sathane in interitu^ carnis. It is not lawful for me to sit before the
Priest, for him it is lawfall if I sin, to deliver me up to Satan, to the
destruction of the flesh.

Saint Ambrose in his learned treatise of the dignity of Priests salutes Lib.
de dig. Sacer.
them with those venerable Epitets: Audite me, beatissimi Patres, etsi dignum
ducitis, sanctissimi Fratres, audite me stirps Leuitica, germen Sacerdotale,
propago sanctificata, Duces and Rectores gregis Christi. Et paulo post. Honor
and sublimitas Sacerdotalis, nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari, si Regum
fulgori compares, and Principum diademati, long erit inferius, quam si plumbi
metallu^, auri fulgorem co^pares: quippe cum videas Regum and Principum colla
submitti genibus Sacerdotum, and exosculatis eorum dextris orationibus eorum
credunt se communiri.

Hear me, most blessed Fathers, and if you take it in good part, most holy It
is due to Priests to be called Fathers.
Brothers, hear me you Leuiticall stock, you Sacerdotall branch, you
sanctified race, you leaders and governors of Christ's flock. And a little
after; The honor and sublimitie of priesthood cannot be equalized by any
comparisons, if you compare it to the splendour of kings, and to Princes
crowns, that will be far more unequal to it, then if you did compare the
metal of lead to the splendour of gold: for you see the necks of kings and
Princes bowed down to the knees of Priests, and having kissed their right
hands they believe that they are fortified and strengthened by their prayers.

S. Chrysostom wrote six books of the dignity and power of Priests putting
it above all kings, Princes and Potentats of the earth, and in his third book
he says thus: Sacerdotium ipsum in terra quidem peragitur, sed in rerum
caelestium classem, ordinemque referendum est, atque id quidem merito; quippe
non mortalis quispiam, non Angelus, non alia quaeuis creata potentia, sed Deus
ipse ordinem huiusmodi disponit. Prieshood truly is exercised in earth, but it
is to be referred to the rank and order of celestial things, and that truly
very worthily; because it is no mortal man, nor Angel nor any other created
power, but God himsef that does dispose and appoint this order.

Sacerdotibus sicut Episcopis, inquit sanctus Isidorus, dispensatio Mysteriorum
Dei commissa est: praesunt enim Lib. 2. de Diu. Off. cap. 7.
Ecclesiae, and in confectione diuina corporis and sanguinis consortes cum
Episcopo sunt, similiter in doctrina populorum and in officio predicationis. To
Priests as to Bishops the dispensation of the mysteries of God is committed:
for that they bear the rule in the Church and in the divine consecration of
the body and blood of Christ, they are consorts with the Bishops likewise in
teaching the people, and in the office of preaching.

Philippus de Hareing a Religious and a most learned Abbot in his work which
he wrote four hundred and fifty years ago: De dignitate, scientia and
iustitia and continentia Cleritorum, does highly commend the Regulars, but in
every chapter he prefers the Clergy before all Regulars, though himself was
one: In his 17. chapter he says thus: Nostrum est nouissimum locum eligere nec
ad altiora volatu praesumptuoso nos ipsos erigere. It is our parts (that is to
say, the part of Religious men) to choose the last place, and not by a
presumptuous flight to eleuat our selves to higher things. And in his 17.
epistle he says, that from all the bounds and limits of the earth, all
antiquity did ever extol the Clericall order, and ever gave it amongst the
other Orders the principal rank and degree, and though by divine disposition
a Soildiour or Rustique do excel in sanctity, yet the Clergy man in
excellency of Ecclesiastical dignity; and although the Clergy man, as we do
sometimes, decline to worldly things, and to the weak and poor elements, yet
their Order declineth not in authority. Thus he: To which I must add this
other passage of saint Jerome which does occur unto me: Communi Presbyterorum
Concilio Ecclesiae S. Hier in ep. ad Tit.
gubernabantur: The Churches were governed by the common council of Priests;
And I must not forget this passage of Bellarmin who was a Jesuit and a
Cardinal: Tria sunt Ecclesiae membra praecipua, primum eorum est, qui in statu
perfectionis Belar. l. 2. cap. 5. de Gemitu Columbae.
adeptae esse dicuntur, qui sunt Episcopi Ecclesiarum Principes, and Magistri,
quibus adiungimus Presbyteros qui sunt minores Sacerdotes, atque eorum
administros. There are three chief members of the church; the first of them
are those that are said to be in the state of perfection acquired, which are
the Bishops the Princes and masters of the churches, to which we join the
Priests, who are the inferior Priests, and their assistants. And the same
Author in the preface of his second book, De Monachis says: Disseruimus,
libro superiori de Episcopis and Clericis, id est, de prima and nobilissima
part corporis Eclesiastici: We have discoursed in the former book of Bishops
and Clergymen that is to say, of the chief and noblest part of the
Ecclesiastical body.

The Council of Trent speaking of the Hierarchy of the Church says thus: Si
quis dixerit in Ecclesia Catholica Can. 6.
non esse Hierarchiam Diuina ordinatione institutam que constat ex Episcopis,
Presbyteris and ministris anathemasit. Whosoever will say that in the Catholic
Church there is not a Hierarchy instituted by divine ordinance, which
consists of Bishops, Priests and Ministers, let him be cursed. Lo, You see
that the Council makes no mention here of Regulars, which by all likelihoode
it would have done, if they had been of this Hierarchy.

To be brief in all these passages, both out of Scripture and out of the
Fathers which are not the tieth of the passages which might be produced for
this matter, the Reader will see but little or no mention of Regulars; and in
the little mention that is made of them by late writers, he shall find that
Priests, both for dignity and office are still preferred to them, and are put
in a far higher rank then they; which considered, he may conclude with him
self that the propositions specified in the Dedicatorie Epistle of this
Tretise, are of a new stamp forged by the Regulars themselves: For had there
been any such prerogative granted to them by God or by his Church, who can
imagine that all ancient writers, speaking of all the members and dignities of
the Church would omit to speak of them, and of these prerogatives which now
they challenge to themselves? Notwithstanding I do not wish Priests (but
counsel the contrary) to take any pride of this, nor set the less by
Regulars, but acknowledge them to be a noble and profitable portion of Gods
Church, and as such to embrace and cherish them; and rather receive injuries
patiently of them, then offer them any, remembering that saying of the Apostle:
If you bite and eat one an other: take Gal. 5. v. 15
heed you be not consumed one of an other.

FINIS.

