THE TRAGEDY OF CHABOT ADMIRAL OF FRANCE: As it was presented by her
Majesty's Servants, at the private House in Drury Lane.

Written by George Chapman, and James Shirly.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and William Cook.

1639.

Speakers.
ASall. Allegre. King. Queen. Treasuror. Chancellor. Admiral. Father.
General. Chabot. Judges. Officers. Secretary. Vshers. Constable. Courtiers.
Porter. Guard.
THE TRAGEDY OF PHILIP CHABOT, ADMIRAL of FRANCE.
Actus Primus.
Enter Asall, and Allegre. Asall. NOw Phillip Chabot, Admiral of France,
The great, and only famous Favorite
To Francis first of that Imperial name,
Has found a fresh competitor in glory,
(Duke Montmorancie, Constable of France)
Who drinks as deep as he of the stream Royal,
And may in little time convert the strength
To raise his spring, and blow the others fall.

Al. The world would wish it so, that will not patiently
Endure the due rise of a virtuous man.

As. If he be virtuous, what is the reason
That men affect him not, why is he lost
Toth' general opinion, and become
Rather their hate than love?

Al. I wonder you
Will question it, ask a ground or reason
Of men bred in this vile degenerate age;
The most men are not good, and it agrees not
With impious natures to allow what is honest,
It Is an offense enough to be exalted
To regal favors, great men are not safe
In their own vice, where good men by the hand
Of Kings are planted to survey their workings;
What man was ever fixed 'ith Sphere of honor,
And precious to his Sovereign, whose actions,
Nay very soul was not exposed to every
Common and base dissection? and not only
That which in Nature has excuse, and in
Themselves is priviledg'd by name of frailty,
But even Virtues are made crimes, and doomed
Toth' fate of Treason.

As. A bad age the while,
I ask your pardon Sir, but thinks your judgment,
His love to Justice, and Corruptions hate
Are true and hearty?

Al. Judge your self by this
One argument, his hearty truth to all,
For in the heart has anger his wisest seat,
And against unjust suites such brave anger fires him,
That when they seek to pass his place and power,
Though moved, and urged by the other minion,
Or by his greatest friends, and even the King
Lead them to his allowance with his hand,
First given in Bill, assigned, even then his spirit,
(In nature calm as any Summers evening)
Puts up his Whole powers like a Winters sea,
His blood boyles over, and his heart even cracks
At the injustice, and he tears the Bill,
And would do, were he for it to be torn in pe^ces.

As. It Is brave I swear.

Al. Nay it is worthy your wonder
That I must tell you further, there no Needle
In a Sun Dial placed upon his steel
In such a tender posture, that does tremble
The timely Dial being held amiss,
And will shake ever, till you hold it right
More tender than himsefe in any thing
That he concludes in Justice for the State:
For as a fever held him, he will shake
When he is signing any things of weight,
Least humane frailty should misguide his justice.

As. You have declared him a most noble ^usticer.

Al. He truly weighes and feels Sir, what a charge
The subjects livings are (being even their lives
Laid on the hand of power,) which abused
Though seen, blood flow not from the justice seat,
It Is in true sense as grievous, and horrid.

As. It argues nothing less, but since your Lord
Is diversely reported for his parts,
What Is your true c^nsure of his general worth,
Virtue and Judgment.

Al. As of a Picture wrought to opticke reason,
That to all passers by, seems as they move
Now woman, now a Monster, now a Devil,
And till you stand, and in a right line view it,
You cannot well judge what the maine form is,
So men that view him but in vulgar passes
Casting but laterall, or partial glances,
At what he is, suppose him weak, unjust,
Bloody, and monstrous, but stand free and fast,
And judge him by no more than what you know
Ingenuously, and by the right laid line
Of truth, he truly, will all styles deserve
Of wise, just, good, a man both soul and nerve.

As. Sir, I must join in just belief with you,
But what is his rival the Lord high Constable?

Al. As just, and well inclined when he is himself,
(Not wrought on with the counsels, and opinions
Of other men) and the maine difference is,
The Admiral is not flexible nor won
To move one scruple, when he comprehends
The honest tract and justness of a cause,
The Constable explores not so sincerely
The course he runs, but takes the mind of others
(By name Judicial) for what his own
Judgment, and knowledge should conclude.

As. A fault
In my apprehension, another knowledge
Applied to my instruction, cannot equal
My own souls knowledge, how to inform Acts;
The Suns rich radiance shot through waves most fair,
Is but a shadow to his beams in the air,
His beams that in the air we so admire,
Is but a darkness to his flame in fire,
In fire his fervor but as vapor flies
To what his own pure bosom rarifies:
And the Almighty wisdom, having given
Each man within himself an apter light
To guide his acts, than any light without him
(Creating nothing not in all things equal)
It seems a fault in any that depend
On others knowledge, and exile their own.

Al. It Is nobly argued, and exemplified,
But now I hear my Lord, and his young rival
Are to be reconciled, and then one light
May serve to guide them both.

As. I wish it may, the King being made first mover
To form their reconcilement, and inflame it
With all the sweetness of his praise and honor.

Al. See, it is dispatched I hope, the King does grace it.

Loud Music, and Enter Vshers before, the Secretary, Tresuror, Chancellor,
Admiral, Constable hand in hand, the King following, others attend. Kin. This
does express the noblest fruit of peace.

Cha. Which when the great begin, the humble end
In joyful imitation, all combining
A guardian beyond the Thrigian knot
Past wit to lose it, or the sword, be still so.

Tree. It Is certain Sir, by concord least things grow
Most great, and flourishing like trees that wrap
Their forehead in the skies, may these do so.

Kin. You hear my Lord, all that is spoke contends
To celebrate with pious vote the atonement
So lately, and so nobly made between you.

Ad. Which for it self Sir, resolve to keep
Pure, and inviolable, needing none
To encourage or confirm it, but my own
Love and allegiance to your sacred counsel.

Kin. It Is good, and pleases, like my dearest health,
Stand you firm on that sweet simplicity.

Con. Past all earth policy that would infringe it.

Kin. It Is well, and answers all the doubts suspected*
Enter one that whispers with the Admiral. And what moves this close message
Phillip?

Adm. My wives Father Sir, is closely come to Court.

King. Is he come to the Court, whose aversation
So much affects him, that he shunnes and flies it,
What Is the strange reason that he will not rise
Above the middle region he was borne in?

Adm. He says Sir, it is because the extreme of height
Makes a man less seem to the imperfect eye
Then he is truly, his acts envied more,
And though he nothing cares for seeming, so
His being just stand firm twixt heaven and him,
Yet since in his souls jealousy, he fears
That he himself advanced, would undervalue
Men placed beneath him, and their business with him,
Since height of place often dazles height of judgment,
He takes his top* sail down in such rough storms,
And apts his sails to airs more temperate.

Kin. A most wise soul he has, how long shall King^
Raise men that are not wise till they be high*
You have our leave, but tell him Phillip we
Would have him nearer.

Con. Your desires attend you.

Enter another. Kin. We know from whence you come, say to the Queen*
We were coming to her, it is a day of love
And she seals all perfection.

Exit Tree. My Lord,
We must beseech your stay.

Con. My stay?

Cha. Our Counsels
Have led you thus far to your reconcilement,
And must remember you, to observe the end
At which in plain I told you then we aimed at,
You know we all urged the atonement, rather
To enforce the broader difference between you,
Then to conclude your friendship, which wise men
Know to be fashionable, and priviledg'd policy*
And will succeed betwixt you, and the Admiral
As sure as fate, if you please to get signed
A suit now to the King with all our hands,
Which will so much increase his precise justice,
That weighing not circumstances of politic State,
He will instantly oppose it, and complain,
And urge in passion, what the King will sooner
Punish than yield too, and so render you
In the Kings frown on him, the only darling*
And mediate power of France.

Con. My good Lord Chancellor,
Shall I so late atton'd, and by the Kings
Hearty and earnest motion, fall in pieces?

Cha. It Is he, not you that break.

Tree. Ha not you patience
To let him burn himself in the Kings flame?

Cha. Come, be not Sir infected with a spice
Of that too servile equity, that renders
Men free borne slaves, and rid with bits like horses,
When you must know my Lord, that even in nature
A man is Animal politicum,
So that when he informs his actions simply
He does in both against policy and nature,
And therefore our soul motion is affirmed
To be like heavenly natures circular*
And circles being called ambitious lines,
We must like them become ambitious ever,
And endless in our circumventions;
No tough hides limiting our cheverill minds.

Tree. It Is learnedly, and past all answer argued,
Yare great, and must grow greater still, and greater,
And not be like a dull and standing lake,
That settles, putrifies, and chokes with mudde,
But like a river gushing from the head,
That winds through the undervalles, what checkes ore flowing
Gets strength still of his course,
Till with the Ocean meeting, even with him
In sway, and title, his brave billows move.

Con. You speak a ra^e affection, and high souls,
But give me leave great Lords, still my just thanks
Remembered* ^o your counsels and direction,
I seeking this way to confirm my self
I undermine the columns that support
My hopeful glorious fortune, and at once
Provoke the tempest* though did drown my envy,
With what assurance shall the King expect
My faith to him, that break it for another,
He has engaged our peace, and my revenge
Forfits my trust with him, whose narrow ^ight
Will penetrate through all our mists, could we
Veil our design with clouds blacker than night;
But grant this danger over, with what Justice,
Or satisfaction to the inward Judge,
Shall I be gultie of this good man's ruin,
Though I may still the murmuring tongues without me,
Loud conscience has a voice to shadder greatness*

Secr. A name to fright, and terrify young statists,
There is necessity my Lord, that you
Must lose your light, if you eclipse not him,
Two stars so Lucide cannot shine at once
In such a firmament, and better you
Extinguish his fires, then be made his fuel,
And in your ashes give his slame a Trophy.

Cha. My Lord, the league that you have vowed of friendship,
In a true understanding not confines you,
But makes you boundless, turn not edge at such
A liberty, but look to your own fortune;
Secure your honor, a Precisian,
In state, is a rideculous miracle
Friendship is but a visor, beneath which
A wise man laughes to see whole families
Ruinde, upon whose miserable pile
He mounts to glory, Sir you must resolve
To use any advantage.

Con. Misery
Of rising Statesmen I must on, I see
That against the politic, and priviledg'd f^shion,
All justice tastes but affectation.

Cha. Why so? we shall do good on him in the end.

Exeunt. Enter Father and the Admiral. Adm. You are most welcome.

Fa. I wish your Lordships safety*
Which whilst I pray for, I must not forget
To urge again the ways to fix you where
No danger has access to threaten you.

Adm. Still your old argument, I owe your love fort.

Fa. But fortified with new and pregnant reasons,
That you should leave the Court.

Ad. I dare not Sir.

Fa. You dare be undone then.

Ad. I should be ungrateful
To such a master, as no subject boasted
To leave his service when they exact
My chiefest duty, and attendance Sir.

Fa. Would thou went less degraded from thy titles,
And swelling offices, that will in the end
Engulfe thee past a rescue, I had not come
So far to trouble you at this time, but that
I do not like the loud tongues of the world,
That say the King has taken another favorite,
The Constable a gay man, and a great,
With a hugh train of faction too, the Queen,
Chancellor, Treasurer, Secretary, and
An army of state warriers* whose discipline
Is sure, and subtle to confusion,
I hope the rumour's false, thou art so calm.

Adm. Report has not abused you Sir.

Fa. It has not,
And you are pleased, then you do mean to mix
With unjust courses, the great Constable
And you combining, that no suite may pass
One of the graples of your eithers rape,
I that abhorred, must I now entertain
A thought, that your so straight, and simple custom
To render Justice, and the common good,
Should now be patched with policy, and wrested
From the ingenious step you took,
And hang
Upon the shoulders of your enemy
To bear you out in what you shame to act*

Adm. Sir, We both are reconciled.

Fa. It follows then that both the acts must bear
Like reconcilement, and if he will now
Malign and malice you for crossing him
Or any of his faction in their suites,
Being now atton'd, you must be one in all,
One in corruption, and twixt you two millstones
New picked, and put together, must the grain
Of good men's needful means to live, be ground
Into your choking superfluities;
You both too rich, they ruinde.

Adm. I conceive Sir
We both may be enriched, and raise our fortunes
Even with our places in our Sovereigns favor:
Though past the height of others, yet within
The rules of Law and Justice, and approove
Our actions white and innocent.

Fa. I doubt it
While enforced show perhaps, which will I fear
Prove in true substance but a Millers whiteness,
More sticking in your clothes then conscience.

Adm. Your censure herein tastes some passion Sir,
And I beseech you nourish better thoughts,
Then to imagine that the Kings mere grace
Sustaines such prejudice by those it honors;
That of necessity we must pervert it
With passionate enemies, and ambitious boundless
Avarice, and every license incident
To fortunate greatness, and that all abuse it
For the most impious avarice of some.

Fa. As if the total sum of favorites frailties
Affected not the full rule of their Kings
In their own partially disposed ambitions,
And that Kings do no hazard infinitely
In their free realties of rights and honors,
Where they leave much for favorites powers to order.

Adm. But we have such a master of our King
In the Imperial art, that no power flies
Out of his favor, but his policy ties
A criance to it, to contain it still;
And for the reconcilement of us Sir,
Never were two in favor, that were more,
One in all love of Justice, and true honor,
Though in the act and pro^ecution
Pehaps we differ. Howsoever yet
One beam us both creating, what should let
That both our souls should both one met^le bear,
And that one stamp, one word, one character.

Fa. I could almost be won to be a Courtier,
There Is some thing more in's composition,
Then ever yet was favorites.
Enter a Courtier. What Is he?

Cour. I bring your Lordship a signed bill, to ^ave
The addition of your honored hand, the counsel
Have all before subscribed, and full prepared it.

Ad. It seems then they have weighed the importance of it,
And know the grant is just.

Cour. No doubt my Lord,
Or else they take therein the Constables word,
It being his suite, and his power having wrought
The King already to appose his hand.

Adm. I do not like his working of the King,
For if it be a suite made known to him,
And fit to pass, he wrought himself to it,
However my hand goes to no such grant,
But first I Will know and censure it my self.

Cour. A he, if thou be goddess of contention*
That Jove took by the hair, and hurled from heaven
Assume in earth thy empire, and this bill
Thy firebrand make to turn his love, thus tempted
Into a hate, as horrid as thy furies.

Adm. Does this bear title of his Lordships suite?

Cour. It does my Lord, and therefore he beseech'd
The rather your dispatch.

Adm. No thought the rather,
But now the rather all powers against it,
The suite being most injust, and he pretending
In all his actions justice, on the sudden
After his so late vow not to violate it,
Is strange and vile, and if the King himself
Should own and urge it, I would stay* and cross it,
For it is within the free power of my office,
And I should strain his kingdom if I past it,
I see their poor attempts, and giddy malice;
Is this the reconcilement that so lately
He vowed in sacred witness of the King?
Assuring me, he never more would offer
To pass a suite unjust, which I well know
This is, above all, and have often been urged
To give it passage, be you Sir the Judge.

Fa. I wonot meddle
With any thing of state, you knew long since.

Adm. Yet you may hear it Sir.

Fa. You wonot urge
My opinion then, go to.

Adm. An honest merchant
Presuming on our league of France with Spain,
Brought into Spain a wealthy ship, to vent
Her fit commodities to serve the country,
Which, in the place of suffering their sail
Were seas'd to recompense a Spanish ship
Prized by a French man, ere the league was made,
No suites, no letters of our Kings could gain
Our merchants first right in it, but his letters
Vnreverently received, the Kings self scandal,
Beside the leagues breach, and the foul injustice
Done to our honest merchant, who endured all,
Till some small time since (authorized by our counsel,
Though not in open Court*) he made a ship out,
And took a Spaniard, brings all home, and sues
To gain his full proved loss, full recompense
Of his just prize, his prize is staid and ceaz'd,
Yet for the Kings disposure, and the Spaniard
Makes suite to be restored her, which this bill
Would f^ine get granted, faining (as they hoped)
With my allowance, and way given to make
Our Country man's in Spain their absolute prize.

Fa. I were absolute injustice.

Adm. Should I pass it.

Fa. Pass life, and state before.

Adm. If this would seem
His Lordships suite, his love to me, and justice
Including plots upon me, while my simpleness
Is seriously vowed to reconcilement;
Love him good vulgars, and abhor me still,
For if I court your slatterie with my crimes,
Heavens love before me fly, till in my tomb
I stick pursuing it, and for this bill,
Thus say it was shivered, bless us equal heaven!

Exit. Fa. This could I cherish, now above his loss,
You may report as much, the bill discharged Sir.

Exeunt. Actus Secundus.
Enter King and Queen, Secretary with the Torn bill. Kin. IS it en^*so.

Que. Good heaven how tame you are?
Do Kings of France reward foul Traitors thus?

Kin. No Traitor, you are too loud* Chabots no Traitor,
He has the passions of a man about him,
And multiplicitie of cares may make
Wise men forget themselves, come be you patient.

Qu. Can you be so, and see your self thus torn.

Kin. Our self.

Qu. There is some left, if yo^ dare own,
Your royal character, is not this your name?

Kin. It Is Francis I confess.

Qu. Be but a name
If this stain live upon it, affronted, by
Your subject, shall the sacred name of King,
A word to make your nation bow and tremble,
Be thus profain'd, are laws established
To punish the defacers of your image,
But dully set by the rude hand of others
Upon your coin, and shall the character
That does include the blessing of all France,
Your name, thus written by your royal hand
Designed for Justice, and your Kingdoms honor,
Not call up equal anger to reward it?
Your Counselors of state contemned, and slighted
As in this brain more circumscribed all wisdom,
And policy of Empire, and your power,
Subordinate and subject to his passion.

Kin. Come, it concerns you not.

Qu. Is this the consequence
Of an atonement made so lately between*
The hopeful Mountmorencie, and his Lordship
Urge by your self with such a precious sanction;
Come, he that dares do this, wants not a heart,
But opportunity.

Kin. To do what?

Qu. To tear your crown off.

Kin. Come your language does taste more
Of rage and womanish flame than solid reason
Against the Admiral, what commands of yours
Not to your expectation* obeyed
By him, is ground of your so keen displeasure?

Qu. Commands of mine? he is too great, and powerful
To stoop to my employment, a Colossus,
And can stride from one Province to another
By the assistance o^ those offices
You have most confidently imposed upon him,
It Is he, not you take up the peoples eyes
And admiration, while his Princely wise.

Kin. Nay then I reach the spring of your distaste,
He has a wife, --

Enter Chancellor, Treasurer, and whisper with the King. Qu. Whom for her pride
I love not,
And I but in her husbands ruin
Can triumph ore her greatness.

King. Well, well, I Will think on it?

Exit. Cha. He begins to incline,
Madam you are the soul of our great work.

Qu. I Will follow, and employ my powers upon him.

Tree. We are confident you will prevail at last,
And for the pious work oblige the King to you.

Cha, And us your humblest creatures.

Que. Press no further.
Exit. Que.
Cha. Lets seek out my Lord Constable.

Tree. And inflame him.

Cha. To expostulate with Chabot, something may
Arise from thence, *to pull more weight upon him.

Exeunt. Enter Father and Allegre. Fa. How sorts the business? how took the
King
The tearing of his bill?

Al. Exceeding well,
And seemed to smile at all their grimme complaints,
Against all that outrage to his highness hand,
And said in plain, he signed it but to try
My Lords firm Justice

Fa. What a sweet King it is?

Al. But how his rival the Lord Constable
Is labored by the Chancellor, and others to retort
His wrong with ten parts more upon my Lord,
Is monstrous?

Fa. Need he their spurs?

Al. I Sir, for he is afraid
To bear himself too boldly in his braves
Upon the King (being newly entered Mynion)
Since it is but patience sometime they think;
Because the favor spending in two streams,
One must run low at length, till when he dare
Take fire in such flame, as his faction wishes,
But with wise fear contains himself, and so
Like a green faggot in his kindling smoakes,
And where the Chancellor his chief Cyclops finds
The fire within him apt to take, he blows,
And then the faggot flames, as never more
The bellows needed, till the too soft greenenesse
Of his state habit, shows his sap still flows,
Above the solid timber, with which, then
His blaze shrinkes head, he cooles, and smoakes again.

Fa. Good man he would be, wod the bad not spoil him.

Al. True sir, but they still ply him with their arts,
And as I heard have wrought him, personally
To question my Lord with all the bitterness
The galls of all their faction can power in,
And such an expectation hangs upon it,
Though all the Court as twere with child, and longed
To make a mirror of my Lords clear blood,
And therein see the full ebb of his flood,
And therefore if you please to counsel him
You shall perform a fathers part.

Fa. Nay since
He Is gone so far, I wod not have him fear
But dare them, and yet i will not meddle int.
Enter Admiral. Hoes here, if he have wit to like his cause,
His spirit wonot be ashamed to die int.

Exit. Al. My Lord retire, you are waylaid in your walks,
Your friends are all fallen from you, all your servants
Suborned by all advantage to report
Each word you whisper out, and to serve you
With hat and knee, while other have their hearts.

Adm. Much profit may my foes make of such servants,
I love no enemy I have so well,
To take so ill a bargain from his hands.

Al. Their other odds yet shun, all being combinde,
And lodged in ambush ariv'd to do you mischief
By any means past fear of law, or sovereign.

Adm. I wa^ke no desert, yet go armed with that,
That would give wildest beasts instincts to rescue,
Rather then offer any force to hurt me;
My innocence is, which is a conquering justice,
As wears a shield, that both defends and fights.

All. One against all the world.

Adm. The more the odds,
The less the conquest, or if all the world
Be thought an army fit to employ against one,
That one is argued fit to fight against all;
If I fall under them, this breast shall bear
Their heap digested in my sepulcher,
Death is the life of good men, let them come.

Enter Constable, Chancellor, Treasurer, Secretary. Con. I thought my Lord our
reconcilement perfect,
You have expressed what sea of gall flowed in you,
In tearing of the bill I sent to allow.

Adm. Dare you confess the sending of that bill.

Con. Dare, why not?

Adm. Because it break your oath
Made in our reconcilement, and betrays
The honor, and the chief life of the King
Which is his justice.

Con. Betraies?

Adm. No less, and that I Will prove to him.

Omnes You cannot.

Trea. I would not wish you offer at an action
So most impossibly, and much against
The judgment, and favor of the King.

Adm. His judgment nor his favor I respect,
So I preserve his Justice.

Cha. It Is not Justice,
Which I Will prove by law, and absolute learning.

Adm. All your great law, and learning are but words,
When I plead plainly, naked truth, and deeds,
Which though you seek to fray with state, and glory,
I Will shoot a shaft at all your globe of light,
If lightning split it, yet it was high and right.

Exit: Con. Brave resolution so his acts be just,
He cares for gain not honor.

Chan. How came he then
By all his infinite honor and his gain?

Tree. Well said my Lord.

Sec. Answer but only that.

Con. By doing justice still in all his actions.

Sec But if this action prove unjust, will you
Say all his other may be so as well,
And think your own course fitter far than his.

Con, I will --

Exit. Cha. He cooles, we must not leave him, we have no
Such engine to remove the Admiral.

Exeunt. Enter King and the Admiral. Kin. I prithee Philip be not so severe
To him I favor, it is an argument
That may serve one day to avail your self,
Nor Does it square with your so gentle nature,
To give such fires of envy to your blood;
For howsoever out of love to Justice,
Your Jealousy of that does so incense you,
Yet they that censure it will say it is envy.

Adm. I serve not you for them, but for your self,
And that good in your Rule, that Justice does you,
And care not this what others say, so you
Please but to do me right for what you know.

King. You will not do your self right, why should I
Exceed you to your self?

Adm. My self am nothing
Compared to what I seek, it is justice only
The fount and flood, both of your strength and kingdoms.

King. But who knows not, that extreme justice is
(by all ruld laws) the extreme of injury,
And must to you be so, the persons that
Your passionate heat calls into question
Are great, and many, and may wrong in you
Your rights of kind, and dignities of fortune,
And I advanced you not to heap on you
Honors, and fortunes, that by strong hand now
Held up, and over you, when heaven takes off
That powerful hand' should thunder on your head,
And after you crush your surviving seeds.

Adm. Sir, your regards to both are great, and sacred,
But if the innocence, and right that raised me
And means for mine, can find no friend hereafter
Of him that ever lives, and ever seconds
All Kings just bounties with defense, and refuge
In just men's races, let my fabric ruin,
My stock want sap, my branches by the root
Be ^orne to death, and swept with whirlewindes out.

King. For my love no relenting.

Adm. No my liege,
It Is for your love, and right that I stand out.

King. Be better yet advised.

Adm. I cannot Sir
Should any Oracle become my counsel,
For that I stand not out, thus of set will,
Or pride of any singular conceit,
My e^ne^mies, and the world may clearly know,
I taste no sweetes to drown in others gall,
And to affect in that which makes me lothed,
To leave my self and mine exposed to all
The dangers you proposed, my purchased honors,
And all my fortunes in an instant lost,
That money, cares, and pains, and years have gathered,
How mad were I to rave thus in my wounds,
Unless my known health felt in these forced issues
Were sound, and fit, and that I did not know
By most true proofs, that to become sincere
With all men's hates, does far exceed their loves,
To be as they are, mixtures of corruption?
And that those envies that I see pursue me
Of all true actions are the natural consequents
Which being my object, and my resolute choice
Not for my good but yours, I will have justice.

King. You will have justice, is your will so strong
Now against mine? your power being so weak
Before my favor gave them both their forces
Of all that ever shared in my free graces,
You Philip Chabot a mean Gentleman
Have not I-rais'd you to a supremest Lord,
And given you greater dignities than any?

Adm. You have so.

King. Well sed, and to spur your dulinesse
With the particulars to which I raised you,
Have not I made you first a Knight of the Order^
Then Admiral of France, then Count Byzanges,
Lord, and Livetenant general of all
My country, and command of Burgady;
Livetenant general likewise of my son
Daulphine, and heir, and of all Normandy,
And of my chiefly honored privy Counsel,
And cannot all these powers weigh down your will?

Adm. No Sir, they were not given me to that end,
But to uphold my will, my will being just.

King. And who shall judge that Justice, you or I?

Adm. I Sir, in this case your royal thoughts are fitly
Exempt from every curious search of one,
You have the general charge with care of all.

Kin. And do not generals include particulars?
May not I Judge of any thing comprised
In your particular as well as you?

Adm. Far be the misery from you, that you may,
My cares, pains, broken sleep therein made more
Then yours should make me see more, and my forces
Render of better judgment.

King. Well Sir, grant
Your force in this my odds in benefits
Paid for your pains, put in the other scale,
And any equal holder of the balance
Will show my merits hoist up yours to air
In rule of any doubt or deed betwixt us.

Adm. You merit not of me for benefits
More than my self of you for services.

King. Is It possible.

Adm. It Is true.

King. Stand you on that?

Adm. I to the death and will approve to all men.

Kin. I am deceived, but I shall find good Judges
That will find difference.

Adm. Find them being good.

King. Still so? what if conferring
My bounties, and your services to sound them,
We fall foul on some licenses of yours,
Nay, give me therein some advantage of you.

Adm. They cannot.

King. Not in sisting their severe discharges
Of all your offices?

Adm. The more you sift
The more you shall refine me.

King. What if I
Grant out against you a commission
Joined with an extraordinary process
To arrest, and put you in laws hands for trial.

Adm. Not with laws uttermost.

King. I Will throw the dice.

Adm. And I Will endure the chance,
The dice being square.

Adm. Reposed in dreadlesse confidence, and conscience,
That all your most extremes shall never reach,
Or to my life, my goods or honors breach.

King. Was ever heard so fine a confidence?
Must it not p^ove presumption, and can that
Escape brack^s and errors in your search of law,
I prithee weigh yet, with more soul than danger,
And some less passion.

Adm. Witness heaven, I cannot.
Were I dissolved, and nothing else but soul.

King. Be shrew my blood, but his resolves amaze me;
Was ever such a Justice in a subject*
Of so much office left to his own swinge
That left to law thus, and his Sovereigns wrath,
Could stand clear spite of both? let reason rule it
Before it come at law, a man so rare
In one thing cannot in the rest be vulgar,
And who sees you not in the broad highway
The common dust up in your own eyes, beating
In quest of riches, honors, offices,
As heartily in show as most believe,
And he that can use actions with the vulgar,
Must needs embrace the same effects and cannot inform him
Whatsoever he pretends, use them with such
Free equity, as fits one just and real*
Even in the eyes of men, nor stand at all parts
So truly circular, so sound, and solid,
But have his swellings out, his crackes and crannies,
And therefore in this reason, before law
Take you to her, least you affect and flatter
Your self with mad opinions.

Adm. I were mad
Directly Sir, if I were yet to know
Not the sure danger, but the certain ruin
Of men shot into law from Kings bent brow,
There being no dream from the most muddie brain
Upon the foulest fa^cie, that can forge
More horror in the shadows of mere fame,
Then can some Lawyer in a man exposed
To his interpretation by the King,
But these grave toys I shall despise in death,
And while I live will lay them open so
(My inocence laid by them) that like foiles
They shall stick of my merits ten times more,
And make your bounties nothing, for who gives
And hits ith teeth, himself pays with the glory
For which he gave, as being his end of giving,
Not to crown merits, or do any good,
And so no thanks is due but to his glory.

King. It Is brave I swear.

Adm. No Sir, it is plain, and rude
But true, and spotless, and where you object
My hearty, and gross vulgar love of riches,
Titles, and honors, I did never seek them
For any love to them, but to that justice
You ought to use in their due gift to merits,
To show you royal, and most open handed,
Not using for hands talons, pincers, grapples;
In whose gripes, and upon whose gord point,
Deserts hang sprawling out their virtuous limbs,

King. Better and better.

Adm. This your glory is
My deserts wrought upon no wretched matter,
But showed your royal palms as free, and moist,
As Ida, all enchast with silver springs,
And yet my merit still their equal sings.

King. Sing till thou sigh thy soul out hence, and leave us.

Adm. My person shall, my love and faith shall never.

King. Perish thy love, and faith, and thee for ever;
Whose there?
Enter Asall. Let one go for the Chancellor.

Asa. He Is here in Court Sir.

King. Haste and send him hither,
This is an insolence I never met with,
Can one so high as his degrees ascend,
Clime all so free, and without stain?
My Lord
Enter Chancellor. Chancellor, I send for you about a service
Of equal price to me, as if again
My ransom came to me from Pavian thraldom,
And more, as if from forth a subjects fetters,
The worst of servitudes my life were rescued.

Cha. You fright me with a Prologue of much trouble*

King. Me thinks it might be, tell me out of all
Your famous learning, was there ever subject
Raised by his Sovereigns free hand from the dust,
Up to a height above Airs upper region,
That might compare with him in any merit
That so advanced him? and not show in that
Gross overweening worthy cause to think
There might be other over-sights excepted
Of capital nature in his sifted greatness.

Chan. And past question Sir, for one absurd thing granted,
A thousand follow.

King. You must then employ
Your most exact, and curious art to explore
A man in place of greatest trust, and charge,
Whom I suspect to have abused them all,
And in whom you may give such proud veins vent,
As will bewray their boiling blood corrupted
Both against my crown and life.

Cha. And may my life
Be crust in every act,
If I explore him not to every finer.

King. It is my Admiral.

Cha. Oh my good Liege
You tempt, not charge me with such search of him.

King. Doubt not my heartiest meaning, all the troubles
That ever moved in a distracted King,
Put in just fear of his assaulted life
Are not above my sufferings for Chabot.

Cha. Then I am glad, and proud that I can cure you,
For he is a man that I am studied in,
And all his offices, and if you please
To give authority.

King. You shall not want it.

Cha. If I discharge you not of that disease,
About your neck grown, by your strange trust in him,
With full discovery of the foulest treasons.

King. But I must have all proved with that free justice.

Cha. Beseech your Majesty do not question it.

King. About it instantly, and take me wholly
Upon your self.

Cha. How much you grace your servant?

King. Let it be fiery quick.

Cha. It shall have wings,
And every feather show the slight of Kings.

Actus Tertius.
Enter Chancellor attended, the Proctor general whispering in his ear. Two
Judges following. They past. Enter Chabot in his gown, a gaurd about him, his
father and his wife on each side, Allegre. Adm. ANd have they put my faithful
servant to the rack,
Heaven arm the honest man.

Fa. Allegre feels the malice of the Chancellor.

Adm. Many upon the torture have confessed
Things against truth, and yet his pain sits nearer
Than all my other fears, come don't weep.

Wife My Lord, I do not grive out of a thought,
Or poor suspicion, they with all their malice
Can stain your honor, but it troubles me,
The King should grant this license to your enemies,
As he were willing to hear Chabot guilty.

Adm. No more, the King is just, and by exposing me
To this trial, means to render me
More happy to his subjects, and himself
His sacred will be obeyed, take thy own spirit,
And let no thought in fringe thy peace for me,
I go to have my honors all confirmed;
Farewell thy lip, my cause has so much innocence,
It shanot need thy prayer, I leave her yours
Till my return; oh let me be a son
Still in your thoughts, now Gentlemen set forward.

Exit. Manente Father and Wife. Fa. See you that trust in greatness, what
sustaines you,
These hazards you must look for, you that thrust
Your heads into a cloud, where lie in ambush
The soldiers of state in privy arms
Of yellow fire jealous, and mad at all
That shoot their foreheads up into their forges,
And pry into their gloomy Cabbinets;
You like vain Citizens that must go see
Those ever burning furnaces, wherein
Your brittle glasses of estate are blown;
Who knows not you are all but puff, and bubble
Of breath, and fume forged, your vile brittle natures
Cause of your dearness? were you tough and lasting,
You would be cheap, and not worth half your face,
Now daughter Plannet struck.

Wif. I am considering
What form I shall put on, as best agreeing
With my Lords fortune.

Fa. Habit do you mean,
Of mind or body?

Wif. Both wod be apparelled.

Fa. In neither you have reason yet to mourn.

Wif. I Will not accuse my heart of so much weakness*
Twere a confession against my Lord. The Queen!
Enter Queen, Constable, Treasurer, Secretary. She has expressed against me some
displeasure.

Fa. Lets this way through the Gallery.

Qu. It Is she,
Do you my Lord say I wo^ speak with her?
And has Allegre, one of chiefest trust with him
Suff^red the rack* the Chancellor is violent;
And what is c^nfest?

Tree. Nothing, he contemned all
That could with any cruelst pain explore him,
As if his mind* had robbed his nerves of sense,
And through them diffusd fiery spirits above
All flesh and blood; for as his limbs were stretched,
His contempts too extended.

Qu. A strange fortitude*

Tree. But we shall lose the arraignement.

Qu. The success
Will soon arrive.

Tree. You Will not appear, my Lord then?

Con. I desire
Your Lordship wod excuse me.

Tree. We are your servants.

Exiunt. Tree. and Sec. Con. She attends you Madam.

Qu. This humbleness proceeds not from your heart,
Why, you are a Queen your self in your own thoughts,
The Admiralls wife of France cannot be less,
You have not state enough, you should not move
Without a train of friends and servants.

Wif. There is some mystery
Within your language Madam, I would hope
You have more charity than to imagine
My present condition worth your triumph,
In which I am not so lost, but I have
Some friends and servants with proportion
To my Lords fortune, but none within the list
Of those that obey me can be more ready
To express their duties, than my heart to serve
Your just commands.

Qu. Then pride will ebb I see,
There is no constant flood of state, and greatness,
The prodigy is ceasing when your Lord
Comes to the balance, he whose blazing fires,
Shot wonders through the Kingdom, will discover
What slying and corrupted matter sed him.

Wif. My Lord?

Qu. Your high and mighty Justicer,
The man of conscience, the Oracle
Of State, whose honorable titles
Would crack an Elephants back, is now turned mortal,
Must pass examination, and the test
Of Law, have all his offices rip*d up,
And his corrupt soul laid open to the subjects,
His bribes, oppressions, and close sins that made
So many groan, and curse him, now shall find
Their just reward, and all that love their country,
Bless heaven, and the Kings Justice, for removing
Such a devouring monster.

Fa. Sir your pardon
Madam you are the Queen, she is my daughter,
And he that you have charactered so monstrous,
My son in Law, now gone to be arraigned,
The King is just, and a good man, but't does not
Add to the graces of your royal person
To tread upon a Lady thus dejected
By her own grief, her Lord's not yet found guilty,
Much less condemned, though you have pleased to execute him.

Qu. What saw^y fellow's this?

Fa. I must confess
I am a man out of this element
No Courtier, yet I am a gentleman
That dare speak honest truth to the Queens care,
(A duty every subject wonot pay you)
And justify it to all the world, there is nothing
Does more eclipse the honors of our soul,
Than an ill grounded, and ill followed passion,
Let sly with noise, and license against those*
Whose hearts before are bleeding.

Con. Brave old man.

Fa. Cause* you are a Queen to trample ore a woman,
(...) tongue and faculties are all tied up,
(...) out a Lions teeth, and pare his claws,
And then a dwarf may pluck him by the beard,
It Is a gay victory.

Qu, Did you hear my Lord?

Fa. I ha done.

Wif. And it concerns me to begin,
I have not made this pause through servile fear
Or guilty apprehension of your rage,
But with just wonder of the heates, and wildness
Has prepossest your nature against our innocence,
You are my Queen, unto that title bows
The humblest knee in France, my heart made lower
With my obedience, and prostrate duty,
Nor have I powers created for my use,
When just commands of you expect their service;
But were you Queen of all the world, or something
To be thought greater, betwixt heaven and us
That I could reach you with my eyes and voice,
I would shoot both up in defense of my
Abused honor, and stand all your lightning.

Qu. So brave.

Wif. So just and boldly innocent,
I cannot fear armed with a noble conscience
The tempest of your frown, were it more frightfull
Then every fury made a woman's anger,
Prepared to kill with deaths most horrid ceremony,
Yet with what freedom of my soul I can
Forgive your accusation of my pride.

Qu. Forgive? what insolence is like this language?
Can any action of ours be capable
Of thy forgiveness? dust! how I despise thee?
Can we sin to be object of thy mercy?

Wif. Yes, and have don't already, and no stain
To your greatness Madam, it is my charity
I can remit, when sovereign Princes dare
Do injury to those that live beneath them,
They turn worth pity, and their pray^rs, and it is
In the free power of those whom they oppress
To pardon them, each soul has a prerogative,
And privilege royal that was signed by heaven,
But though ith knowledge of my disposition
Stranger to pride, and what you charge me with,
I can forgive the injustice done to me,
And striking at my person, I have no
Commission from my Lord to clear you for
The wrongs you have done him, and still he pardon
The wounding of his loyalty, with which life
Can hold no balance, I must talk just boldness
To say --

Fa No more, now I must tell you daughter
Least you forget your self, she is the Queen,
And it becomes not you to vie with her
Passion for passion, if your Lord stand fast
To the full search of Law, Heaven will revenge him,
And give him up precious to good men's loves
If you attempt by these unruly ways
To vindicate his justice, I me against you,
Dear as I wish your husbands life and fame,
Suffer are bound to suffer, not contest
With Princes, since their Will and Acts must be
Accounted one day to a Judge supreme.

Wif. I ha done, if the devotion to my Lord,
Or piety to his innocence have led me
Beyond the awful limits to be observed
By one so much beneath your sacred person,
I thus low crave your royal pardon Madam;
I know you will remember in your goodness,
My life blood is concerned while his least vein
Shall run black and polluted, my heart fed
With what keeps him alive, nor can there be
A greater wound than that which strikes the life
Of our good name, so much above the bleeding
Of this rude pile we carry, as the soul
Has excellence above this earth-borne frailty:
My Lord, by the Kings will is lead already
To a severe arraignement, and to Judges,
Will make no tender search into his tract
Of life and state, stay but a little while,
And ^ranc^ shall ^^^ho to his shame or innocence,
This suit I beg with tears, I shall have sorrow
Enough to hear him censured foul and monstrous,
Should you forbear to antidate my sufferings.

Qu. Your conscience comes about, and you incline
To fear he may be worth the laws condemning.

Wif. I sooner will suspect the stars may lose
Their way, and cristall heaven return to Chaos;
Truth ^its not on her square more firm than he;
Yet let me tell you Madam, were his life
And action so foul as you have charactered,
And the bad world expects, though as a wife
Twere duty I should weep my self to death,
To know him fallen from virtue, yet so much
I a frail woman love my King and Country,
I should condemn him too, and think^ all honors
The price of his lost faith more fatal to me,
Than Cleopatra's aspes warm in my bosom,
And as much boast their killing.

Qu. This declares
Another soul than was delivered me,
My anger melts, and I begin to pity her,
How much a Princes ear may be abused?
Enjoy your happy confidence, at more leisure
You may hear from us.

Wif. Heaven preserve the Queen,
And may her heart be charitable.

Fa. You bless and honor your unworthy servant.

Qu. My Lord, did you observe this?

Con. Yes great Madam,
And read a noble spirit, which becomes
The wife of Chabot, their great ti^ of m^rriage
I^ not more strong upon em, than their virtues.

Qu. That your opinion? I thought your judgment
Against the Admi^all, do you think him honest?

Con. Religiously, a true, most zealous Patrior,
And worth all royal favor.

Qu. You amaze me,
Can you be just your self then, and advance
Your powers against him?

Con. Such a will be far
From Montmoranzie, Pioners of state
Have left no art to gain me to their faction,
And it is my misery to be placed in such
A sphere where I am whirled by violence
Of a fierce raging motion, and not what
My own will would incline me. I shall make
This appear Madam, if you please to second
My free speech with the King.

Qu. Good heaven protect all,
Haste to the King, Justice her swift wing needs,
It Is high time to be good, when virtue bleedes.

Exeunt. Enter Officers before the Chancellor, Judges, the Proctor general,
whispering with the Chancellor, they take their places. To them

Enter Treasures and Secretary who take their places prepared on one side of
the Court. To them

The Captain of the Guard, the Admiral following, who is placed at the bar.
Cha. Good Mr. Proctor general begin.

Pro, It is not unknown to you my very good Lords the Judges, and indeed to
all the world, for I will make short work, since your honorable ears need
not to be enlarged, I speak by a figure with prolixe ennumeration how
infinitely the King has favored this ill favored Traitor; and yet I may
worthily too insist and prove that no grace has been so large and voluminous,
as this, that he has appointed such upright Judges at this time, and the
chief of this Triumvirie, our Chancellor by name Poyet, which deriveth from
the Greek his Etymology from Poyeni, which is to make, to create, to invent
matter that was never extant in nature, from whence also is the name and
dignity of Poeta, which I will not insist upon, in this place, although I am
confident his Lordshippe wants no faculty in making of Verses: but what
addition I say is it to the honor of this Delinquent, that he has such a
Judge, a man so learned, so full of equity, so noble, so notable in the
progress of his life, so innocent, in the manage of his office so incorrupt;
in the passages of State so wise, in affection to his country so religious, in
all his services to the King so fortunate, and exploring, as envy it self
cannot accuse, or malice vitiate, whom all lips will open to commend, but
those of Philip; and in their hearts will erect Altars, and Statues, Columns,
and Obelishes, Pillars and Pyramids, to the perpetuity of his name and memory.
What shall I say ^ but conclude for his so great and sacred service, both to
our King and Kingdom, and for their everlasting benefit, there may
everlastingly be left here one of his loins, one of his loins ever remain I
say, and stay upon this Bench, to be the example of all Justice, even while the
North and South Star shall continue.


Cha. You express your Oratory Mr. Proctor,
I ray come presen^ly to the matter.

Pro. Thus with your Lordships pardon, I proceed; and the first thing I shall
glance at, will be worth your Lordships reflection, his ingratitude, and to
whom? to no less person than a King, and to what King, his own, and our
general Sovereign Proh deum atque hominum fidem; a King, and such a King, the
health, life, and soul of us all, whose very mention draws this s^lt water
from my eyes; for he indeed is our eye, who wakes and watches for us when we
sleep, and who will not sleep^ for him, I mean not sleep, which the
Philosophers call, a natural c^ssation of the common and consequently* of all
the exterior senses, caused first and immediately by a detension of spirits,
which can have no communication, since the way is obstructed, by which the^se
spirits should commearce, by vapors ascending from the stomach to the head,
by which evaporation the roots of the nerves are filled, through which the
annual spirits, to be powered into the dwellings of the external senses; but
sleep I taken for death, which all know to be Vltima linea, who will not
sleep eternally for such a King as we enjoy? If therefore in general as he
is King of us all, all sharing and dividing the benefits of this our
Sovereign: none should be so ungrateful as once to murm^re against him, what
shall be said of the ingratitude more monstrous in this Chabot, for our Francis
has loved, not in general in the crowd with other subjects, but particularly
this Ph^l^p advanced him to the supreme dignity of a Statsman, lodged him in
his very heart, yet Monstrum horrendum; even to this Francis has Philip been
ungrateful. Brutus the loved son has stabbed Caesar with a Bodkin: Oh what
brute may be compared to him? and in what particulars may this crime be
exemplified; he has, as we say, chopped Logic with the King, nay to the very
teeth of his Sovereign advance his own Gnat-like merits, and justified with
Luciferous pride, that his services have deserved more than all the bounty of
our Munificent King has paid him.


Cha. O^serve that my Lords.


Pro. Nay he has gone further, and most traitaerously has commitred outrage
and impiety to the Kings own hand, and royal character, which presented to
him in a bill from the whole counsel, he most violently did tear in pieces,
and will do the very body and person of your King, if our Justice make no
timely prevention, and strike out the Serpentine teeth of the high and more
than ho^rible monster.


Tr. This was e^forced home.


Pro. In the next place I will relate to your honors his most cruel exactions
upon the subject, the old vantcurriers of rebellions. In the year 15. 6. and
37. This oppressor, and this extortioner, under pretext of his due taxation,
being Admiral impo^'d upon certain Fishermen, (observe I beseech you the
circumstance of their persons, Fishermen) who poor John's were embarked upon
the cost of Normandy, and fishing there for Herrings (which some s^y is the
king of Fishes) he imposed I say twenty souse, and upon every boat six
livers, oh intolerable exaction! enough not only to alienate the hearts of
these miserable people from their King, which Ipso facto is high treason, but
an occasion of a greater inconvenience, for want of due provision of fish among
the subjects, for by this might ensue a necessity of mortal sins, by breaking
the religious fast upon Vigils, Embers, and other days commanded by sacred
authority, besides the miserable rut that would follow, and perhaps contagion,
when feasting and flesh should be licenced for every carnal appetite. -- I
could urge many more particulars of his dangerous insatiate and boundless
Avarice, but the improvement of his estate in so few years, from a private
Gentleman's fortune, to a great Dukes revenewes, might save our sovereign
therein an Orator to enforce and prove faulty even to gyantisme against heaven.


Judge. This is but a noise of words.


Pro. To the foul outrages so violent, let us add his Commissions granted out
of his own presumed authority, his Majesty neither infround or respected his
disloyalties, infidelities, contempts, oppressions, extortions, with
innumerable abuses, offenses, and forfeits, both to his Majesty's most royal
person, crown, and dignity, yet notwithstanding all these injustices, this
unmatchable, u^just delinquent affects to be thought inculpable, and
incomparable just; but alas my most learned Lord, none knows better than your
selves, how easy the sincerity of Justice is pretended, how hard it is to be
performed, and how common it is for him that has least color of title to it,
to be thought the very substance and soul of it, he that was never true
scholar in the least degree, longs as a woman with child to be great with
scholar she that was never with child longs Omnibus vijs modis to be got with
child, and will wear a cushion to seem with child, and he that was never
just, will fly in the Kings face to be counted just, though for all he be
nothing, but just, a Traitor.


Sec. The Admiral smil^s.


Jud. Answer your self my Lord.


Adm. I shall, and briefly,
The furious eloquence of my accuser has
Branched my offenses heinous to the King,
And then his subject, a most vast indictment,
That to the King I have justified my merit,
And services; which conscience of that truth,
That gave my actions life when they are questioned,
I ought to urge again, and do without
The least part of injustice; for the Bill
A foul, and most unjust one, and preferred
Against the Kings honor, and his subjects privilege,
And with a policy to betray my office,
And faith to both, I do confess I tore it,
It being pressed immodestly, but without
A thought of disobedience to his name,
To whose mention I bow, with humble reverence,
And dare appeal to the Kings knowledge of me,
How far I am in soul from such a rebel,
For the rest my Lord, and you my honored Judges,
Since all this mountain all this time in labor
With more than mortal fury against my life,
Has brought forth naught but some ridiculous vermin,
I will not wrong my right, and innocence,
With any serious plea in my reply,
To frustrate breath, and fight with terrible shadow
That have been forged, and forced against my state,
But leave all, with my life to your free censures;
Only beseeching all your learned judgments
Equal and pious conscience to weigh.

Pro. And how this great and mighty fortune has exalted him to pride is
apparent, not only in his b^aves and bearings to the King, the fountain of
all this increase, but in his contempt and scorn of the subject, his vast
expenses in buildings, his private bounties, above royal to soldiers and
scholars, that he may be the General and Patron, and protector of arms and
arts; the number of domesticke attendants, an army of Grasshoppers and gay
Butterflies able to devour the Spring; his glorious wardrobes, his stable of
horses that are pricked with provender, and will enforce us to weed up our
Vineyards to sow Oats for supply of their provision, his caroches shining with
gold, and more bright than the chariot of the Sun, wearing out the pavements;
nay, he is of late so transcendently proud, that men must be his Mules, and
carry him up and down as it were in a Procession for men to gaze at him till
their chines crackes with the weight of his insupportable pride, and who knows
but this may prove a fashion? But who groans for this? the subject, who
murmr, and are ready to begin a rebellion, but the tumultuous sailors, and
water-rats, who tun up and down the city, like an overbearing tempest,
cursing the Admiral, who in duty ought to undo himself for the general
satisfaction of his countrymen.


Adm. The variety, and wonder now presented
To your most noble notice, and the worlds,
That all my life and actions, and offices,
Explored with all the hundred eyes of Law
Lighted with lightning, shot out of the wrath
Of an incenst, and commanding King,
And blown with foes, with far more bitter winds,
Then Winter from his Eastern cave exhailes,
Yeh nothing found, but what you all have heard,
And then consider if a peer of State,
Should be exposed to such a wild arraignement
For poor complaints, his fame, faith, life, and honors
Rackt for no more.

Cha. No more? good heaven, what say
My learned assistants.

1 Iu. My Lord, the crimes urged here for us to censure
As capital, and worth this high arraignement
To me seem strange, because they do not fall
In force of Law, to arraigne a Peer of State,
For all that Law can take into her power
To sentence, is the exaction of the Fishermen.

2 Iu. Here is no majesty violated, I consent to what my Brother has expressed.

Cha. Break then in wonder,
My frighted words out of their forming powers,
That you no more collect, from all these forfeits
That Mr. Proctor general has opened,
With so apparent, and impulsive learning,
Against the rage and madness of the offender,
And violate Majesty (my learned assistants)
When Majesty's affronted and desied,
It being compared with? and in such an onset
As leaped into his throat? his life affrighting?
Be justified in all insolence, all subjects
If this be so considered, and insult
Upon your priviledg'd malice, is not Majesty
Poisoned in this wonder! and no felony set
Where royalty is robbed, and
Fie how it fights with Law, and grates upon
Her brain and soul, and all the powers of Reason,
Reporter of the process, show the sedule.

No. Here my good Lord.
1. No altering it in us.
2. Far be it from us Sir.

Cha. Here Is silken Justice,
It might be altered, mend your sentences.

Both. Not we my Lord.

Cha. Not you? The King shall know
You slight a duty to his will, and safety,
Give me your pen, it must be capital.
1. Make what you please my Lord, our doom shall stand.

Cha. Thus I subscribe, now at your perils follow.

Both. Perils my Lord? threats in the Kings free justice?

Tree, I am amazed they can be so remiss.

Sec. Merciful men, pitiful Judges certain.
1. Subscribe, it matters nothing being constrained
On this side, and on this side, this capital I,
Both which together put, import plain Vi;
And witness we are forced.
2. Enough,
It will acquit us when we make it known,
Our names are forced.

Cha. If traitorous pride
Upon the royal person of a King
Were sentenced unfelloniously before,
I Will burn my Books and be a Judge no more.

Both. Here are our hands subscribed.

Cha. Why so, it joys me,
You have reformed your justice and your judgment,
Now have you done like Judges and learned Lawyers,
The King shall thank, and honor you for this.
Notary read.

No. We by his sacred Majesty appointed
Judges, upon due trial, and examination
Of Philip Chabot Admiral of France
Declare him guilty of high treasons, etc.

Cha. Now Captain of the gaurd, secure his person,
Till the King signify
His pleasure for his death, this day is happy
To France, thus reskued from the vile devourer.
A shoute within. Hark how the votes applaud their blessed deliverance,
You that so late did right and conscience boast,
Heavens mercy now implore, the Kings is lost.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus.
Enter King, Queen, and Constable. Kin. YOu raise my thoughrs to wonder, that
you Madam,
And you my Lord, unite your force to plead
In The Admiralls behalf, this is not that
Language you did express, when the torn Bill
Was late pretended to us, it was then
Defiance to our high prerogative,
The act of him whose proud heart would rebel
And armed with faction, too soon attempt
To tear my crown off.

Qu. I was ignorant
Then of his worth, and heard but the report
Of his accusers, and his enemies,
Who never mention in his character
Shadows of any virtue in those men,
They would depresse like Crows, and carrion birds,
They sly ore slowrie Meades, clear Springs, fair Gardens,
And stoop at carcasses; for your own honor
Pity poor Chabot.

King. Poor and a Colossus?
What could so lately straddle ore a Province,
Can he be fallen so low, and miserable,
To want my pity, who breaks forth like day,
Takes up all peoples eyes, and admiration?
It cannot be, he has a Princely wife too.

Qu. I interpose not often Sir, or press you
With unbecomming importunity,
To serve the profitable ends of others
Conscience, and duty to your self enforce
My present mediation, you have given
The health of your own state away, unless
Wisdom in time recover him.

King. If he prove
No adulterate gold, trial confirms his value.

Qu. Although it hold in mettle gracious Sir,
Such fiery examination, and the furnace
May wast a heart that's faithful, and together
With that you call the feces, something of
The precious substance may be hazarded.

King. Why, you are the chief engine raised against him,
And in the worlds Creed labor most to sink him,
That in his fall, and absence every beam
May shine on you, and only guild your fortune,
Your difference is the ground of his arraignement,
Nor were we unsollicited by you,
To have your bill confirmed, from that that spring
Came all these mighty and impetuous waves,
With which he now must wrestle, if the strength
Of his own innocence can break the storm,
Truth wonot lose her servant, her wings cover him,
He must obey his fate.

Con. I would not have
It lie upon my fame, that I should be
Mentioned in Story his unjust supplanter
For your whole Kingdom, I have been abused,
And made believe my suite was just and necessary,
My walks have not been safe, my closet prayers,
But some plot has pursued me, by some great ones
Against your noble Admiral, they have frighted
My fancy into my dreams with their close whispers,
How to uncement your affections,
And render him the fable, and the scorn
Of France.

Qu. Brave Montmorancie.

King. Are you serious.

Con. Have I a soul? or gratitude, to acknowledge
My self your creature, dignified and honored
By your high favors with an equal truth,
I must declare the justice of your Admiral
(In what my thoughts are conscious) and will rather
Give up my claim to birth, title, and offices,
Be thrown from your warm smile, the top and crown
Of subjects happiness, then be bribed with all
Their glories to the guilt of Chabots ruin.

King. Come, come, you over act this passion,
And if it be not policy it tastes
Too green, and wants some counsel to mature it,
His fall prepares your triumph.

Con. It confirms
My shame alive, and buried will corrupt
My very dust, make our house-genious groan,
And fright the honest marble from my ashes:
His fall prepare my triumph? turn me first
A naked exile to the world.

King. No more,
Take heed you banish not your self, be wise,
And let not too much zeal devour your reason,

Enter Asall. As. Your Admiral
Is condemned Sir?

King. Ha? strange! no matter,
Leave us, a great man I see may be
As soon dispatched, as a common subject*

Qu. No mercy then for Chabot.

Enter Wife and Father. Wif. From whence came
That sound of Chabot? then we are all undone:
Oh do not hear the Queen, she is no friend
To my poor Lord, but made against his life,
Which has too many enemies already.

Con. Poor soul, she thinks the Queen is still against him,
Who employeth all her powers to preserve him.

Fa. Say you so my Lord? daughter the Queen's our friend.

Wif. Why do you mock my sorrow! can you flatter
Your own grief so, be just, and hear me sir,
And do not sacrifice a subjects blood
To appease a wrathful Queen, let mercy shine
Upon your brow, and heaven will pay it back
Upon your soul, be deaf to all her prayers.

King. Poor heart, she knows not what she has desired.

Wif. I beg my Chab^ts life, my sorrows yet
Have not destroid my reason.

King. He is in the power of my Laws, not mine.

Wif. Then you have no power,
And are but the empty shadow of a King,
To whom is it resigned? where shall I beg
The forfeit life of one condemn^d by Laws
To partial doom?

King. You hear he is condemned then?

Fa. My son is condemned fit.

King. You know for what too.

Fa. What the Judges please to call it,
But they have given t^ a name, Treason they say.

Qu. I must not be denied.

King. I must deny you.

Wif. Be^lest for ever fort.

Qu. Grant then to her.

King. Chabot condemned by law?

Fa. But you have power
To change the rigor, in ^our breast there is
A Chancellor above it, I nere had
A suite before, but my knees join with hers
To implore your royal mercy to her Lord,
And take his cause to your examination,
It cannot wrong your Judges, if they have
Been steered by conscience.

Con. It will fame your Justice.

King. I cannot be prescribed, you kneel in vain,
You labor to betray me with your tears
To a treason above his, against my own Laws,
Look to the Lady --

Exeunt. Enter Asall. As. Sir the Chancellor.

King. Admit him, leave us all.
Enter Chancellor. How now my Lord?
You have lost no time, and how thrive the proceedings.

Cha. It Was sit my gracious Sovereign, time should leave
His motion made in all affairs beside,
And spend his wings only in speed of this.

King. You have showed diligence, and what is become
Of our most curious Iusticer, the Admiral?

Cha. Condemned sir utterly, and all hands set
To his conviction.

King. And for faults most foul?

Cha. More than most impious, but the applausive issue
Struck by the concourse of your ravished subjects
For joy of your free Justice, if there were
No other cause to assure the sentence just
Were proof convincing.

King. Now then he sees clearly
That men perceive how vain his Justice was,
And scorn him for the foolish net he wore
To hide his nakedness; is it not a wonder
That men's ambitions should so blind their reason
To affect shapes of honesty, and take pride
Rather in seeming, then in being just.

Cha. Seeming has better fortune to attend it
Then being sound at heart, and virtuous.

King. Profess all? nothing do, like those that live
By looking to the Lamps of holy Temples,
Who still are busy taking off their snuffes,
But for their profit sake will add no oil;
So these will check and sentence every fame,
The blaze of riotous blood does cast in others,
And in themselves leave the sum most offensive,
But he to do this? more deceives my judgment
Than all the rest whose nature I have sounded.

Cha. I know Sir, and have proved it.

King. Well my Lord
To omit circumstance, I highly thank you
For this late service you have done me here,
Which is so great and meritorious
That with my ablest power I scarce can quit you.

Cha. Your sole acceptance (my dread sovereign)
I more rejoice in, than in all the fortunes
That ever chanced me, but when may it please
Your Highness to order the execution?
The haste thus far has spared no pinions.

King. No my Lord, your care
Has therein much deserved.

Cha. But where proportion
Is kept toth' end in things, at start so happy
That end set on the crown.

King. I Will speed it therefore.

Cha. Your thoughts direct it, they are winged.

Exit. King. I joy this boldness is condemned, that I may pardon,
And t^erein get some ground in his opinion
By so much bounty as save his life,
And me thinks that weighed more, should sway the balance
Twixt me and him, held by his own free Justice,
For I could never find him obstinate
In any mind he held, when once he saw
The error with which he labored, and since now
He needs must feel it, I admit no doubt,
But that his alteration will beget
Another sense of things twixt him and me;
Whose there?
Go to the Captain of my ^uard, and will him
To attend his condemned prisoner to me instantly.

As. I shall sir

Ewer Treasurer and Secretary King. My Lords, you were spectators of our
Admiral.

Tree. And hearers too of his most just conviction,
In which we witnest over-weight enough
In your great bounties, and as they there were weighed
With all the feathers of his boasted merits.

King. Has felt a scorching trial, and the test
(That holds fires utmost force) we must give mettalls
That will not with the hammer, and the melting
Confess their truth, and this same sense of feeling
(Being ground to all the senses) has one key
More than the rest to let in through them all
The minds true apprehension, that thence takes
Her first conveyed intelligence. I long
To see this man of considence again:
How think you Lords, will Chabot look on me,
Now sp^ild of the integrity, he boasted?

Sec. It were too much honor to vouchsafe your sight.

Tr. No doubt my Leigh, but he that has offended
In such a height against your crown and person,
Will want no impudence to look upon you.

Enter As^ll, Captain, Admiral. Cap. Sir, I had charge given me by this
Gentleman
To bring your condemned prisoner to your presence.

King. You have done well, and tell the Queen, and our
Lord Constable we desire their presence, bid
Our Admiralls Lady, and her father too
Attend us here, they are but new withdrawn.

As. I shall sir!

Tree. Do you ^^serve this confidence?
He stands as all his trial were a dream.

S^c. Hele find the horror waking the King's troubled;
Now for ^ thu^der-clap: the Queen and Constable.

Enter Queen, Constable, Wise and Father. Tr. I do not like their mixtu^e.

King, My Lo^d Admiral,
You made it your desire to have this trial
That late has past upon you;
And now you feel how vain is too much faith
And flattery of your self, as if your breast
Were proof against all invasion, it is so slight
You see it lets in death, what is past, has been
To satisfy your insolence, there remains
That now we serve our own free pleasure, therefore
By that most absolute power, with which all right
Puts in my hands, these issues turns, and changes,
I here in ear of all these, pardon all
Your faults and forfeits, whatsoever sensur'd,
Again advancing, and establishing
Your person in all fullness of that state
That ever you enjoyed before the attainder*

Tree. Wonderful, pardoned!

Wif. Heaven preserve the King.

Qu. Who for this will deserve all time to honor him.

Con. And live Kings best example.

Fa. Son yare pardoned,
Be sure you look hereafter well about you.

Adm. Vouchsafe great Sir to assure me what you said,
You named my pardon.

King. And again declare it,
For all crimes past, of what nature soever.

Adm. You cannot pardon me Sir.

King. How Is that Philip?

Adm. It is a word carries too much relation
To an offense, of which I am not guilty,
And I must still be bold where truth still arms,
In spite of all those frowns that would deject me
To say I need no pardon.

King. Ha, howes this?

Fa. He Is mad with over-joy, and answers nonsense.

King. Why, tell me Chabot, are not you condemned?

Adm. Yes, and that justifies me much the more,
For whatsoever false report has brought you,
I was condemned for nothing that could reach
To prejudice my life, my goods or honor,
As first in firmness of my conscience,
I confidently told you, not alas
Presuming on your slender thread of favor,
Or pride of fortunate and courtly boldness,
But what my faith and justice bade me trust too,
For none of all your learned assistant Judges,
With all the malice of my crimes could urge,
Or fel^ny or hurt of sacred power.

King. Do any hear this, but my self? My Lords,
This man still justifies his innocence,
What prodigies are these? have not our Laws
Past on his actions, have not equal Judges
Certified his arraignement, and him guilty
Of capital Treason? and yet do I hear
Chabot accuse all these, and quit himself.

Tr. It does appear distraction sir.

King. Did we
Seem so indulgent to propose our free
And royal pardon without suite or prayer,
To meet with his contempt?

Sec. Vnhea^'d of impudence!

Ad. I were malicious to my self, and desperate
To force untruths upon my soul, and when
It Is clear, to confess a shame to exercise
Your pardon sir, were I so foul and monstrous
As I am given to you, you would commit
A sin next mine, by wronging your own mercy
To let me draw out impious breath, it will
Release your wonder, if you give command
To see your process, and if it prove other
Tha^ I presume to Inform, tear me in pieces.

King. Go for the Process, and the Chancellor,
With the assistant Judges. I thank heaven
Exit As. That with all these inforcements of distraction
My reason stays so clear to hear, and answer,
And ^^ direct a message. This inversion
Of all the loyalties, and true deserts
That I believed I governed with, till now
In my choice Lawyers, and chief Counselors
Is able to shake all my frame of reason.

Adm. I am much griv'd.

King. No more, I do incline
To think I am abused, my Laws betrayed
And wrested to the purpose of my Judges,
This confidence in Chabot turns my judgment,
This was too wild away* to make his merits
Stoop and acknowledge my superior bounties,
That it does raise, and six them past my art,
To shadow all the shame and forfeits mine.

Enter Asall, Chancellor, Judges. As. The Chancellor and Judges Sir.

Tree. I like not
This passion in the King, the Queen and Constable
Are of that side.

King. My Lord, you dare appear then?

Cha. Dare Sir, I hope.

King. Well done, hope still, and tell me,
Is not this man condemned?

Cha. Strange question Sir,
The process will declare it, signed with all
These my assistant brothers reverend hands
To his conviction in a public trial.

King. You said for foul and monstrous facts proved by (...)

Cha. The very words are there sir.

King. But the deeds
I look for sir, name me but one that's monstrous?

Cha. His foul comparisons, and affronts of you,
To me seemed monstrous.

King. I told you them sir,
Nor were they any that your so vast knowledge,
Being a man studied in him, could produce
And prove as clear as heaven, you warranted
To make appear such treasons in the Admiral,
As never all Laws, Volumes yet had sentenced,
And France should look on, having escaped with wonder
What in this nature has been clearly proved
In his arraignement.
1. Nothing that we heard
In slendrest touch urged by your Advocate.

King. Dare you affirm this too?
2. Most considently.

King. No base corruptions charged upon him.
1. None sir.

Tr. This argues Chabot has corrupted him.

Se^. I do not like this.
1. The sum of all
Was urged to prove your Admiral corrupt,
Was an exaction of his officers,
Of twenty souse taken from the Fishermen
For every boat, and that fished the Normand coast.

King. And was this all
The mountains, and the marvells promised me,
To be in clear proof made against the life.
Of our so hated Admiral.

Iud. All sir,
Upon our lives and consciences.

Cha. I am blasted.

King. How durst you then subscribe to his conviction.
1. For threats by my Lord Chancellor on the Bench,
Affirming that your Majesty would have it
Made capital treason, or account us traitors.
2. Yet sir, we did put to our names with this
Interposition of a note in secret
In these two letters V, and I, to show
We were enforced to what we did, which then
In Law is nothing.

Fa. How do you feel your Lordship,
Did you not find some stuffing in your head,
Your brain should have been purged,

Cha. I fall to pieces,
Would they had rotted on the Bench.

King. And so you saved the peace of that high Court.
Which otherwise his impious rage had broken,
But thus am I by his malicious arts
A parley rendered, and most tyrannous spur
To all the open course of his base envies,
A forcer of my Judges, and a thirst
Of my nobilities blood, and all by one,
I trusted to make clear my love of Justice.

Cha. I beseech your Majesty, let all my zeal
To serve your virtues, with a sacred value
Made of your royal state, to which each least
But shade of violence in any subject
Does provoke certain death.

King. Death on thy name
And memory for ever, one command
Our Advocate attend us presently.

As. He waits here.

King. But single death shall not excuse, thy skin
Torn ore thine ears, and what else can be inflicted^
If thy life with the same severity
Dissected cannot stand so many fires.

Sec. Tree. Be merciful great Sir.

King. Yet more amaze?
Is there a knee in all the world beside
That any humane conscience can let bow
For him, yare traitors all that pity him.

Tr. This is no time to move.

King. Yet it was my fault
To trust this wretch, whom I knew fierce and proud
With forms of tongue and learning, what a prisoner
Is pride of the whole slood of man? for as
A humane seed is said to be a mixture
And fair contemperature extracted from
All our best faculties, so the seed of all
Man's sensual frailty, may be said to abide,
And have their confluence in only pride,
It stupifies man's reason so, and dulls
True sense of any thing, but what may fall
In his own glory, quenches all the spirits
That light a man to honor and true goodness.

As. Your Advocate.

Enter Advocate. King. Come hither.

Adv. My most gracious Sovereign.

Adm. Madam you infinitely oblige our duty.

Qu. I was too long ignorant of your worth my Lord,
And this sweet Ladies virtue.

W^f. Both your servants.

Adm I never had a fear of the Kings Justice,
And yet I Know not what creepes ore my heart,
And leaves an ice beneath it, my Lord Chancellor,
You have my forgiveness, but implore heavens pardon
For wrongs to equal justice, you shall want
No charity of mine to mediate
To the King for you.

Cha. Horror of my soul
Confounds my gratitude.

Con. To me now most welcome.

Adv. It was my allegiance sir, I did enforce,
But by directions of your Chancellor,
It was my office to advance your cause
Against all the world, which when I leave to execute,
Flea me, and turn me out a most raw Advocate.

King. You see my Chancellor.

Adv. He has an ill look with him.

King. It shall be your province now, on our behalf
To urge what can in justice be against him,
His riot on our Laws, and corrupt actions
Will give you scope and field enough.

Adv. And I
Will play my law prize, never fear it sir.
He shall be guilty of what you please, I am studied
In him sir, I will squeeze his villan^es,
And urge his acts so whom into his bowels,
The force of it shall make him hang himself,
And save the Laws a labor.

King. Judges, for all
The poisonous outrage, that this viper spile
On all my royal freedom and my Empire,
As making all but servants to his malice,
I will have you revise the late arraignement,
And for those worthy reasons, that already
Affect you for my Admiralls acquitall
Employ your justice on this Chancellor, away with him,
Arrest him Captain of my guard to answer
All that due course of Law against him can
Charge both his Acts and life.

Cap. I do arrest thee

Poyet Lord Chancellor in his Highness name,
To answer all that equal course of Law
Can charge thy acts and life with.

Cha. I Obey.

King. How false a heart corruption has, how base
Without true worth are all these earth-bred glories?
Oh blessed justice, by which all things stand,
That stills the thunder, and makes lightning finke
Twixt earth and heaven amazed, and cannot strike,
Being proved so now in wonder of this man,
The object of men's hate, and heavens bright love;
And as in cloudy days, we see the Sun
Glide over turrets, temples, richest fields,
All those left dark, and slighted in his way,
And on the wretched plight of some poor shed,
Powers all the glories of his golden head;
So heavenly virtue, on this envied Lord,
Points all his graces, that I may dinstinguish
Him better from the world.

Tree. You do him right.

King. But away Judges, and pursue the afraignement
Of this polluted Chancellor with that swiftness,
His fury winged against my Admiral,
And be you all, that sat on him compurgators
Of me against this false Judge.

Iud. We are so.

King. Be you two joined in the commission,
And nothing urged but justly, of me learning
This one more lesson out of the events
Of these affairs now past, that whatsoever
Charge or Commission Judges have from us,
They ever make their aim ingenuous Justice,
Not partial for reward, or swelling favor,
To which if your King steer you, spare to obey;
For when his troubled blood is clear, and calm,
He will repent that he pursued his rage,
Before his pious Law, and hold that Judge
Unworthy of his place, that lets his censure
Flote in the waves of an imagined favor,
This shipwracks in the haven, and but wounds
Their consciences that sooth the soon ebbed humors
Of their incensed King.

Con. Tree. Royal and sacred.

King. Come Philip, shine thy honor now for ever,
For this short temporal eclipse it suffered
By the interposed desire I had to try thee,
Nor let the thought of what is past afflict thee,
For my unkindnesse, live still circled here,
The bright intelligence of our royal spheere.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus.
Enter Queen, Constable, Father. Qu. THe Admiral sick?
Fa. With danger at the h^^rt,
I came to tell the King.

Con. He never had
More reason in his soul, to entertain
All the delights of health.

Fa. I fear my Lord,
Some apprehension of the Kings unkindnesse,
By giving up his person, and his offices
To the Laws gripe and search, is ground of his
Sad change, the greatest fowls are thus often wounded,
If he vouchsafe his presence, it may quicken
His fast decaying spirits, and prevent
The hasty ebb of life.

Qu. The King is now
Fraught with the joy of his fresh preservation,
The news so violent, let into his ear,
May have some dangerous effect in him,
I wod not counsel sir to that.

Fa. With greater reason
I may suspect they will spread my Lord, and as
A river left his curled and impetuous waves
Over the banks, by confluence of streams
That fill and swell her channel, for by this time
He has the addition of Allegres suffering,
His honest servant, whom I met though feeble
And worn with torture, going to congratulate
His Masters safety.

Qu. It seems he much
Affected that Allegre.

Con. There will be
But a sad interview and dialogue.

Qu. Does he keep his bed?

Fa. In that alone
He shows a fortitude, he will move, and walk
He says while his own strength or others can
Support him, wishing he might stand and look
His destiny in the face at the last summon,
Not sluggishly exhaile his soul in bed,
With indulgence, and nice flattery of his limbs.

Qu. Can he in this show spirit, and want force
To wrestle with a thought?

Fa. Oh Madam, Madam,
We may have proof against the sword, and tyranny
Of boisterous war that threatens us, but when
Kings froune, a Cannon mounted in each eye,
Shoot death to apprehension, ere their fire
And force approach us.

Enter King. Con. Here Is the King.

Qu. No words
To interrupt his quiet,

Fa. I Will begone then.

King. Our Admiralls father! call him back.

Qu. I w^not stay to hear them.

Exit. Con. Sir, be prudent,
And do not for your son fright the Kings health.

Exit. King. What, ha they left us? how does my Admiral?

Fa. I am forbid to tell you sir.

King. By whom.

Fa. The Queen and my Lord Constable.

King. Are there
Remaining seeds of faction? have they souls
Not yet convinced ith truth of Chabots honor,
Clear as the crystal heaven, and bove the reach
Of imitation.

Fa. It Is their care of you,
And no thought prejudicial to my son.

King. Their care of me?
How can the knowledge of my Admiralls state
Concern their fears of me, I see their envy
Of Chabots happiness, whose joy to be
Rendr'd so pure and genuine to the world
Does grate upon their conscience and affright 'em;
But let 'em vex, and bid my Chabot still
Exalt his heart, and triumph, he shall have
The access of ours, the kingdom shall put on
Such joys for him as she would bost to celebrate
Her own escape from ruin.

Fa. He is not in state to hear my sad news
I perceive.

King. That countenance is not right, it does not answe^
What I expect,
Say, how is my Admiral?
The truth upon thy life.

Fa. To secure his, I would you had.

King Ha? Who durst oppose him?

Fa. One that has power enough has practiced on him
And made his great heart stoop.

King. I will revenge it
With crushing, crushing that rebellious power to nothing.
Name him.

Fa. He was his friend.

King. A friend to malice, his own black impostume
Burn his blood up, what mischief has engendered
New storms?

Fa. It Is the old tempest.

King. Did not we
Appease all horrors that looked wild upon him?

Fa. You dressed his wounds I must confess, but made
No cure, they bleed a fresh, pardon me sir,
Although your conscience have closed too soon,
He is in danger, and does want new surgerie
Though he be right in fame, and your opinion,
He thinks you were unkind.

King. Alas poor Chabot,
Does that afflict him.

Fa. So much, though he strive
With most resolved and Adamantine nerves,
As ever humane fire in flesh and blood,
Forged for example, to bear all, so killing
The arrows that you shot were (still your pardon)
No Centaures blood could rancle so.

King. If this
Be all, i will cure him, Kings retain
More Balsome in their soul them hurt in anger.

Fa. Far short sir, with one breath they uncreate,
And Kings with only words more wounds can make
Then all their kingdom made in balm can heal,
It Is dangerous to play to wild a descant
On numerous virtue, though it become Princes
To assure their adventures made in every thing,
Goodness confined within poor flesh and blood,
Has but a queazie and still sickly state,
A musical hand should only play on her
Fluent as air, yet every touch command.

King. No more,
Commend us to the Admiral, and say,
The King will visit him, and bring health.

Fa. I will not doubt that blessing, and shall move
Nimbly with this command.

Exeunt. Enter Officers before, Treasurer, Secretary, and Judges, attended by
Petitioners, the Advocate also with many papers in his hand, they take their
places. The Chancellor with a guard, and placed at the Bar. Tree. Did you
believe the Chancellor had been
So foul?

Sec. He Is lost toth' people, what contempts
They throw upon him? but we must be wise.

1 Iud. Were there no other guilt, his malice showed
Upon the Admiral, in orebearing justice,
Would well deserve a sentence.

Tree. And a deep one.

2 Iud. If please your Lordships to remember that
Was specially commended by the King,
As being most blemish to his royal person,
And the free justice of his state.

Tree. Already
He has confessed upon his examinations
Enough for sensure, yet to obey form --
Mr. Advocate if you please --

Adv. I am ready for your Lordships: It has been said, and will be said again,
and may truly be justified, Omnia ex lite fieri. It was the position of
Philosophers, and now proved by a more Phylosophycall sect, the Lawyers, that
Omnia ex lite fiant, we are all made by Law, made I say, and worthily if we be
just, if we be un just, marred, though in marring some, there is necessity of
making others, for if one sall by the Law, ten to one but another is exalted
by the execution of the Law, since the corruption of one must conclude the
generation of another, though not always in the same profession; the
corruption of an Apothecary, may be the generation of a Doctor of Physic; the
corruption of a Citizen may beget a Courtier, and a Courtier may very well
beget an Alderman, the corruption of an Alderman may be the generation of a
Country Justice, whose corrupt ignorance easily may beget a tumult, a tumult
may beget a Captain, and the corruption of a Captain may beget a
Gentleman-usher, and a Gentleman-usher may beget a Lord, whose wit may beget a
Poet, and a Poet may get a thousand pound a year, but nothing without
corruption.


Tree. Good Mr. Advocate be pleased to leave all digressions, and speak of the
Chancellor.


Adv. Your Lordship does very seasonably premonish, and I shall not need to
leave my subject corruption, while I discourse of him, who is the very fenne
and stigian abisse of it, five thousand and odd hundred foul and impious
corruptions, for I will be brief; have been found by several examinations,
and by oaths proved against this odious and polluted Chancellor, a man of so
tainted, and contagious a life, that it is a miracle any man enjoys his
nostrills, that has lived within the sent of his offices; he was borne with
teeth in his head, by an affidavit of his Midwife, to note his devouring, and
has one toe on his left foot crooked, and in the form of an Eagles talon, to
foretell his rapacitie: What shall I say? branded, marked, and designed in his
birth for shame and obloquie, which appears further by a mole under his right
ear, with only three Witches hairs int, strange and ominous predictions of
nature.


Tree. You have acquainted your self but very lately
With this intelligence, for as I remember
Your tongue was guilty of no such character,
When he sat Judge upon the Admiral,
A pious incorrupt man, a faithful and fortunate
Servant to his King, and one of the greatest
Honors that ever the Admiral received, was
That he had so noble and just a Judge, this must
Imply a strange volubilitie in your tongue, or
Conscience, I speak not to discountenance any
Evidence for the King, but to put you in mind,
Mr. Advocate that you had then a better opinion
Of my Lord Chancellor.

Adv. Your Lordship has most aptly interposed, and with a word I shall easily
satisfy all your judgments; He was then a Judge, and in Cathedra, in which he
could not err; it may be your Lordships cases, out of the chair and seat of
Justice, he has his frailties, is loos'ed and exposed to the conditions of
other humane natures; so every Judge, your Lordships are not ignorant has a
kind of privilege while he is in his state, office and being, and although
he may quoad se, internally and privately be guilty of bribery of Justice, yet
quoad nos, and in public he is an upright and innocent Judge, we are to take
no notice, nay, we deserved to suffer, if we should detect or stain him; for
in that we disparage the Office, which is the Kings, and may be our own, but
once removed from his place by just dishonor of the King, he is no more a
Judge but a common person, whom the law takes hold on, and we are then to
forget what he has been, and without partiality to strip and lay him open
to the world, a counterfeit and corrupt Judge, as for example, he may and
ought to flourish in his greatness, and break any man's neck, with as much
facility as a jest, but the case being altered, and he down, every subject
shall be heard, a Wolf may be appareld in a Lambskinne; and if every man
should be afraid to speak truth, nay and more than truth, if the good of the
subject which are clients sometime require it, there would be no remove of
Officers, if no remove no motions* if no motion in Court no heat, and by
consequence but cold Terms; take away this moving, this removing of Judges,
the Law may bury it self in Buckram, and the kingdom suffer for want of a due
execution; and now I hope your Lordships are satisfied.


Tree. Most learnedly concluded to acquity our self.


1 Iud. Mr. Advocate, please you to urge for satisfaction
Of the world, and clearing the Kings honor, how
In justly he proceeded against the Admiral.

Adv. I shall obey your Lordship -- So v^st so infinite has been the
impudence of this Chancellor* not only toward the subject, but even the sacred
person of the King, that I tremble as with a Palsy to remember it. This man,
or rather this monster, having power and commission trusted for the examination
of the Lord Admiral, a man perfect in all honor and justice; indeed the very
ornament and second flower of France, for the Flower de lis, is sacred and
above all flowers, and indeed the best flower in our garden. Having used all
ways to circumvent his innocence by suborning and promising rewards to his
betrayers, by compelling others by the cruelty of tortures, as namely Mounsieur
Allegre a most honest and faithful servant to his Lord, tearing and extending
his sinews upon the ^acke to force a confession to his purpose, and finding
nothing prevail upon the invincible virtue of the Admiral.


Sec. How he would flatter him?


Adv. Yet most maliciously proceeded to arraigne him; to be short against all
color of Justice condemned him of high treasons; oh think what the life of
man is, that can never be recompensed; but the life of a just man, a man that
is the vigor and glory of our life and nation to be torn to death, and
sacrifis'd beyond the malice of common persecution. What Tiger of Hercanian
breed could have been so cruel? but this is not all? he was not guilty only
of murder, guilty I may say In foro co^sctieniae, though our good Admiral was
miraculously preserved, but unto this he added a most prodigious and fearful
rape, a rape even upon Justice it self, the very soul of our state, for the
rest of the Judges upon the Bench, venerable images of Austria, he most
tyranously compelled to set their hands to his most unjust sentence; did ever
story remember the like outr^ge and injustice; what forfeit, what penalty can
be enough to satisfy this transcendent offense? and yet my good Lords, this is
but venial to the sacrilege which now follows, and by him committed, not
content with this sentence, not satisfied with horrid violence upon the sacred
Tribunal, but he proceeds and blasphemes the very name and honor of the
King himself, observe that, making him the author and impulsive cause of all
these rapines, justifying that he moved only by his special command to the
death, nay the murder of his most faithful subject, translating all his own
black and damnable guilt upon the Kings heirs, a traitor to his Country,
first, he conspires the death of one whom the King loves, and whom every
subject ought to honor, and then makes it no conscience to proclaim it the
Kings act, and by consequ^nce declares him a murderer of his own, and of his
best subjects.


Within An Advocate, an Advocate, tear him in pieces,
Tear the Chancellor in pieces.

Tree. The people have deep sense of the Chancellors injustice.

Sec. We must be careful to prevent their mutiny.

^ Iud. It will become our wisdoms to secure the court
And prisoner.

Tree. Captain of the guard.
2. What can you say for your self Lord Chancellor.

Cha. Again, I confess all, and humbly fly to
The royal mercy of the King.

Tree. And this submission is the way to purchase it.

Cha. Hear me great Judges, if you have not lost
For my sake all your charities, I beseech you,
Let the King know my heart is full of penitence,
Calm his high-going sea, or in that tempest
I ruin to eternity, oh my Lords,
Consider your own places, and the helmes
You sit at, while with all your providence
You steer, look forth and see devouring quicksands,
My ambition now is punished, and my pride
Of state and greatness falling into nothing,
I that had never time through vast employments
To think of heaven, feel his revengefull wrath,
Boiling my blood, and scorching up my entrills,
There doomesday is my conscience black and horrid,
For my abuse of Justice, but no stings
Pricked with that terror as the wounds I made
Upon the pious Admiral, some good man
Bear my repentance thither, he is merciful,
And may incline the King to stay his lightning
Which threatens my confusion, that my free
Resign of title, office, and what else
My pride looked at, would buy my poor lives safety,
For ever banish me the court, and let
Me waste my life far off in some Village.

Adv. How? Did your Lordships note his request to you, he would direct your
sentence to punish him with confining him to live in the country, like the
Mouse in the Fable, that having offended to deserve death, begged he might be
banished into a Parmisan. I hope your Lordships will be more just to the nature
of his offenses.


Sec. I could have wished him fall on softer ground
For his good parts.

Tree. My Lord, this is your sentence for you high misdemeanors against his
Majesty's Judges, for your unjust sentence of the most equal Lord Admiral,
for many and foul corruptions and abuse of your office, and that infinite
stain of the Kings person, and honor, we in his Majesty's name, deprive you
of your estate of Chancellor, and declare you uncapeable of any judicial
office, and besides condemn you in the sum of two hundred thousand crowns;
whereof one hundred thousand to the King, and one hundred thousand to the Lord
Admiral, and what remains of your estate to go to the restitution of those
you have injured, and to suffer perpetual imprisonment in the Castle, so take
him to your custody. Your Lordships have been merciful in his sentence.

Exit. They have spared my life then, that some cure may bring,
I spend it in my prayers for the King.

Exeunt* Enter Admiral in his Gown and Cap, his Wife. Adm. Allegre I am glad
he has so much strength,
I prithee let me see him.

Wif. It will but
Enlarge a passion -- my Lord he will come
Another time and tender you his service.

Adm. Nay then --

Wif. Although I like it not, I must obey.

Exit. Enter Allegre supported. Adm. Welcome my injured servant, what a misery
Ha they made on thee?

Al. Though some change appear
Upon my body, whose severe affliction
Has brought it thus to be sustained by others,
My hurt is still the same in faith to you,
Not broken with their rage.

Adm. Alas poor man!
Were all my joys essential, and so mighty
As the affected world believes I taste,
This object were enough to unsweeten all,
Though in thy absence I had suffering,
And felt within me a strong sympathy,
While for my sake their cruelty did vex,
And fright thy nerves with horror of thy sense,
Yet in this spectacle I apprehend
More grief than all my imagination
Could let before into me; did not curse me
Upon the torture?

Al. Good my Lord, let not
The thought of what I suffered dwell upon
Your memory, they could not punish more
Then what my duty did oblige to bear
For you and Justice, but there is some thing in
Your looks, presents more fear than all the malice
Of my tormentors could affect my soul with,
That palenesse, and the other forms you wear,
Would well become a guilty Admiral, and one
Lost to his hopes and honor, not the man
Upon whose life the fury of unjustice
Armed with fierce lightning, and the power of thunder,
Can make no breach, I was not racked till now,
There Is more death in that falling eye, than all
Rage ever yet brought forth, what accident sir can blast,
Can be so black and fatal to distract
The calm? the triumph that should sit upon
Your noble brow, mi^fortune could have no
Time to conspire with fate, since you were rescued
By the great arm of providence, nor can
Those garlands that now grow about your forehead
With all the poison of the world be blasted.

Adm. Allegre, thou do bear thy wounds upon thee,
In wide and spacious characters, but in
The volumne of my sadness thou do want
An eye to read an open force, has torn
Thy manly sinews which sometime may cure
The engine is not seen that wounds thy Master,
Past all the remedy of art or time,
The flatteries of Court, of fame or honors,
Thus in the Summer a tall flourishing tree,
Transplanted by strong hand, with all her leaves
And blooming pride upon her makes a show
Of Spring, tempting the eye with wanton blossom,
But not the Sun with all her amorous smiles,
The dewes of mornings, or the tears of night,
Can root her fibers in the earth again,
Or make her bosom kind, to growth and bearing,
But the tree withers, and those very beams
That once were natural warmth to her soft verdure
Dry up her sap and shoot a fever through
The bark and rind, till she becomes a burden
To that which gave her life: so Chabot, Chabot.

Al. Wonder in apprehension, I must
Suspect your health indeed.

Adm. No no, thou shanot
Be troubled, I but stirred thee with a morrall,
That's empty contains nothing, I am well,
See I can walk poor man, thou have not strength yet.

Al. What accident is ground of this distraction?

Enter Admiral. Adm. Thou have not heard yet what is become oth' Chancellor?

Al. Not yet my Lord.

Adm. Poor gentleman, when I think
Upon the King, I Have balm enough to cure
A thousand wounds, have I not Allegre?
Was ever bountious mercy read in story,
Like his upon my life, condemned for sacrifice
By Law, and snatched out of the flame unlooked for,
And unpetitioned? but his justice then
That wod not spare whom his own love made great,
But give me up to the most cruel test
Of Judges, for some boldness in defense
Of my own merits, and my honest faith to him
Was rare, past example.

Enter Father. Fa. Sir, the King
Is coming hither.

Al. It will
Become my duty sir to leave you now.

Adm, Stay by all means Allegre, 'tshall concerne^ you,
I Am infinitely honored in his presence.

Enter King, Queen, Constable, and Wife. King. Madam be comforted, I Will be his
Physician.

Wif. Pray heaven you may.

King. No ceremonial knees,
Give me thy heart, my dear, my honest Chabot,
And yet in vain I challenge that it is here
Already in my own, and shall be cherished
With care of my best life, violence
Shall ravish it from my possession,
Not those distempers that infirm my blood
And spirits shall betray it to a fear,
When time and nature join to dispossess
My body of a cold and languishing breath,
No stroke in all my arteries, but silence
In every faculty, yet dissect me then,
And in my heart, the world shall read thee living,
And by the virtue of thy name write there,
That part of me shall never putrify,
When I am lost in all my other dust.

Adm. You too much honor your poor servant sir,
My heart dispares so rich a monument;
But when it dies --

King. I wonot hear a sound
Of any thing that trenched upon death,
He speaks the funeral of my crown that prophesies
So unkind a fate, we will live and die together,
And by that duty which has taught you hitherto,
All loyal and just services I charge thee,
Preserve thy heart for me and thy reward,
Which now shall crown thy merits.

Adm. I have found
A glorious harvest in your savor sir,
And by this overslow of royal grace,
All my deserts are shadows and sly from me,
I have not in the wealth of my desires,
Enough to pay you now, yet you encourage me
To make one suite.

King. So soon as named possess it.

Adm. You would be pleased take notice of this Gentleman,
A Secretary of mine.

Con. Mounsieur Allegre,
He that was racked sir for your Admiral.

Adm. His limbs want strength to tender their full duty,
An honest man that suffers for my sake.

King. He shall be dear to us, for what has past sir
By the unjustice of our Chancellors power,
We Will study to recompense, in the mean time that office
You exercised for Chabot we translate
To our self, you shall be our Secretary.

Al. This is
An honor above my weak desert, and shall
Oblige the service of my life to satisfy it.

Adm. You are gracious, and in this act have put
All our complaints to silence, you Allegre,
Enter Tresuror, Secretary. Cherish your health, and feeble limbs which cannot
Without much prejudice be thus employed;
All my best wishes with thee.

Al. All my prayers
Are duties to your Lordship --

Exit. King. It Is too little,
Can forfeit of his place, wealth, and a lasting
Imprisonment purge his offenses to
Our honest Admiral, had our person been
Exempted from his malice, he did persecute
The life of Chabot with an equal wrath,
You should have powered death on his treacherous head,
I revoke all your sentences, and make
Him that was wronged full Master of his destiny,
Be thou his judge.

Adm. O far be such injustice,
I know his doom is heavy, and I beg
Where mercy may be let into his sentence
For my sake you would soften it, I have
Glory enough to be set right in yours,
And my dear countries thought, and by an act
With such apparent notice to the world.

King. Express it in some joy then.

Adm. I will strive
To show that pious gratitude to you but --

Kng. But what

Adm. My frame has lately sir been taken a peec^s,
And but now put together, the least force
Of mirth will shake and unjoynt all my reason,
Your patience royal sir.

King. I Will have no patience,
If thou forget the courage of a man.

Adm. My strength would ^latter me.

King. Phisitian^
Now I begin to fear his apprehension,
Why how is Chabots spirit fallen?

Qu. Twere best
He were conveid to his bed.

Wif. How soon turned widow.

Adm. Who would not wish to live to serve your goodness.
Stand from me, you betray me with your fears,
The plummets may fall off that hang upon
My heart, they were but thoughts at first, or if
They weigh me down to death let not my eyes
Close with another object then the King,
Let him be last I look on.

King. I would not have him lost for my whole Kingdom.

Con. He may recover sir.

King. I see it fall,
For Justice being the proppe of every Kingdom
And mine broke, violating him that was
The knot and contract of it all in him,
It already falling in my eat,
Pompey could hear it thunder, when the Senate
And Capitol were deaf, so heavens loud chiding,
I Will have another sentence for my Chancellor,
Unless my Chabot live,
In a Prince
What a swift executioner is a frown,
Especially of great and noble souls;
How is it with my Philip?

Adm. I must beg
One other boon.

King. Upon condition
My Chabot will collect his scattered spirits,
And be himself again, he shall divide
My Kingdom with me.

Fa. Sweet King.

Adm. I observe
A fierce and killing wrath engendered in you;
For my sake, as you wish me strength to serve you,
Forgive your Chancellor, let not the story
Of Philip Chabot read hereafter draw
A tear from any family, I beseech
Your royal mercy on his life, and free
Remission of all seasure upon his state,
I have no comfort else.

King. Endeavor
But thy own health, and pronounce general pardon
To all through France.

Adm. Sir I must kneel to thank you,
It is not sealed else, your blessed hand live happy,
May all you trust have no less faith then Chabot,
Oh.

Wif. His heart is broken.

Fa. And kneeling sir,
As his ambition were in death to show
The truth of his obedience.

Con. I feared this issue.

Tree. He Is past hope.

King. He has a victory ins death, this world
Deserved him not, how soon he was translated
To glorious eternity, it is too late
To fright the air with words, my teare^ embalme him.

Wif. What can become of me?

Qu. I Will be your husband Madam, and with care
Supply your childrens father, to your father
I Will be a son, in what ou^ love or power
Can serve his friends, Chabot shall nere be wanting,
The greatest loss is mine, past scale or recompense,
We will proceed no further against the Chancellor,
To the charity of our Admiral he owes
His life which ever banished to a prison,
Shall not beget in us, or in the subject
N^w fears of his injustice, for his fortunes
Great and acquired corruptly, it is our will
They make just restitution for all wrongs
That shall within a year be proved against him;
O Chabot that shall boast as many monuments
As there be hearts in France, which as they grow,
Shall with more love enshrine thee, Kings they say,
Die not, or starve succession, oh why
Should that stand firm, and Kings themselves despair,
To find their subject still in the next heir*

Exeunt. FINIS.

