AN OLD THRIFT NEWLY REVIVED.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED THE MANNER OF PLANTING, PRESERVING, AND Husbanding young
Trees of diverse kinds for Timber and Fuel.

AND OF SOWING ACORNES, CHESNVTS, BEECH-MAST, THE SEEDS OF Elmes, Ashen-keyes,
etc. With the Commodities and Discommodities of Enclosing decayed Forests,
Commons, and waste GROUNDS.

And also the use of a small portable Instrument for measuring of Board, and
the solid content and height of any Tree standing.

Discoursed in Dialogue between a Surueyour, Woodward, Gentleman, and a Farmer.

Divided into four parts, by R. C.

Tout pour L'Eglise.

LONDON. Printed by W. S. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop in
St. Dunstanes Churchyard.

1612.

To the Nobility, Gentry, and Yeomanrie of great Britatine.
IT either is, or should be the duty of every man to invent, publish, and act
some thing that might benefit his country: according to which, I present to
your noble, approved, and discreet judgments, a willing mind, in setting forth
that, which I assure my self (if the conclusions herein be carefully
practiced) will prove most profitable to you and your posterity for ever. The
good that I do here intend to speak of, is an increase of wood in general:
which upon my employment in the late Surueyes and Sales of diverse his Majesty's
Copies and Woods, wherein I found lamentable scarcity, and exceeding abuses
(which I fear to be universally as well over the Realm, as in the said
particular places) I then began (as duty ^bound me) seriously to consider of
such notes which I had observed in those services, as well for redress of
misdemeanors as also for planting of wood, and preserving of spring-wood and
timber for increase of timber and fuel, which I saw in most places too
apparently decay. And having digested these collections into some form, I then
conceived that the publishing of them might be very beneficial to the Realm.
And the rather was I encouraged hereunto, because I perceived such prudent care
in the right noble Lord Privy Seal the Earl of Northampton, who most freely
endeavored himself to have the service carefully performed, as well for the
carriage of those whom he employed in that affair: as also to be respective
of such who were any manner of ways to be interessed in that service
concerning those Surueyes and Sales, and also for maintenance and increase of
Wood: which when I had diligently noted in that Honorable and worthy person, I
then resolved to diuu^ge them abroad. And were it not pity* nay more than
time, that this work of preserving or surueying his Majesty's woods, being
with that grave consent of such worthy Peers so advisedly begun, should now by
inferior officers be rejected, or not carefully continued, the present
necessity being so great and markable? For if Coal should fail (as it is too
apparent it begins to grow dear and scarce, and in many places there is
none to be had) how then should we do for this material of fuel? for do we
think that wood alone can bear the brunt to satisfy every man's chimney?
assuredly no, except it were more plentiful. Then must there needs be some
speedy means used for preuentio^ of felling whole woods of timber, and grubbing
up of Copies at pleasure to convert them into pasture, arrable, or meadow
grounds, else in short time, this waste and scarcity will grow to a
consummation of the whole: which prevention must be as well the execution of
the law, provided for such abuses, committed to honest and discreet officers,
by punishing or complaining of such who wilfully offend in this kind, as also
willing minds to propagate and advance this most needful thrift of planting
young trees, and sowing of their seeds (where scarce of wood is) for increase
of Timber and Fuel: both which combined together, will in short time make a
plentiful harvest. I write not these instructions to offend any, but as well
to please all, desirous that all should reap benefit hereby: as also to
encourage others to take pains hereafter to collect and publish some more
ample instructions concerning this subject; wherein if I have omitted any thing
that might fully advance this Old thrift: I crave pardon, and do commend it to
your honorable, favorable, and husbandlie censures, and willing minds to
practice. Always resting in my service, friendship, and true love, as it will
please you to account of him.

R. Chapter

The general Contents of this Book.
1 THe first part treats of planting trees of diverse kinds for timber and
fuel, and of sowing their seeds, preparing the ground, husbanding and pruning
the young plants and trees, and of diverse other things.

2 The second part discourses of the commodities and discommodities of
enclosing decayed Forests, Commons and waste grounds.

3 The third part shows the difference of diverse kinds of trees for timber
and fuel, and such as are most apt to grow and prosper in our clymate: and
also a discourse concerning some new law to be made for the increase and
preservation of wood.

4 And in the fourth part is expressed the use of a small portable Instrument
for measuring of board, and the soild content and height of any tree standing.

OF PLANTING and preserving for Timber and Fuel.
THE FIRST PART,
Which treats of planting Trees of diverse kinds for Timber and Fuel, and of
sowing their seeds, preparing the ground, husbanding and pruning the young
Plants and Trees, and of diverse other things.

Surueyor. MAster Woodward you are well met, I hope you have now sufficiently
digested those doubts concerning woods and wooddie grounds, which at our last
meeting I was desirous to satisfy you of.


Woodward. Sir, I must confess, that since my last conference with you I have
better apprehended that subject then I did at the first: for to tell you true,
though by Patent I am his Majesty's Woodward in these parts, and according to
the opinion and understanding of every man, I should not be ignorant in the
particulars concerning my office, yet so ambitious we are of preferment and
gains, as if we can devise to make a secret commodity to our selves, we
think we have understanding sufficient for the executing of the place.


Suru. It seems then you little respect either diligence or art, in planting
and well husbanding of woods and wooddie grounds within your office, but all
seems to be well done by you, if it be done with profit to your self.


Wood. Not so M. Surueyor, you tax me too far: for though I am content,
partly by custom, and partly (I must confess) out of a desire of gains to
make some honest thrift of my office, yet notwithstanding (though I do not
plant or set young trees) I have a special care that none of his Majesty's
Timber or Dottard trees be taken or felled, but by special authority: and as
for underwood and Coppies, they are so carefully preserved, as not any cattle
comes in them until five or six years after the fall.


Sur. If you do so, you do reasonable well, though yet to be blamed: for by
Statute, Copies of diverse growthes newly felled, should be preserved according
to their growthes. For the Statute says, Woods felled at or under 14 years
growth, shall be preserved 6 years: Woods felled above 14 years growth, and
under 24, shall be preserved 8 years: Common Woods enclosed shall be kept in
several 9 years following. And also the Statute further says, 35. H. 8. 13.
Eliz.
It shall not be lawful for any person to put any manner of cattle into
Copies wood, to be preserved from the time of the sale thereof, until the end
of five years, nor from the end of five years any other cattle, but Calves
and yeareling Colts only unto the end of six years, if the wood was under the
age of 14 years at the last fall, or until the age of 8 years, if the wood
was above the age of 14 years at the last fall. But indeed the best way for
pr^seruing of Spring wood, is not to put any cattle into such Copies at all:
and the best time to fell them is in January and February, at the first
quarter of the Moon. But yet there be some Woodwards, Baylifes, and Tenants of
Woods, who are not so careful in their office as you are, yet will they for
fashion sake preserve the Spring reasonably well for one year or two after the
fall and hagging of them, but afterward they grow covetous and careless, and
will make it as common for their cattle as any the rest of their grounds. And
truly though the Statute of 35. of H. 8. does seem a little to help the
imperfections of the former Statutes, for seueraltie in common soyles, where
replantation is to be made, yet God knows it comes far too short to cure
the spoils and deu^stations that since has been made in Woods. For my self
have known certain grounds, upon which within this twenty or thirty years
was growing great store of Underwood and Timber, and did yearly pay to the
late Queen a rent, but now the wood is all gone, the soil turned to a Common,
and the rent quite lost, and not any paid: and truly more is like to follow in
this kind, if the headie and headlong clamor of the vulgar sort be not (by
some advised course of superior officers) moderated in the balance of equity.
There be also other officers of Woods, who, as they do accidentally travail
by such Woods that are within their office (pretending a special care of
preserving the Wood) will before they depart commonly claim some Timber trees
(and those not of the worst) for their see trees as they call them.


Wood. It is true, that where woods have been spoiled, and that the inhabitants
do find a benefit by the herbage of the soil, they will never endure (by their
good wills) to hear of any replantation or enclosure, meet for it, but with a
general clamor they cry for their ^ommon, their Common, forgetting altogether
by whom the Woods have bin so spoiled and destroyed, and as though the Common
were their own inheritance. Well, leaving these matters to those that chiefly
manage such and the like affairs, and to answer you concerning those Fee
trees you speak of, which indeed is a custom (but by what authority I know
not) that many of us commonly challenge such Fee trees: and also when his
Majesty makes any sale of Timber or Fee trees unjustly challenged.
Dottard trees, we likewise claim (and are our own caruers, for who may
control us) one tree in every score.


Sur. It is true, it is both a custom and an abuse among diverse others, by
some maintained, by not being complained of, especially by some officers, whose
names I will conceal: for one of them having a few years past a warrant
directed to him for the felling of an hundred Timber trees, for the repair of
a Parke-pale of the Kings, and which was at that instant in repairing, by wood
growing in the said Park, this honest officer did cause to be felled, and
marked to be felled 140. which was 40. more then he had warrant for. The same
officer did also, by virtue of his office, or else by warrant (at two several
times for the repair of another Parke-pale of his Majesty's, which had a
sufficient stone wall about it, and which was about 30. miles distant from the
said Wood) caused to be delivered about 30. Timber trees, which, as it was
said, were sold unto towns not far from the said Wood, and the money pursed
up, and not any bestowed about the said Park, because ind^ed it needed no
paling, but stone to make and mend the wall, of which was great store hard by.


Wood. If this be true, this officer does ill deserve his place, much less any
allowance of his fees.


Sur. You would say so, if you knew all: but leaving these abuses of such
officers of Woods. not much impertinent The abuses of Wooden officers.
to the subject in hand (for to speak the truth, many of them have been
special instruments, that by their conniuencie, neglect, and covetousness,
great spoil has been made in the Kings Woods) let us, if you please, proceed
to the reuiewing of the question concerning The question.
Woods and wooddie grounds, as well for preserving of Timber trees of diverse
kinds, as also of planting, sowing, and replenishing of wooddie grounds, as
well for increase of Timber as Fuel.


Wood. Sir, your question is most excellent and profitable for the
Commonwealth, therefore I pray proceed as distinctly as you may, for as well my
self, as many other such ignorant Woodwards as I am, yea and who not, shall
greatly be benefited hereby.


Sur. But stay, what two are those who come yonder?


Wood. Marry it is M. Peregrine, one who holds diverse Copies of the Kings in
Lease, and the other is also a Farmer, called Ienings.


Peregrine. Ienings, do know the gentleman that is yonder with the Woodward?


Ienings. Know him, I God knows; do not you Sir?


Pereg. Oh* I perceive it is the Surueyor: gentleman God save you.


Sur. M. Peregrine, you are welcome, and happily now arrived, for this honest
Woodward and I were beginning a discourse, concerning the preserving and
increasing of Wood, which subject (if you please) will not be altogether
unprofitable for you to hear.


Pereg. Your discourse will seem very necessary and pleasing, considering how
forward every man is in these days to fell down Timber, and grub up Copies,
and none endeavors to plant any, whereby in time must needs follow a general
wast of all.


Sur. It is true, that it is many men's humors so to do, and the reason thereof
as I conceive is, first, they desire to make profit of the tree by felling it:
secondly, that in planting young trees, or sowing of their seeds, they think
not to live to reap any profit thereby during their lives, because it seems
a long time before they come to any growth: and thirdly, because not any of
late have as yet written of this subject, whereby they want rules and
instructions how to begin, and proceed: in all which I hope to give them good
satisfaction, and so far to encourage them herein, as where now every one
seems to draw by the plough tail, they will I doubt not, after more
diuulging of this subject, and duly considering hereof, uniformly apply their
minds and labors to this general and profitable business. Omitting then all
circumstances, and to satisfy your desires, you shall understand, that to
plant wood, or sow their seeds, you must consider the fatness or The quality
of the ground must be considered for the planting of trees, or sowing of their
seeds.
leanness of the soil, as whether it be of a good depth of earth, grauelly,
sandy, or of a watrie soil, and so according to the nature of the ground you
must plant trees or sow their seeds: as, the Oak commonly will prosper well
in all kind of grounds, but in a watrie and moorish place; the Aller, Aspe, and
Willow trees do best like of a low and watrie ground; and so of every sort of
trees, you must according to their nature and quality of the soil, apply
your self to fit it with such plants and seed, as shall be most profit and
pleasure to you.


Wood. You begin well. I perceive then that all manner of trees are not to be
planted in all sorts of grounds, but the nature of the tree considered, it must
so be suited with such a ground, that the plant and seed may the better come up
and prosper, be it Timber, Fruit trees, or any other kind of wood.


Sur. It is so, for if you plant an Oak in a wet moorish ground, a Willow upon
a grauellie, dry, and barren hill, or an Appletree in an open, cold, and
bleake field, they may well grow, but so poorly, as neither their fruit or
trees themselves, in many years, will counteruaile the first years charge of
planting them; therefore the nature of the plant and seed must well be
considered of, to correspond with the quality and condition of the ground. And
now Four sorts of Timber trees growing in England. Oak tree. Elm Ash Beech
to proceed concerning* Timber* trees, it is well known, that there grow in
England four sorts of special Timber trees, and they also exceeding one
another in goodness, and these are the Oak, the Elm, the Ash, and Beech
tree, and they are all excellent in their kinds; but the chiefest of them for
durable building of houses and shipping, is the Oak: next to that is the Elms
which serves to like good uses: the third is the Ash; which sometime also is
used for building, but most commonly for Coupers, Wheelewrights, and
Ploughwrights: and the fourth, which is the Beech tree, is the worst, yet often
employed for Timber, and much used among Ioyners, and also for many other good
purposes. There is also a fifth kind of Timber tree, of which few grow in
England, and which is little inferior to any the rest, and that is the Chestnut
tree, which bears Chestnut tree.
good fruit, that poor people in time of dearth may with a small quantity of
Oa^s or Barley make bread of, and the bole thereof is large and excellent good
Timber: and this tree when you begin first to plant it, will grow more in one
year (if you husband it well at the first) than an Oak will do in two; as
those of some part of France, who have great store of wooddie grounds of this
kind, do find it t^^e by experience. There may also a sixth tree be equalized
with any the best formerly ^amed, and that is a Fur Fur tree.
tree; and though they are rarely found to grow in England, yet I have seen
them grow and prosper well here in diverse places; as namely at Sion, within
seven miles of London (but now they are cut down) and at Newhall in Essex, and
in diverse other places. How necessary these kinds of trees are, I report me to
all Seamen; and now of late, for want of other Timber, we begin to use them for
building of houses: and I see no reason to the contrary, but that in time we
might have as goodly trees and whole Woods of this kind growing in our own
country, (if men would endeavor to get them, as easily they may) as is in that
famous Wood of Hyrcania Silua, which enuironeth that fertile kingdom of
Bohemia, where the pesants of that country, in their travail there, do often
chop fliues or chips of those trees with their hatchets, (which usually they do
walk withal, as we do here with staves) and bring them home and use them in
stead of candles to do their business about the house in the night time, which
by reason of the abundance of gum that is in them, they will burn exceeding
well and clear: and these kinds of trees might well be had and made to grow
and prosper here in England, if men would with a free desire apply themselves
to be ingenious and careful herein. And the rather am I confirmed in this
opinion, because (as I have credibly heard) the Marquess of Huntley, and many
other, have diverse Woods of this kind growing in the County of Aberdeene in
Scotland. And also one Master Thomas Bowen of Trefloine in the County of
Pembroke, a Gentleman of good worth, had about fifteen or sixteen years past
many young and small plants of this kind brought him home by Sailors from the
Newfound land, with some of the earth wherein they did formerly grow, and
planted them together with the said earth in convenient places about his house,
where they have since so well prospered, that many of them at this present are
about four foot in circuit, and also very high and tapering. And they will
grow upon mountains, grauellie soyles, or in good earth, either by planting
the young tree, or sowing of the seed.


Pereg. These Fur trees, as I have heard trauaylers report, will also grow
very well in a heath or lingie soil, which if they would, what a benefit
might we have thereby in planting the young trees, or sowing of the seeds in
such grounds, from whence ensues (as it is) scarce a thought of any profit.


Sur. It is true, and I have seen them grow upon such land as you speak of,
and that exceeding large and tall; and if some industrious man would apply
himself to make trial thereof in Windsor Forest, or some such like heathie
barren ground, his endeavor were worthily to be respected, and no doubt would
prove very acceptable to the Commonwealth.


Pereg. I like your discourse so well, that if you would here make an end, I
think you have said enough to make me an excellent husband in my own Woods,
for I now perceive that better skill and husbandry is used about woods and
wooddie grounds than usually is known.


Sur. I am glad you conceive so well of my speeches, I trust before we end our
discourse, to make it plainly appear to you the excellency and great
commodity of this new kind of industry, or rather an old thrift newly
revived. But what says goodman Ienings to this conference? it seems nothing
pleasing to him, because he has been so long silent.


Ienings. It may be you hit the nail upon the head: for these are matters
beyond my capacity or profit, and therefore I intend not to trouble my self
with them.


Sur. And why so? is it not better for you to have your Copies and Hedgrowes
well set and grown with trees, whereby you may at ease and with little cost
have Houseboote, Fireboote, etc. more then sufficient to supply your wants,
rather than that for want of them you perhaps do send two or three miles, yea
it may be ten or twelve miles, or more, to furnish your self therewith.


Ien. I Sir, I grant all that to be true; but if we poor Farmers take pains
to plant young trees and sow Acornes, these great Landlords will be sure to
have the crop thereof: so that we have nothing but our labors for our hire,
which indeed does greatly discourage all honest men in that kind.


Sur. Herein you say but just and reason: for if by your good means and
industry you enrich your Landlords ground with any commodity, there is also
just cause why the Lord should by deed show himself thankful to you for it.
But to proceed, the nature of the plant and quality of the ground considered,
you are then to enclose this circuit of ground, which you intend to plant or
sow, with a good ditch and quickset Ditch and quickset.
of White thorn, Crabtree, or Hollin mixed together, or else any one of them
(and by no means, if you can choose, set any Black thorn amongst it, for that
it will grow into the fields ward, and spoil pasture, and tear the wool of
the Sheep back, though otherwise the Sloes of that bush are excellent for
many diseases, as also it will make a reasonable good kind of drink for poor
people, by depressing the juice out of them) which done, let no cattle come
thereinto: and when you begin to set your plants, set them six or eight foot
distant the one from the other, and that also by a live, which distance is
sufficient for them to prosper well* and also they being set in that regular
manner, it will be much pleasing to the eye, especially when they grow and
begin to bear leaves: and then to plant them well, you must have the ground
well dug or ploughed, and cast up like unto the ridges of a corn Ground
dug for ridges.
field, about six or seven foot wide, and about one foot high, and make
furrows between every row of plants of two yards wide: which so done, the
air, rain, and snow will much battle and mellow it, to the great comfort and
prospering of the plant, especially if at the first you cast into the place
where the plant shall be set good earth, whereby the root may nourish and feed
it self therein, without raunging to fasten it self upon other bad mould,
which may cause the tree to prosper ill.


Pereg. This seems an infinite labor and charge, the gains had need be
great.


Sur. It is true, that upon the first view or apprehension thereof the labor
and charge seems somewhat great, but with patience, and upon some few years
expectancie, the gains will greatly ouertop the charge, as hereafter shall be
further declared.


Wood. But I pray Sir at what time of the year is it best to plant in?


Sur. It is a good time for planting, from about the fifteenth of February to
the beginning of April; or generally, as some rather think it best, about the
later end of September The best time of planting.
until the beginning of January following, for then the chiefest nourishment
is in the root of the tree, and toward the spring it ascends to the upper
part of the plant* and at such time must you plant it, when the wind is neither
in the East or North, and freeseth not, but calm and warm, and in the
increase of the Moon, when the is in Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn.


Pereg. And I pray in what sort should we make choice of our plants to be
planted?


Sur. You shall understand, there is no man who either intends or maintains
a breed of Horses, but desires to furnish himself with fair proportionable
Stallions, and answerable Mares, by which he expects like foales. And so in
planting, I would wish every man that planteth trees to The choice and using of
the plant.
have a special care that the plant be taken up with as many roots as may be,
and if any be broken, let them be cut off, and those not broken, cut the ends
also of some little quantity, as you think good, whereby they wit be the
better refreshed: and also make choice of your plant, to have a smooth and
clean bark, not rough or mossie, and that the stem be strai^ht and long,
without galls or frets, and then set it in the earth as plum as you can, and
cover the roots with good mould, and press it down easily with your hand and
foot, that the root may not lie hollow from the mould, and have no air at all,
whereby it will be the better nourished, to take root in this good earth; which
otherwise, the earth lying hollow from the root, it would be in danger to die,
or else like to search the firm and bad ground, which it should not do: and if
it wants good nourishment, it would prove but a runtish or shrubbie tree.
After all this is done, make up your ridge sloping, that the rain and wet
weather may not too much ann^y it, yet so, that you make a little gutter at the
foot of the plant, for receiving of the water in dry weather, to nourish the
root thereof. You must also cut off the top of the stem, and leave it to be
about five or six foot long out of the earth, and care must be taken, that they
be planted the same day, or the next day after they are taken up, i^ it may be.
And before The ground twice tille^.
you begin to make these dug ridges, or plant your trees, the ground must be
twice tilled, once in April, and then again in the later end of July, after
some great rain; and also you must be careful to clear them from
Caterpillars, if any fall upon them when they are planted, and begin to spring.


Ien. Though I hate your profession, because you pry into our livings, yet I
begin to conceive well of your speeches: but you Surueyors are shroade and
terrible men to deal withal, when you come among us poor Farmers, and
therefore I dare not approve your conceit herein too much.


Sur. I pray my friend wherein are we shroade and terrible men to deal
withal* for if we be employed in a Survey of land, and do according to truth
and equity make an exact and just certificat to the Lord of the Manor of all
the particulars incident in the said Survey, what shroade or terrible dealing
is this? Again, if other men, and those perhaps your neighbors, should out of
malice (as many do) inform your Lord, that your Farm were better worth by
twenty pounds the year than it is, whereby the Lord perhaps, somewhat too
covetous to advance his own thrift, is drawn by their reports to prize it
accordingly: and hereupon he employeth a man of good sufficiency, both in
skill and honesty, to survey it: this man upon the surueying of every
particular hereof, certifieth the Lord in an upright conscience, that this your
neighbors information was false, and grounded altogether upon malice and
spleen: if this then be so, as commonly it is, it cannot be called terrible
dealing in the Surueyor, but good and upright justice; and who then may be
justly said to be a shroade and terrible man, this your malicious neighbor, or
the honest Surueyor? And this have I certainly known by experience, that upon
surueying of a Manor, wherein I have had power and authority from the Lord
both to set and sell lands; during which time, diverse men have come to me to
deal for them by way of hiring and buying, wherein I have found such apparent
malice, as they would not only in private importune me to outbid each other,
but also even publicly, and that with great earnestness affirm the same; and
what then should I do, but according to the trust reposed in me, inform the
Lord thereof, and why also should not the Lord, without any imputation of
racking his T^nants, take what willingly is offered him. And truly I must
needs say this of most Tenants, that by ^eason of this greediness and spleen
one against the other of hyring and buying land, they are more their own
enemies Tenants are most their own enemies.
than is either the Surueyor or their Landlord; so that hither unto I see no
shroade or terrible dealing in the Surueyor: yet I will not deny but that
there may be some such officious men as you speak of, who account themselves
skillful Surueyors, and who also to win a reputation in the world, will seem
to estimate land so immeasurably dear, as there is no possibility the Lord
should ever get that rate for it. Others there may also be, who do value land
at so mean a price, as the Lord is greatly prejudiced thereby: which is a
lamentable thing, and much detriment comes to the buyer as seller thereof,
and great pity it is, that there is no redress therefore. Neither is it
possible for a Surueyor to value What belongs to a* skillful Surueyor.
lands truly, except he know the Tenure, Rents, Customs, Services, Reprises,
and have some understanding in the law; and also he must be very judicious in
the quality and quantity of the land, or else his error must needs be
great: Therefore I would wish all Surueyors to be very careful in this
important matter of Survey, which should with great judgment and indifferency
be managed between the Lord and Tenant. And now I trust I have well satisfied
you in these few words.


Ien. Well Sir, I am content for this present to take your speeches for
payment, but I trust before we depart, to make you confess your own shroade
and terrible doings.


Sur. If you can do that justly, let me then be proclaimed, not only shroade
and terrible, but also dishonest and trea^herous.


Wood. Master Peregrine, our Farmer here is too contentious and choleric, I
pray let this idle controversy be ended until some other time, and let us
proceed in our former discourse of planting wood. Therefore Sir we must
entreat you to bear with this honest Farmers imperfection: for it is likely
he speaks according as he has found by some such officious men you spoke
of even now, who have certified the value and goodness of his Farm to be much
better than the rent he now pays; and therefore I pray have patience, and let
us continue our subject of Planting.


Sur. Most willingly, if it will please this angry Farmer to have patience,
and not to interrupt me, I will willingly frame my self to a peaceable
discourse, and would be glad to satisfy him in any thing I can, and therefore
speak freely, if you conceive any doubt. And now to our planting again. Next
after you have thus planted your trees, and that they are well and firmly
settled in the ground the whole Summer and Winter, then toward the Spring you
must begin to trim and husband them, which is a special help and Dressing
and husbanding of young trees.
comfort to young trees for their better prospering, if it be done in
convenient and due time: for the more they are trimmed and dressed, the more
will they prosper and grow, and especially the first three or four years they
must be most carefully, and that twice in the year dressed and trimmed,
somewhat like unto your Hoppe grounds (I mean for the well husbanding of the
mould, and howghing up of the weeds, the not doing whereof would endanger their
destruction) and that about the midst of April, when they begin to put forth
their buds, and then again toward the end of June; and this must be done as
near as you can after some raynie weather, and not in hot or dry weather,
because the earth being then dry and turned downward toward the roots, it
must needs be, that those clods of earth will lie hollow, and not close upon
the root, so that for want of earth and moisture the plants must of force die:
which to the contrary being dug in moist weather, the earth will then lie
more neer^ and firm to the root, and the water that falls will the rather
more easily enter unto it; which nourishment plants greatly desire. And the
chiefest labor about young trees that are newly planted, is to keep the
ground clean from weeds; which if they be suffered to grow, they will in such
Weeding is necessary for the Spring.
sort take away the sap and heart of the ground from the plants, as it will
much hinder them from growing to that handsome and full form, as otherwise
they would be, and perhaps prove to be wind shaken and galled trees, by reason
they want that good nourishment as they expect: and as is daily seen in Hoppe
grounds, which except they be well and orderly husbanded in opening the hills,
putting good moul^ upon the roots, and clean kept from weeds, you are like to
have but bad Hoppes. And so will it prove in these plants, that being orderly
husbanded, as aforesaid, in due and seasonable times, you shall find the profit
double by the increase of the stem and branches; so that then one of the
greatest cares is (after their planting, especially if they be very young and
small plants) to keep them clean from weeds for four or five years: for if
they be choked or smothered by them, how possibly can they prosper?


Wood. This must needs be a most excellent course and manner of planting,
only that the charge thereof will somewhat dismay men from entering thereinto,
which if it should, then we are still like to have all manner of wood go
down, which at last must needs make an end of all.


Sur. I tell you again, the charge is little to be respected in regard of the
profit, which within three or four years men shall apparently see come on*
which short time ended, the charge and labor is then past for ever: for after
the plants be grown to a sufficient height and steadiness in the ground, that
weeds and bushes cannot ouertop or sway them down, then to the contrary, the
young trees so grown, the shadow of them will keep the Sun and air from
the weeds, that they cannot get up, or at least very poorly: and if this were
but once put in practice by some industrious men, and a diligent care had
therein, as is aforesaid, I do not think the contrary, but that the
undertakers thereof would grow more ambitious and jealous in concealing the
profit therein than the Merchant, who aduentureth great sums of money upon
uncertain and desperate hazards.


Ien. Why, I pray M. Surueyor, is it not daily seen, that young trees grow up
and prosper well without such pains and charge, and that only by the natural
nourishment and fruitfulness of the ground or climate? And if so, what then
needs all this pains and cost: and therefore I should think (if men will
needs be at cost and charges) that sowing of Acornes, and other such Timber
seeds, is much better, less charge, and will grow up as timely.


Sur. It is true, many plants or young siences or springs grow up naturally to
goodly tall and straight trees, but where one does come up so well without art,
there do an hundred perish for it, being either ouergrowne by weeds or
bushes, or Trees set by art do grow sooner and better than wild trees.
eaten and bitten by cattle while they are young and tender, or else by some
other casual mischance they miscarrie in this their infancy. And for that you
think sowing of Acornes and other Timber seeds more profitable, because less
chargeable, I will presently speak somewhat in approving your opinion, the
more fully to satisfy and encourage you and others therein: for there is no
doubt, but that they will grow and prosper excellent well, and the tree that
comes up of such seeds, do grow to their full height and top, which the
plant does not: but yet I hold planting to be more sure, and as profitable: yet
would I not have men so far to insist upon planting, as that they should
expect, that not any should die: but this I say, that if the ground be well and
orderly husbanded, and the plant carefully chosen, and set in the ground as
aforesaid, that then in ordinary understanding, not one in a hundred of them
will die, as experience shows it true in many places, and particularly in
Moorefields at London: and to that end I would wish ingenious and willing
minds to make trial both of the plant set thus by art, and the wild tree
growing of his own accord, and I make no doubt, but that they will confess
with me, that the plant thus orderly set, will grow more in one year, and that
also more comely than the wild tree will do in two years.


Pereg. Your discourse is very pleasing, and probably may effect well, if it
were put in practice: and of this you said sufficiently, and therefore I think
there needs not any thing else to be done concerning the setting and
husbanding of plants.


Sur. Yes, there is yet more to be said and done concerning this practice,
which I shall now speak of. Before then you go in hand to plant any young
trees, you are first to consider of two things; namely, the soil where you
intend to plant, Two things to be considered of in planting.
and the soil where the plant did formerly grow: for if you intend to plant
upon a barren soil, and take your plant from a fat soil, that tree will
hardly prosper at all: but contrariwise, if you take your plant from a barren
soil, and plant it in a fertile soil, that tree by all likelihood will in
time prove Removing of trees from a barren soil to a fat soil, and so of the
contrary.
large and beautiful: for the firtler the ground is, the better will the tree
thrive and beautify, as well in his verdure, as bole and boughs, if it be
well ordered at the first, as is to be seen in every place where great trees
are, which shows they have been well and carefully husbanded. And therefore
I would advise, that before any do plant young trees, or sow their seeds,
well to observe the quality and species of the soil, as whether the
production or vesture thereof, either which now is, or formerly has been of a
comely and large proportion; namely big bodies, large spreading branches and
arms, smoothly growing, and high tapering trees; for in such layers one may
with exceeding pleasure and comfort adventure to plant or sow, because it is to
be expected (orderly observing the foresaid prescriptions) that the habitude or
fertility of the ground will again in time produce like growthes. And it were
also good, that at the taking up of the plant you made a mark upon it, to know
which side stood toward the South Sun, because you may also so set it
again, and it will prosper so much the better. Being thus planted, during the
first two or three years, their boughs or small sprigges newly shooting out
(as some are of opinion) would gently and better be taken away with the hand
(because Pruning of young Plants.
those superfluous twigges do hinder the growth of the tree) rather then to
cut them with a knife, or any edged tool: and in this sort they must be used
until the fourth year, and after they are come to that growth, then use
altogether an edged tool to prune them withal, if you perceive they spring
too thick, and that they hinder each others growth, and leave only some few
of the principal branches in the top: and this pruning must be done in March,
the Moon being in Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn.


Wood. Indeed I like well of this pruning or shredding of trees, especially
when they grow to some good bigness of Timber, for then the Dear have their
fill of brousing, the tree much prospers, and we poor officers make some
little commodity of the remnant of such brouse wood: and also now and then for
want of sufficient brouse for our fuel, we take a poor old doted tree or two
to supply our wants.


Sur. M. Woodward, I believe you without swearing: for under the color for
brouse for the Dear, you make havoc of loppes, and many times fell branches
or arms of Timber trees, wherein my self have seen sixteen or twenty foot
of good Timber in many such loppings, wherein indeed you should fell boughs
for brousing no bigger than the Dear may well turn over with his horns. And
further, where you think it causes the Timber tree to grow tall and large,
therein you greatly deceive your self, for the boughs once cut from such a
Timber tree, in that manner as you speak of, be it either cut near the body,
or far off, the wet and rainie weather does then straight begin to enter in,
and even from the highest of every such bough so cut off, to the foot of the
tree, the water will slide and soke down between the Lopping of Timber trees
do quite spoil them.
bark and the bole of the tree, and the longer that tree stands, the worse
it will be, and within twelve or sixteen years after that Timber tree will
grow to be little better than a very Dottard: yet it is good every twelve or
fourteen years to lop and crop Dottard or Pollard trees, because it will not
hurt those kind of trees, but be a means for them to bear more boughs; but
yet lop not any tree in sap time, least that tree be in danger to perish within
a short time after. But I persuade my self the chiefest cause why you make
such large loppes, is neither for brouse for the Dear, nor yet that the tree
should the better prosper, but it is indeed out of a desire of gains to sell
the loppes. And as for the taking of trees, which you are content to esteem
Dottard trees, I imagine many of you are as lavish therein, as you are in
cropping of Timber trees.


Wood. Why, I pray what is a Dottard tree? may we not call those doted trees
which are dead in the top?


Sur. Now good God, what an age is this! how pleasingly men do assume to
themselves any thing which sauoureth of profit, how unjust soever! But Sir, you
shall understand, that all trees decayed in the top are not accounted Dottards,
though it be apparent that they are in declining, for in such trees happily
there may be three or four loades of very good Timber. But a Dottard tree, as
I conceive, is any old tree What is a doted tree.
that bears little or no verte, nor in which is scarce any timber, nor yet
good for little else but for the fire: and therefore you must be careful what
manner of trees you take, least that afterward, upon complaint, you be called
in question to answer your offense: and if those fees and allowances were
prohibited as well from taking as felling, and to be allowed no more than
should sufficiently serve for your own fuel, the Kings Timber would be much
the better preserved.


Wood. What Master Surueyor, have we all this while approved your speeches for
good and commendable, and will you now oppose your self against poor
Woodwards, Keepers, and other officers of Woods, who now and then get some such
poor fees? I had thought you had been a man of a more charitable and friendly
disposition.


Ien. Charitable! I: let men of his profession be but a little countenanced by
some great man, and you will instantly see how they will domineere over such
poor men as we be.


Pereg. Indeed Master Surueyor, where lawful fees have been of custom due to
Officers, I see no cause why they should be abridged of them, they clayming but
the ancient and ordinary fees, which for many years their predecessors have
had.


Sur. Why I pray what hurt have I said? which though by way of discourse I
spoke of such an abuse; yet it lies not in me to determine it, neither are
they the ^urther from it, nor is it my meaning, that these officers should love
hereby, if it should be taken from them: but directly I say it is an abuse, and
the Timber is much impaired thereby, and I could wish a reformation thereof, as
also that such officers should have competent fees or allowances in money in
stead of loppes and brouse wood, whereby the Kings Timber might be the better
preserved.


Wood. You do well to salve what you have said: but how I pray, What competent
fees can be allowed them? What likelihood is there in that?


Sur. Marry thus: where a Woodward or Keeper perhaps do make yearly of such
brouse wood ten pounds (either by selling the wood, or burning of it to
ashes) I would have them strictly prohibited from felling but so much, and such
as will sufficiently serve the Dear for brousing, and that such loppings
should not any way annoy or impair the tree, and those so felled, that when
the Dear have done brousing of them, that the Keeper have a competencie
thereof for his fuel, and the remain should be sold to the Kings use by some
other officer appointed for that purpose: and then, for that the Keeper is thus
abridged of these fees, which he cannot in right challenge, yet I would wish
that he might still have the same proportion per annum in money, not because I
hold it a thing due unto him, but because it will encourage him to be more
careful in his office, as well in looking to the Game, that no idle persons
range up and down with dogs, Crossebowes, or Gunnes; and also to the Wood,
that no sticke-carriers or other p^rloyning people do abuse themselves therein
by hacking and mangling of the trees: and though this may seem a charge to the
King, by paying yearly a certain sum out of his cofers, where before he
paid none, yet upon good consideration (under correction) he should greatly
gain hereby: for this ten pounds the year which you get by selling this
brouse wood, is perhaps richly worth twenty pounds (for you cannot possibly
get the full price thereof, but you must needs sell it greatly under the
value, as glad to have it gone, for that you dare not approve the sale thereof)
so that his Majesty shall save one way by the bargain in not lopping of any
trees, because the tree shall then still have his full burden, and he shall
save much more another way by the well preserving his Timber treees, if no such
Loppes be felled at all: For as I said before, such loppings or shreddings do
utterly spoil many good Timber trees. For if your tree at the Lopping or
Shredding thereof were worth forty sh^^lings, that tree within twelve or
sixteen years following will incline to be a Dottard tree, and worth perhaps
not above fifteen or twenty shilings. I speak not this upon conjecture, but
upon certainty which I know to be true, partly upon my own observation, and
partly upon conference which I have had with diverse Woodwards and Baylifes in
my late circuit Northward for Survey and sale of some of his Majesty's Woods.
And now I pray what hurt have I said against Woodwards, Keepers, or other
Officers belonging to Woods? Nay, have I not to the contrary, spoken with good
indifferency between the King and them?


Ienings. Indeed you have now made some amends, and I conceive better of you
for your plain speeches, then I did at the first: For to tell you true, most
of you Surueyors are odious to Farmers.


Survey. As I will not endeavor to approve all Surneyors honest men, so I
would not have honest and discreet Surueyors condemned, but as they are so I
leave them. But now again to our Planting, wherein we have somewhat (though
not altogether unnecessarily) digressed. I told you before, that it is fit to
prune ^ong Plants until three or four years after they are Planted, and also
after, if you see cause and this pruning must The time to prune young trees or
plants.
be about March, when the cold weather and Frosts are past, for if you should
prune them in Winter time, it would greatly endanger the Plants: And you may
thus continue pruning of them, till toward the midst of April, at what time
the B^d begins to put forth. And after they are come to the growth of three
or four years, they must be cut finely and neately with a sharp hook or
Hatchet, in doing which you must use great care from shaking or loosing the
Root of the Plant, and this course of pruning you may use yearly for a long
or short time, if need be, and many of those little sprigges, or boughs so cut
off, may serve to Plant in other places, making choice of the straightest or
handsomest among them, they may also in time prove fair tall trees. And some
do write, that if you will have an Oak, or any other tree to continue A secret.
green all the Summer and Winter, you must graft it upon a Colewort stock:
which kind of experiment I leave to the ingenious to practice.


Pe. Now trust me your discourse of Planting is very pleasing, and happily may
prove very profitable; and I pray give me leave also to add one other benefit
thereunto, which is, that by this manner of husbandry, poor men shall now and
then help themselves by earning a penny.


Sur. It is true, and they may also, when Wood is grown to be more plentiful,
keep better fires, with much less cost, and your Hedges are like to stand
longer.


Wood. But I pray what circuit or quantity would you have this piece of
ground to be which should be thus planted.


Sur. Because it should not seem tedious or chargeable to y^ undertakers of
this good work. I would wish it were not above eight or ten Acres more or
less, according as the parties ability and desire is to have it, and that
either to be within one hedge, or else in several, little, and convenient
places about the ground, for be it great or little, when they once begin this
work, they will have as great desire and pleasure in seeing of it kindly to
prosper and grow, as they have in their Hoppe grounds, or rather much more. For
though Hops do now and then yield a good commodity, yet in respect of the
continual great charge of them, and uncertainty of the year, I have known
many a man, who have given over planting of them; which is not so in this
course of planting trees: for after the first three or four years charge and
labor, there is then no more to be done to them, or at least very little, but
only a diligent care to be had in preserving of what is already well done,
and which will always remain to posteriti^.


Ie. I now begin to like your discourse well of Planting trees, according as
you have said: and I think it were also very fit to Plant in Hedgrowes, and so
quickset every ditch, where already are none, or perhaps but thin Hedges of
boughs, or bushes; for this once well done, they would sufficiently strengthen
one another, he a great saving of Wood, and also be a Fence to the worlds end,
and we free from having our Hedges broken down; the repayring of which, is
daily a charge to us, and many times breeds much discontent and suite between
neighbors.


Sur. It is true, and therefore I marvel at those Landlords, who do grant
many Estates either for lives or years of their Land, do not condition with
such persons to Plant trees and Quickset ditches in connenient places of the
Farm so granted, and especially in Champian Countries where Wood is scarce.
And also it were most necessary that when the Lord felleth any Timber trees in
his Farm or demean Lands, that he do for every tree so felled, cause to be
set three or four young Plants fit and likely to prove to be Timber, in steed
thereof, which course would not be s^ chargeable as profitable. For by this
means also we should have Wood and Timber perpetually without want.


Pe. You say well, if Tenants would be careful therein to see them prosper:
and for my part I intend to make trial thereof upon the next Farm which
falls to me. But now Sir, that you have thus probably spoken of Planting young
trees, I would desire you if you please, to begin to speak somewhat of sowing
Acornes, Chestnuts, Beechmast, etc. For if you speak with that good likelihood
of the one, as you have done of the other, I see no reason to the contrary, if
men would apply themselves hereunto, and be industrious, but that we might in
very few years have the whole Realm sufficiently furnished with Wood, to serve
our selves and posterity for ever.


Sur. No question but it would be so, if men would not altogether be so slack
in their own profit of this nature, but that they would be pleased to plant
yearly one hundred or two hundred of young trees, more or less, and that for
four or five years together, in convenient places about their grounds (the
charge of which would not be so much, as the profit thereof would be pleasing
and commodious) they should then be their own Judges to consider, whether it
were profitable or no: to which I will leave them, and will now, if you please,
speak a little of sowing Acornes, Chestnuts, Beechmaste, and Ashen keys.


Wood. I pray do; for hetherunto you have spoken well of planting, and I long
to hear an end of your opinion in this kind.


Sur. Sir, most willingly, and I will now begin to satisfy your desire. You
must then first let your ground be of a good and fertile soil, neither too
wet, dry, or barren, and that it be Preparing of ground for sowing of Acornes.
seated in a warm place, and toward the South Sun, if it may be, and let it
be well dug or ploughed, as you would do if it were to set or s^w Wheat in;
and make choice of your Acornes to be ripe, but not ouerdrie, faulty, or
corrupted. Then must you have a Fur board, which must have six or eight
reasonable big wooden pinnes fastened in it, a foot distant the one from the
other, of five or six inches long, and when you begin to set your seed, you
must lay this board upon the ground, and press it so down, that every of
those pinnes make holes in the ground of that depth the pinnes are long; and
then let another (for more expedition) go along with you, to carry and put
the seed into those holes, and always when he has so done, let him then
cover those holes with a little loose earth: and you must set them even and
straight by a long line; and which must be done in November, in the decreasing
of the Moon in moist grounds, and increasing of the Moon in dry grounds,
she being then in Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn, Aquarius, or
Pisces: and the best time to gather your Acornes for keeping and sowing of them
is in October. And after they are thus set in the ground* let them then be
watered ^uening and (...), it conveniently you can, and that there be (...)
thereof. And also be careful, that the Birds and Crows be kept away from
eating the seed or young sprigges which grow up: and these seeds when they are
come up and grown to be trees, will be more high and tall (by reason they
have always the full height of their tops) than your Plant, that is thus set
as aforesaid, because his top at the setting or planting thereof, is cut ^^f.
Some men also do use to sow Acornes, Chestnuts, etc. (as they ca^ it) under
^urrough with the hand, as you do ca^e, and which also is good: both which
sorts of setting and s^wing the Acorne I will leave to your practice.


Wood. But I ma^uaile why you would have such good ground, charge, and pains
bestowed thereon, for the planting of your Oak, considering that it is not
unknown to you, that a^ ^^ll in this, as many other Counties of England, Trees
growing upon rockie grounds.
great and ^^ll Timber trees do grow and prosper excellent well upon Rockie
grounds, and where such Rocks are, I would rather have them employed for those
purposes than our good land.


Sur. The reason why trees grow upon Rockie grounds, as I conceive, is this:
Your Rocks or Mountains that bring forth great trees, it is to be intended,
that they are not firm or solid, but have many veins in them, where the
very heart and mother of the soil lies, and where happily such trees do
chance to grow, by being either planted or ^owne of Acornes, there with^^t all
doubt they will as well increase and fructify, as upon any other ^oyle
whatsoever, because in th^se veins the whole nourishment of the soil does
more abundantly ascend up and feed the tree, th^n it does in any open fertile
grounds. And I can give you an instance thereof by Vines growing along the
River of Rhine upon the sides of Rocks, where those country people do more
esteem such a Vine garden, both for quantity and goodness of the grape, than
they do a garden planted in a large and battable ground: yet though we see
some rock^e grounds to bear large trees, I would not advise any to bestow much
cost in planting them upon such hard and desperate adventures, though yet not
amiss to try conclusions, how or whether they will there prosper or no.


Pereg. Sir, I commend your reasons why trees do grow upon Rockie grounds, but
your opinion concerning the distance of setting Acornes I cannot approve,
because you allow but one foot distance between every Acorne thus set, which
I think too little by much: for considering that when they are grown up to
be trees, the longer they grow, the greater they will be, so that in the end
there will be no legs to bear these bodies, I mean all the ground will be
trees.


Sur. You say well: for if there were no larger distance allowed for the
setting of them than one square foot, the ground indeed would not be able to
bear them: therefore as you leave longstwayes but one foot distance, so also
sidewayes you shall leave five or six feet, which will be distance sufficient:
and yet notwithstanding that distance, if all of them do not prosper well, and
grow straight and seemly when they are come up (as perhaps many of them will
not do) you may then make a culling of the most vnhandsomest of them, from the
other of finer and ^eater growth, and then those remaining, the greater they
grow, the better they will prosper. And this Garden or Nurcerie thus made, you
may, when they are grown to three foot high, remove of them how many you
please, and to what other convenient place about your ground you think fit;
and begin to remove them from the change to the full, or in the last quarter of
the Moon, she The best time to remove young plants.
being in Taurus or Capricorn, and let it be done in September, October, or
November, before the roots grow to be too strong, and then being planted, they
will prosper much the better. And when you do remove and set these young
plants anew, if you cut off the tops and prune them, they will prosper the
better to bear Maste; but if you intend to reserve them for Timber trees, then
meddle not at all with the tops of them, because they will be more straight,
seemly, and higher for that purpose.


Ien. This is spoken to great reason: for there is no question but if you
remove your young plants to a firtler soil, they will in short time ^reatly
advance themselves in their growth: and if we did not in live sort trium^e and
dress our Hoppes, by pulling away sprigges and roots, which superfluously
grow out of them, and also put sheep into our wheat grounds which grow too
rank, to eat it down, we should have as bad Hoppes as Corn, and little
profit should we have by either: so that this course of husbanding young plants
must needs be very good.


Sur. You are likewise to consider, to set weeders on work, that the seeds be
not smothered by weeds, nor that the air, Weeding.
Sun, or heart of the earth be taken away by them, which especially in wet
weather will grow apace among the seeds and plants: for if these nourishments
and comforts do not freely come to the seed and tender plants, newly set or
come up, as I have already said, there is no doubt but that it will endanger
the whole Croppe; which otherwise by this good means and labor of weeding
the^, wist cause them to grow and prosper so well, as that within short time
they will have the greater power of the weeds: and if there were no such
labor in this kind, the weeds would assuredly over grow, and spoil them, and
cause them to come up a^^ grow so abortiue and ill favored, as you would
neither find pleasure or profit therein.


Ien. You say true: for as I said before of Hoppes and Corn, if they be not in
their kinds well pruned, husbanded, and weeded, in faith we were like to have
poor Croppes, and therefore weeding of these seeds and young sprigges newly
come up, must needs be most excellent for their better prospering.


Sur. These trees and seeds thus let, you must be careful that the ground be
well fenced, that no manner of cattle The ground fenced.
may come in for spoiling the Speing, and passengers would be kept out, because
they should not touch or handle th^se tender sprigges. And this manner of
setting Acornes, Chestnuts, Beechmaste, or any other seed for trees, may ^^ in
void places, wooddie grounds, or between ^re^s where there is Seed or plants
may also be set in void places o^ in wooddie grounds.
any roo^re or scope sufficient, or in Hedgrowes, as well as in this appointed
and husbanded place made of purpose, so that there be a diligent care had in
trimming the ground and well preserving them afterward.


Pe. It is very true: for we were much better to employ vacant places and
Ga^les in Springs and woodie grounds, and in Hedgrowes to some good profit,
then to let them li^ and be nurceries for weeds and trash without any
conundditie. And surely this course of setting or sowing Acornes is very
necessary for those who dwell in Champian Countries, and can hardly come by
any Plants either for love or money, and I do much wonder that men of good
worth, and also Farmers and Husbandmen, where Wood is scarce, and also at
excessive prises, do not take this course of setting Acornes, Ashen-keyes,
Withies, etc.


Ie. Sir it is no wonder. For men of worth have commonby a good Spring
wheresoever they go, I mean, their purses are well and thickly set with
Crowns, so that they may at all times keep good firing. And as for the poor
Tenant, I have given a sufficient reason before, why he is unwilling to bestow
that labor and cost: and M. Surueyour, I thank him, d^^ approve my reason to
be good and honest.


Sur. In deed you speak to good purpose, and I could wish that many
Landlords were better respective of their poor T^^ants, as well for the
Landlords own profit and honor, as for the Tenants better relief of
himself and family.


Ie. God I give him thanks that I hear a man of your prefessi^^s so
charitably affected toward poor men, for I did surely agree with the common
opinion, you all were great enemies to us poor Farmers; but now upon better
consideration I see it otherwise: But well, I pray proceed.


Sur. A (...) might likewise answer you, according to common opinion, that all
Farmers desire to conceal the quantity, quality, and value of their Farms
from the knowledge of the Lord: yet I am not of that opinion, but think the
contrary, that all honest Farmers will truly certify the Lord the truth of
every the former particulars. But lea^ing every man to his own conscience* let
us again return to the subject of our discourse. The place and ground thus
fenced, and the Spring now grown to ten or twelve years of age, both pleasure
and profit will now begin apace to come on. And first for the pleasure thereof,
it greatly Pleasures of the Spring.
delights the fight with the variety of his green and pleasant colors; the
harmony and Mu^^de of the Birds i^ pleasant to the ear; the Have and Fore
hunted with a kenell of good mouthed Dogs does also greatly rejoice the
spirits and minds of man with an excellent resounding cry; fine and pleasant
cooling walks in the heat of Summer are there to be had, as well to keep
t^^m from the heat of the Sun, as also to sol^ce themselves in private from
being distracted in their other affairs. With these pleasures and many more
not here spoken of (which comes by planting or sowing of this Wood) there may
by para^el^ as many Commodity of the Spring.
profitable commodities: as namely by putting in of Cattle (for at these years
the Spring is past all danger by being annoyed with their feeding there) in the
heat of Summer, which by reason of the great store of shadow in this Spring,
the Cattle will feed and like the better, and it is also in the Winter time,
good (...) and shelter for them, and which also will greatly enrich and battle
the ground: Then may you at fifte^ne or sixteen years growth, make a fell
either of the whole or part of the Spring, which happily you may f^ll for four
or five pounds the Acrs, or according as the valu^ and vent for W^^d is in that
place whers it grow^th: and you are also like to have store of Maste of as many
kinds as you ^ew, to fat your Swine withal, and for other good purposes.


Wood. The pleasure and profit no doubt of such a Spring, is very great, but I
pray what number of Standils for Timber trees are to be left upon every Acre at
the time of f^lling the Spring?


Sur. As I intend not now to speak of the whole course of the Statutes
concerning Wood, yet I would be glad to satisfy you in any thing I can:
therefore you shall understand that every Spring so felled, the Owners or
buyers thereof are bound by Statute, to leave twelve young Trees, commonly
called Standils for Timber trees, upon every Acre, which Standils must not be
afterward felled, until they are grown to be ten inches square within three
foot The number of Standils to be left upon every Acre of Wood-land.
of the ground (except it be for needful use of repair) in which leaving of
Standils, I would advise the feller to have a special care that he makes
choice of the straightest and neatest grown Standils for that purpose.


Wood. Your advise herein is good, for as the Plant is, so is the Tree like to
prove: and I perceive, the ground which bears Wood, considering the great
pleasure, profit, Wood-ground as profitable as Corn ground.
and little charge thereof, is little inferior in commodity to the ground
which is employed in bearing of Corn or Hoppes.


Sur. You say well, but if any difference be in the profit of them, I think it
rather in the Wood-ground, especially if it be husbanded and preserved
accordingly as I have said, and that the vent for Wood where it grows be
dear: For it is true, that though the profit of Woods be longer in coming to
a man's purse, then Corn or Hops are, yet in the end it makes a double
recompense, because the first three or four years charge once defrayed,
nature then of it self, without further charge or labor, will abundantly
bring forth the Crop: which is not so in Corn or Hop grounds, because they
bear not without continual charge of Tillage, Hop-poles, digging and deluing,
servants, and good husbandry. But now if you please I will begin to draw to an
end, wherein I have been the more prolixe to set down the course of Planting
young Trees, and sowing Acornes, as also in speaking somewhat of the pleasure
and profit which comes by Woods, to the end that those who are industrious,
may hereby be the rather encouraged to begin and proceed in this profitable
course; and let none ever think the time large in reaping profit hereby, but
let them be sorry that they have lost so much time, because they Planted and
Sowed no sooner. And note, that all Timber trees which grow upon high grounds,
though they will not be so large, Note.
tall, and tough, yet will they be of a more beautiful, and pleasing grain,
then those which grow in low Valleys, and also it will last and endure longer.
And as you sow Acorns, so must you d^e Beeth-mast, and Ashen-keyes; and as for
the manner of sowing and setting of Chestnuts, I will hereafter more at large
speak of, and in the mean time I will only acquaint you with the difference
of some several trees for Timber, and what grounds are most apt for them to
prosper: And also set down some brief Rules to take the Sollid content of any
Timber-tree standing, together with the height thereof, performed by a small
portable Instrument which is both facill and pleasant, (and which may be carried
in one pocket) fitting that purpose.


THE SECOND PART,
Discoursing of the Commodities and Discommodities of enclosing decayed
Forests, Commons, and Wast grounds.

Peregrine. MAster Surueyor, you have formerly spoken so well of planting and
sowing in this kind, as I long to hear your opinion concerning the differences
and qualities of Trees, that hereby we might compose of this our Discourse some
ample introduction to this your new kind of Husbandry. And the rather most
abundantly to advance this kind of thrift by planting of trees, and sowing of
their seeds for increase of Timber and Fuel, or rather to have it linked with
a benefit equalling, or far exceeding it in a general profit, I should
think it not amiss, that decayed Taking in of decayed Forests, Commons, and
Wast grounds.
Forests, Commons, and Wast grounds might be taken in and divided into
seuerals, with good ditches, which should be set with Quickset, and also
planted with young Trees, accordingly as my neighbor Ienings did speak of even
now.


Ien. Sir, your memory is good, and it is true that I spoke of quicksetting
and planting ditches about a Farm or Demean grounds, but not to have decayed
Forests, Commons, or Wast grounds enclosed: for hereby the King should be
greatly scanted in his pleasure, every man wronged, the poor generally be
undone* and all would be in an uproar.


Pereg. That is but as you conceive it: for it is not intended that any Forests
should be enclosed where is store of Game, or near to any place where usually
his Majesty makes any progress for his pleasure, but I would have only such
decayed Forests enclosed which have few or no Dear in them, and which are
far remote from any such his Highness places of progress or pleasure, and
which also are a charge to his Majesty, by paying officers their fees, and yet
neither profit or pleasure comes by them. And though this name of enclosing
and taking in of Commons and wast grounds be odious to the Communaltie, and
therefore may seem dangerous, yet if they did rightly apprehend it, that as
well the rich as the poor might reap a general good hereby (as most
assuredly they would) no doubt they would uniformly importune, that all such
decayed Forests, Commons, and Wast grounds might be taken in.


Ien. Yea, when there is any appearance of such a general benefit, then it is
likely they will yield thereunto, but in my opinion there is neither benefit or
conscience to be expected hereby.


Sur. Nay there you speak somewhat too unadvisedly: for By enclosing of
Commons is both benefit and conscience.
by enclosing of Wast grounds there is both benefit and conscience. And first
in general for the benefit, it conuerteth all such bad and Wast grounds to be
good and profitable to all those who have any interest in such kind of grounds:
and as for using a conscience in this business, when all things are done with
indifferency and conueniencie in allotting (with the approbation of the
Commoners) an equal portion according to their Freehold, Copyhold, and
Cottage, and that at an easy rate, I hope then you will confess there is good
conscience used therein.


Wood. Yet by your favor M. Surueyor this plain Farmer in my opinion has
spoken honestly: for if your Common be taken away, how shall the poor Farmer
and Cottager live? Or shall they not rather, by being thrust out of it, both
themselves and whole family live in extreme penuri^ and famine?


Sur. It is true, that the poor inhabitants of such a Common would be much
impou^rished, if they should be wholly abridged thereof, which God forbid. But
by enclosing decayed What is intended by enclosing decayed Forests, Commons,
and wast grounds.
Forests, Commons, and Wast grounds, as I understand by M. Peregrine, is wholly
intended such community, that both the rich and the poor should be allotted
equal portions thereof, according to their Freehold, Copyhold, and Cottage;
the good whereof, in every man's understanding, would be greatly beneficial
and pleasing to all.


Pereg. It is so: for who doubts, that if any such Forest, Common, or Wast
ground were enclosed, but that they would plentifully yield a treble benefit:
every one should The benefit of enclosing wast grounds.
have more certain scope and freedom to their Farms, Copyholds, and Cottages
than they had before, to sell, let, or use them themselves; many idle persons
would be oftener set on work; and Church liuing^ would be exceedingly advanced.


Ien. You have spoken well and briefly in commendation of this unpleasing
work, if every one would applaud it. But Sir, because you nearly touch my
poor living (a great profit whereof is in respect of the Common) you must give
me leave as briefly as I can to answer you. And therefore 1 The discommodities
of enclosing wast grounds.
first for the treble profit you speak of, I think the charge considered
about Surueying, Ditching, Quicksetting, and Planting this Enclosure, and other
husbanding of it, before it co(...)th to yield any profit, and then the not any
charge of the other, as it lies in common, and where is a daily profit, both
compared together, I believe your treble profit will f(...)e be cast up, scarce
to make you a single sauer. them) to improve their rents at an extreme rack*
by which the loss of enclosing this wast ground is then most apparent, in
paying at the end of that expiration a racked rent for that which they were
wont to have gratis among their other grounds.


Wood. How now Master Peregrine, I think our honest Farmer has reasonably
well answered you:


Sur. Master Woodward, the Farmer has spoken well according 1 The
discommodities of enclosing waste* grounds answered, and a^ further ^ene^^
thereof expressed.
to his understanding, yet in my opinion not very material, and your motive of
the peoples tumult is of as little validity as his; and to answer you both,
this I say, That the profit will be treble by enclosing, as aforesaid, yea and
much more, if the s^y^e be any thing good: for after the charge is past (which
suppose it be great and chargeable) of enclosing this pe^c^ of wast ground
accordingly as the Farmer has said: does any man doubt to let it for not
above, or make thereof three shillings the Acre, which before was not worth six
pence the Acre? nay rather may the^ not assure them* selves it will be worth
eight shillings or ten shillings the Acre, or perhaps more, within one or two
years after the enclosing thereof? And then for their scope and freedom: is
any man so poorly conceited, but that he would be glad to enlarge his Farm by
taking more ground, and especially when he may have it at a very easy rate,
and for a good term, and according to the tenure of his estate, so may he
either sell, let, or use it himself, without any prejudice to himself, or
wrong to his Lord? And where you think that none but rich Free holders should
get hereby, if you had said the contrary, you had spoken with better
judgment: for where these Freeholders have Common, there without all doubt
they greatly oppress poor Copy holders, Farmers, and Cottagers, by
ouercharging the Common with Sheep and other Cattle, which is more than they
can justify by law or conscience: and yet who dare complain, or what redress
thereof? whereas if this Common were enclosed as aforesaid, these rich
Freeholders should then have certainly their equal portions as other men
have, without wrong to any the poorest Cottager. And whereas I perceive you are
apt enough to put a buzze into poor men's heads, by telling them, their Lord
may prove hard to them in the end, by racking of what they have formerly had
gratis: which though he should do so, what is that to the purpose? when as
before the enclosing of it, this poor man made not certainly of this Waste
ground six pence the Acre (and yet also covertly does pay for it) and lived
most penuriously thereon, he shall now upon the enclosing thereof, as I said
before, if the soil be any thing good; make ten shillings or twelve shillings
the Acre, or so much, that he may well and better live, and pay the Lord his
rent, than he did before. And do not all men know, where Common is, there the
Lord does let his Farms and Tenements not according to their own proper
values, but according to their true values, by reason of the Common? so that
then here is an appearance, that every man pays a portion of rent for his
Common lying open. allowed them) than possibly they can do upon a miserable
bare Common: and also they may with more ease, profit, and pleasure husband and
manage five or six Acres, more or less, of such enclosure, by sowing it with
some profitable grain, grazing, planting fruit trees, Hoppes, roots, or take
a yearly rent for it, than to live upon a bare and hard Common in extreme
want, where is neither pleasure nor certainty of gain, and where poor people
do daily increase in number and poverty upon such waste grounds, and which
may seem rather to starve Sheep and other Cattle grazing upon them, than any
way be compared to enclosures, where they may daily have their fill, and grow
large and sound. they did not plentifully find both ease and profit ^herein,
they would never undergo that labor and charge of enclosing such Commons:
wherefore if the Subjects in regard of this profit do thus, and daily take in
such Zi^crochments, which by law they cannot justly; who doubts but that the
King may more freely make use and profit of his own by enclosing and dividing,
as aforesaid? Further more, Commons that lie open are much subject to ill
weather, so as Cattle which graze upon them are not able to continue there
about four or five months in the year; but if once they be made into
seueralties, they will then become warm, and the hedges and walls which do
mound them, will mightily preserve and defend the Cattle both from wind and
weather, and which will batten the soil and make the Cattle grow more fat, to
the great comfort and profit of the owners. And would you not think it a good
and pleasing sight to see a large decayed Forest, or wild and ruinous piece of
ground, which as it lies is not worth perhaps six pence the Acre, to be now
enclosed with ditches and quickset, and planted with many young trees of diverse
kinds, to prove worth eight shillings or ten shillings the Acre? What should I
say more? the Subjects poverty will be turned into wealth, his Royal Majesty
abundantly supported, without any burden or charge to his Subjects, and such a
flourishing estate will be, both to Prince and people, as the like will not be
parallelled in all Christendom. If all this may probably be true which I have
said: what hurt or depression is there offered herein to the poor man? or
could I possibly have spoken more for his greater benefit?


Ien. Indeed I must now confess you have satisfied me with better reasons
than I did ever heretofore dream of. But yet Sir I pray give me leave (a
little by the way) after all your discourse of enclosing, now to fall to
disclosing; I mean not leuelling or pulling down of Ditches or Hedges, but
somewhat more amply to disclose to you the true state and dislike of us
Husbandmen and Farmers, concerning this point of taking in waste grounds. It
is true, and cannot be denied, that which you say, of the benefits of enclosed
Counties, if they be compared with champaine and open Counties, for which we
need no further proofs, than to compare Rent, Essex, Suffolk, Middlesex,
Hartford-shire, Hereford-shire, and diverse other Counties and particular
places* with those of Buckingham, Oxford, Northampton, Cambridge, Lincoln,
Rutland, and sundry others; what plenty of all things most necessary for
sustenance of life (far above other Counties) are in those enclosed Counties,
is so infallible a truth, as it cannot be denied: and the reason is, the
agilitie and industry of man (concurring with Gods grace) from whence ensues
abundance and plenty of all things. But hence (alas) is our misery, when
enclosures once be made, straight ways some, yea very many merciless
Landlords, that esteem it best to live Lordlike, do peecemeale ingrosse and
resume such Enclosures, and expel their poor tenants, leaving them in woeful
state, either to beg, steal, or starve. This in my opinion is not only now,
but still like to be, the very Gangrene of Enclosures. I must confess that
Ingrossement and Resumption the Gangrene of Enclosures.
we poor Farmers (beating Jack for Itlls fault) do exclaim against
Enclosures, in which we (in my conscience) are rather led, because of the
mischief of Resumption, which does most commonly follow it, than by any evil
that we can justly find in the Enclosure it self. For I must freely confess,
that if we could be assured from those two Cankers, Ingrossement and
Resumption, and in equal distribution have portions in such Enclosures, at
easy rates and upon good terms, as you have before spoken of, never was
there any thing more wealefully propounded, nor a better means to free England
from idle Rogues and wandering Beggars; of which kind of people some one
champaine County has a greater number resident therein, than I think can be
found in any four of the enclosed Counties. And now having something disclosed
my opinion concerning the enclosing of decayed Forests, Commons, and Wast
grounds, in which also great difficulty would be in managing of it, by
dividing the seuerals with indifferency and conueniencie, as also to lay out
high ways and convenient passages for the country, I pray if you please
proceed in your Discourse where you left.


Sur. You have spoken herein as much as possibly can be said, to which
already sufficient is answered: and for the managing of this business, there
is no difficulty in it at all, in giving good satisfaction to every one, both
for convenient and several Closes, as also for commodious highwayes and
passages for the good and ease of the country, as formerly has been
discoursed of. But let us now close up this our enclosing Discourse, and
happily expect by a general consent and applaud of every one the practicing
thereof, which in my opinion would be the greatest benefit that has come to
our country these many years, and let us now again return to our Planting.


Wood. Sir, though you have made a long discourse of enclosing Commons and wast
grounds (to which argument this our good Farmer Ienings has added, in his
opinion, the true reasons why it is to be feared and hated of the Communaltie)
yet it has been very pleasing, and you have also conceived good
considerations to approve your opinion; and if the actors of this business
could with that indifferency manage these affairs accordingly as you have
spoken, I see no cause to the contrary, but that it might be generally desired
of all Commoners. But yet Master Surueyor there is one One objection more
against Enclosures.
obstacle more concerning this business of enclosing Commons, which in my
opinion is unanswerable; and that is, when the King or any private Lord have
granted Leases to their Tenants who dwell (and have Common sans number) in
such decayed Forests and Wastes, how can this Common be justly taken in and
enclosed? Or how can you give them satisfaction, but that their Common sans
number shall be abridged and drawn into a stinted number, and so their liberty
contracted and diminished, to their great loss? for betwixt finite and
infinite there is no proportion: What proportion then will you in your Division
and Enclosures make to him or them, who being sans number, are sans proportion?
and who also have good Leases, and the Kings broad Seal for many years so to
enjoy the same.


Sur. Master Woodward, you have put me to the narrowest pinch that yet I was
driven unto, and I marvel you did not speak of this difficulty before, but
suffered me quietly to run on, as though you had been well satisfied, and
yet now suddenly do pull me back, as men do wild Colts, giving them a
little liberty, and with a sudden ierke gives them a twitch ready to
overthrow, when thinking themselves free, they little expected such a check.


Wood. Sir it is true, I was content of purpose to let you run on in your
own conceits, until I saw you, in a manner, fully to determine it. But for
that I see it concerns my poor neighbors so much, and generally most
Commoners, I then thought it fitting to put you to your greatest plunge by this
my last refuge, and greatest difficulty: which if you can devise to solue, or
make any probable or satisfactorie answer, I will then say, you have brought
the matter to an excellent conclusion.


Sur. Well Sir, although this your in^ricate point, which you have now moved,
be of most difficulty, yet you shall now perceive I will easily resolve you of
it. For it was my An answer to the former objection.
chance of late to confer with a Councellor at law, of good understanding and
judgment, about this very subject of granting Communage by Lease amongst
other lands, whose opinion was, That Tenants who have such graunts either from
the King, or any private Lord, that they must not so far extend their challenge
of Common, sans number, in putting on so many Cattle, that they must eat up
the whole profit thereof, whereby the poorer sort of Commoners should live in
penury and want. But the Law (said he) does intend, that his Farm considered
(that is, what Cattle is necessary for Tillage, what for manuring his land,
what for a convenient number of breeders of all sorts of Cattle, to supply his
stock, and what for him to spend in his own house, and other necessaries) he
shall not be debarred or limited. And so you see, that although he shall not be
stinted in putting on of Cattle in that order, and as aforesaid; yet if he
do exceed that proportion of a reasonable number, the rest of the Commoners,
who have also Common there sans number as well as he, may very justly endeavor
to depresse his oppressions, and draw him to a kind of mean and orderly
proportion, which yet shall liberally serve, with respective regard as well of
his Farm, as Rent.


Wood. Sir, I must confess you have giyen me very good satis^action, and most
effectually have you delivered your opinion herein. And truly, if every Tenant
might (the inferies or contents of his Farm considered) with an indifferent or
rather liberal allowance, beset out Enclosures of decayed Forests, Commons,
and Wast grounds, as we have spoken of, that as well for his Milc^ Kine, young
Cattle, Oxen and Sheep; as with any pr(...)ion or reason (the rest of his
fellow Communers considered) might suffice and agree with the quantity of his
Farm and Rent there were then great probability and hope of effecting what
you speak of. But alas the sin of Covetousness does so much possess these
kind of people, as they think the liberty of their whole Common, sans number,
too little for them, and therefore can hardly endure to hear of any
abridgement, or withdrawing any part thereof; when yet upon proportions cast,
allowed, and ratified at a very easy rate, and that for many years, with a
daily and more increase of profit, together with a liberal proportion allotted
them for all the sorts of their Cattle which their Farms are able to
maintain and bear, or that they can any way desire of the Lord, and that they
also see a resulting Surplage remaining, then happily they may seem more
tractable and willing, that any who have right to such Wast grounds, should
dispose of them as they please; to which I think our honest Farmer will agree.


Ien. Most willingly: for you have spoken to good purpose. And if the Law do
intend that men shall be stinted (as I could wish it might be so) to put on no
more Cattle into a Common, than what conveniently their Farms or Freehold can
bear and maintain all the year, many rich Freeholders in our parish will
give you little thanks for this Item, because indeed they greatly ouerlay the
Common, to the prejudice of the rest of their poor neighbors, and they will
most assuredly spurn, although it be against the prick.


Sur. The more are they in danger to offend and hurt themselves: for if the
Commoners do combine in an honest and lawful manner against such abuses, they
may easily force these rich Freeholders to a more neighbourly course of
Commoning.


Wood. You say true: but leaving this matter of enclosing Wast grounds to men
more eminent in the State, let us make an end hereof, and proceed in our
Discourse of Timber trees.


Sur. Most willingly, and do submit my opinion herein to all honest and
discreet Husbandmen.


THE THIRD PART,
Showing the difference of diverse kinds of Trees for Timber and Fuel, and such
as are most apt to grow and prosper in our Climate. And also a discourse
concerning some new law to be made for the increase and preservation of Wood.

Woodward. MAster Surueyor, we lest as I remember, about the differences of
some several Trees for Timber, and what ground is most apt for them to prosper
in: and also some Rules concerning how to take the content of any Timber tree,
standing or growing upon the ground, which is a thing that will be much
pleasing and helping to us Woodwards, who are none of the ingeniousest men in
that faculty, but we are only content to observe the ordinary custom of
looking to the Wood, by presenting at the next Court day or Swanimote Court
those who offend by purloyning of Trees, hacking of Boughs and Standils, and
carrying them away: But when we are demanded, how many Tun, Load, or square
feet of Timber is contained in such a Timber tree (which I think fit that
every Woodward should know) we must then answer with silence, or make some
sleeuelesse reply, and so pass it over to other talk.


Sur. In deeds I think many of you are so skillful therein, as many be who are
Surueyours of Counties by Patent, for which they have more fee then knowledge
to discharge that Office. But it is fit that Woodwards, should have some skill
and understanding in the measuring of these Sollid bodies, or else how can they
sufficiently discharge that trust and credit which is reposed in them; when a
Warrant is directed to them for the felling and delivery of a hundred Tons
or Loades more or less of Timber for repair of Bridges, Parke-pales, Houses,
etc. And when perhaps they never know how many square feet make a Tun or
Load of Timber, nor yet how many Trees, they must cause to be felled to have
as near as may be, the number of Tons or Loades specified in their Warrant,
but cuts down at an adventure perhaps ten or twelve Tun or Load, more or
less, then they had Warrant for, which is a gross error.


Wood. In deed most of us have little or no skill in measuring of Timber
trees, but as you say, we must take them at all adventures, as near the number
specified in our Warrant as we can. But I pray Sir, are there not men of your
profession, who pass over as gross and witting errors in Surueying, which
justly a man may term abuses, partly, as I conceive, out of ignorance, and
partly out of dishonestie?


Sur. No doubt there are some such indeed, yet we must not justify our own
errors by other men's misdemeanors, but those Surueyours would I have give over
Surueying and seek to be entertained into the society of those idl^
Catchpoles you spoke off even now, and if I saw cause, I could instance such a
one, but I will be sparing therein, and only tell you, that the manner of his
Surueyes were always upon Tenants reports, and taking some notes out of their
Leases and Coppies, and giving of the Jury certain Articles in charge to be
enquired of.


Pe. But did he not also by Instrument and Cheine, as commonly you do, Survey
and measure the ground?


Sur. No, for indeed he knew not the use of any Surueying Instrument.


Pe. But do you think the Tenants would or could truly deliver their
knowledge herein, concerning the quality, quantity, and value of their Land,
with the rest of the particulars?


Sur. Truly I think no, though every man in honesty is bound upon Oath to
tell the truth of any thing, when he is lawfully demanded thereof, as near as
he can, yet for that they conceived these questions nearly concerued their
estates, and for that also they law the Surueyour to be unexperienced, in that
kind of measuring and duly Surueying of lands, it is to be imagined that they
would somewhat dissemble with him therein, and acquainte him with no more then
ordinary* and so altogether upon the tenants reports, as well for the quantity
and quality, as value of their land, he would conclude, and at his good
leisure make up his books.


Per. This is the strangest kind of Surueying that ever I heard of; but would
he then upon his credit give up this Survey to the Lord of the Manor?


Sur. Yes that he would, according to the Tenants reports by oath: and diverse
has he done in this kind.


Per. But I pray if the Lord sell or let this Manor, do you not think,
according to that Survey, but that he should be a great looser thereby?


Sur. Yes, there is no doubt, but that he must loose much thereby: but I trow
there is no man so unadvised that will sell or let land in th^se days after
such a fashion, but will make a more precise course by admeasurement, performed
by a skillful man in that faculty.


Ien. And I pray, why may not one buy or sell land, as certainly by knowing
what Cattle a Ferme or Demaines will keep, as also how many load of hay such a
Meadow will yield upon every acre, as by all your nice tricks of measuring.


Sur. You say well, it is a good means in general to know the value of any
land, but yet how shall the Lord or buyer thereof who dwell far remote from
it, know certainly how many cattle it will keep? If you say by his Baylife,
commonly he being his Tenant, and dwelling in the same Lordship will for his
own good embrace the true value of these demeasne, because the goodness of
his own farm shall the less be discerued: if you say by the report of the
country, they commonly fail in their estimation, as well in the quantity and
quality of the ground, as also in the number of cattle, what it will keep*
and neither shall the Lord (if he be a stranger to this Demeanes) receive any
better satisfaction, although he take pains to enquire thereof Who are most
fitt^est and likely to advertise any Lord the true estate of his land.
himself. So that there is no better way for this Lord, or purchaser to know
the true value of this land, then only to employ an honest and judicious*
Surueyor therein, who besides his art of platting the ground, and fairly
setting forth in a Map, and knowing the quantity of acres, will also use his
best judgment and experience to discern the quality as well for goodness as
badnesse of the soil, as whether it be fittest for arable, pasture, meadow, or
woodland, together with buts and bounds, and every thing else as it lies in
due proportion: all which compared together, with the reports and
aduertisements, that he may learn in the time of his being there* I think he
may then give more full satisfaction, as well to the eye, as judgment of him
who is owner thereof, or shall buy it.


Per. You say true. For my self being of some small ^euenew in land, I have
two or three of my Manors surueyed, and the plots of them fairly set forth in
colors upon Vellem, distinctly sp^^ifying which is meadow, pasture, arable,
and woodland, with the quantity, quality, and value thereof, with every
other thing there fitting to be noted, which I find to be a great
satisfaction* pleasure, and ^ase to me, especially when I am to let any of
those Farms, or Tenements in any the said M^^or^ because they are far remote
from the place I dwell* But whether now do we range. You promised to speak
somewhat of the difference of trees, and what grounds were most apt for them to
prosper in, therefore I pray leave off these discourses until some other time,
and begin now your promise.


Sur. Sir, most willingly: you remember then what I have spoken concerning the
manner and time to be observed as well in planting of Trees for Timber, and
husbanding the ground, as also in making special choice of the Plant, and the
care of weeding and trimming them afterward, until they are grown to the age
of three or four years: which remembered, I will now discharge my promise in
declaring briefly to you the nature and sorts of certain trees for fuel and
building, which ordinarily do grow in England, and what ground and soil every
one delights most in, for their better and larger prospering, to the end that
those who take pleasure in this practice, may not altogether be deluded, and
frustrate of their pains and expectation, but may in the end reap some profit
thereby. I told you then, that before you resolve to plant, two things are to
be considered of, namely the soil where you intend to plant, and the soil
where the plant has formerly grown: for that tree which grows upon a dry
ground and hot soil, must not be planted in a moist or cold go^ud and so
contrariwise, that tree which grows in a watery soil, be not planted upon
hills or dry barren grounds, least by planting them in a soil contrary to
the nature and condition of the plant, all cost and profit be lost thereby.
First therefore Two sorts of Trees.
you shall understand, that there may be said to be in general two sorts of
trees, that is, waterie trees, or trees delighting Watery trees. ^and
in moist and waterie soyles, and land trees, or trees which grow upon dry and
firm land.


Wood. Indeed it is probable that trees will hardly prosper, but in a ground
well corresponding with their nature and property: but I pray what experience
is there hereof?


Sur. I will first satisfy you by the experience of trees which commonly are
called water trees; as namely Aller, Within Aspe, Birch, etc. which trees
except they have store of moisture, Water trees.
will hardly grow to any goodness. And the chiefest of those trees that most
desire to grow in water, or waterie grounds, is the Aller, for it will prosper
very well, though Aller tree.
half the body thereof stand in the water; as is to be seen in diverse places
of Holland and Zeland, where the greatest part of the bodies thereof, in the
Winter time stand in water, or at least the roots of those Trees always stand
in or lower then the water, or else they would prosper but poorly. Experience
also is seen hereof in our own country, that these Aller trees do naturally
grow up in Bogges and Meerish places without any art or industry at all, and
never any of them do prosper or thrive upon high or dry soyles: therefore the
fittest ground for these trees to grow in, is your low waterie meadows, or
other moorish grounds near unto brooks or rivers. This tree is plentiful in
his grouth, and brings forth in short time store of boughs, which are very
profitable for firing and other necessary uses.


Ien. Indeed these kinds of trees grow a pace without any great labor or
charge, and the profit thereof forfuell is very great.


Sur. It is true, for if you either take branches from the Aller tree, or
roots dug out of the earth, and set them again Planting of Aller trees.
in like moist places with some of the earth, if you can, from whence you had
them, cutting of the branches and stem within four or five inches of the
root, there will in short time put forth many more young shoots then were at
the first* and within five or six years after, grow to be good brushie Fuel,
or if you let them ^^and longer until they grow to be large bodied trees, they
will then serve to many necessary uses, especially for water works, either to
lay in the water, or else to make pipes of to convey water to any place,
because it will not ^ot. The next waterie tree is the Withie, of Withie tree^*
of which are four kinds.
which are said to be 4 kinds, that is, the white, withy, black Withie, and
red Withie, oster Withie. Some think that white withie will grow rather in
dry grounds, if it be set in the beginning of winter, then in moorish grounds:
the black^ withie will grow better in moorish grounds, then on dry; and so will
the Red and Osi^r withies do, and generally they all prosper best in low
meadows, and moist places, the earth must be dug, and a little raised,
wherein they must be planted; and the best way to plant them, is either to cut
branches To plant Withies.
from withie trees, or else withie poles of the bigness of ones arm, cut from
the stock or body of the tree, and they must be but only pricked down in
that dug place of a reasonable depth, but not in the water as the Aller is
planted, and the top must be cut off about one foot or two, and then cover
Note.
that lower part with some good earth. And note, that when you cut these
branches or poles from the tree to be planted, it must be in dry weather, and
by no means when it raineth. And the best time to plant Withies, is about the
midst of February: or rather toward the latter end of September, when the
heart of the cold weather is past, or else before it comes, which otherwise
would endanger the plant, if it should either be cut in wet weather, or planted
in the extremest of winter: And you shall place every plant five or six feet
each from other: And you must be very careful for the well preserving of them
the first two or three years, and they must also be cropped every eight or
nine years, or else they will be in danger to vade and die; yet crop them not
in sap time.


Pe. Then I perceive that the Withie does not desire such moist grounds as the
Aller tree.


Sur. No, for we see they grow and prosper better upon banks of ditches, and
good low battable ground (if they have water near them) then those do which
grow in low and Sirch tree.
watrie meadows. Next to the Withie may the Birch tree be accounted for a
waterie tree, and which also desires a cold and moist soil, but not
altogether so waterie a ground as the Aller and Withie does: for we daily see
they naturally grow up and prosper in cold springing gravely soiles, rather
then in any other dry or waterie kind of ground: And this tree is very
profitable, and serves well to make chercole, and also for Turners to make
bowls, dishes, and other necessary things for the house. The fourth waterie
tree is the Poplar or Aspe tree, which also disereth to grow rather in moist
places Popular or Aspe tree.
then otherwise; and the best way to plant them, is of young roots, but where
roots cannot be had, then take such like plants, as you do of Withie, and this
wood is also very good to make Pipes of, for conueying of water, and other
uses.


Woe. But I pray will not these trees which you have termed water trees, grow
in any other place then in low waterie grounds?


Sur. Yes, I say not to the contrary, but their nature being to grow in low
wet grounds, or near unto water, where they will more kindly prosper then in
high and dry places which is far from water, where perhaps with much ado,
and very slow, they will put forth some few and small branches: And where one
so prospers well, and continues long in such a high place, there will five
hundred prosper much better, and last longer, growing in low and waterie
grounds. It is true, that by industry they may be made to grow upon the
barrennest soil that is, but then the labor and charge must be very great,
which if once it be neglected, and not daily followed, and that with great
care, all pains and charge is lost, and the tree will wither and die. The
contrary whereof is found by planting them in a low soil, or near unto water
fitting their kind. And some do also hold it necessary after the first years
planting of the^, to cut away all the twigs which then first put forth, whereby
the root may be the better fed, and also that the winds may have less power
to shake and loosen them in the earth; for trees often perish and die by such
untimely accidents: therefore it is necessary as well to plant them well and
orderly at the first; as to be careful afterward in looking well to them, for
a thing once well done at the first, is much better then when it needs a
second doing. And this shall suffice for these kinds of water trees, or for any
other you intend to plant, and now to your land trees.


Per. But I pray do you not account Ash trees to be in Ash tree*
the number of the water trees.


Sur. No, though they do naturally desire a low and moist soil, wherein they
will grow and prosper much better, then in high dry grounds, yet the ground
need not be altogether so low and watrie, as that which is for Aller, Withie,
Birch, and Aspe: therefore the best ground which is most agreeable to their
condition, and wherein they most delight, is in valleys of an indifferent
layre, neither too dry nor moist: for in such warm places they will grow tall
and beautiful, and that also in short time. But howsoever, if conveniently
they cannot be set in Valleys, they will grow very well in any fat and moist
soil; but by no means plant them in any dry or barren ground, nor yet in
very low watrie places.


Ien. Yet I have often seen Ash trees grow upon high hills, and that very well.


Sur. I grant that to be so, but then it is likely that those hills are
somewhat replenished with Springs, or else the ground is very good, and then
there is no doubt of their prospering, though yet not to prove so firm and
tough wood (by reason of the wind and storms do often shake them, and the
full heat of the Sun makes them more spault and brittle for uses (yet will
they be better feathered, and longer endure for building) as those which grow
secure and steadie in temperate and calm places. And you may either set
Ashenkeyes To set or sow Ashen keys.
to have Plants of them* (the ground being well husbanded as aforesaid) or else
young Ashen Plants, to be dressed and ordered in like sort as the young Oaken
Plants are. To plant young Ashen trees.
And when your Ashen-keyes are grown up to be little trees, you may then
yearly for two or three years prune or cut away the superfluous boughs of
them, but not the top, which will cause the tree to prosper exceeding well, and
to grow high, round, smooth, and strong. And as for the Plant, within a year
or two after it is thus set and firmly rooted in the earth, at the usual time
of cutting down Copies wood, you may then if you please also cut down this
Plant, or any other kind of Tree thus set, hard by the root, and it will
prosper and put forth again three or four stemmes, which will grow in short
time to be good wood for fuel, and very tall trees for Timber, because then it
will have his full height and top, if you let them stand and preserve them
well, as formerly has been spoken. And you shall understand, At what time,
and for what uses it is best to fell Ashen wood.
that the best time to fell Ash wood for the Cooper, is, when it is about
fourteen or sixteen years growth: if you will let it grow until about
thirty years, it is then best for the Wheelewright and Ploughwright; and if
you let it grow longer, it is then best for Timber to build withal: and fell
it for the foresaid uses in or about November. Of the use of The Oak tree of
which there are three sorts.
this Tree I have formerly spoken, therefore I will proceed to speak somewhat
of the Oak, of which you shall understand there be three sorts.


Woodward. But I pray how are their differences known?


Sur. They are easily known: for the first of them has a The first sort.
body very short, thick, and large, being full of knots and knubs and great
spreading roots, yet bears a good quantity of boughs, which are thick and
long grown, but commonly not straight. The wood of this Oak is good for
little else than for the fire, because of his short knubbie bole, therefore not
worth your labor to plant any of this kind. The second sort has a body of a
reasonable thickness and The second sort.
height, of five or six fadome long* with some few boughs upon the body, and
more toward the top, and those of no great breadth or spreading out: and of
this kind you may well venture to sow Adornes, or plant young Trees, because
they are reasonable ^all, the body smooth, and without knots, and proves good
Timber for many uses of building. The third The third sort.
sort has somewhat a more small and smooth body than the second, but very
straight, comely, clean, and neatly grown, and about eight or nine fadomes
long or more, not having any boughs on the body at all, but only toward the
top; so that all or most of the nourishment of such a Tree, is in the body:
and these sorts of Oaks are held the best for any building, and therefore
fittest to plant of this kind. And also they grow more close and near together
than the others do, nature teaching them (by reason of their slenderness and
height) ye it is best so to grow, rather than to stand scattering and open to
winds and storms, and be endangered by them. All these three sorts of Oaks
do bear leaves and Acornes of several bignesses and fashions: and it is
said, that these Trees are of long continuance, namely one hundred years in
growing, one hundred years to continue good and sound, and one hundred years
in decaying: and therefore we must not expect, that in sowing of Acornes, or
planting of young Oaks, they will in forty or fifty years come to be good
and indifferent large Timber, as Elm, Ash, and Beech will do, (which will
grow and put forth more in eight years, than an Oak will do in twelve, and
which commonly are at their best at seventy or eighty years growth) but we
must with patience expect, that our posterity may have the profit of such long
continuing Trees, as we plant and sow which in time they may reap both to
their pleasure and profit. And all Oaks generally would be planted in a fat,
good, and seasonable ground, as I have already said: for according to the
nature and quality of the soil, be it good, indifferent, or barren, so will
your Oak grow and prosper.


Ien. It is most probable to be so, but I pray at what time of the year is it
best to fell Oak Timber trees, as well for the durablenesse of the Timber for
building, as also to have profit by the Bark? for as I have heard they must be
felled at two several times in the year.


Sur. The best time to fell all manner of Timber trees for building, is in
December and January, from the full to the change of the Moon, and toward
the last quarter, she being then in Aquarius and Pisces, and then commonly they
will The time of felling Oak timber trees as well for building as for Bark.
neither chinke, riue, nor grow rotten or be worm eaten, for then they are (as
one may say) at a stand from growing, by reason they have little or no sap in
them at that time, but all is in the root. And to fell Oak Timber trees for
Bark, the Statute appoints it to be between the first of April and last of
June, for then the Bark will pill well, by reason the sap is now come up
into the tree again. And always when you fell any Timber tree, fell them as
near the ground as you can, for one foot of Timber next the ground, is worth
two foot of Timber in the top. And some, when they would have the Tree more
dry and clean from the sap, do use to out it half through, unto the
middle or pith of the Tree, and then to let it stand a certain time, until
the sap that is in it may descend and drop out, whereby the Timber when the
s^ppe has thus dropped out will be the less putrified or corrupted, but will
endure and last much the longer.


Pereg. Herein you have given me very good satisfaction: but I pray will the
stubbe of such an Oaken Timber tree newly felled, shoot out young sprigges,
whereby may be expected a new spring to come of that root again?


Sur. Yes, there will such shootes sprout out again after the felling of the
Tree in manner as I have said, especially if the Tree felled were a growing
Timber tree, and that it be felled from the change to the first quarter of the
Moon: for though the Tree be taken away, yet the root is still fresh and
springing, and will in some sort put forth his fruit and increase again,
though in another kind, for in stead of Timber, which before did grow upon that
stubbe and root, you shall now have Copies Wood, if you preserve it accordingly.


Pereg. It is probable to be so, but why then should not men, who fell down
Timber trees, preserve such a spring?


Sur. The reason as I conceive is this, that Timber commonly is not felled
together, but scatteringly, as here and there a tree, which indeed would not
quit the cost to preserve the spring of every such tree so felled. And again,
those who fell eight or ten acres more or less of Timber trees to make a
present sum of money, they never respect any new spring thereof to grow
again, but straight they fall to grubbing of that piece of ground so felled,
and then conuerteth it into pasture, arable, or meadow, which they think to be
the most gains: but such men in my opinion are none of the Landlords who let
Farms from 5 years to 5 years, are none of the best husbands.
best husbands; and they may well be compared to such Landlords, who think it
a great profit for them to let their lands from year to year, or not for
above five or six years: which short time expired, they think they may then
again set it upon the rack, and still increase both rent and sine: but such
Landlords do often fail in their expectation, as common experience shows it
true in every poor Farmer: for if he has his Farm but for five or six
years, is it not likely he will then tear up the ground, and ransacke the
very bowels thereof for his profit, and never bestow cost thereof, neither to
better the soil with Compass, or mend any Fences, or his Tenement, but all
shall be cost sufficient, if it will but last his time, to bring in some little
profit, during those few years; which ended, the ground no doubt will be much
more worse than it was at the first taking thereof: for what reason has this
poor Farmer to be at any charge thereof, more than he shall think fit, when
he knows not whether he shall be tenant to it again, or no? And what then
does this covetous Landlord get hereby, but only assurance, that the heart of
his ground is worn out, his fences broken down and spoiled, his Tenements
decayed, himself notoriously exclaimed of, and very likely to let it for
less, after the expiration of those few years, than he did at the first.


Ien. You have given two sufficient reasons why men do not preserve such
springs, to which a third may also be added; namely, as I conceive, they are
careless, and never expect that any spring at all will come forth out of such
a stubbe or root, from which the Timber tree is felled. And your comparing such
an one, who grubbeth up whole Woods to convert the ground to tillage or
pasture, is very aptly applied to such a Landlord, who will let his Farms but
for some short time: for if the ground be good when the Farmer takes it, it
will then for those few years well serve his turn, to bring in profit without
any cost bestowing thereof: which term ended, and the utmost of his labor
and pains bestowed thereof, the ground then will be much the poorer: and if
at his first entering thereon, the ground, fence and tenement be bad, he must
then bestow so much cost thereof, as will well last him to have profit thereby
during that time (for more it is not likely he will bestow) for you must think
he will use all the skill of husbandry he can, to get his full benefit out of
the very heart of the ground, and by that time those few years are expired,
both ground, fence, and housing will be much impaired, and little advantage
this griping Landlord will get by letting of this land the second time.


Sur. It is true, they neither expect or care for the springing of such Copies,
and especially many of the Kings Tenants, who hold any Springs or Copies of his
Majesty by lease: for when they fell a Hagge or Spring, partly out of a desire
of unlawful gains, they cut and mangle down the arms and loppes of good
Timber trees, yea and many good Timber trees themselves, in the name of
Cranckes or shrubbed Trees, which they presume they may without prejudice of
their Lease, take; and partly to bare and clear the ground of such a burden,
that so much the sooner it might become a pasture ground (of which Tenants do
make a better commodity, because they make more often return both of ware and
money) as my self have found it true in my late Northern circuit. And this
abuse will never be left, except some Woodwards were more honest and careful
in their office, for they will not only wink at such faults, but ex officio,
will be as forward as any to take and sell trees at pleasure.


Ien. How now Master Woodward, how do you like this geere? I perceive men of
your profession is also like to undergo the sensure of the world, as well as
Surueyors.


Sur. Howsoever he likes it, or may be censured of the world with Surueyors,
yet God forbid that all Woodwards should be so; but I do speak but of such
who demeans themselves in this idle fashion: and I could wish, that all such
Surueyors, who deal not justly according to the trust reposed in them, might
be punished accordingly.


Wood. Which your opinion I approve, and will willingly subscribe thereunto.
But leaving these abuses to the punishment of the law, I pray proceed in your
discourse of timber trees: and the second in order for goodness, which you
told us of, as I remember, is the Elm.


Sur. You say true: and therefore you shall understand, that there are also of
this kind three sorts, and they are thus The Elm tree, of which are three
sorts.
known. The first sort of them have a little leaf and a black stalk, the
second has somewhat a larger leaf, and a reasonable white stalk, and the
third has a more large and full leaf, and a stalk more white. The best of
these to plant is the last, and the second next, and these will grow thick and
tall in short time, and bear long boughs: and the third sort is worst of all,
and will hardly grow to any reasonable tree, and therefore not worth your
labor of planting it. And of these trees you may plant them three or four
several ways, that is, of the seed, young plants, and roots, with the young
impes cut from the tree or root: and also some do think they will grow well
of stippes or branches cut from a young tree of three or four years old, and
to be set in good mould half a foot deep about the later end of March, or
beginning of October, and cut off the tops of those slippes, and set them
about four or five foot distant the one from the other, and this tree will
grow as soon and plentiful as any other, by reason it is of a spungie
substance.


Pereg. Have Elmes then seed, I pray whereabouts in the Elm does it grow?


Sur. Yes that they have, and that great store, and it grows about the
midst of the Leaf, and the Bloome thereof is somewhat like unto a Hoppe, or
the seed of Orage, and to set or sow this seed you must do thus: Gather the
seed before the Tree be fully covered with leaves (which is about the middle of
April) at such time as it begins to be yellow, and fall from the Tree: and
after they are gathered, they must be two or thee days dried in the shadow,
and then sown in good and firm ground an ynch deep, and afterward let them
be watered, if the weather prove dry: which done, and then carefully looked
unto, they will come up and prosper very well. Yet it is better to set Plants
of them as you do your Oak, for they will come up sooner, and prove more
large of body and plentiful of boughs, even according as the soil is where
they grow* And to plant the roots or impes of them, cut from the tree or root,
you must lay them deep in good mould, and they will prosper and plentifully
come forth, and grow to be high and tapering Trees, by reason they have then
still their tops: and they will best like and thrive in a grauellie soil, as
is to be seen about London and other places, where they grow tall and straight
in short time. Of the great use of this tree I have spoken before, and
therefore it were needless here again to repeat it. The third sort in
goodness, is the Beech Tree, Beech tree.
which bears Maste very profitable for fatting of Swine, and it may be sown
as your Acornes are, or young Trees thereof planted, like unto Oaken Standils;
and this Tree will grow well in any reasonable ground, but only in wet and
moorish grounds: and in Barkshire and Oxfordshire they grow much upon chalkey
and barren soyles: and the time of planting them is in February, when the
heart of the cold weather is past, or rather at the latter end of September,
and they must also be husbanded as you do your Oaken Plant. The Hornebeame
Tree does much resemble Hornebeame tree.
the Beech Tree in quality, and desires the same kind of ground, husbanding
and dressing, as the Beech tree does, but it is a more firm and solid kind
of Wood. And these, namely the Oak, Elm, Beech, Ash, and Hornebeame Trees,
are the chiefest sort of Timber trees which grow in England. And there be other
small Trees of diverse kinds, which would also serve well for Fuel and other
necessaries, and would much beautify Forests and Parkes, and also prove very
commodious for Springs and Hedgerowes in Demeanes and Farm Grounds; namely,
the Maple, Crabtree, Service tree, Yew tree, and Hasell tree, which also would
do well to be set in places where scarce of Wood is, and these will grow and
prosper well, the ground being aptly chosen for them, and husbanded
accordingly: For the Maple desires a fat and moist Maple tree.
soil, as in Hedgerowes of arable grounds, or in other places, where they may
stand warm, and then they will timely put forth good branches, and the body
thereof is a white and reasonable firm wood, and good for many household uses.
The Crabtree desires somewhat a better soil to be Crab tree.
planted in than the Maple, because of his fruit, which serves to make
veriuice of, and which is good for many purposes, as well for the sick as
whole, and a great relief to many poor people, and also good food for Dear,
if they be planted either in Forests, Chases, or Parks: and therefore the
better the ground is where this plant or tree grows, the larger and
pleasanter will the Crab and Veriuice be: the stock or body of this Tree is
good to graft upon, and the wood of this Tree is also very good to make Cogges
for Grist Mills, and other things. The Service tree delights in a cold,
moist, and ^arren soil, and Service tree.
they do use to fow the stones thereof, and also to plant young sprigs thereof
in February or March or rather in the beginning of October, and the ground
must be well husbanded and often dug* and also putting ashes to the root
thereof, which must be place^ very deep in the earth. This wood is very
excellent for Ioyners to make Cupbords, Deskes, and Instruments of, because it
is solid and smooth without knots* Of the barries of this Tree is made a kind
of drink somewhat like in taste to Perrie, and of which in Germany I have
drunk. The Yew tree delights in a hard, stony* or chalkie Yew tree.
ground, as is to be seen about Ro^h Abbey in ^he West Riding of Yorkshire*
and in some parts of kent, and also in many Churchyards in England, and other
grauelly places: the wood of this Tree is very hard, and good as every man
knows to make Bows, Deskes, Instruments, and many other necessary things;
and it is so much the better, because it is not subject to be eaten of worms:
yet the Spanish Yew and Ash* is much better than any we have which grows in
England, yet ours not to be rejected.


Wood. But I pray S^r why do you forget to speak of the Chestnut tree,
considering you gave such extraordinary commendations, as well for the Timber
as fruit thereof.


Sur. Though I have for borne to speak thereof, yet I intend not to be silent
therein* for the worth of this tree deserves Chestnut tree.
no less commendations then any the former: for it grows to as large a tree
as an Oak, does as well in tallness as thickness of body, and also bears
plentiful of Chestnuts sow^ Chestnuts pla^ts
boughs, if it be at the first well and carefully husbanded: and you may set
or sow Chestnuts, or else set* young plants thereof* by both which ways they
will come up and prosper very well* and sow them rather in valleys then
mountains; in a light, soft, and black mould, rather then in a stiff, clayie
or sandy soil: and plant them so that the heat of the Sun do not too much
annoy them* because the tree it self naturally desires shadow and cool
places, yet not cold. And the The best time of planting Chestnuts.
best time to plant them as some do think, is when the Sun is in the
Equinoctial. And after they are planted, take yearly the young sprigs away,
as they come forth, (with your hand* as is formerly said* and not with an edged
tool,) until they are three or four years old, and that in the beginning of
the spring, which will cause them to prosper better, and put forth more
houghes. And some held it better rather to sow Chestnuts (whereby they think
more fruit will come thereof) then to set plants* so that the ground be well
husbanded, which must be done either in October or March: and Nuts that you
mean to set or sow, must be very fair, ripe, and sound, and the newer they
are, the better they will grow and prosper* and these Nuts must be set four or
five of them together in one hole in the earth a foot deep* the sharp ends
downward, two yeards distant the one from the other: and within two or three
yeards after, when they are grown up to a reasonable height, then take them up
again and plant them about fifteen or sixteen yeards dista^t the one from
the other, for else when they are grow^e to be large trees, Chestnuts steped in
water or milk.
their maine spreading branches will greatly annoy and hinder each others
grouth. And some do use before they set the Nuts in the ground, to steep them
two or three days in water, or rather milk, and you may set them either in
October or February.


Ien. But will not this tree grow and prosper as well of the Plant, as of the
Nut?


Sur. Yes no doubt but it will, but you will hardly find in England any young
plants with roots, and to set sprigges thereof having no roots, but cut from the
tree, they will by no means prosper: and therefore the best and surest way is
to sow the Nuts.


Per. But the Chestnuts which commonly come into England are rotten and perished
before the time comes of setting them: how then shall we get any of these to
be sound for setting, that in likelihood we might not loose both labor and
charge?


Sur. You say true, many of those Chestnuts which come out of France are indeed
much perished, and the reason may be as well of their untimely gathering, as
also when they are gathered, in not well keeping of them: in both which great
care must be had, and therefore the sooner you set those Nuts the better and
sooner will they prosper.


Per. But I pray how do they keep them?


Sur. The manner of keeping them in France, about the country of Dalphine,
where great store of these trees do grow, is, that about Autumn they do gather
these Nuts, and keep them until their hulks grow, tending to a ^ay color,
and that also until they rast out their fruit, and this without any more ado,
is their common course of keeping them. But others who make great profit of
them by their long keeping, and selling them to seamen to transport into other
countries, do beat them down before they be fully ripe, or fall from the
tree of themselves, for those ripe ones so falling will not keep above twenty
or thirty days, except they be dried, and yet for all that they will not
keep very long. And being gathered as aforesaid, some then do cover them
with Hasell Nuts, which they say do dry up the superfluous moisture of the
Chestnuts. And others gather them in the decrease The keeping of Chestnuts.
of the Moon, when they are reasonable ripe, and do put them in sand, or
place them in some cool room, or else lay them in earthen vessels well
covered, that no air get in, which they set in cool cellers, for if any air
do come at them, they will soon rot and perish. And I could wish that many
would apply themselves to plant (next unto the Oak) this kind of tree, as well
for the timber thereof, which will serve with the best for building of houses,
for which purpose it is most durable: as also for the fruit thereof, which may
be eaten ^aw, roasted, baked in Pies, or make bread thereof, and also being
boiled, it may be brayed and eaten with milk, and wi^h may be a great relief
to many poor people, and which also is good to fat Swine.


Per. You say weil, and I would to God there might be as good care had of the
planting and prospering of this kind of treee, which I perceive brings
abundance of necessary profit, as well to the rich as poor, both for building
The Mulberie tree.
and food, as there is in planting of Mulberie trees, which though it be also
profitable, yet is the profit thereof annexed with a kind of pride, in making
silks for ga^e clothes.


Sur. It is true, yet the profit of the Chestnut tree (as I conceive) is more
necessary, as well in respect of the goodness of Timber, as also for the
sustenance and relief of the poor: yet the commodity of the Mulberie tree is
greatly to be respected, in regard of the silk that is made thereof, as also
for the wood it self: and therefore it is a tree well worth the planting, and
not amiss to speak somewhat Two sorts of Mulbery trees, the one white, the
other red.
thereof. You shall understand then, that there are two sorts of Mulberie
trees, the white and the black, or dark red Mulberie, and they are so called
by reason of their fruit, and the black Mulbery is better the^ in the white,
because it brings forth a more large and better relished fruit, and in which
is greater store of liquor then the white, and the body of that tree is also
thicker, and does more kindly grow without knubs or ^^ynings then the white
does, and when you intend to plant it, you must have great care, as well in
manuring the ground which must be a fat and moist soil, as also in planting of
it toward the South Sun, and in warm places, and that very deep in the
earth, in the three foresaid months of February, March, or rather October:
and in planting of it mix earth with ashes, and lay it about, and upon the
root, for this tree is very tender, and therefore cold winds and frosts are
great enemies to it, neither does it thrive in ertreame drouthes. They may also
be grafted upon Apple or Pear trees, or upon their own stocks Note.
in the increase of the Moon, or three or four days before the first
quarter. And note (as some do write) that how many days the Moon is old
when you graft them, so many years will it be before they bring forth any
fruit. And this planting or grafting them is much better, then sowing the
Mulbery kernel, especially in our climate, which is somewhat too cold for that
purpose. Some also do plant this Mulberie, by taking a little slip of a
foot-long from the tree it self, and set it five or six inches in the earth,
which done, it must then be carefully wa^ered in Summer time. Some also to make
a nurcerie of fruit trees, will sow these kernels of Mulberies among their
other fruit trees. But howsoever, whether you plant this tree, or sow kernels
thereof, it would better beseem spacious grounds, Forests and Parkes (because
of his largeness and variety, and some annoyance withal) then an Orchard or
Garden, because the fruit once ripe (which is then sweet and lutious) the flies
and waspes will continually haunt in those trees, and exceedingly annoy the
house. The wood of this tree is very good for ioyners to Wood of this tree.
Leaves of this tree. Fruit of the tree.
make household implements of, and they use it in some parts of Italy to build
their houses. Of the leaves of tree, they feed Silkewormes, of which great
profit is made. And the fruit of this tree is good to fat Swine and Poultrie.
And to conclude, this tree is so good and profitable, as there is neither wood,
leaves, or fruit, but serves to good uses.


Wood. You have sufficiently spoken of this tree, and that according to his
worth, but there is yet another kind of tree which would help to adorn and
beautify all kinds, as well of wild as Farm grounds, both for the fruit, and
also largeness of the tree, and that is the Walnut tree, of which Walnut tree.
as not yet any thing has been spoken.


Sur. Neither did I think to have said any thing thereof at all, though it be
a seemly and large tree, and well worth the having, yet has it that malignant
nature with it (as my Author affirms) as it annoyeth all other trees which
grow near unto it, and especially the Oak tree: yet because it is good and
profitable, as well for the wood and timber, as also for the fruit, I will a
little speak hereof. The ground then that these trees do most delight in, is
rather a hot soil then a fat or waterish, and the best place to plant them in,
is upon highway sides, or vacant places, because of the spoiling other trees
which grow by them, for the very shadow and droppings of this tree does much
annoy any thing that grows near or under it: And you may either set the Nut,
plant a Three manner of ways to have this tree to grow. To set the Nut
young tree thereof, or else graft it upon some other tree. If you will set the
nut, you must first (after the ground is well dug and prepared as aforesaid)
make choice of the Nut to be of a year old, the shell fair, large, and
tender, and the kernel full and crispe; and you must lay them either in steep
in Cow milk, or else in urine of a Boy for three or four days before you set
them, and then put them into the earth the sharp ends downward, either in
October, February, or March, for then the sharpness of the cold wether is not
fully come, or else past, and then put up the earth lightly about the Nut. And
some also do use to set them with their green ^uskes on, being newly taken
from the tree. If To set the plant.
you will set young plants thereof, take then the fairest and best liking young
trees you can, and after the ground being well trimmed and husbanded, and the
superfluous roots cut away (the master root excepted) plant them about for^ie
foot distant one from the other, or else when they grow to be great trees,
they will much hinder the prospering of one the other: and in planting of them
let some of the earth where they did formerly grow, be put together with the
plant into the hole where it must stand, and plant them in the three foresaid
months of February, March, or rather October. The third way to have this tree
come up, is by grafting Grafting of it.
of it, which some do use upon Plumtree stocks, for want of stocks of the
same kind: But the best way is to graft it upon a stock of his own kind in
grafting time. But beware you neither set the Nut, plant young trees, or graft
any sciences of this kind of tree, near unto any Oak, or where any Oak has
formerly grown.


Ien. But do you not think that this tree will grow in cold and moist places,
as well as in the fertile soil, for it seems to mec, to be of a hard
condition, for I have often seen them beaten with a long pole, when the Nuts
begin to grow ripe, and their branches much broken therewith.


Sur. Yes, they will grow reasonable well in such soyles, and also endure the
cold weather as well as any tree, but then it will not come to that perfection
neither for the largeness and bole of the tree, nor store or goodness of the
Nut, as if it had been planted in a good and seasonable ground: yet plant this
tree where you will, it is so hardy of it self, that being exceedingly beaten
with a long pole, as you spoke of even now, the more and better fruit shall you
have thereof: but if you do omit beating of it, then may you prune it, or
finely with the point of your knife cut the bark thereof from the foot of the
tree upwards, as high as you can reach, which some do call scarifying or
lancing. And you shall do well now and then, after some few years planting of
it, to lay ashes at the root thereof, or else water it with stale urine, which
will cause the Nut to grow more large, the shell tender, and the kernel more
firm and pleasant in taste; and the tree it self will grow fairer, and bear
his fruit more timely. And although the disposition of this tree be so adverse
against all other trees which grow near unto it, yet is the profit thereof
greatly to be respected: for the timber thereof is large, smooth, pleasant, and
serves The profit of the VValnut tree.
to many good uses for ioyners; and the loppings or boughs thereof (which grow
thick and large, when the tree is dead or to be felled, for before you must
not lop it, if you intend to have any good thereof) will serve for firewood:
the whole Nut from the outermost rind to the innermost kernel, is all and
very excellent good for many griefs and diseases: and the leaf thereof also
serves to like good purposes: so that there is not any impediment in this tree
in comparing of it with any the former, but only his bad condition in growing
near unto other trees, and commonly it kills any thing The Pine tree.
which grows under it; which yet the Pine tree does not, but is of a
contrary and more pleasing nature, and every thing does prosper very well
which grows under the shadow thereof, which is neither so combersome or
thick, but that the Sun, Rain and Air may sufficiently come to any thing
which so grows.


Wood. But do you think that Pine trees will grow and prosper in our climate?


Sur. I must needs think so, because I have seen some grow in England,
though yet but rarely, and the reason perhaps may be, of the not well
husbanding them at the first, in which great care must be used, yet when they
are grown to be trees, they are then sufficiently able to endure all
hardness; but being set either of the plant or seed, they are then most choice
and tender.


Wood. But I pray what course do you use in planting them, and in what kind of
ground?


Sur. The soil that chiefly these trees delight in, is a sandy, light, and
stony ground, and will thrive very well upon mountains, and in open ayrie
places, and they will grow sooner and better of the kernel, then of a young
plant. And you must lay the kernels in steep three or four days before you
set or sow them and let the ground where you intend to sow them be as carefully
husbanded and tilled, as you would do if you would sow wheat thereon, and then
put 6 or 7 of them into the earth in one hole together 4 or 5 fingers deep, and
cover the^ lightly with loose earth. And the best time to sow them is in
October or November* in warm, hot, or dry places, and in cold and wet grounds
in February or March, and when they are grown up to be young trees, you must
be very careful in removing any of them, because it is long before they will
settle and take root, and they will hardly endure to be transplanted (without
hurt and hinderance to their grouth) but yet when you do remove of them,
beware you do not bruze or break any of the roots, espcially the master-roote.
And it is thought this tree will continue the longer, if the bark be now and
then taken from it, because that under the bark worms do breed, which do
fret and destroy the tree. And though you may think this disdourse of mine to
be more curious then necessary, because there be excellent good laws already
inacted for preserving the wood, yet in respect there do want peculiar officers
that should carefully look thereunto, those laws, as many other be, are
little respected: therefore if you please, before we end our conference, Some
new law fit to be thought of for preserving of wood.
let us a little consider of some points fit to be thought of by our grave and
discreet Parliament, meant to that end.


Per. M. Surueyor you have made a good motion, I pray let us hear your conceit
concerning this point.


Sur. Sir with all willingness I will discover to you my poor opinion
therein, which is, that every Freeholder or Copiholder of Inheritance holding
twenty Acres or upward of land, should be enjoined by a special act to be
made in that behalf, to plant or sow one Acre of those twenty with Oak,
Elm, Ash, Beech, or Chestnut, etc. in Counties that are not wooddie, or where
little or no wood is growing, and to ditch and hedge the same defensably from
Cattle and Swine, or other destruction.


Per. You say well, but that law would as little be respected as any the rest,
except it might also be enacted, that there should be officers appointed for
the due surueying and yearly view of every man's performance thereof.


Sur. That is my meaning, for after this little nurcery thus Officers appointed
to look to the preservation of these little groves.
made and planted according to the proportion abouesaid, that is, from twenty
Acres to one thousand, etc. I would then have the high Constable of every
Hundred, Wapentake, or Liberty appointed an officer to look to the
preservation of these little groves, and that twice in the year, which should
be about the Spring and Fall, viz. Our Lady day* and Martinmas, that the
fences be well maintained, the grounds cleansed from weeds, and all manner of
cattle be kept out from annoying and spoiling the tender sprigs, for which he
should yearly have five pounds, to be with equal proportion levied A yearly
allowance to this new Officer.
through his whole Division or Hundred, according to their usual course and
proportion of rates and cessements there used in other services for the County.


Pereg. But what then should these high Constables do, when they find offenders
in any point of this planting or preserving law?


Sur. I would have them to keep note books of al their doings therein, and
that once in the year, and at the next Quarter Sessions extract these defaults
to the Justices of The defaults extracted to the Justices of Peace. A fine and
penalty.
Peace, and if they find any offense, to impose a fine for that default past,
and a penalty for the amendment thereof, before a certain day, as to their
discretions should seem meet: and that the same chief Constable may have the
leuying of their fines or amercements, the profit whereof to be thus divided
into four equal parts, viz. to the Justices of the Peace one part, to the
Clerk of the Peace for entering distreating the same, another part, to the
chief Constables for collecting them one other part, and to the poor of the
parish respectively the fourth part. And that also Articles to be given in
charge to the Jury.
by the same act, the Justices at every their Sessions may have power to give
in their charge to the Jury these following Cautions, as parcel of their
charge. Michaelmas) with other young Plants of like kind, etc. and carefully
mended. That by these and such like Inquiries presentiments may at our Lady day
and Martinmas be made by the Jury of the defaults, that they may be compared
with the presentiments of the said chief Constables, who are the Surueyors of
these Groves. And if there find the said chief Constable negligent or conniuing
Another fine to be imposed.
in that Office, that then the Justices do also fine them, according as their
discretions shall think fit: which fine shall be divided into two equal
parts, the one half to the Clerk of the Peace, and the other half to the
Jury that presented the defaults.


Pereg. Sir, in my opinion you have laid a foundation of very good and probable
law, which being perfected by the wisdom of the Parliament Burgesses, who
knowing the natures, conditions, and properties of every County, can best form
and fashion the same fit for every place, which assuredly cannot but do well;
because you have made such a cautionarie law, that the profits arising of the
amercements and fines for defaults, as well of the owners of those springs, as
of the Surueyors, will cause the same to be quickly found and levied, which
will make every one more carefully to look about him.


Surueyor. Truly Sir, it is most needful that some such course should be
thought of, and I should think my self happy if I could possess some
pregnant wits to raise up any profitable law for the increasing of so pitiful
a decay, as is generally of our Woods, which has come by the unnaturalness of
the times, that has bred men void of charity; Epicures, only providing for
the supply of their pleasures: without that natural leave, care, and respect,
that by the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations they should have of their
posterity and succeeding ages.


Pereg. Master Surueyor you have spoken most truly herein: for my self (in
this small time that I have lived, which is not yet fully sixty years) have
observed, that in these latter ages true charity has had a great fight with
self-love, and much banding on both parties has been for some few years
after. But since this conflict, sensuality has so played the parasite, as he
has levied more forces, and grown more powerful by his libertine
insinuations, than poor charity could do: whereby it has followed that she
is abolished, and self-love has obtained the victory; and thereupon coming
in by conquest, she thinks her self not bound to any law, but at her
pleasure most licentiously has made havoc of all old charitable foundations,
plantations, preseruations, and what not; whereby this pitiful spoil of Woods
amongst the rest, that served to many needful and worthy uses, is now
presented to us in the pageant of this our age, as part of the fruits of
self-love, in every degree, sex, and person.


Sur. Good Sir, I pray make some stay of relating so feelingly the memory of
these woeful deuastations, for in good faith you make my heart ache with the
remembrance of them, and the more, for that I see all this which you have said
to be most true in all sorts of people: for it we look upon the Clergy, we
may then see their Church-land to be rather champaine than reasonably wooddie,
and their Woods and Copies cut down, wasted, and sold by them, not upon
necessity, but upon covetousness, want of charity, and due care of Churches
posterity. If we look upon foundations and donations of Colleges, Schools,
and Hospitals, every man we see is for himself, vasting, and deuasting all, as
though they expected never to have any successors at all. If we look toward
widows having dowries, we shall easily perceive the small care and motherly
affection they have of their heirs, in respect of their later and new
husbands, but all is brought to the fall and ruin, without respect of future
good to their posterities. And if we bend our considerations upon many Officers
of the Crown, we may easily discern what course they hold to advance their
own profits, more then the preservation of the Princes Woods and Royalties.


Pereg. Well, since charity is in this mournful sort confronted and derided
by self-love, let every one endeavor to unite himself, as well in others as
in this most needful thrift of Planting: which your conceit for erecting some
new law for the same, does seem to me most probable and effectual for
increase of Timber and Fuel, and that with the least charge that may be.


Sur. Happily it may effect well, if judicious men would be pleased to make
smooth and plain that which I have roughly hewn: with which I pray give me
leave to end this discourse of Planting; wherein if I have given you any
satisfaction, I shall think my time well bestowed, and would be glad to see
you or any other practice some of these directions of Planting and Sowing for
increase of Wood and Timber, of which the scarcity is daily seen: and yet few
or none in our time (to any great purpose) have ever taken pains to write
hereof, how or in what manner to begin and proceed. And I see there are as few
industrious spirits that will undertake the care and charge for the increase or
preserving of them.


Wood. Are there not then any other sort of Trees worth the planting either for
Timber or Fuel, more then what you have already spoken of?


Sur. There are not any other worth the labor either for Timber or Fuel, which
either do, or as I conceive, will plentifully grow or fructify in England,
because the soil and climate is more adverse than pleasing to their
conditions: yet there be many other Trees of small growth worth the planting,
in regard of their fruit, as namely, the Apple Tree, Warden-tree, Plumme-tree,
etc. the profit of which (if men would be industrious to plant them) would in
short time happily yield a liberal increase, and discharge a good part of
their rent, besides finding of their own houses* by the store of Cy^er and
Perry, which yearly may be made thereof, as those of the Counties of
Worcester, Gloucester, and Hereford do find it true by experience: but hereof I
intend not to speak, because many men are already excellent and most curious
in that kind in their Orchards; and the making of Perrie and Cider is neither
so difficult or chargeable, as it is pleasant and profitable: and for that also
I should then exceed the compass of an introduction to an old thrift, which
was the whole scope of my intent in this discourse.


Pereg. But Sir, though we are content for this present to spare your further
labor herein, because I think we have almost tired you, yet I would entreat
you hereafter (though many men by practice are most skillful therein) to let us
hear your conceit concerning fruit trees, and the commodity thereof: for
though the bodies or boles of them yield but small Timber, yet you know they
are both profitable and pleasant, in respect of the fruit which comes from
them.


Sur. Sir, I thank you for your patience in hearing this abrupt discourse of
Planting and Sowing, for increase of Timber and Fuel, wherein if I see any
desirous either to practice some of these experiments, or else add some more
lively and practike directions for the bettering of this subject, it will the
rather encourage me hereafter to satisfy your desire. And in the mean time I
wish we might not be either too wise or ridiculous in contemning what we never
saw or practiced, and to imitate nothing but what has been approved by daily
experience, which always does best suite with dull spirits.


Pereg. You say well, and so we will bid you adue until to morrow, when we
will chaleng^ your promise, to hear your discourse of the aforesaid Instrument
for measuring of Timber.


Sur. M. Peregrine and the rest you are we^come; and I will not fail to give
you the b^st satisfaction I can therein.


THE FOVRTH PART,
A short Treatise of measuring Board, and the solid content of any Tree,
either standing or lying upon the ground, be it square or round; and also to
take the height thereof: performed by a small portable Instrument, which is
both facile and pleasant.

Surueyor. MAster Peregrine, and the rest, God give you all a good day.


Pereg. Sir, the like to you, and we are now come according to your
appointment, as well to give you thanks for your yesterdaies discourse of
Planting and Sowing for increase of Timber and Fuel, as also to desire you to
satisfy us concerning the use of this Instrument, for measuring the content of
any Timber tree, and also to take the height thereof, either standing or
growing.


Sur. Sir, your request being grounded upon my own offer and promise, I cannot
deny you so just a demand: but first let me ask you, if you have any
understanding in the science of Arithmeticke?


Pereg. Yes a little, and I once had it reasonably perfect, but now for want
and use thereof I have almost forgotten it: yet will I help that defect in my
self as well as I can, by being attentive and willing to understand.

Inward edge




Wood. And I have been so slack therein, as the question must be very easy,
if I can resolve it: therefore I must the more entreat your pains and patience
herein.


Sur. It is my purpose to be painful and patient to give you the best
satisfaction herein I can. But the use and practice of this Art is so
ingenious, excellent, and necessary, as we can use no manner of commerce or
correspondencie with any, or practice any faculty or knowledge, but still
Ari^hmeticke is the speciallest and most essential part thereof: therefore you
do not well to be so negligent or forgetful of so excellent a thing as this
is: But the hearing of this Discourse will be little pleasing or profitable to
our Farmer, because I imagine he is little seen in the practice of numbers and
figures.


Ien. Master Surueyor, I thank you for your care, and it is likely you will
find me an old Truant therein: yet if it will please you to proceed, I will
also do my best to understand you therein; for I have special use and need
thereof, because I buy and sell much Timber.


Sur. It is well, I perceive then if you will be attentive, all of you will
soon conceive the use of this Instrument: but you must know, that I intend not
to instruct you in the whole course of measuring Timber and Board (which this
Instrument will perform as well as any other) but only to teach you some
brief rules, and so much as shall sufficiently serve you to measure board, or
any solid, round or square body, be it Timber, stone, glass, or any such
like, and also to take the height of a Tree, or of any thing else. This
Instrument The description of the Instrument.
then is made as you see of two pieces of Box or Brass, whether you will, and
of a reasonable thickness, with a joint in the midst to open and that at
pleasure, to what distance Vpper-side lower side, outward edge, ^nward edge.
you please, yea, even unto a straight line, and it consists of the upper
side and lower side, outward edge and inward edge.


Ien. I pray what do you mean by the consisting of it?


Sur. I mean there are graduated upon those sides and edges divisions that
must perform the work: and first I will instruct you of such graduatio^s as
are upon ye upper side, which as you see are certain degrees called the Sines,
the degrees of a Quadrant, and 20 equal parts along the edge of the Scale. And
first for the Sines, they are 90 unequal parts extending from the Center,
growing by degrees to a smaller proportion toward 90, and which are numbered by
10, 20, 30, to 90, the fines being ^ut further than the unites, and each unite
divided into halues, and is of great use in the doctrine of Triangles, as
hereafter shall be showed. Secondly, the degrees of a Quadrant are likewise 90,
from the Center toward your right hand, having the Sines vpmost, and holding
the Center from you wards; and also the fines are cut further than the unites,
and each unite divided into halues, and which serves to take heights. Thirdly,
the 20 equal parts are thus to be understood, the Scale is to be opened to a
straight line, and then the whole length thereof (which is just one foot) is
divided into 20 equal parts, and is numbered by 5, 10, 15, to 20. And which
also serves to measure the breadth, depth, and circumference of any Tree.


Wood. All this I understand, because I see it so in the Scale, but how or upon
what grounds they are made, that I know not.


Sur. Neither is it material whether you know it or no, except you will apply
your self a little to study Geometry, and therefore it shall suffice only
to instruct you in the use of it. Next in order follows the graduations of
the lower ^ower side.
side, and first of the equal parts which come from the Center, are 100, being
numbered by 10, 20, 30, to 100. And the fines are cut further than the unites,
and which serves to find the circumference of a circle, the diameter being
given; to take any part or parts of a line being given, and for diverse other
uses. On the right hand are graduated 30 equal parts, being numbered by 5, 10,
15, to 25. And the first 5 are not numbered at all, and each unite is divided
into halues and quarters; which Scale serves to find the Diameter of a
Circle, the circumference being given. Toward your left hand are graduated 25
equal parts, being numbered by 5, 10, 15, to 20. And the first 5 is not numbered
at all, being divided into unites, and each unite into halues and quarters,
serving to find the side of a square equal to a Circle, to lay down a figure
according to the proportion of that Scale, and also to other uses.


Ien. Hitherunto I perceive it is most easy, and I understand you well without
further instruction.


Sur. You will assuredly think so, if you conceive that the knowledge and
learning of new things feeme not tedious and difficult to attain, which indeed
at the first are always the hardest: But to proceed, then upon the outward
Outward edg^.
edge, is graduated inches (divided into halues and quarters,) to the number of
12. (the just length of the scale) and are numbered by 1. 2. 3. to 12. And then
for the graduations of the inward edge (the scale being in a straight In ward
edge.
line as before) the whole length is divided into 10. equal parts, and is
numbered by 1. 2. 3. to 10. And which serves to measure the length, height, and
distance of things. And thus much for the graduations of the scale, by which is
wrought any thing that I intend to speak of.


Per. It seems that this Instrument is very necessary to perform what you
have said, but yet if I should for want of skill commit any error in the work,
what help is there then, when I know not how or where to find the fault, or
upon what grounds it is made?


Sur. You speak to good purpose, but as I said before, so I say now, you must
be pleased to take it for an answer, that except you will studiously seek to
attain the knowledge of these things, you must be content with such brief
Rules, as shall be taught you, concerning this or any the like subject: yet
this help shall you have herein, that you may try by Arithmeticke, any the
materiallest matters concerning this affair, whether it will hold true with
the Scale or no.


Per. That is as much as I desire: and therefore I pray begin some proposition.


Sur. I will: First then rather for variety, then use hereof in measuring
board or, timber, (but only for the The use of the upper side.
height of a tree excepted) I will show you two or three propositions
concerning the Sines. As.


The Radius, or whole length of a line being given To give of the upper side.
to find any Sine desired.
Let a. b. be Radius, I demand the sine of 40. degrees.



Fit a. b. upon the sines in 90. and take it over in 40. which distance set
from a. to c. and so shall a. c. be the sine of 40. degrees, as was required.

Another Example.

Let a. b. be Radius, I demand the sine of 25. degrees.



Fit a. b. in 90. and take it over in 25. and then work as before: and so
shall a. c. be the sine of 25. degrees.

Ien. What do you call this fitting and taking over?


Sur. Fitting is to open or shut the Scale until a certain distance be fitted
in 90. 80. 70. or any other number desired: and taking over is the opening or
shutting of the compasses to the Scale unstirred in such degrees as shall be
required.


Wood. But I pray what concerns the two former examples of the sines, for the
measuring of Board and Timber?


Sur. Not any thing, but only as I told you in respect of the variety and
pleasure thereof, and the chiefest use of these sines in Timber measure, is of
Triangles in taking the height of a tree (an example whereof you shall presently
understand.) But before you come to learn how to take the height What an Angle
i^.
of a tree, it is necessary for you to know what an Angle is, that so by
degrees, you may somewhat understand the doctrine of Triangles. Therefore you
shall know that an angle is the meeting of two lines in one point, whose
quantity is measured by an Arch of a Circle passing from the one line to the
other, and whose Center shall be the point where the two lines do meet. As
for example.



a. b. and a. c. are two lines drawn at pleasure, and meet both in the point
a. making the Angle b. a. c. (wherein note that the middle letter a. does
always signify the Angle,) whose quantity is measured by the Arch d. c. and
is found to be 90. degrees.

And for that I would have you the perfecter herein (having already showed you
what an Angle is, and how it is measured) It remains now to show you how to
find the quantity of any Angle by the Scale, which is done after this manner.
Let the foresaid Angle b. a. c. be given to be measured, whose quantity is
required: First therefore open your compasses at To find the quantity of an
Angle by the Scale.
pleasure, and setting one foot in the Center a. with the other, foot describe
the Arch d. e. Then without stirring the Compasses, always fit the Radius
(which is the Semidiameter) a. d. or a. e. in 30. upon the fines, and there let
the Instrument rest, and then take with your Compasses the distance from d. to
e. and bring that along the sines till it be equally fitted on each side
(which now you see it does in 45.) and so shall 45. be found to be the half of
that Angle, which being doubled, it makes 90. for the true qaantitie of the
Angle b. a. c. required. And because I would well have you to understand what I
have said, I will now show you the use of Angles in taking heights performed by
the sines. As thus.

Let a. b. be the height of a tree given to be measured. To take the height of
a tree.




First therefore take a standing a good distance off the tree at pleasure,
which let be at c. Then standing at c. look to the top of the tree b. through
the sight of the Quadrant, and note the degree cut upon the limb of the
Quadrant, by the line at which the lead hangs, which let be 31. degrees: and
so shall the Angle c. be an Angle of 31. degrees, whose complement is 59.
degrees for the Angle b. That done, measure the distance a. c. which let be
42.. feet, which take upon some Scale, and fit it in 59. his opposite Angle b.
upon the sines, and take it over in 31. the Angle c. and that applied to the
same parts from whence you had the 42.. shows 25. and almost. to which add
the height of your eye from the ground, which suppose to be 5. foot: and so
shall you have the whole height of the tree to be 30. foot, and. of a foot,
as was required. And if you would have the Diagonall line b. c. (that is the
distance from your eye c. to the top b. Then take the distance over in 90. and
that applied to the same Scale of equal parts, shows 49. for the line bc.
required.


Ien. Master Surueyor you take much pains to instruct one, whose brains I
fear will scarce be able to conceive you to the end, but what call you this
Complement, to what use serves that?


Sur. Fear not, though the beginning seem hardest, yet practice with a
willing mind will make it very easy, and therefore I would wish you, not as
yet to trouble your self with too much curiosity to understand every
particular, because I would not have you to think it tedious: yet to satisfy
your desire, you shall know: That a Complement is such What a complement is.
a number, which added to another number, they both make just, 90. (which are
the degrees of a Quadrant) as 31. is the Angle of c. to which add 59. his
Complement, the Angle b. and they both make 90. Or else take 31. the Angle at
c. out of 90. rest 59. for his Complement, the Angle at b. And now I will show
you another example of taking a height which is inaccessible.


Per. Sir, I thank you, but first I pray show me how you do the former
example of the height by Arithmeticke, for if it does correspond with the
Scale, it is then most speedy and easy.


Sur. I perceive you will forget nothing what you think may do your self
good: therefore be attentive, for it is wrought by the Rule of 3. by the help
of the table of Sines (which also I will show you.) Therefore say.

b. a. c. c.

If 59. the Angle at b. give 42.. measures, what shall 31. the Angle at c. give.

^ ab. Facit 25. 505 / 857. which fraction is almost. for the line a. b. the
height of the tree.

And if you will also find out the length of the line b. c. work thus.

^ Facit 49. and 382 / 516 or 191 / 258 which fraction is more then half, but
not for the line b. c.

Whereby you see, that as well by Arithmetic, as by the Scale, it comes very
near unto one the other. And always place the number of Sines under the
quantities of the angles as you see, that under the quantity of the Angle 59,
is set his Sine, which is 857, and under the quantity of the Angle 31. is also
placed his Sine 516. and so of others.


Per. This pleases me exceeding well, and you will make me more studious
therein then ever I did think to have been.


Sur. I am glad you apprehend it so well, I hope you will the better understand
this other example, which now I will show you, which is, in taking the height
of a tree (or any thing else) if you could not come to measure the distance
from the tree to you, or that the tree stood on the further side of a River.
And though it be more tedious, and therefore may seem more difficult, yet the
manner of working it is al one. And it is not only worth the learning to
satisfy you in taking the height of a tree, but also it is of special use,
and worthy to be known of those who profess military affairs. And thus it
is wrought.



Let a. b be the height of the tree, (standing on the further To take a height
that is inaccessable.
side of the river, or which is inaccessible) given to be measured, and let the
breadth of the River be from a. to d. So that you can come no nearer to the
tree then the point d. Therefore standing at d. look with your Instrument
through the sight to the top of the tree b. and note the degree cut, which let
be 43 for the Angle a. d. b. which take out of 90. rests 46. for the quantity
of the Angle a. b. d. which also note: That done* choose another Station, as
the Angle c. and there stand and do observe as before, and then let the degree
cut be 27 for the angle c. whose complement is 62.. for the quantity of the
angle a. b. c. from which take 46. the quantity of the Angle a. b. d. rests.
16. degrees for the quantity of the Angle d. b. c. which note as before. Then
measure the distance between your first and second Station d. c. and which let
be 22 of yards. And then may you not only find out the height of the tree a. b.
but also the breadth of the river a. c. and also ye lines c. b. and b. d. in
this manner.

Fit 22 upon the Sines in 16. his opposite Angle c. b. d. and take it over in
27.. the Angle c. and that shows 36. (being applied to the Scale from whence
you took your 22.) for the line b. d. which distance fit in 90. his opposite
Angle b. a. d. and take it over in 43. the Angle d. and that shows 25. for a.
b. the height of the tree; to which add 5. foot, (that is from the height of
your eye to the ground a. e.) and then the whole height of the tree will be 26.
yards, and two foot. Then without stirring the Scale, take it over also in 46.
the Angle a. b. d. and that shows 26. for a. d. the breadth of the river.
That done, take a. b. and fit it in 27. his opposite Angle c. and take it over
in 90. and it shows 54. and almost. for the line b. c. And thus by measuring
only the distance between your two Stations c. and d. diverse other lines are
found out as you see.


Per. This way seems very pleasant and brief by the Scale, and I hope in
short time to understand it reasonably well: but may not this also be done by
Arithmeticke?


Sur. Yes, best of all, but then as you did before, so now you must still use
the help of some Table of Sines.


Per. All the better, for I am also willing to understand the use of those
Sines; therefore I pray show it me.


Sur. Most willingly: therefore having found all the Angles as before showed,
with the Quadrant, you shall now find each line in order by Arithmeticke, as
follows. And first for the line. B. D. say

^

If 16. have to his Sine 22. what 27.

Facit 36.332 / 55^. which is a little more then a half, and therefore it may
serve for a half. Or.

^ For A. B.

If 90. the Angle b. a. d. give 36. what 43. the Angle a. d. b. facit 25 ^. for
a. b. the height of the tree.

For A. D.

^ If 90. give 36. what 46. the Angle a. b. d. facit 26. and 201 / 50^s. which
is almost a half, for the breadth of the River a. d.

For B. C.

^ If 27. give 25. a. b. what 90. the Angle b. a. c. facit 54. 134 / 229. which
is a little more then a half.

And thus you see that each line is found out by Arithmeticke to agree with the
Scale according to your desire: and thus much for the use of the upper side.


Per. This is very pleasant because it seems most perfect; but now I pray to
what use serves these divisions of 20. which are set upon this upper side of
the Scale?


Sur. It is well remembered, but as concerning those divisions, I will presently
speak of when I come to measure Board and Timber, and therefore now I will
show you the use of the lower side, and begin with equal parts which come from
the center, and which serve for dividing a line into any number of equal parts.


Per. But first let me ask you: will not these degrees which you call Sines,
perform more then you have already spoke of?


Sur. Yes many things, and namely this: they serve to divide the circumference
of a circle into what number of parts you will, and which is done after this
manner.

Let A. be a circle given, whose circumference I would divide into 5. equal
parts.



Fit the Diameter in 90. To divide a circle into any equal parts.
(or the Semidiameter in 30) and there let the Instrument rest, and then take
it over in 36. (which is of 180.) which applied to the circumference, shows
it to be. part of the circumference as was required.

And now that I have showed you the use of the Sines, and also to take the
height of a tree by the Quadrant, I will also show you the use of the lower
side, and first T(...)se of the lower side.
you shall have an example of dividing a line into any number of equal parts,
which is of good use for many purposes. As

Let a. b. be a line given to be divided into 7 equal parts. To divide a line
into any equal parts.




First take the whole length of the line a. b. with your compasses, which fit
it in 70. upon the equal parts, and then (letting the Scale rest) take it over
in 10. of those parts (which is 1 / 7 part thereof) and that distance set from
a. to c. and so shall the line a. c. be found to be 1 / 7 part of that line, as
was required.

Another Example.

Let a. b. be a line given whose is required.



Take the whole line as before, which fit in 50. and then the Scale so resting,
take it over in 30. (which is of 50.) and that shows a. c. to be of the line
a. b. required.

Another Example.

A line being given containing any number of measures, to find another line in
any proportion thereunto.

Let a: b. be a line given containing 60. equal parts upon some Scale, and let
the proposition be to give another line shall which contain 36. of the same
parts.



Fit a. b. in 60. and then take it over in 36. and that shows a. c. to be 36.
of the same equal parts, whereof a. b. is 60. as was required.

And though these examples (and many other which I omit) of giving any part of
a line, be not material for the measuring of Board and Timber: yet it is of
special use for Carpenters, Ioyners, Masons, and for such who draw plots of
houses, fortifications, etc. and therefore considering that it being already
upon the Scale for Timber and Board measure, I thought it not amiss to speak
somewhat thereof concerning other uses. And because I desire to use brevity, I
will now show you how to measure Board and Timber, wherein you shall see the
use of those 20. divisions graduated along the upper side by the edge of the
Scale to his full length in a straight line, with which the breadth of Board and
Timber is to be measured, counting once the length of the Scale for 20. And
likewise the 10. divisions which are graduated upon the inward edge do serve
to measure the length of Board and Timber, counting once the length of To
measure Board.
the Scale for 10. saying 10. 20. 30. and so forth; whereof suppose your Board
to be 127. of those divisions long, which note. Then measure the breadth of
your Board by those parts whereof the whole length of the Scale contains 20.
And suppose the breadth to contain 29. of those parts. That done, multiply
127. the length by 29, the breadth, product will be 3746. which divide by 200.
or else always cut of the two last figures toward your right hand thus 37 /
46. and then take. of the figures toward your left hand, as half of 37. is
18. and so have you 18. foot of board therein contained, and 46 / 200. parts
of a foot, which is almost. of a foot more.

^ Another Example

Suppose the length of your board to contain 95. parts, and the breadth 30.
parts, then multiply 95. by 30. product is 2850. which divide by 200. or else
cut of the two last figures 50. and take the half of the foremost figures,
which are 28. whose half is 14. And so I find 14. foot of board, and 50 /
200. or. of a foot to be contained in that board as was required.


Per. This is a very good and speedy way; but I pray let me try how this
will hold true by measuring of it by the ordinary way of feet and inches.


Sur. I pray do.


Per. This board then is 9. foot long, and 18. inches broad, multiply 18. by
9. product is 171. which divide by 12. cotient shows 14 3 / 12. or. of feet
to be contained in that board, as was before.

^
Sur. You do well, I perceive you will soon become an apt scholar, but how
if your board be tapering, that is, broader at the one end, then at the other,
what course then will you use to know the content thereof?


Per. I have seen some measure not only such board, but Timber also that has
been tapering, in this manner following: they will take half the number of
the length of the board, and there measure over for the breadth, and then
multiply the one in the other, and that product being divided, will show the
content of that board. As suppose the length to be 11 foot, and two foot broad
at the one end, and 1. foot at the other end. Then take half a 11. foot which
is 5.. feet for the length, and both the breadthes added together, they make
3.. feet, which multiplied by 5.. product is 19.. of feet in that board.

^
Sur. This is a good way, but in my opinion, not so good To measure board that
is tapering.
as this other way, which is done in this manner. Measure the length by the
parts thereunto belonging as before, which suppose to be 110. of 10. in the
whole: and then also measure the breadth at each end severally by those parts ^
thereunto belonging, which is, by 20. and which suppose at the one end to be To
measure board that is tapering.
40. and at the other end 30. which 2. breadthes added together, they both make
70. of which take half, which is 35. and then multiply 110. by 35, product is
3850. which divide by 200. or else cut off the two last figures 50. and take
the half of the two former figures, and so shall you find to be in that board
19 foot as was before. Or else you may add the breadths at each end together,
which is 70. which multiplied by 110. the length, product will be 7700. which
always divide by 400 or else cut of the two last Siphers, and then take part
of the two first figures toward your left hand, that is of 77. which is 19. as
before. And thus have you two or three ways to measure Board, the choice
whereof you may at pleasure use.

^
Per. This which you have taught me, I hope with some little practice to be
soon perfect therein, because I perceive it is not very difficult. But if
your board be 30 of those 20 parts broad, how many of the 10 parts must one
have in length to make a foot of board?


Sur. Sir I commend your diligence, for this is also necessary to be known;
and therefore work thus. Multiply 20 by 10, product is 200. (parts square in a
foot of board square) which divide by 30. the breadth quotient shows ^ the
demand, which is 6 parts, and of those 10. for the length to make a foot of
board, at that breadth which is from a. to b.


Ie. If there were no more difficulty in the rest, I think I should then
soon learn to measure board, because it seems not very hard: but what else
is there to be learned concerning the measuring of board?


Sur. This which I have said is sufficient, until you be better practiced
herein. And therefore I will now begin to speak of measuring Timber, which
is the chiefest matter for our Woodward to learn, because it does more
concern him in his office, and for which I have chiefly invented this
Instrument. First therefore to know the content of a square piece of Timber in
feet, you shall measure the length thereof by the equal parts in the Scale,
of which 10 are contained in the whole, which suppose to be 100. Then measure
To measure square timber.
also the breadth and depth by those parts, whereof the Scale contains 20.
which suppose to be 40. the breadth, and 30 the depth. That done, multiply 100
the length by 40 the breadth, which product, multiply again by 30 the depth;
ofcome will be 120000. which always divide by 4000. or else cut off the three
last Siphers toward your righthand, and of the figures toward your left hand,
take. that is, of 120. take, which is, 30 and so shall you find in that piece
of Timber to be 30 cubicall feet.

^
Wood. If this will hold true by measuring of it according to the usual way,
with a two-foote Rule, it is then very easy and brief: Therefore I pray let
us try it.


Sur. Do so. ^


Wood. The length of this piece of Timber is 10. foot, the breadth two foot,
and the depth 1. foot. Then multiply 10. by 2. and that product again by 1..
of come, shows the content of feet in that log, which is 30. feet, as it was
before. But if there be odd inches either in length, breadth, or thickness,
then I think they must all be reduced into inches, as if the piece of Timber
were 10. foot, and 5. inches long, 26. inches broad, and 19 inches deep,
reduce length, breadth, and thickness into inches, and then the total of
inches in that logge will be 61750. which divide by 1728. (square inches in a
foot of timber square) quotient shows 35 foot, and 645 / 864. of a foot to
be contained in that piece of Timber, which fraction is fully of a whole one.

^
Sur. And now that you have tried both these ways of measuring Timber, how do
you like them by my way?


Wood. My first example I hold to be as brief and speedy as yours, because it
is in feet and halues of feet; but for the second way, in respect there be
odd inches in the length, breadth, and thickness, your way does far exceed
it, because of the facility and briefness, but we are so wedded to our dull
and sluggish dispositions, as we rather think it innouatio^ to practice any new
or ingenious conceit, then sound judgment to embrace probable things, of which
may certainly be expected pleasure and profit. But well I pray now also show
us how many of those parts of 10. in the whole will serve to make a foot of
Timber at that breadth and depth as it is.


Sur. The way to do it is thus: multiply 40 the breadth ^ by 30 the depth,
product is 1200, by which divide 4000. cotient shows 3. of those parts
whereof 10 are in the whole, for the length of a foot of Timber at that
breadth and depth as it is, which is from a. to b. and this shall suffice you
for that. But now if you will be more precise herein, and think there may be.
and. of those divisions, more or less in that logge, and that you would also
have an example thereof; for your better satisfaction therein, I will also show
you the work which is done in this manner. Suppose the piece of Timber to be
146 parts long 23 broad, and 18 deep; multiply the length 146 by 23 the
breadth, product is 3406 which multiplied again by 18.. the depth, ofcome will
be 63864. 3. 3 / 31. which divide by 4000, or cut of the three last figures as
before, and take of the remain, that is, of 6^, which ^s 15. 864 / 4^^^ or 27
/ 125 of a foot, for the content of that tree in feet, or else 864 / 1000
parts of of a foot.

^
Per. You have often in this Board and Timber measure, spoken of two numbers
for denominators, that is, 200 and 4000. I pray from whence do they arise?


Sur. It were over t^dious to satisfy you of the whole therein; yet thus much
know, they are two numbers chosen the fittest to make those two divisions by,
as the 200 is the whole square or superficies of a foot; that is, a f^ote is
divided into 200 small Paralelograms or long squares, as you see in this
figure, and such whose length makes the 10 part of a foot, and breadth the 20
part of a foot, which multiplied together, they make 200; and if one had made
choice of any other two numbers, it would have been far more tedious and
troublesome. But I would wish you not as yet to be too curious herein, least
you forget more necessary matter for you to learn concerning this practice.


Wood. Well let it be as you have said. I perceive a willing mind, with a
little study, will easily overcome all this. But I pray if your piece of
Timber be tapering (as commonly all rough Timber is) in what manner then are
you to work?


Sur. Marry thus, if your piece of Timber be tapering, then measure the length
as before, which let be 127 of those parts of which 10 are in the whole, and
measure also To measure timber that is tapering.
the breadth and depth at each end by the parts thereunto belonging, which
suppose to be broad at the one end 29. parts, and deep 26 parts: and also
broad at the other end 24. and deep 19. Then multiply the breadth 29 by 26 ^
the depth, and they make 754. And also multiply 24. the breadth, and 19 the
depth, and they make 456. both which added together, they make 1210, of which
always take half, which is 605 which multiplied by 127. the length, product
is 768 35. Then cut off the three last figures as before, and take. of the rest
toward your left hand, which is 19. And so shall you find 19 foot of Timber
to be in that logge, and 835 / 1000 parts of. of a foot.


Wood. This is some thing more difficult then the last, therefore I pray
explain it better in a figure by a draught with your pen.


Sur. That will I do, and here is the demonstration which you see to be 127.
long, 29 broad, and 26 deep at the one end: and 24 broad, and 19 deep at the
other end.


Wood. This seems now more easy to be understood then before. But I pray how
do you measure round Timber*?


Ie. Round Timber is more easily measured then any other.


Sur. I pray as how?


Ie. Why thus: gird the tree with some cord or string, and take part thereof
for the square of that tre^: that done, measure the length or height of the
tree, and multiply that with the length, and that will soon show you the
number of feet in that tree.




Sur. I thought what your skill was herein, for by that kind of measuring
round Timber, there is great loss to the seller, for it is not the content of
the square by part and more, as I will plainly make it appear to you by this
figure following, which is a Circle and two Squares, and the content of the
bigger seems to the eye equal to the Circle, which indeed it is; and the
content of the lesser seems much less then the Circle. The circumference of
which Circle is 44. which take upon the equal parts, and that applied to the
Scale on the left hand, shows to be 12 and for the side of a square equal to
that Circle. And to prove how both their areas do agree, multiply 14 (the
diameter of that Circle, in it self, and that product by 11 the ofcome is
2156. which divide by 14. quotient shows 154 for the area of that circle. Or
if you multiply half the diameter by half the circu^fere^ce, product also
shows 154. for the area of that circle. And then multiply 12. (the side of
the square equal to that Circle) in it self product is 153. 5 / 4 which
wants but part of the whole to make the same content of the former area,
which 12. take upon the scale of equal parts on the right hand, and with that
distance prescribe the Square a. b. c. d. ^ which shall be equal to the Circle
required. Now if the content of your Circle does accord with this, then it is
also true, or else not* which for the better understanding hereof, we will now
try. A part of 44. (for that you say is the true square of the tree) is 11.
which multiplied in it self, product is 121. the area of your square, which
subtract from 154 rests 33 more in my square, then is in yours, which shows
it to be too little by part and more: and which also may more plainly appear
to you by the two squares a. b. c. d. and e. f. g. h. for the square a. b. c.
d. is according to art true, and is equal to that Circle, and if the square be
made of ^ / 4 part of the Circumference, accordingly as you intend it, the
Circle should contain no more then the pricked square e. f. g. h. which is too
little as it plainly appears.


Ie. You have sufficiently discovered this error, and I must now confess my
own rashness therein: but well I pray proceed.


Wood. I had thought my neighbor Iennings skill had been most true, because I
have seen many men do the like, but now I perceive there is great defect in
that kind of measuring round timber: therefore I pray show us your manner of
measuring it.


Sur. I will: first then girde the tree about with some small line or
packthreed, which suppose to be 116 of those parts, by which you measured the
breadth and depth whose Diameter is 37. But because this Diameter is also the
thickness of the bark, therefore you shall subtract as many of those parts as
you think convenient, which in some trees is 2 or 3, or perhaps 4. but
suppose that in this the bark be but 2 of those parts thick, which subtract
out of 37 rests 35 for the Diameter of the tree, the bark being off. And let
the height of the tree be 200 of those parts To measure round Timber.
by which you measured the length. That done, take the Diameter 35 upon the
Scale of equal parts on the right hand, and apply it to the equal parts on the
left hand, and it shows a side of a square equal to that Circle; but for as
much as you cannot take the whole 35 upon that Scale, therefore take half of
it, which is 17. and that applied to the Scale on the left hand shows half
which is 15.. which double^ makes 31. the side of a square equal to that
Circle: Therefore multiply 31 in it self, product will be 961. which
multiplied by 200. the length, ofcome will be 192200 which divide by 4000* or
cut off the three last figures, and take of the rest toward your left hand as
before, as of 192. the fourth part thereof is 48. And so there is found to be
48 feet, and 200 / 4000. parts or part of of a foot as was required.


Wood. I pray let me see how this is wrought by Arithmeticke, for it may be I
shall not always have the Scale about me to do it, yet I would be glad to
satisfy my self by doing of it some other way.


Sur. You shall do well: therefore first know that every Circumference ^ to his
Diameter is as 22. to 7. Therefore work by the rule of three to know the
diameter of this circle of 110 and say, If 22. the circumference require 7 for
his diameter, what shall 110* the Circumference of the tree require for the
Diameter. Facit 35 which 35 multiply in it self producte is 1225. which
mutiply by 11. ofcome is 13475. which divide by 14. cotie^t shows 962. 7 /
14. or. whose square root is 31 1 / 63. for the true side of a square equal to
that circle. Now knowing the area of that circle which is 962 ^ / 2. parts,
multiply it in 200. the length, product is 192510 of which sum cut off the
three last figures, and take. of the remain, and that shows 48 foot of
square Timber to be in that leg, and 510 / 1000 parts of of a foot. And so
you may perceive how well this Instrument agrees with the Arithmetical work,
because it wants not above parts of a of a foot as appears by the two
fractions 200 / 1000 parts which is of, or 1 / 20 part 51 / 400 or. the
difference is 3 / 40. which is about 1 / 13 part.


Wood. But how if your tree be tapering, as this is, how then are you to work?




Sur. If your tree be tapering, gird it at the top and below, and then find out
the Diameter at each end, as: suppose the tree to be at the one end 110 in
circumference, To measure a round tree that is tapering.
and at the other end 80. Then finding the area at each end, which is, 962..
and 509 1 / 11. Both which added together they make 1471 13 / 22. of which take
half which is 735 35 / 44. which multiplied by 200 the length, producte is
147159 1 / 11 of which cut of the three last figures, and take 1 / 4. of the
remain as before. And so have you 36.. foot, and 159 / 1000. of a. of a foot
to be in that timber tree.



But for that it will be somewhat difficult for every man (although he have the
Circumference of a tree, or round piece of Timber) to know thereby how many
feet, inches, and parts of inches in length will make a foot of timber; I
have therefore devised a Table which will readily show you the same, knowing
the Circumference: which known resort to the Column of Circumference in the
Table, and the measure against the same Circumference shall show you your
desire. As

The first Column shows the Circumference being at 20. and so continues
unto 120. and in the second Column is expressed the number of feet, inches,
and parts of inches in the length which will make a foot of Timber.


Wood. I pray acquaint us with that Table, for if we should fail in seeking to
know the content thereof by Arithmeticke, yet knowing the circumference, I
perceive we shall soon understand without Arithmeticke, what quantity of feet
in length of inches will make one foot of Timber, and thereby we may soon
know the content of the whole.


Sur. You conceive it well, and therefore here is the Table, always provided
that you do give still allowance for the bark in the Circumference.


A Table showing how many inches and parts of Inches upon any piece of round
Timber will make a cubicall foot throughout the same piece, the Circumference
or Inch thereof being first known.
Inches about Feet, Inches, and parts of Inches in the length Feet Inches
parts of Inches. 20 4 6 54 / 175 21 4 1 89 / 349 22 3 8 748 / 847 23 3 5 241 /
3703 24 3 1 5 / 7* 25 3 10 3314 / 4375 26 2 8 61^ / 1183 27 2 5 1^1 / 189 28 2
3 243 / 343 29 2 1 4889 / 5887 30 2 0 24 / 175 31 1 10 4070 / 6727 2 32 1 9 3 /
13 33 1 7 803 / 847 34 1 6 1602 / 2023 35 1 5 6289 / 8575 36 1 4 16 / 21 37 1 3
8 / 9 319 / 583 38 1 3 11^ / 2527 39 1 2 334 / 1183 40 1 1 134 / 175 41 1 0
^0860 / 11767 42 1 0 108 / 343 43* 11 9691 / 12943 44 11 187 / ^47 45 10 382 /
525 46 10 986 / 3703 47 9 12897 / 15463 48 9 3 / 7 49 9 8^^ / 16807 50 8 3016 /
4375 51 8 712 / 2025 52 8 40 / 1183 53 7 14423 / 19663 54 7 85 / 189 55 7 3839
/ 21175 56 6 318 / 343 57 6 1734 / 2527 58 6 2694 / 5887 59 6 ^5862 / 24367 60
6 6 / 17^ 61 5 21829 / 26047 62 5 4381 / 672^ 63 5 487 / 1^29 64 5 17 / 56 65 5
4189 / 29575 66 4 836 / ^47 67 4 26372 / 31423 68 4 1412 / 2023 69 4 2084 /
3703 70 4 37^6 / 857^ 7^ 4 10910 / 35287 72 4 4 / 21 7^ 4 285^ / 37303 74 3
9267 / 9583 75 3 3771 / 4375 76 3 1923 / 2527 77 3 27555 / 41503 78 3 675 /
1183 79 ^ 21003 / 4^687 80 3 69 / 175 81 3 529 / 1701 82 3 2715 / 11767 83 ^
7395 / 48223 84 3 27 / 243 85 3 339 / 5057 86 2 12130 / 12943 87 2 5122 / 5887
88 2 682 / 847 89 2 41170 / 55^47 90 2 358 / 525 91 2 36130 / 57967 92 2 2098 /
3703 9^ 2 3442 / 6^27 94 2 7^90 / 1546^ 95 2 257^4 / 6^7^ 96 2 ^ / 14 97 2
20338 / 65863 98 2 4402 / 16807 99 2 50 / 231 100 2 754 / 4375 101 2 9250 /
71407 102 2 178 / 2023 103 2 3538 / 74263 104 2 10 / 1183 105 1 8321 / 8575 106
1 18353 / 19663 107 1 71921 / 80143 108 1 163 / 189 109 1 68897 / 83167 110 1
16841 / 21175 111 1 7313 / 9583 112 1 251 / 343 113 1 62681 / 89383 114 1 1697
/ 2527 115 1 59489 / 92575 116 1 3^17 / 5887 117 1 208^ / ^549 118 1 13649 /
24367 119 1 52937 / 99127 120 1 89 / ^75

Wood. But how if one can neither clime the tree by ladder or otherwise, how
then should we do to know the Circumserence at the top.


Sur. Because I would have you well satisfied in this business, I will show
you an ingenious way according to art, which though the rule be true in it
self, yet in respect there be some impediments herein (which in this cannot
true, yet when necessity commands, we must of force make a virtue thereof,
and therefore you shall work thus. To know the Circumfere^ce of a tree at the
top, and never to clime or measure it.
Measure the Circumference of the tree at the root, which suppose to be 160
parts of 20 in the whole, and let the height of the tree be 300 parts of 10 in
the whole, and 50 of those parts from the ground, the tree is but 155 in the
Circumference of the former 20 parts. Then work by the Rule of 3 and say. If
50 rebate 5 in the Circumference from the bottom, what shall 300 the whole
length of the tree facit 30. which taken from 160 rests 130. for the
Circumference of the tree at the top. And then if you will have the content of
this tree, work as in the last example before, and that will show you. And
thus you see that by this means, you may as well take the Circumference of a
tree at the top, and never measure it, as the height of a tree, which you
cannot come to measure. And this shall suffice you for a brief instruction,
how to measure Board and Timber, and to take the height of a tree, wherein if
you find any harshnesse in the examples, I will at any time do my best to
resolve you thereof, to make it the more facile and pleasing, to your
understanding.

^
Per. Sir we thank you for your pains, and if we prove as good scholars
herein, as you have shown a willing mind to instruct us, I think neither
Master Woodward, this honest Farmer, or my self, will by any hereafter be
ouer-reached in buying and selling of Timber.


Wood. Neither will I, I trust be abused in setting forth of timber trees when
any warrant comes to me for that purpose, but to deliver, as near as may be,
so many loads or tons of timber, as I am thereby commanded. But I pray
resolve me one question more before we make an end; and that is, how many
square feet of timber do make as well a tun, as a load of timber?


Sur. There goes to a tun of Timber 40 cubicall Number of square feet of
timber in a t^n or load o^ timber.
feet of Timber, and to a load there has al ways been accounted 50 cubicall
feet.


Ie. I had thought there had been no difference between a tun and a load of
timber, and that a load of Timber was as much as six or seven good cart-horses
could well draw, being laid in a cart, were it more or less then 40 or 50
square feet. But I trust now, upon some practice and consideration of this
business, to do my self and friends good herein, for as I would be loath to
abuse any one either by selling of more loads or tuns of timber then are in 20
or 30 trees more or less, so I would willingly have my due of what I pay for.


Sur. I am glad that all of you do so understandingly apprehend what I have
said: for which, I desire no other recompense, but that I may see you willingly
to practice as well some part of our yesterdaies discourse of planting and
sowing for increase of timber and fuel; as also for your own respects, to be
perfect in measuring of board and timber, of which you have daily occasion to
use. And so if you please, let us now return about our own particular
affairs.


Per. Most willingly, and we do all thank you for your great pains herein.


A Table of Sines Radius. 1000.
D 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 0 3 6 9 12 15 1 17 20 23 26 29 32 2 35 38 41 44 47 49 3
52 55 58 61 64 67 4 70 73 76 78 81 84 5 87 90 93 96 99 102 6 105 107 110 113
116 119 7 122 125 128 131 133 136 8 139 142 145 148 151 154 9 156 159 169 165
168 171 10 174 177 179 182 185 188 11 191 194 197 199 202 205 12 208 211 214
216 219 222 13 225 228 231 233 236 230 14 242 248 248 250 253 256 15 259 262
264 267 270 273 16 276 278 281 284 287 290 17 292 295 298 301 303 306 18 309
312 315 317 320 323 19 326 328 331 334 337 339 20 342 345 347 350 353 356 21
358 361 364 367 369 372 22 375 377 380 383 385 388 23 391 393 396 399 401 404
24 407 409 412 415 417 420 25 423 425 428 431 433 436 26 438 441 444 446 449
451 27 454 457 459 462 464 467 28 469 472 475 477 480 482 29 485 487 490 492
495 497 30 500 503 505 508 510 513 31 516 518 520 522 525 527 32 530 532 535
537 540 542 33 545 547 550 552 554 557 34 559 562 564 566 569 571 35 574 576
578 581 582 585 36 588 590 592 595 597 599 37 602 604 606 609 611 613 38 616
618 620 622 625 627 39 629 632 634 636 638 641 40 643 645 647 640 652 654 41
656 658 660 663 665 667 42 669 671 673 676 678 680 43 682 684 686 688 690 692
44 692 697 699 701 70^ 705 45 707 709 711 713 715 717 46 719 721 723 725 727
729 47 731 733 735 737 739 741 48 743 745 747 749 751 753 49 755 757 759 760
762 764 50 766 768 770 772 773 775 51 777 779 781 783 784 786 52 788 790 792
793 795 797 53 799 800 802 804 806 807 54 809 811 812 814 816 817 55 819 821
822 824 826 827 56 829 831 832 834 835 837 57 839 840 842 843 845 847 58 848
850 851 853 854 856 59 857 859 860 863 863 865 D 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 866 867
869 870 872 873 61 875 876 877 878 880 882 62 883 884 886 887 888 890 63 891
892 894 895 896 898 64 899 900 901 903 904 905 65 906 908 909 910 911 912 66
914 915 916 917 918 919 67 921 922 923 924 925 926 68 927 928 929 930 931 933
69 934 935 936 937 938 939 70 940 941 942 943 944 945 71 946 946 947 948 949
950 72 951 952 953 954 955 955 73 956 957 958 959 960 960 74 961 962 963 964
965 965 75 966 967 967 968 969 970 76 970 971 972 972 973 974 77 974 975 976
976 977 978 78 978 979 980 980 981 981 79 982 982 983 983 984 984 80 985 985
986 986 987 987 81 988 988 989 989 989 990 82 990 991 991 991 992 992 83 993
993 993 994 994 994 84 995 995 995 995 996 996 85 996 996 997 997 997 997 86
998 998 998 998 998 998 87 999 999 999 999 999 999 88 999 999 999 1000 1000
1000 89 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 90 1000

A Table of the Contents of the first Part.
FEe-tres unjustly challenged. Fol. 4 The abuses of Woodwards. ibid The
question. bid. The quality of the ground must be considered of for the
planting of trees, or sowing of their seed 6 Four sorts of Timber trees
growing in England. ibid. Oak, Elm, Ash, Beech tree. ibid. Chestnut tree. 7
Fur tree. ibid. Pine tree 8 Ditch and Quickset 9 Ground dug for ridges. 10
The best time of planting ibid. The choice and using of the plant 11 The ground
twice tilled ibid. Tenants are most their own enemies 13 What belongs to a
skillful surueyor ibid. Dressing and husbanding of young plants 14 Weeding is
necessary for the spring ibid. Trees set by art do grow sooner and better then
wild trees 16 Two things to be considered of in planting 17 Romouing of trees
from a barren soil to a fat soil, and so of the contrary ibid. Pruning of
young Plants ibid. Lopping of timber trees do quite spoil them 18 What is a
doted tree 19 The time to prune young trees or plants 21 A secret 22 Preparing
of ground for sowing of Acornes 24 Trees growing upon rockie grounds 25 The
best time to remove young plants. 26 Weeding 27 The ground fenced ibid. Seed or
plants may also be set in void places, or in woddy grounds. 28 Pleasures of the
Spring 29 Commodity of the Spring ibid. The number of standils to be left upon
every acre of wood land 30 Wood ground as profitable as corn ground. ibid.
Note. 31
A Table of the contents of the second part.
TAking in of decayed forests commons, and wast grounds 32 By enclosing of
commons is both benfite and conscience 33 What is intended by enclosing decayed
Forests, Commons and waste grounds 3^ The benefit of enclosing waste grounds
ibid. The discommodities of enclosing wast ground ibid. The discommodities of
enclosing wast ground answered, and a further benefit thereof expressed 35
Ingrossement and resumption, the Gangreene of Enclosures 39 One objection more
against enclosures 40 An answer to the former objection 41
A Table of the contents of the third part.
Who are most fittest and likely to advertise any Lord the true estate of his
land true estate of his land 47 Two sorts of trees 48 Watery trees, land trees
ibid. Water trees ibid. Aller trees. 49 Planting of Aller trees ibid. Withie
trees of which are four kinds ibid. To plant Withies 50 Note ibid. Bi^ch tree
ibid. Poplar or Aspe tree ibid. Ash tree 51 To set or sow Ashen keys 52 To
plant young Ashen trees ibid. At what time, and for what uses it is best to
fell Ashen wood. 53 The Oak tree: of which there are three sorts ibid. The
first sort ibid. The second sort ibid. The third sort ibid The time of felling
Oak timber trees, as well for building as for bark 54 Landlords who let
farms from five years to five years are none of the best husbands 55 The
Elm tree of which are three sorts 58 Beech tree 59 Hornebeame tree ibid. Maple
tree ibid. Crab tree 60 Service tree ibid. Ewe tree ibid. Chestnut tree ibid.
Chestnuts sown 61 Chestnuts planted ibid. The best time of planting Chestnuts
ibid. Chestnuts steeped in water or milk ibid. The keeping of Chestnuts 62 The
Mulberie tree 63 Two sorts of Mulberie trees, the one white, the other red
ibid. Note 64 Wood, leaves, and fruit of this tree ibid. Walnut tree ibid.
Three manner of ways to have this tree grow 65 To set the Nut, to set the
plant grafting of it ibid. The profit of the Walnut 66 The Pine tree 67 Some
new law fit to be thought for preserving of wood 68 Officers appointed to look
to the preservation of these groves ibid. A yearly allowance to this new
officer 69 The defaults extracted to the Justices of peace ibid. A fine and
penalty ibid. Articles to be given in charge to the Jury. ibid. Another fine
to be imposed. 70
A Table of the contents of the fourth part.
THe description of the Instrument. 75 Upper side, lower side: outward edge,
inward edge. ibid Lower side 76 Outward edge 77 Inward edge ibid. The use of
the upper side ibid. What an Angle is 78 To find the quantity of an Angle by
the Scale 79 To take the height of a tree 80 What a complement is 81 To take a
height that is inaccessable 83 To divide a circle into any equal parts 86 The
use of the lower side ibid. To divide a line into any equal parts 87 To
measure board 88 To measure board that is tapering 89 To measure square timber
91 To measure timber th^^ is tapering 94 To measure round timber 98 To measure
round timber that is tapering 100 A Table to show how many feet, inches, and
parts of inches in length will make a foot of timber, the circumference being
known 101 To know the circumference of a tree at the top, and never to clime
or measure it 104 Number of square feet of timber to a tun or load of timber
105 A Table of Sines 106. 107. 108.
FINIS.
Place this in Folio 74. and 75.



