A BRIEF COLLECTION CONCERNING THE LOVE of God toward Mankind, and how for
diverse causes we are justly bound to love and serve him.

WITH PREPARATION TO Prayer, and certain necessary prayers and thankesgeuing
to God for his benefits, daily to be used.

Also a deuote Meditation to procure Contrition, and excite Devotion With other
virtuous prayers.

ECCLESIAST. 18. Before Prayer prepare thy Soul: and be not as a man that
tempts God



Printed at Doway, by LAVRENCE KELLAM at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1603.



BEing desirerous (good Reader) to have published some short Collection of most
necessairie prayers, but hindered by diverse vrge^t occatio^s: I thought good, in
respect of my duty to God, and necessity of the time present, rather with the
poor widow, to offer unto him this simple Mite, for the increase of his
honor in helping of the godly, then altogether to give over my purpose. And
vvheras true virtue, consists principallye in the love of God: without
vvhieh our prayers are of no force. I have here prepared a little Treatise
concerning that matter, and in what respect we are bound to serve him: In
which, as in a glass we may clerelie behold our ingraitude, toward so
loving a Lord. And because many rather of custom then true devotion, so
rashly go about that holy work of prayer: I have set dou^e a preparation
thereunto, with necessary prayers, Meditations, and thankesgeuing, to be used
daily. Farevvell.

A BREFE COLLECTION CONcerning the Love of God toward Mankind, and how we
are for diverse causes bound to serve and love him.
THE great and incomprehensible charity of our Lord toward Mankind, may
be co^sidred four sundry ways.

First in the dignity of our Creation. Secondly in taking our coruptible
nature. Thirdly in susteining for us his B. passion. And fourthly in his great
benefits and bountiful gifts, both spiritual and corporal, which may justly
kindle and inflame the hearts of al true Christians, to render to him again
that which he requires of us, which is nothing else but a loueing heart, a
just and upright life.

In the dignity of our Creation, has he showed, that he loved us more then
any other creature in the world: and that in two things. First in creating and
making us acording to his own Image and likeness: secondly in constituting us
Lords and Gouerners over al his other creatures.

In taking of our nature, he has also showed that he loved Mankind better then
Angels, and that in three respects. First in honor, because he assumpted our
nature, and not the nature of Angels: Secondly in love, in that he repaired
Mankind with his precious blood, and not them. And thirdly in vision, because
in heaven we shall possess more joy in Contemplation of Christ's Humanity
then the Angels, in that we shall see our nature, united to the divine Nature.

But in suffering his B. Passion, he has showed [as we may say] that he loved
us better then him self, giving for our Salvation freely his whole Body and
life. And here mark, that in this B. Passion of our Savior, we may learn
five notable things.

First it teaches us to give him hearty thanks for the glorious fruit which
we have received by the same, which gratfulnes is a thing so acceptable
vnto-him, as S. Aug. says, that nothing maybe more. This B. Lamb of God which
was conceived and borne without sin, would thus suffer for us, that by his
painful Passion, he might pull us back from the filthy pleasure of sin. He
suffered in all his members, that with our members, we might willingly serve
him. He offered for us his precious blood the price of our Redemption, that we
might offer our bodies with all the force of the same to do him service.

Secondly it teaches us to love him, because above all things, he loved us.

Thirdly it teaches us how much we ought to detest and hate sin, for which
he sustained such a painful and dolorous Passion, yea he abhors it so much,
that not withstanding his great desire of our Salvation: he condemns the
sinner for one deadly offense to perpetual pain and tormente.

Fourthly it teaches us Fortitude, to withstand strongly any adversity, pain
or tribulation, for the honor and love of him, that loved us so much: and also
for our own Salvation, because tribulation in this world patiently sustained
is the ready way to heaven. This blessed Passion being called to remembrance
there is nothing so hard, as S. Isidore says, which is not with an equal
mind toll rated. Let us therefore as true Soldiers, diligently study to
suffer with him: and the^ no doubt we shall, as S. Paul says, be pertakers
of his co^solatio^s and Joys.

Fifthly it teaches us Humility, for if Christ, which was the Son of God,
abased and humbled him self so much as to desce^d from his glorious Kingdom,
into this vale of misery, to take upon him our base Nature, and suffer such
an ignominious death: with what face can man lift up him self in pride, and
contemn so loving a Redeemer? This Humility is the ground and foundation of
all Virtue, and without that no virtue can be acceptable in the sight of God
which caused our Savior so carefully in his holy Gospel, to admonish us of
the same, saying. Learn of me, for I am meke and humble in heart. And S.
Ambrose says, that how much more abject a man is in this life: so much the
more he shall be exalted in the world to come. Would thou have al vices, says
one, destroyed within thee? Learn then to be truly humble. To which agrees
S. Agust. saying. Humility is the Queen of virtues, the death of vices, the
looking glass of virgins, and the harbor of the holy Trinity. It is only
humilitye, says S. Bernard, that exalts: and she alone leads to life,
because says he, this is the way, and there is none other. And therefore S.
Gregory says well, that whatsoever a man does is lost, if it be not kept by
humility. God grant us to embrace this Virtue, and to imitate that sweet
Lamb, which as S. Bernard says, was borne poor, lived poor, and dyed poor.

Now touching his bountiful Gifts, it drives me into a mase, to remember
them. First how he has made us, as is before said, to his own B. Image and
likeness, geueing us the noble gifts of Memory, Reason, and Will: and has
made the Soul of man so noble, that nothing is able to fill or satisfy it,
but him self alone. It may well be occupied, as S. Bernarde says, with all
other things: but filled or satisfied, can it not be.

He does enrich us also with his grace and does visit comfort and strength
us, with his good inspirations, and motions to Virtue: And in the end, has
prepared such Joys for us, as passes all understanding, either of man or
Angels.

And for the gifts corporal, they be also such and so many, as are maruelus
to consider. He has created for our behoof the Elements, with the Sun to
give us light by day, and the Moon to illuminate the night. The Fire to keep
us from could: and the Air to mitigate his heat, and preserve our health.
The Water to wash away our filthiness. The Earth with his variable Fruits to
sustain us, and with his beautiful Flowers, to recreate us: Besides the great
diversity of Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes, for our norishment and delight.

He has given unto us our Wits, and right Limbs, with Beauty, Strength and
comlye shape. He has kept and delivered us from many dangers, both of fire
and water, thunder and tempest, slanders, shames, and many other euels, with
the which, for our sins, he might iustlye have punished us: and when we
offended in deadly sin, have cast us headlong into hell: and yet of his
tender love has forborne and spared us.

O what shall we render again unto God for all his Benefits? how infinitely
are we bound to love and serve him, not only in respect of his goodness in
him self (which is the cheifest cause indede) and of his tender love toward
us: But also in respect of the great delight he takes in our service, yea
much more the^ he does in the service of his Angels, and the reason is this
because man does not only serve God of love as the Angels do: but also with
labor and pain, which they do not: For he laboreth more in serving him one
day, then they have done since the beginning of the world: and therefore does
God singulerly delighte in our prayers, and other good works, and shall give
us, if we continue to the end, a double Crown of glory, that is both in
Body and Soul.

And here understand, that for diverse causes we are justly bound to serve him.

First for our Creation, because we are created only to that end: and
therefore all our members and strength of body and Soul, are to be employed
and exercysed in his holy Service.

Also we are bound to serve him in respect of his loving service done unto
us, who says by his Prophet Esaias, Seruire me fecisti in peccatis tuis, that
is, thou have caused me to serve in thy sins: As when he prayed, fasted and
preached, when he was vvhipped and crowned with thorn, when he carried his
Cross, and thereon suffered painful death: and besides all this, in token of
his great love, he serves us still with his own blessed Body and blood in
the holy Sacrament, and therefore every way are we bound most louinglye to
serve him again.

Also we are bound to serve him, in respect of our Obligation and Vow, made
in Baptism: having there vowed and promised so to do all the time of our life.

Likewise for his great Benefits, as is before said, bestovved upon us.

And lastly for that inestimable glory that he has promised to al those that
love, and truly serve him to the end.

But because no Service can be acceptable unto him, which proceeds not from a
clean and pure heart: It shall not be here amiss to declare brefely, by what
means the same may be obtained and gotten.

First he that would serve God truly in clea^nes of heart and Conscience
must daily behold, and look into his works, and diligently consider his
whole state and conversation, and see if there be any thing in the same
reprehensible, or contrary to the will of God: because the knowledge of our
felfe, is the beginning of our health and Salvation.

Secondly vvhat-soeuer he finds in himself, in which he has offended God:
he must heartily repent, and humbly ask mercy for the same, firmly purposing
thereof to make a clear and perfect confession, so soon as he may.

Thirdly he must with careful study, and devout prayer, continually desire of
God, to keep and defend him from sin: for as the holy Prophet says, Except
God keep the city, he watches in vain that keeps it. Therefore every man
ought to serve God in great humility, and with continual watch and ward
over him self. The difficulty of Perseverance in well doing appears in the
fall of Lucifer from heaven, of Adam from Paradise, and Judas from the number
of the xij Apostles: what cause have we therefore to pray, as our Savior
counseleth us continually, having experience of our own weakness and debility
in resisting temptations: In so much that sometimes through one only word, we
are provoked to anger and impacience.

Therefore it behooves us ever to stand in fear for offending God, and to that
end says the Scripture. Blessed is the man that is ever fearful. And S.
Bernard says, that fear and Religion are knit together: and that the one can
not remain without the other. God give us grace, that we may dailye study
to obtain this most noble virtue, that the blessinge which Christ speaks
of in the Gospel, may light on us: where he says Blessed be the clean in
heart* for they shall see God, To whom be all honor for Euer-more. Amen.

A Thankesgeuing to the B. Trinity to be Daily used.
AL Honor, thanks, and praise, be to thee o blessed Father of heaven which
have created and made me. Glory be to thee, o B. Son of God which with thy
precious blood have redeemed me. Glory be to thee, o holy Ghost, which have
Sanctified me. Glory be to thee, o holy, B. and Indeuided Trinity, whose
works are marvelous, and pass all understanding. I laud and praise thee
with heart and mouth, and give loving thanks unto thee, for all thy B. Benefits
Spiritual and Corporal, and singe unto thee, the Hime of glory, Sanctus.
Sanctus. Sanctus. Thou only art God, and besides thee there is none at all,
which vvorkest great, marvelous and Inscrutable things, whereof ar no end. To
thee belongs al Laud and Jubilee. To thee all Angels the Heavens, and
universal Powers, do sing Praises. To thee o glorious Trinity be given all
honor of every creature both in Heaven and Earth now and for ever more. Amen.

Soli Deo honor and gloria.
An Invocation to be used before Prayer, for the attaining of Gods grace, the
asista^ce and direction of the holy Ghost. And also to obtain thereby,
Humillity, Charity, Purity of Inte^tion, Cleannes and Peace of heart: for
protection, and defense, against the assaults, temptations, and firye darts
of the Devil: and al invisible, and visible enemies.

What is to be co^sidred before Prayer, and the manner to behave your self
therein, morning and eueninge, before the office of our Lady, or other usual
Prayers: with certain Benedictio^s, which you may use all or part, at your
Discretion.

What is to be Premeditated before prayer.

When you inte^d to offer the Sacrifice of Prayer, and Praises, to almighty
God, and prepare you to prayer.

Recale your Senses, and gather to gether your vvittes, and with an humble,
attentive, and devout mind, lift up your heart to God: Reverently standing
upright, with your hands joined before your breast, and lifted up.

Pause then a little while, and advised lie consider with your self
wherefore you come, vvheraboute you go, and what business, you now take in
hand.

Also, before whom you are present, the Petitions you will ask, and the
Offerring you mean to make.

Remember you are now, before a most mighty and Divine Majesty: The Creator,
and Redeemer, of your self and all Mankind, whom Infinite Numbers of
Angels, and all the Caelestiall multitude do continually adore and vvorshipe,
with fear and tremblinge.

And your self, a most wretched and vnworthey Creature, frail unstable,
falling from him: dulle, and vn-apte to call upon him. And yet, his mercy is so
much, and his goodness so great, that he is ever, ready to hear, and
graciously to grant, your lawful requests, and to receive you when you come
unto him: and also to forgive you al your offenses, when you are heartily sorye,
and ask mercy for them.

Likewise, he is one that has, and does, most bountefully bestow upon you, al
things necessary for body and soul: and has and does, defend and keep, feed
and nourish, you, and al creatures.

And that before his divine Presence, you now presume to enter, and to present
you self: To Entreat, beseech, and Require mercy, and forgeuenes of sins,
for your self and al others: and to offer the Sacrifise of Praise, and
Thankesgeuinge.

Therefore, with all humility, and reverence, prostrate your self at the feet
of his mercy: and Indeuore with devotion, to accomplish that you come for.

But before you begin your prayers, that you may the rather, offer them with
cleannes of heart, and give thanks to God, not only for his Benefits, but
chefely for his goodness in him self; Make it fully known to your heart (as
true it is uncertain whether you shall live to the end of your Prayers or
not: Endeavor therefore they may be such, as if it should so happen before you
had ended them, that so through the mercy of God, they may be acceptable unto
him, for the full forgeuenes of your former offenses and the receiving you to
his favor.

And that you may the more perfectly, begin, continue, and end, al your
prayers, and other good actions In the Name, and to the honor, and glory of
God, the most holy and blessed Trinitye: and have in mind his great goodness
toward you, and Benefits bestovved upon you, and give thanks for them, and
also, that the Passion of our Lord, may take the more effect, the benefit of
it be Imparted, the fruit there of Inioyed: and in all spiritual Practices
remembered: You may, if it please you, begin your Prayers, in manner as
follows Meekly falling on your knees, your heart and joined hands, being
Elevated to God.

What is first to be used, at the beginning of Prayer.
IN the Name of the Father. and of the Son. and of the Holy Ghost. Ame^.

In the Name, and Honor of our Lord JESUS Christ, Emanuel, Crucified, for our
Redemption, and Salvation.

In the Honor of God, the most holy, Blessed, Glorious, and Indeuided,
Trinitye: and Eternal Majesty.

In the Honor of our Lord Jesus Christ's Humanity: and In memory of his
great Charity, toward me, and all Mankind.

In the vvorshippe of our Blessed Lady, the holy Virgin S. Marye: and In
mind of her Humilitye.

In the Name, and Honor, of God the most holy Trinitye In Unity, and
Unity In Trinitye, To whom be al glory.

And In the Honor, and Memory, of our Lord Jesus Christ's humble
Incarnation, his Chaste Nativity, his life and Conversation, Charitable Death,
and Bitter Passion: His glorious Resurrection, and Asscension: and the Coming
of the Holy Ghost.

In the Honor, and Memory of all the Labors, and Virtues, of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and of his holy Life and Conversation.

In the Honor, and Memory, of the bitter Agony, Blooddye Svvete, and
Painful Prayer, that our Lord Jesus Christ, made in the Mount of Oliuet:
Before his taking and B. Passion.

And In Honor, and Memory of all the Parts, and Pains, of his most Blessed,
bitter, and Paynfull Passion.

In the Honor, and Memory of the five Wounds, that were persed in our Lord
Jesus Christ's Blessed Body and Hands, and Feet, his Side, and Heart.

And that I may with all Humillitie, and Reverence, have in Mind, and
worship aright as I ought, all the Precious drops of Blood, that our Lord
Jesus Christ shed for my sake and all Mankind.

And likewise, that I may ever have in mind, and obtain the Promised last
Revvard, of Salvation, Glorification, and Perpetual Fruition of the Deyitie:
and eschevve the Punishment, and Pain, of eternal damnation: I offer these my
prayers.

O God most holy o A Donay, in thy Name, and to thy honor and glory: I
Begin, Continue, and end, these my prayers: and I offer this my duty and
labor, unto thy most Sacred Diuinitye.

O Good Lord Jesus Christ, I offer unto thee my heart, and Soul, and I offer
my self Body and Soul, with all the parts, powers and works thereof, and
all my thoughts, words and deeds, all my Intentions, and Actions, and all the
Labors of my hands: To do thy will in all, and accomplish all to thy honor
and glory, now, and all the time of my life.

And I beseech thee, O God Holy Ghost, give me grace, and strength, to do
thy will in all things: to obey, serve, and love thee aright, and to offer
these my Prayers, with cleannes of heart, purity of Intention, vprightnes of
Action, and with Attention, and Devotion, In perfect charity, with true
humility, and in the Unity of thy true Church, and Faith Catholic, that they
may, ascend into thy sight, and be acceptable unto thee, as a sweet Sacrifice
of Insence.

O Blessed and Indeuided Trinity, I offer unto thy divine Omnipote^cie, these
my Prayers, duty, and labors, for my health, help, and parfect weal, and
for all things necessary, for my body and soul and for the right direction of
my whole Life, as it may be best pleasing, and most acceptable unto thee.

And likewise, I offer unto thy Omnipotent Majesty, o Holy and Glorious
Trinity, these my Prayers, duty and labors, for the health, and help of
soul and body, of al other persons, that thy B. vvil and pleasure is to have
prayed for Quick and dead, within the Church and without, in special and
general, those in special, that I am most behoulding to and bound to Pray
for, by Enjoined penance, blood or kindred, promise debt, or any other benefit
received.

And for all other in general, that thy blessed will and pleasure is to have
prayed for: And for whom, and what soever else, thy Wisdom knows
necessary and my frailty can not acke.

That it may please thee to grant unto us, Patience in all temptations, and
tribulations, ghostly and bodily: Protection and defense, against all enemies
visible, and invisible: Constancy and perseverance in virtue and al goodness,
help and relief, in all needs and necessities: Ease and delivery, out of al
troubles and affictions that we are in, or may any way happen unto us. And
to live and dye, in the Unity of the true Catholic Faith and Church, and come
to bliss.

O most Blessed; Glorious, and Indeuided Trinity, I humbly here prostrate my
self, before the Feet of thy Divine Majesty, and mesurlesse mertie:
Beseeching thee of mercy, and forgeuenes of sins, for my self, and all
others: and mittigation of thy Justice toward us, now, and in the hour of
our Death, and at our Judgment, particular, and genarall. Grant this Lord
Jesus Amen.

Devout Prayers, and Blessings, to be used at the beginning of Prayer, for
obtaining Grace, and assistance of the Holy Ghost.
IN the name of God. Amen.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

By the sign of the holy Cross, and virtue of our Lords Passion: from our
enemies, visible, and invisible, deliver us o Lord our God.

The Grace of the Holy Ghost, lighten our hearts, and Sensces: and be with us.
Amen.

Come Holy Ghost, and fill the hearts or all faithful people, and kindle in
them the fire, of thy divine Love.

O God be our helper, in whose Name and by whose word all things are done:
Who has made heaven and earth.

O Lord, in thy Name, shall I lift up my hands and heart, that my Prayers may
ascend, and be acceptale unto thee as an Evening Sacrifice.

In thy Name o Lord, shall I receive health, and help, and in thy Name, and by
thy Power, shall I be made safe. And in thy Virtue, thou shall Judge me.

The triumphant Cross, and victorious Passion of our Lord, and the glorious
Name JESUS, honored in heaven and earth, be our defense and safety, sheeld and
protection, and he bless and keep us now, and ever. Amen.

JESUS who is the vvisdome of the Father, give us health of Body and Soul.
Amen.

God Almighty, bless and direct me, and be with me now, and ever, in my
beginning, proceeding, and ending. Amen.

GOd be in my head, and in my being.

God be in my mind, and understanding God be in my eyes, and in my Seeing.

God be in my Ears, and in my hearing.

God be in my mouth, and in my speaking.

God be in my heart, and in my thinking.

God keep me from al euel in my vvorking touching, smelling, and al my other
senses God be at my ending, and my departing.

Bless me o God the Father, who has made me, and Created me.

Bless me o God the Son, who Suffered for me, and Redeemed me.

Bless me o God the Holy Ghost, who in Baptism, has Sanctified me, and
since, has called, defended, and norished me.

O Holy Trinity, of thy Incomprehensible goodness, lighten my heart, and
senses, my mind, and understanding, my soul and body, with the light of thy
grace, and be with me now and ever. Ame^.

The Manner to offer your self and Prayers to God, first, and last.
O My most sweet Lord Jesus Christ in the Unity, and Union, of love, that
thou did praise, and pray, to thy Father, and take great pain and labor for
us sinners, duringe thy lifetime here on earth: I offer unto thee this Prayer,
and Praise, this Laud, and labor, and my self body and soul, with all the
parts powers and actions thereof: To do all to the honor and glory of thy
holy name. the weal of the true Catholic Church the furtherance and increase
of Virtue, and helping of souls to everlasting bliss.

O most dear Lord Jesus Christ. In the Unity, and Union, of Love, that
moved thee to be Incarnate, and become Man: and dye for us sinners.

I offer unto thee this praise, this prayer, this work and labor, and my
self body and soul, to do thy vvil in all things, now, and always. Amen.

O Good Lord Jesus Christ, I offer un to thy Father, for the Remission of my
sins (and all others) the pains, bitter Passion, and Death, that thou did
suffer for me, and all Mankind.

Forget good Lord, and clearly remit, the sins, and offenses, of us and our
parents, and be not reue^ged on our demerits, but spare, and forgive us, thy
people penitentes, with thy Blood precious, from sin, and from torments
boughte, and Redeemed. And ever let mercy, temper thy wrath, against us, and
our follye.

As our hope is in thee our trust and affiance, Ame^ to this say we with heart
and true conscience. Grant these my prayers, most B. Lord Jesus. To whom be
al praise and glory, now and ever blessed.

Certain necessary prayers, to be daily used, morning and evening: with
others. And first. A thankesgeuing to God, at your vprisinge.
I Give thee thanks, laud, and praise, o most holy and blessed Trinity, one
omnipotent, and eternal Majesty, who haste this night preserved, defended, and
visited, me thy unworthy servant, N. and have caused me thus, to come to the
beginning of this day, and for all thy other benefits, which of thy only
goodness thou haste bestowed on me.

O Father most merciful, I beseech thee of mercy and forgeuenes, how soever I
have this night offended thy divine Majesty, and grant me grace so to spend
this day, in thy holy service, faith fear, and love: that with all
humility, charity, diserction, devotion, and obedeence, I may be able to do
all my deeds and services due, as they may be best pleasinge and most
acceptable unto thee, In all my thoughts, words, and works. and grant me
by thy grace, alvvayes to live according to thy holy will. And all the days
and time of my life, I commend unto thee, my soul and body, my faith, my
life, and my death: to be preserved, protected, and directed, by thee now,
and for ever. Amen.

An other thenkesgening, to be used every night with a Confession also of our
sins.
OMnipotent Father, and most worthy of all adoration, who bear a loving and
fatherly care toward us, thy unworthy children: I render unto thee most
hearty thanks, for keeping and preserving me this day past, and for other thy
great gifts and benefits, spiritual and corporal, bestowed on me unkind
wretch, deserving rather to have been sharply punished for my grievous sin
and ingratitude: and also for my delivery from diverse and sundry perils, bodily
and ghostlye, into the which many have fallen.

I Confess unto thee, o most loving father with sorrowful heart, that this day I
have offended thy divine Majesty, in wicked thoughts, words, and works: and
especially in this manner, place and time (here let him examine his conscience
and be sorovvful for his sins committed) o most loving and peetiful father,
I humbly beseech thee, by the immaculate life, and painful Passion, of thy
dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ, of mercy and forgeuenes howsoever I have
offended this day, either of frailty, ignorance, or malice: against thee, my
neighbore, or my self. Amen.

Blessed Father and God of al mercy I humbly beseech thee, to give me the
grace of true contrition, and penance that I may with a sorovvful heart
bewail my sins committed, and with firm purpose forsake and detest them,
and from hence forvvard, walk in newnes of life, agreeable to thy will and my
vocation. Create in me o Lord a clane heart, and give me chastity of body and
soul. Grant that thy holy Angel may keep us, and this house in peace, that
so we may pass the night without sin, to thine honor, and our
salvation. Amen.

I commend unto thee O Lord my body and soul, friends and enemies, sick and
whole: and all Catholics quick and dead with the universal Church, that thy
blessinge may be upon us, and remain with us, now and for euer-more. Amen.

The omnipotente and blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
bless and keep us, and grant unto us a quiet night, and perfect end.
Amen.

A confession of Faith, and devout prayer to the holy Trinity, daily to be
used.
O Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost: three Persons and one God,
I Believe with my heart, and Confess with my mouth, all that the holy Catholic
Church believes and houldeth of thee: and as much as a good Catholic and
Christian man ought, to feel and believe of thee. And I here protest before
thy diuiue Majesty, that I will (with thy gracions assistance) continue al my
life, in this Faith, and dye in the same. And I acknowledge thee my God and
Father, maker of all the world, and I thy poor creature, subject, and servant,
make to thee fealty, and homage, both of my body and soul, which I houlde of
thee nobly, as of my sovereign Lord and God: with all the goods natural,
spiritual, and temporal that I have, that ever I had and that I intend to have
of thee, here in this world, or in the world to come, and with all my heart I
thank thee. And in sign of recognisance, and knowledge thereof, I pay unto
thee this little tribute, morning and evening: That is I adore and worshipe
thee, with my heart and mouth, in Faith, Hope and Charity: with this little
Oraison or Prayer, which al only appertains to thy B. Majesty, Signiorie and
Divinity: and humbly I require thee of three things.

The first is, mercy and forgenues, of as manny evils, sins, and offenses, as
I have done in time paste, against thy blessed will.

The second, that it vvil please thee, to give me graee, that I may serve thee,
and accomplish thy Commandments, and not to run or fall into deadly sin.

The third is, that at my death, and great need, thou will succor me, and
give me grace that I may have remembrance of thy Blessed Passion, and true
contrition for my sins: and that I may live and dye, in the Faith and Unity,
of holy Church: and finally come to thy glory eternal, With all saints Amen.

An other Deuote prayer, or Protestation.
O Lord God Almighty, which see and know al things, in whom is al
profound wisdom, and Sapience: I wretched sinner, being now in good health and
perfect memory (for which, as I am in duty bound, I thank thee most
hartelye) do hear this day (in disspite of al my ghostly enemies) make
protestation, that if either by enticeing, frailty, temptation, or deceit, of
the devil or other adversities coming by sorrow pain sickness, feeblenes of
body or by other occations whatsoever it be, I decline or fall in perille of
my Soul, or prejudice of my health, or in error of the holy Faith Catholic
in which I was regenerate in the holy Font of Baptism: I do utterly disclame
in it, renounce it, and with meek acknowledging my fault, do in most
humble manner crave pardon for it. In token whereof, I do now sincerly
profess, to live and dye in the Faith of thy loving Spouse, our holy mother
the Catholic Church. And in witness of this Confession, and protestation: I
offer to thee the Creed in which al verity and truth is contained. And to
thee I commend my Soul and Body, my Faith, my Life, and Death. Amen. I Bleeue
in God etc.

A Prayer or Salutation, to our Lady.
Hail Mary the hand-mayde of the holy Trinity most humble. Hail Mary chosen
to be the most high daughter of God. Hail Mary spouse of the holy Ghost best
beloved. Hail Mary the Mother of our Lord JESUS Christ most noble. Hail Mary
the sister of Angels most sweet. Hail Mary promise of Prophets most
desirable. Hail Mary Queen and daughter of Patriarchs most glorious. Hail
Mary mistress of Evangelists most faithful. Hail Mary teacher of the Apostles
most wise. Hail Mary the comforter of Martirs most valiant. Hail Mary
holiness, fountain, and fulness of Confessors most benign. Hail Mary honor
and Crown of chastity of Virgins most pure. Hail Mary the co^so latrice of
quick and dead most ready. Be thou with me in all tribulation and anguish of
thy motherly pity: and in the hour of my death, receive my soul and offer it
to thy sweet Son Jesus (I beseech thee) with all those that have committed
them selves to my prayers. Amen.

A Blessing to be used before you go forth.
The Imperial Majesty of God bless me The Regal Divinity protecte me. The
Everlasting Deytie keep me. The Glorious Unity comfort me. The
Inco^prehensible Trinity defend me. The Inestimable Goodness direct me. The
Power of the Father Govern me. The Wisdom of the Son quicken me. The
Virtue of the Holy Ghost, Illuminate me and be with me. Amen.

Alpha and Omega, God and Man: Let this Blessing be unto me all health and
safety of body and soul, against all my enemies, visible and invisible: now
and for ever.

Amen.
A most virtuous prayer for all Estates.
O Most benign Father, O Father most worthy to be prayed unto, I most
miserable wretch, do offer unto thee, for all my sins (which I confess are
many and vile) and for the sins of the whole world, the bitter Passion and
death of thy only Son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: I offer his
labors, his fastings: his vvearines, his watchings, his prayers, his tears,
his humility,, his bountifulnes, his patience, and his Charity: I offer his
vexations and troubles of mind, his anguishes his contumelies, his pains his
vvhippings, and his wounds: I offer all the drops of his most precious blood:
I offer the merits of thy most svveete mother and Virgin S. Mary, and of al
thy holy Saints.

O Most blessed Jesus my Redeemer I give thee humble thanks for thy
innumerable, benefits which thou have granted and given unto me, being most
unworthy and do daily bestow upon me. For thy most sacred Incarnation. chaste
Nativity, thy holy Life and conversation thy most bitter Passion, and the
effusion of thy most blessed blood: and for thy death which was most
Ignominious. Make me, I beseech thee pertaker of al thy merits and grant that
through the diligent immitation and following of thy virtues, I may be found a
lively branche in thee, who art the true Vine.

O Holy Ghost my comforter, I commend to thee my Soul and Body the be ginning
and end of my life, grant me a good entrance and beginning: Give me grace to
do true Penance, that I may be heartily sorry for my sins, and from them (by
virtue of thy holy name) I may be perfectlye purifyed before I deparre hence
from this mortal body. I that am corupte and blind in my affections and
desires. and in my own judgment, am easily overcome, easily I do err, and am
easily seduced and illuded: wherefore to thee (O Lord) I whollye commit, and
offer my self. Defend and keep me thy unworthy servant from al evil, teach
and illuminate my mind, govern me both within and without, strengthen my
weak spirit against inordinate pusillanimitie, and superfluous scruples of
Conscience, and humble it that it fall not into presumption. Give me right
Faith, immovable Hope, sincere and perfect Charity, that I may sweet lie
delight in thee, I may love thee hartelie, and every where I may fulfill thy
holy will and pleasure.

O Holy and blessed Trinity, God omnipotet, I comment unto thee al my bussines
both spiritual and corporal. I commend unto thee my benefactours, my neighbors
my friends, my familiars, and al for whom I ought to pray, al those which have
desired, or do desire my prayers. I commend unto thee, the whole Catholic
Church, renew in it I beseech thee, purity of life, grant that each one may
corect him self: norish and keep among them that are members of the same Church
mutual charity, and continually to love thee. Such as do err call back into
the way of Salvation extinguish al heresies, and convert those to the knowledge
of thy Faith, which as yet do not know thee. Comfort and lift up all that are
trubled in mind and conscience and such as are opressed with temptations and
calamities.

All Hayle o holy Virgin Marye, the white Lilly of the B Trinity, of whom the
king of Heaven Jesus Christ the brightness of his Fathers glory, would be borne:
and with they sweet milk be fed and norished. O blessed mother assist my
weakness in all temptations, and necessities in all peril of sin, and in the
hour of my death, that thou helping and protecting me, I may be safe in our
Lord.

O Blessed Spirits Angellical pray for me, and espicially thou holy Angel, the
keeper of my soul and body, have thou faithful care over me. O al ye holy
Saints of God, which have passed over the troubles and vexations of his
exile, and have atained most happily to come to the port of the celestial
country, I most humbly call you unto my protections: help with your metites
and prayers, both now and in the hour of my death.

Amen.
A Prayer to be used at the beginning of work.
O Most glorious and indeuided Trinity the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
who art the only and ever lasting goodness, and without whom nothing may be
parfecte: I beseech thee by thy almighty power, confirm and streng then my
memory, by thy vvisdome, lighten mine understanding, and by thy goodness reform
and make perfect my will, that this work which I now go about, may begin
and end, to thine honor and glory, to the help and confort of my neighbor,
and salvation of my soul: the which work, and my self also body and soul,
I humbly offer to thee. Convert me to thee, o heavenly Artificer drive away the
old man with all his vicious inclinations, and make me anew. Create in me o
Lord a clean heart, and an upright intention in this and all other my works:
that both in me and them, thy holy name may be glorified, and thy B. vvil
fulfilled.

An other to be used at the end of work.
TO thee o God be al praise, which have permitted me to aco^plish this work.
Grant O Lord, it may be to thee acceptable to me healthful, and to others
profitable. Not unto us o Lord, not unto us but unto thy holy name, give
golrye. Amen.

A Devout Meditation, to procure Contrition and kindle the fire of Douotion
and feruore in Prayer: Written, by the Reverent and Devout Richard Roll
Eremite at Hampoole.
When thou preparest thy self to Prayer, and desire to have therein
Devotion: Seek some connenient place, free from noise and trouble that thou
may have there some time of quiet without disturba^ce: sit or kneel, as
thou think most convenient.

Then be thou Emproure, King, or Prince, Lord, or Lady, or any other person
of what state soever: Consider well there is a God, that has made thee of
nothing, to his own Image and likeness, and has bestovved on thee my right
vvittes and Senses, my limes, and all other features of body, with many
great gifts and grace spiritual and corporal: As memory, understanding, and
will, also strength, bewtye, and comlye shape, with worldly ease and pleasures,
that diverse others want, which live in great distress, and much anguishe of
body and mind: All which, thou may daily see, and behoulde before thee.

Think also, how frail and sinful thou art, and without the keeping of
that good Lord, thou sholdest fall into al kind of sin and iniquity, through
thine own vvretchednes and frailtye.

And further thou may think as of thy self, there is no more sinful a
creature then thou art, and if thou have any grace of good life, in living more
uprightly then some others: Consider it comes of God, and not of thy self,
and by him that grace is freely given thee.

Call also to mind, how long God has suffered thee in thy sins, and how
often he might have punished thee with perpetual pain, vvhere-as by offending
him thou deseruedst it, yet of his great mercy and goodness, has he spared
thee, for the amendment of thy life, that thou myghtest ask mercy, and
loueinglie has he abiden thee, until thou vvoldst come unto him, leave thy
sin, and return unto good life: For loathe he were to forsake or lose, that
by death he bought full dear, with bittter pains, and the price of his most
precious Blood.

Also thou may yet further considder, that because he would not lose thee,
he became Man, and was borne of a Virgin, he lived here in poverty, anguishe,
and tribulation, al his life: and after that, death he would suffer to save
thee by his mercy, and bye thee again that was lost by sin and folly. In
this manner, or the like, thou may consider of his great goodness and
benefits.

And for obtaining of more grace and devotion in thy Prayers, and to get thee
compunction: Behoulde here with the ghostly Eye of thy Soul Christ's pitious
paynful Passion.

First, Imagine in thy heart, that thou see thy Lord taken of his enemies
with many reproofs and dispites, brought before a Judge, falsely there accused
of many wicked men, and answered right naught, but meekly sufred their wicked
and reprochful words. They were desirous to have him dead, but first to
suffer pains.

Behold then that good Lord chiuering and quaking, al his body naked bound to
a pillar, and about him standing wicked men void of al reason, sore scourging
his most blessed body with out any pitye.

See now, how they sease not from their furious strokes, though they see him
stand in his own blood, From the top of his head, to the sole of his foot,
hole skin they leave none: his flesh they rese to the bone, and for werines of
them slues, they leave, him almost for dead.

Look then aside, upon his blessed Mother, see what sorrow she makes for her
dear Son, and have compassion of her pain, which lies there in a swoone.
Turn then again to thy Lord and see how rudely they unbind him, how
hastily they draw him forth, to heap upon his tender body, more painye and
torments.

A Garlande of sharp thorns they thruste with violence on his B. head, til
the blood ran down into his eyes, nose, mouth, and ears. They kneel then
down with scorns, and rise with reproves and spitte in his blessed face. Se
the^ how that B. Lady beats her breast, and vvringeth her hands: and I trow
thou vvilte weep for that doleful sight.

Look yet again to thy Lord, and see how spitefully they hale him forth to an
high hill, there to nail him hand and foot, to the Rood Tree. See there first
how fearsely they pull of his clothes, how meekly he goes then to the Cross,
and spreads his arms abroad, and how with cords, those pitieles Tormentors
dravve them forth, til his B. senewes and Joints al to bruste. Then with
great boisterous Nails, they make fast to the Cross his precious hands. In
the same manner thou may see how greeuosly they draw his blessed legs, and
nail his feet, down to the Tree. Se then how they proffer him to drink
bitter galle and isel, and knele again before him with many despites.

Then harken to that good Lord how meekly he takes his leave of his gracious
Mother, and of his dear Apostle, and betaketh them either to other, as dear
Mother and Son: and after with a loud voice he commends his Spirit, to
his Father in Heaven, hanging down his B. head upon his breaste. Se also how
soon after, they pearce his heart with a Spear, in great fury, and how
blood and water gusheth forth of his B. side.

Then may thou have full great pity behoulding that good Lady, how for sorrow
she shrinketh down in her sisters arms. Take heed to the heavy chere of his
Apostle S John: To the tears of Magdelein, and of his other friends: and I
hope among al these thou shall have compunction. Then is it time to speak for
thine own need, and for all others alive and dead that trust to thy prayers.
Cast down thy body to the ground, and lift up thy heart with doliful
chere: and make thy prayer in manner as follows.

O Lord God Almighty, blessed may thou boughtest me, thy sufferance is great
in me. Thou would not condemn me having often times justly deserved it:
But thou have kept and saved me, til I would forsake sin, and turn wholly
to thee. Now Lord, with sorrowful heart I acknowledge to thy Goodness, that I
have misspente without profit, al my vvittes, powers, and virtues, that thou
haste given me, to the help of my soul

All the time of my life, have I waste in diverse vanities, all the li^mes of my
body, in sin and superfluities: The grace of my Christendom, in pride and
other vvretchednes: and truly Lord, many other things have I loved, better
then thee, and not vvithstanding my great unkindness ever thou haste norished
me, and tenderly kept me. Of thy great suffra^ce I had full little knowledge,
and of thy great rightuosnes I had but little dreed. I took no head to thank
thee for thy great goodness, but in all my life from day to day, great matter
of wrath, have I heaped up through mine own wickedness. Therefore sweet
Lord, what I shall say to thee I know not: But only this word in which I
trust. God of thy great mercy, have mercy upon me. I acknowledge o Lord, all that I have, comes only of thee, I know well without thee nothing may be,
but sin and vvretchednes, which comes of me. Wherefore Lord with meke heart
I beseech thy goodness do not to me as I have deserved, but after thy great
mercy, and send me the grace of the holy Ghost to lighten my heart, to comfort
my spirit, to establish me in the right way, and to perform thy will, that I
may have perseverance, in that I have begun, and never hereafter be separated
from thee, by my unstableness, ne by temptations to my enemy: I am worthy o
Lord, to be chastised for my wicked living, with what rod it pleases thee:
vvelcome be it Patience good Lord send me, gladly to suffer thy correction,
comfort me among of thy grace and when thy vvil is, withdraw thy rod and take
me to thy mercy. Full bitter be the temptations and full grievous to suffer, but
though they be dreedful, I know they shall hereafter to my soul be meedful. O
Lord thou know my heart is right feeble much is my unstableness and my knowledge
full little: Therefore good Lord, strengthen me, establish me, and teach me: and
as thou made and bought me; so keep and defend me. Body and Soul, I commit
to thee, not as I vvil, but as thou will Lord so be it.

And now good Jesus Gods Son, that know al things, help me in all wicked
thoughts that I displese thee not in liking or consenting. Full often I have
offended thee in diverse thoughts against thy vvil, and much to my liking:
therefore it is thy righteousness, that I be trubled with other thoughts at thy
pleasure that be greuos to me. But sweet Jesus when thy vvil is put them from
me, and take me to mercy. O Lord Jesus Christ Gods Son, keep my mind, that I
dilight not in vain thoughts. Jesus Christ Gods Son, which stood still
before a Judge, nothing, to him answering: with draw my tongue til I consider
how and what I shall speak that may be to thy vvoorshippe.

Jesus Christ Gods Son, whose hands were bound full sore for my love: guide
and govern my hands and al my other members, that my works may ever begin
to thy worship, and graciously end, to thy most honor. Arise o Lord, and
help us: And for thy holy names-sake, save and deliver us. O Lord Jesus
Christ, cause me to have in thy love a mean without mesure, an afection
without mean, a longing without order: and a burning desire without ceassing.

O Lord I beseech thee of mercy also for all those that do desire my prayers
and though I be a most vvretched sinner. unworthy to be hard, have regard to
their humility and devotion, and what they desire to thy worship, grant
the^ for thy goodness. Grant them and me, and to al other that I am behoulding
to, or bound to pray for, grace to love what is most to thy liking, thee to
love above al things, nothing to desire that should thee displese. Al
temptations mightily to withstand, al other vanities o Lord for thy love to
despise. Thee good Lord ever to have in mind: and in thy service to abide to
our lives end, and if thou grant us any thing to do that shall be to us
meedful: grant part o Lord to the Souls departed, abidig thy mercy in the
pains of Purgatory. Amen.

In such manner thou may pray in the beginning, and when thou art entered in
devotion, thou shall percas have better feeling in prayer and holy meditations,
then I can show. Good brother or sister pray then form writ by the teching of
Almighty God, have which thee these few words, for the help of thy Soul,
whom God of his endless mercy govern, to his good pleasure, and thy
salvation. Amen.

Very Devout and Godly Prayers on the Passion of Christ. Gre. Mag.
O Lord Jesus Christ, I adore and worship thee hanging on the Cross, bearing
on thy head a Crown of Thorn, I pray thee, that thy holy Cross and death, be
my defense and sheeld; and I beseech thee deliver me from the Angel smiting.
Amen. Pater noster. Aue Maria.

O Lord Jesus Christ, I adore and worship thee vvounded upon the Cross: and
there drinking Gaul and Eisel: I require thee that thy wounds, may ever be
comfort to my Soul, and remission of my sins. Amen. Pater noster. Aue Maria.

O Lord Jesus Christ, I honor thee, for those most bitter pains, which on
the Cross, thou did suffer form: specially in that hour, when thy most
holy Soul departed from thy blessed body: I beseech thee have mercy on my
Soul, when it shall depart out of my body, and bring it to everlasting
bliss: and Joy in Heaven. Amen. Pater. Aue*

O Lord Jesus Christ, I adore and worship thee, laid in the Sepulcher,
anointed with Mirre and Inscence: I beseech thee that thy death, may be my
life, and light Everlasting. Amen. Pater. Aue.

O Lord Jesus Christ, I adore and worship thee, descending into Hell, and from
thence delivering those that were Captive: I beseech thee, that thou suffer
not me thither to descend. Amen. P. Aue.

O Lord Jesus Christ, I adore and worship thee, Rising from death, Ascending
into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of thy Father: I beseech thee, that
thither I may follow thee, and that I may deserve to be presented before thee.
Amen. P. A.

O Lord Jesus Christ, the good Shepherd, co^serue and keep the Just,
Justify the Sinner, have pity upon al faithful People, and be merciful to me
a grievous Sinner. Amen. Pater. Aue. Credo.

I Beseech thee o Lord Jesus Christ, that thy Death, be my Life, and strength,
with the which, I may be Armed, protected, and directed. Thy Wounds be unto
me, continual food, vvherwith I may be refreshed and delighted. The Shedding
of thy most precious blood, be the washing away of all my sins. Thy passion,
and Resurrection: be unto me Eternal Life and Glory. In these things, be all
my delihgt, and desire, my refection, and rejoicing, my health, and strength,
my Joy and studdies: and the whole desire, of my heart mind, and body: now and
ever. Amen.

Reasons inducing us to be gratful unto God for his Benefits.
HOw much we are bound continually to laud and praise God, chiefly for his
goodness in him self, and also to be thankful to him for his B. Benefits: we
may learn of the holy Prophet David, which in that respect said, the praise of
God was in his mouth: For we ought without cessing as S. Bernard says to
give thanks unto him, which never ceasseth to bestow his benefits upon us.

And how dangerous it is to be ingratful, it apeareth well in one of the holy
Fathers saying, that there is nothing which so much provoke the indignation
of God against us, as ingratitude. Therefore seeing we were created to serve
God: Let us begin to learn here in Earth, as S. Bernard cou^saileth us,
praises we shall yield to him in heaven.

A Most Godly and Devout praise, and Thankes-geuing to God, for his blessed
Benefits Spiritual and Corporal: Of al true Christians, daily to be used.
O Most holy B. glorious and Indeuided Trinity, the Father the Son and
Holy Gstost, Three Persons and one Almighty God: my Lord and God my maker and
redeemer, my norisher, my defender, my sweetness, my mercy my refuge, my
strength, my victory, my Savior, my Joy, and glory Eternal.

I Laud thee, I glorify thee, I honor and worship thee, O Blessed Trinity,
for that thou art in thy self: for thou art the highest God, from whom flows
al goodness. Thou art gracious Eternity, thou art eternal Felicity, thou art
the depth of all Wisdom and Sapience: Thou art only God, and there is none
without thee.

I Laud and honor thee o B. Trinity, that mightilye haste made of nothing
Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon, and al other creaturs, and for that thou
conseruest and gouernest al things in this World All worship, Laud, glory,
and thanks, be ever given to thee for all thy works, and of al thy creaturs, now
and ever. Amen.

Also I Laud, thank, and praise thee, for that it pleased thee to make the
ix. glorious Orders of Angels, to laud and honor thee eternally, and some of
them to asist us faithfully, in this exile, and vale of misary with houable and
necessary councels and helpings: and also to declare thine Ineffable goodness.
And thou made al these things for man: But man, thou made with thy proper
hands, to thin own glorious Image and liknes. Thou formed in him
Understanding, and adorned, and enabled him with free will. I Laud and glorify
thee, for that great gift, in that thou set him in Paradise flowing with
delights that he might have high things in fruition, inferior things in
government, and to possessed al things to thine honor, and to worship Laud and
praise thee everlastingly.

Yet thou made not these noble creaturs, Angel and man, for any necessity thou
had to the^, for truly al things were sufficient in thee, to thine eternal
glory: But of the feruor of charity, thou wast moved to create them, that such
noble creatures should be pertakers of thine inexpressable Joy and glory.

Thanks giving to God for our Creation and other benefits spiritual and
corporal.
ANd furthermore, I Laud honor and worship thee O Lord, for that it has
pleased thee among al thy B. works to make me a reasonnable man: For gracious,
Lord thou might, if it had pleased thee, have made me a clod of earth, a
stone, a mine of metal, or any such dead creature: Or else good Lord thou
might have made me an herb a plant, or a tree, bringing forth blossons
and fruit, which has life vegetiue to fructify: Or yet a more worthy creature
then any of these, as a beast, bird, or fish, having sense, feeling, and local
moving: But thou o Lord, have made me none of al these creatures, but to my
use, health, and help, have thou made them al, to be my subjects, and I to be
their Sovereign.

And to me. whom thou have made a creature reasonable, thou have given power,
Wisdom, Reason, Understanding, and free will, and have formed me with all my
right li^ms and featur of body: and thou o Lord have bestowed on me, the
perfection of all the forsaid creatures, having given me being, with stons and
metales: life, with Trees and herbs: Sense, feling, and moueing, with
beasts: and Understanding with Angels: Having also endued me, with many other
good gifts, spiritual, and Corporal, As the gifts of grace, gifts of
nature, and the gifts of Fortune.

The gifts of Grace, as Memory, Understanding, and will, Mind, Reason,
Imagination, and Capacity, which are calleed the mightes of the Soul inward.

The gifts of Nature, as beauty, comely shape, strength, agility, and svviftnes:
My v. wits, and corporal limms, and menbers, as hands, feet, mouth, nose,
eyes, and ears, which be the mightes of the Body outvvard.

And with these also the gifts of fortune, as meat, drink and cloth,
vvorldly riches, and al other things necessary for Body and Soul: which many
a good creature that has served thee better then I have want: Al honor and
praise be to thee, for all these thy loving kindness, that thou o Lord have showed
to me, and I not withstanding, have been so unkind to the in mispending these
thy gifts, little concidering thy abundant goodness: I humbly ask mercy o Lor,
for these my trespasses: and loueingly I thank thee, for thy great Grace, and
goodness.

Praises to God for his gracious visitation Inspiration and Preservation.
AL honor and Praise be to thee o Lord for thy manifold mercies in having so
often visyted my heart, with thy Graces, spiritual motions and good
Inspirations: And also have kept defended, and delivered me, this day and
night, and all the days and times of my life unto this hour, from many perils
and dangers of body and soul, As from fire and water, lightning, thunder, and
tempeste from slanders, shames, and rebukes of this world and many other
mischiefs, into which for my sins, I might justly have fallen, thou o Lord,
having suffered many a vvorthier person then I, both in strength, beauty, and
cunning, suddenly to be punished for their defaultes: But merciful Lord, me
thou have spared and forborne, and have suffered me in all my great and greuos
trespasses, which I have don against thee, more then they, patiently abiding
always for my conversion and ame^dment, when rightfully thou might have slain
me and damned me also perpetuallye.

Others Lord, thou have punished by great troubles many ways, as by
imprisonment, hunger, thirst, could and heat, blindness, and madness, by
bakbiting and open infamy: and me unkind wretch thou caledst by friendly
chastisings, as by bodily sickness, by death of friends, or loss of vvorldly
goods: And sometime thou admonished me, calling me again with full benign and
tender love, by example of others, that have been drowned, slain, or dead
suddenly in my company: and I spared and saved, which if I had then finished
my life as they did, I had been unready to thee, and dyed in my sin.

Thus then have thou saved me, both soul and body, from many perils and
dangers diversely for the which I give thee most hearty and loving thanks. For
the multitude of al these thy mercies: forgive me I beseech thee o Lord my
great offenses, and remember not my sins and Iniquities, but of thy goodness
pardone me, and give me grace co^tinuallye, to yield acceptable thanks unto
thee for all thy B. Benefits.

Laud and Praise for our Sanctification and Vocation, to the Unity of the
Catholic Church.
Above al these thy mercies, have thou o Lord, of thy especial grace and
goodness, knit me to thee, by calling me to the knowledge of thy self, and
making me a member of thy Church catholic: whereas many thousand Jews, Turks,
and Infidels, that have been borne since I was, have died in their iniquities,
and many hundred thousand also, since the beginning of the world until this
time, more worthy and noble then I: and if it had plesed thee o Lord, thou
might have made me one of them, and so to have lived and died as they did:
But of thy especial mercy and tender love, have thou chosen me, among so many
thousa^ds, to be one of thy darlings, borne now in the time of grace, among
Christian people, and under the Keys and suffrages of holy Church, for the
which, al honor be to thee for evermore. Amen.

Thanks and praise to our Savior Jesus for the Benefices of Redemption,
Glorification, and fruition.
O Blessed Jesus, I Laud and honor thee which for my sake was borne of the
B. Virgin, and suffered here, for the space of xxxiij. years, hunger, thirst,
cold and heat: and after al, dispite, and painful death. And by that thy
death, and bitter Passion, thou bought us out of the thraldom of the fiende,
the third day, thy Soul and body, being knit again together, by thy glorious
Resurrection. And in thy Ascension, have thou abled be, to be a Prince, or
Princes, in the high Bliss of Heaven, not ten or xx. years, as earthly
Princes live here in this life, But ever to live, world without end, in all
Joy, Bliss, and endless Felicitye.

Great is the reward o Lord, thou have prepared for me if I leave my sin,
and continue in thy service to my lives end That is three dovvries in my soul,
and five in my body.

The three of my soul be these, perfect love and Charity in thy Divine
Majesty. Clear Inspection, of thy B. Godhead. And true knitting, and perpetual
union to thee, without dissolution, or departing from thee.

And the body, shall be endued with v. special gifts, As brightness, svviftnes,
and subtilnes, able to pearse every thing as the Sun pearseth the Glass:
impassibilitie, never to suffer pain of hunger, or thirst, could, or heat,
sorrow, ne sickness, trouble or heaviness: and Imortality ever to live in, Joy,
and al felicity, and never die.

Al which, when I concider and perceive and that thou o Lord might have made
me a stone, stub, or any other dead creature, and haste not so done: But of
thy especial great mercy, have advanced me so worthilye, having made and abled
me, to be an heir, and to Inherit the high bliss of heaven, in the companies
of Angels and al Saints, there with them thee to praise, thee to love, and in
thee to Joy, world without end: I cannot but with sorrowful heart, lament my
great Ingratitude toward thee. O merciful Lord, for thy great mercy, forgive
me al my sins I beseech thee: and according to the multitude of thy
compassions take pity upon me: And give me grace daile to go forward, in thy
holy service, Faith, Fear, and Lone: and in the same to continue, to my lives
end.

A Prayer for mercy and forgeuenes of sins and for Grace to give God thanks
for his Benefits.
Have mercy on me o God and of thy especial Grace, grant me that I may with all
my wits, bodily and ghostly thank thee entirly for all thy benefits, calling to
my help, our Blessed Lady, with all the number of Elect, to Pray and beseech
thee Lord of thy great goodness to grant the same, and to have mercy on me,
and forgive me my sins: That we together may thank praise, and laud, thee,
now and everlasting. Amen.

O Lord, for the gifts of Fortune we Laud and praise thee, saying Laudamus te:
And for the gifts of Nature, we Bless thee, saying Benedicimus te: For thy
gifts of Grace, we Adore and worship thee, saying Adoramus te: And for thy
merciful keeping, guiding, and governing us in this life, we glorify thee
saying. Glorificamus te: And for thy great mercy, and metit, of our last
reward: Gratias agimus tibi propter Magnam gloriam tuam. Amen.

Praise to God for his long suffrance, and calling, and receiving, sinners, to
his Mercy.
O Lord God almighty, I Laud and glorify thee, for all thy mercies, which thou
have always showed to sinners, patiently abiding for them, mercifully Calling
them, benignely Receiving them, abundantly giving grace to them, and to such
familiarity admitting them, as though they had never sinned. O merciful Lord,
and pacient God, what shall I say to thee, for all these thy benefits? What lauds
and thankings, shall I yield to thee? For if al my sins were avoided from me,
yet were I not worthy for the least of them to give condign thanks unto thee,
but as a wretched sinner may, with all my heart I Laud, thee, I Thank thee, I
Honor and worship thee: And al Laud and Praise be ever given unto thee,
world without end. Amen.

The Conclusion.
O Holy Trinity in Unity, and Unity, in Trinite, three in one, and one in
Three: merciful and pitiful in all thy works, gracious in thy gifts, and God
of al bounty: vouchsafe to hear benignely me thy wretched and sinful servant,
and with me, all the Saints of thy Heavenly Court, beseeching thee of mercy
and forgeunes for my great ingratitude toward thee. This Praise and thanks
giving o Lord, which I presume to offer and yield unto thy Divine Maistie: Be
it, through the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ the prayers and, of al thy
Elect, accepted and allowed, in the Ears of thy mercy and pity. Raise me up o
Lord, and mercifully relieve me. Grant pardon of al my sins paste, forgive
my gilte present: and defend me from al to come. Amen. Pater Aue. Credo Te deum.


