CHRIST'S LOVE, AND SAINTS SACRIFICE.

Preached in a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, on the 23. of August, 1635.

BY JAMES CONYERS, Mr. of Arts of Sydney-Sussex in Cambridge, and Minister of
Stratford-Bow, in Middlesex.

CANTIC. 2. 12. My wel-beloved is unto me as a bundle of Myrrh, he shall lie
between my breasts. Ambros. in 118. Psalm. Velle Christi commune in omnes est;
mundari, fidei est credentis in Christum. LONDON, Printed by E. P. for H.
Seile, dwelling at the Tigers head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1635.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir ROGER NORTH, of Milden Hall, in SVFFOLKE; His
truly Religious Lady, THOMASIN NORTH; Their much honored Offspring, HENRY
NORTH, Esquire; with his virtuous Spouse, Mris. SARAH NORTH; And Mr. DVDLY
NORTH, Mris. MARY NORTH:

Collation of Grace and Glory.
WOrthies, your gracious and immerited Favors, not only intended, but also
extended toward me (the meanest of a thousand) exact at my hands a more exact
Demonstration of gratitude, than at this present to present you with a Sermon;
but having no better Present to offer, daign it I pray you, your candid aspect,
and accept it, as Artaxerxes did the water at Synataes Aelian.
hands, and expande yours for patronage; under which, as the Dove in Noah's
Arc, shall be its best repose and shelter. The lines I tender you are a
Monument of my sincere and loving affection, in themselves mostly lines of
Love, not carnal but spiritual, being richly in-layd with the love of Christ,
that love out-layd by effusion of his most precious Blood, together with the
true felicity and incomparable dignity of Chrtstians, wherewith your pious
souls have been daily more and more inamoured, and your persons more
honored, than Nobilitas s^la est atque vinca vertus.
with any Indian Treasure, or the Worlds umbratilous Honor; which Work
wheresoever it is wrought, there is eminently, Digitus Dei, the finger of God,
which finger as did that Star the Magi, guide you to the Star of Jacob,
whose love as a Banner ever overspread you, and the blessings of whose hands
compass you on every side, that ye may be able with all Saints to comprehend
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18
and height, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, and that
ye may be filled with all fullness of God, to the praise of his Glory.

Yours, and the Churches most humble Servant, JAMES CONYERS.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, as these lines are writ, so read, in love; and then thou
can not carpe, but cover, if therein had escaped even a spectable Error. But
to put thee out of doubt, I will be bold to warrant thee two things; first,
herein is nothing contrary to good Manners, neither in the second place
opposite to orthodox Theology, therefore lend them thy look, and happily thou will like them, and the rather if these contents, Christ his Love, his Blood,
the price of thy Redemption, or thy own blessed promotion like thee. In hope
of one and all to thee and me, with all that love unfainedly, I rest thine in
him that lives for ever, and ever loves his.

J. C.

CHRIST'S LOVE, AND SAINTS SACRIFICE.
Apoc. cap. 1. verse. 5, 6. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his blood, And made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father, to
him be glory and Dominion for evermore, Amen.
WEre that Quaere put to In vita Budaei idem narratur de Theodoro Goza. Sphynx
Philos. c. 25.
me which once was to Budeus, by Francis the first; viz. if all the volumes in
the world were doomed to the fire, what one would he save? as his resolve was,
Plutarchs Works; by reason, they had the impression of all Sciences: Mine,
should be, Epistolam Creatoris ad Greg Ep. ^d Furiam.
Creaturas, the Epistle of the Creator to the Creature, viz. the sacred
Scripture: And therein this Text, a richer Mine than golden Peru affords, the
Magazine of all true treasure, Christ a jemme of invaluable price, his love
better than Wine; his blood, one drop whereof more worth than the Luthe. in 2.
ad galat.
whole world; two Evangelicall and Angelical Sacrifices, the one expiatorie
for sin, made by Christ on the Altar of the Cross, who loved us, and washed us
in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto our God: The other
gratulatorie to Christ, John 21. 20.
presented by the beloved Disciple, for that act of mere grace: To him be
glory and dominion for evermore, Amen.

In the former sacrifice, are offered two parts. Analysis.


1 The Motive thereto. 2 The Manifestation thereof. Expiatory Sacrifice.

The Motive, is love; wherein, to shun a denial discourse, I shall confine to
these limits:

1 The (...), that Christ loved us. 2 The (...), the impulsive cause to love
us. 3 The (...), how he loved us. 4 The quos, whom, he loved us.
Unto him that loved us.

The Manifestation of this love, appears two ways. 1. In Christ's own
Humiliation, (viz.) he Christ's Humiliation.
washed us from our sins in his Blood; where are in-laid these 3. particulars:

1 The Act; he washed. 2 The Object, us from our sins. 3 The Organon,
wherewith; his own blood.
2. In our Exaltation, in these words; and Our Exaltation.
made us Kings and Priests to God his Father, etc. whereout springs two
branches of honor:

The first, is Regal, he has crowned us Kings:

The second, is sacerdoticall; he has consecrated us Priests, unto God, even
his Father.

In the latter sacrifice, which is Eucharisticall, Eucharisticall Sacrifice.
observe, first, the matter expressed, Glory and Dominion: secondly, the
Majesty, to whom it is presented; viz. the Prince of the Kings of the Earth:
Thirdly, the manner, pressed two ways: First, in regard of cirumstance of
time, beyond all time, for evermore: Secondly, in regard of the Sacrificer,
with a good heart, and a very good heart, couched in this word Amen; Unto him
that loved us, etc. Thus have I taken the Text asunder, and now I must take the
parts in their order; and because they are many, I must but touch, as the Be
the flower, and fly away. The first that Method manuducts me to, is the (...),
that our (...).
Mercy-Master Christ Jesus loved us: this is true, (...), in word and deed, a
Truth, Tertul.
Tanquam radio solis scripta, as engraven with the Sunne-beame; behold the
manner of the writing: The wretched Jews played the Scribes; the pens they
used, were thorns, and spears, and nails; the ink, was purest blood; the
Volume wherein they writ (and that on both sides) was the body of all Divinity;
the capital letters, deep and wide wounds; the testimonies, men and Angels;
Brond. in loc.
the Seal set to it, was Christ's consummatum est, it is finished: whereon, as
an impregnable Arch-jewell, I build my faith, and am persuaded, That neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, Romans 8. 38, 39
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature, shall ever be able to separate us from the love of Christ
Jesus, who loved us. And thus much, or rather, thus little, on this first
point, viz. the (...), that Christ loved us; and so we proceed to the second,
(...), why he loved us. The Ethnicks feign, their (...).
Gods and Goddesses for some lovely good, loved certain Trees; Jupiter, the
Oak, for durance; Neptune, the Cedar, for stature; Apollo, the Laurel, for
greenness; Venus, the Poplar, for whiteness; Pallas, the Vine, for
fruitfulness: but what should move the God of all gods, to love us, wildings
in this fools Paradise; Trees indeed; but such as St. Jude mentions, (...),
corrupt, fruitless, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots. St. Bernard
resolves it in three words, Amat quia amat, he loves because he loves; the
root of love to us, lies in himself, and by his communicative goodness the
fruit is ours.

Hence then exclude we all boasting in our selves, and conclude, since Christ
has loved us, and hereby is made to us wisdom in the headfaculty of our
souls, righteousness in the works of our hands, sanctification in our
hearts, redemption Zach. 4. 7.
in all parts; it was of grace, and grace be to it: and thus from the (...),
why he loved us, pass we to the (...), how he loved us.

Whereon while I muse, I am rapt with amazement; (...)
for suppose the Heavens as a scrowle of Parchment; the Vaste Ocean, Ink;
Creatures caelestiall and subcaelestiall Penmen; all were unable to unfold
this (...), how he loved us: The reason is, his love as himself is infinite;
which no finite creature is able fully to comprehend; yet in a model we may
conceive it is much: so sounds that Trumpet of grace, as if he loved, and
overloved: Propter nimium charitatem, so it is rendered in the Ephesians. 2. 4.
vulgar. Our stupendous Divine, he speaks for order first: grave Cyprian
says, Immerito dilexit, 1 John 4. 19.
he loved us in mercy, without merit. St. Bernard thus, he loved us, Dulciter,
sweetly, he In Cantic.
assumed our nature, sapienter, wisely; he severed sin and nature, fortiter,
strongly: Much waters could not quench love, though never so bitter or so
abundant; nay the more waters, the more love.

Magnes Amoris Amor. His love should be the magnet of ours: But oh how are we
drawn aside! if we love him, it is but a little, too little, or little or
nothing at all, as we should. Will you read the reason, (...); Isid. Peleus.
Ep. 209.
Since the love of Gold grew so hot, the love of Christ has grown cold: Since
Prince Mammon has triumphed, the Prince of our Salvation has been
underprized. Shall this worlds goods, which in respect of Christ, are mere
(...), rubbish; or the god of this World, which only loves us, as the Wolf
the Lamb to devour, have so strong a hand over us, to draw our hearts from
the love of our Savior? Absit, God forbid: Yet for fear of the worst, open
thy ear to Wisdoms voice; He that loves not Christ, plus quam se, suos, sua,
more than himself, his friends, Mat. 10. 37.
his means, is not worthy of him. If this should not win our love, hearken to
S. Paul's thunder, If 1 Cor. 16. 22.
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema: or, if the voice
of consolation may work on our hearts, know, all things work togegether for
the best unto them that love God: Quae Romans 8. 28.
(...)? Armies of Angels, as for Elishaes protection; Sun, Moon, and
Stars, as for Duke Iosuah and Deboraes conquest; dumb creatures, Quid non
speremus amantes.
for instruction and preservation, Gods rod for caution, his rigide staff for
reverence; sickness as in Ezechias, even sins (by accident merely) as in
the Publican, for humiliation and salvation: these, as so many matches, may
give fire to our chill affections, to inzeale and inflame them with the Love of
Christ: but to prove it, is all in all; the touchstone hereof is love to Gods
material Temple, in sincerity to behold the Probatio amoris est exhibitio
operi^.
fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple, therein to hold up
pure hands and hearts for the peace of Sion, and to uphold it prece and pretio,
with our prayers, and with our purses, in opposition to the old Massalians, who
to the number of their impieties add contemptum templorum, the disgrace of
Cathedrals; as also to crown our souls with blessings, for they shall prosper
that love it: And let not our love only rest here, but reach to the mystical
Temple, viz. Christ's poor members; hereby we shall neither want Christ's
commemoration, nor remuneration: For what if the great Keeper of his Saints
here, and the Grand-Iudge of all at Doomes-day, shall conceal Abels
martyrdom, Noah his saving a remnant from the Deluge, Abraham's invincible
Faith; Peter's, Paul's, John's sufferings; yet of the acts of charity, he will
make a rehearsal Sermon, I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; Mat. 25. 35.
I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me; I was
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and
ye came unto me; and therefore I will remunerate your bowels of mercy, with,
Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Come

ad me your Savior, that dearly bought you, Venite benedicti.
meos, to my Saints and Angels your fellow servants. mea, to all that is mine,
joys, etc.

Honors interminable to all dimensions, blessed of my Father, before you were
borne, and blessed that ever ye were borne: inherit by my grace, not your
merit, no less than a Kingdom, no other than a heavenly Kingdom, prepared
for you before all time, purchased for you in the fullness of time, and shall
be yours in possession when there shall be no more time. Thus in a short
compass of time, I come unto the last stage, viz. Quos whom Christ loved.

[Vs] Unto him that loved us. Divine History perpetuates the memorable
affection of Jonathan to David, how his soul was knit unto his soul, And he
loved him as his own 1 Samuel 18.
soul; thereto was no little inducement, for David was Ionathans Fathers
beloved servant, his own faithful friend, a wise and valiant Captain, and
all Israel loved him. Humane story Val. Max. l. 4. cap. 8.
survives of Orestillo, when her life went from her, Pla^tius at the instant
became her second for a burial, in memorial whereof was erected a Monument at
Tarentum, called, (...), the Lovers Monument: These we must know were dear
and near, an espoused pair: but for Christ to set his love on us, every way
unworthy Romans 5. (...) Hos. 2. 19.
to be beloved, 1. weak, 2. godless, 3. sinners, 4. enemies, yea traitors to
him and our own souls, though once espoused by a Ring of Love, in-laid with
the pearls of his Spirit, yet by reason of spiritual adultery, divorced; and
for all this, to love us! this is much, Greater love than this Isa. 59. 2. John
15. 13
has no man, than to lay down his life for his friend; yet (under correction)
To majorem habuisti charitatem Domine; dilexti non existentes, imo resistentes;
greater, sweet Savior, was thy love: thou lovedst us when we were nothing,
yea worse than nothing, sworn enemies to thy life. In meditation whereof that
inscription upon Senacheribs Tomb, I may apply to Christ, and the Christians
use, (...). whosoever Herodot.
thou art, make Christ thy spectacle, learn of him to love thine enemies: this
is (...), Luke. 6. 35.
that spiritual wisdom which adopts thee Gods child: hereto (...), natures
instinct works, all being (...) of one blood: now never man hated his own
flesh; this is the Royal Acts 17. 26.
command, I say to you, Love your enemies: and Mat. 5. 44
Christ himself herein is, exemplum fine exemplo, a matchless mirror of
benevolence and beneficence toward his enemies, in that he loved us. It is
storyed of Alexander the Monarch, that he Edicte vetuit, de quis se praeter
Apelle pingeret, aut alius Lysippo Horat. Epist. 2.
would have no man draw his Picture, save Apelles, or engrave it, save
Lysippus; the best Artists, both for theorie and practice. No Artist in
Christendom can draw the most high GOD, better to the life, than in the lines
of his own life to blaze the true oriental colors of love toward his
enemies, after the example of the engraven form of his person, that loved us;
which words ere I depart from, me thinks echoes so sweetly in the ear of my
soul, and in thine (except deafness or deadness, have made a forcible
entry) that Miriams Timbrels, Asaphs Trumpet, David's Anthemes, Salomons
Epithalamions, sound nothing so sweetly; the ground Romans 5. 10
is sound; for if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life: which
brings me to the second general part, the life of his love, in ample
manifestation. 2 General part of the 1 Sacrifice. Quest.


He washed us in his blood from our sins. He? Christ the Son of the living
God, Lord of Men and Angels, majesty in excelsis in the highest, to become
humility, in profundis, in the lowest! did this become him? was not this a
servile act, viz. to wash us, a stain to his honorable person?

To put this Question out of doubt, or the Resp.
doubt out of question, no whit: for herein first was the complement of that
Prophecy in a good sense, The elder shall serve the younger. Further, it Genesis
25. 23.
was of such absolute necessity, that Peter's case being ours, except he had
washed us, we had had no part with him. But to clear the scruple, John 13. 8.
it is illustrated thus; A Peer of the Realm Ruff. in Symb.
beholding a poor child wel-nigh choked in the mud, and to save him, if some
slime should adhere to him, it were no dishonor, rather an honor, to do so
good a days work, as to save a soul: semblably that true Nobleman, Christ
Jesus, beholding with the eye of grace our silly soul plunged in the puddle of
sin, albeit our slimy sins stuck to him, to pluck us out and save us, it
did not impair his honor, yea rather set it off with a fairer luster. And by
this act he reads us a Lecture of humility. If I then your Lord and Master,
have washed your feet, Ioh. 13. 14, 15
ye ought also to wash one another feet; for I have given you an example that
ye should do, even as I have done: How may this be? Saint Cyprian is our
Schoolmasters, Quoties igitur, etc. D^ Ablutione pedum.
as often, as we persuade those which are under spiritual Pharoahs slavery, to
get them out of Egypt; mourn, with those that mourn; burn with those that
are offended; are infirm, with those that are infirm: that Aquin. in Cor. 2.
11.
is, as Aquinas interprets, for him that is infirm in the Faith, Dolemus in
cordibus nostris sicut de nobis, lament for them as for our selves; so often
wash we the feet of our Brethren. And when this thy Saviors humility comes
fresh into thy memory, that he whose Throne is Mount-heaven, footstool the
Earth, whom all the inhabitants of the Earth, and all the Angels of Heaven must
worship; that he would stoop to wash thee: Stoop Gallant and learn of him to
be lowly, so to be, it is a good argument thou art well laden with grace; for
as branches of Trees, and ears of Corn, the better they are laden, stoop
nearer the earth; and the best refined Gold, goes down in the balance: so the
more fruitful and Quo sanctior hoc humilior Ambros.
precious a Soul is, the more it lowers it self, and the higher in Gods eye
it shall be exalted.

Christ's Act, we descend to the Object, what he washed, and from what; Us from
our sins.

Which words argue, 1 sins condition, it is pollution; so Zacharias brands
it, uncleanenesse; 13. 1. Atramentum Evae. Amb. 26.
therefore Ezekiel compares it to scum, 22. 18. Hosea to a rising leprosy; S.
Jude, to a spot; S. Ambrose to a black cloud: Vna nubecula peccatricis totam
fere obscuravit Ecclesiam. Res est Ep. ad virg. lapsam.
foetida, says Origin, a spawne of an unclean spirit; which unless washed
away in the laver of Christ's purifying blood, and a flood of cordial
repentance, will in fine associate with a Cage of unclean Birds. Therefore
mind we Apostolical counsel; touch not, taste not, handle not; for as
Syracides speaks, he that washes himself because of a dead body, and
touches it Eccles. 34. 26.
again, what availes his washing? And as his washing proves sin its nature,
so it unmaskes all the sons of men, that albeit in their original they were
like to the house of Jacob; wherein Amb. de fug. seculi c. 4.
no image of impiety, no spot of pollution, but all as clear as Crystal; yet
since the prevarication all as Labans Lambs are speckled and spotted, A capite
ad calcem, from top to toe.

Let Abraham, the father of the faithful; Isa. 1. 6.
Aaron, on whose bonnet was holiness to the Lord; Amb. a pol. Daniel. Antequam
noscamur maculamur.
David, the Lords Darling; Job, whose crown is Justice; Paul, that vessel of
mercy; Peter the mouth of the Apostles; those devout Women, that were Apostolae
Apostolis, even Mary-Iesus, the mirror of the Saints, speak freely; and they
will unanimously confess to their own shame, they were great sinners; yet to
the praise of Gods grace, his Son washed them from their sins.

Sarepta to Elias, Am I come to bring their sins to remembrance?

I have no delight to rake in dead men's graves, Resp.
or set their frailties on the Stage, but so far to confirm from them this
truth; in many things Amb. non solum docentes sed errantes instruunt
we sin all, and that if we fall as they did, we may bear our selves upon
the wings of mercy, to obtain as they have; or make their faults, as marks at
Sea, to steer our course wisely, lest wee-runne on these Rocks, and so sink
Bark and Goods.

Dilemma: if Christ's Spouse be all fair, then there is no spot, so needs no
washing; if any spot, how is she all fair, as Solomon speaks; withal is not
this Cant. 4 7.
derogatorie from Christ's plenary satisfaction?

For resolution of the former part, we are to Resp.
consider the Spouse, the body of Saints; first, in regard of imputative
holiness, thus spotless, Ecclesia nigra quia ex peccatoribus, decora ex fide^
Sacramento Ambros.
and more orient than the Sun: Secondly, in their inherent holiness; thus as
the Moon, part black, part bright: And for the latter part of the Argument,
grant the Churches pollution, it imperfects not Christ's lotion; to instance: He
that comes forth of the Bathe, is clean washed, but trampling slimie earth,
the soles of his feet contract some sully: yet therein for his defilement the
Bathe is unblameable: after the same manner we cleansed in that beatifying
fountain of Christ's blood open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in for sin
and uncleanness; may not Zach. 13. 1.
if the feet of our souls, viz. our affections, walking on this sinful soil,
lick up some defiling dust, that we stand afterward need of washing, impute
to this holy Bathe any imperfection; and hereupon is it according to our
Saviors saying, He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet. John 13.
10.


Avaunt then vain Catharist, that vaunts thy Consect.
self clear of all tincture of sin: Elisha was of another mind, witness
his words, What is man Job 25. 14, 15, 16.
that he should be clean? and he that is borne of a Woman, that he should be
just? behold he found no steadfastness in his Saints; Yea the Heavens are
unclean in his sight; how much more is man abominable and filthy which
drinks iniquity like water.

Therefore to that selfe-beseeming pure generation, I say no more, but as the
Emperor said to that Arch-Puritan, Acesius, (...) Theod. Histor.
(...), set thou the Ladder, and go alone to Heaven; but for my own part, with
the Leper I confess I am unclean, and with the wings of devotion, faith and
prayer, hie me to the mercy-seat; and in the Publicans posture, cry, Lord be
merciful to me a sinner: and to conclude this with that Exhortation of the
Apostle, Cleanse 2 Cor. 7. 1.
your selves from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit; not from the
great Beams, but the least Motes; not that the World may see on the outside,
but that thou know in the inside, even all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, for into the new Jerusalem enters no unclean thing. Apoc. 21. 27.


But you will say unto me, wherewithal may we be made clean?

To which I answer: First, flumine, by Eyewater tears, for sins distilled
through the lymbecke of a contrite Soul, which do not only A^^ quod defendi
non potest, ^^^ui potest.
wash, but as a sponge, wipe out. Secondly, flamine, with the Holy Ghost;
which, as fire, scoures of rust-eating sins from the face of the Soul; and
for this shall every one pray with the Church, Come Holy Ghost. Thirdly,
sanguine, by blood; not mystical, as the blood of Martyrs; nor typical, as
was the blood of Goats, but the natural and most precious blood of Christ,
which cleanses from all sin; and this is that wherewith 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
he washed us; the third branch of the second general part, viz. the Organon,
of our purification. Organon.


And washed us in his Blood. In washing us with his Blood, his love, life,
blood, is shed abroad in our hearts, that it was not cold, but warm as blood,
nor dry, for with his blood he washed us; nor little, it was not gutta, sed
unda; not a drop, but a flood wherewith he washed us: This was prophesied by
good old Jacob, of Christ, under the name of Judah, he Genesis 49 11.
should wash his garment in Wine, and his Cloak in the blood of the Grape:
what other meaning, but that Christ's Body, the vestment of his soul, should be
all over bloody? This was prefigured by the red Cow, whose blood was to be
sprinkled Numb. 19.
seven times before the Tabernacle; so our Saviors seven times effused upon
the Tabernacle of his Body; First, In his Circumcision: Secondly, in Pilates
Hall, stripped and whipped till blood came: Thirdly, in the Garden sweat tears of
blood: Fourthly, in his spineall coronation: Fifthly, in his crucifixion:
Sixthly, in piercing his hands and feet with nails: and Seventhly, at the
last, to be sure to take away life, the Soldier thrust a Spear into the filme
of his heart, whence streamed Columb. dear Anat. ^. 7.
water and blood in abundance; whereupon the Element trembled, Rocks rent
asunder, the Heavens covered the face of the Earth with darkness, as with a
sable Canopie, veil his bloody nakedness.

It is noted to be the innative virtue of blood in its kind; 1. To mollify:
2. To purify: 3. To preserve alive: 4. To revive the dead.

Goat, that albeit the Adamant in its own nature be inflexible and
infrangible, yet steeped in Goats blood, it becomes pliable and tender: But
more efficacious is the impreciable virtue of Christ's Blood, that being
sprinkled on the heart, by the hand of Faith, it intenders it though harder
than the hardest Adamant: This rent Rocks, and made stones relent; this
wrought one of the Thieves on the Cross, as soft as Wax, to receive the
gracious impression of the Spirit, to believe in a crucified Christ, and in the
merit of that his Blood, bubbling before his eyes, to be with him in Paradise.

Blood purifies spots, and purges over-spreading maladies; therefore the
Persian Magi (as Nicephorus relates) counseled Constantine the Lib. 7. c. 33.
great, being smitten with a loathsome Leprosy, for his cure, to bathe
himself in the blood of Innocents (it savours Jesuitical advise) let the
credit of the Story stand, ad placitum; but this is (...), worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ's innocent Blood expiates our guilt, and heales all
manner of spiritual Leprosy. Ioh. 1. 1.


Blood preserves alive; therefore Physicians prescribe the blood of a Dove, a
sovereign against diseases in the eye and the brain. Galen gives it against
the bruises, called Hyposphagmata, which (...).
presents every thing to the eye, red. And Iul. Alex. commends it dropped on
the corners of Lib. 4. salubrium.
the brain, called, Pia and Dura Matter, in the wounds of the head, to help to
hold in life: So precious was the blood of Christ, a harmless Dove that
dropped on our eyes, whereas before all we could see were (...), goare blood,
by reason of our bloody sins; now we behold as in a Glass, salvation before
our eyes: And whereas in our head (Adam) we had received a deadly wound; by a
Balm, made of this Blood, and laid to it, we are alive unto God.

Blood has revived the dead; As the Story of the Pelican goes for current, her
brood being stung to death by the brood of the Serpent, by distilling her blood
on her own brood, they have been restored to life: So Christ our true
Pelican, when by our serpentine firy-stinging sins, we were stung to death,
by the virtue of his blood effused on our souls we are quickened and raised to
life, to the praise of his glory. But there is one maine and memorable
difference betwixt this Blood and all others: The blood of man or beast may
give snow-white a scarlet tincture, but never die scarlet, snow-white: but this
and this only, by mercy and miracle, makes scarlet Souls as white as snow. In
Solomon thus that Elder moved the question, and made the answer to our
Evangelist, What are they that Apoc. 7. 13, 14.
are arrayed in long white robes, and whence came they? These are they which
came out of great tribulation, and have washed their long Robes, and have made
their long robes white in the Blood of the Lamb.

Now, that Christ washed us with his blood: Hence, a choke Pear to the
Manichees, who deny the truth of Christs-humanity; to the Marcionites, who
aver he had a fantastical Body; to Apelles, who conceived he had a
Sydereall substance: He that runs, may read printed in blood, the truth of
his Manhood: For as Alexander the great, however the popular sort deified him,
yet having got a clap with an Arrow, said, ye style me Jupiters Son, as if
immortal, Sed hoc vulnus clamat me esse hominem, this blood that issues from
the wound, proves me in the issue a man: So may I say of our Savior, though
myriads of Angels and Saints acclaime he is God, ergo, immortal, and a crew of
Heretics, disclaim him to be a man; yet the streams of blood following the
arrow of death that struck him, make good, he was perfect man, of a reasonable
soul, and humane flesh subsisting: but this their heresy we pass: for there
must be 1 Cor. 11. 9.
heresies; and in holy admiration, ponder in the chambers of our hearts, the
immense love of the Father, and of the Son; of the Father, that he would
give his Son to shed his blood, and dye the execrable death of the Cross for
the sons of men, Ab aeterno genitum, begotten before all eternity.

His Son? Psalm. 2. 7.


Omnis creaturae primogenitum, the first begotten of every creature; Vnigenitum
his only begotten Col. 1. 16. Ioh. 1. 18. Mat. 3. ult. Esa 42. 1.
Son; Dilectum, his beloved Son; and as speaks that Seraphicall Prophet,
Electum Animae suae, such a son in whom his soul delighted; and for us
Caytiffes not worthy the least crum of his mercy. And no less admirable is the
love of Gods dearly beloved Son, to power out his soul unto death for us
and our salvation.

It is storied of Cyrus, King of Persia, having Zenop. lib. 3.
taken Tygranes, King of Armenia, with his Queen, captives; on a time he moved
Tygranes, what he would give for his Queens ransom; to whom he replied, That
had he what he once had, viz. his Crown and Kingdom, he would freely give
it for her freedom, and if that were too little, he would purchase it with the
price of his blood; which love to his Spouse, Cyrus observing, presently
reinvested them to their pristine liberties and honors: Whereupon Tygranes
spoke unto his Queen: Cyrus is a most (...).
noble Prince; the Queen made answer, My affections were only bent on him that
would have spent his dearest blood for me: a fortiori, should we, espoused unto
Christ, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, fix our hearts on him, that not
only resolved our freedom from Persian, but infernal thraldom, and
purchased it with his precious Blood. To wind up in a word, here every eye may
see whereon to rest his Soul, that it may be saved in that great and notable
day; not on his own righteousness, that is imperfect; nor Saints oil, that
is not sufficient for themselves; nor the Popish incruentall Mass, a Mass of
horrible impieties; no Popes pardon, or, Aqua benedicta of theirs, to which
they ascribe rare, incredible, both spiritual and corporal effects; whereby
they bewitch silly souls, to enrich themselves, and all not worth a bit of
bread, but solely in the blessed blood of that immaculate Lamb, Christ Jesus.

Herein to our most precious souls is, salus oblata, salvation freely offered;
herein, by our most precious faith, is salus recepta, salvation embraced; in
this faith, by the impresse of the Spirit, is salus obsignata, salvation
sealed; and hereby is the end of our faith, salus consummata, our salvation
finished; and while we sojourne in these terrene Tabernacles, the foundation of
our glory, the rise and perfection is in and from this blood; whereby we are
made Kings and Priests unto our God. And this is the second branch wherein
Christ's love is manifested.

He has crowned us Kings, and consecrated us Priests to God and his Father.

Artaxerxes honored Nehemiah much, to Kings.
advance him to be his Cup Bearer; and Saul David, to make him his Son in
law, but to make us Kings, less than none save God alone, what could be more?
but what manner of Kings? Rex sol^ deo minor.
not political, but spiritual; Et been (says S. Gregory) quia praelati
cunctis motibus carnis, etc. Moral. 36. c. 21.
as reigning over our corrupt affections; curbing luxury; tempering intemperate
avarice, humbling hautinesse of spirit, and extinguishing the fire of fury:
Will you a little more at large behold the majesty of as many as are truly
made Kings?

Their unction is not oil, but holy blood.

Their Diadem is not 12. stones, but 12. s^ars. Apoc. 12. 1.


The Sword is the Word of God.

The Scepter is the power of his Spirit.

The Globe, the World, all things are theirs.

Their Royal Robes, the syndone of Christ's 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Righteousness.

Their Princely Palaces, White Hall, Gods Sanctuary, and Non-such the new
Jerusalem; the Esquires of their bodies, a heavenly guard, even 10000. of
Angels; their diet is of the best, the inconsumptible body and the blood of
Christ; and he that made them kings, is the King of Kings.

Beloved Brethren, we see our honorable calling; let dogs return to their
vomit; Hogs of Epicurus Herds, wallow in their obscene Aliud Sceptrum, aliud
plectrum.
pleasures; Kites feed on caerrion; Beasts live like Beasts; yet our calling
calls upon us to live like men, the chief of men, Kings, and Christian Kings.
What therefore was Iosuahs injunction, ought to be ours, in theory and
practice, viz. the exercise of pure Religion, to meditate in the Book of the
Law day and night, to observe, and Iosu. 1. 8.
do according to all the Law, not to turn from it to the right hand, nor to
the left, that we Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
may prosper wheresoever we go. It is recorded in Ecclesiastical History of
Philadelphus, King of Egypt, however he had two hundred thousand volumes in
his Library, yet he sent the keeper of his Library, Demetrius, to the Jews,
to have the Book of the Law, and the Translators, which we call the
Septuagint. Such was his love to the Law: We need not send far, or spend much
to have the Book of the Law and the Gospel in our own houses, in Gods houses
they are read and orthodoxally expounded every day, and if the best of desires
be not thereto, to know and to do, we are not worthy the name of Christians,
much less the honor of Kings: but if we shall make the profession and the
practice of sincere Religion, our joy, our glory, and our crown, and be found
so doing, Kings we are here by grace, and shall reign with the King of Kings
hereafter in eternal glory: And thus I leave this, and take hold on the last
branch of our honor, He has consecrated us Priests to God and the Father.

Amongst the Heathen, one man sometime was both King and Priest; Rex idem
hominum Virg.
Phoebique sacerdos. St. Peter combines both together, Ye are a royal
Priesthood. St. Ambrose is 1 Pet. 2. 9. In Luc. c. 22.
plain, Omnes filii Ecclesiae sacerdotes sunt, all the true children of the
Church are Priests, spiritually Priests; whereof Clemens Alexandrinus renders
this reason, Quia eorum caput Christus est Rex and Sacerdos, because Christ
their head is both King and Priest. Then Priests we are: therefore it behooves
us to adorn our holy Profession, as Priests, to be filled with knowledge, not
of the most so much, as of the best; to send up the Heralds of our souls to
the Mercy-seat, for our selves and others, that we may be healed, to purify
our selves when we approach the Temple; and to be holy in all manner of
conversation: what other thing in Moses Law, did that his Act Levit. 8. 24.
typifie, to put blood on the Priests ear, the thumb of the right hand, and
the great toe of the right foot, than that to spiritual Priests, the door of
knowledge, and the instruments of action, should be sanctified, and being
sanctified, forget not to sacrifice, Cum sale, cum igne, cum thure, with
discretion, fervor of love, prayer: subdue Arrogance; then we offer to the Lord
a Calfe; Orig. 9. Ep. ad Rom
overcome we anger, then we offer a Ram; quell we concupiscence, that is to
offer a Goat; restrain we wandering imagination, then we offer Pigeons. In
three words to conclude all; let us all offer, the Philosophers three kinds of
goods, 1. (...), our external goods, doling Ethic. l. 1. c. 8.
alms to the needy; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. I, but thou
have it not to offer; yes sure, not so poor, but thou have a sacrifice, Si
Zachei divitias non habes, si desint tibi duo minuta, Remig.
etc, if thou have not Zache his store, not so much as the widows mites, no
not a cup of cold water; offer to thy God, thy good will, and God takes it
well, according to that, Coronat Deus intus Voluntatem, ubi non invenit
facultatem. 2. (...) August.
(...), the goods of our bodies; so the Apostle Romans 12. 1.
supplicates the Romans: how this may be, golden mouthed Chrysostom instructs
elegantly, Let thy eye behold no evil, or no evil hold thy eye: Hom 20. in
Ep. ad Romans
(...), so thy eye is a sacrifice: thy tongue speak no evil, (...), and it is
an oblation, thy hand act no evil, (...) and it is become a burnt Offering; so
order all other parts in Gods service, and so they are made Gods sacrifices:
Lastly, (...), the goods of our mind, Prayers perfumed with faith, incensed
with zeal to make them as incense, daily and duly presented by the hands of
Christ Jesus, to that God which hears prayers, and to close with our God in
praises, and praise him for all his mercies, from the morning of our youth, to
the midday of our strength; even to the evening of our days, till our Sun
set, that when the Son of righteousness shall appear, we may bear with
Cherubins and Seraphins a part in their heavenly Hallelujah, world without end.

Now to the God of Love; the Spirit of grace, that moves us to love; and the
Son of Gods Love, Who loved us, and washed us in his Blood, and made us Kings
and Priests unto our God; a Trinity in Unity, and an Unity in Trinity, be
ascribed Glory and Dominion, for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

SA. BAKER,
Fulham, September. 16. 1635.

