THE SACRED MYSTERY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF the Thoughts:

DISCOVERING Their Nature and Differences, and together, Resolving such
special Doubts, which are incident hereunto. Very necessary for the Trial and
safe keeping of the Heart. AND ALSO, For the well ordering and comfort of a
Christian Life.

LONDON, Printed by Ber: Alsop, and are to be sold by Thomas Jones at his shop
in Chancery Lane, over against the Rowles. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and my very much respected Friend, M. D. White, all
health and happiness.
Reverend, and Beloved in our Lord Jesus, It having pleased the Almighty to
vouchsafe me to be a member of these his churches: both by a general bond of
my ingraffing thereto, as also by a more special calling to engraft others
therein: I have therefore endeavored since the Lord has vouchsafed light
thereto, to improve my best means and occasions, though in great weakness, for
the supply thereof, in what is most necessary. And therefore finding our Times
to be rank, and so indeed rankle with unnecessary contentions; and yet to be
too much barren of that fruit, which is most necessary: namely, the powerful
practice of godliness. I have labored by Gods mercy, as occasion and ability
has served, to cast in my mite in^o that Treasury, in discovering the
by-pathes of hypocrisy and Apostasy, and strengthening the weak, with such
holy directions, as may happily build them forward to perfection. Wherein though
I must needs acknowledge to Gods glory, and mine own abasing, that I have
been for a time much interrupted, by reason of the Differences in our Church;
as being a long time carried with the contrary wind of such, who have bin
dazeled with the beauty thereof, and so have stu^bled at her seeming blacknes,
and pretended deformities; and so thereby have bin much distracted in judgment,
and so different in practice, and so thereby exposed to manifold afflictions;
yet seeing our gracious God turns all things about to the best unto his poor
children, as I have had experience in my opposition of much deceitfulness and
vanity in men; so has this sent me graciously for satisfaction to him alone,
who has mercifully resolved my unsettled mind, and fitted me thereby to a more
free, and comfortable renewing and pursuit of my main endeavor, even to
strengthen the things that remain, and to keep my self and others in the way
of Life: Wherein because I have had comfortable experience of your Worships
love and piety, both in refreshing me formerly in that long and tedious
distress of my body, as also in furthering lately my liberty in the Gospel,
and so thereby reviving, as it were, both of Soul and Body: I have thought it
fit to consecrate unto you these first fruits of my renewed calling, as to
whom under God I acknowledge my self especially bounden for the same. What the
subject hereof is, and intent of the same: I desire you heartily to take notice
of in the Treatice ensuing, and to weigh the worth of the Argument equally with
my weakness in the handling thereof. And if herein you shall perceive any power
of God in the weakness of man, any hidden pearls under the rubbish of humane
infirmity, as this shall be an occasion to give God the only glory: so may
it also provoke you by Gods mercy to lend your helping hand, that such defects
may be helped, and such weakness strengthened, Blessed be GOD, that has
given you an heart and place in the Church of God, whereby as you are able, so
are you willing to supply any good means, for the furtherance of the truth,
and peace of our Churches. Whereunto seeing by the grace of God, I am now
returned from many dangerous outgoings of Schism, and separation. My humble
request unto your Worship is, that seeing I have long traveled of many such
other burdens, which are even ready for the birth, but there wants st^ength to
bring the forth, and otherwise am desirous, and in some poor measure, by the
grace of God able to be serviceable in Gods Church. It would please you still
to enlarge your accustomed love for my furtherance herein, in performing some
Widwife-like office hereunto, that the souls of Gods people may bless you,
and the blessing of the Almighty may be multiplied upon you, and all your holy
endeauours to the perfecting of his gracious work, for your eternal
salvation. And so commending my self and labor unto your gracious acceptance,
and protection, and your Worship unto the everlasting mercy and protection of
the Lord, I humbly take my leave.

Resting in Christ Jesus. Your Worshippes and the Churches servant, Th. Cooper.
From my house in Whitecrosse street, Feb. 5.
Erata.
Page. 6. read because. p. 7. r. according. p. 14. r. prove. to serve. 20. r.
preceding. 42. r. 3. r. clear p. 59. dele thirdly: p. 97. r. is. sufficient.
128. l. 2. r. perfection, 116. r. to, 151. r. reject. 153 r. conscience. 162.
r, convenient, 179. r, it of, 184 l. 1. r. cloyeth, 187. r. as, 191. r.
counterfaiteth, 199 r. head, 209. r. at least, 242. r. intention. 255. r. new
to, 269. r. Adynata, 284. r. that where. 317 r. and does not, 353. r. soundnes
of, 385. r. as not 412. from a heart and a heart, 416. r. pronnesses 424 t. for
one. 429. r. then with, 446. r of, 462. r. how can they prove. 466, r. but that
still, 474. r. fetling. 477. r. conceited evils, approving of some pretended,

The Contents hereof.
FIrst, the occasions of this Treatise are discovered together with the maine
Scope and use thereof, as also diverse Rules are laid down concerning the
Method thereof, and benefit thereby. Chap. 1. 2 There is a general
description of thoughts propounded. Namely, 1. What they are, with a particular
explication of this description, discovering the kinds and proper subject of
them. Chap. 2. 3 The uses of thoughts in general, are laid open. Cha. 3. 4 It
proceeds to the description of good thoghts, where 1. the description is
explayned. 2. The diverse kinds of good thoughts are distinguished together
with the benefits of them. Chap. 4. 5 General rules are propounded for the
well ordering of the thoughts and the purifying of them. Chap. 5. 6 As also
diverse marks are discovered, whereby the goodness of our thoughts may be
tried, with the use thereof. Chap. 6. 7 It is showed what evil thoughts are in
general, here the description is explained, the causes of them opened, and the
diverse kinds thereof generally discovered, with general rules hereto. Chap.
7. 8 It is added, how these evil thoughts may be prevented and mastered, to
this end diverse preservatives both in general and particular are propounded
together with the uses thereof. Chap. 8. 9 It is manifested how evil thoghts
differ in the regenerate and unregenerate. Chap. 9. 10 Three special kinds of
evil thoughts are discovered, wherewith the Saints are troubled, whereof the
first is blasphemous and impious thoughts concerning God, religion, and where
the causes of them are laid down: And here 1 How to discern them to proceed
from natural corruption. With the remedy thereof. 2 How to discern them to
be cast in by Satan: With 1 The causes thereof, and 2 Danger and 3 Remedies of
the same.

Together with a trial of their comfortable issue: Chap. 10. 11 A second kind
of these thoughtt are laid open: Namely, Melancholy Imaginations: where 1 The
occasions of them are opened. 2 Their nature is discovered and explained. 3 The
inward causes there-ripped up. 4 The outward causes laid open. 5 Their
differences, are propounded. 6 Their effects discovered. 7 Their remedy
adjoined. 8 With the trial thereof. Chap. 11.
12 A 3, sort of evil thoughts is propounded: Namely Wandering and idle
thoughts interrupting in holy duties, and where 1 Is described what they are,
and the description explained. 2 The causes thereof ripped up. 3 Their kinds
are discovered 4 Their effect, laid open. 5 Their remedy applied. With 6 The
trial thereof. Chapter 12
13 Diverse cases of conscience atre resolved. 1. Concerning Thoughts in
general. As, 1 Whether they be free, wherc. 1 What this means. 2 The
pretenses hereof. 3 The true grounds of this delusion are discovered. 4 With
the danger thereof. 5 The delusion is discovered and refuted. And 6 The colors
thereof detected. 7 With the use thereof, Chap. 13.

14 Special cases of conscience are discussed: 1 concerning good thoughts, and
that on the right hand and, 2 on the left. 3 With the resolution and victory
thereof, and use of the same. Chap. 14. Where specially of dreams and fancies.
15 Special cases of conscience are determined concerning evil thoughts, with
the use thereof. Chap. 15. 16 The general use of the whole treatise
prrpounded. with promise of further light. Chap. 16. 17 The Conclusion of the
whole. Chap. 17.
OF THE OCCASION OF THIS TREATISE, AND Method of the same, as also the Maine
scope and use thereof.
CHAP. I.
Having by Gods mercy, commended unto the Church of God, a Godly direction for
a settled course of sanctification, in the First part of the Christian Daily
Sacrifice, and endeavoring to be a Law unto my self: wherein I have desired to
prescribe laws unto others: among other impediments, which I have found very
forcible to interrupt and cool that gracious resolutio ^ I have had experience
in nothing more, then in the want of ordering of those manifold and unruly
Thoughts, wherewith the mind is distracted, and so oppressed, and miserably
enthralled. For as these are the beginnings of all Actions: so it usually
falls out, that according, either to the well ordering, or neglect hereof,
the constant practice of sanctification, is either furthered or hindered. And
yet such is the Policy of Satan herein: that the outward practice of
sanctification being visible to men, and so drawing to an affectatio^ of
present fruit, even such as the world affoords, as pleasure, profit, credit,
applause, etc. does thereby withdraw from the inward trial of the heart,
before the Lord, and so procures a neglect of the Thoughts and inward motions,
whereby we should especially approve our selves unto God, and so be approved of
him, in the uprightness of our hearts. Which seeing it is a maine occasion and
ground of hypocrisy:

First, of that which is privy, when we think our selves better then we are,
because we measure not our selves by the inward man: or else, indeed by
neglect of our own thoughts, we can not discern thereof. And so may be an
occasion of Gross Hypocrisy: even to make show of that which we would not
be, as being that in show, which we are not in thought, and purpose: therefore
have I especially labored in this inquisition of the Thoughts: Both to the
furtherance of that constant and sincere worship of God: as also for the
purging and preventing of all privy and gross Hypocrsie.

And the rather have I been induced hereunto, because that, as yet, none has
raised any Building upon this Foundation. So, the neglect of our Thoughts, and
ignorance in the discerning of the holy governing of the^, has both on the
one side been an occasion of those many distractions and desertions which the
weak Christian is daily subject unto, and also on the other side of that
desperate profaneness, and licentiousnes, whereunto the common sort of
professors is given over in these evil times. For, whereas, the truth and power
of Sanctification, rather depends upon the inward purpose and sway of the
heart, which is seen and approved of God, then upon the outward conversation,
which is obuious to men: hereupon it falls out that the weak Christian
failing daily in the outward course, being not now able to discern of the
inward purpose of his heart: or if he do discern it, yet not being wise to
judge of the tincture and truth thereof: is thereby subject to manifold
distractions. As, either to think the work of grace not yet truly begun
because it breaks not out into eminent and constant fruit, and so to question
the truth of it Conversion: or else if it be begun, yet because in the outward
course it is subject to many interruptions and decays, therefore it is ready
to conclude to the challenge of Gods faithfulness, and confusion of all it hopes,
that the work begun is undone and abolished: whereas if it were able to measure
the truth of the work begun, by the inward purpose of the heart, and holy
temper thereof: as it should hereby be satisfied in regard of outward
weakness, that the Lord requires no more then he gives: that he looks not so
much to the outward man, as to the heart: that if there be a willing mind, he
accepts it according to what we have, and not according to what we have not.
2. Cor. 8.12. So might this also fully settle against all such interruptions
and decays which accompany all our proceedings in CHRIST.

For whereas the work of grace begun in us merely of Cods mercy, for his
glory, must so be led along in his wisdom, that his power shall be seen in
our weakness, and perfited in our infirmities, that he may have the only glory
thereof: Therefore, howsoever the Lord may leave his children to outward
faylings, for their own humiliati^n, and advancement of his glory, yet still
does his faithfulness appear in this, that although they sleep, yet their
heart is evermore awake, to discover their faylings, to condemn the same, to
give them no rest till they have recovered again; So that as, while they
fail, they have this comfort, that the Evil they do, shall not be imputed
unto them: because their hearts (being purifyed by Faith) do assure them
thereby of the acceptance of their persons above their worth, and of the Truth
of Gods grace, prevailing in them, because the evil they do, they would not,
and therefore they may answer, It is not I, but sin that dwells in me.
Romans 7.19. so though they fail, yet the holy seed abiding in them, gives them
both assurance of their recovery again, and enables them still by faith, to
lay hold upon Christ in whom the Work begun, shall be undoubtedly
perfected, and that, if they can wisely discern the pulse of the heart, in
their greatest failings, and faintings thereupon, and shall be able to make use
of such help as it affords unto them for recovery, they may by Gods mercy
find a gracious issue out of their greatest tentations: either in that by
Faith, they can look back into former experience, and so may conclude from
the faithfulness of God, that he that has begun the work, will perfect it in
them. Phil. 1.6. or, in that by Faith, they can look forwards, within the
veil, whereunto the foreru^ner JESUS CHRIST their head, is entered in before
them: and so thereby may certainly conclude, that he will draw them up all
after him, that their head being now at rest, and in perfect glory, they, the
members also shall be more then conquerours in and with him, and when Christ
which is their life shall appear, they shall also appear with him in glory,
whose lives are now hid with Christ in God. Thus the discovery of this great
Mystery of the Thoughts, shall be much available to assure the weak Christian
of the truth of his calling, and also to satisfy and recover him in, and out
of any such rubs or faylings as are incident thereunto his further growth.

And so also shall it serve to discover and convince the secret Atheism of the
times, and such gross prophanenes as issues from the same,

For, whereas, the Root of al Atheism, especially that which is secret and
concealed from the eye of man: Is this, The fool says in his heart there is no
God. Though the Lord be in their lips, yet he is not in their reins. In their
thoughts they deny him, though they confess him with their lips, God is not
in all his thoughts. Psalm. 10.4. Therefore if once, it shall be made good, that
our Thoghts are to be ordered and brought into subjection: this will prove a
gracious means to convince and confound this secret Atheism.

And seeing, when once we give the bridle to our loose and wicked thoughts, as
if the Lord had no power over them: we are hereby justly given up by the Lord
to all open prophanenes, who will have al, or none: who usually confounds such
hypocrisy, with desperate prophanes: so that if we deny him in the heart, to
give him spiritual worship, he will deny us before men, in leaving us to all
gross evils for the confusion of our Atheism: what better remedy can we
minister hereunto: then first to purge the fountain, that the streams may be
wholesome. That by the rectifying of the heart and subduing the imaginations
thereof, the whole man may be brought into subjection to the obedience of
Christ. And thus shall this holy government of the thoughts prove a blessed
means to purge out the secret Atheism of the heart, and so to procure a
blameless and upright conversation before men.

But of these things more fully in the conclusion of the Treatise. Mean while,
as this may serve to discover the scope of this Treatise, so for the Method
there of take these few directions, that so we may the better profit thereby.
Concerning the method. Take first this direction, that seeing spiritual
experience especially of mine own, and other estates has been the chief
spring, that has yielded these meditation: so it must be the touchstone to
make trial thereof. As this subject is a mystery to the carnal man, so it is
he only that can plough with my Heifer, that shall make true benefit thereby.
And therefore labor to be found in Christ, and thou shall be able to unfold this
ridle: thou shall find the comfort of these wholesome observations.

And therefore seeing in these experimental collections, that may be
consonant to faith which is contrary and above the reach of reason: and so many
times crosses the stream of Art: therefore let this be thy second direction
for profit herein, that thou stumble not at such failing in Art, which I
profess my self herein not strictly to have stood upon: as in the
Descriptions, Divisions, etc. but rather that thou make use of such heavenly
Experience as is covered under a ruder form, and so bless God, for any true
light revealed in these evil times, to further thee in sanctification: and the
rather in that the infirmities of man shall make more to his glory.

Lastly, that thou may not fail to make use hereof: Compare what here thou
see in a glass, with thine own particular estate see how face answers face,
and so the heart of man it self, and so by experience of thine own
particular, thou shall be able to discern the truth of such observations as are
here laid down, and make application thereof to thy self, for thy better
reformation.

Above all; use earnest prayer to thy God to open the eyes of thine
understanding, that thou may discern this great Mystery of the government of
thy thoughts That thy heart may be opened, and subdued to the approbation and
practice thereof. Praising God for any light thou receiuest hereby, and praying
for grace and liberty, for the supply of further light to build thee forward
to perfection.

CHAP. II. Of thoughts in general. 1. What they are, 2. how they they differ
from consent to sin, and such occasions thereof, 3. what are the subjects and
4. causes of them, 5 how we are to order them, 6. with the use thereof.
THat we may lay down some certain direction for the well governing of our
thoughts. We are first to consider what these Thoughts are. Namely, they are
the first motions of the the mind unto good or evil, either arising from the
inward disposition of the heart, or else suggested outwardly by Satan, or else
occasioned by outward objects, that present themselves unto the senses: and so
to the common sense, and thereby stirring and affecting the heart, to the
liking, or dislike of what is conceived and so producing good or evil actions
in the conversation.

First, I say, they are the First motions, as thereby to distinguish them from
the Affections, which are accompanied with the concurrence of the will, which
though they seem to break out suddenly, yet they have these motions proceeding
and occasioning the same. And secondly, to discern them from such sudden and
violent actions of revenge, lust, etc which howsoever they may seem to be
first conceived in the birth: yet in truth they wanted not both the first
suggestion, and second approbation to occasion the same: howsoever in time,
they may seem to be all one, nay like the lightning which oftentimes seems to
break out before the thunder, so they may seem to prevent the motion unto
evil. And so 3. to determine the true ground and order of the accomplishment of
evil and consumatio^ thereof, as arising from the corruption of the heart
originallie, without which all suggestion of satan, or occasions from objects
could not avail to commit sin, which only of it self is sufficient to raise
up, and cherish the matter of sin, that it may be inexcusable for the first
motion, much more for the acting thereof.

4 And so to humble the Saints in their first motions to good, which seeing
they may many times proceed from Satan if they be unseasonable, and not
befitting our persons, and callings: howsoever they proceed from our selves,
or from the illightning Spirit: they are no warrant of our renewed nature,
unless they be entertained, and approved by the will, and so in some measure
practiced.

5 And yet withal to comfort the Saints. And that both in respect of the evil
motion, that if it be not consented unto, but resisted: it shall not be
imputed: especially in regard of the good motion, that if it be entertained
and endeavored to be put in practice, howsoever we may be hindered in the
act by Tentation or opposition: yet if there be a willing mind, the Lord will
accept it according to that which we have, and not according to what we have
not, 2. Cor. 8.12.

Of the kinds of evil thoughts.
1 I say they proceed either from the heart, in ascending out of it, being
naturally as a boiling sea, or sepulcher of corruption, steeming and vaporating
up continually a world of all wicked, and ill disposed imagination, as the
stomach vapoureth up continually into the head all noisome and flatulent
vapors: therein declaring,

1 The root of the^, namely the evil and corrupt heart. Math.

2 And showing, that this alone is sufficient to poison the whole man with all
kind of wickedness, as having in it the ground and spawne thereof.

3 And withal making it manifest, that as without this corrupt fountain, all
motions iniected by satan, or occasioned from the world, are not effectual to
sin, as we see in our Saviors example: so this corruption of the heart is
the cause of all such iniected thoughts by Satan, of all such occasioned
thoughts, from the world, and the objects thereof.

And so thereby conuincing wretched man to be the sole author of his own
misery, as having the ground and matter within himself, Ioh. 13.

2 I add, That these thoughts proceed from Satan, as being iniected by him,
who being a Spirit, can insensibly cast evil thoughts into our hearts: who
taking advantage of our corruption, apt to receive them as tinder is the fire:
does therefore cast them as oil into the flame, to make it more vehement, and
dangerous: Discovering herein, as the subtilty of Satan, who knows in what
ground to sow his seed: so the desperate corruption of our Nature; which is not
only evil in it self, but hereby enticeth and provoke Satan, like a filthy
harlot, to commit spiritual fornication with the soul, and so to beget not
only all sorts of blasphemous and abominable thou^hts, but thereby Appro^^ion,
and consent to evil, and so acting and consummating thereof: and so
discovering the desperatnesse of natural corruption, which willingly submits
to, nay entertaines the power of Satan: yea inui^es him with it to whorish
allurements, to the consummation of all wickedness, even as the sent of the
carrion, draws the ravens thereto: and discovering the impossibility of nature
to any good: seeing it is not only prone to evil continually-but greedily
enticeth and entertaines all sorts of devilish rentation, to perfect iniquity.

3 I add, tha^ ^hese evil thoughts procee^^ from outward objects, whi^^ though
they be good in the^^^lues, yet by the corrup^^^ of man, they become all
subject to corruption: and so being altered in their prime quality by our
sin, they prove instruments by the divine justice, to consummate the same,
and to take vengeance of the sin of man, by being occasions to stir up
delight in sin, and so to the acting and consummating thereof: and so being
subject more and more to va^^ty by our abuse; cease not to groan and sigh in
their kind and manner for their deliverance from corruption; and so to the
hastening of eternal vengeance upon man, the cause of their corruption.

Discovering herein as the diverse kinds of evil thoghts, from the diverse
Grounds of them: so also the order and consummation of evil Thoughts: That
first, they proceed from the evil heart: 2 Hereupon they are increased by
Satan's iniection, and so enflamed more and more: 3. And they are seconded by
the world, and outward occasions, all serving as fuel to increase the inward
fire, and as matter to nourish and maintain the same, til it has set them and
it self, all on fire of Hell.

And hereby manifesting the impossibility of man's recovery, either from
himself, or from any thing in the world, seeing by reason of his corruption,
all things become impure unto him, as being matter of sin, and fuel for
vengence.

Disclayming their niceness and perverseness, their superstition and
hypocrisy, that teach to abstain from Meats, which God has created good, and
that for fear of pollution from the creature, seeing that which only goes
out of man, only defiles him, and all other creatures, 2. that refuse their
good, in regard of the corruption, that accidentally accompanies the same, 3.
And esteem good things evil, because they are abused by evil men.

And teaching us, how to Sanctify al things, and make them pure unto us; even
by purging first our selves; because to the pure, all things are pure, Tit.
1.11.15. and so how to converse with, and in the World; Even by walking, as
lights in the midst of a crooked generation, by sanctifying the same unto us
by the Word, and Prayer, 1. Tim. 4.5.

What is the proper subject of them?
Thirdly I add, That as these motions and evil Thoughts proceed from the
heart: so they rebound again upon the same, stirring and affecting of the
heart to the liking or disliking of what is conceived: discovering herein the
contagions and poison some nature of these Thoughts, that not only by their
sent, they delight the heart, which was the fountain of them: but further also
do ensnare and enuenome the same, to affect and consent thereunto. Advancing
hereby the admirable wisdom and justice of God: who makes the evil heart it
own scourge and tormenter, in that it is affected and infected with those
thoughts, which ascend out of the same.

And so therein conuincing it desperate estate in sin: that through it Native
corruption, is fast bound in the chains thereof, being so far from resisting
the first motion to evil, as that thereby it is enticed and ensnared to
consent thereto.

And so it follows, that from this consent, it proceeds to the act of
evil, and so to custom therein, and so to the benumming and perverting of the
conscience, that he may make up the measure thereof.

Discovering therein, first; the desperate corruption of nature which has in it
self the seeds and spawne of it self, of all sin, no not the sin of the
Holy Ghost exempted: and is sufficient of it self to the consummation of all
sins, though there were no Devil to tempt, no outward object to allure, and
so conuincing him to be sole author of his own condemnation, to the Justifying
of God, and his righteous judgments against him, to the abasing and
confounding of the pride of the flesh, and the advancement of the merit of
Christ, as being only available for his recovery, only sufficient to the
perfection of his Sanctification, that God may have the only glory of all his
mercy.

And this I lay down as a Description of T^oughtes in general, because
naturally they are only evil: continually the best are not without some
mixture of corruption, sufficient without Gods rich mercy, to convince and
confound not only all natural, but even all spiritual inherent
righteousness* that so all pride of flesh may be abased, and the Lord only
advanced in his free goodness and mercy.

CHAP. II. Uses to be made in general of our Thoughts.
1 Whereas Hypocrisy usually makes a fayrer show in Religion then does
sincerity; in regard of outward shows and and actions: yet herein is the
honor of Sincerity, this the trial hereof, even by making conscience of
Thoughts: this is the prerogation of Grace, to keep rule in the inward man, to
captiuate the imaginations, and subdue the Thoughts to the obedience of Christ.
1. Cor. 10.4.

Only the Regenerate man makes conscience of the 10. Commandment, concerning
lustful thoughts and desires, and so herein makes conscience of all the rest.
Math. 5.

2. Whereas in regard of the variety and intricatenes of our thoughts, yea
indeed their infiniteness in a manner, we cannot take notice of them, and so
neither of our own hearts: howsoever this to the carnal man may be an
occasion of profaneness and hypocrisy: yet to the regenerate, it proves a
gracious means to deny our selves, and renounce our own righteousness, that
we may be found in Christ. Ioh. 9. 3. Phil. 10.11.

3. Seeing security is the most damnable and fearful delusion that Christians
may be subject unto, as nourishing all cursed hypocrisy, and preparing by the
ripening of sin, to sudden and unavoidable vengeance: There is not a better
help to prevent the same, then the meditation and observation of our thoughts,
as yielding continual matter of fear, humiliation, etc.

4. Whereas the Lord uses means to the prevention of evil, and therefore not
only has so left the mind of man, as that it is a continual fountain to
yield such strange and monstrous thoughts; but further also leaves it to
Satan, who pestereth it ofttimes with worlds of horrible imaginations and
temptations to evil: And this to prevent the actions of sin and custom
therein: Therefore this use may we make of our Thoughts: either to recall
sin past unrepented of, or to prevent some sin we are subject unto: or to
stir up to some such duty, as we have neglected and grown cold in.

5 Whereas the Lord is the searcher of the hearts and reins, he knows our
Thoughts long before: therefore, as this may settle the heart against that
secret Atheism, that says in his heart there is no God, so it may further us
to sinceritie-to labor truth in the inward man, to do all things as in Gods
presence, to approve the heart in all things unto God.

6 Whereas the Lord has so estated us in this life, as that we have no abiding
City here, but as strangers are traveling to what is above: hereunto
especially furthers the consideration of our Thoughts. As being continual
matter to unsettle us in any repose of this life, and gracious means to
provoke us to hunger after perfection and glory in the life to come, where we
shall be free from these inborne neighbors, and noisome companions, haunting
us in all occasions, places, and times, being present with us, when we should
do good, and always conuincing us of evil, when we do our best, who shall
not now desire to be rid of this body of sin, that we may more freely and
entirely serve our blessed God.

7. Lastly, this Doctrine of Thoughts will prove an excellent spur for our
encouragement to all conscionable holiness. For as our Thoughts are, so will
be our words and actions, labor we to rectify them, and all will be
conformable.

CHAP. IV. Of good Thoughts, and such temptations as are incident hereunto.
What good Thoghts are: Namely, The sole and immediate Motions and Operations
of the Spirit of God, illightning the understanding with knowledge of good
things, and so stirring up Thoughts and Motions to affect and embrace the same,
and so to constant practice herein.

I say, they are the sole and immediate motions and operations of Gods spirit:
thereby to distinguish them from all evil motions, which arise from corrupt
Nature and so to strip Nature of any interest in them, and to give the Glory of
all good in us unto God, in whom we live and move, and have our being: whose it
is, to give the will and the deed, of whom is our sufficiency even to the
thinking of a good Thought. 1 Cor. 3.5.

2. I add, how they are wrought in us by Gods Spirit, namely, by illightning
the understanding with the knowledge of good things: Expressing therein the
material cause of these thoughts: Namely, that they are bred of the knowledge
of good and holy things: not that natural divine knowledge remaining in
corruption, which neither at all reaches to the Dear knowledge of the true
good; neither enable; the knowledge of what it tenders, to be particularly
conceived, and applied of us; but a spiritual knowledge from the perfect light:
whereby it conceiues the will of God, and what concerns the same, and so

As it follows, prouokes the Thoughts to an actual and constant approving,
and practicing of the will of God: And herein they are differenced from all the
Thoughts of Hypocrites which are but Flashes, and Tastes; never enabling to
action: at least not to constancy therein.

Of the diverse kinds of good Thoughts.
These are generally Two 1. Extraordinary, such as were occasioned by
Revelations, Dreams, as to the Prophets and Apostl s of old: and these, either
concerning their own estates, or the general condition of the Church, as to
Esaias, Jeremy, etc.

And also to peculiar and private men, as to Princes, Dan. 2. and 4. Genes. 41.
so Joseph. Luke 1. Mat. 1.

And these good Thoughts are common to good and bad: As being sent of the Lord,
either to warn them, and bring them to repentance, or else to make them
without excuse, as may appear in the case of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Jeremy,
etc.

Secondly, these Thoughts are ordinarily raised by the blessed Spirit of God,
guiding the heart, and stirring up therein good motions: and these also are
diverse according to the different working and measure of the Spirit in diverse
subjects. For either the Spirit only illightens the mind with some
supernatural knowledge, and so thereupon offers motions, and stirs up
Thoughts, and so desires and affections to the truth. And these may be in the
wicked, and unregenerate as serving to puff up, to entertain worldly ends,
to benefit others, and happily further their salvation, to make our selves
without excuse. Or else,

The spirit heales and renues the heart, and so kindles in it Thoughts, and
motions to serve God, to embrace him as the chiefest good: which though by
tentation, or neglect, they may be choked, and in a manner to our sense
extinguished; yet by the power of Grace, they are revived again, and so
continued to provoke us to perfection and to comfort us in our faylings: And
these are proper to the Regenerate.

And these are diverse, according to the diverse occasions of them: which are
Generally two. Either Occasions of Joy, in regard of particular or public,
inward or outward prosperity, and these occasion Thoughts of joy,
thankfulness, triumph, etc.

Or Occasion of Sorrow, in respect either of our own or the Churches inward or
outward distress: and these occasion thoughts of sorrow, perplexity, etc.

And both these, though contrary in themselves; yet both good; being Ieuelled
to their proper Objects, and kept within their true and holy Bounds.

And both these according to their several objects are also differenced more
particularly, yea extend themselves innumerably according to their occasions.

The singular benefit and advantage of good Thoughts.
Generally, They are notable evidences of the sincerity of the heart, as only
known to God, and by the pureness and holy temper, and swaying of the
Thoughts, so known unto us, as that thereby we are sensible of Gods present
grace, and hungry after a greater measure: for as our Thoughts, so are our
desires after heavenly things.

Particularly, they are gracious trials, and warrants of the sincerity of all
private duties performed secretly to our God; who seeeth the heart, that not
so much with the lips, as with the motions of the mind, and wrastlings of the
inward Thoughts, we combat with the Lord; and figh and groan unto him, who
sees in secret, and will reward it openly: So did Moses, David, Anna, and the
rest of the Saints, approve themselves unto God. Exodus 32. 1. Sam. 2.

Secondly, they are sound Trials of the sincerity of all Outward duties. It is
not so much what we do, as what we mind; not what the eye or ear attends, as
what the Thought and Affection fastens on. The Lord loves truth in the inward
parts, and regards the outward service according to the inward intention. And
so they prove gracious means daily to humble us in the performance of our best
duties: seeing at the best, howsoever we may carry the duty currantly in the
outward Action before men; and so being approved and advanced of them, are
thereby subject to pride and vain glory; and so to hypocrisy; as to rest in
the outward work done: yet if we consider the manifold wanderings of the heart,
those blasphemous and profane thoughts, that do accompany them, diuerting the
mind therein from God, and hindering the constant sincerity thereof: how shall
this but exceedingly humble us under the mighty hand of God? who tries the
thought, and judges according to the sway and temper of the heart: shall not
this discover the imperfection and pollution of our best actions, even to be no
better then a menstruous cloth? Esaias, 64.6.

And hence arises another gracious Benefit, namely, that being privy to
this inward corruption, we stand not upon our own righteousness to be
justified thereby, but still renounce our selves, that we may be found in
Christ: that by his virtue we may be enabled to more sincere and universal
obedience.

And this produces another gracious Benefit, namely, that in the sense of our
imperfection, co^uinced by the obliquitie of our Thoughts; we are still
provoked to forget what is behind and to hasten to that which is before, even
for the prize of our high calling in Jesus Christ.

Lastly, because the conscience of inward corruption is a special occasion to
Satan to challenge of hypocrisy, and so to discourage in our proceeding: We
have out of this consideration of our inward purposes, as a gracious evidence
of the truth of our hearts, because we think and endeavor more then we can
do: and so on the other side, a sure pledge of the sincerity of our thoghts;
because we discern and mourn for our inward faylings, and so have a notable
comfort of the acceptance of our Actions, not so much from the vprightnes of
our hearts, as from the righteousness of Christ: whereby his Spirit being
conuayed into our hearts: does thereby still convince us of such evil, which
the world knows not of: and so withal, approues us to be in Christ, not
having our own righteousness, in that we stand not upon our own
Justification, which is confounded by this sense of the corruption of our
thoughts; but that still we take hold of Christ, and labor to be found in
him, that so we may grow up in him to perfectness: as having thereby not
only an evidence of the Acceptance of our persent, and so of our Endeauours
for the present: but hereby also reaping a comfortable evidence of our
assurance to continue, and persevere unto the end, seeing our Christ will not
quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed: but will still show his
power in our weakness, and perfect his work by our infirmities, that he may
have the only glory of his Merit, and we in him may attain the full measure
of the age of Christ, growing up to be perfect men, wanting nothing.

CHAP. V. General Rules for the well ordering of the Thoughts
1 THat we spend our time most in Meditation of Gods Majesty and goodness:
and so wholly season our thoughts therewith, and with the fruits thereof,
namely, the hope and holdfast of eternal life.

2 That we withdraw our selves as much as may be from worldly vanity.

3 That we begin the day with holy Thoughts and Meditations, not suffering
our selves to be interrupted by any unnecessary occasion.

4 That we take occasion in the night, to exercise our thoughts on God, and
such occasions as then shall be seasonably offered, breaking our sleep not
unwillingly to this end.

5 Rectify we our thoughts daily by Reading the Word, and often private prayer.

6 Call we often our Thoughts to an account, and let not an idle thought pass
without a Censure of the Word.

And condemn we the Deceitfulnes of our hearts: which minister occasion of
such infinite thoughts, and contra^ie.

8 Meditate we often on the day of judgment, when inquisition shall be made
for our Thoughts.

9 And forget we not, that Infinite Sacrifice of the Son of God, who knows
our thoughts, which we are ignorant of: and has performed a plentif^ll
Redemption for them all.

9 Give we not the least way to our wandering and foolish Thoughts, but
suppress we them presently, and

10 Exercise we some Special of our Thoughts, and put them in practice,
because Idleness is the nurse of these vain Thoughts.

11 Strive we especially against Pride and Covetousness, which minister most
common and dangerous matter of fearful and wounding thoughts.

12 Obey we the checkes of Conscience, conuincing these Thoughts, and labor
we to sharpen it, that it may censure more.

13 Discern we wisely between our Thoughts, 1. such as are unnecessary,
nicke we them in the head, and cut we them off presently, 2. Such as are
necessary, discern we of the most necessary, and laying aside those, pursue we
these.

Thirdly, yet so, as that we wisely single them out, not confounding our
minds and memories with many at once, but pursuing one, and bringing it to
some head and use.

4 Yea though a more necessary Thought come in the way, yet hold we on in our
choice, till we have brought it to some issue.

5 And whereas we must look for often interruptions from Satan: so
entertain we these, as that we give not over without sight of conquest, and
then return we to the pursuit of our former subject.

14 Be we constant in pe^forming the Daily Sacrifice, and restrain we our
thoughts to such particular duties, as are incide^t to each season and occasion.

And herein avoid we wisely al curious Speculation, and diuing into hidden
mysteries, as being a maine occasion to stir up and increase blasphemous
Thoughts. And so also carefully avoid we curiosity and prying into others
affairs: looking home especially, and minding our own business, that so we may
prevent a world of envious and censorious thoughts.

Especially be we careful of keeping the Sabbath, spiritually confining our
Thoughts to holy things: and this shall be a means to better them at all
other occasions.

CHAP. VI, Of diverse Marks and Rules to discern holy Thoughts by. And how to
difference them from all deceitful and carnal thoughts.
FIrst is, in regard of their Nature, Form, and manner of working, as
ordinarily following the temper and constitution of the heart wherein they we
molded. As in the wicked, good motions and Thoughts as they are rare, so are
they sudden and easily vanishing. But in the godly they are frequent and
advised, constant and effectual.

Secondly, they differ in regard of the Obuct. The Thoughts of Gods child are
upon that one thing which is necessary, subordinating all other thoughts
thereunto. But the thoughts of the hypocrite, though they may roue now and then
after heaven, yet their maine object is temporal happiness, and such things
as may further thereunto, and so subjects all conceit of heaven to the
happiness of the earth.

Thirdly, They differ, in regard of the Order and Government of them. The
Hypocrite esteeming them as Thoughts, and so Free, rather as dreams, and
imaginations, then any matter to be heeded; so passes the mouer without
observation* without employment, etc.

But the Godly, labors to make his heart a gracious receptacle of holiest
thoughts, and so sets a watch over his heart, to prevent evil thoughts,
covenants with his soul to entertain the good. Among the good, makes choice of
the most necessary, subordinates all other hereunto, sets bounds to those
millions of imaginations, that daily arise: and erects an holy Regiment among
them, Confining the^ wisely to a reverent and settled meditation upon Gods word
and works; to a care of conscionable managing the Affairs of his Calling; to
a desire, how to benefit the Church of God abroad, or any particular brother
^ very sparingly, and warily, not without many cautions, and exceptions,
letting them out to honest recreations.

Fourthly, they differ in respect of their measure and extent: and so there are
some thoughts peculiar to the Elect, with which the State of unregeneration is
utterly unacquainted.

As first, Thoughts full of fear and astonishment, all of hell and horror,
which first rise out of the heart, when it is first stricken with the sense of
Gods wrath, at the sight of his sins. These are scortched in many with the
very flames of hell, in their first conversion, and they do even fret and
consume the very marrow out of the bones, and turn the best moisture of them,
into the drought of summer: and yet (which is not peculiar to the wicked, which
have some such terrors from the fear of vengeance) have their issue in most
unspeakable comforts

And these are a second sort of Thoughts proper to the Godly, composed all of
pure comfort, joy, heaven, immortality: being the sweet and lovely issues of
the Spirit of Adoption, speaking peace unto the poor soul, in the testimony
of the pardon of sin.

Hence proceeds another troop of spiritual and unutterable Thoughts: after
the new birth is confirmed and grown up to some good stature: because now it is
to encounter, either with the fained joys of the world, or with the bitter
sto^mes of troubles, and persecutions: therefore it pleases the Lord to
prevent and arm it with some such heavenly draughts of that immortal pleasure,
that so it may both despise the bitter sweetes of the world, and wade through
more cheerfully the momentany troubles of this life.

1. And these usually may be discerned by their fit seasons: either, after some
zealous heat, and feeling feruencie in prayer.

2. Or, some gracious and profitable sanctifying of the Sabaoths.

3. Or upon some special and set humiliation, performed for some special
sin, or general calamity, imminent, or lying upon the Church.

4. Or, upon some strange imputation of the fiery and malicious tongues of the
wicked, when the innocent heart retyring into it se^f, and examining it inward
evidence, finds no cause of such false and cruel imputation, but defense of
Gods truth and profession of holiness.

5 Or, when the malice of the wicked, has so far provoked, as to compass
and enclose the poor soul, that it sees no way to escape: but is ready to be
swallowed up and utterly rooted out: then as a comfortable testimony of
deliverance: it pleases the Lord usually to shine unto it, with some such
beams of heavenly joy, that so it may not faint under the burden, that it may
be more then conqueror in it.

6. Often times, it pleases God to accompany the conscionable receiving of the
Sacrament, with these rauishing joys, that so the heart may be taken up, from
poring on the outward Elements, to solace it self in that heavenly Feast of
Christ's all-sufficient merits.

7. Specially, if it please the Lord to call out any of his Saints to witness
to his truth, and to lay down their lives for the testimony of Jesus: usually
here, this Joy appears: both in their profession of it before men; with that
boldness alacrity as they usually have bin esteemed out of their wits: in
patient enduring their taunts, etc. as also especially in sealing up the truth
with their blood, as the case of many Martyrs have made it evident.

Usually, after an heavy storm of inward trouble, and vexation of Consc^ence,
it pleases the Lord to return with the Joy of his countenance, and so refresh
the heart with Joy unspeakable, and glorious. 1. Pet. 1.8.

A fifth difference of the good Thoughts of the Hypocrite and sincere Christian
is in regard of the seasonablenesse of them.
The sincere heart as it has it Thoughts fixed on the best Object: Namely, the
glory of God, and it own salvation; and such means as may further the same;
so does it wisely entertain such occasions as either way fall out, to further
it enoying of it desired end: And to this purpose, are the holy Thoughts
suited, and sorted accordingly.

If the Lord turn away his face, the thoughts of grief and astonishment, if
he smile and return, in liberty, and compassion: then our thoughts are
striving to be thankful unto our God: As it fares well or ill with
spiritual occurrents, either in particular to our selves, or in general to
the Church of God: so are the thoughts of feeling members sorted answerably.
Especially seeing the Lord has offered one Occasion above all the rest, to try
the right swaying and pitch of our Thoughts. Namely, his holy Sabboath:
therefore this will prove a maine trial of the Sincerity of our thoughts that
we can prepare them to entertain the spiritual Occasions thereof: Fix the^
constan^ly and separate them thereupon, and retain in them a longing and
hungring after the next S^baoth approaching, as if yet we had not our fill of
those heavenly dainties, as if we would redeem the time, and store up against
the day of reckoning: And thus ought it to be with the children of God, thus in
some measure it falls out. But it is otherwise with the hypocrites Howsoever
diversity of earthly occasions may distract and alter his thoughts, yet is
this only in regard of the crossing of his temporal happiness, not in that
h^^^^^e and it future happiness is intended hereby. Let Profaneness be
countenanced, or sincerity cherished, he takes no thought, so he may sleep in
a whole skin, and keep entire his worldly comforts: this is that which gives
life to his thoughts; if this do fail, his thoughts are heavy, dumpish and
desperate. Well may he conform and confort with the times in his outward
gestures, words and actions: but ordinarily his thoughts admit no change, save
only so far as his private temporal felicity is endangered by public
judgments, or enlarged by showers of mercy, and blessings from heau^n.

5 A sixth ^^^fference between the Thoughts of the sincere hearts, and formal
hypocrite appears by his skill and dexterity in ruling, by that holy
wisdom, and Godly jealousy, in watching over them.

1 We may observe even in the unsanctified heart some watching over words and
actions, because these are obuious to the World, and respect credit; but for
Inward thoughts these are neglected upon pretense of their Liberty, or in
regard of the difficulty and impossibility of ordering them; being so diverse,
sudden, innumerable, etc.

2 If any regard be had herein, it is only of such, as tend to provoke to
some monstrous sins, either abhorrent to Nature, as not being accustomed
thereto, or tending to some disgrace, and danger in the World, or some great
horror of conscience.

3 Yea happily upon Experience, in regard of present employments, he may gain
some masterie over thoughts of heaviness, or mela^choly, over thoghts of rage,
revenge, and so to maintain the credit of his civil honesty, to prosecute
his present occasions more chearefully, and so enjoy more securely his Idol of
worldly happiness: but for a General and Special Watch over all his
thoughts: such as hinder and interrupt spiritual duties, such as provoke to
the enjoying of his beloved sin: such as tend to an inward familiarity with
God; these things as he makes no conscience of, or desires to be soothed in:
so for the Thoughts that concern each particular, he easily gives liberty to
himself; Either resting in the outward Work, and form of holy duties, and
never regarding, or being troubled with such inward thoughts, as do tend to
make him spiritual therein: or laboring to smother and dead such thoug^^^, as
any way cross his darling sin: or not at all being acquainted with any
inward familiarity with God in meditation, private prayer; etc. he esteems
all such thoughts no better then Tentations that move and call upon him
thereunto.

4 And if so be, that he be touched with troubled thoughts, tending to bring
him to Repentance: these also he esteems as fittes of Melancholy, tending to
disquiet his carnal peace, and so reiects them as tentations. Thus is it with
a naughty heart in the ordering of his Thoughts for Heavenly things.

5 Only for such worldly occasion ^^ as tend to the managing and enjoying of
present happiness, as his thoughts are usually, and indeed only hereupon: so
has he here so^^ wisdom to order and dispose of them, to their several
occasions, not that he may repress and subdue the insatiablenesse of them, but
rather that by his politic disposing of them to their several occasions, he
may better enlarge them with more contentment and profit, for the more free
enjoying of earthly happiness.

6 And so though he should generally suppress and smother all subordinate
Thoughts, tending any way to the satisfying^ of the Flesh, yet herein is his
deceit, that he intends only the curbing of some present: for the enjoying of
the maine Idol of pleasure, or profit which he aims at, that his thoughts
being now restrained in a lesser evil, he may have more liberty to prosecute
his darling sin: and so when he has attained his desire, then the former watch
is discharged, seven worse Spirits enter in, Liberty is now granted to all
looseness, and euilnesse of Thoughts.

7 Or if he be disappointed of his hope, and crossed in his maine desire: yet
here is his comfort, to enlarge his Thoughts therein, to please himself
thereby, that his mind was as good though he cannot enjoy it: He is rich in
thought, though he cannot be otherwise: It does him good that he can still
think thereon: This gives him hope, that yet he shall prevail, or this will
please him, that he can even think enuiously and disdainefully of others,
that have attained what he has missed.

8 May we not observe it ordinary with wicked men, that though they are out of
date concerning the act of some evil: yet in regard of the insatiable desire
of their hearts, it is a maine comfort to think of pleasures past, and so to
retain in the mind a speculatiue Idea of them, and thereby to renew a
spiritual practice even of former sins.

9 Thus it fares with the wicked in the ordering of their Thoughts. Generally
we shall find this, That their maine practice is to curb and extinguish by
all means, all good and holy Thoughts: But to give the bridle by all occasions
to vain and wicked imaginations.

As for the Regenerate, It is otherwise with him: As his heart is settled upon
God, and the things of a better life, so are all his thoughts intended and
purposed thereunto.

And he uses all holy means to nourish these holy Thoughts, by Prayer,
Meditation, Hearing and Reading the Word.

And he auoydeth carefully all means which may interrupt or divert the same
as idleness, ill Company, wicked objects, wandering of his senses, discontent.

4 If evil thoughts are raised up by Natures corruption, or Satan's iniection,
or occasioned from without by worldly objects: herein appears the wisdom of
a good heart: First not to give way unto them: He suffers not his heart to
run after his eye, no not so much as to be delighted with it, to be ensnared
with the pleasure thereof: but by all means seeks to stifle the thought at the
first rising, If it be blasphemous and terrible he reasons not with it, but
reiects and abandons it, with all detestation and horror: by prayer, repentance
and humiliation, repelling the same. If it be good, and yet not seasonable, as
interrupting in Prayer, meditation, hearing the Word: and he reiects it
likewise speedily, as a bratte of Satan's Angel-like brightness: and so
continues with fear and watchfulnes in his intended duty.

5 As for the sins he has by Gods mercy conquered: as Satan by renewing the
thoughts thereof, seeks to reenter; so does he wisely turn these thoughts to
prevent reentrie: adding withal, not so much the sweetness of the sin past,
as the bitterness thereof, what it has cost him already, what a scarre it
has left on him, what a good God he has found in delivering him there from:
and so turning the thoughts of entising to sin, to the thoughts of Gods
exceeding mercy, in pardoning the same, and giving him grace to subdue so
hideous a monster, his heart is taken up and nourished with the love of Christ,
and in him is strengthened to resist Tentation.

6 This is certain, that the Thoughts reviuing former sin, breed in him
more humility, more fear of him self, more watchfulness against new
surprisals, a daily renouncing of himself, and relying upon Christ, that so he
may neither be tickled with new delights, nor affrighted with horror of
judgment, at the ghastly appearance of them

7. Especially, whereas Satan will now shrowde himself even under our holiest
purposes of humiliation; either by raising up some tickling delight of the
sin, which we labor by most earnest and sorrowful thoughts, to judge in our
selus, or else mingling with these thoughts of sorrow, melancholy passions; to
distract and divert them from the true end: Or else to eat out this
flourishing gourd of our most intentive and humbled thoughts, with some worm of
spiritual pride, desert, etc. had not the holy heart need to keep a special
watch herein, does it not wisely suspect it self, in regard of these dead
flies that are like to corrupt the most precious ointment, and to deprive it of
the comfort of all sound humiliation; though not enticing it again unto the
same sin, yet changing it hereby into a more grievous and dangerous evil.

Another point of this heavenly wisdom in watching over the Thoughts;
ordinary to the elect, where in he exceeds the unregenerate, is, a wise
singling out, and encountering of them. As, whereas there is no child of God, but
is subject to one sin above another: therefore it is his especial care to
curb his thoughts concerning it: though he neglect not any other, yet
principally he attends such thoughts, as tend this way, etc.

And so, as it usually falls out, that, as he shall find himself defective in
one grace more then another: as his heart is enflmed with a love to al Gods
commandments, and to such graces as may further to the performance hereof; so
especially does he think upon most, what he wants most: and so labors to
enlarge and quicken his thoughts thereunto by prayer, repentance etc.

And hence proceeds another branch of this heavenly wisdom: that, whereas,
it is then best to enlarge the mind in holy thoughts and meditation, when it is
freest from hinderance, either abroad or at home: Therefore the holy heart
takes the fit opportunity hereunto: Either desiring a private and retired
course, that so it may more freely solace it self with it God; and enlarge it
thoughts on God and his goodness: or else taking Occasion of the night season,
when the body being at rest, is free from interruption by outward objects:
thereby to contemplate more freely and constantly on the glory of the life to
come, and all such gracious means as may further thereunto. As for the
Hypocrite it is otherwise with him: As of all things he cannot endure to be
alone, for fear of Melancholy Bugbeares, etc. So, if he retire himself, it is
rather to plot for his desire, or bless himself in his purchase: to flatter
his heart in his imaginary happiness. If now any good motion break in, to
draw him higher, he startles as it had been at a Bugbeare; and presently
breaks of to company, music: so far is he from cherishing and
entertaining the same.

Above all, he cannot endure, if it may be, to wake in the night alone: It is
his wisdom to drown his head to bedward, that he may lie in his bed like a
stone: If he awake, his next work is to toss and tumble his body, that so the
mind may not settle to any holy meditation: If he dream of temporal good, it
grieves him that he has it not. If he dream of eu^ll, it scares him to report
of it, Once it is, that he seldom or never dreams of heavenly things, or if
he do, he accounts it as a dream and so it vanishes.

Especially we shall find this proper to the Saints, to be wise in
entertaining the motions of the Spirit: observing the checkes of conscience,
and furnishing the mind with holy meditations: Rejoicing exceedingly in the
now plentiful tender and gracious success thereof. And grieuing exceedingly,
either at any contrary motions, or at the neglect and disappointment of good
motions: He knows, that by neglecting such, he may grieve the Spirit, and so
grow to a quenching of the same, and thereby be drawn to despite the spirit
of Grace: if not directly and by profession, yet indirectly and by an carnal
opposition in slandering and persecuting spiritual graces in Gods children.
And therefore his wisdom is, to resist the beginnings of evil, and entertain
the first motions of good: that so he may prevent the practice, and custom of
sin, and so hardness of heart, profaneness and Apostasy. That so being
faithful in a little, he may be entrusted with greater mercies.

And so he is also careful and provident to gather and treasure up store of
good matter and heavenly businesses for the continual exercise of his mind;
lest that noble power of his soul, should be taken up with trifles and
vanity, seed upon the earth, or wear and waste it self with barren and
lumpish melancholy. To this end he is conscionable in redeeming of the Time,
in walking faithfully in his calling, to auspicate his worldly occasions with
spiritual exercises, and spiritual ends. And thus his life is a life of
meditation, either upon his own infirmities, and deceitful heart, that so he
may prevent them, or be humbled for them: Or upon the Majesty and Attributes
of God, to eleuate and settle his mind from these base and corruptible things
to that one thing which is necessary: Or upon that wonderfully mystery of his
redemption, to quicken and strengththen his faith, and settle him against all
oppositions; or upon the power of Grace, and sweet trade and course of
sanctification: to provoke him to thankfulness and and encourage him to
perfection: or upon the occasions of his calling, the manifold cases of
conscience, and perplexity, that are incident thereunto, to weane him from the
love of the world, and provoke him to a general and entire holiness: or upon
his spiritual state: how to preserve first love, prevent rel^pses, grow in
grace; or, upon his own mortality and infirmities, the trains of Satan, the
terrors of hell, the suddennes of judgment to prevent security, and provoke
to a daily watchfulnes. This is the Treasury that supplies an holy mind with
continual profitable matter. What room would there be for idle thoughts, if
the mind were thus employed, intending seriously now one, and then another, to
prevent custom, and loathing, not giving over any particular without some
special uses for the reformation of some special hurt, or increase of some
spiritual good.

The last difference of Thoughts between the Regenerate and Hypocrite, is in
regard of the issue of the^, Is this,

The best as they are not without corruption, so they are accompanied with
Thoughts suitable thereunto. Either in regard of their own, or others
occasions. Hence it is, that for sin, thoughts of excuse, astonishment do
ensue, for others of prosperity, thoughts of indignation, envy, etc. Psalm.
73.37.

So it is also with the wicked But. with this difference In these, the issue of
sorrow brings, despair, or blockishnesse, or carnal pleasure. In the godly,
Repentance, so peace and Joy. In these, the Issue of Discontent and
Indignation, is bloody Conclusions and Stratage^s, or closing with the world.
Psa. 73

But in the Godly they produce a wise entrance into the sanctuary of the Lord,
and thereby a quyeting and refreshing of the heart in (...) issues of Gods
proui^ (...)* And so a daily refining and purging of the hearts from the dregs
o^ ^orruption, and eleuat^^^ ^he same to more durable happiness. Psalm.
62.1.2.5.6.7.

And may we not difference these good thoughts in the wicked and godly by
their compass and bounds: Yea certainly. As thus, The ordinary good thoughts
of the godly, are bou^ded within the compass of their calling, not only as
they are Christians, but Civil too: but those of the wicked are exorbitant,
exceeding the true measure of both callings. More particularly.

2 The Thoughts of the Godly are bounded by the Word, but those of the wicked
by their own ^^aning, and such false Rules of the World.

^ ^he Thoughts of the Godly, are within the compass of their own ability,
either in Nature or Grace, for the present: but those of thc wicked, are either
co^fined to Nature, or else they tend to the confining of grace: they do more
sometimes then they purpose inwardly, or would do, being drawn by outward
respects against the maine purpose: and if they do less then they purpose, it
is not because they consider their shortness of practice above their purpose,
what they should and would do, but because they think what they do
insufficient: They entend no more, they are afraid to over do, to be precise
or curious, as they call it: they cannot be Saints, and therefore they purpose
not to be so, as measuring their purpose by their ability, and stinting their
ability to their own power, and not measuring it by the power of God.

Uses of these Differences.
1 Hereby we may be able to discern that Privy Hypocrisy, which lurketh in
our hearts, as now understanding the bent and current of our thoughts, and
being wise to discern the secret sleights and deceitfulness thereof.

2 We may also hereby both comfort our selves and others in all outward
faylings, if we can find such a frame and ordering of our Thoughts and
Affections, and to clear our selves and others of hypocrisy.

3 This difference shall cause us to labor, an holy government and
watchfulness over our hearts and secret thoughts, that so we may attain to a
constant practice (...) holiness, and thereby follow after perfection, and be
prepared to glory.

4 By this we shall discern of all particular actions in Gods worship, and to
have comfort by the sincerity thereof, of their acceptance with God.

Evil Thoughts, are either general, such as proceed from the corruption of
nature, principally, and so from such occasions outwardly that further the same.

Or else they are particular such as wherewith some men are especially
molested, and these are,

1. Blasphemous and Atheistical Thoughts.

2. Melancholicke and fearful imaginations.

3. Vain and wandering thoughts interrupting them in holy duties, of which in
their places: And first,

CHAP. VII. Of evil Thoughts in general, What they are.
NAmely, the Immediate sprouts and first blossoms of the corrupt heart, diuerted
from God, and encited hereby to do somewhat displeasing his Majesty.

1. I say, they are the immediate and first sprouts and blossoms. Because the
evil heart feels and expresses it corruption, first by these evil
thoughts* These first bewray it auersion from God, these are the first motions
to displease his Majesty.

2. I add: That they proceed immediately from a corrupt heart, as being a fit
tree to bring forth such bad fruit, as being able to yield no better. Shall we
look for figs of thorns? In that it is wholly tainted with sin; to prove that
they are not ^^ee, proceeding from such a ^ountaine; that there is no ability
in man to good* seeing the fountain and first streams are altogether defiled?

3. I add, that they proceed from a heart diuerted from God: to prove, both
the corruption of the heart, whose sincerity consists in conformity with God,
so that it no sooners diuerts from him, but it loses it virtue. As also,
thereby their further corruption; not only that they are evil, as being
estrang^d from God, but that they are of themselves like to continue so* as
having no power to rectify themselves again.

4 And thereupon it follows That these thoughts arising from the corrupt
heart, become presently strong, and lively to draw the heart to consent, and so
to action of evil: so impossible it is without grace to stay the current of
them. Iam. 1.13.14.

Of evil Thoughts: The causes of them.
1 The Lord many times leaves us to be buffeted with evil thoughts, to prevent
thereby security, and so to avoid gross and scandalous sins: as we have
often temptations of unbelief, to make us careful of Apostasy, and fear
renou^cing of the faith.

2 These arise either from our own corrupt nature, not yet thoroughly purged,
in regard of the inward poison thereof: or of some sin unrepented of, or of
some sin which we have not labored to reform in others; or of secret
sins which we may fall into: and are inclinable by former custom, course of
life, calling, and company, etc.

3 They proceed also from outward objects of the World, as the lusts of the
eye, and whatsoever working upon the senses.

4 Or they proceed from Satan, ^^media^^ly, casting in fearful, and
blasphemous thoughts: or mediately joining with inward corruption, and outward
objects, or both: and so quickening, and enlarging, yea strengthening those
inward evil thoughts, and multiplying upon them others more evil and
desperate.

And these are more especially the Occasions of them, in regard of our selves.
1 Either we are not watchful over our hearts, do not guard and fence them:
but let them run after the eye and other se^ses, and so through those carnal
windows, occasions are offered, and evil motions presented.

2 Or we are careless and negligent in the meditation of good things, and not
allotting set times thereunto: not preparing our hearts to confer familiarly
with our God: and so we are whipped to his duty, with evil thoughts.

3 Or we are grown formal in the matter of religion, resting in the fashion
and custom thereof, suffering our hearts to run after our covetousness,
Ezech. 33.31.32. and so we are justly confounded in our formality, with
variety of evil thoughts.

4 Or else we take not notice of Original corruption, but rather measure our
Estate by actual and outward sins, and so we are pestered with evil
Thoughts, either to convince thereof, or to draw us to inward sincerity.

5 Or we stand upon it, rather to do things in the sight of men, then in the
presence of the Almighty; and so we are confounded with sense of inward
corruption.

6 Or we have neglected good and holy motions and thoughts, and therefore we
are given up to be buffeted with evil Imaginations, and yet to set light by
them.

Of the diverse kinds of evil Thoughts, and the occasions of them.
Our Thoughts are different, either according to the infinite variety of
objects from without, occasioning them.

Or from the insatiable fountain of corruption within, breaking out daily to
innumerable, and these different.

According either to complexions or callings, or Company or condition outward,
or custom and habit of life, etc.

Or from the unquenchable malice of Satan, either stirring up natural
corruption, or forcing nature by iniecting of violent darts of venomous and
blasphemous thoughts

So that to determine of each diversity were infinite and impossible: Only my
purpose is, to touch such diversity of Thoughts, as are most dangerous and
obuious to the Saints; that so we may learn to resist and subdue the same.

And these are according either to those three maine objects, ordinary in the
World: as the Lust of the ^ye, occasioned from the eye, receiving wanton, and
alluring objects to provoke Lust.

And 2. the Lust of the Flesh, desiring and affecting riches and means for the
furtherance of carnal pleasures and delights.

And 3. The Pride of Life, honor and greatness to countenance sin, to make
it our happiness, to flatter us therein, because we prosper, etc.

Or according to the two general Conditions, which men in the World are
subject unto, namely Prosperity and Adversity: the one whereof is accompanied
usually with Blasphemous and atheistical thoughts, The other with Melancholic
and desperate Thoughts.

Truly they agree all in this, that they are deceitful to our selves and
others.

General Rules concerning evil Thoughts, both for the discerning and
suppressing of them.
1 That what sin we are most accustomed to: the Thought thereof will be sure
most to disturb us, and that in the morning at our first rising, principally
to prevent al good motions: to provoke to continuance in sin.

2 That when we are about to do most good, we shall be sure to be prevented
or interrupted with vilest thoughts.

3 That we must at no hand give way to evil Thoughts, nor to suffer them to
dwell upon the heart, or upon any object, lest they draw to consent, and so to
action of sin.

4 That in rejecting evil Thoughts, we propound a contrary object, and so
divert the thought thereupon, and so we shall graciously subdue the same.

5. That we entertain the very first motions to evil not without some horror
and trembling; so shall we be graciously prevented of the tickling of the
flesh; by these thoughts, and so consent and action wisely prevented.

6. That though evil Thoughts in themselves, and to the wicked are sins,
even without consent: yet to the godly, through Gods mercies they are not
imputed, so we do not consent, and approve of them. Romans 7.15.16.17. etc.

7. That man judges the heart and thoughts by the works, but God judges the
works by the heart: first he accepts Caine and then his sacrifice. And
therefore above all, we should watch our Thoughts.

Preservatives against evil Thoughts.
Some are extraordinary. As that it pleases God ofttimes, because we have
entertained thoughts of evil, and so are likely to fall to the Act of them,
because the committing hereof might be a reproach to his Name: To leave us to
be touched in our Names by men, that so the evil report may prevent the evil
deed, and preserve the Name of God untainted thereby.

Nay it falls out, that to heal inward lusts and ordinary evil thoughts: it
pleases God often times to leave us to be buffeted by Satan with horrible and
fearful thoughts of blasphemy, to awake us out of security, to call us to a
deeper humiliation, and so to draw us nearer into Gods presencc; to be more
fam^liar with him, and so to replenish our minds with more heavenly thoughts.

3. Yea often times our best and holiest actions as they cannot be without, so
it pleases God in his wisdom that they shall be accompanied with wandering
thoughts usually, sometimes with blasphemous and ouerioyous iniections both to
discover our imperfection, and to humble us under his mighty hand, as also to
provoke us daily to hunger after Christ, and so ^n him to hasten to perfection,
as hereby preventing us of such as are more dangerous, namely, thoughts of
Pride, Merit, etc. which may rob God of his Glory, and so hinder our
proceeding in grace.

Rules herein are,
That seeing secret things belong unto God: but that which is revealed to us
and our children: Therefore howsoever God in his infinite wisdom may
sometimes work extraordinarily as bringing light out of darkness, to reserve
the glory of his mercies entirely to himself. Yet seeing we have a sure Rule
and an ordinary way to walk by and in: we may so make use only of these
extraordinary ways of God, as to be humbled thereby in giving God the glory
of his wonderful wisdom and mercy: not at any hand to presume upon this
experience to give way unto Satan or our own proud heart, either to try
such conclusions with God, as if because the Lord in mercy turn about such
evils to our good therefore we may purposely do evil that good may come
thereof, we may give way to our vain thoughts, cherish blasphemous
imaginations, puff up our hearts with unseasonable joy: But rather herein
walk we by the common Rule of settling our hearts in the presence of God,
purging them of all known evils by repentance, examining the by the word, and
our intention in the present work, confinining them to the action in hand, and
being humbled in our best endeauours for the incurrence and interruption which
arises thereby. That so we may still fetch our righteousness from our Maker, and
procure the acceptance of our weldoing, through the merit of our Saviors and
so in him grow up to perfection.

2. That we be more careful to purge the fountain of corruption, our evil
and unbelieving hearts; and so we shall be less postered with evil thoughts,
or less ensnared by the extraordinary incurrence of them.

Ordinary Preservatives, and means to subdue them are these:
1 That we store the heart continually with holy matter, and so shall there be
no room for idle Thoughts.

2 That we make a covenant with our hearts, and keep a continual watch over
them; examining them daily, and trying them by the word: so shall not evil
thoughts roost in them.

3 That we make a covenant with our eyes, and other senses; keeping them from
carnal objects, or not letting them dwell upon the^: and so may evil thoughts
be graciously prevented.

4 To this end, be we careful of our company, avoiding the fellowship of
the wicked: and so shall we wisely avoid the occasion of many evil Thoughts.

5 And avoid we curiosity and p^ying into hidden mysteries, and unnecessary
speculations, so shall we avoid blasphemous and Atheistical Thoughts.

6 Above all take heed of Idleness, being the fountain and nourse of all
filthy and terrible Thoughts.

7 And labor we to set bounds to the mind in regard of it desires, striving
for contentment in our estates: so shall we avoid a world of covetous and
ambitious thoughts, and such as do accompany the same, as thoughts of deceit,
murder, flattery, etc.

8 Be we conscionable and powerful in holy duties, watching over such
thoughts as do accompany us therein: especially those good thoughts that are
foysted into hinder the present intention of the mind: For the neglect hereof
gives the Lord just occasion to leave us to be buffeted with all sorts of
evil thoughts: especially such as are terrible and impure.

9 And so be we careful especially of our selves, when we are alone, that now
especially we let not our thoghts roue at random, but confine them to some
certain bounds: Principally to think on the goodness of God, to lay open our
hearts before him, lest terrors assault us, or mopishnes and drowsines dead the
heart.

10 Especially be we careful to entertain the good motions of Gods Spirit, to
obey the checks of Conscience, to make use of Gods wonderful works, both of
mercy and judgment, that are extraordinarily offered unto us, seasoning our
hearts with an holy meditation of them, so shall we graciously prevent evil
thoughts.

11 Take we notice often of natural corruption: In all pract^se of repentance
fetch we our sin from this fountain. Psalm. 51.3. and be we still hewing and
digging at this root, and so shall we be less troubled with evil Thoughts.

12 And labor we in holy duties to draw our selves into the presence of God,
to avoid ostentation, and respect of man: to do al things as in Gods presence,
and to his glory: so shall evil thoghts less prevail with us.

13 Remember we, that we must give account for them, and so let us reckon
with our selves for them in this life, that so we may not be judged for them
in the life to come.

14 Above all be we careful to watch over our Thoughts on the Sabbath; because
that day above all other binds our Thoughts wholly to the good abearing: and
this shall be a means to order them the better when we have more liberty for
the world.

15 And to this end labor we to wash and purge the Fountain of our hearts in
the blood of Christ, that so being purified by Faith in him, the streams of
our thoughts and affections may be cleansed and sanctified.

16 And so, if any evil Thoughts arise up in our hearts, let them not remain
in us, but presently make resistance against them; by trembling thereat, and
turning the heart to a contrary subject, humbling our souls by speedy
repentance for the same; Ierem. 4.13.

Uses in general to be made of our evil Thoughts.
1 Hence we may gather the immortality of the soul seeing our Thoughts are so
infinite, various; etc.

2 As also that original corruption of our Nature is hence evident, from which
proceeds this vanity and disorderednesse of our Thoughts.

3 And so the Impossibility of nature to any good; seeing we are not
sufficient so much as to think a good Thought, much less to do any thing
acceptable unto God.

4 That if we will suppress sin, we must begin at the thoughts: see ng
these are the ringleaders unto all mischief. Ierem. 4.

5 The daily occurrence of evil Thoughts, the inability to avoid them, the
continual interruption of them in holy duties, is an excellent means to send
us unto Christ, to cast us out of our selves, and convince all Natural and
Moral righteousness, which pleades liberty of Thoughts, gives way thereto.

6 Whereas it is ordinary with Satan, in stead of real Covenants to content
himself with secret and inward motions and passions of the mind, as has been
observed in the Discovery of the mystery of Witchcraft: therefore ought we
especially to watch over these evil Thoughts, not to give way unto them,
especially if they proceed to desires and settled wishes; seeing by this means
we may be easily drawn to that secret covenant.

7 The Conscience of evil Thoughts, is a gracious means to confound even all
measure of present grace inhere^t, in regard of resting therein, for
justification, or quantity of Sanctification, and so to send us daily unto
Christ for the renewing of grace, to provoke us to encre^se, and hastening to
perfection.

8 Whereas it is common to Sinners, for their further hardening therein and
shutting out ^f Repentance, to post over their sins to Satan and outward
occasions. This Doctrine of evil. Thoughts, is most available to prevent the
same: for did we but thoroughly consider and acknowledge, that though there
were no Devil to tempt, or any occasion to allure, yet our own hearts were
sufficient both to stir up the motion to evil, and by reflection thereof upon
the heart, to draw to consent, and so to action, we should be brought to lay
all the fault upon our selves; and so by the judging of our selves to be sent
unto Christ for pardon thereof, for grace to reform and change our courses.

9 The consideration of the evil of (...) hearts and Thoughts, (...) notable
evidence, that we know the Law of God, and are convinced thereby, and so a
gracious preparatiue to receive Christ.

Differences between evil thoughts in the Godly and wicked.
1 They differ in their judgment: As that the wicked think evil thoughts
free, and good Thoughts natural; they mean well, this they have by nature,
though they cannot ^oe as others. And if they think ill, they cannot do
otherwise, they must be borne withal, they do no body any hurt, etc.

But the godly esteem evil thoughts natural, and good thoughts free: If
they think evil, this they are sure of, nature yeeldes no better milk: but
if they think well, this is a free gift of God. It argues a heart set at
liberty by the mercy of God.

2 The godly esteem evil thoughts as natural, so damnable: are more troubled
with them then outward evils, as being the fountain and occasions of all
sin. They differ in their entertainment, as with the wicked, they are either
made no reckoning of, because so ordinary. As they suite with the beloved sin:
so they are more welcome, and fed on, as the chief refreshing of the mind:
that though it cannot do ill, yet herein it prides it self, that it can
think thereof: that it can wish opportunity and ability thereunto; as we see
in wicked old folks, in beggars, they can think evil, though they dare not
do it. It does them good to think of it, though now they are past date, etc,
But in the Godly it is otherwise: An evil thought arises not in the heart,
but the heart presently rises against it, as against the enemy to it peace;
yea, she makes out against it presently, by Prayer, and humiliation, by
changing the copy to a contrary good though:, and so by an after watchfulness
against the same: especially whereas not only in the day, but in the night
also, the mind as it always is in action, so is exercised as well with evil,
as it is with good Thoughts: we may now observe this difference herein,
between the hypocrite and true Nathaniel, that whatsoever evil thoughts, and
effects thereof, are incident to the night, these are, if not for the present
judged, and disclaymed, yet by Gods blessed spirit they are called to
remembrance in the morning, or upon some such like occasions in the day; and so
seasonably reproved by the Spirit that knows the heart, and labors to purge
it from all secret evils: and so the conscience maintains peace inwardly with
God; and so thereby gains more fruit and spiritual rest hereafter: but with
the hypocrite it is not so: this nightly thoughts give occasions to attempt
such wickedness in the day, which the night has seemed to deprive him of: Mich.
2.1.2.
or else at the best, they pass away as dreams, without use and profit.

Thirdly, they differ in their Quality, as that howsoever the Saints before
their calling are subject to all sorts of evil thoughts: yet after their
calling, they are only or especially subject to such as concern their
calling, such as oppose the same, such as concern their aberrations therein,
as of hypocrisy, distrust, World-lines: when as the wicked are usually subject
to such evil thoughts as concern their Nature, Constitution, Education,
condition of life, company, etc. God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4,
5. Little or no thinking have they of the life to come, or such happiness, as
concerns the same: much less of their end or preparation thereto, unless they
be forced upon them, either by the word, or some sickness, or loss, or such
like.

But the special difference is in regard of the issue, and effects thereof, as
that evil thoughts in the godly breed humiliation, fear, watchfulness,
examining of their hearts, iudgeing of themselves, Prayer, longing after
Heaven, etc.

But in the wicked they breed presumption, as if they were free and
invincible: and hereby hypocrisy, securitiy, and profaneness, and all
disordinate Atheism, and impiety, all deboshnes in the conversation. etc.

CHAP. VIII. Of blasphemous Thoughts, what they are.
THese are such as concern the Nature and Properties of God, of the Mes^ias,
his Nature and offices, of the holy Ghost, and his work, of the Truth of the
word, etc.

Whence they come.
And they either arise from that root of Infidelity, and Atheism naturally
settled in us.

Or else they are cast in by Satan, envying our knowledge and love of God, and
thereby seeking to distract and discourage us in our profession and proceeding
therein.

Or they proceed from our customary, and carnal worship of God, whereupon it
comes to pass, that having made a real Idol of God by counterfeit worship,
no maruail^ if we be fcourged with such blasphemous Thoughts, as if there
were no such thing in it self: and because so far as lies in us, we have
made him no better unto us, by our deceitful worship.

The differences of them.
We shall discern them to arise from natural corruption by these Marks.

First in respect of the persons that are troubled with them.

Which are either Nouices in Christ, ignorant for the most part of heavenly
Mysteries, unexperienced in the power of sanctification: and such usually are
troubled with the tentations of blasphemy, to pusle and stagger them in the
grounds of their faith, and so to hinder them for going forward in grace.

Or else they are well grown Christians, and so hereby being subject to
spiritual Pride, and so to rob God of his glory: are therefore also humbled
with such terrible thoughts, to make them the more sober in their
understanding, to prevent curious searching, exspectation of revelations, and
such effects as follow thereupon: or else through inward testimonies of joy,
they are grown secure, and so are awakened usually with such horrible thoughts.

Or they fall to pry into sublime and sacred mysteries so far, and to are
left to such Tentations.

Or they are decayed, and so decline from their first love, and so are rouzed
up, and set upon by such horrible thoughts, to put them to their Trial, and so
recover them again.

Or in their failings they are plunged into sudden Thoughts of Despair, and
these usually are seconded with such blasphemous Thoughts, as to hold them
therein by Satan's Policy, so indeed by the mercy of God to put them to try
their hold in God, and so to live by faith without feeling, and so in the end
to recover Feeling again.

Ann so also we may discern these Tentations to arise from Natures corruption
by such occasions, as are incident to Gods children: For

Either it pleases God to shine unto his children with extraordinary comforts
and inward joys, which Satan seeking to turn as occasions to the Flesh, and
to set up thereby temporal happiness: It therefore pleases God to leave us
to be buffeted with such fearful Thoughts, that so we may try our hold in
God, whether we love him better then these comforts: that we may wait upon him
in the want of comfort, and be provoked truly to faint after eternal
comforts. And so as it pleases God sometimes to give unto his Church outward
rest, because it is Natures corruption to build tabernacles here, to measure
God by outward prosperity, as if he only were known herein: therefore herein
follow these Tentations of Atheism, and Blasphemy, to draw us to an higher
conceit of the Deity, to measure by inward graces, not by common blessings; nay
to measure him by himself, so far as possibly we may, and not by his gifts.

Moreover, because the Saints are subject to conceit sufficiency of Grace, to
set up their rest therein, to admire the gift, and not the giver: to tie the
Giver to the gift, and to tie the gift to our ability, in employing and usage
thereof, and not to the intent of the giver: by which it comes to pass, that
we fail, either in the right use of the Gift, or end thereof: Hence follow
these Tentations of Blasphemy, when the Lord is thus stinted by his gifts,
while we make him a God no farther then we see him, we are easily drawn to
think there is no God.

Especially, when either for our security or carnal living by sense, it
pleases our God to strippe us of his gifts, not only outward, by casting us
into great troubles, but even inward too, to our sense, by leaving us to some
grievous sin, or withdrawing his face from us, so that We see not your
signs. Is it any marvel, if now such a case of desertion breed thoughts of
Atheism and Blasphemy, as if God had forsaken us? and therefore curse God and
die: Has God forgotten to be merciful; therefore surely he has forgot
himself: The fool says in his heart, There is no God, the weak Christian
says in his folly, I have washed my hands in vain, I have built upon a
shadow, I have laid my foundation in the sands. The wicked say, Where is now
their God? and the poor soul that seeks him now, doubts whether hi^ word be
true, whether there be any such saving power or no. And so whereas we profane
holy duties doing the^ oftentimes and without power, and feeling, can it be
otherwise, but that now we should be assaulted with such profane and fearful
thoughts that there is no God, no salvation, seeing our worship is formal
senseless, etc. And if it fall out that whom we profess with our mouth we
deny in our works, is it not a maine occasion of this Tentation, that there is
no God? else would he keep us from such fearful falls, make us conformable
to him. And are there not some such occasions incident? truly many, which may
occasion these Blasphemous thoughts; yea certainly, and that many ways.

For either it may please God upon an ouerualuing of his graces in us, or our
selves for them, to leave us to discontent, because we are not respected
accordingly, and so to give us up to rash judging and censuring of others,
that have not attained our measure, will not be squared by our Line, and so
we fall to stumble at common corruptions, and thereby proceed to separation,
upon a vain conceit of general pollution. As this is a chalenging of Gods
wisdom, in leaving corruptions in the Church, a disanulling of Gods power, as
if be were not able to keep his undefiled in the midst of a wicked
Generation: nay a presumptuous encroaching upon that perfection* which this
life cannot affoorde, and so a wilful disturbance and overthrow of that Peace
and order which the Lord has by his constant Providence set in his Church. Is
it not therefore just with God, to humble us with these blasphemou^ Thoughts,
even to proceed to censure and determine who are elect, as if it could
certainly be discerned by visible marks, to grow to a flat condemnation of all
such, as iumpe not with our dreams, as profane, ungodly, reprobate, and so
from judging of men, even to proceed to judge and censure God himself; as not
wise to order his Churches: and thereby to be given up to open blasphemies,
even to assume the power, nay (...) very nature of God, as Hacket and others
have done, and so by separation from the Saints, to fall to utter separation
from God, by Arianisme, Libertinisme. Has not this been the issue of Smith,
Brown and others: Especially, seeing together with this conceit of
singularity, there is usually conjoined irregularity, and transcendency above
all that is called God, upon pretense of Christian Liberty, despising
government, as being an enemy to Christ's kingdom, an hinderance to the
Gospel, etc. Is it not just with God, that they which will not obey man, shall
not even acknowledge God. Thus is it with that man of sin at this day: he
makes a footestoole of Princes: and therefore makes no better then a Fable of
Christ, he deuoures his God, and kills his King. And so even thus it is with all
heretics and schismatickes: their beginnings have been pride, their
proceedings singularity and separation from men, Stand apart, come not near
us, we are more holy then others: their ends have been Atheism and
departing from the living God, to serve maine and capit^ll heresy. Heb.
3.12.13. Heb. 10.24. 2 Timothy 3.8. etc. 2. ^et. 2.10. And compared with ver.
18.19. Iud. 8. compared with 11.16. And so to despair, and thereby to
fearful vengeance.

Thus may we discern these blasphemous thoughts to proceed from Natures
corruption.

Remedy. And thus we are to deal with them first.
1 Discern we the occasions of them as before.

2 We are not to dispute with these blasphemous thoughts, lest reason breed
Atheism. But upon the very first apprehension of the^, we are to abhor and
disdain them by prayer and repentance, etc.

3 And yet examine we wisely the cause of them, and discerning it
particularly, labor we to reform or remove the same, that so we may prevent
the assault of future thoughts, and sanctify those that are past to our good.

4 Laboring to free our hearts of that guiltiness of our thoughts by a daily
application of the merit of Christ, that so Satan may not take advantage
thereby, either to fasten such desperate tentations upon us: or else not to
plunge into horror and distraction thereby.

5 And striving to purge our hearts of that pollution of sin which cleaues
unto them, by the blood of Christ, that so the fountain of our corrupt nature
being cleared, it may less entice Satan to grow upon us with such fearful
tentations, or at least may be more powerful to resist the same.

And so labor we to grow in knowledge and soundness of judgment
concercerning the truth of God, that Satan may less pusle and distract us
with any blasphemous thoughts, tending to challenge and pervert the same, that
so not sticking in the beginning of Christ, but growing on to comprehend the
height and depth and breadth, and length of the love of Christ, our hearts may
be so ravished and taken up thereby, as that there may be no entrance, or
entertainment of such desperate imaginations.

To this end make we confidence in all things as we know, and take we heed
of customarines: and hypocrisy in the doing thereof, doing al things out of a
sound judgment and power of affections, as in the presence of God, to his
glory: so shall we prevent these tentations of Atheism and blasphemy, and
speedily repel them.

Being wise with sobriety, both in our knowledge, that we affect not high
Mysteries, and presume to look into the Arc, and such secrets as belong only
to God: as, to know how long we shall live, when the day of judgment shall be,
for these are occasions of these blasphemous Thoughts.

But especially be we careful in the practice of Godliness, neither to affect
si^gularitie, and fall to separation: neither to presume above our callings in
arrogating what belongs to the Magistrate or Minister, for these have been
occasions of blasphemous Thoughts and errors, even to question the Truth of the
Church: The maine grounds hf Religion and so from Brownisme to fall to
Anabaptisme, and so to Arrianisme, and so to Atheism.

We shall perceive them to be cast in by Satan, by these tokens. By the
manner.
1 If they come suddenly, and violently, not without some impression of terror
to the flesh.

2 And that they last not long of themselnes, unless they fasten upon natural
corruption, and so receive fuel from the same, for their further maintenance.
If they be strong and extraordinary, either exceeding the compass of our
knowledge as tending to broach some new and fearful conceit in us of God,
Religion; etc. or leading us beyond the compass of sobriety of Religion
contrary to what we have received, and is warrantable by the word, tending to
bring in all confusion of the power of godliness.

3 By their entertainment. That the holy heart entertaines not so much as
parlie with them, but presently abhorring the very sent of them, reiects them,
with all trembling and detestatio^: yet a wicked heart, howsoever at the first
it be affected with horror in regard of Satan's extraordinary power and shows:
yet being naturally enthralled to Satan, and so ready to be led captive by
him at his will, is either easily pacified by the consent and sway of it
corruption and Satan's colors deceiving and enticing thereto and so with
greediness embraces the same, or else though with some reluctation of
natural light, is by the power of Satan yet not unwillingly drawn to the
same.

Especially when we are about to do the^ most good, and so are most intentive
and serious therein; our minds being earnestly set thereupon, and the spirit
helping us with special power, if now such thoughts fly in suddenly upon our
hearts; these now we conceive to be Satan's iniections, intending thereby to
interrupt and cool our most fervent affetions, and so if it may be to break
off the action, or confound us therein.

Lastly, whereas we may oftimes fall into strange distempers by reason of some
fever or strange accident affecting the body, and disenabling the faculties
thereof, yea many times promising and discovering the same, that they are not
able to acquit their function aright: Is not this now Satan's time to cast in
such blasphemous thoughts, if not altogether to confound us? yea by our strong
distempers to stumble others, that they may take offense at religion, yea, by
this means to cause the name of God to be blasphemed?

And whereas it falls out, that the dearest of Gods children, are oftentimes
wounded in Spirit, and so also disquieted in their inward powers, that they f^l
to distrust of the goodness of God, and conceive him to be their enemies: Is
it not ^ow Satan's policy to foist in upon the heart such blasphemous
thoughts, and so fearful speeches concerning the providence of God, his Word;
and that so he may thereby sink us deeper in despair, as conceiving them to
be our own: that the power of God may appear more lively in sustaining us in
these desertions, that his mercy may shine more clearly in our deliverance,
that Satan may be more confounded in his policies, and the Saints by our
example may be even judged to wait upon the Lord in the issues of death.

Causes of these iniected thoughts by Satan.
Either we have stood more upon the outward form of Religion, and bodily
performance thereof, then upon the inward strain of the heart, and ordering the
inward thoughts.

Or else we have rejected or grieved the spirit of God, and therefore we are
assalted with these blasphemies against the blessed Spirit.

Or else we have sought for help of Satan in the times of our ignorance, etc.
therefore now we are assaulted with blasphemous thoughts concerning God,
because we have forsaken him in the needful time, that so we might not now
seek to him to repentance.

Certainly Pride of heart; exalting our selves above what is meet, either in
searching after things convenient, or in conceit of profession, or in our
calling, is a just cause why we should be left to those fearful buffetings,
or we are pestered with multitude of wonted thoughts, and are careless of
them, and therefore it pleases God to leave us to be buffeted by Satan with
such terrible thoughts, that so we may have more conscience of our ordinary
thoughts, keep a better watch of them.

Especially if we grow to conceit that thought is free, and so we may think
and delight in sin; because God is a spirit and will be worshipped in
spirit. If now by this position we shut God out of our hearts, will not the Lord
leave the heart to be smitten by Satan, with these blasphemous thoughts that
so we may herein see our folly in the other.

And whereas by giving way to thoughts of sin, we are easily drawn to the
act thereof, which might give occasion to blaspheme Gods name, therefore now
we may expect such blasphemous thoughts, to curb the other, ready to break
out to act: that so sin being prevented, Gods holy name may be preserved.

Of the dangerous issues of these blasphemous thoughts. And that first in the
Mind, As that
1 They produce doubtings of the Truth of God and his attributes and offices,
and so shake the very foundations, and thereby procure the overthrow both of
all sound knowledge, as also al conscionable practice of Religion.

2 Are occasions of fearful terrors and woundings of the conscience.

3 And so proceed either to horrible despair and renouncing of salvation.

4 Or else produce fearful Lunacies and distraction of the mind, as a just
punishment of such horrible blasphemy and hellish conceits of the glorious God.

5 Or else they break out into open Atheism, and mocking of God.

6 And so are occasions that we shall be given up to all horrible blasphemy
of the Tongue, and all desperate impiety, and filthiness of conversation, to
the offense of others.

7 Yea usually their end is damnable heresy, broaching of strange and
fearful conclusions, to the poisoning, and seducing, or at least to the most
grievous disturbancie of the whole Church of Christ.

8 And so proceed to open combustions and devouring of each other for the
remembrance thereof.

Secondly to the Body, As
1 Causing through distraction of mind and terror thereof, not only wasting
and consuming thereof*

2 But even through terror of conscience exposing oftentimes to open violence
and desperate butchering of our selves: The just Lord not enduring such
monsters to poison the earth; and causing their own pride and contentious
spirits to be their own bane, either their proud hearts will not endure
controulement, and so they will make away themselves upon conceit, that the
world is not worthy of them, or to be freede from the corruptions thereof: Or
their mad enraged consciences, can find this only ease thereof, even to rende
their lives a sunder, and macerate their cursed carkases: that the Lord may be
justified in their just confusion, in making them the executioners of their
own destruction.

The Remedy hereof. How we shall resist them by some such like, as these
means.
1 If we tremble at the first motion of them, and abhor them:

2 And are more troubled with them, then with any desperate thoughts tending to
our own hurt.

3 That we offer them up to God in Prayer, as Ezechias did the letter of
Rabsaka.

4 And humble our selves with extraordinary grief, and zeal against our
selves in regard thereof.

5 Making more conscience of taking Gods name in our mouths, and so generally,
of all holy duties:

6 Applying our selves to a more serious meditation of the Majesty, power and
goodness of God.

Specially, when as in regard, that these thoughts are iniected by Satan,
though they are occasioned by our corruption: yet here the snare may be, to
divert the the blame from our selves, and lay it upon Satan, and so we shall
be hindered of the search of our hearts, giving the occasion, and so from the
duery of Repentance: Therefore be we wise, herein so^ to discern between
things that differ, that neither all the burden may be laid upon Satan, nor
upon our selves: But learn we thus to divide this Tentatio^ between Satan
and the corrupt heart: as to acknowledge the corruption of the heart, to occasion
this Tentation, and yet to return the poison of the Cup to Satan again, in
not approving thereof; nay in a speedy repelling of the same; yet so as
retayning with it self an holy fear and humiliation, in regard of such
horrible buffetings, and so walking more spiritually with God, to prevent the
like assaults.

Trial of a good issue of these blasphemous Thoughts.
1 That whereas usually their accompanies these blasphemous thoughts, an usual
tentation to destroy our selves as a just effect thereof: As either to be
avenged of our selus, because we thus dishonor God, we are not worthy to
live, etc. or else these fearful Thoughts, infer that we have no hope, no
hold in God, and therefore cause to despair of his mercy, and so to expose
our selves to his vengeance.

This falling out, here the Trial is, that whereas naturally we should be
more troubled with what touches us so near, then with that which concerns
God: If now these diverse thoughts eftsoons at the same time, assalting us,
though both no doubt must needs affect: Yet if it more affect us: that our God
is dishonored, and his glory called in question by these blasphemous thoghts,
then that our own estate is hazarded by the other. This is a true sign of
grace, and a graciou^ Testimony, that we shall get the mastery of them.

2 That we find our selves more affected with Reverence, and care in taking
Gods name in our mouths and be more grieved with the blasphemous oaths, that
reign in the Land, and prove more strict and sincere in the matter of Gods
Worship, laboring to reform and limit it by the Word, comforting our
selves, that what Satan iniects, shall be rejected upon him again: he shall
answer for his blasphemy, and abusing of our infirmities.

Of four kinds of evil thoughts wherewith some men are especially troubled.
Namely.
1 Blasphemous Thoughts. 2 Melancholy Imaginations, 3 Unseasonable and wandering
Thoughts interrupting them in holy duties. 4 Of dreams and thoughts in the
night: Together with their several causes, dangers, and remedies.
CHAP. IX. Of Melancholicke Thoughts, and such perturbations as do arise from
and accompany them.
What they are not.
IT is ordinary with Satan when any good Thoughts arise to divert us from
sin, or provoke us to goodness, to impute these to Melancholy.

2 And it is also a special prancke of that old Serpent, that when any
fearful and blasphemous thoughts arise to the dishonor of God, that we
might not regard them, and so neglect that due humiliation which is required in
this case: to father these upon Melancholy, it is not corruption, but only
some Melancholy mood, we are not in our right mind they are but idle fancies,
etc.

Which ^^ough it were sufficient to condemn them, yet the policy of Satan
herein, is, that we should undervalue them, and so not answer our God in that
just honor and deep astonishment, as is fit herein.

3 Yea Generally if we will believe devil, the there is no^ ^^y evil thought
but mu^^ ^ee foysted upon Melancholy. That so we may condemn the humor and
not our selves, nay rather that we may altogether neglect them, as proceeding
from such an idle brain.

Very necessary therefore is it that we should know what indeed Melancholy
Thoughts are: And so to discover the causes of them, and also the outward
occasions thereof. And withal to lay down the diff^^^nces thereof.

And so to ^^y open the manifold dangers, and issues of the same.

Together with the Remedy thereof.

Concerning Melancholy Thoughts. What they are.
Namely, Violent and yet settled and strong imaginat ons of the Mind, arising
from such parts as are especially possessed with that strong and pestilent,
humor, and namely, the Brain, Spleen, and Heart, causing strange and vehement
passions of Fear, Grief, Jealousy, Rage, yea oftentimes even utter despair,
and fearful violence against Nature.

First, I say, ^^ey are violent, as proceeding from the rage of the humor
enduring no mean, and from the ruling of it, as by it flatulent and fiery
nature causing such sudden and violent passions: And yet though they be
v^olent, yet they are settled and strong, according to the growth and power of
the humor, and difficulty of it remoueall.

3 I add, that they arise from such parts as are affected with that humor:
which being bread, first in the stomach, through ill digestion, and partly
bodily constitution, emptying this humor into the Spleen, as the natural
seat thereof, and so cloying and obscuring the same, produces that flatulent
and pestilent wind: which possessing the veins and concauities about the
heart, choaketh and infecteth the spirits thereof, and so causes such
Melancholicke imaginations. Or else fumeth up to the brain and so perverting
the fantasy, not only depriueth it of power rightly to discern of things,
but peruerteth it with a contrary quality to mistake the truth, and so out of
it wrong apprehension, perverting the judgment, returns to the heart
according to it false report, and so affects the same, with such passions of
fear, joy, etc as are nothing so indeed, or above the occasion. And so
produces thereupon such effects in the body and mind of despair, horror,
distemper, consumption, etc.

These are Melancholy thoghts. And the inward causes of them are.
1 The complextion naturally yielding such kind of imaginations.

2 Or the condition of life, as either contemplative, and nourishing the same,
in regard of the deep employment of the mind, or that rest of the body
necessary required herein: both which concur to the procuring of such
thoughts, as requiring solitariness, and so giving liberty to feed such
thoughts, and to feed thereon.

Or, the condition is spiritual and abstracted from the world: and so, either
for want of outward contentment to the flesh, causes by the mortification
thereof, such solemn and retired thoughts: nay oftentimes by reason of our
excessive desire to conquer corruption, follows even an infatuating of nature,
and so such sottish imaginations. Or by reason of those extraordinary joys and
comforts which do accompany such spiritual walking, cause a kind of dotage
thereon, and so such idle and fantastic thoughts to humble us therein: that so
we might have no sensible delight in the flesh: or might be comforted
graciously, in our delight therein, or in respect of the imperfection of grace,
thoughts of infidelity, despair, etc.

Or a crasie and diseased constitution wasting natural heat and moisture may
be a cause hereof, especially if violent feauers, and acute diseases do
accompany the same.

Especially a wounded spirit finding no rest in God, is at continual unrest
with it self, and so turmoyled and racked with these fearful and desperate
imaginations.

Outward Occasions are:
1 Principally, Satan closing with Natures disposition, and so continuing
these dumpish and sotting thoughts, to pusle us therein that we may not wind
out thereof.

Or, taking advantage of the imperfections of grace, and such infirmities as
do accompany the same, and so occasioning such lumpish and distracted Thought;.

Or closing with the fay^est flowers of Grace, and so causing to doat and rest
therein, clears the mind therewith, and so causes mufing and feeding thereon.

Or, taking occasion by outward crosses to plunge the mind into immoderate
sorrow, and so procures melancholicke and fearful Thoughts.

2 Strange distempers and drowsinesse of the weather, working upon the
complexion and sorting with other occasions, and so cause these lumpish and
fearful Thoughts.

3 Or else some great outward Cross may amate and confound the mind, and so
oppress it with these imaginations, upon conceit of deserving the same, upon
fear of further evils.

4 Or some extraordinary happiness may over joy the mind, and so not being
able to weld it estate, is therefore usually confounded with such distracted and
lumpish imaginations.

5 Or habit and custom of Diet may dispose the body hereunto.

6 Or lastly, Age and consumption of nature, may occasion the same.

The Difference of these Thoughts are either.
According to the diverse Subjects, wherein they are,

Or else according to the several occasions of them.

Concerning the Subjects either they are Natural, or newborn: If Natural,
either affected with Natural Melancholy, or with Melancholique excreme^ts,
that is unnatural, arising from Adustion; and so also the Thoughts do differ:
Being more temperate in the natural Melancholy, but in the vnnnaturall, more
violent and outrageous: the difference being only in quantity, and measure,
not in quality. If the subject be renewed and regenerate, this is to be
considered in the soundness of his mind, or in the wounding thereof, with the
conscience of sin. If the mind be wounded, the Thoughts will be yet more
fearful, heavy, desperate, etc. But a sound mind will bear his Infirmity,
Prou. 18. yea sanctify it graciously to be matter of much spiritual use, as
afterward.

This difference may be observed in regard of the diverse Subjects: As also in
respect of the occasions: There may be great diversity of these Thoughts,
accordingly are they occasions, are more and less violent: or as they are more
and less pleasing; or as they more and less concern us; which difference may
be rather determined by experience and observation, then by any relation or
discourse, etc. Thus of the Differences.

And so also the Effects of them are according to the Diversity of Subjects,
and occasions.
Concerning the Subjects of Melancholic Thoughts, they are generally such as
are disposed naturally thereunto by complexion, constitution, condition of life,
and more especially they are two, according to the old Rule, Aut Deus, aut
Demon. The Melancholic person is either a God or a Devil, that is exceedingly
well inclined, or disposed, or passing ill. This humor admits no mean, either
it furthers graciously to a pursuit of the best graces, and so is employed and
sanctified thereto; or else it is the occasion of most desperate wickedness,
of Pride, Idolatry Blasphemy, Despair, etc.' against God, or of Malice,
Murder, confusions, and strange combustions of men.

In the better of these.
It has these effects being qualified and ruled by grace.

1 As to occasion zeal and courage in the cause of God.

2 To procure constancy and resolution in well doing.

3 To enable to divine contemplation, and heavenly meditations.

4 To breed tenderness of conscience, and daily sense and remorse for sin.

5 To further profounde and deep insight into heavenly Mysteries and sound
judgment thereof.

6 To lead us to more entire society with God, and acquaint us more
familiarlie with him.

7 To weane us from the love of the World, and all earthly things.

In the other, giving the reine hereunto, and being daily kindled by Satan,
and has usually these effects.

Namely, according.
To the diversity of the cause, or cont^nuance and strength of the humor, or
such Accidents, as do accompany the same.

As if Natural Melancholy prevail in the blood, there it causes Fear,
suspicion, sadness, and pensiveness, even when there is no cause: in that the
spleen sends up vapors into the heart, and so annoying the same, passes up
to the brain, countersayeth terrible objects to the fantasy, and polluting
both the substance and spirits of the brain, causes it without external
occasion to forge monstrous fictions, and terrible to the conceit: which the
judgment taking as they are presented by the disordered instrument, delivers us
over to the heart which which has no judgment of discretion it self, but
giving credit to the mistaken report of the brain, breaks out into that
inordinate passion against reason. The cause hereof is, because the instrument
of discretion is depraved by these melancholic Spirits, and by darkness and
clouds of melancholy vapors, rising from that puddle of the spleen, obscure
the clearenesse which our spirits are endued with, and is requisite to the
true discretion of outward objects. But

If Adust choler prevail, then proceed other passions of rage, presumption,
despair, and such actions as issue thereupon.

The Remedy of these Melancholic Thoughts.
This is twofold according to the diverse causes of them.

Which are partly Natural, partly Spiritual, and External.

Touching Natural causes, here though Natural Remedies have their due
places, for which I re^erre them to the godly Physician, yet in these I take it
the cure is to be begone (if the party be capable thereof) with spiritual
Remedies to discover the ground, namely, Natural corruption, and to find out
the particular sin which may cause the same,, and so rectify and settle the
mind, that it may be capable of the bodily cure, and better able to make use
thereof. And when the bodily cure is well proceeded in (for I take it almost
impossible thoroughly to rid this humor, that it may not trouble at all,
especially in Students and old Folks, and such are given to contemplation.)
Then the mind is to be further dealt with, for resolution and uprightness,
that so it may still keep the Masterie over the humor, and turn it to the
best.

But my principal intent herein is to minister cure to the mind.

And this is to be disposed according to the diverse causes of it, arising and
temper thereof, and also according to the true judgment of melancholic
Thoughts.

Concerning the Causes, these are first the corruption and constitution
enclining to, and increasing the same.

Which effecting either a dimmenesse of the Spirits, according to the earthie
quality thereof, as it is natural, or producing an overmuch quicknes and
operation of them, as it proceeds from adust choler, breeding flatulent and
fiery spirits, does so produce a double effect.

1 Of Idleness, or besotting the Spirits, and so making them unfit, for
active occasions.

2 Of high and strange speculations, and so attempts accordingly, as proceeding
from those inflamed vapors; effecting the same; by which we may wisely
discern, how to apply the remedy: As to Thoughts proceeding of natural
Melancholy, and so effecting dulnes, and producing Idleness. Here 1. a set
calling is necessary, such as may stir up the spirits by exerci^ing the body
w^^^ labor, to q^icken the dulnes of the humor, and humble the mind also with
this bodily exercise, that so it may not give way to such idle thoughts.

But specially labor for a general calling, namely, to be found in Christ,
and made partaker of his holiness; so shall the grace of God quicken natures
dullness, and fit this drowsy humor to more heavenly medication, as
withdrawing from the love and delight in earthly things, and affecting rest and
retirednes from the world.

And so be we careful to nourish and maintain the evidence of the Spirit,
concerning particular salvation, and this shall revive and quicken us to any
holy and civil occasion

To this end well graciously further a daily viewing of the heart, and so
refreshing the same by daily renewed repentance, that it may be still a foot
in the constant worship of God.

And here also more free use of our Christian liberty, in diet, music,
recreation, will not be amiss: so that still we watch over our selves
therein, not making it a toil, and so a trade, and thereby a snare to entangle
the heart with the love thereof, lest thereby it prove an occasion to wound the
conscience, and so produce vexation and despair.

And so the true use of society shall much further this cure, not so much to
drive away Melancholy, as by conference and comp^ring each others estates
together, to quicken and stir up one anothet to holy duties of love, and
examine each other therein.

Thus of the cure of such thoughts as grow from natural melancholy.

As for such as arise from accidental melancholy, when adust choler causes
flatulent vapors to ascend into the heart and brain, and so inflame the same,
and thereby breed presumptions and desperate thoughts: these may be remedied
thus:

First, the mind must be persuaded, that these are but erroneous and false
conceits, and therefore not to measure our estates by them.

2 Physic hereupon being used to purge the humor, and preserve the parts
affected from obstruction and inflammation.

The mind again must be taken in hand: and first to be brought to a lively
sense of sin, even of particular sins, which may cause such fearful
distractions, that so being brought to sound repentance, it may renew it peace
with God, in the merit of Christ.

Peace being restored, care must be taken to preserve it, by laboring
soundnes of judgment, and tenderness of conscience in all our ways: By
diligence in our particular Callings, and continual watchfulness over our
hearts, and by daily viewing the heart, by the word, and keeping our selves
close thereunto, laboring to confirm the weak, and raise up such as are
fallen, and still preparing for the coming of Christ.

Cautions herein serving for the trial of the Remedy.
Whereas it is the policy of Satan to impute whatsoever Thoughts tending to
reformation, to Melancholy as implying thereby the mind to be deceived in the
true judgment of things, because that which is persuaded to us is so contrary
to natural light and wisdom that so he may hold us in our old Byas.

Therefore here we must be wary in discerning of things that differ. As
first,

Between such Thoughts as necessarily proceed from Melancholy, and such as are
imputed thereto. Namely,

That Thoughts of Melancholy, as they are sudden and violent, so many times
they are unseasonable* and exorbitant. Yea for the most part vain and idle
without sound ground, yea contrary to common reason and religion and yet
obstinate and refractorie, impatient, of cure, very difficult to be remedied.

1 But holy Thoughts concerning sanctification arise from the true ground, the
word of God, and by it are subdued to deliberation, for the wise disce^ning of
them, and so by the assistance of the spirit, find comfortable entertainment,
and so are profitably brought into practice.

2 All evil thoughts proceed narurally from the corrupt fountain of our hearts,
and therefore at no hand are to be imputed to Melancholy, this may further them
and their dwelling on our hearts, but the ground of them is our cursed nature,
led captive by Satan at his will, and so breaking out into all sorts of wicked
imaginations.

3 All good Thoughts arise from the motion of the spirit in the regenerate, and
so in no case may be imputed to Melancholy: well may they be checked in regard
of the dullness of the humor but if the person be sanctified, this dullness of
the humor may prove a mean to deliberate of them, that so we may determine
the fitnes thereof, and so to retain them more constantly, and the accidental
quickness of the humor if it proceed from adust choler, may be a means to
put them more speedily in execution, and to eleuate the mind to the highest
object and end of them.

So that if we can be more slow to evil, and nimble to good, more retired from
the world, and familiar with God, more serviceable to the Church, and less
respect our selves in regard of the flesh: if we can be more patient i^
troubles, more fearful of offending our God, more jealous of our selves in
regard of cleaving corruption, and more confident on our God in resting on his
faithfulness: so turning the effects of natural melancholy to be spurs
unto grace, being more sorrowful for sin, and cheerful in well doing, and
so using them as furtherances for our exercise in holiness, and weakening of
the body of sin: hereby we shall know that they are sanctified unto us, that
we have obtained a gracious conquest over nature^, and a good measure of Grace.

Uses of these Melancholy Thoughts.
It serves first to advance the singular goodness, of our God; that seeing we
may be so far transported by these melancholic fit^, as to speak, yea to
act sometimes strange things against our seiues, yet where Grace preuayleth,
these are all brought about to the advancement of his glory. The Lord does not
account of us as we are transported by this pestilent humor, but according to
his own purpose and end to which he has ordained us.

2 We are hereby taught wisely not to excuse sin by these Melancholicke
moods; Because indeed it secures to do the sin, in that it becomes a cloak
to defend the same. As he that in his drunkenness kills a man, is guilty of a
double offense, the one that he commits murder, the other, that he did it
in that humor: so is it in this case of Melancholy. And yet here is exceeding
comfort to such as are troubled in mind and through, distemper break out into
fearful courses and speeches: that seeing the Lord will not impute unto them
what they advisedly intend not, therefore because Melancholy may father that on
them which they did not, or further them to what they did not entend: The Lord
will not impute what they did not, or what in their best advice they would not.

CHAP. X. Of vain and wandering thoghts intruding into and interrupting holy
duties.
HItherto concerning blasphemous and melancholy Thoughts, extraordinarily, and
not so commonly troubling the saints, together with their several Causes,
effects, and Remedies.

There remains yet, to consider of another troop of Thoughts ordinarily and
frequently molesting the Saints in the worship of God as tending to challenge
the same of hypocrisy, or least so to interrupt and cool the sense, as that,
either they are deprived altogether of the present comfort thereof, or at the
least they are hindered thereby of such entire communion with God therein, as
they heartily desire, and so receive much discomfort and confusion thereby: and
therefore very necessary is it: Both

1 To know what these Thoughts are.

2 To discern the occasion and true causes thereof.

3 To discover the effects thereof.

4 To prescribe the remedies against the same: because though we cannot be
altogether free from the same; yet we may both graciously lessen and subdue
such Thoughts, and also may make profitable use of such as do necessarily
accompany us therein.

Examine we therefore first the nature of these Thoughts. What these are.
They are unseasonable and disorderly Thoughts, arising from our corrupt
nature, occasioned by outward objects, and sometimes iniected by Satan
contrary, and besides the business we have in hand, tending to interrupt,
and confound us therein, which makes us, that we may not rest in our own
righteousness, but wholly rely upon the merit of Christ.

First, I say, they are unseasonable, and disorderly, as not sorting with the
present occasion, not leading us along therein; not accompanying the same, and
so if they be evil, or good, they are disclaymed.

2 I add, that they either spring from our corrupt Nature, which is but in
part regenerate, and so necessarily yields store thereof, in that the flesh
lusts against the Spirit, that so we may have a t^yall of the truth ^f what
we do, by this combat of the flesh, and conquest thereof.

Or 2 they are occasioned from outward objects, affecting the senses, whereof
we are generally too careless and prodigal.

3 Or they are cast in by Satan, in our most serious intentions, to interrupt,
and so deprive us of the comfort of them.

Lastly, I discover the end hereof; that hereby being convinced of our
imperfection herein, we may be sent unto Christ.

Or else, hereby we might be made inexcusable, if yet we shall stand upon
the worth of our well doing.

The Causes hereof.
Are principally, Satan diuing into our very inward man, and either stirring
up such vain Thoughts from natural corruption, and such special sins, as
we are most subject unto; or else provoking the same, upon occasion of some
outward object, affecting the senses, and so thereby violently to distract and
drive us from the duty we have in hand.

Secondly, there may be causes hereof in our selves. As these.

1 Want of preparation to holy duties. And

2 Want of intention and settling of the mind on God in the performance of them.

3 Or thirdly, a dissolute and inconstant course and practice of holy duties,
may occasion the same, when we keep not a set course and order therein.

4 Or contrarily, too much relying on the outward form and times hereto, as if
this were the maine: may prove occasion of such idle Thoughts.

5 Or some special sin not sufficiently repented of, may occasion the same:
the thought whereof will be still presenting, and intruding it self when we
are about to do good.

6 Or some touch of vain glory may tickle us in the holy action; which usually
remits the mind, and so gives way to such unseasonable Thoughts.

7 Or we may give too much liberty to our senses, in holy duties by letting
the eye roue, the ear wander after pleasing objects, and these may be
occasions to cloy the heart with such kind of carnal Thoughts and affections.

8 Hitherto also much avails pompous and vain ceremonies in the worship of
God, such I mean as are too ordinary in Popery; which being in them a
wilworship intended to satisfy the flesh, and to norish the heart in the
ignorance of it self, does by the divine justice herein, prove it own
confusion, as bewitching the heart with a conceit of carnal happiness, and
secret Atheism, as if God were not a spirit, that he were like unto man, to
be pleased with thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, that
either he were asleep, or in pursuit of his enemies, and so must be awakened
and charmed with such chantings and brutish noise, in an unknown tongue, and
so thereby is justly given up of the Lord, to be pestered with carnal and
vain Thoghts for the confusion of it wisdom.

9 Add we hereunto that common disease which worldlings are too much possessed
withal: Namely Covetousness and greedy desires of worldly gain, who
measuring happiness hereby, do therefore give the bridle to these
immeasurable desires, and so making this their maine, to the maintenance of
sin, no marvel if when they come before the Lord, and sit before him as his
people do, yet they hear the word and will not do it, nay indeed cannot so
much as intend the same; because their hearts wander after their covetousness.
Ezech. 33.31.32. No marvel if the the word prove no better unto them then a
Jesting song or a pleasant voice, only to tickle the ear, because their
hearts are taken up with their pleasures, and are full fraught with
cogitations and desires thereof.

10 And if we do observe that common condition of ordinary Proselites, that
either they worship they know not what, through the wilful ignorance that is
in them; or else through pride and curiosity, they are still to seek how to
worship God; each day, and example proving an occasion, to change their
judgments in the matter or manner of divine worship, at the least, and that,
because hereby they would still take some occasion of carnal liberty, as
imagining they are not bound in obedience, to what they are not resolved of,
and so they will never be resolved, how to serve God, that they may not serve
him at all: as this necessarily occasioneth much staggering in what they do:
so by reason of this staggering in their minds, how can they choose but be
pestered with multitudes of wandering and disturbing thoughts of Fear of
themselves, judging of others, etc.

11 Hereunto furthers that manner of Preaching in these days among some,
suiting by the divine justice, with the common aim of the baser people. Which
being only to retain the credit and form of Religion, and to deny the power
thereof: to rest, in what may give contentment to the flesh, rejecting that
which may abase the same: and therefore willing to grace and countenance, what
may sort therewith: hating those that rebuke in the Gate, and advancing such as
cry peace, either by not meddling with sin at all, or else by making a mock
of it, with their politic and carnal glancings at the same. Is it any
marvel, if now in stead of powerful teaching, they are fitted with the
enticing words of man's wisdom, either with such matter as may be mystical
and profound, exceeding to their capacities or with such as may nourish sin,
by it cold reproof thereof: And does not this prove a means to nourish vain
Thoughts: either that it is not the word of God, or that the Lord is like unto
them, That Preaching is but policy etc.

12 Especially that which increases and confirms these vain and wandering
Thoughts, in divine worship: Is our customarie and carnal keeping of the
Sabbath: Wherein seeing the Lord requires the whole and entire concurrence of
the whole man: of his Thoughts, wholly to delight in him, of his Words, to
speak altogether of heavenly things, of his actions suitable thereunto: the
Natural man being not able to conceive this spiritual worship, or if he
do, yet thinking it impossible or unreasonable to be so restrained: and
measuring the worshipppe of God, by the acceptance of man, who sees and regards
the appearance; and not the heart; does therefore content himself with bodily
service, and willingly gives way to the vanity of the mind, and so the bridle
is let loose to its own corruption, and Satan fostering the same, by
furthering variety of objects hereunto, and casting moreover into the heart
multitudes of carnal, and profane Thoughts: Is it any marvel if the like
liberty be taken in other days, at other times, that the heart in the
performance of them, may roue and wander after vanity.

13 And hereunto further the false conceit of that Liberty, which the Lord has
given, as to follow out own affairs on the six days: Wherein, seeing we
presume that we now are exempted from serving of God, or else that we may
serve him only so far, as that our own times must be first served, we
must serve him for our own sakes, and not for his glory: As this has proved
an occasion to the most, to renounce altogether the worship of God on the
other days, as if now they had no leisure, they should wrong themselves, and
disobey Gods will: so if any such duties be performed, yet the conceit of this
liberty for the world so cuttalls, and subjects them to any worldly occasions*
as that it is no marvel, that as they are begun upon such grounds rather that
we may prosper in the world, then God may be honored: so they are suited
with carnal matter, as rather for things of this life, then those of a
better; and so they are performed in carnal manner with worldly Thoughts, and
carnal affections: and so have no better then a carnal issue: God may give us
our desire, and yet send leanness into our souls, Psalm. 1. to 15. We may
have our reward in this life, profit pleasure, credit, etc. Math. 7.8 God will
not be beholding to us for his service, but gives us our wages in hand; but as
for the things of a better life, as we do not principally seek them, nay do
but conceit them for our present use, so no marvel if we miss of the^ in
the end, as having our portion in this life.

14 And does not the conceit of our Ability to serve God of our selves, (a
thing incident to every natural man to think he is man good enough to do
God service of his own liberty and power, and that rather God is beholding to
him for his service, then he any whit indebted to God for the same) does not
this conceit, I say, justly provoke the Lord to leave us to our own counsels,
that in his worship our hearts being puffed up with conceits of their worth,
shall be justly confounded therein by these carnal imaginations and ends, which
aim at no better then this life, which savor only, or principally of earthly
things, even when they are worshipping the God of heaven.

15 And does not that conceit of Merit, which bewitcheth usually the natural
man, upon the former false ground of his ability to worship God; does not this*
I say, rob God of his glory, and Christ of his merit, and so provoke the
Lord to leave us to such carnal and bodily service and thoughts thereunto,
that so we may be confounded in our confidence, and reap the whirlewinde of
men's praises and worldly contentment, while we sow the wind of our own proud
and vain glorious hearts.

16 Lastly, whereas the worship of God being spiritual, is therefore
principally performed with the heart and affections, and so with the outward
man, only furthethering thereto, and expressing the same. Hereupon many
conceiving that bodyly service profits nothing, as indeed it does not of it
self; nay rather, that the letter kills, or at least wise hinders our
spiritual worship have therefore grown to strange conclusions and practice:
as that the word is too scant a rule for holiness, or too base a string to
tune the same. That the service of the body, is either altogether needless or
combersome in the worship of God; who must be worshipped in the spirit: and so
have vanished into fearful courses of singularity and separation. Of
singularity, as fancying to themselves strange dreams and revelations in
stead of the word, or adding their own inventions and fancies to supply the
same. And so of separation, as forsaking the society, that submit to the
ordinances of God, as Nouices or carnal worshippers, as time-seruers and will
worshippers: as a profane people, that have not the spirit: Is it not just
with God to fill such with the fruits of their own dreams, giving them up to
strange and fearful imaginations, to endless conceits in divine worship, to
fearful censurings of their brethren, to envious imaginations at the
prosperity of the Churches, to desperate slandering of the beauty of Sion,
and so in the end to fearful speculations, and actions of most gross and
abominable sins.

These may be some special causes of these vain and wandering Thoughts. And
these Thoughts are of diverse kinds, according to the several occasions of
them.
As 1. Sometimes idle and sottish meeting with our formal and carnal worship
our lip-labor, etc.

2 Otherwiles obscene and filthy, suitable to our ends, in the worshipping of
God, which is to satisfy the flesh. Col. 2 23.

3 Eftsoons they are profane and Atheistical, blasphemous, and horrible,
meeting with our Pride and confidence in well doing.

4 Yea sometimes they seem to be Divine and Angelical, replenished with joy
and yet being unseasonable, seem to meet with our rejoicing in the flesh, and
so to interrupt us, in the present occasion.

5 Sometimes they are profound and mystical, such as neither our selves nor
others can tell what to make of. Answerable to our curious and presumptious
spirits, desirous to pry into hidden mysteries, and to roue after dreams and
revelations to confound our vain trust and confidence therein.

6 For the most part, they are carnal and full of worldliness: according to
the common aim of profession which is current in the world, namely for
profit, pleasure, etc. as justly conuincing our want of preparation and
intention thereto, and arising either from our own unstable hearts: or Satan's
malice, to divert us from what we have in hand.

8 And so according to our ignorance or unsettled judgment, in the matter and
manner of divine worship, they are full of vncertaineties and wanderings, full
of fear, distraction, and inconstancy.

The Effects of these kinds of Thoughts are,
At the best they interrupt the intention of the heart in the worship of God,
and so hinder the work of the Spirit in the power thereof, and deprive the
conscience of much comfort of the same.

But if they be in any sort given way unto, they may prove occasions, of
profaneness in the heart, and secret Atheism.

And also of hypocrisy, and carnal worship, yea if they be not speedily
qualified and suppressed, they may be occasions by t ckling the affections,
and procuring consent thereto, to break out into gross evils, to the reproach
of profession, and wounding of the conscience.

Nay does it not fall out, that when as these vain and wandering Thoughts
accompanying us in divine worship, occasioned from our want of preparation
thereto, and conscience thereof to make us more holy and careful therein; yet
by these thoughts we may often times measure the worship of God, and so grow
either to conceive basely thereof, and thereby fall to plain formality and
customa^inesse therein; or else, on the other side, conceiving the worship of
God to be so heavenly, and our selves so carnal, and unable to perform the
same, through a scrupulous fear of defiling the same, and so making it
unprofitable unto us, we grow at length to this resolution, not to deal with
such edge-tooles, lest we not only not profit, but rather may be further
confounded hereby. Is not this a tentation incident to many weak ones in the
day of their desertions, when comfort should be ministered to them from the
ordinances of God, That they belong not to them, they dare not presume to
meddle with them, their hearts are so full of vanity, ignorance, they have so
abused them hereby before, that now they can look for no better from them
but a savor of death, they may make the ordinances of God worse, but they are
like to be little better by them, their hearts are so choked and forestalled
with all abomination.

The Remedies hereof are.
1 An holy preparation to all duties.

1 By consideration of our inabilitie and unworthiness to perform them.

2 By meditation of the Majesty and holiness of God, to whom we are to
perform them.

3 By renewing our estates in Christ, by faith and repentance, in whom we may
perform them acceptably.

4 In the doing thereof we must especially look to the intention of the heart:
settling it in the presence of the great and allseeing God, and fixing it
constantly upon him alone.

3 Hereunto furthers constancy in keeping our times and occasions for holy
duties because the neglect hereof prouokes the Lord to leave us to be buffeted
with these wandering thoughts, that so we may be humbled in our failings, and be
provoked to more constancy.

4 Especially, be we careful of the duties of the Sabbath, not so much to
stand upon the work done, as upon the binding of our thoughts and affections
to prosecute the same more entirely, and this shall prove a gracious
preservative against such wandering thoughts all the week after.

5. And hereunto also shall serve very profitably the confining our thoughts,
and affections in worldly occasions. That our conversation therein be without
discontent, covetousness, distrust, etc. for hereby we shall be less
pestered with vain and carnal thoughts, when we intend spiritual duties.

And therefore labor we here to prosecute our civil affairs, with heavenly
minds; beginning them with prayer accompanying of them with subjection to Gods
will, not measuring his goodness by them, or propounding absolutely success
in them. And so shall we be less encombred with such thoughts in the worship
of God.

And be we frequent in the meditation of heavenly things, draw we our selves
apart often into Gods presence, to have private familiarity with his Holiness;
that so we may be more ready and spiritual, when we come to set duties.

Especially labor we daily to renew our Repentance daily for all known sins,
that so we may more boldly appear before the Lord in his worship, and may
more freely and entirely converse with him therein: because sin unrepented of
will be sure to haunt and interrupt us, when we are about to do most good,
as to defile the same: so in the wise mercy of God, to provoke us to the
clearing of the score, lest if we regard Iniquity in our hearts, the Lord will
not hear our Pray^rs, Psalm. 66.18. And therefore, as we are to begin al
holy exercises with Confession, and deprecation for our sins, especially such
particular, as lie upon us: that so they may not fly in our faces, when we
seek the face of God in his worship: so if we conclude all holy duties with
confession of our faylings therein: especially of the vanity of our mind, and
wandering of our affections, we shall hereby be better stored with holy
Thoughts, and affections therein, and less interrupted with the contrary.

To this end it is now fit also, that we Make a Covenant with our outward man,
with our eyes, ears and hearts, that so in the worshippt of God they may not
wander after vanities, and so let in such occasions a^ may divert and corrupt
our serious meditations.

And yet take we here heed of Satan's Policy, that while we labor the
conformity of our outward man, to the worship of God, we grow not curious or
superstitious therein, tying our selves to such gestures of the body, which in
private are indifferent; or else more tampering upon the one then the other
namely the Invention of the mind, lest this prove an occasion to draw the mind
to the senses, and so to offer up no better then a carnal worship and for the
same, justly to be buffeted with such like imaginations.

And therefore as here we must be careful in the worship of God to avoid
such vain pomp and ceremony, which may rather work upon the sense, then the
heart, and so to affect it according to the outward objects.

So also be we wise, to keep an holy conformity with the Congregation,
therein, lest difference of gestures cause distraction in the mind, and so
oppress it with vain affection of singularity, scrupulosity, etc.

And therefore as it is unseemly to pray when others sing, to stand when
others kneel: because the public actions must be uniform, as in the matter,
so in the manner, or else we deface the Communion pretented therein, and make a
jar in such a sweet consort, and thereby be given up to manifold vain and
wandering thoughts; so it is wisdom to submit our selves, to the means
vouchsafed, though happily we might have daintier food else where, lest
hereby we seem to prescribe unto the Lord, and discover our pride and
unthankfulness, and so be justly left to such thoughts and extraordinary
motions as may scourge us for the same.

Lastly, whereas the Ordinances of God served as well to discover corruption, as
to healed the same: therefore howsoever in performance of holy duties, the
vanities and aberrations of the heart may be more discerned through Satan's
malice, intending hereby to cast us from the same: yet here the comfort is,
that what at the first discouers corruption, is also able to heal it: and
therefore let us wait upon God therein, though we be more vile, assuring our
selves, that when we be thoroughly humbled, we shall be so far healed, as
that still we shall love the Lord that has smitten us, and trust in God though
he kill us:

The Trial of the Remedy: And therefore here is the Trial that these
thoughts are in cure.
1 If in holy duties we more particularly discern them.

2 An^ so in regard of them are confounded in respect of confidence in, the
work done as of our selves.

3 And yet in obedience to our God, shall still submit to his Ordinances.

4 Not so much measuring the worth and acceptance thereof by the present
success.

5 As still living by faith in the Son of God, persuading our selves, that
our persons and services shall be accepted of our God.

6 And so in this assurance shall still draw near unto the throne of Grace,
complaining unto our God, of the unruliness of our hearts, and laboring to
approve the same in his presence, waiting upon him for the accomplishment of
his work, and comforting our selves, that he requires no more then he gives,
but will accept according to what we have, and not according to what we have
not, still plying the Lord in his ways, and not being weary of well doing:
undoubtedly we shall reap if we faint not: and for the present shall not
lose our labor.

We shall find our hearts more humbled to meet the Lord, more pliable
toward him, and so more familiar with him, and so by communion with our
blessed God, more freedom from these vain and wandering thoughts.

So that howsoever they may yet glaunce and start up in our hearts, our hearts
shall yet more rise against them, our cries against them more earnest, our
affections more enlarged to our God in his worship. And so though we do no
other good, yet if we can give over with a sound judging of our selves, we
shall not be judged of the Lord.

And so out of conscience of our unworthiness of any means, much less of
that which we find our selves so much short unto in inward conformity: we
shall hereby grow more pure and sober in our judgments concerning the
Ordinances of God, not stumbling at such smaller supposed failings and
corruptions therein, arising rather from our abuse, then the nature of it in it
self, as if we might not in regard thereof communicate therewith, nor lusting
after quails when we have plenty of Manna, as distasting the simplicity and
outward seeming baseness thereof, or measuring the same by the estimation and
entertainment thereof in the world, as it is our corruption through desire of
novelty and change, to think others come better then our own, because indeed
we abuse our own, and are not worthy of it: But wisely judging of what is
fittest for us, because that may better fit others which is not so convenient
for us, I speak of the manner, and also of the matter: yea all matter may not
be fit for all sorts, at al times: We shall be able to discern between things
that differ; and so trying all things, shall yet hold that which is good: not
refusing our meat, because others do abuse it: or it is not so well cooked:
but in the conscience of our own unworthiness, shall be thankful for what
we have, as knowing it shall be sufficient till the Lord affoorde more, and
he will require no more at our hands, then according to the measure which he
gives: And so shall labor to be faithful in a little, husbanding that well,
which is committed unto us, and bringing forth fruits answerable thereunto: As
hereby we shall find our minds: settled in obedience to our God; so we shall
find a gracious return of this our obedience, even a quieting of the heart in
what we do; and settling of our thoughts and affections more entirely
thereupon, that so we may reap more profit thereby, and be ready to give up
our account with joy and not with grief. Surely when I do remember what
stumbling there has been in our churches at the matter and manner of our
worship: some measuring it by the vessel, and so conceiting the corruption
thereof: others, judging it by the outward habit thereof, and so condemning it
to be Antichristian: and so not to be communicated with others censuring of it
by it estimation and success, which being not powerful with the wisest, and
multitude, is therefore rejected, because not many seeming wise nor noble, do
embrace the same. Ioh. 7.48. As this is unto me is a plain evidence of the
truth and power thereof: so it is a sufficient satisfaction, not to stumble
with these stumblers, but to hold the truth in sobriety and meekness.
Especially when I consider a double effect of these stu^blings. The one in
those who being given up by the Lord so to stumble, that they shall never
recover again, have therefore upon pretense to better themselves and avoyde
these offenses, forsaken our assemblies, and refused their true guide and
light, to know God and themselves by, and so indeed by the justice of God have
been given up to all vanity and perverseness of error, and endless wanderings
Not only condemning our Communion as abominable and monstrous, and yet still
chopping and changing their judgments therein; sometimes we are a Church,
sometimes no Church, but a Synagogue of Antichrist: hear us they will, but not
join with us: But herein also justly condemning themselves, in condemning us,
as renouncing that conversion, which if ever they had any (as themselves
undertake they had) they had it among us: And so condemning all truth of Gods
former graces in them, as no better then hypocrisy, and so beginni^g again
with Rebaptization, New constitutions: And ^ t still as we to begin as ever,
not knowing what to hold, every day affoording a new conceit, according to the
giddines of their spirits, and justice of God especially giving them up to
endless mazes and coining of new fangled conceits; and so instead of broaching
conceits of purity and perfection, have been given up to fearful errors of
Atheism and Libertinisme, and so thereby given up to all licentiousnes and
gross profaneness: As herein the justice of God is admirable, in meating
unto them such recompense of error as is meet, so has it bin my instruction to
be wise with sobriety. And finding sufficient in our Churches to salvation,
to set up my rest herein, in all humility and thankfulness, and so to labor
the improuing of such gifts and means which are plentifully offered herein for
the serving of my self and others.

And thus the rather have I been resolved in, when I observe others, though at
the first stumbling at corruptions, in regard of the tenderness of conscience,
and happily being carried through ignorance, with the fair shows of such as
have gone out from our society, have the rather conceited of their way, least
they should prove uncharitable in judging them, by not siding with them: yet
now upon some experience of their way, and better discerning of things, have
grown by Gods mercy to a settling of their judgments in subjection to the light
that shines among us, and so by the blessing of God upon their labors and
persons; have been approved therein to God, and to the Churches: As this has
been a further confirmation unto me, to labor the Peace of the Churches, and
submit with all conscience thereunto, so it has affoorded much more peace to
my soul and comfort in my labors.

And therefore as I have found that wavering and unsettledness of judgment, is
a principal ground of all such vanity and perverseness of thoughts, that do
pester us in divine worship: so I may safely conclude, that where the mind
once is settled in what it should do, and how to perform the same, this is a
gracious evidence of the cleansing of this corrupt puddle: This shall make our
thoughts and affections more pure and intentive in the worship of God.

And therefore, howsoever we may yet be troubled with the same, when we know
what we do, and endeavor after the best manner to perf^rme the same: yet herein
is our comfort, that the Lord will not be severe to mark what is done amiss;
if there be a willing mind in his service, that we justify God in doing his
will, though therein we judge our selves* for our failing therein.

As considering that in this life we are laboring to pe^fection, and have not
yet attained, and therefore as it is our perfection then, to see our
Imperfection, because thereby we evidence our hold in Christ, and not in our
selves, who is our righteousnrsse and sanctification, that he that rejoices
may rejoice in the Lord, 1. Cor. 1.30: So by the daily sense of our faylings,
convinced by the imaginations and daily rebellions of our hearts, we shall be
provoked daily to renew our ^ight in Christ Jesus, and so receiving daily new
strength and grace from that fountain, we shall be enabled thereby to proceed
in grace, and in every good work, that so we in him may attain to
perfection, and follow hard after the mark, for the price of our high calling
in Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3.12.14.

As remembering that this life is the Time of combating and wrestling with
corruptions, not of full victory over them: And therefore, if we strive
lawfully, we shall obtain if we give not over them, they in the end will give
over us.

And therefore if now we can still groan to be disburthened of these
trouble-houses, and sigh to be pertakers of the heavenly communion, where we
shall be freede from all these noisome guests: This is our Evidence that
already we have got the better of them, and in the end shall be quite rid of
them. Especially, for the healing of this Flux of vain and wandering
thoughts, labor we to receiuc the Word, and all other duties as the Word of
God, as in the presence of God, propounding the maine end, which is our
conformity to God, our obedience to his Will, being wise to try the Spirits,
and hold that which is good: so shall our hearts be set upon the Lord in holy
duties, so shall they not roue at any by-obiects, either of the Minister and
his faylings, to stumble at therein, or at any other vain complement that may
distract us.

Above all, bring faith to the practice of all Gods ornances, namely, a
persuasion that God commands them. 2. an evidence that we do them, not to
merit, but in obedience to God, in thankfulness to him for his unspeakable
love in Christ, that by the power of Christ we are enabled thereto, that
through the merit of Christ we shall be accepted, and so shall this immoderate
Flux be graciously healed.

Uses of these wandering thoghts both for
The trial of our mastery over them, and also for our comfort in regard of
such remaindure as will necessarily accompany us in this our Pilgrimage.

Howsoever we have undertaken to prescribe a remedy against these wandering
thoughts, encumbring of us in the worship of God, yet lest we might be
discouraged in the use of the remedy as imagining it to be altogether
ineffectuall and so may question the truth of Gods grace in us.

Consider we first, that as it is impossible so long as corruption remains, to
be quite free from such noisome guests, but that whatsoever means we use, we
shall be molested with them continually, because our life is a con^inuall
warfare between the flesh and spirit, we are yet in the state of growing and
so of imperfection, so we are not therefore to despair that we have done no
good, because we have not attained what this life cannot afford: Only herein
may be our comfort that in obedience to Gods will we maintain the combat,
using such remedies as are prescribed thereunto, and this shall be our
evidence that we still walk within our bounds and so may be sure of Gods
protection to assist us against these enemies of our souls and of his
acceptance of our endeavors though yet we cannot attain.

1 And therefore as here is our trial that still we fight lawfully, though we
receive many a foil.

2 So we are more humbled in the daily sense of these thoughts challenging the
imperfection of our obedience that so we may be still fitted to more grace,
because God gives grace to the humble and replenisheth the low valleys with
his fullness.

3 And because Satan and outward objects do most prevail upon us in public
worship: if now we shall grow more retired in the service of God, and shall
more diligently exercise our selves in private duties of prayer, meditation etc
finding more liberty and yet restraint of our thoughts thereto, more restraint
from by matter, and more liberty of spirit in our communion with our God, this
is a gracious trial that we have got some ground of these wandering thoughts,
that they shall less interrupt us in all other public devotions.

Lastly, if hereby we shall be more provoked to hunger after our dissolution,
increasing our sighs and groans to be rid of this body of sin. This also is
a lively trial that we have profited by this Remedy.

And the comfort is manifold, as shall be plainly discovered in the
conclusion of this Treatise.

Even this in sum, that hereby we are both assured of the work begun in this
life, and also of the consummation thereof in the life to come.

And therefore we must in patience possess our hearts, and daily cry, come
Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Tentations, and Cases of Conscience; concerning Thoughts and secret
Imaginations.
These are either, 1 Concerning Thoughts in General. 2 Concerning good
Thoughts. 3 Concerning evil Thoughts.


CHAP. XI. TENTATIONS Concerning Thoughts in general.
Whereof, The first is, That as some think, Thoughts are free.
That is,

THat they are either in the Nature of Indifferent things, neither good nor
evil in themselves; but as they approved by consent, Jacob. 1.

Or else that they are in the Nature of those Impossibilities, Adrynata, Papist.
those Noli me tangere, such as cannot be ordered, in regard of their
infiniteness, variety, and so they claim a Priuiledg of invincible liberty:
because indeed they cannot be subdued. Or else they are such slight and small
scapes, as that they carry their pasport and pardon with them, to be free from
punishment, and so it is concluded, that because free from punishment,
therefore free from evil.

That Thought is free, And it is inferred
1 Because the Law of man takes no hold thereof.

2 Because it is not possible to avoid these thoughts.

3 They come so suddenly and unexpectedly, as that neither reason sometime can
be given of them, and therefore no reason that account should be given for
them.

4 They do no body any hurt, and therefore what evil is in them.

5 Is not th^s the Practice of Papists, to place the worth of the service, in
the work done, without the concurrence of the heart.

6 Is not this the common strain of the Civil honest man, and formal
hypocrite, Isay. 29.^6
even to draw near unto God with his lips, when his heart is far from him:
to make no bones of Thoughts, or inward corruption, only to take care with the
Harlot, to wipe the lips, with Pilate, to wash the hands with the Pharisees to
have much babbling, and little sense: in the end to place Religion in the
sense, and not in the heart, not for reformation of the inward man, but only
for conformity, and complement of the outward. And that to suite with his
carnal ends, of pleasure, and profit. And is not the Lord just to deal with
him accordingly. Though he give him his desire, yet to send leanenesse into
his soul, to reward him for the present with such as he measures, bodily
comforts, for bodily service. As for the Inward man, the Thoughts, Affections,
etc. These may run Riot, because man sees them not; can flesh and blood order
this? and therefore they must have their swing. Especially if it must be in the
matter of pleasure: herein appears the deceitfulness of the heart, that
though it can restrain it Thoughts (out of self love and carnal wisdom) for
sorrow, etc. yet it gives the raines with greatest liberty to joy and delights.

These are the colors and pretenses that Thoughts are free.
But the true and inward grounds of this Atheistical and damnable Delusion
are,

1 The Ignorance of the corruption of the heart; which being naturally, and so
necessarily full of all abominations continually, which as we cannot avoid,
so we with all delight and greediness give way hereunto: therefore we
conclude our Thoughts to be free, because we so freely and willingly give way
thereto.

Hereunto furthers the Ignorance of the Law of God: which being Spiritual and
preuayling to the discerning of the Thoughts, and inmost secrets of the heart.
We desite therefore to be ignorant hereof; that so we may not be thoroughly
humbled and convinced thereby: and measuring only the Law by the Letter
thereof, as reaching only to actual evils, that are apparent unto man: We
therefore conclude a Liberty of our Thoughts, because the Law of God seems not
to reach unto them.

Add we hereunto, the General estimate of Religion in the World: which is
not by the heart and thoughts; because as none can, or may presume to discern
thereby, as being only known to God: so, Few labor this Intentive ordering
of the Inward man, as being a business too laborious, and occasioning much
distraction, in regard of the unmeasurableness, and uncertainty of the heart:
And therefore it being the end of Religion ordinarily, to compass the things
of this life, as profit, pleasure, credit, etc. These being within the
compass of humane reach, and to be procured from men by carnal means:
Hereupon it follows, that carnal professors, mistaking the true end of
Religion, namely, to approve themselves unto God, who sees in secret; and
standing only upon that which is approved of the World, and which may make
themselus approved rhereof; do therefore vanish in bodily service and outward
devotions of lip* labor, by service, etc. Concluding hereby, that Thoughts
are free, that for the sin of the heart, it matters not, so they may approue^
themselves for their present ends, to the partial judgment of men.

Hereunto furthers that usual effect which proceeds from the neglect of the
heart: that being hereby given up to approve our selves unto men, we are also
for the further satisfying of the world, given up to eat of such things as
please them; to place religion not only in the service of the body, but also
to exercise religion for the satisfying of the lust of the flesh: whereby the
light of conscience being extinguished and the heart so hardened, that it
proves insensible of inward evils: it becomes hereby, not only a broker to
any gross iniquity, and so opens a gappe to all licentiousness, but hereby
also concludes, that thoughts are free, because it has no touch or remorse of
them.

And herein the Policy of Satan is notorious: Who as by this means he
keeps them in desperate impenitency, so by plunging them hereby into all
excess of riot, as nourishing by this mea^s that root of bitterness in their
hearts: that God sees not, it boots not to fear such Bugbeares: he thereby
leads them at his pleasure to make up the measure of sin, that so they may
be overtaken with unavoidable vengeance.

Above all, the Justice and wisdom of God is admirable herein, who purposing
to take the wise in their own craftiness, does hereby most righteously
accomplish the same; even by catching them in their own delusion, that
Thoughts are free. For, as hereby they regard not to know God, who rules in
their hearts; but do labor altogether to cast off this yoke from them; so
does the righteous Lord give them up to their own conceits: that by this
conceited liberty of their Thoughts, they may be nourished in their damnable
Ignorance, and denial of his power and presence: and so being deceived with
the outward estimate and form of Religion among men, they may worship the
Creature, by advancing their own Fancies, above the Lord. And so are justly
given up to a reprobate sense, even to do those things which are not
convenient, being filled with all wickedness and gross impiety, and so
ripening and fatting up thereby themselves unto the day of slaughter.

Lastly, if we consider the deceitfulness of the heart. This as it is in his
greatest wisdom, enmity against God, so it appears in nothing, more then in
this deceit of the liberty of Thoughts, is in nothing more deceived then
herein. For though by the light of Nature, it be convinced that Thoughts are
not free because they do either excuse for good, or accuse for evil: yet to
the further deceiving of it self herein, it most dangerously peruerteth the
light of grace: which though it be a searcher of the thoghts and the just
conuincer of them: yet because withal it grants some privilege to such as
are in Christ. That if there be a willing mind to some good, and not
co^senting to sin, it shall not be imputed unto us: hereupon, they falsely
conclude that though they have worlds of evil thoughts, yet they shall not be
imputed to them, because they do not consent to and approve the same: wherein
their lies a double deceit: One, that they think their Thought to be free,
because they are not imputed, whereas they may be sinful though not imputed,
nay in that they are not imputed, therefore they are sinful. But the special
Deceit is in their false collection and misiudging of their consent to evil
Thoughts.

Differences between resistance of Conscience and the Will.
And that first, because they imagine that to be a resista^ce of the Will,
which is but only a conviction and confusion of Conscience. These being the
Differences between these two.

That Resistance of Will arises from a distinct knowledge of these evils, and
that God, against whom they are committed: in whose goodness they apprehend
the haynousnes of the thoughts, and so out of love unto his Majesty, are
grieved at them, and labor to subdue and reform the same: whereas there may
be a reluctation of Conscience, from a confused knowledge of these evils, not
so much, as they are in the heart, as that they break out to daily contagion
in the outward man, as in the Eyes, Tongue, Hands: And that not so much out of
love unto God, as our selves, for fear of shame, punishment, etc. not so much
out of a holy desire to be rid of them, that the Fountain may be purged, as
only out of a purpose, to smother and conceal them, that so our outward
credit may be kept; howsoever the heart lie open to the Lord, and be hereby
enflamed and hardened therein.

A second difference between the resistance of the will to evil and
reluctation of the conscience, common to the naturalist and hypocrite is this,
that there is only a striving of the conscience against sin, there usually
follows two things: either Policy to lay the conscience a sleep again by
refusing the powerful means, which may thoroughly captiuate the same, to the
obedience of the truth, or else a subtlety to bleare the conscience, and
deceive it with such carnal Rules, as may enueagle it thereby, to the
conuincing of evil, and justifying of the same; or else, if the conscience be
so convinced, that it cannot gainesay, then usually follows despair and
fearful issues thereof: whereas if the will be truly renewed by grace, as it
abhors the evil whereunto it is enticed: so it uses al gracious means to
avoid the same; and declineth whatsoever may ensnare it to the practice
thereof.

A third Difference between a Convinced Conscience, and a rectified Will is in
the Effects thereof: That though in the wicked the Conscience, though it
gainsay, yet is not able to forsake sin, but usually on either side, is the
occasion to hasten the committing thereof; because the more we are restrained,
the more desperately we rebel naturally against the Bridle: yea proves an
occasion to fall into greater sins, either of presumption, if the conscience
be laid asleep; or deceived by false Rules; or of Despay^e, if the conviction
cannot be avoided: yet the rectified will, as it is assisted by grace to hate
sin, as sin: so it is enabled thereby in the use of holy means, either to
decline the particular to which it is enticed: or if through violence of
Tentation, or neglect of meane^, it be overtaken therewith; yet this proves a
gracious means to prevent further euil^ of Security, Pride, etc. and so sends
us unto Christ, to be renewed in his righteousness.

These are the Differences between a gaine-saying conscience, and Resistance
of the will.

A second deceit, whereby the carnal man is bewitched in this conceit of his
unwillingness to commit sin, whereupon he builds this dream, That his
thoughts are free, because he consents not unto them: Is the mistaking and
misiudging of his unwillingness to commit evil: For besides the reluctation
of Conscience incident to the Natural man, there may be also a kind of
striving i^ the will and affections, common to the hypocrite, which is far
from that sanctified dislike of sin, and purpose of goodness. The difference
hereof appears in these things.

Differences between the Godly and wicked, in not willing to sin.
First in the predominancie of these affections. The wicked though they have
some desire to leave sin, yet this is not their chief desire, but rather
their prime and chief desire is to live for ever therein either they know no
other happiness, or else they account this their chief happiness to revel
securely therein wherein because they are interrupted by the conviction of
conscience, therefore as they do in their carnal wisdom labor the
suppressing and corrupting thereof, that so they may more securely wallow
therein: so if the conscience lie sore upon them, then do they desire to leave
some sin, rather to procure peace to themselves, and more liberty to other
evils, then in obedience to Gods will, to give him the glory thereof.

They may happily be desirous to avoid open and gross evils: but for secret
sins, they hug them in their bosoms; they may happily stick at some sins
which may hinder their own present good, of profit, pleasure, etc* but such
as tend to dishonor God, or the hurt of their neighbor, these they make no
bones of, they commit them with greediness: they may stick at sin and be
unwilling to commit it, out of love to themselves, because it may bring shame,
punishment, etc. But not in conscience of obedience to the will of God; not in
desire to glorify God. Either they make it enough to avoid evil, as being a
means to excuse them, from doing good, or else they may be unwilling to some
small evil, that so they may be excused in a greater mischief. This is once,
their unwillingness to evil arises not immediately and primarily from a
sanctified heart, hating the same out of love unto God, but from carnal
wisdom out of self love and liking of sin: They like it simply and chiefly,
as their darling and Idol; and endeavor by all means to frollicke therein,
only their dislike arises from by respects; and outward occasions.

The second Difference.

Thus as their unwillingness to evil, is not rooted primarily in the heart: so
it quickly vanishes and decays: either when the bridle is removed, or
contrary occasions are offered, as neglecting and rejecting with all wisdom,
such means as may strengthen us against sin; and embracing willingly
whatsoever occasions may make way thereunto.

3. Diff. And hence proceeds a 3. difference of this unwillingness in the
wicked, that as it is quickly cooled and quenched by any carnal fuel: so it
is altogether fruitless in the maine. Either their unwillingness to sin, may
produce blockishnesse and barrenness to good, as being fearful and
scrupulous in all, because each thing offers sin unto the^: and so they dare
not attempt or prosecute any good, lest evil may lie therein: or else their
unwillingness to evil may further the commiting thereof: if the Fear be
removed, by peruersenes of judgment, that hindered the same: now they were
more scrupulous then needed: now they may more boldly commit the same. It being
the policy of Satan to draw from one extreme to the other, and by one
extreme to further the other. Thus is it with the unregenerate in their
unwillingness to evils. But in the Saints it is otherwise. Their desire and
purpose against sin is not so much, that they may not do it, as that being
freed from it, they may do the contrary. Their chief desire is to glorify
God, and so out of that ground, they desire to leave sin, because it hinders
Gods glory: and so out of this ground they are constant and wise in the use of
all holy means, to attain their ends; and so by Gods mercy do in some measure
accomplish the same.

Furtherances hereunto are in many, that Thoughts are Free.
The ordinary manner of teaching in these days with some, is, either to preach
altogether the Gospel and not the Law: and so to plaster over the wound before
it be searched and lanced: whereby the sore being conceited to be whole before
it be ripped up before the heart and core thereof be discerned and purged out:
this proves an occasion to flatter us in the goodness of our hearts, that our
Thoughts are free, because they are not captiuated by the word to the obedience
of Christ. And hereunto furthers that other manner of Teaching, ordinary with
some in these times; which usually makes only to the tickling of the itching
ear, with quaint phrases and entising discourses: as, if thereby they rather
intended to magnify themselves in the minds of their hearers, then to abase
them to the obedience of the word, rather to puff them up with conceit of
what they are not, as a learned auditorie a people so wise as that rather they
ca^ judge of their Teachers, then their Teachers could judge the^, so that the
heart being now altogether neglected, and the ear and brain only pleased:
Is it any marvel, if the heart hereby be flattred with conceit of it own
goodness: if this conceit follow that Thoughts are free, because the Preacher
aims not at them.

The danger of the Delusion is,
1 It aduanceth the Power, yea the perfection of Nature. For if Thoughts be
free; then also all others that proceed therefrom, as words and Actions; and so
commits Idolatry thereunto, setting it up in the place of God: yea adoring
it above all that is called God, and so conuinceth that root of bitterness,
namely, desperate Atheism to reign in the hearts of men.

2 Hereby it nourishes security, and confidence in Nature, and so excludes
Grace, as if it were sufficient to happiness, as if it were already possessed
thereof, and so utterly excludes all pursuit, and hope of the happiness of a
better life,

3 It also proves most effectual to Deprive us of all interest in Christ
Jesus, who only came to save sinners; and therefore if we acknowledge not our
sins, Gods promise belongs not to us, that he will forgive us, 1. John. 1.8.
Ioh. 9.26.27 And so it becomes a most effectual means to exclude from al hope
of entertaining Christ, as producing a presumptuous power to limit and
prescribe the Ordinances of God; that they ought not to search the heart, and
captiuate the Thoughts, and bring them to obedience, but that rather they serve
only as matters of Policy, with some to approve and maintain civil honesty,
and outward holiness, for the attaining of worldly ends: and so utterly
excludes Faith; whereby the heart may be convinced, and so purified by Christ
to the obedience thereof.

And so this proves an effectual means to confound all inward piety, and to
set up an Idol of Civil and moral righteousness in the hearts of men: and
thereby becomes a powerful means to give the bridle not only unto all secret
wickedness, as not being apparent unto men: but in the end also to all gross
wickedness: because this being once granted that Thoughts are free, it will
easily follow, that any thing is free, if we need not care for the presence of
God, in the heart, but that we may think any thing though never so vile, we
shall in the end much less regard the presence of men, and so break out into
all open filthiness.

And so the bridle being given to all gross wickedness, hereupon follows
hardness of heart, which being past feeling now commits sin with greediness,
and the heart being obdurate, that it conuinceth not for sin: hereupon
follows a reprobate sense to justify and approve any wickedness: and so this
opens a gap to all presumptuous wickedness: as if we might now sin freely,
because our hearts do not accuse us of our ways, and so follows desperats
impenitency, and reiection of the mercy of God, and so an heaping up of wrath
against the day of wrath.

The Conquest hereof, that Thoughts are not Erce,
Appears first,

By the commandment of GOD, which forbids them, Exodus 10, 10. And it is
therefore set in the last place, as the exposition and touchstone of all the
other, which seem to reach only to outward facts or motions with consent:
showing as the Apostle expoundes it, nay our Savior Christ himself, Math. 5.
Romans 7. That the Law is spiritual, extending to the very thought of the heart:
and so expressing the power thereof, that it is of God, who searches the heart
by it, 1. Cor. 14.25. Heb. 4.12. And therein also the use thereof, which is to
work an utter denial of Nature, and to send us daily unto Christ, Gal. 3.27.
And also to try the sincerity of our obedience, whether it be as well
inward, and secret unto God, as outward and apparent unto men. And so to
comfort us, both against the Imputations of infirmity: seeing in the Law of
our Mind we cleave unto God with purpose of heart, but especially against
imputation of hypocu^sae, in regard of outward failing: seeing as Satan knows
not our thoghts, nay our selves know not in this respect our own souls:
therefore though we do fail outwardly, and our hearts may smite us for the
same: yet the Lord knows our hearts and thoughts, we can appeal unto him, as
Ezechias and David did, in the sincerity of our hearts, and though^s; nay
though our hearts should fail us, yet seeing the Lord is greater then our
heart, and knows who are his: therefore may we appeal from our ignorant and
unbelieving hearts unto our God who knows that of, and in us, which we cannot
know, and so approues us, as we are in his purpose, above what we are in our
selves, yea contrary to that we feel in our selves: does graciously accept us.
Oh what a comfort is this to a distressed soul, through: violence of
tentation, or the roarings and dampes of the flesh, though he cry, yet he
thinks God hears him not, because now he knows not whether he prays or no.
Romans 8.27. or what he prays. That now he is answered by the spirit. That he
that searches the heart, knows the meaning of the spirit: opposing Gods
knowing of our prayers, to our not knowing of them, as if he should say: Let it
not trouble thee, that thou perceiuest not that thou prayest, for though thou
know not, yet God the searcher of thy heart, who is greater then thy heart, he
knows and approves thy prayer: God sees that good, which we see not
sometimes in our selves.

Thus does the Nature and use of the Commandment euince that our thoughts are
not free, not allowing to think evil of the Prince. Eccl. 10.70. no not of
the meanest.

2 And so does also the Nature and glory of the Lawgiuer euince the same.
Namely, The Lord our God,

1 Who being a Spirit is therefore not only to be worshipped with bodily
service, but even with the heart and all the powers and faculties thereof. Ioh.
4.24. Even with all the Mind, with all the Soul, with all the Heart and with
all the Strength. Mark. 12.30. Luke 10.27. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22. Pro. 23.26.

2 Who having cre^ted and redeemed both body and soul, is therefore to be
glorified both in soul and body, for they are his, 1. Cor. 6.20. only. Psalm.
94.

3 Who searches the heart, and by the Spirit searches the hidden things
thereof, and knows the thoughts long before. Psalm. 139.2. Ier. 10.17. 1.
Cor. 2.10.11.12. As being every where. Ierem. 23.24. And preserving and
upholding of the mind in it thoughts. Act. 17.28.

And therefore is to be worshipped in the heart, as being the trial of the
sincerity thereof. 1. These. 2.3.4. Psalm. 44.18.19 20.21. Mat. 5. so David.
Psalm. 119.168. I have kept thy precepts, that is constantly and sincerely, for
all my ways are before thee. Pro. 3.6.

4 Who is also righteous and will not only judge us according to our words or
works, but even according to our evil thoughts, as being breaches of the
tenth Commandment, and so breaking the whole. Jacob. 20.10. Act. 1.22. Eccl.
11.9.

As judging the work by the heart. Esaias 58. which indeed is the treasure both
of good and bad. Luk, 6.45, 46.

Thus witnesses the Spirit, that the thoughts of the wicked are abomination to
the Lord, Pro. 18.15.16. Herein most odious, because hereby they take liberty
to profane his spiritual Nature, making a mock and Idol of him, as if he
knew not the thoughts, had no soueraignety over them.

A third argument to prove that thoughts are not free, is from the
consideration of those to whom the Law^s given.
Namely, Mankind, whom if we consider generally: either in their first Estate.

1 As they are Creatures: are they not hereby generally at the devotion of
their creator, even in soul as well as in body.

2 Are they not subjects to their all-seeing Lord in all things to do him all
spiritual homage.

3 Are they not fitted immediately with that heavenly image, that so they may
be conformable to the invisible God.

Secondly, if we consider them particularly as they stand in the corrupt
estate of Apostasy.

Are not all their thoughts and imaginations only evil continually. Genesis 6.4.

Is there any power in them so much as to think a good thought. 2. Cor. 3 5.

And are they not hereby liable to the curse, for the breach of the spiritual
Law, which requires inward, and entire obedience in soul and body and spirit
Deuteronomy. 4 Are they not hereby ^ed captive under the law of sin, they cannot
choose but sin, though they choose and entertayne the same with all
greediness? so far it is that there thoughts are free to evil: that indeed
they are only free to evil, they have no liberty to any thing that is good.
1. Cor. 3.20.

Thirdly, consider we man in the estate of his recovery.

If we observe the means whereby this was acc^mplished, namely the sufferings
of Christ, seeing he suffered as well in soul as in body, as this does argue
a general taineture both of soul and body, so does it imply are, stauration
both of soul, as well as the body, and a subjection thereof with the body, to
the obedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 4.10. And this shall the better appear, if
we consider the work it self, I mean the effectual power of Christ in the
restoring of nature, which is herein operative, that it makes it a Creature, so
new, that old things are passed away, we are dead, and buried with Christ,
and all things are become new. The very Spirit and quintessence of the mind,
the most noble and inward part thereof renewed; which I take to be the
Thoughts. The affections ordered and changed from earthly to heavenly objects.
The understanding illightned to conceive the great mystery of godliness, the
conscience purged and quieted from dead works to serve the living God. Heb. 9.
10. The will altered, and enlarged to desire and prosecute the will of God. The
whole man with all the outward members thereof, given up as weapons of
righteousness, to serve the living God; and all this out of the good Treasure
of the renewed mind and heart, transformed into the holy Image which it had
lost, and conformed thereby in all things to the glory of God: 2. Cor 5.16.17.
Romans 12.2. Col. 3 2. Romans 7.7. Heb. 10.21.22 Romans 7.20.22. Romans 6.7 11.

Thus as we are made partakers of the Divine nature: so do we in nothing more
resemble the simplicity and purity thereof, in no. thing more do, we communicate
therewith, then in our nimble and pure thoughts. By these, though we be absent
in body, yet we can be present with-him, by these when the body lies
senseless in the bed; yet we may solace our selus with God, and so indeed
without this Ministry of holy Thoughts, we could not perform that constant
and continual worship unto our God, as may give sound comfort of the sincerity
thereof.

And hence it is, That the godly have been so careful of their Thoughts and
and preparing of their hearts; That it is their Thoughts that they most
complain upon. Romans 7.21. Their Thoughts it is that they are most comforted
with. As God accepts these above all other service, so above other, this
service is most comfortable, as freest from hypocrisy, tediousnes and
whatsoever other imputations.

4 Thus as in the creating of this new Work, the Thoughts are as well ranged
and brought in subjection as the outward man. So if at any time the work has
been again defaced by any grievous sin: The Lord has taught us to begin
the repairing thereof from the Thoughts, as Esaias 1.16. Esaias 55.7. Put away the
evil of your Thoughts, says the Spirit: Let the wicked forsake his Thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, Ier. 4.4.

And so have the Saints practiced accordingly, beginning with the search and
trial of their Thoughts and hearts, and so proceeded to confession and
acknowldgement of their sins. Lam. 3.40.41.42. Psalm. 4.5.6.

But what do we speak of the Saints, and their practice for the condemnation
of this conceit, that Thought is free: may not this be proved eue^ from the
light of Nature, and polity of the wicked themselves? Do not their thoghts
either accuse or excuse naturally, Romans 2.15. Have not even humane Laws guided
only, and derived from the divine light of Nature, condemned Thoughts and
purposes of evil, though the fact has not been performed, as in cases of
T^eason. And does their reasons, because it is against so eminent a person,
because others may be terrified from imagining and contriuing the like? Do
not these reasons, I say, condemn the evil of Thoughts, being co^menced
against the great God, infinitely above all earthly Sovereignty, which meets
with evil thoughts, to prevent worse evils.

Surely, if common reason do awarde that the principal be punished, at least
equally with the Accessory, then must not evil thoughts escape the censure,
seeing they are the Ringleaders, and firebrands to all sin, all outward
objects and occasions could not hurt, but by the Thoughts: affecting and
embracing the same.

Nay if the greater sin, the greater punishment, the^ surely evil Thoughts
being hereby, usually made the greatest sins, because they are cherished and
cloaked thereby, may certainly look to be beaten with more stripes.

Observe we yet further the practice of the wicked: su^ely if there were no
other reason to condemn this position of liberty, then that accursed nature
pleads for it: It were even enough to condemn the same. For who will believe
the thief that he is a true man: but if we shall further consider the
practice of the wicked, we shall find, that what they assume in opinion, they
condemn in practice, being in nothing less free, then in their thoughts;
wherein yet they claim greatest liberty.

For what greater bondage and slavery can there be, then by the rage and
vnsatiaablenesse of the Thoughts to be hindered from rest, the sweet nurse of
Nature, so great a blessings, that the Lord promises it only to his beloved,
that his sleeepe shall be sweet. Mich. 2.1. Lo the wicked imagine mischief
upon their beds: and is it any maruayle if there be a woe belonging to them?
not only in depriving them for the present, of that sweet blessing of sleep,
but in preparing them to that everlasting night in the life to come. And yet
(so strongly are they bewitched) this to them is accounted the greatest
liberty, they cannot sleep, unless they do evil, their sleep departs from
them, unless they cause some to fall Pro. 4.18.19. If we could take a view of
the restless and insatiable thoughts of the Aspyrer, and Usurer, of the
envious and cruel man, how he wastes his marrow, his time, his senses, etc. We
might conclude, their thoughts to be inflamed from hell, which nothing but
hell, if that, shall satisfy. And what greater plague and tormte^ ca^ there be
to a manthe^ to be still thinking of that which he cannot have? Nay what greater
bondage and torture can happen unto men, then still to be thinking of that
good, which he has lost: shall not this be a part of his torments in hell, nay
the very hell of hell it self. And yet this is even the greatest liberty of
the thoughts of the wicked; herein they do most applaude themselves. That
either they can think of that they cannot have, it does them good to imagine
themselves rich to wish, to be great or else, they can think with great
delight of their sins and pleasure past, it does their hearts good, to
remember their tricks of youth. Is not this the best comfort to wicked old
age. And is not this a draught of the infernal cup, the dregs whereof they
shall fully drink up hereafter? Thus as the conceited liberty of carnal
thoughts, is the greatest bondage thereof: so if we shall but observe further
the justice of God, in confounding this wisdom of the flesh, to bless it
self in the liberty and vanity of it thoughts, not only by exercising the
wicked with terrors in the day: so that the sound of fear is always in his
ears: But further also, visiting him with terrors in the night, with fearful
dreams, and strange apparitions to the further increase of his daily terrors.
And that eue^ in the midst of his iolity and security, what may be the reason
hereof, but his appalled and guilty thoughts: presenting so many Instruments
of vengeance as they apprehend variety of objects, as being bound by his
guilty thoughts to the expectation of vengeance, and sentenced thereby to the
undergoing thereof. Behold the issue of the liberty of the Thoughts: and
conclude with me, this liberty to be the greatest bondage.

At the best, say, that the mind should not be appalled with these terrors:
say, that this conceit of the thoughts liberty, flattering in a formal and
outside holiness, and so deceiving with some conformity in outward behavior,
upon presumption that we may think loosely, should hereupon breed security,
and putting the evil day far from us. Is not this the next way to
unavoidable destruction. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

To conclude. As the Law, so the Prophets have condemned evil thoughts. Pro.
12.20. It is an argument of deceit to imagine evil, Ecclo. 4.8. he that
deuiseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous person. Es. 29.16. and
57.11. Ez. 11.2. Ie 18.18. and 48.2. Os. 7.15. Psalm. 94.11. and 119.118.3 Zeph.
7. Mich. 2.1.

Lastly, that Thoughts are not free, appears out of the Gospel.
1 For our Savior Christ reproues the Jews and his Disciples for their evil
thoughts. Math. 9.4. Math. 16.7. Mar. 8.17.

2 Shows that from the heart proceed evil thoughts adulteries, fornications,
and murders. Mark. 7.21.

3 Accepts of the thoghts and purposes, and his Saints that they fail in
Act, and so on the contrary, condemns the thoughts of the wicked.

4 Shows that men are judges of their own evil thoughts. Jacob. 24.

5 And seeing the spirit does ascribe unto love, the bond of perfection, that
it thinks not evil: what does it else hereby but condemn evil thoughts? 1.
Cor. 13.5.

6 Are not the thoughts of the Idiot convinced by the power of the word. 1.
Cor. 14.25. therefore they are sin.

7 The spirit reproves the world of sin, but what the spirit reproves is
sin: The spirit reproves the thoughts: Therefore they are sin, Ioh. 16.

8 Can any clean thing come forth of that which is unclean: the fountain of
our thoughts is unclean: therefore that which flows there from. Job. 14.5.6.

9 And seeing inquisition shall be made for our thoughts, seeing God shall
judge the thoughts of our own hearts, by his word. Therefore certainly they a
e evil and abominable before the Lord.

10 Lastly, those manifold absurdities which do ensue upon this conceit, are
plain evidences that thoghts are not free. As, that Gods government in the
heart is denied, and so God who is a spirit renounced.

The right Nature and use of the Law abolished, as being spiritual and reaching
to the thoughts.

The fall of man disclaymed.

The combat between the flesh and Spirit denied. etc. To. 7.

Answer to the Reasons.
And therefore though the Law of man punish not all, but only such as tend to
the preservation of government yet this rather argues that man's Law is
partial and defective, the^ that our thoghts are exempted therefro^. Nay,
seeing the Law of man pretends it descent from the law of God, and
subordination thereunto, therefore, seeing the Law of God reaches to the
thoughts, therefore either the law of man must also extend thereunto, or else
it comes short of that perfection which is in the Law of God. But if we
observe the judicial proceedings even of man's law, we shall find, that it
chalengeth some soueraintie over the thoghts: In that it not only by oaths
requires an answer to what may be demanded for the clearing of the truth,
where as by a consequent the thoughts and purposes of evil, may be often
scanned, as serving either to aggrauate the fact, or to diminish the same, but
as in case of treason, so also in many other, meets as well with the thoughts
of evil, as the actions thereof. Howsoever, let God be true and every man a
liar. Let it be the glory of Gods Law, to be spiritual, reaching to the
inmost thoughts to procure sincerity. And let it be the humiliation of man's
law, that while it only or principally binds the outward man, it may prove
hereby in some an occasion of hypocrisy: And yet if we shall observe, that
even the law of man binds the conscience, in it subordination to the law of
God, even in all things that are commanded thereby: does it not hereby also
challenge some power over the mind, and thoughts, according to which the
conscience is informed and so tied. And therefore as it is an argument of
sincerity, even wherein it binds man therein, not of fashion, or custom, but
even of conscience to submit thereto: so let it be the glory and privilege of
sincerity, to obey God above man: to make conscience of thoughts which the law
of man does not reach unto yea making conscience of all things, agreeable to
the will of God.

Answer to the second.
Justifying the Lord, even to the confusion of it self, That though it cannot
avoid evil thoughts: yet herein not to sit down, and give way unto them, as
if it were bootelesse and impossible: but seeing, through God, we are able to
do all things, and we are the soldiers of Christ, and therefore must daily
fight against our sinful lusts, shall we not then endeavor, what we cannot,
seeing the Lord accepts our purposes, and will crown his own work with a
gracious ordering and holy curbing of our rebellious thoughts, that they shall
rather be spurs to well doing, then quench the spirit of God:

Answer to the ^hird.
And therefore, in regard of their suddenness, and unseasonable importunity,
howsoever no reason can be given of them: yet as herein they are condemned by
the law, because they are exorbitant and reasonlesse: so the wise heart will
not fail to nippe them as he can single them out, or in general to be
humbled for their corruption, and exorbitancie, that so he may not be judged
of the Lord for them.

Answer to the fourth.
And that because, though they seem to hurt none: yet are they aberrations of
the law from God, they are the greatest galls to an holy heart, that would
shine entirely solace it self in it God. And they hurt also others many ways,
as hindering us from doing that good unto them, which we ought, and provoking
to many evils of Anger, covetousness, murder, sla^der, etc. to the endangering
of the life's good name, yea the soul of our brother.

Yea in that they generally hinder the doing of much good, and indeed are the
grounds of all evil, are they not therefore more especially to be judged, and
reformed.

Answer to the fifth.
As for Po^ish resting in bodily seruice^^ not so much as requiring the heart,
much less ordering the Thoughts thereof: Let this be their glory, that
rejoice in the Flesh; and have their reward in this life: yea let this be
their shame, that whereas they stand only upon making clean the outside of
the Platter, not regarding the inward man: Are they not justly confounded in
their fair show in the Flesh: giving liberty thereto with all greediness,
while they seem to have it in no estimation, and abolishing all order and
government amongst men, while they seem especially to advance the same, while
they undertake the protection thereof. Is not the Lord just to take these
fools in their craftiness, that while they stand only upon complement and
formality, upon conformity of the outward man, they break out to all desperate
wickedness, for the rooting out of mankind, and desolation of Government.

The like may we answer to the civil honest man, and formal Hipocrite, that
as he reapeth, so shall he sow: he sowes the wind of his lips, and shall
reap the wind of men's praises, and applause: he departs from God in his
heart, and therefore my soul shall depart from him, says the Lord, he has
sown the wind, and shall reap the while wind.

CASES OF CONSCIENCE Herein further to be resolved.

Concerning Good and Evil Thoughts.

Cases and tentations concerning good thoughts^on the left hand, tending to
extenuate the worth of them.
1 That because they are sudden and various, not abiding long with us, nor
regarded of us.

Thertfore either they are but flashes and sudden motions, and so must argue
an ineffctuall calling. Heb. 6.4.5.

Or else being not entertained, argue that we grieve the Spirit.

Or else, that because they pass unregarded and indeed are so infinite and
inconstant that it may seem they cannot be apprehended, therefore we need not
be troubled with them, we may pass them over as dreams.

Especially because we cannot put in practice our thoghts Nay not our
resolutions, therefore may not this challenge of hypocrisy, etc.

And is it not a strong and fearful delusion of Satan, that whereas
naturally all our Thoughts are evil, and by custom obstinate. Therefore if any
good Thoughts or motions are offered to reform corruption, we either refer
this to Melancholy, or some tentation of Satan.

The satisfaction is.
That in that they are sudden and variable, if they be evil, there is less
danger in them. The Proverb is here true of a mind thus alterable, that he
will never be mad: because it is settled and constant thoughts poaring upon
the same object that usually feeds melancholy, and so causes madness.

But if they be good, there is the more trial of our wisdom in retaining, and
husbanding of them, to the best behoof of our Master, and our own
furtherance in sanctification.

Especially herein appears a true work of grace: that because we are but
regenerate in part, there is a daily combat between the flesh and the spirit;
therefore our thoughts are variable: sometimes the flesh preuayling, the
thoughts are accordingly: Eftsoons the spirit preuayles, and so are the
thoughts suitable: so that to look for constancy of thoughts and continuance of
them on the best objects, Is a state reserved for us in the heavens: to assume
such for the present, is presumption and strong delusion. Only herein is the
comfort. That the though^s of the hypocrite as they are variable, so they are
neglected* or else this variety is delightful, and so evil thoghts prevail.
But with the elect though there be a changeableness of thoughts, yet this
change is a burden. It grieves the soul that evil thoughts interrupt and
hinder our sweet peace with God, and so by the power of Grace, evil Thoughts
are rejected, and wisdom used to entertain good Thoughts more constantly,
and so by Gods mercy good thoughts prevail.

And therefore though good Thoughts be not put in practice, yet this is no
argument, that they are not entertained, and so we grieve the Spirit: For
neither is it possible to put all good Thoughts in practice, seeing they are
so infinite: neither is it convenient to put in practice all good motions that
are offered: but only such, as are seasonable to the present occasion in hand:
seeing all the rest now offering themselves, are but Tentations, to hinder the
intention of the present employment, and so are to be rejected as most
dangerous evils. And if so be through violence of Tentation, or strength of
corruption, we may be hindered in the practice of those good motions and
purposes we entend: yet herein is our comfort, that we delight in the Law of
God concerning the inward man, that if there be a willing mind, the Lord will
accept it according to that which we have, and not according to that which we
have not.

So that we shall now renew our Thoughts, and purposes for well doing, the
more we are crossed therein, and be more eager to fight against Satan: the
greater foil we have received: This is the undoubted work of Gods grace in
us, avouching still the maintenance of the combat by the Spirit against the
Flesh, and assuring that we shall be more then conquerours through Christ that
has loved us.

And therefore, though our Thoughts being so infinite and changeable, it may
seem an impossible, and so indeed a bootelesse labor to bring them in
subjection; yet as by the grace of God, we may do all things, so far forth
as shall further us to happiness; so by the Grace of God, we shall so far
range and order our Thoughts, as to entende a general aim by them all to Gods
glory: to entertain the occasions for the quickening and well dispasing of
them, to avoid the contrary, to be humbled wherein we are crossed and
diuerted by by-thoughtes, to renew the combat by holy motions, and so by Gods
mercy to attain such an issue, as that we shall still be more humbled in
regard of our Thoughts, and drawn nearer unto God in a spiritual worship,
yea more hunger after our deliverance from the bondage of corruption.

And therefore though we cannot put in practice, what we think of; yet is
this so far from chalendging us of hypocrisy: As that indeed it is a
specially evidence of sincerity, to endeavor more then we can practice, as
justifying God by our allowing what should be done, and abasing flesh, in it
failing therein.

Lastly, howsoever Melancholy preuayling may occasion multitudes of fearful
and monstrous Imaginations, which being contrary to truth, are not to be
regarded of us, but either to be rejected, as the fruits of a depraved
disposition: so that in this case, the victory is to neglect and suppress such
vain and exorbitant thoughts; yet may we not father such thoughts upon this
depraved humor, which are the motions of GODS blessed Spirit. For though
through the power of the deceived imagination, and the power of Satan's
concurring therewith, we may be seduced to father such strange thoughts upon
God and Religion, which are quite contrary thereto, as it falls out in
retired spirits, who being oppressed with melancholy, and puffed up with
their conceited austerity, and contemplative walking, are thereby vsu^ay fitted
by Satan with high thoughts and mystical imaginations, to their further
infatuating and deceiving; as fancying hereby strange errors and monstrous
conceits; and so through pride of heart, broaching the same as the Oracles of
God, which are no better then the Enthusiasmes of Satan, that so deceyuing
themselves and others thereby, they may be confounded in their voluntary
devotions, and convinced of idleness, and neglect or abuse of their holy
callings; yet does it not follow on the contrary, that all such motions of the
Spirit, tending to reclaim them from their errors, must therefore be esteemed
melancholic dotages. Indeed if we consider the Policy of Satan, who labors
by all means to keep the hold he has gotten. It is no marvel if such that
are overtaken with error, as through pride of heart, they can hardly be
reclaymed, because this may serve to the confusion of their excellency and
wisdom; so are justly seduced by Satan, and obfirmed against all recovery:
And is there a more effectual delusion to harden the heart in error, then by
perverting the judgment further, that it shall stumble at the true light,
esteeming it to be but the darkness and corruption of Nature: an idle and
frivolous conceit of Melancholy. Is it not just with God, that they which call
darkness light, because they love the darkness more then the light, should
also be given up to a further delusion, even to call light darkness, that so
they may be held captive in darkness, and thereby be prepared to everlasting
darkness.

That we may therefore not be feduced with this error, which is worse then the
first, because to err is natural, but by rejecting the light to remain in
error, is devilish and incurable.

Take we in the fear of God these directions.

1 Know we that our hearts naturally are full of darkness, we neither have
any light of grace of our selves, neither indeed know that we want it: but
rather esteem the darkness to be light, our own ability and free will to
be guide enough to happiness. And therefore is it any maruayle if we lie open
to a world of errors to deceive us herein. Is there any hope that by the light
of Nature we should walk one step to happiness. Is it not necessary that if
we follow Natu^es light, we must run headlong to destruction? And therefore
first renounce we nature, as a guide to grace and acknowledge we that all our
direction must come else where.

And therefore, secondly, seeing the word is the true light to bring us to
happiness, as discovering us to be out of the way, and showing the true way
wherein we must walk: yea leading and enabling us to take that holy path:
renounce we our own wisdom, and become we fools in embracing this
foolishness of preaching, that so thereby we may be made wise to salvation.

3 Sriuing as we have received the knowledge hereof, so to receive also the
love of the same, that so we may be brought in subjection to the obedience
thereof; That so we may not be given up to strong delusions. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.

4 And so though by melancholy we may be so distempered for a time, as to
distaste the light, in that our outward man is distracted in the judgment
thereof; yet shall the power of grace preuayling above natures diste^per, keep
us still in sou^dnes judgment concerning the true light, as teaching us to live
by faith: And the light of grace shall in due time banish these fogs and clouds
of natures distemper, that so we may discern more clearly the power of this
light, and be recovered by the same from all our misconceipts: knowing that as
it is not in the power of any melancholy distemper, where grace has taken
root, wholly to pervert the truth of judgment, to call light darkness: so
when the light is altogether measured by the darkness of melancholy, and
rejected as a fruit thereuf: It is a suspicion that there grace has not yet
taken possession. But of this sufficiently heretofore.

CHAP. XII. Tentations concerning good thoughts on the right hand tending to
ouerrate the wurth of them.
TO imagine all good thoughts and motions to proceed from the sanctlfying
spirit, whereas even the wicked may have some good motions, arising either
outwardly from some power of the word, some present blessing, delighting and
provoking joy, or some grievous judgment occasioning some remorse, or occasion
of some good company, etc.

Or else, Satan may cast in thoughts, into the minds of the wicked to deceive
them withal in their estates.

Or else, good thoughts may arise from within, either from those remnants of
Nature in the mind and conscience, striving against sin, or moving to some
present good.

Or the spirit of Illumination may be an occasion hereof, illightning the mind
with divine knowledge, and so moving thereby to affect the same.

Or the spirit restrayning evil, and so suppressing wicked thoughts, may be
an occasion, that because they are not so ordinary, because it is better with
us then it has been, because we have good thoughts to disclayme sin,
therefore they are absolutely holy.

A second Tentation, concerning good thoughts is, to imagine: That to think
well only, to have good motions, is enough, though we make no conscience of
practice, though they dye in the conception, and vanish utterly.

A third tentation concerning them is, That when they are offered unto us
unseasonably, that is, when we are entending some other holy duty, though they
are iniected usually at this time by Satan, to distract us in the seasonable
and present occasion, to hinder the power and intention thereof: yet to think
these to be most comfortable: whereas these are most dangerous of all other,
though they are sometimes most Angel like, and joyous, as hereby more likely to
ravish the mind, and so to withdraw it from it seasonable work.

A fourth Tentation concerning good Thoughts, is when they are not bounded
within the compass of the Word and our Callings, As to think we had
extraordinary Revelations: Or else though the word do warrant in General;
yet our callings do not allow. Such as are the thoughts proceeding from
preposterous and ignorant zeal, moving to some good and glorious end, as to
teforme the Church, punish sin, as Phinehas, which are not in our power,
neither belong to our calling, but to the Magistrate.

A fifth Tentation herein is, when we only rest in good meaning, esteeming it
only good, because we conceive it so, not having warant from the word, etc.
and these are usually the Pretenses of the ignorant Christian.

A sixth tentation, concerning good thoughts, is that, they are leuelled to a
contrary end, as to will worship, having our custom or example, or opinion,
to be our Rule, without the word.

The Conquest of these Tentationi, is
First, That it is not the taste of a good motion, or sudden touch thereof,
that argues a sanctified heart; but when the thoughts as they proceed from
some former ground of the heart, seasoned by grace, and experienced in the
work thereof, so they are entertained with deliberation, to discern the
fitness of them: because every good thought may not be fit for the present
occasion, or our callings: and so retained with wisdom to be put in
execution: For as good thoughts are tendered to the wicked to make them
inexcusable: so the godly are furnished with good thoghts and motions thereby
to be furthered in sanctification. And as it is a property of grace though it
be molested with evil thoghts, yet not to let them rest quietly with us: but
to use all diligence to quench, or convert them to good; so it is the property
of the wicked to entertain good thoughts, as strangers, and either to reject
them speedily, or to give them lodging for a night, they are not of the
family, and therefore here is no abiding for them. Nay, indeed how can they
be, seeing the house is possessed by such guests, as cannot endure such holy
company. Measure we therefore the goodness of the thoughts: First, by the
room wherein they are: A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart,
brings forth good fruit. The tree must be good, that the fruit may be good
also: An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
fruit, if any goodness, it is but leaves, or bad fruit, not in season: even as
in dead carcases, excrements may grow, when no fruits of life abide therein.

^ Measure we them by their entertainment: if they dwell with us for the most
part continually, though they may travel abroad, yet they come home again,
and love home the better, by their experience abroad, if they be shut out of
doors, they will not cease knocking till they be let in again, the holy
heart, is their Tabernacle here, and this they labor to adorn for their
eternal mansion in Heaven: And hereby also we may discover and reject the
second tentation. That every good meaning and motion is not a sanctified
thought, when we entend not the practice thereof. For seeing true grace is
operative, not only to think well, but to do well also. Therefore where such
meanings are not with purpose of practice and ability to perform: This is a
plain Evidence, that Grace has not there prevailed: Not that we can put every
good thought in practice, or need to do it: but my meaning is, that as the
heart does not only mean, but steadfastly purpose to keep all the
Commandments of God, so howsoever for the present, through violence of
tentation, it cannot do that it would; yet afterward the tentation being
mastered, it performs the same. And though through imperfection of grace, it
cannot do all at once, yet by the power of grace it shall bring forth fruit in
due season, seasonable repentence, thankfulness, patience, and suffering for
Christ, fit for the season, wherein it is required, fit for the person, that
does perform it: fit for the person to whom it performs: and fit to
glorify God in the imperfection thereof. Whereas the Hypocrites good meaning
is, but a cloud without water, as a morning dew not continuing, or as the snow
in Harvest unseasonable; or as the apples of Sodom, inwardly full of
rottennes, though outwardly glorious. Only the sanctified heart yeldes fruit in
due season, answerable to the means it has received, convenient for the
diverse seasons, ripe to the harvest; though green in Winter: like the morning
light, shining more and more unto the perfect day: so that whereas good
Thoughts, concerning some special occasion being offered, by reason of the
concurrence of others, are put by, and so forgotten: and thereupon for the
present are unprofitable: yet here the trial is, that we mourn heartily for
the same: and press the Lord by earnest prayer to return them again.

And here the comfort is, that either the Lord will answer in a seasonable
time, even when we are employed about the like, or else will supply what may
counteruayle and be more profitable.

And this may serve to r^pell the third tentation conning unseasonable
thoughts. That whereas in the performance of holy duties, sometimes thoughts of
Joy, and extraordinary comfort, are cast in by Satan to divert us from the
present business, or to flatter us therein, as if it were accepted as perfect,
and deserving such comforts that so resting therein, we may rob God of his
glory and our selves of the sound comfort thereof: Here we must be wife to
discern of these thoughts, that if they be not surable to the matter we have
in hand, or not seasonable, following rather the action performed, then
entermingling therewith, we are to suspect them. Especially if we find them
to prove an hinderance to the constancy of the work, as tickling the heart
with sudden flashes of joy, and so puffing up therewith, and thereby causing
slackenesse, and letting down of our affections therein, now we are to
disclaim them as tentations: and that by being more humbled for them, and so
searching our hearts, and abasing them before the Lord, thereby denying our
selves we shall gain power from Christ, to go forward, and hold out in our
particular intention.

Considering that our giving way to these sudden flashes, may prove an occasion
to expose us to be deluded by Satan, with such extraordinary thoughts of
revelation, that so we may be carried into all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness, to think we do God good service, even when we serve the
devil, with all greediness.

For such is the effect of those Angellike thoughts, that puffing up with an
extraordinary conceit of our excellency, they work in us thereby a base
conceit of such ordinary means, which must direct us in the service of God, and
so thereby prouokes us to wander after dreams and speculations, as feeding
hereby our spiritual pride, and so justly confounding us therein. And
therefore for remedy hereof, as we must be faithful in the little we have
received: so we must stick close to the pattern of wholesome doctrine for our
further perfection, as being sufficient to make the man of God absolute:
accounting, that if an Angel from heaven preach any other doctrine, he is not
to be believed: as knowing that whatsoever speaks not in this language, and
according thereto, it is because there is no truth therein. Isa. 8.20. Gal. 1.9.

And thus may we also reject the other tentati^n. That if we shall cleave
constantly to the word, we shall be directed thereby to the true ends of
welldoing to glorify God, in making sure our own election.

CHAP. XIII. Cases of Conscience incideut hereunto.
1 HOw we may comfort our selves in the uprightness of our hearts, which are
to be judged by our thoughts, when our thoughts are so diverse and intricate,
so infinite in comparison, and yet so fleeting and vanishing, that we cannot
discern them, much less judge rightly of them, and so much less judge of our
selves by them.

The Answer hereunto consists,
First, in a wise consideration how we may judge of the sincerity of our
hearts by our thought. Namely, so far forth, as to approve only hereby our
particular Integrity in such seasonable actions as we are employed in: where
the holy thoughts lead us into and through the same, not simply to approve our
general sincerity in all things. So David's heart was upright in all things
saving in the matter of Vriah. In all other actions, though many of them were of
infirmity, yet they were not committed wilfully against the government of the
conscience, only in that, he offered violence to the heart, and committed it
against the light and conviction of his conscience.

So that the judgment of the uprightness of the heart is not so much from the
simple motion to good or evil, as from the approbation of the one, and
reiection of the other.

And so by this rule we may further determine of the uprightness of our hearts
in our general course, by our very thoughts. Namely, by the entertainment, or
disclaiming of them.

But still it will be replied, that we cannot judge of our selves by our
thoughts, because we cannot discern them.

2 Therefore we must answer hereunto by a distinction of our thoughts: That if
we consider our thoughts in general of all sorts: as it is impossible to
discern them, so it is not necessary for this trial, because this only
belongs unto God, so to search the heart, and discern this infinite variety
of the thoughts thereof: and our God will require no more at our hands then
what he gives, namely, so far to discern our hearts, as we may approve our
selves unto him, which we shall do.

If we labor to keep an holy order in our thoughts, that they may intend what
we are employed in.

And endeavor to diminish the multitude and distraction of them by watching
against evil thoughts, and rejecting them, and cherishing the good, by
exercising the general callings with more constancy and humility, and our
civil callings, with more heavenly minds, doing all things as in Gods presence
to his glory. Of which particularly before.

And lastly, if we do not wilfully give way to our evil thoughts, as if they
were free, or seek to rebel against the good, reclayming us from evils, but
wisely labor to observe the checkes of conscience snubbing for evil, and so
to prevent consent and act of sin, and so conscionably entertain all good and
holy motions by prayer and diligent actuating thereof. Which if we do we shall
have comfort of sincerity, that so far as we know, we labor to preserve
this holy government. And what we know not, shall not be required of us. And
above all, herein is our comfort, that as though we know nothing by our selves,
yet therein we are not justified. 1 Cor. 4.4.5. So hereby we are cast upon the
mere mercy of God in Christ, for the acceptance of our persons, above all our
own worth, or knowledge of our selves.

CHAP. XIIII. Cases of conscience to be resolved herein. Is,
WHether it be an argument of unsanctified thoghts that we think more and
oftener of earthly then heavenly things.

The resolution hereof
Consists in a wise distinction of our thoughts.

Whereof some are iniected by Satan, and made our own by liking and
entertaining of them.

Others arise from the corruption of nature, not thoroughly purged.

Hence arises this conclusion.

That if we consider and conioyne all these sorts together, both what are
iniected by Satan, and what arise from our own corruption, it may not be
denied, but that our thoughts are generally more evil then good, more upon
worldly then heavenly things.

And yet it does not follow, that therefore they are unsanctified altogether:
seeing the trial of sanctification consists not in the multitude of our
thoughts either way inclined. (For so both good and evil thoughts are
sinful.) But the trial arises from the diverse entertainment of them. That
though as they arise in our hearts they are evil without consent, and so
though iniected by Satan, yet cannot possibly be so severed from corruption,
but by some mixture therewith, they will prove also evil: yet if we shall
dislike of them, and by prayer humble our selves before the Lord, to the
quashing of them, and make them occasions to provoke us to heavenly motions,
especially such as are contrary thereunto: this is an undoubted argument that
though they be evil, yet they are sanctified unto us, Rom 7.20.21.

For as good motions rejected, are thereby to us unsanctified: so also even
evil Thoughts repelled, and resisted may be sanctified: because the Trial of
sanctification, is not from the motions themselves, or their objects: but from
the power of the Regenerate Will, either entertayning the good, or rejecting
the evil, and so an evil thought being subdued, or rectified may prove good,
and occasion more good, and a good thought, being neglected and perverted, may
be evil, and an occasion also of much more evil.

The satisfaction hereof consists in this consideration: That as al our
thoughts are naturally evil, so even in the state of grace, without
marvelous preparation and watchfulness, evil thoughts will either go along
with, or else begin our best actions, though we set upon duties, which in
themselves are good, yet usually we begin with unprepared or unsanctified
thoughts, as not out of the intentions of the heart, not as in Gods presence,
not to his glory, but carelessly as in the sight of men; receiving the word, as
the word of man: praying as to man, and carnally, for vain glory, and by
respects, so that indeed ordinarily our best thoughts in Gods service, are
not only not good, in these respects, but are sufficient to challenge the whole
action of hypocrisy.

And therefore here the trial is not so much, how we begin, for corruption
likely will be sure to share herein, and so to serve it self rather then God:
but let us consider, how we go on, how corruption is mastred, and grace
preuayles, holy thoughts grow more frequent and seasonable, enliuing the
business, nay principally, consider we how we make an end, rather being
humbled for the interruption and exorbitancy of our thoughts, and so
acknowledging our selves to be unprofitable servants, then any whit standing
upon the worth of what we have done, or can do: for thus shall we give God
the glory of his mercy, in crowning his own work, and so interessing our
selves in Christ, shall be accepted in him above any worth in our selves, and
so enabled by him to further constancy in well doing.

And so, though we have more time given for worldly occasions, and therefore
may imagine that we now have ability to let loose our thoughts upon them: yet
seeing no creature of God is good, unless it be sanctified by the Word and
Prayer, therefore the holy heart labors to make all things pure and holy
thereto, by sanctifying the same. Hence it follows, that a wise Christian
labors to be a Law unto himself, even in his outward liberty, using the
world, as if he used it not, and though his mind may be employed in worldly
occasions, yet it is not set upon them: Neither does he begin them with
carnal occasions but in obedience to Gods will, and desire to glorify him
therein, as to lay up a good foundation thereby against the life to come. 1.
Tim. 16.19. And so he goes forward therein with spiritual affections: as to
fit himself to his general calling, and benefit the Church of God: And so
he concludes them with holy Thoughts of praising God, abasing of himself,
casting his care upon God, and resigning himself to his blessed will, not
being careful in any thing, as distrusting the providence of his God, but
making still his requests manifest unto his God, who will never fail and
forsake his children. And so has his ^^nuersation in heaven, tho^^h he lives
in the world, ^^cause he fashions not himself thereto: but rather by the
experience of it vanity, is wayned from the same, and so hungring more
earnestly to be with his God.

CHAP. XV. Case of dreams and nocturnall imaginations, what is the quality
thereof, how we are to judge and determine the same.
What use to make of the same.
AS the Saints of God are in general troubled with the marvelous preuayling
of corruption in their best actions, and so are not regenerate, because their
thoughts are more conversant about evil then good, so more specially their
nightly thoughts and imaginations do most distract them herein, as seeming to
challenge the truth of their conversion, because either they represent such
actions as they do not at all, and so may charge them of hypocrisy, or else
ofttimes represent such things as are monstrous and fearful, such as cannot
stand with a regenerate heart: Very needful therefore is it that some
satisfaction be yielded unto them in this behalf, that so they may not be
cast from their hold in grace.

To this end these three things are to be resolved.

1 What is the Nature of Dreams.

2 What are the kinds of them, and so.

3 How far we are to take notice of them, and take heed thereof.

Concerning the nature of Dreams, they are generally such thoughts and motions
of the mind, wherewith it is exercised when the bodily senses are bound, as
proceeding principally from the condition thereof, which is immortal, and
therefore are operative, when the bodily faculties are suspended, and are
varyed according to the several occasions of them, which are either natural,
as the constitution thereof, in regard of it calling, condition of life, of
diet, conversation, etc.

Or else supernatural, and this is threefold, either ordinary, as proceeding
from our spiritual calling, exrecised in the day, Or some extraordinary
inspiration from the Lord to foretell things to come, or to bring to mind
things past.

Or else some deceitful iniection of Satan, affecting the mind with some
motions of things past, or to come: or such as are not competent thereto, and
so either distracting with false fear, or else puffing up with conceit of such
things as are above our compass, that thereby we may deceive our selves and
others. Out of which difference of occasions we may determine of the second
point. Namely, the difference of Dreams.

Which are either natural, such as proceed from complexion, condition,
conversation, etc.

2 Or spiritual arising from our general calling.

3 Or divine, such as proceed from revelation.

4 Or Satanicall, such as arise from Satan's power, iniecting strange
imaginations and so affecting the mind diversely thereby.

And so out of this difference of dreams we may also be satisfied in the last
point how far we are to take notice and regard the same: and that by these
considerations.

1 By the difference of these dreams.

2 By the true judgment of them, how far they now stand in force.

3 By the renewing and multiplying of them.

Concerning the difference of these Dreams, whereas some are natural, as such
which proceed from natural causes, namely, constitution of body, condition of
life, conversation, etc. Others supernatural.

Here the first rule of satisfactions is, that though those which proceed from
co^plexio^ are invincible, yet seeing this is alterbale by the condition of
life, especially by renewed conversation, therefore they are not altogether to
be neglected, as arguing our depraved nature, which even in the very complexion
is degenerate from what it was and should be, but we are to be humbled for
them by repentance. Especially seeing they often produce such evil actions,
even in our sleep, of lust anger, etc. as are abominable, and though they be
of good things, yet breed discontent and confusion of our happiness, in that
when we awake, now are an hungry, Isa, 28.7. disappointed of what we dreamt
of, and so confounded therein.

Yet herein also to be comforted that being but dreams, if they be of evil,
we did not fully consent to them: if of good, though disappointed, yet we may
be recompensed with greater goodness: we have yet time to procure that
waking which in our dreams we missed, or else to obtain a greater good, to
turn our dreams into constant practice of holiness, that so our dreams may
be more pure, and our daily carriage may be more spiritual and retired in
Communion with our God, That our righteousness may not be a dream, and so
vanish acordingly: as knowing that these dreams though they be natural, yet
do convince natures corruption, and so make us inexcusable, if we will not
be schooled by them, as being a part of Gods ordinance, to awaken us out of
sin. Job. 33, 15. And therefore, as not altogether despising them: so not
resting therein, (as it is the manner of natures Wisards) but flicking to the
Word for the full information of our Estate, and submitting to the same for
Reformation of our lives. Knowing, that howsoever formerly it pleased God to
affoorde unto his Church, that extraordinary manner of Teaching by dreams,
the^e by inspiring his will unto men, and warning them of evils to come: yet
seeing now he has bestowed an ordinary means upon us t^ inform us in his
will, as we are not to presume of such extraordinary means: so we are to
esteem thereof in these days of ordinary light, no better then delusions to
deceive unstable souls. Which as it may guide us to reject al such predictions
of things to come, as proceed from no better warrant, then our dreams and
fancies; because at the best they are no better, then the illusions of Satan:
so seeing the Lord teaches us as well in the night as in the day, according to
what we have either done or heard in the day: therefore though we may not
rest upon such dreams, as presume to foretell things to come, otherwise then
we have been informed by the word, because even a true dream of things that
fall out accordingly, may be a delusion unto us, to provoke us to the contempt
of the Word; if by the Word we have not been informed thereof: or desire not
to try the same thereby; yet must we not altogether neglect eue^ what our dream
calls to mind either past or done, or to be heard: seeing this may be the
mercy of God hereby to bring us to repentance for some euil^ committed, or to
put us in mind of some good ^ommitted, that so we may pay our vows in
obedience to the Lord, and break off our sins by speedy repentance.

Especially, if it please the Lord to multiply our dreams, that we often
harp upon the same string: Here it is best to be more regardfull of them, as
being now happily some motions of the Spirit, calling upon us for reformation
of some actual evils, or for the performance of some neglected good.

Always provided, that we shall measure our dreams by the rule of the word, and
by that particular calling which God has set us in as subordinate to our
general calling in the house of God, and so we shall by Gods mercy make good
advantage of them.

So that though we may not expect ordinarily any such extraordinary
Revelation by dreams; yet if it please God (as who can restrain his power and
goodness herein, to acquaint us hereby with some occasions to come, which may
tend to our own, and the general good, we may so far stand upon these, as
to use ordinary means, by Prayer, the Word, and the like, for the preparing of
us to the issue: and so no doubt it may prove comfortable to us howsoever.
Wherein as we may behold the mercy of God in teaching us this by dreams in the
night: So may we have hence a lively evidence of our sincerity, even by the
holy temper and motion of our minds in the night: and so are directed to walk
honestly in the day, that so our minds may become pure and holy in the night:
making a Covenant with our eyes and other senses, that so the mind may be
less troubled with the representation thereof in the night.

And laboring especially to make even with our God daily by repentance, That
so our sleep may be more comfortable, and our thoughts peaceable, and holy.

Especially make we use of such dreams as arise from the execution of
general callings, as when we dream that we preach, pray, aduize, grieve for
sin: as not being without the motion of Gods spirit, to confirm us therein,
or to humble us in the neglect thereof, or to try the sincerity of the same;
and so to enable us the better thereunto. It being apparent that even in the
night our affections have, and may be more powerful in holy duties the^
sometimes in the day.

Conclusion of the whole, WHEREIN Of the several Uses of this Doctrine of
Thoughts.

As first,

To convince the Hypocrisy and the Atheism, and profaneness of the times.

2 To confirm the weak Christian in the truth of his calling.

And also,

To raise him up in all such outward faylings, and inward faintings of the
Spirit, which do arise from the same.

CHAP. XVI. OF THE USES of this Treatise,
1 IT serves for reproof. And that 1. of the Atheist, which says in his
heart, There is no God, seeing his thoughts do either accuse him, or excuse
him.

2 It condemns all conceit of Nature ability, and Free Will to goodness. For
if there must be a rect^fying of the Thoughts, then surely they are defective
and degenerate from what they should be: and so, if the Thoughts, then much
more the words and actions, which issue from the same.

3 It conuinceth all Popish Religion, to be no better then Atheism, and a
mere Idol, seeing it whole current consists in bodily service, not so much,
as requiring knowledge in the heart, much less Faith to subdue the
Imaginations thereof to the obedience of Christ.

4 It confounds all Hypocrisy and carnal worship whatsoever, since it is
not the outward man, but the heart and Thoughts, which God respects, not what
we do, but what we mean, and how we do it.

5 It condemns all Epicures and Sadduces, that deny the Immortality of the
Soul: For as this infinite variety of Thoughts and imaginations even when the
body is most bound and senseless of any operation, does plainly evidence it to
be a different thing from the body: so it also proves it to be immortal and
divine, as being of a spiritual nature, expressed by this sudden and swift
motion of such various and infinite thoughts: And so not ending with the body,
as being active without the use of it, as exercising such actions in the body,
which extend to the compass of another life, namely, accusing and excusing for
sin, which is a plain evidence of this day of judgment, and so of the
immortality of the soul.

6 The very consideration of the Nature of thoughts argues them not to be Free,
that is, such as are not sinful such as we may justify.

For seeing they proceed actually from us, therefore they are corrupted.

Seeing they are sudden and exorbitant without present cause and deliberation,
therefore they are sinful, because all good is from fit means from
deliberation, from knowledge, from direction, allowing and commanding the same.

Seeing they are contrary to themselves; therefore they are evil, seeing it is
the nature of goodness to build up, not to destroy it self.

Nay, seeing when we are about to do good, evil is present, that is, our
thoughts will rise up to hinder the same, this is a plain evidence that they
are evil. Romans 7.10.20.

8 It confounds all those excuses and pretenses for sin, which are ordinary
among men, naturally to lay the blame upon Satan, he enticed them upon the
world, as if it were so poison some and contagious, that we could not deal
with it, but we must be defiled. yea, sometimes upon God himself, as if he
compelled us to evil. Seeing the truth is, our corrupt nature is the ground
and fountain of all evil, our very thoughts, the first motions thereof are
only evil continually, yea these are occasions and enticers of Satan and the
world to further sin, yea these as a filthy breath poison the air, the
world, and all that is about them, and so the creatures being subject to
vanity by our sin, prove occasions by divine justice to further the consent
and act thereof, as ministering such matter unto us as may tickle the sense, and
allure the will to consent and give opportunity and means to act the same.

9 This condemns their conceit and delusion that teach abstinency from
marriage, and the different use of meats, as if some were evil, some good, as
if that which entered into man did defile him. Where as indeed it is that only
which proceeds out of man, namely his evil thoughts and imaginations: which
as they are polluted themselves so as a filthy leprosy they defile all other
things, and so to the impure all things are impure, in that their consciences
are defiled. 1. These. 15. where as indeed all things by creation were good,
and by a sanctified use may be made good unto us. 1. Tim. 4.5. only they
become evil by our corruption and abuse of them.

10 This also reproves the ricenesse and superstition, who upon a conceit of
pollution by the evils of others, do either most presumptuously fancy such a
state of a visible Church which may be with out all corruption and
imperfection, both in regard of it outward form, as also in respect of the
particular members, and the^^fore separate from all Churches and so indeed
must go out of the world to find such a perfect model and temper of
communion. 1. Cor. 5. as pretending them to be polluted and so necessarily
defiling and polluting all that communicate with them: whereas indeed neither
can such a congregation be found in this life, neither does a visible militant
church require such perfection, because this belongs only to the triumphant
Church: It is not the evil of others which can defile me: so I consent not and
approve thereof, much less the holy ordinances of God: But as to the pure all
things are pure; so the holy heart may safely partake of the holy things,
though others defile them, nothing becomes impure unto us: but by reason of
that which proceeds from us. If it be sanctified, all things are become new,
not sin excepted, 2. Cor. 5, 15. All things work together for the best unto
us, Rom 8.18.

11 By this doct ine of the government of the Thoughts, are cast to ground all
those conceits and Pleas of goodness, arising from Civil Honesty, and Moral
Righteousness: For seeing it is the well ordering of the heart which God
requires, Pro. 26. seeing true holiness begins from the heart, and proceeds
by the daily purifying and cleansing thereof from inward evils. Therefore
whatsoever holiness consists only in outward actions, and such only, as
concern rather our own present, then future good: not aiming at all at
obedience to God, or at his glory: This is far from truth and soundness.

And therefore seeing the civil honest man makes no conscience of duties unto
God: But if he do any such, either he does them, not from a sincere ground
in obedience to God, nor by an holy manner, as direction from the Word, but his
own good meaning, nor to an holy end, the glory of God, and his own
salvation; but only for his own sake, that he may prosper in the World, have
the credit of what indeed he does not, that he may deceive others by his
shows, and so deceive himself of the true end. It follows necessarily, that
he is far from true grace, and so farthest of all other from salvation,
because he flatters himself in his estate, and through the drowsines of his
conscience lies securely a sleep therein.

12 This doctrine of Thoughts condemns also all those shows of wisdom in
the world, to mean one thing. and do another, to equiuocare and reserve that
in the mind which we utter not with the lips, or utter the contrary, as
proceeding from an heart, and so arguing a deceitful and abominable, heart,
judging and confounding it self in the doing of what it seems by this doubling
to excuse and defend.

A second general use of this Treatise of Thoughts, is for Instruction, and
that many ways. First for the right information of judgment.
As first here is confirmed the doctrine of the Fall of man: and his utter
inability to any good, seeing his thoughts which are, and should be the
beginning of good, are only evil continually, and therefore evil whatsoever
proceeds from them.

2 Hereby is justified the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul: and so
the Resurrection of the Dead, and day of judgment. The Quality and condition
of our Thoughts being so various, so operative, when the bodies are bound, and
senseles thereof, being so evil, as that they must come to judgment, doing
necessarily all these.

3 This confirms the Doctrine of the Nature and power of God in the
government of his children, That seeing our Thoughts and imaginations which
are spiritual, are subject to his knowledge and controlment; therefore seeing
our Conscience condemns us, and our Thoughts do accuse us; then surely God
is greater then the conscience, and judges all things, he is a Spirit that
can thus judge of the motions of the Spirit: 4 John. He that will be
worshipped in spirit, is a Spirit.

4 Seeing our thoughts are not only polluted themselves, but are the grounds of
all evil in us. Therefore our God is holy, and so no cause of sin, nay
maruaylous wise, and merciful, that can govern, and turn sin to our good.

5 Seeing the ground of the beginning and consummation of sin, is in our
selves. We forsake God first, before he forsake us: he made us first
righteous, but we have sought many inventions. Eccl. 7. and so have brought
upon our selus by our willing, reuolte from God. an inability to all good and
proves to all evil: therefore our God is just in punishing sin with sin,
and so with eternal vengeance.

2 For direction to sanctification.

4 Hereby we are taught where to begin our regeneration, namely, the heart
which is wholly auerse from God, must first be purified by faith in Christ, the
thoughts and imaginations thereof, renewed that so we may worship God, which is
a spirit, in spirit and truth.

5 Hereby we may also learn how to go forward in the power of Godliness.
Namely by the lowly government of our thoughts and mastery of them. For the
more our hearts and unruly affections are brought in subjection; the more
ready shall we be to all holy duties, the more spiritual in the doing of
them, and the more constant to persevere and abound in the same.

6 By this doctrine of thoghts is discovered unto us the true state and measure
of that grace, which we may build upon in this life, not that we have already
attained, or were already perfect, Phil. 3.12. But that indeed we are
trauayling to perfection, and that we may hasten thither, are exercised with
this combat between the flesh and the spirit especially manifested in the
rebellion and interruption of our thoughts, when we do our best, or intend
the same: Condemning that conceit of grace which feels not this combat, such
as is in the civil honest man, who never doubted in all his life, performs
outward duties of religion without any such wrastlings, challenges this
combat as a confusion of grace.

2 Confounding the Popish dream of perfection and merit: seeing the
inconformitie and repugnancie of our thoughts, challe^geth our works of much
imperfection and infirmity.

3 Refuting also their conceit of thoughts, as if they were venial: seeing
they are the cause (as themselves confess) of mortal sin.

4 Confounding the Libertine who justifies his interest and hold in Christ, by
the deadness of his conscience, not conuincing him of sin, not reproving for
righteousness.

5 And rejecting the dream of civil honesty, that fancieth the perfection of
his estate, in the ignorance or drowsinesse of his heart, approving falsely of
his ways.

6 This iustifies the power of the word, as being the searcher of the thoughts,
and confounder of them: to convince the profane conceit of it; as if it were a
dead letter, and to prouoake us to yield up our thoughts and hearts to the
obedience thereof, to assure us of the effectuallnesse thereof into our
conversion: because it is able to purge the fountain of corruption, and to dig
up sin by the roots, and so to inform us, to rest wholly thereupon for our
effectual calling, and to teach us to judge thereof by the spirit, not the
letter, to bring spiritual hearts to profit thereby.

8 And so hereby we may discern the grounds of all those combustions, and
separations which have been in, and from our Churches in these days. Namely,
that they have proceeded from the presumptuous thoughts of our hearts, as
puffed up with singularity, and enflamed with envy and discontent, and
practicing separation, upon conceit of impuritie and pollution arising from an
erroneous and perverted judgment.

That so we may labor to moderate our thoughts with meekness and sobriety,
and thereby preserve our peace with God, and so maintain the unity and peace
of the Churches.

9 And so we may be satisfied in the ground of all those trecheries and
practices of Antichrist and his Locusts against the Magistrate and Church of
God. Namely, that it has been no other then the insolency of the heart, and
deceitfulness of the thoughts and imaginations thereof: Intending that
inwardly, whereof it carries a contrary semblance, pretending obedience, when
it plots all desperate mischief: and carrying all things in a mystery, that
so it may deceive it self and others: whereas if it purposes and intentions
were apparent, it could less deceive others, and might hope to be freed from
deceit it self.

10 By the consideration of the quality of our thoghts and power thereof: we
are confirmed in the limited power of Satan: who though he know much, and
labors to diue into our hearts hy his sudden and violent tentations, that he
may make us believe that he knows and rules in them: yet both the manner of
his tentations argues that he knows them not, because they are sudden and
violent, seeking to oppress and take our hearts at unawares; and so to abuse
them with false conceits of themselves, whereas the thoughts of the natural
heart are free and voluntary, such as wherein we take pleasure: yea though they
be contrary to natures happiness: whereas Satan's iniections are not without
some terror to the flesh, and so with confusion of the happiness thereof.

And especially the quality and operation of the thoughts, being so infinite
and contrary, and that as it were in an instant, do argue plainly that there
is an infinite power that does enliue and actuate them, that Satan's power is
limited not to rule them at his pleasure. In that we find by Gods mercy a
resistance of these thoughts, by the grace of God in us, and so a gracious
victory over them.

Whereby, as we have a sure pledge, that the Lord rules in our hearts, and
has taken them into his sole and sovereign protection* so may we be hereby
confirmed in the limited power of Satan, that he can know no more of our
hearts, then shall make for his further confusion, howsoever he would make us
believe, that he knows so much of them, as may serve for confusion. Whereas
all that he knows, is but by probable conjecture, and the outward effects:
which may be wrought by him, contrary to the purpose of the heart, or by the
abused motion of the heart through his obscuring and disenabling thereof, that
either it cannot use the true light wherewith it is informed, or else by his
false light is deceived, to misiudge thereof.

11 This doctrine of thoughts, as it is a plain confusion of all happiness in
this life, seeing our evil and unruly thoughts are sufficient, to confound not
only all that happiness which is placed in earthly things, because our
thoughts cannot be satisfied therewith, and so are much confounded with the
disappointment thereof: but even to confound all that happiness which we may
place in heavenly things, as being confounded therein by the shortness of our
thoghts not able to conceive the same, as it is in it self, or by the
rebellion of our thoghts, conuincing our unfitness thereof: So it proves
hereby a powerful means to provoke us to hunger after the life to come, and
to hasten forward unto the same, that so we may be freed from such noisome
guests, that we may more spiritually serve our God, that we may have more
entire familiarity and society with him: that our hearts may be satisfied
with their proper object. Quia fecisti nos ad te, ideo inquietum est cor
nostrum donec perueniat ad te. Augustine.

Lastly, hereby we may be informed in the true grounds of all such deceites
as fall out in Religion, yea in all our civil affairs. Which is only the
deceitfulness of our hearts and imaginations, either conceiting us, what we
are not, and so seeming somewhat, where we are nothing, we deceive our selves
in our imaginations. Gal. 6.3.

Or else conceiting happiness, where indeed it is not, and so leading us to
destruction in steed of salvation.

Or else abusing us with good thoughts and purposes, when we mean and do the
contrary.

Or else excusing any vile and gross wickedness upon the vain conceit of
our Thoughts and purposes, not meaning^, not intending the same.

A third General Use of this Doctrine is for Trial, and that many ways.
1 Of our sound Conversion.

That if we make conscience of our thoughts, and labor to order and keep
them in subjection: This is a Rule to try our sincerity by.

2 If we are more troubled with the evil of our Thoughts and privy
corruptions, which are apparent to God then with our outward faylings, that are
discernable of men; this also is a gracious Trial of the sincerity of our
hearts.

3 That if we are more careful to do God service in secret then openly,
because here we approve the uprightness of our hearts before him, and give
him the honor of the searching of our hearts, this also argues the sincerity
of our Thoughts, and so of the whole man.

4 If seeing our renewed hearts are more large, and ready to good, then our
outward man can, be in regard of such manifold lets from without, that do
hinder the execution of our endeauours and purposes; therefore, we Endeavor
still more then we can do, and though we are hindered in the action, yet
approve what we should do, and are more earnest in prosecuting the same: This
also is an evidence of inward sincerity.

5 Whereas the heart by the light of grace, as it discerns what it should
do, and is made ready to do the same; yet withal by the same light, it more
sensibly discerns it in ward rebellion and faylings, as being but in part
regenerate: Therefore, if now, Howsoever the outward action may pass current
with men, and the heart also in respect of the truth of it purpose therein, may
have some comfort of it acceptance with God, especially in that the person is
accepted in Christ: yet in regard of the conscience of the Imperfection, and
rebellion of the heart in the doing of good, of it pride and self love in the
ouerualuing thereof, we cannot discern our faylings when we do our best, and
so in stead of expecting praise or merit for the same, shall judge our selves
to have deserved no better then shame and confusion: as hereby we shall
justify the Holiness of our God, who requires perfection of us: so now we shall
also justify our selves, as being desirous to be found in Christ, not having
our own righteousness: as now forgetting what is behind, and hastening to
what is before, that so being enabled still by the virtue of our Lord Jesus,
we may in him grow up to perfection.

6 Whereas the renewed heart, though it endeavor to serve God in uprightness,
yet being but partly renewed, is thereby subject not only to lets from within,
but also in regard thereof, is an occasion to make al outward objects
hindrances also thereunto: If therefore, we shall now keep a watch over our
hearts and thought, laboring to govern them by the Word, and daily confine
them to the righteous law of God: and so withal shall be sober and careful in
the use of outward means which are the objects of evil thoughts, and fuel
thercto, not using our liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but refrayning our
selves, as weined children from the baytes of the world, not doing all what we
may, nor being bold with whatsoever is in our power, but being Laws unto our
selves, shall do all things to edification, and use all things to the glory
of God: being contented with our Estates, and abstaining as strangers from
these varieties of earthly things, which are rather given us for the trial of
our power, in abstaining from their excess, and subduing our hearts from the
desire of them, then that we should take our fill of them, because hereby they
become occasions to pester the heart with innumerable lusts: Thus if we shall
behave our selves in the use of our Christian liberty, it is a plain evidence
of our rectified hearts of our thoughts sanctified.

7 Whereas it is the property of clean beasts to chew the cud end ruminate on
what they receive, so it is an undoubted evidence of the purifying of the
heart, if we ruminate and consider of our thoughts and motions whether to good
or evil. For, if they be evil, hereby we take notice of them, and so
discerning the quality of them, by the word, are hereby humbled and confounded
by them, in regard of any perfection that we have attained, and so by this
means either prevent the consent and act of sin, or else break the force of
it: though it be co^mited, that so it may less discourage us, and abide
shorter time with us.

But if they be good, by this ruminating of them, we discern of their
nature, and fitness for our present use: and so approving of them accordingly,
are enabled to take the opportunity to put them in practice, whiles hereby we
shut out contrary tentations, in that the heart thus dwells upon them, and so
being faithful in a little, we stir up the spirit to assist us in the
execution of them.

And if by violence of tentation, we may happily be prevented of putting the^
in practice, yet herby we know they are sanctified, because they are not now
sudden motions which may be in the wicked, but deliberate and settled purposes
to do the will of God, and so shall be accepted in stead of the deed.

Thus may our Thoughts evidence the truth of our conversion.

Trial of Increase.
And so hereby we have a notable Trial of our growth and increase in grace:
For as our hearts are less pestered with worldly and carnail Thoughts, as
they are more replenished with heavenly meditations, so have we gotten a
greater hand over corruption; so have we a more plentiful increase of the
grace of God:

2 As good Meditations and Thoughts do more abide with us, and are more
affected and delighted of us, are more powerful to enable us to holy actions,
so does the grace of God increase in us.

3 And on the contrary, the more we are sensible of evil Thoughts, the more
they are irksome and grievous unto us: the sooner we can reject them, and
turn them to contrary motions: And yet are made more wary and wate^f^ll by
them, to avoid outward occasions, and baits to sin: so the more has the
death of Christ prevailed in us, to the crucifying of the old man, the more
hereby we draw near to the life of glory.

A third Rule of Trial, by this doctrine of thoughts is in respect of the Part
unregenerate, and so of such effects as proceed from the same.

As first, Faylings in we doing, occasions these Tentations, that it is not in
truth, that God who is perfect, and hates iniquity, will not accept it.

For the conquest whereof this Doctrine of thoughts yeeldes gracious supply.

As that 1. seeing the truth of well doing, is to be measured by the purpose of
the heart intending it, and not by the act thereof, which may be hindered by
many occasions:

And indeed it is not needful that it should be so perfect, as to be
without blemish: for then we should not need a Savior, we should have our
heaven in this life, we had no interest in the merit of Christ: therefore
seeing the Lord loves truth in the inward man, and accepts the willing mind,
above what we can do, as requiring no more then he gives, and showing his
power in our weakness, that he may have the only glory of all his mercies:
it follows necessarily that there may be truth in what we do, though there
be not perfection: and this is an evidence of the truth thereof, because our
hearts do endeavor and approve the same, as being purified by Faith in
Jesus Christ, in whom we truly and uprightly desire to please our God in all
things.

2 And if there be truth in what we do, our hearts bearing us witness of
our imperfect endeavor: we need not fear the acceptance thereof, seeing as
the Lord accepts us above the worth of what we do, or can do in the merit
of his Son: so in him, he accepts the willing mind, not imputing outward
faylings unto us.

This Doctrine of our thoughts is a sound Trial of our sincerity even in our
decays, in such measure of grace, or present power of it, which formerly we
have enjoyed: For though the Saints may leave their first love and decay in
some measure or use of grace, which formerly they have had: yet if their
thoughts acknowledge and approve of such a former measure to be better then
what they now find.

2 And withal judge them in their present decays, and lead them to the
means whereby they may recover, and give them not over, till they have wrought
a denial in themselves, that they may be sound in Christ. This is a sound
evidence, that their decaies are not desperate, nay this is a comforfortable
token that they shall recover again.

3 This also proves a lively trial of an other effect of the unregenerate part,
namely, falling into gross evils: For though the Saints have and may fall into
many gross evils: yet if our thoughts have risen and strouen against the
Motion of them, so that unwillingly we have been drawn thereto, and in the
committing of them do gainsay and dislike of them.

Especially, when they are committed, do smite us for them, and give not over
till the heart be broken with godly sorrow; and so bring forth speedy and
unfeigned repentance: This is a plain evidence of the vprightnes of the heart;
This is a te^timony of our conquest of them.

Yea though the Saints should fall again and again into the same sins, as
Abraham and Sarah did, though they should fall f^^ one gross sin into
another, through the deceitfulness of sin, and violence oftentation, as
David did, and so make a foul bread* even into the synceritie of their hearts:
yet herein also may they have some trial of their sincerity by the power of
their thoughts. As that they are more sensible of sin, the more they are
deceived by it. 2 They are more humbled for it, and testify greater hatred and
detestation of the fame. 3* And are more tender and compassionate in judging of
others. 4 Yea more wise to avoid the occasions thereof. 5 And more profitable in
teaching and forewarning others to do the like. Psa. 51.6. More weaned from the
love of the world, and more desirous of, prepared to their dissolution.

Lastly, because often falling into the same sins against light of conscience
and experience of Gods grace in preventing or mastering the same, proves an
occasion to offer violence even to the purest thoughts, and holiest purposes,
and so to challenge the sincerity of the heart, and thereby proves a means of
wounding the conscience, and affecting, yea swallowing up the same with
intolerable griefs and horrors, yea with hellish and desperate pangs, whereby
our estate in sincerity is specially questioned, because there appears no hope
of recovery, in that hereby there will follow a refusal of means which may
recover, or a perverting of them to our deeper plunging in this horrible pit of
despair: Yet herein also may we raise up unto our selves many evidences of
our sincerity, even by the holy temper and swaying of our thoughts. And that
first by returning our thoughts to what experience we have formerly had of the
goodness and faithfulness of our God, refreshing us with sound peace of
heart, and joy in the holy Ghost Whereby as we may make this collection, that
seeing the graces of God are without repentance, therefore he that has loved
us once will love us to the end Ioh. 13. So hereby may we gather sound
assurance for our upholding in tentation, and recovery out of the same.

A 2. use of our thoughts in these tentations of despair, is, that we think
not so much upon the extremity of the tentation, as upon the power of God and
his promise, upon his word and pledges that he has given us for recovery out
of the same: and this shall also graciously sustain us in the present brunt,
and fasten us upon the Lord for assurance of his love.

A third use of our thoghts for trial in this day of tentation, is, to
consider that as the Lord does not esteem us as we are in tentation, but as he
has accepted us in his Son more then conquerors, so we should not think and
measure our selves by tentation, but by our interrest in Christ.

4 Especialiy, seeing our most^ vile and fearful thoughts in these cases are
Satan's iniections and ten ations, not our own purposes and desires; as
appears both by our greeuing and complaining of them, by our disclaim^ng of
them, when we come to our selves* have we not by this doctrine of thoughts
this gracious evidence, that though Satan seek to aggrauate our affliction
and press us down therein by accusing us of these thoghts as if we now were
utterly past hope, etc. yet in that they are not ours, they shall not be
imputed unto us, but rather provoke the Lord by such blasphemies, to be
avenged of Satan, who dishonors his name, and abuses his workmanship by
such odious contumelies, and so thereby to deliver us out of his hands.

The last use of this Treatise is for comfort, and that many ways.
1 To those which are not yet called, that they may hope for their calling in
due time, and hasten the same.

Not that there is in any naturally any true hope of their calling, or any
means to further the same, but that the powerful and wise Lord for his glory,
turns those things about which in them selves hinder the same, to be means
notwithstanding to hope for and hasten their calling.

As first this doctrine of thoughts discovering hereby our utter inability to
grace, proves a gracious means to cast us wholly out of ourselves, and so to
provoke us to faint for the true remedy.

And the rather, because if once the Lord awaken the conscience by the Law, and
so discover what heretofore we were ignorant of, namely, not only that lust is
evil, but that eue^ our very thoghts without consent deserve eternal
damnation: as this to the natural man proves a means of further rebellion,
because the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God and cannot be subject
to him. Romans 8.7. So hereby our thoghts become more outrageous and
unreasonable, setting the whole man on fire with the rage thereof, and so
depriving him of all rest and carnal peace. Yea for the co^fou^ding all
conceit of perfect happiness in himself, that hereby he must necessarily be
constrained to seek for peace else where. And does not the law now prove a
Schoolmaster to send him unto Christ, that so by faith in the Son of God, he
may find peace to his soul. Gal. 3 27. Romans 5.1.

In our Regenerate Estate they also serve for comfort, and that many ways.
First, in regard of our Imperfections and faylings, in holy duties: As first,
approving hereby unto us the truth of our Estate in grace by this imperfection
of our Sanctification, and so comforting of us, that the Lord which has
begun the work, will perfect it: and in the mean time will accept what he
gives, and magnify his power in our weakness, that he may have the glory, 2
Cor. 12.8.9. Mal. 1.6. Phil. 3.12.13. And so renewing us hereby daily in the
merit of his son, that still we may be found in him, not having our own
righteousness, that in him we may daily bring forth more fruit, John. 15.3.
and so through his power be kept unto salvation and by the alsufficiency of his
sacrifice be daily presented blameless before God, and so enabled to attain
perfection.

3 And seeing no other thing befalls us herein, but what has happened to the
most holy and beloved sons of God by adoption: as this may comfort, that seeing
they have attained, and yet without us shall not be perfected, therefore we
also shall in due time reap if we faint not. If our case were singular from
them, we might despair, but having now with them the same common way of
imperfection, we shall also with them attain unto perfection.

4 If we consider that it is not so much the outward work, as the purpose and
truth of heart which God respects, therefore if there be a willing mind,
though it be in weakness, we have a certain promise, that God will not
quench the smoking Flax, that is, if it be but a mite, he will accept it.

2 In regard of our relapses and decays from former measure of Grace, we may
also raise much comfort by the carriage of our thoughs, and observation, how
they stand affected in such cases: As that,

2 Though we have left our first love, yet we can consider from whence we
are fallen, Revel. 2.4. for this will be a means to recover us again: I have
considered my ways, says David, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies.
Psalm. 119.58. and Psalm. 19.12. Who knows the errors of his youth, Lord cleanse
me from my secret faults.

2 Though we are much decayed, yet by the comparison of our former state with
our present decay, we can judge our selves for our failing. 1. By
acknowledgeing our former estate to be better then now. Hos. 27.8. 2. by
considering the sequel of our present estate, if the Lord should now leave us
to our selves: we gain hope in the Lord, that yet he sustaines us, that
seeing we might have lost all, if he had left us wholly to our selves;
therefore in that somewhat remains, though it be ready to die, yet there is
time to strengthen it, and so to recover again: there is some hold in God
that he can raise us up again. Especialy, seeing our thoghts do not only
dislike of this decay, but being quickened by faith, lay hold of eternal
life, and can see beyond all our present decays: are they not thereby a
gracious evidence, that we shall recover again? Does not their restless and
incessant groaning under the burden, provoke the Lord to case us of it, and so
to return again in mercy for our refreshing, and recovery? Lament. 3.22.23.24.

3 In ^elapses and falls, into grievous sins, we may also reap sound
comfort from the consideration of our Thoughts.

1 That as our maine intent is to serve our God, our purposes wholly tend that
way* so, if we be overtaken with such evils, it is contrary to our intent,
we were traveling the contrary way but Satan has drawn v^^ut of our ^ourse.

2 That though we are started aside, and happily taken a fall by our
security, or ventrousnesse; yet we see where we are, and so find our selves
to be out of the way,

3 And so hereupon we resolve to get up speedily into the way again: Here is
no staying for us, we have somewhat else to do, our journey is set, and
onwarde we must.

4 And therefore the more we have been cast behind; the more we must now
hasten on, we must labor more earnestly, that so we may come in the
appointed time to our iourneyes end.

And that we may hasten, It stands now upon v^ to cast away every thing that
presses down being spacing in our liberty, and avoiding the occasions of
sin, and girding up the loins of our minds, with resolution in what we
do, and sobriety in judging thereof, with watchfulness to prevent after
claps, and fear to be ensnared, putting on the girdle of love, which is the
band of perfection, and having our feet shodde with the preparation of the
Gospel, that so we may be ready to encounter all oppositions: and having
the shield of faith always in a readiness, to beat back all the fiery
darts of the Devil; being more earnest in our supplications to our God for his
continual assistance, etc. waiting with patience the recompense of the reward,
and yet groaning to be delivered from this body of death: these thoughts
accompanying the Saints in their greatest falls, how can prove but very
comfortable unto them.

4 In our most desperate desertions and sounding of mind in regard thereof,
and all such tentations of Satan as may arise thereupon.

As first, that these thoghts and effects thereof arise rather from the
distemper of the disease, or from the mind perverted and abused with false
light, or rather obscured and blinded, that it cannot make use of the true
light: and therefore may be rejected of us as bastards and changelings, and so
we shall not be liable to them.

And yet they may serve graciously, when we come to discern rightly of them,
both to advance the mercy and power of God, in preserving us from such effects,
which our thoughts portend and also to humble us more deeply in the sense of
our vileness, that are subject to be abused and distracted thereby.

A second comfort herein is,

That though Satan may abuse our hearts by casting in strange and fearful
tentations, and so provoke us to conceive that which indeed is not in our
hearts: yet the heart of man is only known to God, and so there may be some
truth of grace in it, which Satan cannot discern, which may stay us from
yielding to his tentations, and give us power and strength to recover ^ resist
the same, yea we through the light of the Spirit may know that in us which
Satan cannot discern, and so may trust our own hearts above Satan, may
reject all his tentations and delusions of our hearts with this, that our
hearts approve not thereof, that they speak better things unto us, that they
contradict and repel Satan's suggestions. And so though we be cast into any
such extremities whereby we may be deprived of the use of the outward man, of
speech and other means of Gods worship, yet here is our comfort, that we may
think and meditate on God and his goodness, by our thoughts we may have most
free communion with our God when we are restrained from all fellowship with man.

5 This a doctrine of our thought yeeldes an excellent comfort of our hope and
interest in the happiness of a better life, and freedom from the bondage and
pressure of them.

1 In that they being so insatiable and in a manner infinite, that no earthly
thing can give that content unto them but shall still they are hungring after
better things: therefore seeing the Lord has made every thing to his end,
which is the satisfaction thereof, though it be a special part of the wickeds
torments of hell, that their restless hearts shall never be satisfied, their
shall remain in them an endless desire of sin, though the means be denied;
yet the Lord will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: what is wanting
for the present shall in due time be supplied. Which seeing it cannot be in
this life, in regard of the clogge and measure of corruption, as not being
capable thereof and so hindering the some, therefore it shall be accomplished
in the life to come, therefore do we sigh and groan to be deliue^ed from
this body of corruption, and to be clothed upon with glory, and immortality
that so we may be with our God, who now while we are in the body are absent
from him: that so we may enjoy for ever his glorious presence, and so that
fullnes of joy which is at his right hand for evermore. Psa. 16.2. Cor. 5.2.3.
And shall not the Lord above all others desires accomplish this, which is the
ground and consummation, of all the rest. And is not this a gracious evidence
of our interest in eternal g^ory, of our hastening thereunto and full enjoying
of the same. Romans 7.24. seeing the Lord which has begun the work in us,
will perfect it for his glory, that where he is we may be also, that we may for
ever be with the Lord. Phil. 1.6. 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.19.

Conclusions of the whole, with diverse aduertisements to the understanding
Reader.
Thus have you dear brethren the brief of such meditations and spiritual
experience which the Lord has affoorded me concerning this most necessarily
skill of governing the Thoughts: A mystery I may truly call it, unknown to
the natural man, and such as the most spiritual may require direction in. And
therefore, as I have been desirous to reveal this high mystery unto thee, so
far as the Lord has enabled me for the holy Trial of thine estate in
grace, and furtherance therein: so I have been the rather enduced hereto,
partly to stop the black mouth of reproach, and calumny, which is too open
in these days against the power of syncerity. And partly to the just confusion
of their hypocrisy, who howsoever they presume to determine of things
belonging not unto them, as of the government of Churches, the state of
particular Christians: making this the maine evidence of their zeal and
sincerity to judge and censure others: yet in the mean while they are so
far from laboring the power of holiness in these and the like experiments
of the heart, and it holy government, as who more ordinarily give way even to
gross and outward wickedness among themselves, who more endeavor the
satisfying of the flesh in Usury, Belly-cheare, undermining and thrusting out
each other, where any profit or pleasure may be had, then those, that
notwithstanding dream of the Spirit, and undertake the judgment thereof: so
wise are they grown to cloak their own hearts, by turning the cry abroad,
and judging of others: so just is the Lord to confound them in their wisdom,
that as hereby they harden their hearts against the voice of the charmer, charm
he never so wisely, as if they were without the reach of reforming themselves,
that so peremptorily undertake the judging of others: so through the hardness
of their hearts they are justly given up, not only to all deceiueablenesse of
righteousness to tith mint and cu^min, neglecting the greater things of the
Law: but also thereby to all deceit of sin, as flattring themselves in any
cloaked wickedness whatsoever, that so they may make up the measure thereof,
by deceiving others. I would this City were not pestered with such
Caterpillars, that under pretense of greatest sincerity, what by wisperings
and flatterers, what by slandering of others and advancing of themselves,
steal away the hearts of Gods people from their faithful Teachers, and
exclude them from all due respect, by their creeping in, and encroaching upon
their consciences. The woeful experience that I have found hereof, as it has
provoked me to deal privately with some of them in the scanning of most
odious, and I may almost say, Jesuitical practices, so if God will, my purpose
is shortly if they walk not more sincerely, to make Iammes and Iambres known
to the world, that so their glory may be their shame. Long have I bin
demurring this case of conscience, whether that the discovery of such deceitful
walking as some are justly given up unto, that under pretense of sincerity,
and reformation, seek themselves and not the glory of God, and the public
good, might any way tend to the hinderance of the Gospel. Much have I observed
and stored up many years since, partly, for mine own experience, and partly
for the aduizing and selling of others, that measuring the cause by the
glorious shows of the persons, have been so easily embarked into the one by a
too preposterous and superstitious admiration of the other. Much have I
conferred with many, concerning their grounded judgments and resolutions
herein. And the issue that I have found, has been usually, either ignorance in
the most, that have not been able to defend what they hold, or else pride and
policy in the wiser, who have concealed their judgments, it may be to save
the^ selves both ways, lest others might share with them in their
contributions, if resolved by them: or else undermine them in their walkings if
they refuse resolution. Some strange and hateful stratagems I have met withal
fitter for machiauellists, then such as pretend the highest strain of
sincerity. Generally I have observed such distraction and contrariety in
opinion, some holding our corruptions simple evil, some only scandalous; some
separating wholly from our Church for them, others separating in part from our
Litourgies and Sacraments, some erecting a new church among our selves, for the
exercise of their discipline, others so admitting our Church, as only to serve
their present carnal ends; least they should loose their exhibitions and
private maintenance, yet most giving that liberty in private, to scandalous
evils, which in public they deny: This distraction, I say, in seeming good,
and concurrence in main evil, has made me not only to seek still for
resolution, where I expected it, but indeed has resolved me, not any farther
to seek it from those at all, who are to seek in all other things, saving in
that still in all these distractions they are wise to seek themselves, caring
not who loose, so they may win, no^ how they win, so they may have still
this visor of sincerity to cover their nakedness; And therefore in this
giddiness of men, I have labored for Resolution from my gracious God, and by
his mercy have now found this Issue, rather to bear with some pretended, and
doubtful evils, then to forbear a necessary and apparent good; wherein as I
have followed the holy examples of the blessed apostles of old, and my reverend
brethren in our Church, whose faithful walking in their Callings in those
corrupt times, is a sufficient warrant unto me of their conscionable giving
way unto some pretended offense therein: So have I been the rather enduced
hereunto, because even such as will not submit to these things themselves,
happily for the maintenance of their credit, ease, profit, and such like, are
yet earnest perswaders of others, to undergo the labor of our Churches
government, though themselves are so far from putting their finger to the
upholding thereof that like the children of Edom^, they cry down with it,
down with it, even to the ground; Which with what Conscience they may do, as
I list not now to discuss, so neither should their advice have taken any place
with me, but that I am persuaded it is the Truth of God, which they are forced
to acknowledge, howsoever for by respects they will not yield thereunto. And
therefore least these men's ruff garment may deceive any longer, I hold it a
matter of conscience to God, and love to my mother to use the best means I can
to pluck it off, and so to discover to this end such experiments of their
deceitful walking, which may justly wind them out of the affections of Gods
people, and so prevent them of further detriment and spoil: But this I have
thought fit to reserve to another time: because I would not mingle mine own
affections with Gods besinesse, nor prevent them of that repentance which mean
while may be gained. Which as I shall in the mean time heartily pray for; so
do I acknowledge in the Fear of God, that as I do reverence some of them
from my heart, who I am persuaded out of tenderness of conscience dare not go
so far herein as others: so for others which I know to walk deceitfully
herein t^ the tree may be judged by the fruit, as my resolution is not to
esteem to be judged of them, so by the grace of God, if they walk not more
conscionably and lovingly in these differences; I will do my best that they
shall walk neither so covertly, nor freely, as hitherto they have done, I
undertake not to judge of the spirits of men peremptorily: And yet I know, that
as the Lord does vouchsafe unto his children that light as to discover those
who say they are Apostles, and yet are not; so I have found it no hard matter
so far to detect an hypocrice, if we will see with our own eyes and not
his, as he does not obscurely discover himself for the present, though we
may leave him to God for the time to come. And why may not we take that
liberty to measure their conscience by their contrary practice: as well as
they spare not the persons of our reverend Governors, and faithful Ministers,
as Time-seruers, profane persons, lims of Antichrist^, Bellies gods, and what
not: that so thereby they may disgrace the government and liberty of our
Churches. And surely as my present case sta^ds, I am in a manner e^forced
herunto, not so much to discover their deceitfulness, as to redeem my holy
calling from such reproach and ignominy, wherewith through the sides of my
person they have sought most desperately to wound and slander the same:
Especially seeing that it has pleased God to vouchsafe me some constant
liberty in the Church upon my voluntary endeavor, to seek the peace thereof.
Am I not now much more provoked to clear mine innocence and uprightness, that
the mouth of that ordinary slander may be stopped, that subjection to the
Churches lawful authority, is a sufficient cloak to any gross wickedness,
that a Surplesse is a couerslut to any profaneness whatsoever: Blessed be
God, that as our Church uses not these ceremonies, either to put thereby any
holiness in them, or to derive any holiness from them, but only for order and
obedience sake to the godly Magistrate, who may lawfully determine matters of
order and decency for the churches government, agreeable to the rules of the
word: so it is supplied with many holy men that perform herein what is meet
unto Caesar, and yet give unto God what belongs in some measure unto him;
howsoever it be the common cry among some, that to obtain liberty in the
Church hereby; is to loose the freedom of a good conscience, and to open a
gappe to all looseness and profaneness: And am I not then constrained to
defend my self against such cursed slanders lest my liberty now renewed, may
be imputed as a cloak to hide such pretended wickedness, and so to nourish
and continue the same: And can I clear my self herein otherwise then laying
the burden on the right horse. I know it is not fit to answer a fool,
according to his foolishnes with raylings, reproaches, etc. for this were no
better then to overcome evil with evil, and so to be like unto him. Yet so
to answer a fool according to his foolishnes, as to let him know himself, and
so to make him ashamed of his folly, and reclaim him from the same, or make
him inexcusable: this I hold to be Christian love and wisdom. And according
to this rule I desire to walk herein, and to this end I do heartily desire
thy prayers unto our gracious God, that I may be led in this discovery with a
single and honest heart, that all may redound to his glory and the public
good. Promising thee, if thou shall receive this Treatise for the Government
of thy Thoughts with an equal hand, that thou shall shortly, God willing, be
furnished with further directions for the well ordering of thy unruly
Affections. And so I do heartily commend thee to the grace of God, whereby
thou m^^st b^e enabled wisely (...) dis^^^e of things (...) diff^^, and so
having tried all things, thou may hold ^^a^ which is good, ^^at so ^^o^ may
be kept b^ (...) to the day of Ch^^st.

In whom I rest thine and the Churches servant. Tho. Cooper.

FINIS.

