THE VOLVNTARIE CONVERSION, AND SEVERAL RECANTATIons, of four great learned
men, professed Friars in sundry Monasteries of France, FROM THE ERROVRS OF
IDOLATRY and Popery, to the true Religion established in the Reformed Church.

1. Master John Le Vager, a Priest in the Roman Church, converted at Mauns,
January 6. 2. Master John Forent, a Friar Carmelite, in the Covent of
Morthemard, converted in the Reformed Church of Poictiers, June, 9. 3. Master
Denis Boucher, a Franciscane Friar, in the Covent of Noisy, near Paris,
converted in the Reformed Church of Paris, July. 6. 4. Master Daniell Dusert, a
Franciscan Friar at Mello, converted in the Church of Mello, December, 22.
All converted this last year, 1603. as their several discourses following at
large do testify, under their own hands.

Truly translated, out of the French printed Copies.

Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke, for W. Jones, dwelling at the sign
of the Gun, near Holborne Conduit: and are to be sold by W. Aspley, in Paul's
Churchyard. 1604.

TO HIS WORTHILY RESPECTED KIND FRIEND, Master George Gibson, Citizen and
Merchant Tailor of London.
IN regard of your many kindnesses, and no other means remaining in me of
requital, except such as my condition allows: I send you this small labor
of mine, being the several conuersions of four learned men, from Popish
error and blind superstition. The fame of them has been far extended, in
regard of the learned handling of each discourse: which, upon consideration, I
am sure good judgments both have, and will confess no less. I desire you to
accept my good will, and bury all defects in the honesty of mine intent
toward you, till better occasion may afford me a larger measure of love on your
behalf. This should have been accompanied with another excellent Treatise, of
a great Duchesses conversion in the kingdom of France, a learned Epistle of
hers to her Lord and husband, declaring her souls high comfort in her forsaking
Idolatry, and the maine Paradoxes of Popery very learnedly discovered: but
wanting leisure, in regard of other very serious employments, I am enforced to
let it rest till more apt opportunity. But I hope within short time to perfect
it: which (then) shall help to supply what wants in this toward you. Till
when, as heretofore, so shall I still remain your poor wel-wishing friend,
any way by you to be used or commanded.

A PROFESSION OF FAITH, MADE IN THE reformed Church of MAVNS, the sixth day of
January, 1603. by Master JOHN LE VAGER, sometimes a Priest in the Church of
Rome.
AS it is undoubtedly true, that God most powerfully (by his infinite
goodness) has called us all to the knowledge of his holy name, to be his
people and his Church, whereon only he has bestowed the treasures of his
mercies, and out of which there is no salvation at all: so certainly, if we be
desirous of this goodness, and would participate of his blessings and mercies,
it behooves us to travail and study, in the search of this Church, to join
and incorporate our selves into the same. And therefore let us not imitate the
heretic EVTICHVS, who said; That as he had learned of his Fathers, and
believed in the Faith wherein he Council. Calced. Act. 2.
was borne, even so he desired to dye. Or as AVXENTIVS the Arrian, who said:
That as he had learned from his infancy, so Hilarious in 1. Epist. ad Aux.
he believed, and would do still. Or as the Jews, thus speaking to Jeremy:
We and our Fathers have done thus. Or as our adversaries Ier. 44. 17.
at this day do, who tells us, that thus our fathers lived and believed. To all
which, God thus answered by his Prophet Ezechiel: Walk not ye in the
ordinances of your Fathers, neither observe their ways, nor defile your selves
with their Ezech. 20. 18. 19.
Idols. I am the Lord your God, walk in my Statutes, and keep my judgments,
and do them. Search the Scriptures, says our John. 5. 39.
Savior Christ to the Jews. And in the Gospel of S. Matthew also, foretelling
us of the evil times which now are come upon us, he does advertise us, that
there shall be a desolation and revolt in his Church, and that many false
Prophets shall arise, who Math. 24. 11.
shall come disguised in sheep clothing: as now adays we see the like
done, by our Monks, Capuchines and Jesuits, who disguise themselves in
habits of simplicity, of poverty, of sanctity and humility, and leave their
own common garments, the better to seduce and beguile poor simple people, who
suffer the^seues willingly to be led, by their outward appearances, according
to the example of the ancient hypocritical Pharisees, with their Philacteries
and outward ceremonies. Math. 23. 5.


We have a further admonition yet, that when we see this Math. 24. 5.
confusion amongst false Prophets, they will say, Here is Christ; others, there
is Christ, as these dissemblers now use to do, saying: He is here under the
Cabinet, in our fair gilded Temples, where he yet works strange miracles.
See here the Jews False miracles among the Friars in Paris, in Italy, and
elsewhere. Math. 24 16.
Lance that pierced his precious side, it is here on this Altar: See here a
handkercher or napkin, colored with his blood. But I say, that God commands
us in this confusion of deceiving Prophets, not to believe the^, but that we
should fly to the mountains. By which mountains, he insinuates unto us, that
we should withdraw, and make diligent search in the sacred Scriptures, on the
foundations whereof he has builded his Church. So does saint John Chrysostom
instruct, speaking upon that place, When ye shall see the abomination of
desolation, standing in the holy place: the Lord commands us (says he) Math.
24. 15. Chrisost. in opere imperfect.
that al Christians, such as desire to hold a firmness in true faith should
retire themselves to the holy Scriptures: for if they go to any place else,
they will be scandalized and perish, as not understanding what the true Church
is, and so may easily fall into the abomination of desolation, crept into the
holy places of the Church.

Origin in like manner says, Those souls that are ignorant of Origin in Mat.
C. 24.
the word of truth and justice, and by that occasion are easily seduced,
cannot abide without seduction, at the very sight of the abomination of
desolation, in the holy place. Saint Hierome likewise says, At the coming of
the Messiah, the people that had slept under their teachers enstructions, went
to the mountains Hierom. in Prophet. C. 3.
of the Scriptures, and there found the old mountains, the mountains of the
Prophets, and the mountains of the new Testament. And even as flesh and blood
has not revealed Jesus Christ unto us, but the Father which is in heaven: so
ought we not to seek for his Church, according to our corporal sense, but
with the eyes of faith in the holy Scriptures, wherein God himself speaks
unto us, and teaches us the will and league he has made with his people,
which we should always have before our eyes, on our foreheades, and in our
hands, to meditate thereon both day and night, to accomplish the same on our
behalf.

As concerning my self, I acknowledge and confess, that I have been trained
up in the Roman Church, and have followed the errors and superstitions
therein used: being carried His protestation concerning himself, and the errors
wherein he has lived long.
only by custom, regard of antiquity, and the goodly outward show delivered.
For looking and contemplating it with the eye of flesh, it appeared to me to be
to be the true Church, erected for perpetual continuance, defended on all
sides: as being rich, potent, clothed with gold, purple, and scarlet;
tryumphing over all her enemies and adversaries; adored by the Kings and
Princes of the earth; commanding Emperors, holding dominion over many
nations, and prospering even against the children of God, thrusting the true
Church into the desert wilderness: But all this was according to the Prophecy
of S. John in his Apocalipse, where he at large describes Antichrist Apoc.
Chap. 11. and 12.
and his Babylon.

Now in this perplexity, in this conflict of opinions, which we daily see
about the matter of Religion: according to the commandment of God, I consulted
with the divine Oracle, and withdrewe my self to the mountains of holy
Scripture. By whose testimony, Jesus Christ repulsed the Tempter, and
confirmed his Apostles after his resurrection. By them, our Fathers stoned all
heretics, and (besides them) whatsoever is spoken, is heresy and execration,
although it be an Angel that Galat. 1. 8.
delivers it, or an Apostle, according as Saint Paul teaches us. God will
have obedience by them, and not sacrifice. He will not Deuteronomy 12. 4. 2 Samuel 15.
22. Math. 15. 6. John. 10. 4. 5.
be served, according to the commandment and traditions of men. He
acknowledges them to be his, that abide in his word. He tells us also, that
such as are of his flock, do hear his voice and know it, and will not
listen to a strangers. See here the infallible marks of the true Church
indeed. But the Church of Rome, in steed of listening to this word, and
obeying it, in Of the church of Rome.
steed of following the kings high way (which is taught us by the aforesaid
mountains) reuolts and turns after her own ways, following her own
fantasies, and not the commandments of the Lord. And so has quitted her
alliance, that we may justly say of her, that which the Prophet spoke of the
holy city of Jerusalem: How is the faithful city become an harlot? She was
full of equity, and justice lodged in her: her gold is turned into dross, and
her wine is mingled with water.

And first of all, for example, she will needs have Idols and Idols and Images.
Images, contrary to the commandment of God; and to shift off this sin with
an excuse, she glosseth a difference between an Idol and an Image. And yet the
prohibition extends, Not to make any resemblance of any thing, which is in
heaven above, Exodus 20. 4. 5.
neither in the earth beneath, nor in the waters below, to serve or worship
them. And so themselves do cut their own throats; for they say, that the
Image which they place in their Temple, is the similitude of that same party
in heaven above. And if there be any difference between Idol and Image, an
Image is for ornament represented in an history: an Idol, that which is
proposed in the Temple to be worshipped, even as their pretended Images are.
THOMAS AQVINAS, one of their Thomas Aquin.
greatest Doctors testifies the same, in 3. Sentent. did. 2. That in 3.
sentent. Did. 2.
the Image ought to be honored with the self same adoration, as the party
that it represents. And in the book termed Decisiones Decisio Rotae,
Rotae, where the question is demanded, to wit; whether the Image in the
Image-makers shop, be to be worshipped or no: He answers plainly no; for it
is exposed there to public sale: but in the Temple it is placed to be
worshipped; and the self same instruction is given, by the C. venerabiles de
Cons. did. 3. C. Venerabiles de Cons. did. 3.


Upon the aforesaid holy mountains, we find but one God only, to call upon
in our afflictions and necessities; And Jesus Christ himself says unto us;
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. The
Church of Math. 11. 28.
Rome sends us to so many hee-Saints and shee-Saints, as there be days in
their Calender: and though it be written; I will not impart my glory to any
other: yet dare they communicate, to all such Saints as themselves have
canonized, the office of an intercessour or mediator between God and us,
which office is only proper to Christ, and depends upon his eternal
sacrifice made. For as Saint Paul says: He is entered into very heaven, Heb.
9. 24.
to appear now in the sight of God for us. If any sin (says 1. John. 2. 1.
saint John) we have an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Just.
In like manner, Jesus Christ, by one only sacrifice, made once upon the
Cross, has abolished the sins of all Heb. 10 14.
believers for ever: so that there is no further need of sacrificing, being
once made thus perfectly. But the Church of Rome, as if the sacrifice of Christ
were imperfect and insufficient, has ordained another, for remission of sins
both to the dead and Masses for the living and the dead.
living, which they call the Mass: and has substituted so many successors,
for the sacrificing again of Jesus Christ, as there be Priests that use to say
Mass. Contrary to that which is written: Thou art a Priest eternally for
ever, after the order of Heb. 7. 21.
MELCHISEDEC, not having any successor at all in his sacrifice, as the same
blessed Apostle Paul teaches us.

And so in other points of our Religion, the Church of Rome has wholly
perverted the^, namely in Christ's institution of his Perverting of the
Sacraments. Of Baptism.
Sacraments. As in Baptism, they make an addition thereto, of Oil, of Salt,
and of Spettle, and transfer (by mere mockery) this holy mystery to bells,
Baptizing them, as if they were of Gods elect, and to be ranked among the
faithful. Likewise, the holy Supper which Jesus Christ instituted, to make a
serious Of the Lords Supper.
commemoration of his death and passion, whereby he purchased eternal life for
us, bearing the curse of our sins upon himself, and in that respect, after his
benediction made, he brake the bread, saying: This is my body, to the end we
might thereby Luke 22. 19.
be instructed, that as bread nourishes our bodies, even so his wounded body,
delivered up unto death for us, does nourish our souls unto eternal life,
receiving the same by Faith, and as a Sacrament. The Church of Rome, of this
food for the soul, would make food for the body; teaching, that this was
not spoken of the bread, which Christ held in his hands, when he pronounced
those words (This is my body) for the bread was then no more bread: but
fantastically forge certain accidents without substance, of indiuidua vaga;
and say, that that is the true body of Christ, which descended into the bowels
of the C. tribus gradibus de consec. Did. 2.
earth, et per aqualiculos in secessu^. And that Rats, Mice, and dogs may eat
the body of Christ: as they teach in their Cautelae Missae, and S. Thomas, and
other Scholasticks, beside a thousand other blasphemies. They say also, that
this proposition (that the bread is the body of Christ) is heretical, and S.
Augustine Part. 3. de Eucharist. Quaest. 79. Art. 3. Gerson contra. floretis.
4. John. 651.
(by consequent) an heretic, who says: That the bread is the body of Jesus
Christ in the sacrament. And by consequent also, Christ himself should be an
heretic too, who says in Saint John: The bread that I will give you is my
flesh. Thus make they God imperfect in power, because it is impossible, that
two bodies should be in one self same place, as they say.

I will rehearse unto ye, how the said Church of Rome, has gotten together
all the ancient heresies: as that of Montanus, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. 8. Ca. 18.
who forbad marriage, and made law for fasting: That of Pelagius, who taught,
that we may do diverse meritorious works. The heresy of the Euchites or
Messalians, who under the color of praying to God, and living in
contemplation: lived in idle slothfulness, without doing any thing, devouring
widows Luke 20. 47.
houses, under pretext of long praying, according as Christ reproved the
hypocritical Scribes. Of whom S. Augustine writes, August. de opere Monach.
that they pray so long, as it is incredible to them that hear them recount
them. And they say, that it is not lawful for Monks, to labor for their own
sustenance, but commend their idleness, and repute them thereby to be
preseruers and keepers of the Gospel. And Theodoret speaking of them, says:
that Failing Theod. heretic. Fabul.
at prayers, they sleep the greater part of the day, and so are allowed to
do: the Author whereof, was one Simeon Abbeus.

The said Church of Rome, does teach us a purgatory, with the Paganes: And
give us Aqua lustralis, which they term Purgatory.
Holy water, which was the invention of Numa Pompilius the Holy water.
Idolater. They bring in the Pagan and Iewishe pompes, in magnificent habits:
as Stones, Luminaries and Processions. I conceal the rest, for brevity sake:
only I say, that as the Church of Rome has willingly changed the ordinances
of God, and of his Sacraments: even so as willingly has she gotten an other
head and husband, then Jesus Christ, to wit, the Pope, who calls the said
Church of Rome, his Spouse, and Cap. quoniam de immuni. in 60. C sunt quidem
dicentes cause. 2. 5. quaest. 1. et ibi glossa.
guides her according to his own fantasy, giving her new Laws; and says,
he has power so to do, in C. Sunt quidam dicentes. And the gloss approved
and allowed by the said Church, says; That he may dispense against God, and
against his holy Gospel. In the doing of which, he declares himself to be
he, of whom saint Paul speaks to the Thessalonians: That he exalts
himself against all that is called God. 2. These. 2. 4,


For, is not this to exalt himself against all that is called God, boldly to
dare, to change his Laws and his Gospel, to add thereto, or diminish thence,
as he says he has power to do, In C. Ideo. ss. erat? Also he says, that
he is C. ideo. ss. erat.
God, C. satis euidenter, Did. 96. And so he makes himself to be, by the
adoration done unto him, and kissing of his Pantofle. We may likewise behold
his Monks, Capuchines and Jesuits, to be daily sent abroad from him, as his
Apostles and Prophets, to preach his new Gospelles, and that new Article of
Faith, the extrauagant devise of BONIFACE the eight, Vnam sanctam Ecclesiam.
Vnam sanctam Ecclesiam.
And that it follows on necessity of salvation, to submit, and Vnam sanctam
Ecclesiam.
obey the Pope in all things, holding and observing his ordinances as heavenly.
C. sic omnes. Did. 19. And say, that his discipline C. Sic omnes Did 19. C.
Sors non est cause. 26. Quaest. 3. C. Honoratus Did. 74.
is more perfect, then the Gospel practiced and preached by the Apostles, C.
sors non est cause. 26. Q. 3. Also, to compel his underlings, to the
observation of his laws, which he prizeth more then the word of God, as it is
to be seen in C. honoratus Did. 74. And for the transgression of his laws
and commandments, to be burned alive, as we have seen many, for eating flesh
on a day by him forbidden: but for blaspheming the name of God, or whordome,
there needs no more but a little holy water, one Pater noster and one Aue
Maria, to wash away the guilt of that offense.

Now by the carriage of himself in this manner, he cannot be Apostolic, as
he vaunts of himself, nor yet the successor of Saint Peter: for doubtless he
sits not in Saint Peter's chair, that neither holds nor confesses the
doctrine, preached by Saint Peter and the other Apostles, who never were
Lawmakers in the Church of God. For there is but one Lawgiver, which is God.
But there have been Ambassadors and interpreters, James. 4. 12.
as Saint Paul instructs us, saying; That we may be esteemed as the
ministers of Christ, dispensers of the secrets of God. 1. Cor. 4. 1. 2.
And Jesus Christ himself, sending his Apostles forth to preach, said unto
them; Go and teach all nations, baptizing Mat. 28. 19. 30
them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost, teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you. He gave them then no
power, to make new laws, as the Pope licenseth his men to do.

I am not willing to extend this discourse any further, because I know it has
already been amply entreated on, by very learned men of these times: but
will conclude, that since he is not obedient to the Gospel, but puts in place
thereof other doctrines and Gospels, that he can be no other, but even he of
whom saint Paul foretold, in his Epistle to the Thessalonians, and as he is
described by saint John in his Apocalipse. And so consequently, his Church,
whereof he terms himself to be the spouse and head, is not that Church, out of
which there is no salvation, and whereto are made such gracious promises; but
rather it is the true Babylon, out of which we are commanded to depart, if we
will not partake in her abominations Apoca. 18. 4.
and plagues.

Which I have done, according to my duty, and the desire Concerning himself.
I have of mine own salvation, which is no where offered, but in the true
Church: and that is it, which follows her Spouse wheresoever he goes, and
hears his voice, and listens to no strangers: that is to say, whatsoever is
beside the doctrine contained in canonical Scripture. For we ought to hold him
(whosoever) accursed, that shall preach any other Gospel to us, according as
Saint Paul advises us.

And we say with TERTVLLIAN, to them of the Romish Tertullian.
Church: That they must show their doctrine, written in those canonical books,
or else let them expect that malediction to fall upon their heads, due to such
as either add or diminish from that doctrine. For as for other men's
traditions, whereon their Church is grounded, and not upon the Apostles
foundation, nor the holy mountains of sacred Scriptures: those traditions are
falsely called Apostolical, as Nicephorus, whom they have among Nicephorus in
lib. 12. C. 33. 34. and 35.
them, does plainly approve to them the contrary, in his book the 12. C. 33.
34 and 35.

God open their eyes, by the illumination of his holy spirit, that they may see
the brightness of his Gospel, to betake themselves to the aforesaid
mountains, whereon the true Church is builded, and to reform their doctrine,
which is to the contrary. Give us also his grace, to persevere in his sacred
vocation, to his glory, and our own salvation. Amen.

John Le Vager.

FINIS.
A CHRISTIAN DECLARATION, OF JOHN FORENT, HEERtofore a religious Friar of the
order of the Carmelites, in the Covent of Morthemard, and Curate of Castle
Lusac. Made publicly in the refor med Church of Poictiers, on Sunday the 9. of
June. 1603.
2. Cor. 6. 18. Come forth from among the Infidels, and separate your selves,
says the Lood and touch no unclean thing: And I will receive you. And I will
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and daughters, says the Lord
Almighty.
AS all the stones that are to build one house, are not brought together in one
instant; and they likewise, laid ready on a heap, will hardly serve for the
constructure thereof, til by good and skillful workmen, they be disposed and
made meet, each one to serve in his due rank or place: Even so our Lord God,
does not gather his elect, of whom he builds and erecteth his Church, all at
one instant time or season, but according as his providence and predestination
has concluded in his eternal counsel, and purposed for acco^plishment thereof,
in and at al times. He calls one while some, at other seasons others, and day by
day (by his blessed spirit) of rude and unapt members, he fashioneth and
disposes them, to enter into the building of his sacred Temple: whereof his
dearly beloved son is not only the foundation, whereon it is builded, but
also the master and corner stone, knitting together the two walls of the
several people, Jews and Gentiles, into one sole building, which is his true
Church.

It is now twelve years and more, since it pleased God to begin, to make me
listen to his inward calling, which from one day to another he confirmed to me
by the sacred Scriptures, whereby continually he solicited me, to come out of
Babylon, and enter into his celestial Sion. But until this instant, there
ensued many repugnancies on mine own behalf, taking it not to be expedient
for my salvation: for an infinite number of humane considerations, and vain
scruples opposed themselves against my desire, presuming to counterchecke those
just reasons, which the spirit of God suggested to me; and even like dreadful
Giants, or furious monsters, guarding the prison gate wherein I was enclosed,
gave me many great apprehensions, and still continued me in the terrible
assaults, even when I best hoped to escape away from them. But in the end, it
pleased the mercy of him (who deigned to choose me among the number of his
living stones, for entrance into the building of his sanctuary,) by little and
little to free me from those fears, by assuring my courage, arming me with
his grace, and furnishing me with stones to beat down the one, and with
weapons to cut off the heads of the others. So that now (by the means of his
aid and favor) I see mine enemies confounded, my prison door opened, and the
way laid wide open for me, to enter into the house of my father. Further
assuring me, that albeit I have greatly provoked his anger, in so long time of
abusing his graces for mine enlargement, and therefore I showed my self the
more unworthy, to bear the title of his son: yet that he is so pitiful, as
he will be moved in compassion toward me, and allow for acceptable, the
repentance wherewith he has touched my heart; and so, if not as a son; yet
to receive me into his house as one of his servants.

For now I will take no more delight in those spiritual brothelries: the pure
chastity of his undoubted Church has invited and drawn me to her communion.
I will now swallow no more of those bitter-sweete baits, which have so long
time abused my taste, as now appears by this contrary heavenly savor. I
desire in the company of the Children of God, to feed on living bread in the
house of the Lord. The Onions, Leekes and Garlike of Egypt, have seemed most
odious and stinking to me, since I tasted of the celestial Manna, which the
heavens have rained down upon us. Too long have I sucked the putrified and
venomous blood, issuing from the impure dugges of that cruel woman, made
drunk with the blood of the Martyrs, Apoc. 17. 6. High time was it
therefore, to relish now (hence forward) the sweet milk, distilling from the
pure pappes of our dearest mother. Too long time has the deadly cup of
abominations, delivered daily abroad by that horrid strumpet, been
ouerlauishly quaffed on: now therefore it behooves the more carefully, to
experiment the sweet liquour of life, in the Cup presented to us by the
modest spouse of Jesus Christ.

Having then hitherto borne the heavy burden, which the tyranny of Antichriste
charged my shoulders withal, I hold it reasonable, since it has pleased God
so graciously to deliver me: that all the rest of my life should be employed
thus, to lay my neck under the sweet and pleasing yoke, of the just rule and
government, belonging to my legitimate and Sovereign king.

And my tongue also, which heretofore has been loose, and unbound to
blasphemies, as also the preaching of dreams and lies: shall henceforth do
his office, in singing the maruels of my God, to bless his holy name, in the
congregation of his Saints, to preach his word, for the edification of his
Church, (if it stand with his good pleasure, to render me worthy and capable
thereof) and also to give him thanks, for that it has pleased him (after he
gave me knowledge of his truth) to deliver me out of the den of Lions, and
lodge me in the fold among his own flocks. Moreover, to crave pardon of him,
for my heinous transgressions committed, in that since the time when he gave
me a taste of his truth, I stood out like a Rebel to the light thereof,
resisting the blessed Spirit, and deferring ouer-long the time of my conversion.

But to the end, that such as have hitherto here held me for a member of the
Church of Rome, may not preiudicately conceive, that I have thence dismembered
or cut off my self lightly, and without a great reason or subject: it is
expedient, that I deliver the principal cause which heerunto has moved me,
and that is nothing else but this sole reason; That out of the Church of God
there is no salvation. For even as during the time of the Deluge, all those men
that found themselves to be out of Noah's Arc, were drowned: even so, all they
that are out of the Church shall perish, and no one person shall obtain the
eternal inheritance, if first of all he have not God for his Father, and there
is no man can have him for his Father, except he have the Church for his Mother.

And forasmuch as the spirit of God has given me to know, that the Church of
Rome is not his Church, but only this the true reformed Church: desiring to be
saved, I have quitted the one, to enter into the bosom of the other.

And although I can by many reasons approve and clearly show, that the Church
of Rome is not the Church of God: yet for avoiding of prolixitie, I will
produce but three only, the very least whereof, is sufficient to persuade me
undoubtedly, and all such as are endued with the unction which teaches all
things, that that Church can not any way be it.

The first is, that every congregation which abolisheth the commandments of
God, to establish other that are contrary to them: does (by this means)
break the affinity which it had with God, and forsaking the same, can no way
be the Church of God. The Church of Rome has abrogated or abolished the
commandments of God, and has established others quite contrary to them: by
which means she has broken the band of alliance with God, and so forsaken
God. It ensues then, that it cannot be the Church of God.

Now for better justifying the minor of this argument, we need to regard
nothing else, but what God has required of a Church, for approbation to be
his, by the two first commandments of the Law.

For the first, he will be known of her to be God only, and as such a one
to be served, honored and adored, forbidding to have any other Gods before
him, or to give them any part of his glory. Exodus 20. 3.

The Church of Rome has so far failed in the keeping of this commandment,
as she has altogether practiced the contrary, receiving an innumerable
multitude of Gods, under the name of Saints by the Pope Canonized: which is as
much to say, as Deified, and to them has attributed and rendered, the self
same honor, service and adoration, which only ought for GOD to be reserved.
For she inuokes and calls upon them, makes vows to them, buildes Temples to
them, erectes Altars, ordaines feasts, celebrates divine honor and service to
them; all which things do appertain to none but God only. And she is not
contented, to forge strange Gods in this manner, of the Saints souls, whom
they believe to be in heaven (although a great number of them, held by her
for Saints, may be buried in hell) but she delves into the bowels of the
earth, and opens Sepulchers, where their supposed bodies are interred, to make
her new Gods of their bones, of their hair, of their habites, and other such
like trashe, which she has caused to be enchased into gold and silver, and
so set upon Altares, or carried about on their shoulders in processions, and
make the people to kiss them upon their knees. Wherein assuredly she has
exceeded the Jews, who albeit they were maruellously inclined to the forging
of strange Gods: yet were they never so brutish, as to canonize the holy
Prophets, neither to give any honor to the bones of dead men, for what
sanctity soever they might have been commended in their lives. Perhaps they
builded goodly Sepulchers, to honor their memory: but they never did any
religious service to them.

The bones of Eliseus might have prophesied after his death; if by their touch
a dead body had been raised: yet all the honor done to them, was to cover
them with earth, there to awaite the sound of the Trumpet, when the soul which
before had given life to them, should return again to reinuest them.

If she have showen her self impious and ridiculous, in these matters already
recyted, then well may she be judged altogether senseless, in tra^slating the
divinity into a morsel of bread, adoring it for Jesus Christ, and creating to
her self daily a million of new Gods.

If she have thus transgressed against the first commandment, it will appear
she has carried no more respect to the second, whereby God expressly
forbids the making of any graven Image, or the resemblance of any thing
whatsoever, either above in heaven, here below on the earth, or in the waters
underneath the earth; nay more, not to fall down before them, or use any
manner of service to them. Exodus 20. 4. 5. But this charge has she taken from
the peoples remembrance, and most maliciously has cut it quite away from the
number of the commandments, in the Hours, which is a book of prayers, by her
ministers provided for the vulgar sort: and yet to the end, that there might
still remain the full number of ten, they have severed the last, and made two
of it. All her Temples has she filled, and charged her Altars with the Images
of men, of Diuelles, of horses, of hogs, of dogs, and other resemblances,
and to them has made incensings, offerings, set ca^dels burning before them,
and her adherents have prostrated themselves before them. Nay, so stra^gely
has she herein proceeded, that in the second Counsel of Nice, she caused it
there to be absolutely decreed, that these Images should be adored, and
excommunicated al such as did, or believed the contrary, and that decree does
she observe to this present day. Wherein apeareth a contrariety most
manifest, between God, who forbids flatly the adoration of Images, and the
Church of Rome, that commands men to adore them. Now as she does excommunicate
every one that does not worship them, so on the other side, God curses all
such as do so, or fall down before them Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Let every man then in
this point be well advised, which malediction ought most to be feared: either
that of God, or the other of the Roman Church. And though I should consider no
other reason, to persuade me that she is not the true Church of God, yet this
alone were more then sufficient.

But now another presents it self before me, which is of no less weight and
substance, and that is it which Saint John says: Whosoever transgresses and
abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God. He that continues in the
doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son. If there come any
to you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither
bid him, God speed. 2. John. 9. 10. And Saint Paul says: Though we, or an
Angel from Heaven do preach unto you otherwise, then that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed, etc. Galat. 1. 8. 9. The Church of
Rome has not continued in the doctrine of Christ, but has announced and
received another Gospel, contrary to that which the Apostles preached.
Therefore she has not God, she ought not to be received nor acknowledged,
nor yet to be saluted, but held as execrable and accursed. Wherefore then, if
she have not God, she is not the Church of God, even no more then the body of
a man, when the soul is separated from it, can then be called, or said to be a
man. If also she be accursed, she is not the Church of God, because the Church
of God is evermore blessed: and therefore whosoever will be saved, ought
necessarily to forsake her, and rank himself there where God abides.

It shall be easy for me to approve the assumption of this argument, by the
conference of the doctrine of Jesus Christ which the Apostles preached: with
that which the Pope, and all his doctors and preachers Romanists, do hold and
preach in the Church of Rome and I will begin at the very foundation of the
Church.

The doctrine Apostolical teaches, Other foundation can no man lay, then that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 3. 11. Whereupon, himself was
desirous to build his Church, saying: Upon this Rock (which is Christ, the
stone which the Roman builders have as well refused, as the Jews did) will I
build my Church. Math. 16. 18. The Church of Rome has taken her self from
under this foundation, and will needs be grounded on that of Saint Peter. But
I refer to their opinion, who cannot be so unprovided of judgment, how well
the Church should be defended against the powers of hell, if she had not a
more solid foundation then that of Saint Peter: who at the voice of a silly
young maiden, was in such sort shaken, as all that was builded on him was near
hand ouerturned. If so weak a wind did totter that foundation, what then could
the terrible storms do, which Satan and his Angels (which are the powers of
the air) vented out of hell against the Church of God.

The Apostles taught: That we are saved and justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, by Faith in his blood. Romans 3.
24. 25. And not by works, least any man should boast himself. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.
which are the three causes of our justification and salvation: the efficient
whereof, is the grace or mercy of God: the material, is Jesus Christ in his
blood: and the isntrumental, faith in him. The Church of Rome does dogmatise
the quite contrary: that we may acquire justice and Paradise, by our good
works, and be justified before God by them.

The doctrine Apostolical testifies: That by the blood of Christ we are
redeemed. 1. Pet. 1. 19. Apoc. 5. 9. purged, Hebre. 1. 3. washed and cleansed
from all our sins. John. 1. 29. Apoc. 1. 6. The Church of Rome holds, that
we may redeem our sins by alms, fastings, pilgrimages, celebration of
Masses, and such like things. That there is another purgatory, beside the
blood of Christ, whereby he satisfied to GOD, for the pains which were due
unto us, and wherein we are purged, cleansed and washed from all soil of
sin, to appear pure and unpolluted before the face of God.

The same doctrine of the Apostles, proposes unto us one sole Mediator,
Advocate and Intercessour, between God and men, to gain grace and remission
of their sins, to wit, Jesus Christ. 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. John. 2. 1. the Church
of Rome does attribute this office to Saints.

The Apostles taught, that before the coming of Jesus Christ, there were many
Priests or sacrificers made, because by death they were impeached from
enduring, and so succeeded one another. But Jesus Christ, because he endures
ever, has an everlasting Priesthode. Hebre. 7. 23. 24. and because he had no
need of any successor, therefore there was no need also, to offer daily
sacrifices for sin. For he did it once for all, offering up himself, and by
this oblation only (the efficacy whereof is daily recent before God) he has
consecrated, to perpetuity, those that shall be saved. He. 9. 10. The Roman
Church holds the Pope for sovereign sacrificer, as if Christ, to whom this
office only appertains, were dead, and he of necessity ought to be his
successor. She acknowledges also, all the Priests of Popery, not only to be
sacrificers, whose office (she faith) is daily to offer sacrifice in the
Mass, for the sins of the living and of the dead: but likewise (O blasphemy,
above all blasphemies the most execrable) she calls them creatours of the
Creator. Stella clericorum.

The Apostles delivered testimony, That Christ was the Prince of Pastors, and
Prince of the Kings upon earth. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 4. Apoc. 1. 5. Attributing to him
the sovereign authority, as well spiritually over the Church, as temporally
over the kingdoms upon earth, expressly allowed and given him the Father, The
heathen for thine inheritance, and all the ends of the earth for possession.
Psalm. 2. 8. himself also declaring, when he was to ascend up into heaven, that
all power is given unto me, both in heaven and earth.

The Church (so much as in her lies) despoyleth him of this authority, and
gives it to the beast mounted upon the earth, which represents the Pope,
acknowledging him, to have two horns like unto those of the Lamb. Apoc. 13.
11. to wit, sovereign authority spiritual over the Church, when she
proclaims him universal head of the Church, sovereign high Priest, and
prince of Bishops, receiving the laws and ordinances proceeding from the
Dragon, and preferring them before those of Jesus Christ, who proceeded from
the eternal Father. She has also granted him, sovereign authority
temporal over the Kingdoms of the earth, in regard she believes, that it is
in his power, to dispossess kings of their thrones, and to give them to
others: that all kings do hold their Realms, by faith and homage to the Sea
of Rome, and that the Emperor, himself ought not to be held as a lawful
Emperor, if he be not first approved and confirmed by the said Sea, that he
have first acknowledged and made ordinary submissions to the beast, adored
him, and falling down before his feet, kissed his Pantofle.

The Apostles taught, That such as prayed in a strange tongue, not
understanding the same, although they prayed in spirit, yet their intelligence
was nevertheless fruitless. 1. Cor. 14. 13. The Church of Rome forbids
praying in the Church in any other language then in Latin, wherein the greater
part of the people, and many of of the Priests themselves, do understand
nothing, therefore their intelligence must of necessity be fruitless.

The doctrine Apostolical holds, That marriage is honorable amongst all, and
the bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13. 4.
And that, To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every
woman have her own husband. 1. Cor. 7. 2. That the Bishop should be the
husband of one wife, and the Deacon likewise. 1. Tim, 3. 2. 8. He pronounces
them also Apostates from the faith, abusers, liars and hypocrites, as shall
forbid marriage. 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3.

The Roman doctrine says, that marriage is pollution, approving and allowing
the opinion of one of her Popes, Siricius, who qualifying the case in this
manner, prohibited and forbad marriage to Bishops, Priests and Deacons,
tolerating notorious whoredoms to the whole world, and permitting public
Stews or Burdelles, that daily pay trybute therefore to the Pope.

By all these Antitheses, we may easily judge the difference, that is between
the doctrine of Christ, and that of the Roman Church: and by these means,
discerning it to be a Church without God, execrable and accursed, think it
meet, that all such as would be saved, should separate themselves from it.

Now after she had thus transgressed against the commandments of God, and
instituted others quite contrary to them in their places. After she has
renounced the doctrine of the Son of God, delivered by his Apostles, and
caused (in their steed) the traditions and constitutions of men, merely
opposite to them all, to be wholly embraced and received: There then remained
no more, but to make a breach of the Sacraments, which our Lord Jesus did leave
to his Church, to confirm and seal (by them) in the hearts of the faithful,
the truth of his promises, and under the signs of visible things, to exhibit
and give them (entirely) all his best blessings.

Now if she showed her self so audacious and bold in the two former points,
it will appear, that she has declared her self no less presumptuous and
headstrong in this third. For over and above her annihilating the Sacraments,
especially that of the Lords Supper, abolishing the signs, without which it
can be no Sacrament, three things being required in all Sacraments; to wit, the
word, the sign, and the thing signified: She has contaminated and profaned
the same, by her additions or diminutions, She has added to the water in
Baptism, Salt, Spettle, Oil and Cream, without any one word of God to
warrant the same. She has cut off from the Laity (as she terms them) the
Cup, the moitie of the Sacrament of the Supper, and which best represents
unto us the death and passion of our Lord, which we ought to remember, and the
washing of our souls from sin, which we ought to seek after, etc. contrary
to his own express word, that says: Drink ye all of this.

Now God has most exactly enjoined us, that we shall have care of fulfilling
what he has commanded us, and that we shall not be so bold, as to add any
thing, or diminish any thing: this was not a temporal commandment, given to
the Jews only, for his enduring is eternal, and he addressed the same to
his Church, even to the end of the world. If it were not lawful to add to,
or omit any of the ceremonies ordained by Moses, concerning the eating of the
Paschal Lamb, which was one of the Sacraments to the Jews: why should it be
permitted now on the behalf of our Sacraments? And, if any one that misprised
the Law of Moses, dyed the death without any mercy: what far worse torments
then does he deserve, that shall tread the son of God under his feet?

The Church of Rome tramples with her foul feet upon him; when she adds
to, and diminishes from his word, when she despises his doctrine, and
delivers another; when she prophanes his Sacraments; and when so enormously
she transgresses the commandments of God. It follows then, that she is to
expect most rigorous punishments: and such as will not participate in her
plagues, must keep themselves from partaking in her sins, and, least they
be infected, to quit themselves of her in due time.

I adjure then all those, in whose souls resides any spark of piety, of
zeal to the glory of GOD, and of affection to their own salvation: that
they, weighing these reasons, and not believing every spirit, but approving the
spirits, whether they be of GOD or no, propose to themselves, that many false
Prophets are come into the world. 1. John. 4. 1.

And forasmuch, as by the sacred Scripture, which is as a candle set upon a
candlestick, to illuminate all those that enter into the Lords house, (and
whereby all falsities, Idolatries, blasphemies, heresies, sacriledges, abuses,
superstitions herein already specified, and infinite other follies and gross
absurdities, which the Church of Rome has conceived in her crazed brain,
void of all wisdom, yet after she has once infanted them, they are
nourished and brought up in so great an estate, as they have almost obscured
the true service of GOD, and even very near hand suffocated the whole doctrine
of salvation) she may be easiliest discovered: yet notwithstanding she has
been so subtle, as to forbid the people the reading of them, knowing very
well, that if they be read, the pot of Roses would be discovered, and all the
world abandoning her, would send forth an open cry upon her, as after an
enraged wolf, that having broken the pales of the Churches Park, sought to
loose and destroy the poor flock of the Lord.

Nevertheless, she could not so cunningly provide for her own affairs, but
GOD discovered her parts of shame, and laid open her abominations to the
whole world: for the light of his Gospel now shining every where, all the
nookes and corners are wide open, and the masque, wherewith she shadowed her
deformed countenance, has been rent off from her face, and there is no one
(if he be not wilfully blind) but may see and perceive her turpitude.

And yet for all this, being thus publicly known, quite contrary to the
imitation of all shameless strumpets, perceiving they can no longer be
covered: yet she has cast down all shame, and contemning all whatsoever,
suffers her self to be carried into the depth of all iniquity.

She is become like to her own Images, that have eyes, yet see nothing,
ears, and hear nothing at all. She has stopped her ears like the Adder, as
not willing to hear the voice of her husband, who called her to better
understanding, by the admonitions of such as bemoned her mishappes, and desired
her reconciliation. She has altogether shut her eyes, because she would not
see the light of truth, taking nothing else more opposite against her heart,
then the bright splendor thereof. Being no way comparable to the noble
Eagles, who look with wide open eyes (without winking) upon the glorious Sun:
but rather resembling Moules, that delight themselves to dwell perpetually in
the dark bowels of the earth, making no account at all of the light. And
although they have no eyes whereby to discern it, yet notwithstanding are they
such enemies thereto: as the least opening they feel, for appearance of any
of his beams, or the air that may yield some glimmering to them, makes them
never cease, until they be underneath a great mass of earth, that light may
not any way have passage to them.

In like manner, when God has pleased to make some opening, whereby to cause
some penetrating or splendor of the fair beams of truths clear light into
the Church of Rome: yet in regard she affects nothing more then dreams,
wherein she has long time been nousled, and used them as a common habit, she
has employed all her earthly forces against it, that no way it may have
entrance to her. And perceiving that to dart her thunder bolts of
excommunication, has grown little to her avail, she makes her recourse now,
to execute her dessignes by the power of kings, by murdring Canons, swords,
and Arms: she has practiced all the rigours of the civil laws, serving her
turn with banishments, proscriptions, imprisonings, libbitings, burnings, and
other cruel inflictions. She has opposed the decrees of her Popes, the
traditions of her fathers, the Canons of her Councels, the headie opinions of
her Scholars, with the fallacies of her Sophisters. She has not forgot, to
set (as marching in her foremost ranks) her venerable antiquity, her
innumerable multitude, her continued succession of Pastors, her invented
miracles, her precious sanctity of Relics, her most holy splendor of
Ceremonies, the beauty and inestimable riches of her vessels and golden
ornaments, and the thundering noise of her belles, as also the marvelous
building of her churches: whereby she makes herself amiable to all such, as
are deaffe to his voice that calls them to salvation.

All which things, are like so many clouds gathered together, to hinder by
their thick darkness, that the bright sun might not justly shine among them:
like so many heaps of earth, only to suffocate and bury truth in, if she
but offer to enter upon them: or as so many illusions, to make her affrighted,
if (of her own nature) she were any way fearful. But albeit the sun do
tardie time a while, yet his arising surmou^teth those clouds, and a vehement
wind disperseth them abroad, a great flood of waters descending from heaven,
quite bears away all those heaps of earth, and the bright presence of the
Lord makes all those feigned illusions to vanish. And in despite of all the
policies of Antichrist, he will enter, to visit them that desire his
company, and to comfort them that mourn after him, and powerfully deliver
them out of the bloody wolves fangs, that call upon him for their help.

God also (in the end) will punish the blasphemies, which this strumpet has
cast forth against his glory, the contempt of salvation by him freely offered,
but by her most impudently rejected, and will revenge the outrages, done by her
to his chosen and faithful; which already he had executed, and quite
confounded her in the bottomless depth, but that his mercy attends the rest
of his elect, who like good corn, are mingled among the darnell: and to the
end they may not perish with the chafe, and be cast into the quenchlesse fire,
he will (in his good time) select them into his Garner. For even as while Lot
was in Sodom, he deferred the punishment of the wicked: so, while one of his
elect shall abide in the polluted Church of Rome, God (with ouer-great
patience) will endure her abominations, and day by day augment the light of
his truth.

Which that he may in his exceeding love and mercy still vouchsafe to do,
upon my knees I heartily entreat of his divine Majesty: And pray you all here
present, to bear testimony of mine unfeigned conversion, imploring also your
continual prayers, for my constant perseverance unto my lives end.

Amen.
John Forent.

FINIS.
A DECLARATION AND PROFESSION PVBLICKLY made, in the reformed Church of Paris,
gathered together at ABLON.
BY MASTER DENIS BOVCHER, SOMEtime a Monk of the Order called Saint Frances,
in the Covent of Noisy, near Paris. On Sunday the sixth of July 1603. of his
conversion to the true Apostolic Religion; and abiuration of the Popish
errors, superstitions and Idolatries.

MY Masters, it is no new thing, neither ought it to be accounted strange, to
see and hear rebellions and blasphemies against God, or persecutions and
heresies against his Church and holy truth: for such matters have held place,
ever since the beginning and creation of the world, as the sacred Scriptures
sufficiently do testify. The wicked spirit, shadowed with the Serpents
skin, would never cease, till he had seduced and withdrawn our first
parents, from their obedience to God and his commandments. Genes. 3.
In the days of Noah, who was at that time a great Patriarch and Prophet of
GOD, as also an Heralde of his justice, Genes. 6.
there arose ouerbold audacious Giants, given to all filthiness and
corruptions: whereby they fell to make war against God, and in such sort
provoked him, as they drew his just judgment against all the inhabitants on
earth, and the universal Deluge of waters, wherein all flesh was drowned and
perished.

After the Deluge, Nimrod and his associates, puffed up also with an ambitious
headstrongness, no way willing to depend Genesis 10.
upon God, were the first that established tyranny and violent dominion in the
world, and enterprised to signalize themselves for pride, in building of the
Tower of Babell: but God made a mockery of them, and even confounded them in
their own enterprise, by the confusion of their languages.

We see throughout the whole book of Exodus, how God, (after he had with
long patience toward Pharaoh the king of Egypt, showed that he forgot not his
people by him persecuted, nor yet his blasphemies committed against his
Majesty) in the end, by a strong hand delivered his people, drowning the said
Pharaoh and all his followers, in the waters of the red Sea. Many other
strangers did bandie themselves against God, and likewise persecuted his
people, as the Chaldeans, Babilonians, Persians and other people, whom God (at
length) did utterly ruinate.

Which examples do declare unto us, that there is no power nor prudence,
neither any counsel whatsoever, that can prevail against the Lord our God.
But when he once awakens himself (as after a profound sleep, to use the
Prophets own words) he knows how to revenge himself on those that durst
lift up themselves before him, and oppose their weakness against his glory.

The Histories Ecclesiastical and profane, as well ancient as modern, give
us assurance and proof hereof, in many great and general persecutions, and
other particular occasions beside, raised up by the Roman Emperors, with
other great kings, Princes and Infidel Potentates, against God, his Church and
sacred truth: wherein (nevertheless) he has in the end shown himself most
magnificently victorious, even over all his enemies, protecting and defending
all those that put their trust in him. Which also was the blessed aduertisment
and assured consolation, that sometimes our Lord Jesus Christ gave to his
Apostles, when he sent them forth to preach his word, saying. I send ye forth
as sheep and lambs among Wolves. Ye Luke 10.
shall have many enemies, that shall put ye to much pain and travail in the
world: But be ye of good courage, for I have overcome the world. And further
assurance of victory he gave Luke 21.
them, by means of a mouth filled with wisdom, which none should be able to
resist or speak against. Undoubtedly then, it is a most extreme folly, for
men to thrust themselves forward, or to enterprise any thing whatsoever against
his wisdom, because he is evermore too strong for them, and he will maintain
his right against all power whatsoever.

In this respect (my worthy and judicious Masters) because now days it seems,
that the Church of Rome is mightily advanced, by the multitude of her supposts
and false Pastors, who in stead of the true heavenly food, present nothing
else but venomous herbs and false doctrines, therewith to feed the souls,
of men: Although (I say) it appears, that this Synagogue of Satan do daily
bear up sail, God sparing and delaying his judgments against her. Yet
notwithstanding, at length he will let loose the arrows of his indignation
and fierce anger, against her blasphemies, so that she shall no way be able to
endure the weight of his displeasure: but shall altogether remain confounded
and ruined. Whereas on the contrary part, he will defend, preserve and
increase (day by day) his little flock, as we may perceive, that many (being
guided and conducted by his holy spirit) have forsaken the accursed foulde of
Popery, to rank themselves amongst the members of his true Church.

And here (my masters) I present my self before you, as one of them, who
although I was one of the least members of that great Popish body: yet did I
not desist from persecuting to my uttermost, the true Church of our Savior,
and the verity of his Gospel, which I impugned by diverse heresies, which I
learned in the infectious Cloisters of sundry Monasteries, publicly preaching
and pronouncing them, understanding and corrupting most vilely the holy
Scriptures, arming and serving mine own turn, with infinite other
subornations, only to contradict the truth withal. I did entirely oppose my
self against that goodly and bright splendor, shining most gloriously in the
word of God: And (to speak truly) I made a spare of nothing, which I imagined
might serve for mine own conservation in the estate of lying. But yet at
length, when God made me to know, that it was ouer-hard for me to kick against
the prick, and that I had wilfully shut up mine eyes before, only because I
would not look on the bright Sun of justice, which vouchsafes to illuminate
all the world, God then (I say) in mercy looking upon me, did let me
plainly perceive, that I deserved no less chastisement, then the veriest
wretch in the whole world. And, to the end I may make a more particular
declaration of his grace bestowed upon me, receiving Heb. 8.
and likewise delivering to you a sound subject of him, to render all praise
and thanks with me to him therefore, as also on the other side, that mine
example of entering now amongst you, may the more resoluedly confirmeyee in the
truth: I will speak and deliver unto ye in very few words, the grounds of
those causes, which moved and incited me to forsake Antichrists Gal. 3.
part of Rome, to follow the truth of God, and join my self to the body of
his Church.

First of all, the word of God teaches us, that Jesus Christ is our sovereign
Prophet, King and Priest, and that at one time only, he offered up himself a
sacrifice to God, for us who were utterly lost, the children of wrath, sin
and death. That by one oblation only he has sanctified us, and bought us
from the curse of the Law, even when he made himself a curse for us. Now the
Church of Rome confesses, that albeit Jesus Christ did die for us: yet his
death is not profitable to us, except we do some good works, to apply unto
our selves matter of merit thereby. As if he had not offered up himself to
his Father, but rather is to be offered up by the Sacrifices and Doctors of
the Law: And that his oblation is not meritorious only, except the same be
daily reiterated in the Mass, which (they say) is propitiatory to God, both
for the living and the dead. That Christ has not thoroughly delivered us from
the curse of the Law, but that (to be saved) we ought in our selves to
accomplish the Law. Wherein they contradict manifestly the sacred Scriptures,
and namely that place taught by saint Paul, in the second Chapter of his
Epistle to Ephesians. 2. and other places.
the Ephesians.

The holy Scriptures also do enstruct us, that Jesus Christ is the alone
Mediator between God and man, as also the only 1. Tim. 2. 1. John. 2. John.
10. Phil. 2. Colos. 1.
Advocate and intercessour. That he is the good Shepherd: that God has
subjected all things unto him, and made him the head of his Church. The Pope,
opposing himself against all these, commands, that prayers must be made to he
Saints and she Saints, as mediators between God and men, and in regard that
they have been men, they have the more communication with our nature, and are
more inclined to compassion of our miseries, then Jesus Christ. And yet
notwithstanding, it is he that says: Come unto me all ye that are heavy
laden, and I will ease you. Beside, Whatsoever you demand Math. 11. John. 14.
of the Father in my name, you shall obtain it. The Pope avouches, that
although Jesus Christ be the head of the Church, yet (says he) that he
himself is the ministerial head thereof in earth, and that all things are as
well subjected to him, as unto Christ. That all, whatsoever he does or says,
ought to be held and reputed, as coming even from God himself. That in
things which concern Religion, he cannot err: and yet notwithstanding, many
Popes have bin found to be heretics, witness Liberius, Marcellinus and
others. He says also, that his commandments ought to be executed equally
with them belonging to God. In brief, he would make the world believe, that
the Church of GOD is a monster with two heads, before which (equally) all
knees ought to bow and bend.

God did likewise expressly forbid his people, and so consequently to all men,
to make any graven Image, of any thing Exodus 20.
whatsoever, to use any service thereto, or fall down before it. The Pope on
the contrary part, he will have Churches to be filled with statues, Images,
Idols, and pictures: whereto incensings and honors must be done, and before
whom they must fall prostrate, although they be vain things, and the works of
men's hands.

Finally, the holy Spirit does assure us, that the sacred Scriptures are
divinely inspired, that they are apt to enstruct, correct 2. Tim. 3.
and convince, and that they can make a man wise before God to salvation. The
Pope and his partakers, taking themselves to be more wise then the holy Ghost,
do not only say, that the sacred Scriptures are obscure, but also that they
be insufficient, and like unto a sword cutting with two edges. That they have a
nose of wax, which heretics form after their own pleasure, and wherewith
they serve their own turn, to confirm their heresies. These are such
blasphemies, as none but a devil durst utter: considering that Jesus Christ
himself, in many places, does authorize the holy Scriptures, referring all to
their John. 5. Luke. 4.
subiectionhat ought men then to do, but follow his example in all things,
which concern religion, and the service of God?

Which if they of Popish spirit would do, so many traditions and humane
doctrins should not be seen, directly against the word of God: As is that of
Purgatory, prayer for the dead, Indulgences, vows and pilgrimages, auricular
confession, and others, so full of superstitions and Idolatries; and never were
heard so many blaspemies. Namely, as when the title of honor of the holy
Father, or of his holiness, which appertains to none but God only, is
attributed and given to a mortal man, a poor and miserable sinner. The
Sacraments of the Church, which are but two, instituted by our Lord Jesus
Christ: are they not broken and profaned, when we see them to be augmented,
and added unto, with five other bastard Sacraments? All which, having no
institution, commandment or promise in the word of God: we cannot, neither
ought we to make any use of them.

My masters, these things, with many others, have incited me to forsake the
places where they are taught and commanded, to leave the large and spacious
way, which leads to perdition, Mat. 7.
to follow the hard and narrow path, full of thorns and afflictions, which
conducteth men to our Lord Jesus Christ, at the end whereof, unspeakable
felicity is found. I set down my rest then (the grace of God assisting me) to
embrace with you the profession of true Christianity, and therein purpose to
live and die. Which I swear, protest and promise before God, and all this
holy assembly. And to renounce, as at this instant I have renounced
altogether, all the false doctrines, superstitions, and Idolatries of Popery:
namely, that false, counterfaite and blaspheamous sacrifice of the Mass, quite
contrary to the merits, death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Upon whom
only I will lay the foundation of my faith, and cast Anchor there, with undoubted
hope of life eternal and perpetual blessedness. I pray God (with all my
heart) to grant me grace heerin, and entreat you all my Masters, according to
your charity, to be helpefull herein to me with your holy prayers to him:
To whom with the Son, and the holy Ghost, be all glory and honor for
evermore. Amen.

This present declaration was with a loud voice pronounced, in the presence of
the whole reformed Church of Paris, congregated at Ablon, after the end of the
Sermon: On Sunday the sixth day of this present month of July, 1603. By me
DENIS BOVCHER, and thus signed.

D. Boucher.

FINIS.
A DECLARATION MADE BY MAster DANIELL DVSERT, a native of Cinte-gauelle near
to Toulouse, and heretofore a Religious Friar, according to the Order of Saint
Frances. Containing his abiuration of the Doctrine of the Romish Church, and
his protestation to live and dye in the Faith of the reformed Church. Made
publicly by himself, in the Church of Mello, the 22. day of December, 1603.
I Render thanks to God, that after so long time of wavering in faith, and
plunging in the errors of the Roman Church, being altogether led by the
cunning Doctors of that profession, and brought into such an estate, as being
wholly subjected under the power of the Prince of darkness: he has yet at
length (by the virtue and efficacy of his blessed spirit) given me to know,
that the doctrine preached in the said Roman Church, is as far off from the
true Evangelical doctrine, as earth is from heaven, and that such as follow
that track, are out of the way of their salvation. For proof whereof, it is a
matter most certain, That out of Christ's Church there is no salvation at all.
Now, that is the Church of Christ, which hears his voice: therefore, since the
voice of Christ (that is to say, his word) is not heard among them of the
Romish Church, it must needs follow, that they are neither of his Church, nor
yet of his flock. And to show apparently, that the voice of Christ is not heard
in the said Roman Church, we will proceed in approving the same, by the
manifest Antithesis and opposition, which is between the Romish doctrine, and
that of Christ, contained in the sacred Scriptures.

And first of all, the Church of Rome teaches, that the holy Scriptures do
not contain all the doctrine of our salvation. Which is quite contrary to the
Apostles instruction, who plainly says: That he had known the holy
Scriptures of a child, which are able to make wise unto salvation, through the
2. Tim. 3 15.
faith which is in Jesus Christ. For the whole Scripture is given by divine
inspiration, and is profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness. That the man of God Chap. eod., v 16. 17.
may he absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrine, Math. 15. 9.
the traditions of men.

Peter's speeches, saying: We 2. Pet. 2. 19.
have also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye
take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place.

Search diligently the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and John. 5. 39.
they are they which testify of me. And Saint John does not he address his
Epistle to all sorts of ages, saying: Little children, I write unto you,
because your sins are forgiven ye for his 2. John. 2. 12. 13. 14.
names sake. Again, I write unto you Fathers, etc. Also, I write unto you
young men, etc. And then, I write unto you, babes.

I had rather in the church, to speak five words with mine understanding, that
I might also 2. Cor. 14. 19.
instruct others, then ten thousand words in a strange language.

Rome they also teach, that some others (beside Jesus Christ) have been
exempted from sin, but do they not lie in so saying? when the Apostle,
speaks thus: Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin
death, Romans 5. 12.
and so death went over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned.

John Baptist, saying: A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from
heaven. And the Apostle also says: It is GOD John 3. 27. Phil. 2. 13.
which works in you, both the will and the deed, even of his own good
pleasure.

Esaias says: All our righteousness is like the filthy Esa. 64. 6.
clouts of a menstruous woman. And against that also which Damel says: We do
not (O Lord) present our supplications before thee, for our own
righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies. Dan. 9. 18.


By Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.
grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God. Not of works, least any man should boast himself. Contrary also to
this to Timothy, That God has saved us, and called us with an holy calling,
not according to our works, 2. Tim. 1. 9.
hut according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through
Christ Jesus, before the world was. Contrary likewise Romans 3. 28.
to this to the Romans: Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by
faith, without the works of the Law.

Paul to the Hebrews, saying: Let Heb. 4 16.
us go boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. Contrary also to his writing to the Romans,
where he says: For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels
nor Principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor Romans 8. 38. 39.
depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And contrary also to his writing to
the Corinthians: That God has sealed us, 2. Cor. 1. 22.
and has given the earnest of his spirit in our hearts.

Paul, writing thus: For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and
man, which is the man Christ Jesus. 2. Tim. 2. 5.
Contrary likewise to the Evangelist Saint John, in two several places of his
Gospel: Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my John. 14. 13. John. 16. 23.
name, he will give it unto you.

Esaias: Abraham is ignorant of us, and Jacob knows us Esa. 63. 16.
not: thou (O Lord) art our Father, and our Redeemer, thy name is for ever.

Whosoever believes in the Son shall not John. 3. 18.
be condemned. And in the first Chapter of the same Gospel: Verily verily I
say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes John. 5. 24.
in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death unto life.

If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all vnrighteousnese. And as it follows in the
1. John. 1. 9.
second Chapter of the same Epistle: We have an Aduocat with the Father, to
wit, Jesus Christ the Just. And he is the propitiation 1. John. 2. 1. 2.
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole
world. Why then it is most false, that there is a third place, beside Paradise
and hell, where the souls of the faithful, departing from this world, are to
be tormented, before they can be brought to heaven. Contrary to the Prophet
Esaias, who says: The just man dying, enters into peace and rest. Esa. 57. 1. 2.
And in the wisdom of Solomon, it is written: The souls of the righteous are
in the hand of God, and no torment shall touch them. Sapi. 3. 1.
Also saint John the divine, says in the Apocalipse: Blessed are Apoc. 14. 13.
the dead, which hereafter die in the Lord. Even so says the Spirit, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

David: That his sins surmounted Psalm. 40. 12.
in number, the hairs of his head. Again he says: Who can understand all his
faults? cleanse me (O Lord) from my secret Psalm, 19. 12.
faults.

Paul writes to the Romans: For I count that the afflictions of Romans 8. 18.
this present time, are not worthy of the glory, which shall be revealed to us.

Galathians, saying: Ye observe days, and months, Galat. 4. 10.
and times and years.

Colossians, where he says: Let no man condemn you in Colos. 2. 16.
meat, or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the
Sabbath days.

whatsoever, saying: Marriage is honorable among all, and the Heb. 13. 4.
bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. And this we
add hereto of the Apostle: Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the
latter days, some shall depart from the 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3.
faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils:
Which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their consciences seared with an
hot Iron: Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.





by persons much more excellent, to wit, by Bishops only: whereas both
Baptism, and the holy Supper, do imprint no Character at all, and may be
ministered by simple Priests.

That Christ shall not descend at all from heaven, but when he comes at the
latter day, to judge both the quick and the dead. And contrary to that which
S. Peter says in the Acts of the Apostles: That the heavens must contain
him, until the time that all things be restored. But by Act. 3. 21.
this doctrine, they will have Jesus Christ to be enclosed under the natures of
Bread and Wine, and make him thereby invisible, impalpable, and filling many
places at one and the same instant, whereby they rob him of his humane nature,
wherein (sin only excepted) he was made in all things like unto us.

Drink ye all of it? and do they not thus violate the testamentarie Math. 26.
27.
institution of the Son of God?

Heb. 9. 25. 26.
expiatorie, for the living and for the dead; Jesus Christ being every day
crucified again, infinite times, by the hands of the Priest. Contrary to that
of the Apostle, in the Hebrews: Not that he should offer himself often, as
the high Priest entered into the Holy place, every year with other blood. For
then must he have often suffered since the foundation of the world: But now in
the end of the world, has he appeared once, to put away sin, by the
sacrifice of himself. And in the tenth of the same Epistle, he says: Lo, I
come to do thy will, O God. By the which Heb. 10. 9. 10.
will we are sanctified, even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ
once made. Whereby we learn, that the sacrifice which our Lord Jesus once
only offered, is alone sufficient, soly perfect, and of perpetual continuance
to expiate our sins, without any reiterating or renewing: as having no
imperfection whatsoever, neither can (by length or succession of times) become
fruitless or unprofitable: as they would gladly make us believe, who,
according to their own doctrine, do daily crucify the Lord anew.

Thou shall make thee no graven Image etc. Thou shall not bow down to them,
neither serve them, etc. But above Exodus 20. 4. 5.
all, he that has any care at al, of the glory of his Lord and maker, cannot
but feel himself stirred with holy zeal, when he looks into their
ouerdaring boldness, that they durst and yet dare, cut quite away the second
Commandment, from the Law of the Sovereign Creator both of Heaven and earth.

Roman Church, under the Popes authority, so many errors are defended and
maintained (both by fire and blood) against God, his holy word and
commandments, and (beyond al other) against the merits and benefits, ensuing
only by our Savior Christ Jesus: we may seriously enter into consideration,
if he deserve not truly to be called, the man of sin, the son of
perdition, that opposes and adua^ceth himself, against all that is called
God, or tends to his honor. For he sits as God, in the Temple of God,
showing him self as if he were God, as saint Paul writes to the
Thessalonians 2. These. 2. 4.
of him. For first of all they say: That he has right above right, and beyond
right, that he may dispense against the four 1. Dic. Non. dec de la Rose.
Ex^r. de. M. 12 2. Clement. 5. Clement. 3. Can. si papa. 4 In Constale Bonis.
Ex de Mayor, et obedien. S. 10. 6.
Evangelists, the Epistles of Saint Paul, and the four first general
Councels. Secondly, that he can command the Angels, to open and shut the
heavens, to give pardon for many hundreds and thousands of years. Thirdly,
that he has a charter of condemning souls into hell. Fourthly, that he has
the two swords, temporal and spiritual, whereby he may confer of kingdoms
and Estates: dispense with subjects oaths of fidelity: command over kings
and Emperors, and make them to fall before his feet. Is this any thing else,
then to lift himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped? So
by consequent, he makes himself no Lieutenant of Christ, who said: That his
kingdom was not of this world, and fled away Luke 19. 14.
when they would have made him king. In brief, is this the being of S. Peter's
successor? who cared neither for gold nor silver, as he protests of himself
in the Acts of the Apostles. Act. 2. 45. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3 4.
And who prayed in all modesty the Elders: To feed the flock of Christ. Not
as if they were Lords over Gods heritage, but that they might be examples to
the flock. To the end, that when the chief sheepeheard shall appear, they
might receive an incorruptible crown of glory. It follows not (by his
behavior) that he should be the Vicar of Christ, nor the successor of Saint
Peter: much less then is he worthy, to sit in the Temple of God, and make
himself honored as a God.

Therefore, before I conclude, addressing my self to you my Masters of the
Roman Church: Behold here the important motives and grounds, which have
moved me, to forsake your said Church, following the Lords commandment, in
the Revelation: Go out of Babylon, my people, that ye be not partakers Apoc.
18. 4.
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. And not (as I protest
here before God) on any inconstant humor do I this, for affection to
novelty, for revenge against any one of you, neither to avoid any punishment
to be inflicted on my self: as (in your own souls) you are my faithful
witnesses. Nor yet to procure any repose, or carnal liberty to my self: but
only for giving the glory due to God, and to attain the salvation of mine
own soul. Praying to the Almighty, who has deigned thus to visit me in his
mercy, that it would please him to extend the same goodness toward you, and
deliver you out of that deadly sinck of ignorance. And so, to him that is King
of Kings, immortal, invisible, and our only wise God, be all honor and
power ascribed eternally. Amen.

D. Dusert.

WE, whose names are hereunder written, the Pastor and Elders of the reformed
Church of Mello in Poictu, do testify, that this day, being the 22. day of
December, 1603. Master Daniell Dusert, (a native of Cincte-gauelle, in
Languedoc, and heretofore a Religious Friar, of the Order of Saint Frances,
called the Reformed Order in the Covent at Toulouse) did come (of himself)
before us, and declaring, that he, having taken good notice of the errors of
the Roman Church, being contrary to the conformity used in the Church
reformed, and the sacred Scriptures, desired that we would lend him a hand, to
entertain him among the number of that holy flock. Upon this declaration made,
we examined him on the principal Articles of true Religion, and find in him,
that he comes not any way polluted among us, nor suffers himself to be
transported in in this his change, by giddie inconstancy: nor seeks to exempt
himself from the austerities, used in the Religion he professed before: nor
yet to procure him any License to carnal liberty. In brief, he hopes not to
attain among us, any honors and treasures of the world: Christ calling his
followers here on earth, to the Communion of the Cup of his Cross, and his
sufferings. To these protestations, he has added withal, that he has no
other aim, but the quiet of his conscience, and salvation of his soul. And
after he had publicly made his abiuration of the doctrine of the Romish
Church, and solemnly protested, to live and die in that of the Church reformed
(according to the Articles before openly pronounced) we received him as a
member thereof, and gave him this present attestation, to stead him upon any
need thereof. Given at Mello, the day and year above written.

B. Manceau, Pastor of the said Church. Rene de la Court, Esquire, Lord of
Boullay. D. Chollet, created at Mello. Gracian, Lord of Vergne Nourry. P.
Tauerneau. Elders.


FINIS.

