THE THANKEFVLL SAMARITANE.

In a Sermon at S. PETER'S in EXETER, the sixth of AUGUST, Anno 1617. Being the
day of the deliverance of that City from the Rebels, in the days of King
EDWARD the Sixth. At which time the Assizes was also there holden.

By JOHN COMYNS Master of Arts of EXETER College in OXFORD, and Minister of
GODS Word at CREDITON in DEVON.

1 Thessalonians. 5.18. In all things give thanks, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTER JOHN SHEERE MAJOR of the City of EXETER, I.
C. wishes the felicity of both Worlds: Grace in this life, and glory in the
next.
SIR,
I Here present unto your view, what was first meditated by your appointment:
it had never been penned but for you, and therefore it does of right
appertain unto you. I confess that at the time of the delivery hereof, the
weakness of my memory was such as never before I had experience of in a
Pulpit, by reason whereof I ouer-slipped many things. And that was one special
motive that made me the more willing to commit it to the Press, that what was
purposed and penned to be preached, but through debilitie of memory was not
uttered with the mouth, and therefore could not be heard with the ear, might
yet at length be seen with the eye. If this poor labor of mine shall find
entertaynement with you, as a testimony of my thankfulness for your
undeserved kindness toward me, and of that respective love and loving respect
I bear you: and if it may be a means of the least good unto any Christian
soul into whose hands it shall come, I have enough. And thus I commend you to
God, beseeching him to keep you by his power through faith unto salvation; and
will for ever rest

Yours in all Christian duty, JOHN COMYNS.

THE THANKEFVLL SAMARITANE.
LVKE 17.15, 16, 17, 18. 15. And one of them, when he saw that he was healed,
turned back, and with a loud voice praised God,

16. And fell down on his face at his feet, and gave him thanks, and he was
a Samaritane.

17. And Jesus answered and said, Are there not ten cleansed? but where are the
nine?

18. There are none found that returned to give God praise, save this Stranger.


WHen Satan that old Serpent had stung our first Parents, and in them had
poisoned all their posterity; so that mankind had received such a deep and
desperate wound, as that it passed the skill and power of all the Angels of
heaven, and all the Creatures on earth to heal the same: it pleased the great
Mat. 9.12.
Physicion of the world, to come down (unsent for by wounded man) from the
height of heaven to the earth below, to cure this (otherwise) incurable
spiritual sore of the Sons of men: that as they who were bitten with fiery
Serpents in the days of Moses, were preserved alive by looking upon that
fiery brazen Serpent, Number. 21.8, 9.
which Moses made and set upon a pole by the commandment of God, so all of
those that had a spiritual eye of faith to look upon this true brazen Serpent
(who was lifted up, not only on the Cross, John 3.14.
but also by the preaching of the Gospel) might not perish, but have life
everlasting. And during the time of his continuance here on earth, for the
healing of mankindes grievous wound, he wrought also many miraculous cures on
them that were diseased with bodily infirmities: he opened the eyes of the
blind, so that they were able to see; and the ears of the deaf, so that they
were able to hear: he loosed the strings of the tongues of the dumb, so that
they were able to speak; and strengthened the feet and ancle bones of the
lame, so that they were able to walk: he rebuked the feauers, and they left
those who were sick of them; and healed the bloody issue, whereof the woman
could not be made whole, Mark 5.26.
but (as one Evangelist has added) became much worse, though she had suffered
many things of many Physicions, and had spent all that she had: finally, he
cleansed the Lepers, as here in the Story whence the Text is taken.

Now, as the earthly Physicion must have his fee when he has finished his
cure; so is there a fee due unto, and expected of this heavenly Physicion. Do
not think that silver and gold, or any worldly pelf is the fee which he will
be best pleased withal: No, no; its a matter of less cost to thee,
Thankfulness the heavenly Physicions fee.
yet of more acceptance with him: he looks to have thanks for his pains,
that is his fee; yet has he cured many that have not paid him: here were ten
Lepers cleansed, and but one of them turned back, and praised God, and gave
him thanks. And therefore might he justly complain of the detestable
ingratitude of the other nine, that having wrought on them so great a cure, yet
was denied by them so small a fee.

In this portion of Scripture, I consider these two general parts, viz. 1 The
event of the miraculous healing of those Lepers, viz. 1 The thankfulness of
one. 2 The ingratitude of nine.
2 The event of that event, viz. 1 Christ's complaint of the great ingratitude
of nine. 2 Christ's approbation of the thankfulness of one.



And one of them, etc. What this one thankful Samaritane, and the other nine
unthankful Jews, were bodily, that are we al spiritually, to wit, infected
with the leprosy of sin: its a disease hereditarie, wherewith we are all
possessed even from our conception and birth. Psalm. 51.5.
He was a Saint that confessed himself to be conceived and borne a sinner: and
(if we will believe S. Suscepit David personam generis humani, Aug. in Loc.
Austine) he did in that confession take upon himself the person of all
mankind: so that all that ever descended from Adam, by the ordinary course of
natural generation, are infected with an inbred spiritual leprosy as soon
as ever they are conceived in the womb: and it may truly be said of them all,
that they were ouer-spred with the darkness of sin, even while their Mother
kept them warm in her womb, before they came forth to see the light of the
world; and were dead in sin and wickedness, before ever they drew the breath
of life in the world: and that they were no sooner naturally conceived men, but
they were also conceived spiritually leprous men: and that they received life
and sin in one moment, the first from God their just Creator, the other from
Adam their sinful Progenitor. The Apostle does plainly avouch so much, when as
he says, that in Adam all have sinned: How? Romans 5.12, 16, 19
but by drawing from him guiltiness of nature, and corruption of nature.
First, guiltiness, because all stand charged with Adams disobedience in the
first moment of their conception, as if it had been their own; that being
justly laid upon the posterity, which he that was the common head of them all
did commit, or which they committed in him, being originally in his loins: for
as the Author to the Hebrews says, that Leui paid tithes in Abraham, Heb.
7.9, 10.
because he was yet in the loins of his Father, when Melchisedec met him; even
so the guilt of Adams disobedience is made his childrens, that then were in his
loins, and thence proceeded by ordinary generation: and by reason of this
guiltiness they are all liable to temporal and eternal death, according to
the Genesis 2.17.
threatening of God, and by nature the children of wrath, according to the
Ephesians. 2.3.
saying of the Apostle, and damned before they be borne, according to the
speech of an ancient Divine. Neither does the offspring of Adam stand charged
only with the guiltiness of his disobedience, but there is also secondly,
corruption derived unto them; and that not by example or imitation only (as the
Pelagians erroniously maintained) but by generation and propagation; whereby
their whole nature, soul and body, is altogether defiled, and disposed only to
evil, not to any thing which is good. This inbred leprosy of original
contagion, Why the sin of nature is termed Original.
breaks forth into a running leprosy of actual transgression in the children
of Adam: for its termed by the name of original sin, not only because it is
ab origin, ever since the fall of Adam: nor only because it is cum origin,
bred in every man in the womb, and brought with him into the world: but also
because it is origo, the bitter root of all the accursed fruits, the poisoned
fountain of all the filthy and noisome streams of actual sins. Thus are we
all Lepers, and unless we be cleansed, shall for ever be excluded out of the
heavenly Jerusalem (into Revel. 21.27.
which no unclean thing shall ever enter) and eternally separated from the
presence of God, and society of glorious Angels and blessed Saints, as the
Lepers in the time of the Law must dwell alone, See Leuit. 13.
and not be admitted into the company of those that were clean.

Will you know then how and by whom you may be made clean again, and so escape
that most fearful and sin all exclusion and separation? Christ alone
cleanses the spiritual leprosy.
Surely, he which healed this One spoken of in the Text, together with his nine
companions, and none but he, is able to cleanse us: he alone is the Physicion,
and his blood only is the medicine that can cure our sick, and poisoned, and
wounded souls, although there be nothing in us but wounds, See Esaias 1.6, 18
and swelling, and sores full of corruption, from the sole of the foot, unto
the head; and though we be dyed with a crimson and skarlet leprosy of sin;
yet being washed by him, John 13.10. Psalm. 51.7.
we shall be clean every whit, and be made as white as wool, yea, whiter then
the snow in Salmon. The Ceremonial cleansing of the Lepers in the Law, was a
most excellent and lively representation of this purging of our spiritual
uncleanness by Christ, who was the Col. 2.12.
body, the substance, and the truth of all Legal shadows and sacrifices
whatsoever. The Ceremonial cleansing was on this manner: the leprous person
must be sprinkled with the blood of a Leuit. 14.
slain Sparrow; wherein a live Sparrow had been dipped. Now, what else was
signified by that blood, but the blood of Christ? What else represented by the
slain Sparrow, but the manhood of Christ which was slain and offered a
sacrifice for sin? What else shaddowed by the live Sparrow dipped in the blood,
but the Godhead of Christ which could not be slain? yet being personally
united and conjoined to the manhood, was (as it were) dipped in the blood
thereof, and so gave virtue unto that blood to purge sin, since that by reason
of this union it became accounted (as the Acts 20.28.
Apostle calls it) the blood of God, because it was indeed the 1. John 1.7.
blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, which cleanses us from all sin. So
is Christ (in an Allegory) the good Samaritane, who voluntarily iourneyed from
heaven to earth, Read Luke 10.30. etc.
to cure us poor, wounded, and robbed souls, from whom the spiritual Thieves
had taken away that raiment of righteousness and holiness, wherewith
Almighty God in the creation adorned us: he saw us with a pitiful eye of
tender compassion, he came unto us by his Incarnation, he put wine and oil
into our wounds by a most gracious infusion, he set us on his own beast, and
bare us on his own back by his most bitter passion, he brought us to the
common Inn of the Church by effectual vocation, and he departing out of the
world by his glorious Ascension, committed us to the Ministers of the Word with
a solemn iniunction, to take care of us, and took out his two pence, his two
Testaments, his two Sacraments, his two great Commandments, his Word and his
Sacraments, which are the ordinary means unto salvation: and finally he
promised to recompense the faithful and careful Stewards of his house at his
coming again, with a large remuneration. He is the Revel. 13.8.
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; John 1.29.
The Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world; 1. Pet. 1.19.
The Lamb without spot and without blemish, by whose precious blood we are
redeemed, and Heb. 12.24.
whose blood speaks better things then the blood of Abel. In a word, as the
Lepers here were healed by his power, so can our spiritual leprosy be
cleansed only by his blood. O then the unspeakable greatness of the admirable
love of a most merciful Savior and a most compassionate Physicion, who
willingly was content (when there was no other remedy left) to be wounded
himself that we by his Esaias 53.5. 1. Pet. 2.24.
stripes and wounds might be healed, to lay down his own life, and to
undergo a most cursed and ignominious death, that we might live a most
blessed and glorious life: to shed his own heart-bloud, and to suffer the
torments of hell, that we might be saved from everlasting destruction, and
enjoy the pleasures of heaven. Greater love then this has no man (says John
15.13.
Christ himself) that a man lay down his life for his friends. No greater love?
Why, blessed Savior, thou thy self did show greater love then this, in
dying for us, not being thy friends, but thy enemies, as thy own See Romans 8.10.
Apostle witnesses. True indeed: it is the highest pitch of man's love, when
one friend lays down his life for another; Christu^ homo verus, non homo
merus.
but thou, sweet Jesus, being not a mere man, but more then a man, even God
and Man both, did commend and set forth thy love beyond the love that man can
show, in giving thy self unto the death for us thy sinful enemies: thy love
is a transcendent love, surpassing the greatest degree of the love of man.
Shall not the consideration of this love (beloved Christians) make us to
bethink with our selves, and to ask with the Psalmist, Psalm. 116.
What reward we shall render, and what see we shall pay unto him who out of his
free love unto us has done and suffered so much for us? Surely, he expects at
our hands the same fee which was paid him by one of the healed Lepers, namely,
That we should return unto him, and fall down before him, and worship him,
and give him thanks. If we look into the practice of the Saints of God, we
shall find that they have ever been careful in the performance hereof. When
S. John had spoken of the Revel. 1.5, 6.
washing from sins in the blood of Christ, he presently interposeth a
thanksgiving, before he had ended his record of the gracious works of Christ
for his Church, Perkins in locum.
as it were interrupting himself, for the great desire he had to the glory of
God: he would proceed no further till he had given thanks; To him (says he)
be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. Our sins are a leprosy; and
Christ is the Physicion; and his blood is the physic; and the washing of us
from sins in his blood, is the making of us clean again by the merit of his
sufferings; and thankfulness is the fee which with S. John we must readily and
willingly, and cheerfully give unto him that has healed us. So likewise 1.
Tim. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
S. Paul speaking of himself as of a spiritual Leper, even a blasphemer and a
persecuter, and considering the riches of Gods mercy (...) receiving him into
favor and pardoning all his sins; breaks out forthwith into thanksgiving,
Now unto the King eternal (says he) immortal, invisible, the only wise God,
be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. In like manner does the Psalm.
103.1, 2, 3, etc.
Psalmist sing, Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise
his holy name. Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits,
which forgiueth all thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities. The practice
of those servants of God must be our pattern, by them must we learn to be
thankful unto God, and to express our thankfulness by 2. Cor. 5.15.
living henceforth not to our selves, but unto him which dyed for us and rose
again: and by 1. Cor. 6.19, 20
glorifying him in our body, and in our spirit, since that we are not our own,
but his, who bought us with the price of his own blood: and by 1. Pet. 1.17,
18, 19.
passing the time of our soiourning here in fear, for as much as we were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. Thus have we
seen, that we are all infected with the leprosy of sin, that we are
cleansed only by the blood of Christ, and that we owe him thanks for our
cleansing, and finally, that we should be careful to pay him, as did the one
spoken of in the Text: of whom we come now more pertinently and more
particularly to discourse.

And one of them, etc. The number of the godly is but small.
We read in the precedent verses of the cleansing of ten, but we read in the
Text of the returning of one alone, to glorify God and to give Jesus thanks:
yet me thinks this one may afford unto us two profitable observations. First,
That few of many come to Christ; That the wicked do in number exceed the
good; That the Dragon has more followers then the Lamb; The Devil more
retayners then Christ. Lo here among ten the Prince of this world is attended
on by nine, and the Prince of peace but with one. Well therefore might our
Savior call his sheep Luke 12.32.
(...), a little flock: well might God by his Prophet term those whom he had
reserved to himself, in the general corruption among the Jews, Esaias 1.9.
a small remant; a Esaias 6.13.
tenth or tithing part; as here we see Christ had no more but the tenth. And
well might the Church break out into a pitiful complaint of her small
number, and say, Micah. 7.1.
Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the
grape-gleanings of the Vintage, there is no cluster to eat. The Matthew. 13.3.
etc.
Parable of the Sower and the Seed propounded and expounded by our Savior,
confirms the truth of the point observed: for among much stony and more
thornie, there is but little good ground: Many hear not the Word of the
Kingdom, and among the Hearers there are many sorts of bad, and but one good.
Wherefore it remains undoubtedly true, that Matt. 22.14.
few are chosen, though many be called. I grant indeed that if we consider the
Church of Christ perse, Ecclesia Christi mul^a est per se considerata, pauca
vero collata ad ingentem impiorum qui pereunt multitudinem, Brent. in Luc. 13.
in it self, without respect or comparison, its a multitude innumerable, a
flock exceeding great, and they that shall be saved, are a number numberless:
the Scripture says so much, Revel. 7.9. Matthew. 8.11. Esaias 60.3, 4. etc. but if
we compare the Church of Christ with the Synagogue of Satan, the good with the
bad, the Elect with the Reprobate, them that shall be saved, with those that
perish; How little is Christ's flock? How few shall be saved? Take a familiar
instance for the illustration hereof: A thousand is in it self a good round
number, but being compared with many hundreds of Millions, it seems almost to
be no number at all; so likewise, those that shall be saved, are in themselves
exceeding many, but compared with the multitude of those that perish, they are
indeed exceeding few. I shut up the justifying of the observation with the
speech of our Savior, who was the truth it self and never spoke a lie; Mat.
7.13.14
Wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be which go in thereat, but strait is the gate, and narrow is the way
which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. And so from the
explication of the point observed, I descend to the application of it.

We see then how well, Multitude no true note of the true Church.
how ill rather, our Adversaries the Papists, do make Multitude a true note
and mark of the true Church of Christ: as though that Religion must needs be
true, which is professed and embraced by the most. Indeed where many join in
the truth, there is the true Church; but not for the manies sake, but for the
truths sake. Is it not a silly kind of Popish reasoning to say, We have a
great multitude of Bishops, and Kings, and Cardinals, and Doctors, etc. on our
side, and you Protestants have but one or two Princes, etc. therefore is our
Church the true one, and our Religion the sound one? for why, Pagans and
Mahometans do in number far exceed the Christians: shall we therefore
conclude that to be the truth which is professed, embraced, and followed by
them? I trow not. Have there not always been more Idolaters then orthodox
Professors? Did not 1. Kings 19.
Elijah and some few thousands worship the Lord of Hosts, when as the most part
bowed the knees unto Baal? was not 2. Pet. 2.7.
righteous Noe with his small number saved, when the rest were disobedient and
perished in the waters? were there not ten here cleansed, and but one that
returned to give God thanks? yet I hope a Papist dare not deny, that the
greatest of those numbers were the worst, and the smallest the best: wherefore
the multitude of Professors is not an argument of the truth of the Religion
professed.

Again, we see, The multitude not to be followed.
how those men come within the compass of a just reproof, that in matters of
belief and practice will conform themselves to the greatest part: and will
defend all courses which they affect or undertake by the example of a
multitude. Our Fathers (say they) were of this Religion, they embraced such and
such opinions: the best, and the wisest, and the greatest, and the richest men
think thus and thus, practice this and that: and why should not we think and
do so likewise? Alas, beloved, do not the more part walk in the broad way
that leads to destruction? Are we not forbidden to follow a Exodus 23.2.
multitude to do evil? Is not the smallest number commonly the best? if we be
transgressors together with others, shall we not be Psalm. 37.38.
destroyed together with them? Shall our torments be the less in hell, if we
go thither with the generality, or our joys be the less in heaven, if we
walk thither with a few? no, no; for he deserves no less punishment that
kills an innocent accompanied with others, then he that does it alone: and a
man endures no less pain if he burn with many, then he should with few.
Wherefore it is a corrupt choice if we have followed the most rather then the
best, and joined our selves to the great rather then to the good: for the most
may believe a matter which has no soundness in it, and may follow a course
which has no holiness in it.

In a third place we see, what reason we have to harken unto that counsel and
exhortation of our Savior, Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate. In our journey toward heaven, we must
observe a right contrary course from that which we take in our earthly
iourneyes: for in our travails on earth we keep the broad beaten way, but in
travailing to heaven we must walk in the narrowest path. In our iourneyes
here, it is good wisdom to go with the most company; but in iournying to
heaven, it is safest and surest to go with the fewest. Its far better to
return unto Christ with one, then to go away from him with nine. Wherefore
let us shake off security and carelessness, because the greater part shall
perish: and the fewer there are that shall be saved, the more Matt. 11.12.
violence let the Kingdom of heaven suffer, and the greater let the care of us
all be, that we may be some of them. And thus much for the first point.

A second observation which I draw from this One, Christ will bid one welcome,
though he come al alone.
that returned to give Christ thanks, is this: That if but one among many
shall come unto Christ, and truly turn to him, even that one shall be sure to
find a most kind and gracious welcome. Let n^ne cleansed Lepers refuse to
turn back to give glory unto God, yet if the tenth shall come, Christ will
entertayne him lovingly. If there be but one righteous Genesis 7.
Noe amongst them of the old world: but one just Genesis 19.
Lot amongst all the Sodomites: but one faithful Josh 6.
Rahab amongst the inhabitants of Jericho: but one good Joseph in Egypt: but
one good 1. Kings 18.
Obadiah in all Ahabs Court: but one Ibid. verse. 22.
Elias a Prophet of the Lord, amongst four hundred and fifty prophets of
Baal: but one 1. Kings 22.
Michaiah amongst four hundred flattering prophets: but one John 7.
Nicodemus amongst all them that sat in counsel against Christ: yet will God
always have regard to that one; and will surely provide and take care for him.
There is joy (says our Luke 15.7.10
Savior) in the presence of the Angels of God, even for but one sinner that
repents and conuerteth.

This second observation serves for a twofold use: The evil fashion of the
world, must not keep us back from doing of good.
First, to condemn such as keep themselves back from the performance of good
duties, because the flat contrary is practiced by the most part of men. I
could be content to bestow my Benefices freely (says a Patron) but I see the
common course and guise of Patrons is to make the most of them, and why should
I only put away mine for nothing? I will therefore take what is offered me by
such a man, and buy my self three or four fair suites to brave it out with
the best at the Assizes. I could find in my heart (says a lukewarm
Professor) to sanctify the Sabbath, to hear and repeat Sermons, to pray with
my Family, to put no money to Usury, to restore the things I have wrongfully
gotten, to speak the truth, and not to coozen my Neighbor, etc. but I see the
fashion of the world is otherwise, and I am loath to go alone. Alas, alas,
beloved, shall Christ inuit us so lovingly to Matt. 11.28
come unto him, and will he bid us heartily welcome though we come alone, and
yet shall we absent our selves because other men will not go with us? O let
not the custom of the world in practicing wickedness, detayne us any longer
from coming unto Christ, and following of goodness!

In a second place this Doctrine serves for a singular consolation unto the
children of God, who sometimes perhaps may be discouraged, because they walk
(as it were) in untrodden paths, and seem (as 1. Kings 19.10, 14.
Elias thought himself) to be left alone, having many disswaders and few
encouragers, many laboring to pull them backward, and few provoking constantly
to go forward: let them comfort themselves with this, that they shall be
welcomed by Christ, though they come all alone unto him. Let such cheer up
their drooping hearts, with that comfortable speech of our Savior, John 6.37.
Him that comes to me, I cast not away. Observe it well, that Christ says
not in the plural number, Them that come to me, as if he would accept of none
but such as come with company; but in the singular, Him that comes, as
noting that he will welcome even one that comes alone. Wherefore though we see
the most part of the world to go back from Christ; yet if the question be put
to us as it was to the John 6.67, 68
twelve, Will ye also go away? let us say with S. Peter, Lord, to whom shall
we go? thou have the words of eternal life, therefore though all men forsake
thee, yet will I never leave thee. And let our resolution be the same that
Ioshuaes was, Josh. 24.15.
What gods soever other men serve, yet I and my house will serve the Lord. Let
others follow what lewd courses soever they will, yet will I continue on in a
gracious course, and then I shall be sure of a glorious end. Finally, let us
resolve thus with the Leper in the Text, Let my nine companions be ungrateful
unto him that has healed them, yet rather then I will prove unthankful too,
I will leave them all, and turn back alone to praise God, and give him
thanks. And thus much for the second point. It follows in the Text.

And he was a Samaritane.] In those words the Evangelist does Calvin. and
Iansen. in loc.
tax the detestable unthankfulness of the rest that were healed, by comparing
one with nine, and a Samaritane with a Jew. For hereby is their horrible
ingratitude aggrauated, that they being nine, and this but one; they being
Jews, and this a Samaritane; yet he alone performed the duty which he owed
for his cleansing.

Hence I observe this point of Doctrine, The Religion of the meaner aggrauates
the profaneness of the greater sort.
That the Religion and holiness of the meaner and more ignorant sort,
aggrauates the profaneness and lewdness of the greater and more learned
sort. As here, the thankfulness of one Samaritane, serves to make the
unthankfulness of nine Jews the greater and more odious. So shall the men of
Niniue (as our Matthew. 12.41, 42.
Savior said) and the Queen of the South rise up in judgment against the
Scribes and Pharisees, and (by their example) condemn them, because they (who
never heard of the true God) repented at the preaching of Jonas; and she (who
was not brought up in the school of Christ) came from the utmost parts of the
earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon; but the Scribes and Pharisees and
people of the Jews, repented not at the preaching of Christ, who was greater
then Jonas, and refused to hear him who was the chief Doctor, the Prince of
Prophets, and greater then Solomon. And so does the Romans 2.27.
Apostle say, that the uncircumcision which is by nature, if it keep the Law,
shall judge (that is, condemn) those which by the letter and circumcision are
transgressors of the Law. I find also that the Apostles and Saints are said in
Matt. 19.28. 1. Cor. 6.2.
Scripture to be those, that shall sit upon Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes
of Israel, and the whole world; not only because they are members of Christ
the Judge, nor only because they shall approve of the sentence pronounced by
Christ, and subscribe to his judgment; but also (as Vide Calvin. in 1. Cor.
6.2. and Bucanum Loco 38. quaest. 8.
Interpreters expound it) because their faith, piety, fear of God, good
conscience, and integrity of life, shall take away all excuse from the wicked;
even as it is Heb. 11.7.
said of Noe, that by his faith he condemned the world. So did the faith of the
Centurion, who was a Gentile; and the belief and repentance of the Publicanes
and Harlots, aggrauate the Infidelity and impenitencie of the people of the
Jews; in that there was Matthew. 8.10.
found greater faith (even so great, that Christ as he was man, wondered at it)
in the Centurion, then in Israel; and because the Matthew. 21.31, 32.
Publicanes and the Harlots believed John, but the Priests and Elders, and the
people of the Jews were not moved with repentance afterward, that they might
believe him. This point needs no further proof nor any larger amplification.

I beseech you now (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and all dearly beloved
Christians) suffer the words of exhortation. They that ^^e greater then
others, must strive to be better then others.
O let it be the care of you all to outstrip others in goodness, as yo ugoe
beyond them in greatness: to excel others in grace, as you are above them in
place: to out-runne others in the conscionable practice of religious duties, as
you are far before them in worldly dignities: and to be richer then others in
good works, as you are richer then they in the goods of the world. Give not, O
give not Christ just cause thus to vpbraid and complain of you, The Samaritane
is better then the lew, I have not found so great faith in Israel as in a
Centurion: that is (as I now apply it) the Magistrates whom I have placed in a
high seat, are not so religious as the vulgar sort: I have not found so much
holiness, such conscionable obedience in the Knights and Gentlemen, as I have
in the painful Husbandmen: the poor laboring man that lives by his daily
work, he serves and honoreth me, but the Knights and Gentlemen spend their
time in Hunting and Hawking, in Diceing and Carding, in Whoring and Carowsing,
and have cast off the yoke of my Commandments from themselves, and will not
live in obedience to my Law: the poor Artificer that has nothing but his
hands to help himself, he has more knowledge, and walks more uprightly
before me, then does the rich man who has abundance of wealth, of lands, and
livings in possession: the ignorant people who know not a letter in the Book,
are more zealous and more holy in their conversation, then the great Scholars
and the famous Preachers: the Mechanical man is a better Christian then the
Merchant man: the Major, the Justices, and the Aldermen, etc. do not live so
piously, so righteously, so soberly, as the poor Apprentices do: the
Seruing-man does fear and serve me better then his Master does, and the
Waiting-maide better then her Mistress. O let not Christ (I say once again)
have cause thus to speak and complain of you! Let not the poorer, the meaner,
and the more unlearned people take away heaven from you: and those whom you
scorn, to have accounted your equals, let it be a shame unto you that they
should be your Superiors in the best things, and that you should come behind
them in godliness.

Yet one thing more I observe from this Samaritane (wherein I must be very
brief, A worker of righteousness is accepted with Christ, of what Nation
soever he be.
as also in all the rest, because the time will not give leave to speak
largely of all:) namely this, That those who come to Christ and are workers of
righteousness, shall be accepted with him, of what Country or condition
soever they be. As here we see that this one which returned to glorify God,
was not rejected of Christ, though he were a Samaritane. The holy Scripture
does in sundry places confirm the truth of this point: for we read that Romans
2.11.
there is no respect of persons with God, and that in Christ Jesus Gal. 3.28.
there is neither Jew nor Grecian, Samaritane nor Scythian; there is neither
bond nor free, male nor female: Acts 10.35.
but in every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness, is
accepted with him, as S. Peter tells us; and whosoever 1. John 3.29.
does righteously, is borne of him, as S. John witnesses. Christ himself has
spoken with his own mouth, without exception of Nation, without exception of
Age, without exception of Sex, without exception of Estate, without exception
of Degree, without any exception at all, that he John 6 37.
casts not away any one that comes unto him. Let us make use of this point
also.

What a singular consolation does this Doctrine minister to all those that are
truly religious, Comfort for poor Christians.
working righteousness and worshipping the Lord in Spirit and Truth! Suppose
that they be poor, and have but a small pittance of worldly things: say they
be base, and have no earthly dignities: admit they want that comely proportion
of body which others have, and that external beauty to make them gracious and
lovely in the eyes of men: grant that they be despised and nothing esteemed
among men: let them be compassed with miseries on every side: yet may they
cheer up their hearts, and say, Though my outward crosses and afflictions be
so many, and though they were a thousand times more, yet does God esteem me
never the less, yet have I the King of heaven for my Father, Christ Jesus for
my Brother, the blessed Angels for my Attendants, and the Kingdom of heaven
for my inheritance. Let men contemn me and set me at naught, yet he that
rejected not the Samaritane which returned to give him thanks, will not cast
away me which am his servant.

Moreover, Outward respects make not men acceptable to God.
this Doctrine serves for an instruction or admonition, to the Great, Noble,
Wise, and Wealthy ones of the world. Let not such persuade themselves or bear
themselves in hand, that their Greatness, their Riches, their Honor, their
Possessions, their deep Learning, or any worldly respect whatsoever, can
procure the favor of God and make them acceptable to him. For unless the
Honorable person do honor God; unless they which are termed Right Worshipful,
be right worshippers of God; unless they which abound in worldly wealth, do
abound in faith, in knowledge, in love, and in other good graces; unless they
Genesis 17.1.
walk before God and be upright, as Abraham was commanded to do; unless they
be workers of righteousness; and truly thankful unto God as was this
Samaritane, surely, howsoever they be highly esteemed among men, yet are they
abominable in the sight of God.

And thus from showing you what this cleansed person was, I come to show you
what he did; viz. First, he saw that he was healed, that is, he considered with
himself what a great blessing the Lord had bestowed upon him, in that he was
cleansed from his leprosy. Secondly, He turned back. Thirdly, He praised God
with a loud voice. Fourthly, He fell down on his face at Jesus feet. Fifthly,
He gave Christ thanks.

Now the practice of this Samaritane is here recorded for our imitation, What
the Samaritane did, is a duty which we ought to perform.
that we likewise should not suffer the benefits of God to flip out of our
minds, but should renew the memory of them by a serious consideration and
meditation of the same, that so we may be stirred up to give thanks unto the
Iam. 1.17.
Father of lights, from whom every good giving, and every perfect gift comes
down, as S. James speaks. And surely, more then thanks God expects not for
the greatest blessings that ever he bestowed: it is his command that we should
Psalm. 50.14, 15, 23.
call upon him in the day of trouble, and it is his promise that he will
deliver us; and it is his expectation that we should offer him praise and
glorify his name. O then how unkind are we if we render less, when as God
requires no more? Hezekiah was a wise King, yet he played but a foolish part,
in that 2. Chro. 32.25
he did not render according to the reward bestowed upon him: and what followed
upon his unthankfulness? Wrath (says the Text) came upon him, and upon Judah
and Jerusalem. Beloved Christians, there is no Nation or people under the Sun,
that have more need to be stirred up to the performance of this duty of
thankfulness, then the Inhabitants of this our Island, upon whom God has
heaped so many and so excellent blessings. How has he magnified his goodness
toward this whole Land, in the raising up, and wonderful preservation of that
famous Princess of blessed memory, Q. Elizabeth, who was an instrument of
much good and happiness unto this Kingdom? Anno 1588.
Did he not make the Sea in her days, to fight against the superstitious
Spaniard, so that wind and water overcame that invincible Army, prepared for
our destruction, and that in such sort, that the Treat. to Mendoza.
Popish relator hereof confessed ingenuously, that God himself in that
sea fight showed himself a very Lutherane, and mere Protestant? What
miraculous deliverances has he wrought for our gracious Sovereign King James,
from the conspiracy of Gowrie, and from that bloudie-intended Massacre by
Gunpowder? What peace and plenty does our Land enjoy, through the blessing of
God? Has he not also bestowed upon this nation, the inestimable pearl of his
holy and heavenly Word? Is not his glorious Gospel truly, sincerely, and
plentifully preached among us, under the peaceable government of a most
religious Prince, so that we may come to Church in peace, and hear in peace, (
Mat. 13.16, 17.
O happy eyes and ears of ours!) and return home in peace; that we may come
in our slippers, and sit on our Cushions? Has not God dispelled from hence the
dark mists of Popish superstition, and planted true Religion among us?
Moreover, that my speech may be somewhat framed to the time; have not you of
this City, tasted many of the blessings of God? Are you not met here in great
solemnity at this present, in remembrance of the deliverance, which God wrought
for your City, in the days of King Edward the sixth, from those Rebels who
invaded it, and twice burned the gates thereof, yet could not win it, because
God was on the Cities side, against them who rose up against it? You can
remember the burning of your Tiuerton and Columbton.
Neighbor-towns, when as your City has hitherto been preserved, and your
houses and goods have not been consumed with fire; the plague has not for
these many years, come near your dwellings. And besides the abundance of
temporal blessings, which you enjoy, God has also stirred up the hearts of
Doctor Bodleigh, who was seconded by Master Mogridge.
religious men, to bestow a perpetual maintenance for a preaching-Minister
amongst you, that your souls may be fed with the wholesome food of his
heavenly Word. Let us descend yet lower, and weigh with our selves, the great
blessings that God has bestowed upon us in particular; he has given us a
being, and to our being he has added life, which he has denied to stones: to
our life he has added sense, which he has denied to plants: to our sense he
has added reason, which he has denied to beasts; he has made us Christians,
not Heathens; Protestants, and not Papists: he has given us eyes to see
withal, when as others are blind; ears to hear withal, when as others are
deaf; tongues to speak withal, when as others are dumb; feet to walk
withal, when as others are lame; health, when as others are in sickness;
wealth, when as others are in poverty; meat to eat, and clothes to put on,
when as others are pinched with famine and nakedness; liberty and freedom,
when as others are prisoners and in bondage: he has bestowed graces upon us,
and the means of grace; he has given us assurance of our election, and of
his love: In a word, he has bestowed upon us, whatsoever good thing we
enjoy, either for soul or body; he has given us his own Son, the
Fountain of all happiness. And now, what does the Lord expect at our hands,
but that considering how good he has been unto us, we should turn unto him,
and with heart and voice, glorify his holy Name, and (with the Samaritane)
fall down before him, and worship him, and give him thanks? We are most
accursed creatures, if we answer not this expectation of God; for then as our
Savior vpbraided the unthankful Cities, Mat. 11.20, 21, etc.
in which most of his great works were done, and cried, Woe unto them and
said, that it should be easier at the day of Judgment, for other Cities,
wherein such great works had not been done, then for them: so likewise a woe
and a curse hangs over our head, if we prove unthankful unto God, and it shall
be easier at the day of Judgment for other Lands, for other Cities, for other
men and women, upon whom God has not bestowed so many blessings, then for
England, then for Exeter, then for us here present, who have received so much
from God, and yet will not do so much as to give him thanks for all. O let us
remember, that there are three great things, which follow one another: 1.
ingentia beneficia, 2. ingentia peccata, 3. ingentes poenae: great benefits
abused do occasion great sins, and great sins will pull down great and
heavy judgments and punishments. And thus much briefly of what the Samaritane
did. It follows in the Text.

Are there not ten cleansed? etc.] Here we have Christ's complaint of the
ingratitude of Nine, and his approbation of the thankfulness of One. We read
that all the ten Lepers began well, for they all believed, they all prayed,
they all obeyed Christ; but their end was not answerable, for nine of them
acknowledged not the benefit of God in their cleansing, and but One only was
thankful, and continued faithful unto the end.

Hence we learn, That the proceedings and endings of many men are unlike their
beginnings; as here the Lepers, while they had their grievous disease, came
unto Christ and prayed him to have mercy on them, but when their turns were
served, they forgot and refused to give him thanks that had healed them. Not
unlike many in these days, who in the time of sickness are ready to pray
unto God, and to promise better obedience if it would please the Lord to
restore their health again; but when God has granted what they desired, they
forget to render (as Hezekiah also did) according to the benefits bestowed upon
them, 2. Chron. 32.25.
2. Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
Returning with the Dog to their own vomit, and with the Sow that was
washed, to their wallowing in the mire, so that the latter end is worse with
them then the beginning. But surely, it had been better for men never to have
received, then not to have rendered; never to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandments of God.

Wherefore (beloved Christians) let us be exhorted and excited constantly to
go on and persevere unto the end, knowing that it is not sufficient to begin
to run well, and to faint in the midst of the race, to Luke 9.62.
put our hand to the plough, and afterward to look back, as our Savior
speaks. It is he that endures to the end which shall be saved, as the
Samaritane here who continued thankful, heard to his great comfort from
Christ, that together with the healing of his body, he had also obtained the
cleansing and salvation of his soul. I conclude therefore with the exhortation
of the Apostle, Gal. 6.9.
Let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not.

Blessed Lord, without whom we can neither begin nor continue in well doing,
enable us to do what thou have commanded, that we may be sure to find what
thou have promised, even peace of conscience in this life, and endless
happiness in that which is to come, through Jesus Christ our only Savior: To
whom with thee, O Father, and the blessed Spirit, be honor, and glory, and
dominion, and thanksgiving, henceforth and for evermore, Amen.

Laus Christo nescia finis.

