EPIGRAMES.

Served out in 52. several Dishes for every man to taste without surfeting.

Modicum non nocet. By I. C. Gent.

LONDON Printed by G. Elde, for W.C. and are to be sold at his Shop near unto
Ludgate.

To the Judicious, Envious and foolish Reader.
TO you al^ but to thee Judicious Reader, as most respected, I submit my twelve
nights trifles, (for so I may truly call them) being then made instead of
Christmas Carrols; I know thou shall find many errors in them, but I will not
entreat thee to mend them, being too great a task for thee, and my self hat^
forborne to do it. I publish them not to purchase fame, nor reward, for I
protest I have been as carlesse in writing them, as any reader can be in
reading them, therefore I would desire thee to think charitably. As for you
envious Reader, I know your malice and ign^rance is such, that were they the
choicest flowers that grow upon the mount of Pernas^us you would spitte your
poison upon them, therefore I have prevented you and sent you netles. But for my
simple plain dealing Reader, I know if he could here but a baudie jest he would
grin like his own picture, and swear he had a good wit that made it, (I would
be loath he should be forsworn) yet I shall still hold him ^imselfe when he has
spoke his best of me. But to my first Reader again, the Romans in their
Epigrames did use the true names of those they write of, and our Epigramitists
do borrow their names of them, but I have used bastard names, such as my fancy
was father of, not waying whether they were proper to the nature of the
Epigrame, as indeed there is no such necessity. So farewell.

Epigrames.
1.
There Is an outlandish man now newly landed,
With rare inuen^^ons, rich conceited tires:
From Court unto the City he is bandied,
To show his wares which suddenly inspires.
The inconstant fancy of the foolish buyers,
The price is great, therefore the wares the better,
Half on it down paid, half on it remain his debtor
And this superfluous waste exp^nce in spending,
Makes Courtiers ever borrowing, never lending.
Yet Ladies best speed when thy spend most of all
For spend they nere so much their wastes still small.
2
THis stranger now is sent for to the City,
Where he does show some relic of a fashion:
A great ruff rare, a little one that is pretty,
Another excelent with alteration.
The City Damsels give more and pay better:
That I conclude your Cities wastes are greater.
3
PHilo is iealious and to his wife would prove,
That in a little jealousy dwells much love:
Which in her ear so often he did cry,
That she at last began to edefie.
And said dear husband henceforth I will be:
More ielous over you then you of me.
Which he likt well and wished it would be so:
And now with less mistrust from home does go.
The whilst some friend steps in then does she fear,
And still is jealous Philo thou art near.
4.
A Madbraine vickar in a desperate mood,
Would sometimes swear to play at dice was good
And he himself would venture many a crown,
Amongst his best parishoners in the Town.
The vicar lost, yet knew no reason why:
Unless there were quicksilver in the Die.
The Die was broake, quicksilver there was none,
Yet was the vickars silver quickly gone.
8
WHat Gallant's this atir'd all in black,
It is no Cour^ier sure, nor what do you lack,
Some ordinary Gallant ten to one,
That lives idly here about the Town,
What is it he, I know him it is a Gull,
That's conicatcht by every scuruy trull,
His father's lately dead and he is heir,
Of large possessions and revenues fair,
I have heard some say, great Lordships to him fall,
Yet this I am sure his manners are but small.
9.
ANother Gallant who was light of heel,
Would take upon him for to run with any,
For he had run round about fortunes wheel,
And never yet was he out run by any,
He ran, and ran, some twenty years together,
And never looked behind him, till he met,
A Seriant at the shoulder, clad in leather,
Then he perceived how he had run in debt,
And now began to stay, yet he must on,
En'e fair and softly unto prison.
10.
VArius the traveler who does not know,
That has bin fu^ther than any map can show,
O^ ventious Drak^, Haukins, or Forbisher;
None ere received like grace of the Emperor,
The Sophi^ and he sworn brothers, it was his lot,
To drink carouse in Solymans own pot,
Yet here he staid not long, but still went on,
To take acquaintance of great Prastor John,
Where he was welcome and it was his chance,
To kiss his empress, and with his daughter dance,
His lies are monstrous great, and yet but young,
Gargantua sure was father of his Tongue.
11
A Pretty Creature of the lightest fashion,
Was early once invited to a marriage,
Before the Cock had given l^st relation,
Of the worlds beauty burner on his carriage,
Up she was got, and got unto her Truncke,
Wherein complexions were that bettered natures,
The very Daffa-downe-dilly of a Puncke,
Besides her Art puts down Venetian features,
But now, either because of have, or want of light,
Painted her face all red and her lips whight.
12
WHo er'e will go unto the press may see,
The hated Fathers of vilde balladrie,
One sings in his base note the River Thames,
Shall sound the famous memory of noble king James
Another says that he will to his death,
Sing the renowned worthiness of sweet Elizabeth,
So runs their verse in such disordered strain,
And with them dare great majesty profane,
Some dare do this, some other humbly craves,
For help of spirits in their sleeping graves,
As he that calde to Shakespeare, Johnson, Green,
To write of their dead noble Queen,
But he that made the Ballads of oh hone,
Did wondrous well to whet the buyer on,
These fellows are the slaunderers of the time,
Make ryming hateful through their bastard rhyme.
But were I made a judge in poetry,
They all should burn for their vilde heresy.
13.
CLodio some for thy feather take thee for a horse
All for an Ass if thou but once discourse.
14
WHen Gatra died great store of wealth was found
In cofers, truncks, great chests, and leather bags,
In cubberds, hampers, and vaults under ground,
Jewels wrapped up (in policy) with rags.
Some say he got more then the beggar did,
That was so rich and excellent at the trade,
Others think devils mong'st his Angels hid,
Who up to the neck in Commonwealth did wade
He was no Merchant beater of the burse,
Nor never pleading at the bar did braule,
Yet he found means to bumbast out his purse,
For many say he got the devil and all,
Well say he did, it seems he let him go,
But now the devil has him hele not do so.
An Epita.
HEre lies the man who dyed in pain,
Yet would have lived to have dyed again,
Of Stone the Iester.
15
Look at what time Pomgranets do wax scant,
At the same time Stone witty jests does want,
Then against Paul's pillars or some other post,
He leanes to find his chapman whole give most.
(...) oftentimes and others muse at it,
^o great a head should have so little wit,
The miracles not so great the jest once known,
Who is it would look for wit in any Stone.
16
I Gave Coxhead more title to his name,
And called him Coxcombe for his greater fame,
But he was angry, was he not a mome?
Who ever saw Coxhead without a Comb.
17
CLogo is knighted, but he knows not by whom,
Says it was by a fine man and in a fine room,
Well fare his wife yet, who is not such a babie,
But knows what fool it was made her a Lady.
18
IF any man look but on Dabus wife,
He is straight a Cuckolde he dares lay his life,
But if one talk with her then it is so,
Though all the soothsayers in the Town say no,
But if you kiss her ay then he is up in blood,
And swears she bears two faces under one hoode.
19
ALl Sims valor consists in his Tongue,
He swore full mouthed oaths,
He Would pocket up no wrong,
When we that were with him,
Beleft him soon.
For wrongfully he did pocket up,
A guilt silver spoone.
20
Unconstant Fortune partial in thy gifts,
Who puts poor gentle men unto their shifts,
And crossest them, and them vncrosse again,
For to be crossed you know is a hellish pain,
But to be vncrost, why it is ten times worse,
To have more silver on the sword then purse.
21
WHy is base Nemius judged to be rich,
Because he looks so grim and wears seal rings,
Or cause he buys commodities of Fish,
Of Cheese, of Butter and such other things,
Or is it because he talks of Bonds and Bills,
Of Leases, and of morgaging of Land,
Of Lordships, Manors, and of making wills,
Of many paunes that lie upon his hand,
Or is it because like a great Alderman,
He wears a gown lac't round, laid down with furre,
Or miser like a pouch where never man,
Could thrust his finger but this Island curre.
All these are signs that he is not belyed,
And yet he has ten thousand marks beside.
22
MOunsir Montaingnis to the Tailor owes,
Some forty shillings for his swaggering hose,
Tailor for money came, Mounsir was ill,
Could not endure to look upon his bill,
The Tailor seeing that did him this grace,
To leave his bill behind but brought a mace.
23
IF any man of monsters chance to talk,
Or big boand Giants that this land did walk,
Cacus steps forth and tells you of his Sire,
And his long may pole legs which reached higher,
Then strong imagination will give leave,
Or probability of truth receive,
It Is but to signify unto this age,
His monstrous birth and high borne parentage,
28.
LAis all of deformity is compact,
Splay-footed beetle-brow'd, crook't-backe,
I ask't her how it came she answers all,
When she was young by an unhappy fall:
But Lais, Lais, you might avoided well,
The fall you had which made your belly swell.
29
IAnus the rich fat usurer desird,
To be a knight and yet was loath to give,
The complete sum which of him was requird,
And once a year a feast while he did live.
Ambition yet gave covetousness a blow,
That stroke two hundred pounds out of his purse,
But of his knighthood such great charge does grow
That he repents of what he did disburse,
And wisely now his knighthood does compare,
To pickle herring or tough martlemas beife,
(Which being eaten not for common fair)
Though it be ready bought yet plays the thief,
meaning as those salt meats do steal down drink
So does his knighthood steal away his chinke.
30
A Fool says Clinius every one would make him
I think they have don't for so al men take him
It Is marle they will offer being so common a rule,
For him himself, to make himself a fool.
31
LOrd what a colle there was to be a Lady,
By mistress Wood been a gentlewoman,
Wife to young Hary holdfast, Knight that may be,
Nay will be, though his fathers but a yeoman
Madness has ceased on his wives troubled brain,
Because the present time she was no Lady,
He seeks to comfort her and ease her pain,
She does not like this shall be nor this may be,
Shall Maulkin milke-maide her high words exalt,
In every place before me I abhor it,
Whose fresh gentillity was picked from malt,
What reason law or conscience have you for it,
Away he went in have, home knighted came,
And she was turned from a mad dame to madam.
23
FVrius a lover was, and had loving fits,
He loved so madly that he lost his wits,
Nay he lost naught yet grant I he was mad,
How could he loose that which he never had.
33
WHen Musk and Ciuet two nere kinsmen meet,
Each other in the middle I Will of Paul's,
Straight they encounter with embraces sweet,
From head unto the foot each other falls,
They Will dance a galliard out in complement,
And chain each other to the bosom fast,
Then say their prayers in curtsie and repent,
The negligence that has between them past,
Then breath a while, without a word make stay.
Salute a fresh again and so away.
34.
A Curious Gallant chanced to have a sight,
Of these slight Epigrames first infancy,
Who Pedunt wise did tax them (not for spite)
Of their lame harsh vnmeasurd quantities,
They halt not so to lie upon the parish,
As much to say upon the Printers hand,
The hole has promised the lame to cherish,
But now he finds two Adjectives to stand,
Joined together that small fault or none,
One Adjective can never stand alone,
An Epitath upon Singer.
DEath was so bold his days to shorten,
Who altogether lived by fortune.
35
SYlla has many parts that blase her fame,
All do not know her that know her name,
She Makes a Lute speak in his airy voice,
Will force sad melanchollies self rejoice,
The Sirens tunes bewitching Trauailer,
Themselves would be bewitched should they here her
Daunces without compare, paints best in Town,
Yet for all this I know one puts her down.
36
A Worthy Lady of great eminence,
Who holds all borrowed beauty in disdain,
Out of whose wisdom shines her excellence,
The Muses are attendant on her train,
And they do her and she does them sustain,
Her acute judgment did vouchsafe to reed,
An Epigrame which this Book does contain,
And pai'd in words what she will pay in deed,
(For Ladies nere make promises in vain)
Were so much given for one is it not a fall,
That for a Tester (Reader) thou have all.
Aenigma.
THe Court has got the City with Child,
Which well has cost their purse,
The Country with it is be guild,
With whom it is at nurse.
THere is a thing which barks not, yet does bite,
Worse then the wildest beast A ()
37
PHrigio lay bedridden now lies in his grave,
Looked like a spittleman and worse diseased,
His wife fresh, lusty, stately, gallant, brave,
Yet the same sickness was on her increased,
Which she brock't well, and made not such a do,
As you did Phrigio yet lay bedridden to.
An Epita.
HEre lies he known to his furd Cloak,
Lived like the Salamander by fire and smoke.
38
MVn has a wife but knows not how to use her,
And yet he knows too well how to abuse her.
39
FIcus was fat in body and in purse,
And unto Sea is gone himself to purge,
Some fifteen hunderd marks he did disburse,
To receive three for one, a tempting scourge,
To whip my Gallant up the surging seas,
And dance to Venice with a whistling wind,
There to euacuate for stomachs ease,
The homebred crudities his flesh did bind,
Of him we have not heard unto this day,
That I believe he is purged all away.
40.
SEignior Tobacco that brave Caualier,
Came swaggering from the Tavern here and there
From wall to kennell, from kennell to the wall,
Was not land room enough for him to sail,
At last he meets a Dray-man with his carte,
And much good sport there was ere they did part,
For about wine and bear they did discourse,
Yet he knew not the Brewer from his horse.
41
A Country man who had some suite belike.
(With a black box down pendant at his side)
Walking from Westminster the stones did strike,
With his naild shoes that every step did slide,
So came he making legs up Ludgate hill,
And looked as if he would eat what he had seen,
At last he Ludgate spied and then stood still,
Gaping upon the picture of the Queen,
The prisoner began his cry, then he for fear,
Started and asked if there the Lions were.
42
SIslie reports Angels appear to her,
And comforts her in all extremity,
Nay and besides they do press near to her,
Promising aid in great'st calamity,
But this you must suppose they come in night,
For Sislies Angels never came in sight.
43
SYlla can play on any instrument,
Yet never does she work her own content,
The reason is so they that know her say,
Because she gives her mind too much to play.
44
Caius thus complements at dinner, sir will you sit
By Jesus Christ I will not eat a bit,
Until you come, but straight does call for bear,
Then by your favor sir, please you be here,
What wine do you drink to ask hele never miss,
But hele be sure you shall drink none of his.
45.
A Wondrous thing, old Phiro goes a woing,
To show himself a Maid, longs to be doing.
46
PHantastique Pedants say these Poets are,
The vainest fellows that live upon the earth,
In Platoes Commonwealth they banished were,
For there is no music in them nor no mirth,
But what is the reason they thus Poets blame,
Because their dearth of wit requires the same.
Epita.
HEre lies an Astronomer that studied by the rule
Dyed because the Stars allotted him a fool.
47
I Talked with Iulia in good modest phraise,
But she my meanings and my words dispraise,
And in a coyness thus replies to me,
I am not her you take me sir to be,
Well Iulia, i will believe what you have said,
But i will besworne I took you for a maid.
48
CLinius misdoubtes himself, says that all men,
Do ride and play upon him now and then,
Fie Clinius fie, never make such strife,
Better they play on you then on your wife.
49
LVcius protests his love blinded sight,
Sees in the dark best by his mistress light,
Or his light mistress, and it well may be,
For light Owls, do by Owle-light clearest see.
50
WHen Dicke a letter to his rich uncle writ,
He superscrib'd it to the R. worshipful,
Now I knew what he meant and smild at it,
To think how he would gul the kings liege people
He would have writ the word right out at large,
But that he thought was not his uncles due,
Yet I upon me tookt for his discharge,
To make it rich and that I am sure was true,
Judge where I wronged him now, or did't on spite
When I am sure he would have had it right.
51.
FIcus has lost his nose, but knows, not how,
And that seems strange to every one that knows it,
My thinks I see it written in his brow,
How, wherefore, and the cause that he did lose it,
To tell you true Ficus I this suppose,
It Was some French Caniball bit of your nose.
52
ANtonio Flora stabd good reason why,
He being a Soldier she gave him the lie,
And yet the desperate wench would nere refrain,
To give it him till she was stabd again.
An Epigrame upon a Book entitled the three Sisters, to a new Strain.
STraind he not hard (think you) that straind such sense,
From the three Sisters in their difference,
To deal with Widow, Wife, and Maid was pain,
That it was marl'e he did not ouerstraine.
REader I know not how I have pleased thy mind,
With these rude Epigrams harsh vnrefind,
But if they be not dressed unto thy taste,
Then blame the Cook for making too much have,
I Will never make promise to remain thy debtor,
But if thou likst them not, would thou had better.
FINIS.
Per Ignotum.
Latet anguis in herba.
WHen perjured Exlex, with his lawyers bragges,
Had me discarded of my golden bags,
Feeding my mind with hope of victory,
By right of law and Justice equity,
Next term to Westminster I post in have,
Where I was thrown and judgment against me past,
All things went cross, I lost the fees and farm,
Rode home to Exlex, craved of him to learn
The reason why: bending his angry brow,
O sir quoth he the case is altered now.
Nocumenta, Documenta.
LVxurio now disdaines lustful desire,
For still you know the burnt child dreades the fire.
In nasum.
NAsus is rich, indeed I so suppose,
Can he be poor that has a ruby nose.
Sic Iter ad astra.
INdeed in sooth, away presitian,
Swear bloody oaths, I that becomes a man:
Indeed I see such oaths makes many a one,
Come to the height of Buis promotion.
FINIS.

