AN ANSWER TO A LETTER OF A IESVITED GENTLEman, by his Cousin, Master A.C.

Concerning the APPEAL; STATE, IESVITS.


Recta Securus.

Newly Imprinted. 1601.

An answer to a Letter of a Iesuited Gentleman.
GOod Cousin; I have received your letter of the first of this present, written
in a spirit too derogatiue from the honors and innocence of the
Appealant-Priests, and supererogatiue in the praise of Jesuits, as it were
above Jesus. Wherein you show your self uncharitable in the one, immoderate in
the other, vncatholicke in each. But perhaps you hold your self herein
excusable, as being so affected either in obedience and reverence to, and of
your ghostly Father (who happily is a Jesuit) or in respect you are willing to
run with the greater number. If the first, take it with you that the Jesuits
in this case of the Appeal, are Principals on the one party, and so in
justice to be thought partial: if the other, what so erres as the most? You
are (good Cousin) to captive your senses rather to the species, then to the
Number of any object, and so far forth to judge your self in the right or
wrong, as you apprehend the same right or wrong: and to run with the most
(making that your ground) is very vulgar. True it is, that to err with
authority is less shame, though no less blame, and therefore your better
excuse may be upon Master Archpriest; which notwithstanding is also
vnallowable in this case, both for that the Apostle wills us, that Seruitus
nostra sit rationabilis, and likewise forasmuch as Master Arch-priests
authority was both obtained sinisterly ex part of the Procurers, though not
of his Holiness grant; and it as factiously administered ever since. The ground
of which faction began since our good Cardinals death, first of all in Wisbicb,
where the Jesuits being taught vindicta diuina; Aemulari charismata meliora
then jurisdiction over the secular Clergy (they being religious, and so within
the compass of an express Canon to the contrary of such subordination) have
since procured this Arch-priestship by sleight and surreption at his Holiness
hands, and invested it in Master Black-well to their use. This is that man,
who to show himself no less grateful to those Fathers his Founders for such
his office, then he has shown himself most glad and greedy of the same,
has by auowing their wrongs against the Appealants, notably prejudiced the
Catholic Church of late here amongst us, and like an ungentle bird berayed
his own nest. Whereby both for the one and the other, he has brought himself
to be also a triable party together with them at the Apostolic bar; who
else (had he been the man he ought) might for all the blemish of his
authorizing, have been admitted of both parties for competent Vmpier betwixt
them of al aggriefes. But see what a thing Ambition is, and how seruill are the
obligations that it makes. Herehence is all the Catholic Church on fire
amongst us at this instant, whiles the Jesuits having offered the wrong, master
Archpriest in obsequious correspondence to them for being such their creature,
maintains that wrong against his own brothers; so much against all nature is
his love rather in ascent then descending.

Herehence have proceeded his thundering suspensions, and prejudicial decrees
against them, to the intangling in a thousand scruples the consciences of the
ignorant, and less learned sort of Catholics; herehence the bandiyng of lay
and clergy one against another throughout the Realm; herehence the
unchristian calumnies, and reproaches, together with the withdrawing of wonted
charity on the Jesuits party, or rather their more and more drawing to them
by flat fraud and rapine, quae sua sint, non quae dei. Brief; herehence is
proceeded the lamentable damage to all our Church, both in her former and
future fruits amongst us, for which all Protestants (being the Chorus hereunto)
lowdlie laugh us to scorn. Whiles (God he knows) these good Fathers the
Appealants in their wisdoms and charity can advise no fitter means to right
all these scandals together with their innocence, then their present appeal,
being taught by former experience how that to compremize aggriefes amongst
themselves here at home, or to send privately to Rome about the same, is but
to make the Jesuits way to farther miscarriages, and give their insolences the
more ground: whiles namely father Cowbuck their brother serves them as jailer
for our complainants at Rome, and here in England M. Archpriest is no head
over them to check their exorbitance, but at their courtesy (they having made
him that head he is) but he rather a votary Fautor of all their misdoings,
whereby they rest here amongst us the most lawles and incorrigible men in the
world.

But oh (say some of them) there is a General of our order, called Aqua-viua,
who upon complaint to him, is to order us in any part of the world wheresoever,
if we misdoe. Forsooth, a goodly reference: an Italian man living in Rome, to
be complained unto of wrongs done here in England, which were a matter both
exceeding chargeable and hazardous, in regard of the distance between, and
likewise unlikely of due redress, he being no whit English, nor otherwise
competent for the same. Besides, that such complaints to be carried to the
Jesuits General by our Priests, were to thrall the Ecclesiastical liberty to
their jurisdiction, in that it might seem Agnitio Authoritatis to them (being
religious) which were absurd.

Seeing then the Jesuits here in England have no other law nor awe in their
carriages then their own consciences, it is no marvel if they have given
these scandals, especially having two such Patrons, the one here, the other at
Rome, as aforesaid. Yet, who would ever have thought that in a Religious
society, so titularly professing Jesus above all other Christians, there could
have bin found so notabiles percussores Cleri? Was it fit (trow ye) for a
Religious person, so uncharitably, and so unlearnedly, as he has done, to
tax by libell so many reverend Priests as thirty: I may say one hundred, so
deeply in their reputations, as by express terms of Schism, Rebellion,
etc. to the Catholic Church? And further; after a pacification of the said
scandal (whereunto the good men though much to their private prejudice, yet
for the general peace of the Church were willing) another of the same society
with many other their fautors at their instigation to revive the same since to
the pass it is now come? Or were the Priests so incorrigible men, as (were it
true that they were Schismatickes, Rebels, etc.) there was no priuater means
left to reclaim them, nor no charity other then by libell? they offering to
purge themselves of such imputations by disputation, which was denied them by
master Archpriest, as a tumultuous request. Again, if they were such, yet
what had a Jesuit to do to censure them, being no head but a member, and that
not of theirs, but of another body, and but only a borrower of their
institution and honors in coming thus to Englands vinyeard, their own not
being so worthy? Surely, the Jesuit thought that Propter quod vnumquodque
tale, and illud magis tale; that Master Blackwel having his authority from
them, a fortiore he might administer the same. Be it so, yet was it not
competentlie, nor condignely administered in that manner, as by a libell so
despightfull, and so unlearned; as for the vnlearnednes whereof, I can (sure)
make no other of it, then paenam peccati to the author for the spite. Had he
bin borne into the world with teeth and nails, his spirit could not have been
more Satyricall, nor yet his terms through malice more vnschollerlike. And
for such the learned university of Paris has censured the tract both to the
Authors and the Fautors disgrace.

Greatly therefore was Master Archpriest to blame to give it countenance at
the first; but more, since the said censure. Who but he would have showed
himself so abject minded for office, not procurable, but already procured, as
to engage his existimation in so foul a defense of but his Benefactors against
his own brothers, and so famous an university? Call ye this either in the
one or the other fraterna correctio? is this vna or altera admonitio? is this
Dic ecclesiae? whereby so virtuous, so learned, and so many Confessors of
Christ to be at once denounced, as Ethnicks and Publicans? Could the Fathers
advise upon no worthier revenge against the Appealants for their concurring
with God almighties miracle against their ambition in Wissbich, wherein to make
use of the Arch-priestship, then thus by Libell? Or could Master Archpriest
also against the same parties, for their not acquainting him with their
counsel concerning a subordination to be porcured from Rome (he weening
himself worthy to have bin not only a party in that consult, but the very
head and soul thereof, as should seem by his Concaleat stomacho unto them
since) be so gross in his revenge, as to support such a libel? Ah poor
advise, or rather too prodigal spite. Cease (Cousin) cease henceforth those
your Fathers their equivocation to the world, whereby under color that the
Archpriest is a secular-Priest, they would have his authority thought to
shine but oblique toward their Society, and too direct toward the Seminaries,
in matters that may arise in difference between them; seeing both his
attaindour to that dignity was ex professo procured by their means; and but
interpretatiuely by the Priests (as their Agent himself has confessed) as also
his homely administration thereof in thus auowing their libell, and other his
partial carriage in their behalfes against them ever since asseuers the
contrary. But Iustus est dominus, and iusta iudicia eius; the Blacke-well or
pit that they dug for others, themselves are fallen into; being like to
learn ere long what it is Mentiri in spiritum-sanctum, as too flatly they have
done in abusing the Apostolic Sea, by such their interpretatiue colloguing
with it for the said Authority toward the maintaining of libell and faction.
Which nevertheless forasmuch as it was well granted by his Holiness, though
ill obtained by them (he doing it in opinion of their honest information
whereof they failed) I list not here to dispute it with you, but in reverence
to Rome admit it with all faults in full force and virtue, seeing the
Appealants themselves (being the parties most wronged) have so done, not
doubting but his Holiness, (as he is wholly Clement) will upon due information
as well touching the said Authority, as other their aggriefes therewith
complained, right both them in especial, and all our Church in general
against the Jesuits, and Archpriest, happily with the demolition of that Arch
erected on so muddie a foundation. Suffice it, that in the mean time we hold
such an Authority fit enough for such a manner of adeption, and
administration; and too prejudicial both to the present state of our Church,
and the future of our Country: and as for his auowrie of the libel, the same
to be both vnclerkly, and unnatural; yea and schismatic in him, subject to
far more satisfactions as well to all our Church, as to the Complainants,
then he and his twelve Assistants are ever able to make. Such a dousen to such
a thirteenth was never seen in the Church of God to this day, either for
Ecclesiastical or civil faction; but what shall I say? Imparum infida
amicitia, and therefore like head, like horns. And wherein may we comfort us,
but to think that (in his Holiness providence) such a head of faction will
not long hold. It is but our patiences of the Laytie in the mean time, by the
example of our Ghostly Fathers the Appealants, and our zealous union with them
against so foul a scandal. The first, though the Jesuits and Archpriest
deride as a virtue perforce (they for their parts not brooking to be forced to
any virtue) yet the latter happily they may rue. As for Patience, it is certain
that Father Cowbuck asking the two messengers at Rome his Prisoners upon what
hope of friends, or countenance they came thither about such a business; and
they answering their Innocence only and the goodness of their cause, he
laughed both them and such their answer to scorn. Even so likewise Master
Archpriest here at home. Oh, (says he by his Agents) cannot Seminary Priests
professing so passive a spirit of persecution and Martyrdom for Christ's cause
(as they do in their very institution) put up some wrong for Jesus sake.
Truly yes: were it not that in cases of scandal Beatius est non dare quam
accipere (howsoever the Jesuits in money matters hold it other) and also, so
long as the persecution proceeds not from a society of Jesus, and in Jesus
name; a name which has always thrown out devils, never brought in any. It is
no ways fit that so glorious a name should be thus abused, as to be made use
of ex part dati scandali: and more tolerable were even murder at an enemies
hands then at a brothers, most of all at a Fathers, such as all Jesuits (though
but score-yearlings) call themselves.

Have the Seminaries bred up Master Blackwell and his dousen Aydants, thus in
steed of being themselves Martyrs to martyr others? And what others? Their own
Brothers: and how? In Jesus name. Good Cardinal Allan never founded the
Seminaries for such impiety, nor yet endowed he them by his Presidence with
such a spirit; who (doubtless) were he now alive and saw this disfigure in
his brood from his institution so all of love, so all of charity, would
scarce know it to be his, or knowing it would weep salt tears, and repent
him at the heart that ever he coupled Jesuits therewith, who even in his life
time began to distaste their factious fashions, and namely notably Father
Cowbuck. At a word (my good Cousin) little reason have the Seminaries to show
themselves so mute and neutrall toward their Appealant-Brothers in this
business, as most of them have done till now of late, seeing that even as
such, the Libeller (if they mark it) asseuers them to be no less then Rebels
too; much less so very opposite as many of them are, and notably the twelve
Assistants, of whom not one (that I hear) is a party for them: little reason
(I say) have they or these to be such, considering that therein they betray
their own and the Seminaries honors wholly to the honoring of the Jesuits,
and forget that implicit every one of themselves in particular is inuolued in
the same disgrace. For, to have it spread throughout all the Christian world,
that thirty English Seminaries are at one clap become Schismatics, Rebels,
etc. to the Catholic Church, what a blot will it be as well to all that are of
the nurserie, as of the number? and in especial, how much may it contrist the
holy Ghost over the Seminaries, and also justly alien from them their
benefactors were such a scandal true? Namely, the Popes Holiness how deeply
may he feel it in his Apostolic and paternall spirit. Whereas on the other
side it not being true, that so many, yea or any of the Libelles are such
Schismatickes, Rebels, etc. to our holy mother as the libeller doteth, how
heartily ought the whole body, and all the members of the Seminaries applaude
the same, and unanimously concur to propulse the reproach. But (alas) too many
of them (we see) are bought and sold to the Jesuits thus from their brothers,
and their own honors; they having the Ecclesiastical purse of our Country
wholly in their pocket, like the Steward in Scripture, who betrayed his and our
good Lord and Master, and these others so deiect, nay abject minds. For, were
they truly zealous, it were possible enough for them to hold out against the
double persecution (to wit) both that of the Protestant, and this of the
Jesuits and Archpriest, with and for their brethren, especially such brethren
as (without offense be it spoken) are the very cream of our Clergy. Not that
I think any of them so unlearned, no not of the Assistants, (who it seems
were most called to the place for their insufficiencies, though in faith
sufficient enough for such employment) as to judge the Appealants Schismatics,
etc. by the book, whereby to be parties against them, or neuters; but only of
mere pusillanimitie. This Mammon is such a Monarke, that it bribes and bridles
all but Capuchines, tainting their humors and honors both; especially where
Authority concurres, as in this wrong of the Jesuits Master Blackwels (such
as it is) does; who whom their largess allures, or parfimonie not, his
Authority makes good in each. For, as for his late answer to the Appealants
book, that imports no such reason or satisfaction why they should think his
proceedings, and consequently their party thereunto any ways just against
their brethren; it arguing only a mere ostentation of his Arch-priestship,
and a bare Ipse dixit, and nothing else; fo full is every line besides of
absurdities and contradictions as touching the matter; only the sayings of the
Doctors he has therein not used, whereby nor abused, which is a marvel.

Great pity therefore it is, and a scandal; our Clergy (which for being a
persecuted Clergy should be the more unite as per antiperistesin) to be found
guilty in this case so much concerning their honors, of that vice which the
Scot notes national and natural to our people (that is) like dogs all to
take part with the iniuring dog against the injured; or rather not like hogs
(which quoth he the Welchmen are) to aid the fugitive and weaker hog against
the stronger. Great pity likewise and a shame it is unto our Seminaries, who
being Luminare maius in our Fermament then the Jesuits, they notwithstanding to
eclipse and obnubulate them therein, by disseuering them, as thus by libell
they have done. Brief, that Jesuits who in their institution are but
Confessors (vz.) but Graduates, Beson^os and Proficients toward perfection,
should dare so basely to blemish the Seminaries, whose institution is far more
hautie (vz.) Pascere gregem and ponere animas suas pro ouibus suis, which
implies perfection already acquired; as, then which, maiorem charitatem nemo
habet: they (I say) to blemish them so libelliously as is said, not only by
seuering them thereby one from another, but (which worse is) by setting them
one against another.

Is Christ's supreme Vicar in earth a secular Clearke, yea, so far forth
secular, as being once chosen out of a Monasticke-order to that Sea (for a
Jesuit Pope never yet had ye any) straight his Monasticke-nature dies. And
also are all Bishops under him in the Universal Church such, whereby they have
authority (as such) to visit and correct the religious person, and not the
religious them; that thus the religious should insult over our Seminaries
(being likewise such) and that without encounter, nay with their own assents? I
speak it boldly, and I hope, abest inuidia verbo; not so glorious by ods is
the Jesuits society as the Seminaries, either for institution, or practice
(especially practice here in our country) whatsoever it be elsewhere. For the
institution, as before is touched; for practice, as for example. Show ye me
from Father Ignatius time their founder to this day (which is now well nigh a
hundred years since) half so many Martyrs thoroughout the whole world in all
that time of the Society, as have been of our Seminaries within these thirty
years here in our country: omitting that even to this day, there is not so
much as one Canonized Saint of the order, Confessor, or Martyr; no not their
founder himself: whom nevertheless with a great many more of the Society, I
reverently think to be such, and as such, do very humbly commend me to
their prayers. Which defect of honor to their Order (which all other religious
Orders have) they would excuse by saying (as some of them have done) that the
Canonizing of Saints is but a superfluous pomp in the Church, which may very
well be spared. Wherein (surely cousin) besides that it founds hereticallie and
against Catholic religion, they have little reason even in morality, seeing
that every gallant Champion is well worthy of his Bay. And therefore as little
reason have they to bear themselves so superlatiuely above all other holy
Orders, were it but for the Puneisme of the society, which blemish to
counteruaile together with all other blemishes in it, they have given it the
name which is above all names, and holy above all holies, the name Jesus. In
which name well I grant them they may justly and victoriously go against all
Gods enemies, but not against his friends; especially bearing no more crosses
along with them wheresoever they go, then we see they do: quaerentes in most
places quae sua sunt, rather then quae Dei, both worship and wealth. Whereby
they have purchased them a hard opinion of all religious Orders, even so far
forth as to be written against by some of them in most parts of Christendom ex
professo, and in particular are banished for such out of all the most Christian
Kingdom of France, as also for their Spanish faction there; where for all
their great means, and flattering Ballades of late made and exhibited to the
King, they are not like to get in again this year, nor yet the next, he
hearing of their turbulent carriage here in England. Only they hold in here
and there with the good Capuchines (being at odds with all other orders, and
oftentimes among themselves) which is their greatest credit, and which they may
easily do, for that (as one of those good Friars on a time confessed) they covet
to have all, and these nothing. Upon this ground likewise it was that the
excellent good Bishop of Bamberge in Germany being labored unto some few
years ago, by the importunat commendations of the house of Austrich, and
other Catholicke-states of the Empire, for their admittance into his most
reformed diocese, he answered; no, I brook no such Quiddits.

To conclude then with that I began to say; seeing the Jesuits are a society
so inferior to all other religious Orders, and yet ambitioning above them all
in the bare name of Jesus, scorning (belike) in their singularity to be
called after their founder, he being as yet no canonized Saint (as aforesaid)
and namely an Order far inferior to the Seminaries both for institution and
merit to our Church and Country (as already is partly proved) though not in
privileges from the Sea Apostolic (wherein howsoever otherwise they come
short in merits to other orders, it will be sure to be never a whit behind to
any) it is (I say) great pusillanimitie in the brothers of the same, cedere suo
iuri so much, as to give them the pre-eminence in our Country for
ecclesiastical rule, either in their own name, or to their use, as Master
Blackwels is; much more to suffer themselves to be so infamed by them as by
flat libell, and which worse is, by their own partaking therewith. Is it not
enough that the Jesuits disgrace and supplant them with their zizaniaes in
their own Colleges, living under their Ferrule; that they expel them thence
at their pleasures; that they beat them almost to death; but also in their
Country they will assay the like? and even not there manumize them from their
wrongs; Pharao himself being no longer cruel to the Israelites, then whilst
they lived in his land, save once, when in revenge thereof the red Sea
miraculously devoured him, and all his host. Is it not enough that for every
one Martyr of those Fathers, there have been twenty at least of these Brothers
to our Church, and yet they to usurp the honor of all, like the
Spanish-Souldiour in the Lowe-countries, who has been always the least part
in his Lieges service there, and yet the most in the praise? Is not all this (I
say) and a great deal more of the Jesuits unkindness, and vndeseruings both
of our Seminaries, our Church and Country, enough; but needs to all this they
must add libelling upon them too, forgetting that Qui dixerit fratri suo Racha
is reus gehennae ignis? I could wish, and I verily hope they will value
themselves above the Iaponian, and other Indian Clergy, who know no other Pope
then the Jesuits, and take their bare words for Canons. At least I could wish
that in this case of so real reproach to their whole body, and prejudice to
their Apostolike-haruest in our vineyard here, they would (as I hope in God
they will, abiuring Mammon, and all other sinister allure, and adjure of both
Jesuit, and Iesuited Archpriest) join with their wronged brethren in a
confident and unanimous defense, and not suffer their honors which is also
their own, so basely to be bandied out of our Church and Country; namely, by
an intruding society, were it but in honor of their excellent Founder, our
late Cardinal, a man no whit inferior to their Father Ignatius, but rather
before him in all manner of rare desert to the Sea-Apostolicke, for which he
was worthy to die a Peer of the same: a fortiore then, they being the
natural brood of our English Church ex traduce from Saint Augustine and
Mellitus, continued rather then founded by the said good Cardinal to our
Country in all this age of persecution. Surely (Cousin) rather then this shall
come to pass through the indiscreete obedience, or rather pusillanimitie of
the Seminaries themselves toward the Jesuits; there will not want amongst the
Catholicke-laitie spirits to undertake the defense, in honor both of our
Church and Country, and namely of the Appealants our so reverend Patriots, and
ghostly Fathers: who, though they for their parts have all this while been
content in their exceeding charity, but to hold the buckler to their ears
against the Societies blows; yet these happily will not stick to return them
in their behalfes a sound venny at least. Yea, seeing those Fathers have thus
presumptuously broken quarter with ours, and that in our own Country (they
being mere Spanish) let them either yet make amends (if at least it be not too
late) or else be sure that they sit fast; for that ( saluo the Appeal) they
are like to carry as good as they bring, for all our good Cardinal be dead
and gone; such being Lex talionis; dens pro dente, oculus pro oculo: and again
a mere moral justice, that Quisquis quae non licet loquitur, quae non lubet
audiat. We Catholics standing as yet on the one side of the River (the
Appeal depending) and the Jesuits on the other, I do not doubt but God will
give us the day when once we come to closing; or if not, at least God shall
lose no honor by our foil, so humbly will we all with our Appealant-Fathers
yield us obedient to the disgrace, and the Apostolic Sea; which spirit (I
pray God) they bear. The Society has given scandals enough, and daily does
throughout all the parts of Christendom, which if they were but half made
into a nosegay, would (I doubt not) yield so unsavory sent unto English noses,
that we should esteem such flowers not worth the setting in Englands garden.
But this debt they may yet forestall if they will, and all harder measure that
may therewith befall them, by licking out their Racha so irreligiously written,
and more impudently maintained against our Fathers, and withal absolve
themselves in so doing, from their reatus gehennae ignis. Well, ipsi viderint.
They know very well that Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum, and
that confession of a fault is the least part of Penance, save letting the
wrong fall; which (we see) they would now gladly do, if that would serve the
turn, but it will not; for that as the French man says: Desbender l'arque ne
guerit pas le play: To unbend the bow, heales not the wound. More charity
were it in them by a penitent confession, though with the less satisfaction
(which once our Fathers for peace-sake would have accepted) they to shame the
Devil rather then themselves still by the contrary: for to stand upon Puntoes
in sin, especially such a sin as brings Schism with it, what a shame is it
for a religious person in a persecuted church; who though it were no wrong at
all, but right that he has written, yet had he Saint Paul's spirit, who wished
Anathema esse pro fratribus suis; he would not stick to confess it a fault
(though none) and also satisfy for it as such: much more Master Archpriest
(the matter being bad) had he the spirit of that good Pope, who of an
Arrian-Prelate (as he was) being by the strong hand of the Empress Eudoxia (as
I remember) exalted to the Sea Apostolic, was no sooner invested therein, but
did straight renounce his Arrianisme, and decree the Catholic faith against
it; had he (I say) but half his spirit, he would now in his authenticke
authority do both himself and his brethren right in this matter against the
Jesuits his makers, howsoever before time he stood for them in the wrong. But
he is all for Gloria patri, and as for Filio he seems the flat Arriane, for
which great pity it is, that Fratrum quoque gratia rara est. Nay, he that
can pen express Sermons, and utter them openly in blemish of the party
present (being a Gentlewoman of Nobility in this land) which (as she her self
has protested) was the only cause of her turning Protestant: he also that can
by his letter expressly incharge one of his Assistants (as he did) to
calumniate and defame a certain reverend Priest by name (whom I know) he (I
say) that can thus do, no marvel if such a Judge be of counsel to a Libell,
and a countenance thereunto. No marvel also if he be an unfortunate Father to
his ghostly children, as to one he was to my knowledge, and that I rue; who
after a long and worshipful confession of the Catholic faith in the Tower of
London and other prisons, in the end fell under his hand. Lastly, no marvel if
such a one for want of good neighbors be feign to praise himself, as lately
he has done, and that in the first place too, before his founder Father
Parsons, in a certain tract entitled Pius grief, which by the confused
huddle of the Doctors sayings therein, and the style, is held to be his.

But to the Jesuits again. Dico meam culpam being their own lesson, and so
boyish a penance, as they use it, me thinks they should not shame to say it
when it comes to their turns, as now through their misdoing it does; much
less should they persist so stiff-necked in defensione peccati, it being a
sin in the highest degree against the holy Ghost. But seeing they do so, as
choosing rather to shame themselves then the Devil (such is their charity)
truly (Cousin) I do not see, but some lay-cauterie as well as the religious
Appeal depending, is requisite to be applied to them (as aforesaid) though
better a great deal, and more meritorious were voluntary penance from the
heart, then that which so perforce they may have cause to take to the heart.
Some show of grace they have already made in proffering a parley of peace to
the Appealants; but it is indeed but grace in show, nor gratia gratis data;
but a mere servile grace, extorted out of the just fear they have of the
Appeal (which by Braues nor by their great friends they see they cannot
suppress) and also for the high injury they have done to Saint Peter's chair
touching the same; for which they are like to be put to such a penance upon
the issue thereof (I fear me) as besides to see the Appealants faculties and
honors restored unto their innocence by the Apostolic Pastor (which they have
taken away) theirs, and the Arch-priests vice versa, to be suspended and
attainted as Schismatic, etc. In which predicament I am persuaded they have
been ipso facto from the first: for which cause (for my own part, I assure ye
Cousin) I make it a scruple in my conscience to communicate with any of them in
Sacraments till they be humbled, especially the Jesuits, holding it (as they
do) lawful vti scientia in confessione, as much to say as to make use of men's
Confessions.

As for Master Blackwell himself (setting aside the libell which in the
libeller was Schism primario and principaliter, and also in his brother Father
Cowbuck, for procuring himself to be jailer at Rome, to the
precursor-messengers thither touching Ecclesiastical liberty, together with
his dismissing them in the end from thence unheard, disgraced, yea, and with
express prohibition to return to their country, and that without exhibition
to live else where) setting this aside which was express Schism in them
primario, was it not (I pray) if not Schism in Master Blackwell (for that he
is since a received superior, as may be objected) at least schismatic in
him secundario, and as in use to Schismatickes, so far forth in countenance
of that libell, to discountenance an Appeal made to his Holiness concerning
the same (all Appeal being intrinsece, Agnitio authoritatis in the highest
degree to the Appeal, and the greatest Plea of Justice both civil and
ecclesiastical, that is, to discountenance it (I say) by suspension of the
Appealants faculties spiritual, and also their temporal relief from their
friends for the same; to interdict so honorable a censure as that of the
University of Paris was toward the forwarding of the same Appeal; to diswarne
the Appealants book, being dedicated to his Holiness own eye in the real
nature of an Appeal, to be read of the Catholics of our country as
schismatic, nay heretical; to slander the sacred Sea with a flat lie,
affirming that he had received a resolution from the mother-Citie, against the
said censure of Paris toward the backewarding of the said Appeal? Brief, to
approve the tract of Schism, whether true or false against his Brothers, it
being to the so great and general disorder of our church both in the Clergy
and in the laytie, especially the libeles, beseeching him to call in the said
treaty so disparageable to their reputation, and all the Seminaries, together
with their showing themselves corrigible by their offer of disputation, whether
it were schism or not, and his refusal of each as aforesaid? Was not all this
(I say) with a great deal more, a primo ad vltimum schismatic in him, as
being to the disunio^ of an united body; at least Excommunication to him as in
prejudice of ecclesiastical liberty (in which nature al Appeal is) and
(sure) flat schism in them, viz. the Jesuits, both for that cause, and also
for that by their said libell they on their parts principally procured the said
disunio^ in Gods church here amongst us, dividing the members thereof one
against another? Was not all this schism, and schismatic in him, or them, or
both, whether the Appealants be Schismatics or no? Which (verily) they are not
if these be, because the question is not ad diuersa, but ad contraria in eodem
subiecto, (vz.) whether in the case whereof they are both agreed, the
Appealants be Schismatics or none. Nor serves the reason before parenthesed of
the Arch-priests now authentike headship for his excuse from schism; for,
though it may be granted, that in such cases whereto his authority is of
force (as it is but ad officia certa and determinata) members to concur with
his misguidance in those cases be no schism in him; but rather those members
schismatic, that go against the same (though justly) the unity in that
case seeming to stand on his side in respect of his authority especial (as a
head) to those cases, which unity they divide by their opposition: yet in a
case which is merely out of his authority (as a head) such as this of the
Appealants is in fundamento; to wit, he being therein a principal party, and
so not just he to be his own Judge, (vz.) as a head, Master Archpriest both
may be, and (under correction) I take it, is a schismaticke (carrying himself
as he has done) and all they that take with him though the greater number; for
that herein he is to be taken not as a head (the matter not being in his
jurisdiction as such) but as an equal member, and that triable like the rest:
so as his dividing his fellowe-members in such a case not as a head (though a
head) but as a member himself, from being an united body as aforetime; I do
not see why it should not be schism in him; much more forasmuch as this
separation both of himself, and others from the united body by his partaking,
and procuring part to be taken with the libell, was at the first when he was
indeed but a member, and no complete head in esse, but only in potentia, and
that in voto proprio more then any others (vz.) in the interim of the Cardinals
constitutiue-letter, and his Holiness Brief; so as it is not his being since
an autenticke head can salve the Schism which he then incurred as a member,
especially he persisting therein by express censures against the Appealants in
the behalf of the libell: but rather more and more the same is heavy upon his
now headship, by how much, Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se Crimen
habet, quanto mayor qui peccat habetur. Nor ever was it holden in the Law, a
good acquittance of a widows debt; much less a justification of her breaking
(for example) her neighbors wives head in the time of her widdowhood (vz.) in
the interim of her two Husbands, to say she is now a remarried Wife: but so as
her second Husband is liable thereunto (as her head, and in her right) and he
answerable for all the same. The like or very little different is this case of
Master Blackwels, whereby (I do not see) but if he were a schismaticke in the
interim aforesaid as a member of the Seminaries, and (as such) so notable an
instrument of the Jesuits who were schismatickes, and so he a schismaticke in
their right though not his own: a fortiore now (as a head) he is such; he
continuing the separation (as such) a great deal more: at leastwise take him
as you will, head, or member, in the right or in the wrong; to impeach
ecclesiastical liberty as he has done in thwarting this Appeal, whether
importing right or wrong in the Appealants (which the trial must show) is
Excommunication to him, and all that take his part. And also whether a head
never so autenticke, or his case never so good; he to suspend an Appealant, and
otherwise to censure him, yea, to decree against him lite pendente; was unjust
dealing, and he subject to Excommunication therefore ipso facto.

Then again for the Jesuits, that they are notable Schismatickes in this case;
it is not their disclayming from being members of the body of the Seminaries,
but of another body, vz. their own society, that can excuse them: for that,
to be a schismatic member to a body, it suffices to be membrum genericum
to that body, though not specificum; and such they are, being members of the
Catholic Church with these; so that as such they are Schismatickes in the case
in the question, they having made a separation in the Seminarie-members,
whereby the union of their body is in hazard to be dissolved, and consequently
of our whole Church thoroughout England. To plead that they are indiuidua
vaga, and vndependant of any body at all (as in truth they seem to be here in
England, so lawless is all their carriage) would sound much better for their
not being Schismatikes, for so might they be held in the nature of Painters and
Poets, of whom the verse is: Pictoribus atque Poetis Quodlibet audendi semper
fuit aequa potestas. Or to stand upon defense of the Tract, and so to think by
maintaining it for good to clear themselves of Schism against the University
of Paris; that were most of all absurd, neither show they any such want of wit
and grace, but rather labor all the ways they can, and as far as their
Pride will give them leave, to hinder it from coming farther in question;
although their faction founded thereupon they no whit desist, but rather
augment it more and more for other their private interests. Or say, that they
should maintain it good to the end, and to a decree at Rome on their behalfes;
yet cannot that honor to them counteruaile one half of their mischievous
carriages, and the domages they have done to our church in the mean time
concerning the same; so much may a good matter be marred in the ill handling;
and so have they done (were their case good) whilst (for example) laboring to
prove there is a God, they raise up the devil: but their case is not so good,
being simply bad; bad before, and bad after.

Brief then, light the Schism where it will, on the Jesuits, or Master
Archpriest, or both; certain it is that in the case of the Appeal, the
Appealants are none, both for the reasons afore-alleaged, and also forasmuch as
they do Appeal. Moreover if they were such, what needed Master Archpriest
to suspend them at all, they being suspended ipso facto for their Schism? Or
what needed the Provincial of the Jesuits, by his letter since craving a
reconciliation, acknowledge the Appealants zelatores gloriae Dei as well as
himself, or any of his; and as such to recommend him (if I mistake not) to
their sacrifices; seeing that all communication with Schismatikes, namely in
devotion (which is an act of Religion) is by an express Canon of the church
inhibited to Catholics upon pain of Excommunication, as well as all communion
with heretics in that kind. Lastly, if they were Schismatikes, what needed
the Archpriest and Jesuits in their Implements, so lauishly to rail at the
Appealants as Appealants, and not as Schismatikes, as yet to this hour they
do; though with somewhat a lower and a hoarse voice, as almost out of breath.
On the otherside, if it be no Schism in them (as out of question it is not)
wherein then are the Appealants to blame to make their defense public; the
offense being public (as is said) both in substance, and in circumstance to
their public reproach? Say, that the Libeller wrote it not in any such spirit
as of a libell, nor that he meant it should ever become public, being written
but privately to his friend; yet it is not that can salve the blame, nor his,
nor his Abbettors shames; seeing that howsoever, it becoming public since, a
public stain thereby inflicted upon the parties by their public defense
thereof hitherto; and a public president thereby given not only to detraction,
but to all manner of vice besides the Schism.

Nor is the world ignorant of the Jesuits querks in this kind, they using to
make show of but done in private, and in jest, what they mean should pass
public, and in earnest, namely if the matter be not justifiable; as for
example, Father Cowbucks letter to Master Doctor Bishop at Paris, touching his
excusing the disgraces done him at Rome as not proceeding from him (it being
most false) did he not write his said letter of untrue excuse unto him, but
first acquaint all France and Flanders, and a great part of England, with the
contents thereof by copies, before ever the original came to the Doctors
hands; in so much as he knew the substance thereof by sundry both copies and
reports of others, before he received the same? Also of later days, to color
their murderous battery of Master Lambart in Salamanca, for not hindering
certain youths under his prefecture there in the College from being
Benedictines (whom belike they had rather should have become Jesuits being very
towardly youths) have they not since his martyrdom herein England, falsified
a letter of his by inserting thereinto certain words, nay whole sentences of
their own, in hyperbolicall and super-exalted praise of their society, and so
copied it abroad for his? True it is, and there is no question but that the
Saint forgave them that outrage at his death, from the bottom of his heart;
but how? Even as Christ our Savior, and Saint Stephen by his example did their
persecutors, praying for them, and not as his so singular good friends and
heavenly Patrons, as that forgerie would make him. Blame not then the
Plaintifes for their public defense by published books; seeing it is meet
that public wrong should use public means toward public amends, and the
rather, for that the Archpriest since the publishing of those books in his
answer to them, boldly and bravely sticks not to say, that even that book to
his Holiness was not like ever to have come to his hands, but by his means;
wherein he most scandalouslie derogates from the Popes honor, as to have him
thought his fellowe-Pupill to the Jesuits.

Now, whereas it is reproacht the Appealants, that in process of this their
business of the Appeal, they pray (as it were) in aid of my Lord of London,
and other capital Protestants in the Land, by using extraordinary access and
commerce to and with them; it is true, that seeing the generaltie of Catholics
is so unnaturally distasteful of their innocence, it has pleased God to raise
them up if not friends, at least commiserators ex lapidibus terrae; not that
the parties so aggrieued, or any their friends, have (I dare say) received any
damage thereby, but contrariwise some of them good turns, and perhaps may in
time more and more. Such is the spirit of these good men, vt retribuant bonum
pro malo, and so good and great is God, and ever was toward distressed
innocence, as to raise it up friends citra expectationem, in confractionem
malignantium. So raised he up these latter years England (the old enemy of
France) to aid and establish France her distressed King, against not so much a
religious as a Spanish league, to the pass of peace he and it enjoy now. And
who knows, whether happily out of this so moral commiseration of the
Protestant, it may likewise please Almighty God by the ministry of these his
innocents, to work his extraordinary and unexpected glory in them, and
generally to the Catholic cause, qui potens est ex lapidibus istis suscitare
filios Abrahae? As great, and as unlikely matters as this has the hand of God
wrought, and namely in this kind in Saint Eustace, whom (as we read in his
Legend) God for his mere morality (being then a heathen man) called by famous
miracle to his faith, and in the end crowned him a glorious Saint. And though
the Jesuits make use of this point in the Appealants reproach, insinuating the
consequent Apostasy of some of them even at Paul's Cross; and hereupon do
copiously discourse to Catholics in their vainglory, how much more blessed
a thing it is to be hated, rather then favored of heretics, and the Devil,
as they (for their parts they say) are, yet for all that, it is well known how
much they labor the contrary under hand at this instant, giving out that what
hope there is of a toleration to us from the state, is wholly by their means,
and not by the Appealants; so cunning they are to make use of every occurrent
to their own glory, rather then their brothers, yea, or then Gods. It is very
well known with what vaunt of their great friends and faculties both here at
home and abroad, namely in the Popes, the Emperors, and other Christian
Princes Courts, they have lately offered their service to the State, and that
with what extreme extenuation of the Appealants their habilities, and friends
to perform the like; and withal it is well known what opinion the State has
of such their offer; as also of their brother Father Combuck his offering not
many years since by his letter and messenger (both which are yet extant) he to
be her Majesty's true Intelligencer from Spain. It were strange if he or they
could so gull our State being so passing prudent; or that they could perform
so notable contraries in eodem subiecto, as to deserve well of Spain and
England both (being each others enemy) namely by malignant means to each
underhand, which as yet (we see) no indifferent and sincere hand has been
able to do. Notwithstanding, admit that their Father-hoods, for all their
hitherto disloyal and mere Spanish vndeserts at out States hands, could thus
work themselves in credit, and employment with, and by it; or that our State
were driven to so desperate terms as to need to use their services, having
been and still being such manner of persons; then were it (forsooth) no
scandal at all, nor no degree from bliss to cooperate with heretics; but
contrary wise they to be esteemed for excellent men, men of high and deep
reach, of acute policy, of rare performance: brief, the very angular-stone
(which only Christ was) ex quo vtraque fiant vnum. Whereas the Appealants to
be the men in that kind, and so to Gods honor (as is expected at so good
Priests, and Patriots hands) is to be relapsed, and even flat Reprobates.

Be it said then, upon thus much feeling of the Jesuits pulse, that it is
rather of envy, then of scorn; and least of all of commiseration or zeal,
that they reproach the Appealants intercourse with Protestants; wherein (whether
soever of the two it be, being upon so ungodly ground as their own mere
glory and interest, and not Gods) they show their infinite vncharitie; which
(truly) is no marvel. It is no marvel, if men so imprudent transgressors
of the law of Charity (as the Jesuits have hitherto appeared to be) and
likewise of the law of Nature toward their Country (as now next shall be
shown) do repine at moral virtue consisting of them both. No marvel, if
they that have crossed Innocence in S. Peter's Court, do deprave the
Protestant-Compassioner thereof here in Christ's Camp, though a great deal
more justifiable (yea nere awhit unbeseeming) are the Appealants in the one,
then they in the other; seeing that all aggrief, whether it be sustained for
right or wrong, deserves pity, and such pity is a virtue were it in the
Devil: whereas to bar a Plaintiff of access to the bar of Justice, by
imprisoning him, and not suffering him to tell his tale (whether his case be
good or bad, which cannot be competently known except iuridically) was
notable foul dealing in Father Cowbucke, and more then a Turk would have
offered. No marvel (I say) if thus debarring God (as it were) to do innocence
right, they reproach morality in the Protestant, and the Innocent for making
use thereof; so good Christians they are both in the one and the other, and so
opposite to Gods honor. Whereby I conclude, that that saying of S. Gregory (I
ween) Qui ^inima spernit, paulatim ruit in grauiora, does no whit touch the
Jesuits in this case; seeing they, because they will be sure not ruere so,
begin a grauioribus first (vz.) the breach of Charity, and Justice in the
highest degree (as is shown) and so next proceed to impugn morality,
weening thereby (belike) and it is good policy too, with the greater blame to
extinguish the lesser, and to make it seem but one.

Besides (which is another point of their Charity) there has not happened any
persecution, no nor the fall of any private Catholic through frailty in our
church since this their Schism, but they impute it all to the Appealants, and
to their intercourse with Protestants; so viperous an ympe is Detraction, not
so much in it self, as in these Fathers; who being the Detractors, seem
longe^ winded to hold out then Detraction it self. Never was an express vice
so graced in the Clergy, nor so likely to be saincted as now; it beginning in
a Jesuit, and maintained by the Apostolike-Pregnatorie. What vice, nay what
villainy, deserves so much as a scruple in the conscience of the laytie, if
this president hold good in the Religious? Or why should Father Cowbucke,
reading himself taxt in the Appealants book to the Popes Holiness for a
bastard, and by intendement a Parsons Son; for a binominous person; a person
exploded, and expelled the University of Oxford with Bells for his turbulence;
and lastly, a fugitive person from the Army of God here in our Country; all
the same being most true, and thirty persons affirming it against his worship,
being many against one, and they all Priests: seeing that one single Jesuit,
and that a simple one too, has dared to impeach even those thirty, nay (God
knows) how many, of a far fouler blemish then all those put together, (vz)
of Schism, Rebellion, etc. to the Catholic Church our holy Mother, and that
most falsely and foolishly. And yet (forsooth) must his Libell pass Cum
priuilegio Prothonotarij Apostolici, in his slander so capital and general,
as against so many worthy Priests; and also against the Censure of the famous
University of Paris to the contrary: without that they may be admitted to
their trial, or be favored in their innocence so much as of Protestants: and
these others in their said matter of truth, importing both a lesser blame, and
that not to a multitude, but to one sole Jesuit, it being ready to be auerred
face to face in the highest Court of conscience in the world (vz.) the
Inquisition; the same (I say) not only not to be believed, but also not allowed
to be read amongst Catholics: so much the said Parson or Parsons-brat, and his
Archpriest for him, stand upon the Puntillio of his Cardinalaticall hopes,
against all faith and charity.

Oh God, how truly are the Jesuits AEsops adder in this case to our good
Fathers of the Seminaries, who bringing them home into this their house our
Country, no sooner felt they the warmth thereof (that is) the fat of the soil
(which they seem to respect more then the dew of heaven) have thus Insidiati
calcaneis eorum, and stung them for their love. They like simple-ciuill
Englishmen doing them at the beginning all the honor that might be, whereby
to bring them (being strangers) in acquaintance with our Country, as by the
Appellatiue of Fathers (forsooth) at every word, and otherwise giving them in
all their meetings the pre-eminence and upper hand (all but at Tyburne, which
is a Post-past they are not greatly liquorish of (it seems) nor worthy, as
appears by the few that have suffered in all this time, and both by Father
Haywood and Smith, their selfe-procured banishments from it, as sitting down
(belike) in the eye of God without their Nuptial garment; and namely Father
Cowbucke his pushing the table from him, and flat running away, without so much
as with a bare by your leave, Sirs) have wrought them such an existimation, as
now (we see) cuts their throats, through their ungrateful making use of such
their courtesies against them. And so vain a Nation are we, and ever were, to
praise outlandish wares though less good (nay bad) above our own.

But time and experience (I doubt not) will teach us to be wiser, kinder, and
more religious; they being likely to show us ere long both in the present
Appeal of our Priests, by that the Popes Holiness have justly cut what they
have unjustly shufled and packt; and also by other our farther proofs (I fear
me) with repentance if due prevention be not used, that the Jesuits are a far
fitter Society for India, then for England. And such was our good Cardinals
opinion of them, who much against his will (being then but Master President)
was ouer-ruled in consorting them with the Seminaries for our Country; he for
his own part, holding it no fit tillage, Arare in bone and asino here in our
Church, but all with Seminaries, considering that Pari iugo dulcis tractus. But
in the mean time how little worship, nay how great blemish this Schism
amongst us is and will be to our Church (being under so sharp affliction) you
partly see already, and may imagine more, whether party so ever prevail. For
what know we what use the State will make thereof, whether rather not to
extinguish both by the means, then to tolerate any? All our comfort is, to
think that the hand of God (whereunto no good thing is impossible) can and
will in honor of the much blood of his Seminary-Saints that has ascended up
to him now these forty years out of our Church, stint extremes and turn all
to the best; who perhaps permits the Society and Archpriest to be thus
obdurate in their Schism, both to their final shame, and to the greater good
of our Church and country, then yet we are worthy to apprehend. For (I assure
ye Cousin) as touching the latter, latet anguis in herba, which but by this
means could not well be descried. And though it seem to us but a matter upon
the By to the Appeal, yet (I doubt not) but it is a principal in the eye of
God, and needing his especial interuention.

It is (Cousin) at a word the whole state of our Country, which the Jesuits
labor (whether in zeal to their Founder who was a Spaniard, or in gratitude
to Spaines benefits, and generally of the house of Austrich to their society)
to subject to Spain; and in such faction, and in such hope have under pretense
of Catholicke-Religion already won unto the Spaniard much ground in our
Country; which (now that the plot is grown to a head in the Archpriest) they
strongly maintain, and daily gain more and more in the hearts of Englishmen.
A shame that either Religion should be so profaned, or English nature so
stained: grace never using to preuaricate nature, but to accomplish it.

First therefore, as touching the Bull of Pius 5. and the same since confirmed
by Gregory the thirteenth against her Majesty: as neither the Spaniard, nor
any other foreign power is either by express, or employed terms thereof
incited to dominion over this land, as little are English hearts thereby
disallegeanced so from her Majesty, as to concur with any foreign Inuadour.
For, though the said Bulls upon her Majesty's Excommunication therein promulged,
do de facto assoyle the subjects of this Realm from their homage unto her; it
therefore follows not that they must, and ought to be parties against her
Majesty, and their Country to a foreign power, howsoever pretending even
Religion, or other civil good thereunto; for that were to conster the Popes
act so overmuch in religion and grace, as to the destruction of nature, which
were against the Maxim aforesaid. For, a man to go against his own Country,
is and ever was holden in the civil part of the world an act Contra ius
gentium: and also unnatural, yea and against all grace. Besides, that Christ
never did delegate any such power to Saint Peter, as Tradere gentem in gentem,
that being a mere temporal revenge, and he but his Viccar spitituall. Yea, he
expressly rebuked him for drawing his sword, and cutting off Malchas his ear.
Christ saying unto him, Tibi dabo claues regni caelorum: and Pasce agnos meos,
pasce ones meas, sounds clean in another sense. Moreover, Mihi vindictam and
ego retribuam says our Savior to all; a fortiore to the Clergy: and by his
Prophet else where, Iustitia and iudicium correctio sedis eius; Ignis ante
ipsum praecedet, and inflammabit in circuitu inimicos eius, etc. So as Saint
Peter's Commission against transgressing Kings and kingdoms, is no more then
only to denounce by Excommunication, and other the like Ecclesiastical
censures, Gods displeasure against them for their transgression, and not to
exercise the secular sword at all: namely in such a manner of revenge as is
said, but leave that to him who only has power over Princes and
Principalities, to convert and subvert at his pleasure. And even the Sea
Apostolic it self has been subject to transmigration sundry times under the
hand of God, and as it has seemed his angry hand too, as well as profane
states; the supreme Pastors having themselves been often forced to forsake Rome
whilst it was a sacking, and even at one clap were away at Auignion almost 80.
years: which if translation of States were so absolutely in the Popes holiness
power, it is not likely he would (neither yet God) have permitted his own Sea
to be so disparaged; ne would the demesnes thereof be so small as they are at
this day.

And whereas it may be objected, that the Prophet Samuel elected, erected, and
consecrated David King of Israel in privation of Saul for his preuarication,
ergo, the Popes holiness may tradere gentem in gentem: that follows not, for
that neither this act of Samuel was such a tradition ( David being a Patriot of
Israel, and no forrainer) as also forasmuch as David did not execute that his
Royalty in any such manner as might argue blood and conquest, he having him
sundry times in his power, and might easily have slain him if he had would;
but as we read expresselie in the story, did bemone, yea, and revenge the
death of Saul, and all because he was Gods anointed; such as her Majesty is
over us at this day, by the hand even of a Catholic Bishop.

So likewise the translation of the Roman Empire by Leo the fourth, to
Charlemaine and his successors, which was the greatest translation of temporal
state that ever was done by the Papal hand (for that of Constantines was of
himself in bounty to the Church) that (I say) of Leo, was no such tradition
as gentis in gentem, it being but titular only, and not in defeazance of the
Grecian Empire, either in her Imperial title, or demesnes; the said Empire
continuing certain hundred years after in each, till in the end vindicta
diuina dissolved it, giving it over for heresy in vere alienam gentem both for
rites and language (viz.) the Turk, who to this day is Lord of it all.

I enforce not thus much unto you (cousin) touching the Popes holiness civil
sword, as to derogate any whit from it, or presumptuouslie to take upon me to
dispute his Commission otherwise then under correction, and in all submission
to holy Church if I mistake; but only in advancement of S. Peter's chair and
his keys, unto which I profess a full and firm believing soul, in reverence
and reference whereunto, as also in loyal love to my Prince and country, and
zeal to the Seminaries fructification hitherto by the word, being likely to
perform it in time to a wished end continuing as they have begun, and with
what else may happen Englishlie to the same end upon the bie; I say again I do
not see, how that that chair and those keys to be imbrude in blood, and to
atchiue Conquests, especially such a tradition as of England to Spain by the
sword, can any ways stand either with Christ's, or his said vicars honor.

Again, neither has the practice of the supreme Pastors from S. Peter to
this day been such that ever I read: Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid
volo nisi vt ardeat, being a fire that Christ never meant as out of two flints
by repercussion, or out of steel by hard-edge; but such a fire as he sent
down in form of disparted tongues over his sacred mother and the Apostolic
assembly at Pentecost, and that which Saint Augustine our countries Apostle
brought over to Eleutherius our king from Saint Peter's sea. Such is the fire
that burns in Jesus name, and such the fire that flames from forth the
Seminaries amongst us at this day. Volentes trahit (says S. Paul of the holy
ghost having his spirit) nolentes non cogit. The Jesuits mistake groslie if
they think that God is to come to his spouse in turbine, and tonitru, for such
shall be the coming of Antichrist another day, but in leui aura quasi
susurrans.

Saxony that was subdued to the Catholic faith by arms how short time
continued it therein? being the last of all the Germaine-Prouinces that received
it, and the first that forsook it. In like manner at this instant, has not
the Poland king received notable damage, and daily does, both in his own and
the Churches estate, at the hands of his natural subjects the Sweathlands,
under the conduct of his uncle Frederick whom they have chosen their Protector
(and as now the news is their king) against him, coming at the Jesuits
instigation to conquer them to the Catholic faith? Has he not lost not
only all that his natural heritage (this of Poland being his kingdom but by
election) from ever being by all likelihood Catholic again; it being now by
means of such his provocation the rather rooted in heresy: but also part of
Liefeland too which before was Catholic, besides his honor, and all his
charges of war? Such (forsooth) was the Jesuits religion in this case, and so
set they on the king to revenge their wrongs rather then his, or Gods, and the
irreuerence those people did them (as they informd) coming to take place, and
to preach amongst them by virtue of the kings letters patent.

And thus if the Popes holiness had any such commission (as is said) the
Jesuits do usurp it, they having (I am sure) no Breue of his to show, whereby
thus to set kingdom against kingdom for religion, as Poland against
Sweathland, and Spain against us. The knights of the Temple, and of Rhodes,
and those of Malta at this day (though they be the vowed soldiers of Christ
and his church) never bore so quarrellous and irreligious spirits: neither yet
the Jesuits founder though he were sometimes a soldier, left them any such
rule. But least of all is the Spaniard so peaceable a man amongst his
neighbors, as that he need to be nowd on to quarrels by the religious.
Howsoever, that is not the way (cousin) the spirit of Christ being meek and
humble, and what manner of Ghospelling he propounded to his Apostles, and what
arms ( viz. a scrip and a staff) you may read in the Acts. Moreover, if
propter iniustitias, etc. as in 2. Reg. God to deliver a nation over to the
hands of another nation, be his curse to that nation so given over, and not his
blessing; is it meet that the Patriotts of the same should exhibit themselves
instruments thereunto; all people being bound to complie with their country as
with their mother in all Gods blessings, and not his maledictions?

Now then, seeing it does or may appear unto you, that the king of Spain
neither de facto has, nor de iure can have any autenticke title, or color of
title from the sea-Apostolicke to the royal Crown of this land as for
religion (which of all pretenses is most forceable) much more easily and
justly may you condemn the Jesuits for persuading amongst us a Spanish title
thereunto in blood, which the Spaniard himself never to this day yet pretended
either in himself or his predecessors: and lastly if such their supposed
title, together with the aforesaid from the church fail, then (forsooth) the
benefit of Spaines conquering us, which of all other positions is most absurd.

Touching their title in blood then, were it never so new and so true, it is
sufficient answer thereunto to say, that in respect they are mere strangers,
and of another nation (I mean the king and his sister both) such their title
is void and of no effect, as well as for France to impleade their
Sallicke-law in bar against Englands title unto it. Again, prescription were
also a compete^t estopple unto them, they pretending from king John, and Edward
the third, and yet neither their ancestors nor they themselves having laid in
their claim to this day, which during the division of the houses of Lancaster
and York, at what time (it continuing long, and the whole land likewise
thereupon divided in civil wars) it was a fit season for the Spaniard to have
done, and set in foot, considering that vis diuisa debilis, and also being
then nearer the stem of this pretended title, which would have made the
better show. Brief, if titles so far fetched might take place for a Crown, I
wisse there are in this land a many poor persons at this hour that might be
serud before Spain. And as for king John, though he were not the best Prince
either to the Church or our Country, but unfortunate to each, and to him self
most, yet will we not hold him so unblessed of God, and unhappy, as that from
his loyne should be entitled a forraine-pretender to this realm: ne ever
built he London bridge for a Spanish Conqueror to trample on, as I have often
heard that nation bost of such a day. Much less king Edward that our
victorious king may his ghost abide to see England under a foreign rule, who
subdued foreign powers and Crowns to it. Be this enough said and more then
needs touching Spaines title in blood to England, seeing that even a mere
English pretendant to deduce a title so far off, and after so many changes
amongst us, without making claim any time between were absurd: much more so
mere strangers, and present enemies as both they are to our state: for which,
as little reason we have as for their religious pretense aforesaid, to be any
way parties to their reigns over us.

Touching their conquest then, and the utility thereof to our country (which
is the last point the Jesuits persuade, the other two failing) they do well
(verily) to suggest it vtill at least (if so) seeing that vulgus amicitias
vtilitate probat, rather then honest and honorable which at all it would not
be, but contrariwise a mere wrong in them to attempt, and slavery in us to
endure. So noble an Island as this, which (to use the Spanish Chronographers
own words) was one of the 3. prime plumes in the helm of the Roman Empire
at her greatest, the other two (quoth he) being Spain, and France: an Island
which before any of them was able to free it self from that Empire, having
ever since (all but the time of the Heptarchie) stood selfelie-Monarchike, and
in paragon with either France or Spain, and other the greatest Monarchies of
christendom as well for the honors of war as of peace: a nation which has
twice conquered France, and as for Spain, was able to free her neck from the
Danish yoke (the Dane being a nation full of valor) within one 24. years, the
Spaniard not performing his like freedom from the Moore (being a base and
obscure nation) under 700: a nation which was able to bring in a Dolphin of
France with all the martiall-flower of that kingdom to make use of here at
home even in civil wars amongst our selves, and that done safely to acquit
it self again of him and them, which what nation in christendom but England
would have adventured? a nation whose Empire has extended from the I Will of
Thule to the Pirenean-mounts simul and semel, and that in settled peace, as we
may read in the reign of king Henry the second: a nation which has been
able to send forth armies and Armadoes as far as the holy land, and
performed more service for God and his church there then any other, nay then
all other christian people concurring in the same: a nation that has made
other countries both afraid and beholding to it, and as we read great Princes,
yea and an Emperor her Pensioners: a nation that has furnished Saint Peter's
sea with two excellent good Popes, and the Catholic church with as many
Saints and deep learned men (and at this day does) as any country in
christendom besides, it being the first begotten child of the same, and our
Ladies Dowre: brief, a nation which at this day even under a woman, and (as
the Spaniard and Jesuits pretend in her unjust undertakings) has hitherto bin
able to make her party good against all the world, maintaining it self in
peace when all her neighbour-states round about her are on fire: such a nation
(I say) to cease now at length her Monarchicke-honour, and become vassal to
Spain or any nation in the world be it by title or conquest, or whatsoever
pretense, yea of religion; oh how dishonorable and abominable were it to true
English-nature and valor, and scandalous to all the world.

Provincial (I say) for so should it be were it either under the brother or
the sister of Spain, seeing that neither of their states Spain or Flaunders
would agree his or her throne to be out of them, and (in faith) for England to
be ruled by a Prince out of the land (which never yet was seen since England
was England) as little reason it has as well for her profit, as for her
honor. If in Spain, it is too far off; if in Flaunders, neither yet is that
near enough: besides, that all those Provinces make but an Archduke, which is
far under the honor of a realm such as England is, whose Crown is, and
ever was Imperial, both for weight and fashion. Then to be governed by their
deputies, say vice-royes (which the Infanta cannot afford being her self no
Queen) how displeasing that were on the otherside the calamities of Flaunders
may any time these 30. years, and yet at this day teach us. For what cutting
off of the Nobility of the land, came in with the Duke of Alua, and what
oppression of the commons, and with and for them both, what wars and waste of
those estates to this hour? The like perhaps may be alleged of Ireland under
her Majesty's deputies (at least the Irishrie so pretend) iustifiying their
present rebellion upon their harsh hand over them; though (questionles) herein
they have little reason, but rather do bite and whine at once, and are turned
rebels for not knowing in their sauagerie when they are well, who were it
Queen Mary's days (how ere they herewith pretend religion) as little would
they be loyal. They want but to have tasted the Spaniard a while to become
true again to England.

As for the Infantaes estate here (if of the two that be it the Jesuits had
rather, and that withal her own country would assent to her residence here)
besides the absurdities and inconveniences hereof already cited this is
another, and not the least (to wit) the unlikelihood of her ever having issue,
being issue-lesse at these years, whereby would remain the same uncertainty
of an English heir after her that now is. In lieu whereof, what factions were
it not likely she would during her reign over us maintain for her brother,
and his heirs succession to the Crown? what ielousies? nay perhaps what not
civil wars? she being a party already aggreeued for the supposed wrongs done
by England both to her father and her brother, for which she would happily
think by this means to make them full amends, or at least if such her
practice should not prevail, to show her self in so assaying a very loving
sister. It is not her laying open her Low Countries, and her brothers
dominions, no not his Indies to our traffic in the mean time (which as well
is like to come to pass ere long (God willing) through their enforced amity
with us) can counteruaile this hazard alone, muchlesse all the aforesaid.

Nor is it yet half an age, since the Spanish nation being admitted into our
country in all love, and in the greatest knot of amity that may be imagined
(to wit) by the marriage of their Prince with ours, at what time and that in how
short a time, we were as willing to be rid of the^ (through their ill
deseruings) as some of our country men with the loss of their lives showed
themselves alittle before unwilling of their coming, we may yet very well
remember. We may yet very well remember the chargeable use they then made of
our country in their own wars both by land and sea, and our loss of Caleis the
while. We may yet remember their insolence amongst us, and proud misgouernance
to the contempt of our nobility, much more of our commons; for which no sooner
was that knot between the two nations broken by the death of yt blessed Queen,
but straight they were made to know how great disgust they had given us, with
the loss of some of their lives for a farewell. If then coming in as friends,
they deserved as foes at our countries hands; how much more coming in as foes
(though nere so much under the covert of religious friends) may we think to
find them cruel and tyrannous, namely having had since, so much matter of
revenge ministered them from hence as they assume? Or why did they not then (if
their title were such to the Crown of England as the Jesuits suggest) make use
of that opportunity for their subiecting us? But (sure) it seems it was not the
will of God, both for that they took no such counsel then, and also (if they
meant any such matter) Gods sequestring the Spanish Prince from out the
realm, and taking away the Queen all at one time. Nay more, to note the will
of God in this behalf, he also took away the issue he had (as I have
credibly heard) by our Queen; as it were to show that he would not have
England any way Spanish, though England it self never so feign would. Great
and ample dowre he likewise laid unto Englands crown by the match, and yet it
was not Gods will that all that should win England Spanish. How much more may
we then hope in God never to see it such by being laid to Spain, especially
so baselie and abiectlie as these hot-spurre Fathers would have it; seeing that
Spain laid to it in so wooing wise could not make it Spanish.

Moreover, what reason were it that Spain should be so great above all her
neighbors, as by the possessing of England? nay, what prejudice were it not to
all christendom, considering the proud and tyrannous humor of that nation?
Say that we for our parts should have Catholic religion by the means, and
with it peace and traffic with all christendom, and all christendom the
same with us; and perhaps all christian Princes peace with one another too,
which by our practices (say the Jesuits) has bin, and daily is infringed.
Grant we all this, does it therefore follow that Spain is sure to have ever a
good king over her, to administer such her greatness in good manner? yea, is
Spain ever sure of a Catholic king under whom to continue Catholic it
self, and all her estates under her? In the five and twentieth year of the
reign of our Sovereign Lord and King Henry the eight, Catholic religion
was as unlikely to have bin suppressed in England, as it is at this day in Spain
under Philip the third, and yet (we see) how soon after it followed, and what
it is now come to. The like may chance to Spain under a king according: and
by the same reason why may not we also hope for Catholic religion yet once
again here in England, as they not expect the Protestant? it being no more
impossible, nay more probable for a Protestant-Prince to return Catholic,
seeing that magna est veritas and praualet, then for a Catholic one to turn
Protestant, it being too true that ruimus in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata.

But say that Spain should be so fortunate in her Sovereigns as to have them
ever Catholic, whereby Catholic religion still to flourish in their
dominions; yet neither does that take away all other mischiefs which may
follow of their greatness, as breach with their neighbour-Princes, and so wars
abroad (and be but for employment of such spirits as happily would else
through peace be tumultuous at home) and consequently oppression of their
subjects for the maintaining of those wars, especially their subjects lying
so far off as England, and governed by their deputies, together with a
thousand such like mischiefs which are incident to great Monarchs as from
their greatness, and having more then they can well weld though nere so
Catholic and good otherwise. And if it be so (as the Jesuits calumniate) that
England alone troubles all the world, how much more (trow ye) would all the
world be troubled, were Spain and England one under a quarrellous Prince? or
rather how would not England then have her part of troubles with all the world
which now is quiet? Great are the hazards that are from greatest Monarchs both
to the Church and the civil state of the world, for that their taking to be
bad (as most men are naturally so inclinde, especially when above control)
carries all in like manner with them, making their greatness the counterpoise,
or ouer-biasse to goodness, as we read in the Greek Emperors, whose
aptness to heresy wrought continual schisms in the church, till in the end
God gave that Empire with her Emperor over for the same to the Turk, as
aforesaid. So likewise before them, the Roman Emperors, who being many bad
to one good, what disorder wrought not their example, and authority throughout
all their Empire? for which it pleased God at last to dissolve it, and convert
it into many kingdoms and Provinces as now we see it; whereby though one
state or kingdom should miscarie under an unhappy Prince, yet the rest may
tarry good and prosperous.

If then such has bin the providence of God, to depose the Roman Empire from
her greatness for her sins as from her greatness, and has disposd it into
distinct states and Provinces as in reformation; why then do the Jesuits so
labor to erect a Spanish Empire against such the providence of God for the
evils he saw in the Roman? or rather why not let England continue English,
and work it self Catholic again (if it please God) in English manner? Are
they so much of God almighties counsel, as to know whether is more to his
honor, the proceeding practice of the Seminaries (as hitherto) for the good of
his church and our country, or the Spanish sword? Or rather what christian
spirit is not able to distinguish whether of the two is more perfect? and how
little behoofefull, nay how unlawful is the drum and ensign where the word
is likely to speed, as here amongst us it daily makes fair show to do.
Brief; a Heathen man could see it to be better, and say thereupon: Cedant arma
togae, concedant laurea linguae.

Which such their Spanish reign if it should once come to pass in our
country (as I beseech God I may never see it either with or against our wills)
how hard, yea impossible a matter it were to euict that nation out again,
Sicilie, Naples, Lumbardie, and the greater part of the Low Countries does at
this day teach us by their lamentable, and extreme bondage; not that Spaines
valor maintains such her dominion over them, but her Indies. Most of all
absurd therefore it is to think it likely, that which Father Cowbucke by his
papers and agents so labors to persuade (viz.) that of their own good nature
they will selfelie avoid the realm, after having once established the
Catholic religion in it, which (says he) is all that the Catholic king
desires. Oh unsavory assertion, and arguing rather that simplicity which
ought to be in a religious person, then the subtilty that is in him. As though
if a reconciled foe be never to be thoroughly affied; a present enemy for
pretended wrongs, and who daily seeks and assayes to be revenged, may having
once the law in his own hand) be so far forth trusted as with a kingdom;
seeing that for it what faith, what justice ever took place in this world? Or
as though the pretense to continue our said holy religion amongst us, may not
as strongly persuade him (were religion his mere motive) to settle in this
land, as to come to inuest the same.

Oh (cousin) show ye me where ever religion and arms marched so together; show
ye me where ever ye read of a Prince that vanquishing a country by the sword,
ever left it but so; which properly is no leauings but loss. Especially a
crown so sweet and so hard to win as Englands, is it likely the Spaniard
would not esteem it worth the holding? or leave such a realm as this to it
self, contenting him only to have it to friend when he may enjoy it subject?
Believe me (cousin) they are no such Aesops coxcombs, as finding so rich a
jewel as England, to leave it as a thing of naught; they having used the
Indies long, and being better iewellers then so: nor are they so te^perate a
people, neither yet is Spain so much the Paradise of the world (it being for
the most part a very barren and desert soil) that they should hold England so
little worth as not worth the holding. If Englands amity heretofore with
Spain have not deserved a worthier opinion at her hands then so; at least her
late enmity has: during which what boot we have made of it both by land and
by sea all the world knows; what it of us it may put it in her eye. Besides,
the dear proffer the Spaniard made for England as England, as well as for
revenge in 88. with the loss both of their honors and lives, and the infinite
charges of their Armado, shows plainly at what price they were willing to
have purchaste it, at a less then which it is not likely that they would ever
have left it. Tush tush, it is very well known that the Spaniard so esteems
of England, that not being able to make it Spanish, he could be content that
even Spain were English, for some, yea sundry honors which it has, and
Spain wants. At least their wise and valorous king the Emperor Charles so
esteemed of England, that in his precepts to his son the last Phillip on his
deathbed, he stuck not to make this one, and that the greatest earthly one
unto him in these words. And (son) in brief; Paz con Yngalatierra, y guerra
con todo el mondo; as much to say as; Son, be at peace with England, and
war with all the world. How base were it then in us to disesteeme our nation
so, as to wish it under another, which so highly, so noble an Emperor
commended? and which the Jesuits themselves find to flow with milk and honey
unto them, even under persecution? There is no question but greatly may
religion sway a Prince, but yet not so as to leave a Crown. We read of many
that have transgrest, yea, left all religion for a Crown, but of very few
that ever left a Crown for religion. Yea, most Princes hold it a point of
religion, never to leave a Crown till a Crown leave them.

See then (I pray) how silly an Orator father Cowbucke is in this his gentle
persuasion of the Spaniard, and how ungentle a mind he bears to his country
(being indeed no gentleman) and lastly (somewhat to excuse the man) how well
it steeds him to seem the religious in this Paradox for his credits sake,
though thereby he discredit his religion in but seeming so. Neither for your
credit-sake (cousin) will I any further persuade you herein, least in so
seeming to undervalue your judgment in a clear case, I should seem not
only the discurteous unto you, but also uncivil. For, what generous nature in
the world would endure his country to be conquered by strangers? or what sot
imagine in a conqueror a voluntary abandon of a Crown, seeing that in such a
case above all other worldly cases whatsoever, Non minor est virtus quam
quaerere, parta tenere.

Passing politickelie notwithstanding deals the king of Spain, seeing his
right to this realm and his successes of war for the same have hitherto bin
no better, to entertain religious men in the pursuit thereof; for that it is
much what a religious person once turned politic may persuade with the vulgar,
making pure religion and devotion his colors, then which no Oratorie can so
enueigle affections not only to covet, but also to undertake matter even
against nature. And on the other side, too cheap were England won to Spain
with so piping: neither need the king of Spain greatly repine at the few
Caricks, and towns we have taken and spoiled of his; neither yet at his
Catholic charges in maintaining two English Seminaries at this day to our
Church in his country, if he can carue himself so easy and so ample amends:
Which (as touching the Seminaries quatinus under Jesuits discipline) and also
his foresaid Armado of 88. if his charity be so great toward us, or rather not
his ambition (for before the miscarriage of that Armado on our cost those
Seminaries were not erected in Spain, but since) are there not (I pray) other
kingdoms as well as England, upon which he may likewise practice such his
Armadoes first, and then after also erect them the like Seminaries, namely
with Iesuit-superiours over them; which if the one were without the other, or
that the Seminaries had been erected before the Armado, were no such
suspicious dealing, but (truly) very fair and friendly play like to the last
French kings in that of Rhemes; but as thus England may well say. Timeo Danaos
and dona ferentes; and the rather for that father Cowbucke has of late gotten
diverse of the youths hands of those Seminaries to the Lady Infantaes title (as
we hear) which (alas poor man) will never earne him the price of a
Cardinals hat, much less the honor to wear it.

But (as I say) if the king of Spaines zeal be such as needs he will be doing;
why there is Denmark and Scotland two ample kingdoms both heretical; why
has he no Jesuits there, or why sends he no Armadoes thither? Oh (belike) he
sees that they have kings to defend them, and England but a Queen, but a
woman; whom (happily) being such, he would have the world think he came a
wooing unto that year: which (truly) besides the manner being so martial,
was also unlawful in the maine; seeing it is not allowable for any Catholic,
much less the Catholic king, the king of Catholics to marry two sisters
(though the one were Catholic) without dispensation, much less perforce. Or
if he will say that not those kingdoms but England has wronged him, what is
that (I pray) for Englishmen to betray therefore their country unto him? or
why should not we the rather for that reason suspect his pretense of religion
in his coming? Shall the son because the father has done his neighbor
wrong, join with that neighbor to cut his fathers throat? God defend: or were
it religion or morality in that neighbor to make such use of the son?
truly no. And yet such is Spaines dealing with our country and us at this
day, and so good Casuists are Jesuits.

Grant we (as the Jesuits suggest) that our country has and does maintain
Spaines rebels against her, sacked her towns, invaded her tresures both by sea
and land; yet were it so, and that it became subjects to define their
Sovereigns affairs of state; all that an English-Catholicke man might do in
this case, is but to be sorry at the injustice, and rather abide the fortune
of his country for the fault (what God shall award) then be a traitor to it
therefore; and it is innocence enough in him not to be guilty of his countries
sin, howsoever he rue it in her shame. And who can tell whether happily the
next age may raise up an English Sovereign whose amity with Spain may more
avail Spain, then these pretended domages come to* At least wise Chronicles
do tell, how that Spain has of auncientie more then once or twice been
beholding to English favors far above these trespasses, which we never read
it requited yet, till now that England pays it self. All the requital that
may be so termed is the two Seminaries which at this day it maintains to our
Church (as aforesaid) if at least he disparage it not with an usurping
intention, whereof the Armado of 88. and the Jesuits practices (whom he has
deputed over those Seminaries) make too palpable show. But howsoever these his
Seminaries may be thought requitals to Englands former favors; sure I am they
are no benefits so of worth, as for which English Catholics should be
traitors to their Prince and country in Spaines behalf: much less the kings
pensions to our people in his dominions, which being greater in title the^ they
are in truth, I do not see but their far sleighter services may deserve them
then the sale of their dear country, and their honors.

I speak this by proof (good cousin) both in my self (as you know) and too
many my good friends that yet are in his, and his sisters service; the more
was my fault when as it was, though thereby the more my experience in dislike of
that nation. Furthermore, thus much I assure ye of my certain knowledge, that
in the action of 88. against our country, the king of Spain made no such show
or countenance to our nation then serving him in his army in the
Low Countries, as also in the Armado, as to make us think, ^ee came either in
love or religion against it (as the Jesuits here suggest both in that and in
the next pretended) but the clean contrary, that is, revenge and rapine. For,
besides that neither in the one, nor in the other there was any Brief of his
holiness promulged, ne (as before is shown) ought to have been promulged in
allowance of that action, whereby the Catholicke-subiects of this land to have
been bound to concur thereunto; the Spaniard in each part notoriously
deserud the clean contrary at our hands. My eye was a witness of a notable
affront done by a Spanish captain unto my Lord of Westmerland in Bruges, at
the very instant of the Armadoes being on our coast (the Duke of Parma then
lying with all his Court there, and his Camp there abouts) namely, upon his
show of disgust that he was no more regarded, the service being for his
country.

In like manner did I not then see after our firing the Spanish-fleet in the
narrow seas, the young Prince of Ascoli at his fugitiue-arriuall to Dunkerke
the morrow after, where the Duke of Parma entertained him on the strond; him (I
say) in answer to the Dukes question what news of the Armado vncap himself,
and grinning toward heaven swear by it, that he thought not only all the
four elements were Lutherans that night and all that morning, but also God
himself; so blasphemous was his Spanish-spirit, much less religious as to
come to conquer a country for religion.

Better yet of the two, and merrier was the Duke of Ossuna (who at this present
serves the Infanta before Ostend) his representation, and answer to the then
king of Spain within a while after; who being the first man that arrived at
the Court with the successeles news of the Armado, stuck a distaffe at his
side, and a spindle at his back in steed of rapier and dagger, and so showed
himself to the king while he was at Mass. Whom the king after Mass asking
what success God had sent, he merrily pointed his majesty to those his
arms, saying and swearing that since they had fought so woman-like, and that a
woman had foiled them, they were worthy before God and man to wear from thence
forth none other. Whereupon the king hastily stepped to the altar, and taking a
silver candlestick from off the same, swore a monstrous oath that he would
waste not only al Spain, but also all his Indies to that candlestick, but he
would be avenged of England; such was the Catholicke-kings religion (forsooth)
toward our country, or rather his profane ambition and despite: for which it
has pleased God (who neither allows conquests for religion, as may appear by
the successes wars of Christians in the Holie-land of yoare, much less for
mere ambition) to speed his two like attempts since as bad as that first. This
latter news of Ossuna in the manner said, came reported into the Low Countries
from the Court of Spain, and confirmed by sundry letters to gentlemen in the
Spanish regiment where I then served.

I will not tell ye (for I cannot) how many unthrifts came to the Duke of
Parmaes camp from out all the Provinces of Christendom, in hope and vaunt to
make themselves whole by England: what waging for our noblemens heads; what
questioning Sir William Stanlies soldiers where the riches of our country
most lay; what lust after our women-kind, yea our Ladies by every rascal
soldier; and what villainy not? I saw and heard all this (cousin) and a great
deal more, and worse, and therefore I may safely say it and swear it for a
certain unto you. Moreover, to confirm this assertion of Spanish-impietie
toward our country, I will give you a Flemmish instant for the same. My father
was the man whom I have often heard tell, how that the morrow after the
Spaniards entering the town of Mastreicht in Brabrant by assault, he there saw
in cold blood a Spanish soldier, to whom a poor Burgar of the town came
suppliant on his knees in the open street, and besought him for his life,
protesting that he ever was a Catholic from his cradle, the said wretched
Spaniard to murder him nevertheless, saying: oh Flemming, then will thy soul
go the white way, and much good may it do thee.

I conclude then, that if the Spaniard be such toward Flemmish Catholics, and
also no kinder (then is said) toward English as yet in the pursuit of his
dominion over us (when in all wisdom he should use us most benignelie, though
but dissemblingly, whereby the rather to vvin our affections, which is the
easiest and surest conquest of all other) what other may both Protestant and
Catholic expect at his hands here in England another day upon his
atchieueme^t by arms? No less unworthily have the Jesuits carried themselves
in those parts, and els-where in the kings dominions toward our gentlemen,
doing them so many indignities and disgusts as I shame to tell, though meet
they were to be known in honor of our gentlemen's patiences, as well there
as here at home for the Catholic cause. Only here and there a skip-lack they
have advanced to fodder and clothes scarce competent, for being their
obsequious Implements in whatsoever disloyalty they would employ them against
their country, vvhiles gentlemen of estimable parts they have misregarded, yea
discarded for being more loyal. In vain therefore do the Jesuits persuade us
the king of Spaines honorable usage of our nation after a conquest, who
together with them before the same entreat it so dishonourablie: and more then
vain, yea accursed were we to be so caught with their pipe (as they
pretend of grace) as to incur mis-nature.

Stand we (cousin) stand we that are Englands upon English, and let all
foreign rule go by: stand we upon the express Statute of our country
(being Catholic) inhibiting all foreign temporal jurisdiction within the
same. Stand we against, yea strongly withstand we Fa. Cowbucke and his
Societies unnatural practices in Spanish behalf, and whatsoever foreign
nations almighty Armadoes, remembering still that facilius est excludere quam
expellere: and also still remembering how if the Catholic church have
condemned the Albigenses of old, and the Caluinists of late in France; the
monocular-Taborite Zisca in Bohemia; John of Leyden, and Th. Muncer in
Germany, and others els-where, as well for managing religion by arms, as for
heretics; how much less lawful it is in the Catholic king (being a child
of the church) so to do: and how very Zuinglians the Jesuits are that thus
preach Christ unto us with a Bible in one hand, and a sword in the other:
lastly remembering still the honor and duty of a Patriot, the honors of our
forefathers, and singularly the honors of this our dear country England. I,
I, let every cup have his own cover, and every country his own king. I
water were good to drink with wine (quoth a good fellow) God himself would
have put it into the grape; but every simple is best. And far more Catholic,
and far more natural it is, to hope one day to be beholding to our own
State for Catholic liberty, then to a foreign, with so desperate
conditions and against all religion. If we our selves within our selves
banished religion, why may not we our selves within our selves bring it in
again, the Protestant now being no more unlikely to be avoided, then the
Catholic then was. I mean (if it so please her Majesty) or at least but to
tolerate it, which as well here as in France and other neighbour-States,
might well stand with that in request without hazard, yea with security to
her royal person and estate.

But this is a point meerelie in her Majesty's grace to complie vvithall, and
to too happy for us to be easily expected at her hands, considering her
Highness inurd displeasure with the Sea-Apostolicke even ab incunabulis; also
since, for the Bulls aforesaid; and now lastly and that daily, for the
disloyal practices of the Jesuits against her estate, which we all rue
without difference. Hard it were (I say) for us to hope for so happy a day,
considering also how all the three estates of the realm are engaged in the
contrary, and all the laws of the land stand expresselie opposite and penal
hereunto. Nevertheless it does me good to think, how if such a grace might
be fall us but even tolerablie, and in never so mean a manner from our own
natural Sovereign, how much more gratefully and gladlier all true
Catholics would accept it, then at an inuadours hands never so indulgentlie.
Her Majesty for her own part (doubtless) is passing meek and gracious, both
in respect of her sex, and now her venerable age, that had not disloyal
practices displeased her, 'twas possible enough that her condescent might have
been so benign unto us long ago; the rather remembering how heartily her
Highness was applauded to her Crown at the first by Catholics, and the same
set upon her Royal head, not by a Protestant but a Catholic Bishop.

Moreover, her Majesty has a wise Council which cannot but see, that though
for the present time the estates ecclesiastical and civil both of our
country being so thoroughly settled as they are, it is meet (they think) and
easy (we know) to keep the Catholic under and suppressed, yet what hereafter
in a change, and in a troubled State our party may work it self, they may
rather perhaps guess, then prevent. Sure I am we are not so ignoble a party
in the land for all the persecution these forty years, but that the unity
thereof with the rest at such a day will perhaps be as requisite for our
commonweal as any other. The consideration vvherof, together with others no
less important may somewhat prevail with so prudent a Council as her
Majesty's is, if not for a toleration of our rites, at least a mitigation of
our aggriefes in the mean time, and the rather for that sufficit diei malitia
sua.

Howsouer, this likelihood we have of Catholic religion yet once again in
our country by our own, not foreign; neither yet warlike but peaceful and
even voluntary means, in that both English Saints-seed is plentifully sown
for it any time these forty years, and also many Conuertites come in
daily, and out of question infinite more would, were it not that Leo est in
via (viz) the penal laws of ye land. But what is that to the will of a
Prince? or what Princes heart is not in the hand of God? Who erected all of
nothing can he not translate any thing* Can he not convert the instruments of
his anger, yea malice it self to grace, and to his honor if he please? It is
neither the archers hand, nor yet the aim giuers, but God alonelie that
directs the arrow where to light; not but what they do is their deed
nevertheless. I say thus much (cousin) by what we have seen of late happened in
our country in favor of the Catholic faith even by the Protestants hand, in
suppressing (though not in that sense) the great Puritan-partie, being the
greatest enemy to our Holies of all the heresies in this land. For which great
pity it was, so noble a subject as the Earl of Essex, and with him so many
worthy gentlemen to be made use of by it in his discontents to the end we
saw. Such spirit have Puritanes, and so unfortunate was that poor Earl: and
namely so unfortunate those few Catholics that of ignorance (I dare swear)
of his project stuck to him in those suds. Had her Majesty's
Catholicke-subiects but a quater the grace that Puritanes have in this realm,
yea but her bare conniuence, I assure me their gratitude would not be so pure*
but pure in deed; they being so loyal as they are (setting Jesuits aside) even
under her frown.

And as for her Highness after so many triumphs over both her covert and
ouert enemies, fairelie (me thinks) with her royal honor it may stand what
even now I touched of a religious-toleration to us her poor Catholic
subjects; seeing that very proper it is to a Lions noble nature as well
parcere subiectis, as, dobellare superbos. Having hitherto done and daily
doing the latter (thorough Gods secret judgments) to do the other now can no
ways seem in her of force or fear. Wherein notwithstanding if her Highness
please not to be so indulgent Princess unto us, and that our prayers are not
yet worthy to be so far forth heard of God (through the ill deseruings of
the Jesuits in our church, and at her Majesty's hands) what part and portion of
duty remains unto us other then that we have hitherto performed? (viz) still
our instant prayers to God for it, and for want of it Patience, knowing that In
patientia possidebimus animas nostras: also continuance of passiue-fortitude
being willed to be Fortes in bello, and not to fear those qui occidunt corpus,
anima autem non habent potestatem: likewise of Perseverance, seeing ye qui
perseuerauerit vsque in finem saluus erit: and lastly, and still between of
Hope, for that spes non confundit. This (cousin) is true Catholic religion in
this case, and true English nature and valor, true faith, and true charity:
and what the Jesuits persuade us toward a conquest of our dear country upon
pretense of nere so much piety, were abominable disloyalty in us to our
Prince; and also base pusillanimitie and diffidence in God, we to concur
thereunto.

No no, a State so settled as this under a Princess so magnanimious, so
mighty, so fortunate, is not likely to be altered in our favors by
Jesuitical and Spanish-braues; but contrariwise by our humble suits, services,
submission and meek deserts. Thus and no otherwise must we hope to incline her
Majesty, and the State to favor us, if not for our religion-sake, at least
for our loyalties: and (please God) the Popes holiness and the king of Spain
would heretofore or yet would seek to win her Majesty, both to them and us
by fair means, rather then by soul, a course which was yet never taken. My
Lord of Durham this Parliament-time made a Sermon at Paul's cross (as I heard)
against a toleration to us by the state; I pray God incline his Lordships
heart, and the rest of his rank, and generally all the realm to a more
moderation. Of as hard beginning as this has oftentimes through Gods goodness
sorted a fair end, and so there may of this if Catholics can but dis-Iesuit
themselves now another while toward the State, and seek to be beholding rather
to it then to Spain, which latter cannot (out of doubt) be but with utter
misfortune to our country. And why should not we the Catholics of England
suit our fidelities and love (I say not our religion) to our
Protestant-Princesse, as well as the Protestants of France do theirs to their
Catholic king; whereby we to enjoy the same peace, yea favors at her Highness
hands here, as they do at his there? Or is it well done in them to do so, and
were it ill in us? Is it either for our honor or ease to be in her Majesty's
disgust, when we may joy in her grace? Fie, that Jesuits should transform us
into such cra-fishes, as to make our opinions go so a-skew from our best
advantages. For my own part, I am verily persuaded, that as the Israelites
mutinies against God in the desert did prorogue at his hands their arrival in
the Holie-land, so likewise the disloyal practices of the Jesuits hitherto
against all religion and nature amongst us, has not only kept back from us
all favors at our Princes hands, but further incenst her more against us; for
which I pray God forgive and amend them. If our Savior stayed almost 4000.
years before ever it pleased him to come to redeem the world, how is it that
these Fathers cannot have patience with our country one 44. years? and if
also his redeeming it was by his dying, how haps it that their spirits are set
so all upon killing? Truly, the reason is that Christ was wholly for us, and
they wholly for themselves; and all his Saints stood wholly on the passive,
these wholly on the active fortitude, or rather quarrellous actiuitie.

And thus (my good cousin) to conclude my discourse upon this point, you may see
how harsh a Society the Jesuits are, and how speenatiuelie they run on in
their mis-grounded conceits and purposes, as well in their revenge against the
Seminaries as aforesaid, which they could advise no fitter means to do it by
then by libell; as also in this of State, and of our church, which (forsooth)
but by conquest they can see no other means to right; and therefore have (as
we see) very virtuously erected an Archpriest the head of their faction
both touching the one and the other, themselves being all the brain thereof,
and he (good man) but the bare forehead. I could wish the Fathers not to be
ouer-hastie in encresing his faculties from Rome, till either they see another
Armado ready in Spain for our country; or that he can use these he has
already better then against his own brethren, and in maintenance of a libell.
And as for us (cousin) of the laytie, let us as touching the present Schism, do
also our parts as well as the Appeala^ts by their Appeal, to quench this fire in
our church by every ones throwing in his paile-full of water (as by this my
answer to you I profess to do) and as for the latter, let us remember we are
Englishmen, and also Catholics, whereby bound to be the rather true English.

Let us remember how altogether as worthy, and as able are English-mens sons
to inherit and predomin England, as Spaniards Spain; and how as hitherto
England has bin selfely-substantiue, so it to scorn to become now an
adjective, much more a subiectiue to Spain or any other nation in the world.
Also let us in favor of our country repute even their Holinesses Bulls so
highly tending to the subversion of our country, as surreptiue, and granted
forth by them as men, and not as Popes: in which respect an English Catholic
to go against them to be no more unlawful, then were unlawful the last
Emperor Charles his wars against the then Pope. For, the matter being a
matter of fact and not of faith, as easy may his holiness err in his
proceedings therein as any other Prince; especially tending to war, and to a
tradition of gentis in gentem, whereunto his commission is scarce competent (as
before is said under correction) nor yet the holy Ghost to be thought therein
his inspirer; but rather (as it is plain) some hot-spurre Jesuits, and the
Spaniard.

Such for my own part is my opinion thereof, and such (I thank God) my
conscience toward my country, that though it be good fishing (as they say) in
a troubled water, and that my estate be such as that to better it I need not be
squemish to wet my self a little; yet rather then be so vn-Catholicke or
vn-English, I protest I had rather never eat bit of fish or flesh whiles I
live. And such is also my opinion of you, knowing you to be a gentleman, such,
as though the Jesuits have or may seduce your religious nature (under color of
religion) in inferior matters; yet in this so capital an honor to your name
and nation (I dare say) you will never forget your self. Neither doubt I, but
wherein they have hitherro distrayed you in the matter of the Appeal against
the Priests, my love (whereof you are and may be ever certain) together with
these my reasons which you have read will reclaim you, or else (truly cousin)
you do your self a great deal more wrong then me.

I have in my love to you already exceeded the limits of a letter,
nevertheless to the end that plenarie conuersus confirms fratres tuos against
these Fathers unchristian and unnatural impostures against our church and
country, I will say a little more unto you of the^ in general, and also of
some of them in especial, whereby you may the better discern their vndeserts
as well of all Christendom as of us here at home, whatsoever they say
themselves their deseruings to be in Indie. Which forasmuch as we have no
authenticke credence of, either from the Sea Apostolic, or otherwise so much
as morrall, that such their own reports of their well doings there are true, I
do not see but the same are as Gerunds that want Supines, whereby their
fatherhoods to stand to the readers courtesy to believe them, especially far
traueilers being naturally vainglorious, and vainglory very apt to tell a
lie.

A kinsman of mine of good worship in the North (whom you know as well as I)
has done them the honor, not only resolutelie to believe them himself, but
more, to translate their tre-annuarie relations from Iaponia into our English,
whereby he has purchased them a good opinion amongst many his friends to whom
he has imparted the same; which zeal (certes) I cannot greatly blame in the
good old gentleman, he doing it in a religiousnes, and the matters tending to
Catholicke-edification whether they be true or false. Nevertheless their
vanity I cannot but condemn if they have written ought other then truth, as
(being such manner of men as partly you have already read, and now I Will show
you more) it is not unlikely but they have done, though not in most, yet in
many things from thence: which also the rather we have cause to suspect, for
that diverse other religious Orders doing daily their Evangelical endeavors in
those East-parts as far forth, if not farther then they, (as we may read in
the history of China and else where) yet they report not one word thereof, but
all of their own: which such their concealing a truth importing so highly
Gods honor to be known as any thing they do report, is (sure) a privative
lie in them; and they that will not stick to lie so, it is to be feared they
will as little doubt to tell a positive and a real untruth, if it be either for
their honor or advantage, especially having (as they have by means of the
far distance) the pas-port of vncontroule to patronize them. And so (by their
leaves) it is to be more then presumed in many things they have done, so
unlikely and incongrue are sundry of their relations. And yet in all the
Legend of their glorious exploits in Quabucondonoes Island, we find no mention
of any Jesuit that ever offered himself slave to a Chinez for his transport
over to that continent in zeal to preach Christ there, nor yet of 41. Martyrs
of them at one clap; neither yet of two hundred thousand heathen souls
baptized by them in (I wot not) how short a time: all which and a great deal
more we read of Saint Augustines Order in the Phillipines fair before ever any
Jesuit came into the Indies.

Besides, neither is Iaponia, or other the countries of Indie where they are,
such as do stand at this day in competence or Paragon with Spain, as ours and
other Nations here in christendom do; for which the Jesuits should there
(like as here) sow factions for Spanish-State; neither is it there amongst
those Barbarians that they care to erect their tabernacles as here in Europe,
whereof they are naturals: for which (I infer) they may the rather deserve
well in Indie then in Europe, having there nothing to intend quae sua sint,
but only quae dei, and the propagation of Christian belief as true religious
men ought. Grant we therefore ( saluo all exception to the vnautenticknesse of
their relations) that they are good Indians, and please God they were but half
as good English; it follows not therefore that to be true which a certain
wise man here amongst us in his unwise treaty asseuers; that they are so
excellent me^ above all excellence, that in choice of our Ghostly Father we
are bound if any of them be in place to go to them before any other, and that
(forsooth) upon pain of a deadly sin. Who ever would have thought a wise man
though but nomine tenus, could have been so very a dottard as to publish such
a tract, so absurd as well in sundry others as in this one point in
fuper-exaltation of the Jesuits. Oh were the Jesuits men of due modesty, how
could they endure so gross a flattery, it being an attribute more then meet
to Christ's vicar himself. But they have a number of such od
Pensionarie-spirits throughout all the parts of Christendom to grace them to
the people (they seeeming to profess their kingdom wholly of this world,
which Jesus never did) that oftentimes with ouer-gracing them they disgrace
them: and so likewise do the Jesuits themselves in such their singularity of
spirit.

As for exmple, is it not notable singularity in them to leave to be called
after their Founders name Ignatians or Loyolians (which all other orders are)
but by the high name of Jesus; a name which no christian creature was ever yet
christened (by) but (in) for reverence sake, but by other his Saints and
servants names? Also is it not singularity in them, they professing themselves
so singular religious, and taking upon them the 3. vows as far forth as any
other religious men, not to rise at midnight to the Quire, which all other
orders do? Also to go so distinctlie habited (that is to say vncould) from
all other religious men? likewise to fare so far more daintilie in their diet
then they? And which is most singular of all, to put themselves into the
Letanies to be praide for by name before all other orders of the church, yea,
and before Domnum Apostolicum too, whom they have expresselie left out, and in
his steed put in these words (viz) Vt societatem nominis Jesus, and then after,
Et omnes Ecclesiasticos ordines in sancta religione conseruare digneris, so
mount-Goddardian-high they are in their own vainglory, and yet so
moulhill-low in the Church, as yet not a hundred years old; nor yet their
Founder to be found in the calender of Saints as before is said. For which their
blemishes and many more the like, yea worse a great deal (if they did it in
that humility) a man might well hold with such their Petition, seeing indeed
for to too many not only their blemishes, but also their very gross blots
they have great need to be prayed for before all others, and not for their so
excellent deserts. They are so passing vainglorious a Society, that call ye
it the very Tetragrammaton of the Catholic church, and of all the christian
world, I warrant ye it will nere a whit offend their modesty or make them
blush, so much have they gotten the Indian-hue, and so singular a dottard is
singularity.

Again, is it not singularity in them (being religious) to affect rule over
the sccular clergy; also to bring arms and conquest into the Catholic
church, so contrary to all Scriptures, and the practice of the same hitherto
(as before is discoursed) and to that end they to manage matter of State more
machiuelianlie then Machiuell himself? as appears by their erection of the
Archpriest (which is also a title of singularity they have given him) and all
his cariages according to them and it? In effect, such singular persons proved
the knights of the Temple, for which God in the end gave them over into a
reprobate spirit, and so they ended; and so (I doubt me) will these ere long,
they being little less warlicke, but as very singular as they. And as they
are a Society thus singular, and singularity is the roof of all evil; so
have they their root according (viz) Radicem omnium maloru^ auaritiam, betwixt
which two extremes what medium may be expected at their hands you may imagine,
and in part I will show you.

First therefore, as for Avarice their other extreme, you are not to marvel
greatly thereat, both for that no vice commonly comes alone, neither is any
vice substantive of it self as the meanest virtue is, as also for that Pride
(you know) is a riotous vice, and a great swaggerer, and therefore requires
great costs and commings in, which but by Avarice cannot well be contrived.
Pride then being to have such a prop, the Jesuits greatest care is how to give
it a good glass, whereby it may not appear in them as it is in proper, but as
a virtue. For, so have they colored their singularity alleging for it the
Apostles precept, Aemulamini charismata meliora; wherein it cannot be denied
but (Aemulamini) they use, yea, and ouer-vse howsoever (charismata) they abuse.
So likewise for Avarice they have their allowance and approbation, though not
from the Apostle, but from themselves, and no ways in ordine ad Deum as
hypocriticallie they pretend all their actions, but verissime ad daemonem (viz)
herehence that they hold it lawful, vtiscientia in confessione; alias, to make
use or boot of men in confession, as before is touched; and how do they it (I
pray?)

First and foremost, when any penitent by their Retriuers means has made
choice of one of them for their ghostly Father, he makes it a dainty matter
to exhibit himself unto him on the sudden, but with much ceremony, and many
a white capo^ to fore-goe the way as to the reclusd king of the Abissines, or
rather as to volto santo in Rome, giving the Eligent to understand how his
Society is the last order in holy church, and therefore by all intendment the
perfectest; for which cause it has more privileges and faculties indulged it
from the sea Apostolic, then the Seminaries or all other religious orders
whatsoever, to communicate to their ghostly child. They tell him farther (or
rather to seem the modest, cause it to be told him by their said Retriuer)
that their coming to this vineyard of our church, is a supererogatiue office
of charity in them; they not being bound thereto by express profession, or as
members of the Seminaries (which they are not) and therefore the rather to be
welcomed and esteemed above them all: that they have extraordinary
correspondence and illumination, with and from the holy ghost as from a
perpendicular Apex or Zenith over their heads, by means whereof they have also
(they say) certain special spiritual rules and exercises, over and above
their foresaid external faculties and privileges from Rome; and also
super-ghostlie skill to distinguish of spirits, whereby to profit spiritually
their child more then all the church besides: and that by their means it was,
that we had here in England the benefit of the last years general Jubilee,
which (by their leaves) every Parson of a parish might for the going for have
obtained, so indulgent a mother is the Catholic church ever, but especially
at such a time: brief, that the laws of the land stand more penal against
them, then all other Priests or Catholics besides (which is untrue:) and that
generally they are the most envied and hated members of Christ's militant
spouse both of the Devil, the Turk, and the Heretic, then all religious
orders besides; yea, or then the Pope himself. All this and a great deal more
to this effect like mounte-banks they tell, or cause to be told the ghostly
Conny aforehand, whereby to indeere themselves unto him, and persuade him that
quicum eis non colligit, spargit: and in conclusion they will him therefore,
that how long time soever he was a Catholic before, to prepare him now to a
general confession (yea rebaptisme if they durst) whereby to prosper the better
under their new lore.

This introduction made (provided always that the Connie thus caught be a good
Mammonist, for a Jesuit is such a leach, that without Mamon in the vain he
will not easily fasten) then coape they, and so next have at all. Then (lo)
follows first a spiritual exercise, commendable (out of doubt) in it self
if it be not abused, but the Jesuits abuse it all to lucre, possessing the
Penitent whiles lie is in it, with so many scruples for his life past and also
to come, that he must think himself so very a worm (or rather so very a
fool) as not worthy to use his own, but to put all over as well what he
has, as what he is, to him his ghostly father; seeing that both being and
having (quoth he) all is but to be a saved soul, which to obtain what soul
would not give a whole world? For, quam commutationem faciet quis pro anima
sua? And, quid proderit homini totum mundum lucrari, animae autem suae
detrim^nlum facere? And therefore (mark the end) vade vende omnia (quoth he)
and da patribus.

With these gulleries (I mean as they use the^) my Jesuit makes himself sole
Steward (and that vnaccountant) of all his ghostly childs both soul and
substance, and him a very child indeed; so cunning warriners they are above
all that ever I knew: for, whereas all other warriners use to catch the Conie
with the purse-net, they for their parts catch the purse with the Conie,
whereby they are both purse and coney-catchers all in one. Is not this their
making use of men's consciences wholly to their own interests, like the Ape
which being liquorish of a Ches-nut in the fire, took a Chit that lay there by
a sleep, and with his foot rakte it out of the embers, and all to save his own
from burning, and to seem to do it mannerly? Or rather is not this a casting
men into a trance, and then a flat cutting off their heads? How many men of
worth and wealth have they drawn into their society by this guile? or wrought
to be their benefactors to their utter vndoings, not seeking to be acquainted
with any but for their own turns? How many in this la^d, specially widows,
and wome^-kind have they thus fetcht-vnder, assuming upon them all their
estates; the letting and setting of their lands; the paying of debts and
servants wages; the marketting, the rewarding even of Christmasse-capons, and
what not, al but pios vsus? weening it pleasant and commendable in them (though
religious) to be so very worldlings what in their lay-child they hold an
incumber. But this (cousin) is not yet (you may thank God) their case with you,
for that your father is living. Nevertheless how they use him in this kind,
with more then licking their own fingers, you may see before your eyes. You
may see, and I have heard you tell, both what decaie has been in your fathers
estate, and also what factions in his house ever since (you know) who came
thither, which before time were not. Yet neither your father nor you can find,
or at leastwise will not mend the amiss. The truth is that a Jesuit is
Piscator, but not like S. Peter Animarum so much as Pecuniarum; and therefore
his fishing is ever best in a troubled water. And this is the reason that
wheresoever he comes he troubles al, being clean opposite to Antelmus a
Sea-spirit, who never shows himself but after a storm, and they ever bring
storms with them; so as for their sakes the note of the Church, Benedictus may
well be changed into maledictus qui venit in nomine domini, not only in
England, but throughout all christendom. For, run ye over all the same, and
find me the city, the village, the house, where they are either many, or
any, but there is also faction. In cities, with all the religious there; in
villages, with the vicar, or cunstable; in houses, your fathers (as is said)
for example. Look into our Seminaries, and you shall find how peaceable that
of Rhemes ever was for not being under Jesuits, how fruitful of Saints, and
excellent men: and on the other side that of Rome under their Rectorate, how
never without faction, and less fertile of such honors to our Church, or
rather fertile of false brothers and Apostataes; and so likewise that of Spain.

They have so many querks and quiddits wherewith to make bate, and abuse
religion for their profit and pleasure, that it is very Puritanisme to tell.
And for I speak of Puritanisme; have you not (I pray) heard how not long ago
a Jesuit here in London erected a kind of family of love, lecturing by night
three or four nights together to his auditors al women, and those fair ones
for the most part? have you not heard the manner of the night-meetings for
fear (forsooth) of the persecution by day, and daemonij meridiani? and yet all the day time nothing but revel and feast? At least (I am sure) you have heard
of many, and do know some, who missing their wives the while, have scracht
their heads where it icht not, and bit their lips, and swore. Had such exercise
bin by day as in Puzzo bianco in Rome, it had been well; but the nightnes of
it, and that night by night, three or four nights together, and as many
days, oh (by your leave) that smackes to too Cornish. But this was soon
discovered, and as soon suppressed, though much (I dare say) against the Jesuit
his love rather then his charity, and also without any check at all to him
therefore to this day, either from his Provincial, or the Archpriest that
ever we heard of.

As often as I think of this occurrent here amongst us, applying it to their
easy living throughout all christendom besides; me thinks that not father
Ignatius Loyola, but some Pomponius Latus, or Macharonicus Festus should have
been their Founder; or that they are descended of the Fratricelli those
Lumbard-Libertines, with only their name changed into Patricelli: and yet for all that, the good men are partly to be excused too considering their wealth,
though not excusable for their wealth. For, omitting what is freely given them,
if their consciences be to gather it other ways, and in other countries as it
is in ours, I do not see what vow they need greatly to make of Poverty. For,
say that a man give them a thousand pounds in Pios vsus to be distributed by
their hand; if it be with the addition proprios, then there is no question but
they are honestly worth a thousand pounds at a clap: but say alienos, and name
ye with-all what alienos; yet in this case too they make it theirs, by
construing themselves verissime alienos before all others, as (truly) such they
are here in England (viz) aliens from all English-nature, Spanish-aliens,
aliens to all that is called English save only English money: for, so are they
Denizens more then due or worthy, were it but for such their
cosoning-constructions. Again, give a Jesuit such another sum of money in
Pios vsus in the neuter gender, neither expressing proprios, nor what alienos;
that also they make their own upon this ground, that qui tacet consentire
videtur, and qui contra me non est mecum est. Thus gull they the religious
minded toward them both quick and dead; whiles on the otherside what use they
make of such In-comes, besides their Bancoes and stocks richly going both
here and beyond sea, the present schism and scandals in our Church most
lamentably declare.

I pretermit in particular the large alms that daily has been, and is given
them here in England (a point which belongs to that part of Arithmeticke which
is called Multiplication) as first my Lord Burleighes-house in the Strand,
given them by a gentleman dying beyond the seas, and pretending title to that
plot: but this bequeath has a reference to the conquest; and good reason, for
that (I doubt me) they will not in haste wage that title against his Lordship
in this time. Three hundred pounds a year of inheritance given them els-where;
a hundred by another; a hundred marks in another place; and so (I think) in
infinitum, all conuayed over to them in uses till the Conquest: in so much as
with what is given them, and what they get besides (for all is fish that comes
to net with them, be it by excheate or cheating; as many prankes of theirs I
could discover unto you in that latter kind) I verily think their profits to
amount yeerelie to half as much as the Queens revenue by Recusants; so
lucratiuelie they begin where the old clergy of England left, and for which
(together with the many other scandals that proceeded from such their riches)
God has hitherto as we see and feel, given over his Church and our country
both, into ye heavy hand of heresy: though a great deal fouler and grosser
transgress is this of theirs at this day, then that of the old clergy; it
being in time of persecution, and that in full favor of the time. And yet for
all this so great bounty of Catholics unto them, they are the vngratefullest
persons under heaven to their Benefactors, if they have occasion to use them,
either here or beyond sea (as I have known it by some) as not a Jew more. Nor
ever was there more poverty both in the Seminaries, and likewise in the
prisons here at home, nor more faction over all then now, that they have thus
engrossed all charity to themselves. In which respect I could wish all
English-Catholickes especially my friends to be their own Almoners, or else if
they needs will do it by the hand of a Jesuit, that they bear as well an eye
over them, as a heart toward them, for (I assure them) they will else find
themselves gulled by their father-hoods daily more and more. I could also wish
that good Capuchine whosoever, that should happen to carry a Jesuit over a
brook, to examine and search him well for money before he take him up upon his
back, least he break his rule in carrying coin about him, and be forced
against the charity that was in S. Fraunces to slip him down (for saving his
said vow) into the stream. Lastly, I could wish both the Lay and Clergy of
our country to beware of all Zizaniaes amongst them, public or private;
present and to come; and to look well into the grounds of the same; in so
doing it is ten to one but they shall find either a Jesuit, or a Iesuited
person at one end of the line, so well they love to fish (as is said) in puddle
water, and frollicke in storms, and which is worst of all, when they have
served their turns by any, to laugh the party to scorn be he stranger or
their own vowed Implement.

Infinite is their practice in this kind, and their instruments as many; whom
first they make to their hand, and try thoroughly before they use them. And
that was the reason why that not long ago, a Gentleman of good sort my
acquaintance, whom they would very feign have wrought theirs; upon his not
making a general confession to his new father the Jesuit (as deeming it
impertinent though he instantly required the same) what did the good father?
forsooth, he took the confession which he made, and absolved him; but yet to
show his disgust, brought him not the blessed Sacrament the next day as he
promised, neither ever after came he at him. Was this (I pray) religious
dealing, or rather not most impious, so to seek to diue into a man's
conscience, whereby to discern radicallie (as it were) in the Sacrament what
mould he was made of? whether apt to serve their seditious turns or not,
without that they need to trouble themselves with any farther trial of the
man then thus briefly by the Sacrament, which of all other is the most
sincere? Could Machiauell himself have been so profane?

If then they dare to diue so sacrilegiouslie into men's consciences in the
Sacraments to serve their lewd turns, you may imagine how true the premises
are of their diuing into men's purses to the same end; and how much they would
scorn to come an Ace behind either Machiauell or his Master, in any other
paultrie whatsoever against either religion or morality. What wresting of
Scriptures, together with their consciences to their present turns? As for
example, the libeller asseuers all Neutrals in whatsoever controversy, to be
in the predicament of transgressors, yea enemies; because (says he) Qui non
est mecum, contra me est: and yet in almes-matters whereto any of them are
deputed distributors (as aforesaid) in the Neuter-gender, they interpret that
neutralitie in bonam parte^ (viz) as alms meant to them, as much to say as,
Quod contra me non est, mecum est. And no marvel if they deal so with the
neuter, seeing that even the express dole of the Testator (ad alios) they have
the conscience to appropriate to themselves, as is also aboue-said. So likewise
of Puneisme, which in all honorable comparatiues is and ever was reputed a
blemish, they interpret the Puneisme of their Society as an honor above the
auncientie of all other holy Orders in the church, even as Mahomet did his law
above either Moses or Christ's for being after them both, and none to come (say
they) after it. Again for Saints, which is a most sweet and important point of
christian religion; they, because they have none as yet in the calendar of
their Society, you have read above what they say. In like manner, whereas the
Scripture denounces that man accursed per quem scandalum venit, they in this
their schism have procured their Archpriest to suspend etc. the Appealants to
the holy-sea touching the same; as though that schism were ex part scandalum
accipientis, and not dantis; and so by consequence the curse to belong to the
Appealants, and not to them. Brief, they go altogether by their own grounds,
and those framed to their own private interests; which though they be in many
matters meerelie against grace, or nature, or both; yet their constructions
(forsooth) must allow them just.

Upon this lawless liberty, detraction which amongst al not only christians
but heathen men, is and ever was held a vice, is a necessary virtue to be used
oftentimes amongst the^. As for example, in the present case of the Appeal,
wherein they holding their rule over the Seminaries expedient and for the avail
of our Church, ye see how they maintain their detractious libell against the
withstanders of such their jurisdiction, and oppose as many foul mouths
against them as they can, disordring all our church.

In like manner, their Position being that her Majesty is an heretic, and an
excommunicated Princess, and consequently to be deposed; what Iesabeling of
her have I heard them use? what questioning whether yet no Iehu have subdued
her? whether yet not given over by God? why yet she prospers? why yet she
reigns? why yet she lives? what defaming her? what throwing soil at her
picture? what auowing her royal Lions and Flowers de Luz, no better worth then
to serve for signs to bawdie houses? And not only do the Jesuits, and
Iesuited use her Majesty thus as in her royal and anointed person (as to my
express knowledge in these particulars they have done, and worse, which for
good manner I omit) but more, for her sake how glad are they both abroad and
here at home, when they hear of any miscarriage of our ships or men, by sea
or land (though in honest adventures) and also how ready to blemish any news
of our good successes by their lying alarums to the contrary, and extenuations
in favor of the enemy? Are these men either Catholics, or true English (trow
ye) I need not say religious, that thus repine at any (say evils) that God
permits to be done, but what they do themselves?

In this kind have I my self been bitten by them, and am to this day, for
having some nine years since (as you know) delivered up to the hand of justice
(though vniusticed) a certain wretched fellow, who came in the nature of an
Enginner, and in a Jesuits name his ghostly Father from beyond the seas, to
persuade my assisting his firing the Queens navy throughout England, against
the next years coming of another Spanish Armado which was pretended: how have
I been ever since in their mouths a relapse, a spy, a treacher? All which,
yea, any of which I as much scorn to be, as I scorn such their disloyalty
and viperie. But are not these iollie mates the while, that thus a man to go
against their unnatural and graceles proiects in loyalty to his Prince and
country, is straight to be a relapse, a spy, a treacher? So likewise, because
they think their Society most perfect, and not needing reformation, how have
they not mangled the good Cardinal Borrhomeo who held them other, and was
minded if he had lived to have eiected them all out of his Arch-diocese? How
baselie also have they reprocht our excellent good Cardinal Allan with their
defamatorie letters since his death, for his having the like opinion of them,
and making show of a mind he had if he had lived a while longer, to have
withdrawn them from the Seminaries, both in the Colleges and in our country?
Did not Doctor Haddocke (for example) their Votarie write thus from Rome to his
friend in Spain, with the news of his death? Been profecto obijt Cardinalis
noster, qui si diutius vixisset, magnu^ and sibi and ecclesiae dedecus
peperisset. Yea, even the Holiness of Xistus Quintus, they have dared to deprave
after his death, calling him in their letters Lupus, and I know not what worse;
and all because he meant if he had lived but a few months longer, to have
reformed them. It is a shame that they have no gagge put in their mouths
against so saucie liberty of language, namely against so excellent a Pope,
and Cardinals as these were; whom as such (to wit the Pope) even a
Protestant-ciuill author here in our country, has in the latter end of his
history of Congo, ex professo singularly commended.

Then for their lying, that is not to be greatly marueiled at amongst them,
seeing it is the sister of detraction. Do they not herein even at this instant
notably play their parts, in that finding themselves now ashamed of their
libell, and the defense thereof hitherto against the Priests and the
University of Paris, and fearing the Appeal concerning the same likely to
light heavy upon them ere long (it going on amain toward Rome for all their
braggard opposition) have they not labored, and still do by all means
possible, both brave and base, here at home and beyond the seas, and namely of
late to the Popes Nuncio in Flaunders, by procuring his letter to the
Appealants to persuade them to a compremise, which must not be? and yet for all
this do they not in their vain-glorie give out that (forsooth) the Appealants
are they that labor it at their hands, and that they refuse? What impudent
lying is this, and other the like, which I could tell you of theirs, which to
believe were neither Charity, nor justice, no nor scant good manners? Fie, fie
(cousin) I should be ashamed and weary to tell you all their lying
legierdemaines, and dishonest dealings which I know, and have credibly heard of
theirs, consisting of infinite querks and quiddits; as mental euasions in
their speech, interpretatiue colloguings, halfe-fac'd terms, tergiuersations,
tentatiue speeches, whole and demie-dublings, the vulpecular-fawne, detraction
with sighs, buttes, and the shrugge, circular calumniations, holding it
lawful to be forsworn in to too many cases, intercepting, rasing, and
forgerie of letters, and such like; of all which they have an Art, and whereby
they take away by such what their doctrine, and what their example (being
religious) not only all good religion from amongst men, but also even moral
honesty.

They have likewise their Counsel of war amongst them like the
Tentonicke-knights of yore, as appears by their undertakings for England, and
otherwise, as is above shown. Wherein their ground (I mean for England) being
that this realm is not likely to be won to the Catholic religion by the
word, at least not so hastily as behooues for their advantages, do they not
solicit daily a Conquest thereof from Spain? and also persuade us that it
is both vtill and honorable? It is (sure) a saucie part in a religious person
to be any ways a stickler between States be it for peace, especially for
war it is a most unbeseeming office in him, and such as John Gerson never
dreamed on in his imitation of Christ, directed as well to them as to all other
religious; or if he had, they know his spirit too well in that point, though
little they observe it either in that of any other thing. In so much as what
for such their soldiourlie minds together with infinite their other scandals,
the penal-Prophets saying, Ibunt praua in directa is false in them, but aspera
in vias planas abundant true.

For is it not a merry life not to be tied to rising up to the Quire at
midnight, but to lie a bed after the Sun? to fare well, to be well clad, and
all this ex professo, not to fast so much as Fridaies, to be a lier when they
will, and yet be believed, a detractor, a cheater, a courtier, a soldiour, a
kil-Prince, and what not? and all without control, nay with allowance and
commendation. Brief, is it not a merry life for a Jesuit to trowle up and
down the country from house to house, from good cheer to good cheer, in a
gallant Coach, accompanied with gentle and fair women, attended by neat
seruingmen, his chamber to be decked and perfumed against his coming, yea, and
a gentlewoman to pluck off his boots by his iniunction (forsooth) for
mortification-sake? Oh monstrous irreligion so to forget good manners, and so
to make the Lay religious, and themselves Lay. What gallants would these men
(trow ye) be in an indulgent time, that are such under persecution? Their
quaint Provincial were he a gentleman, might blush to read these imputations,
so much most of them concern himself, the rest his brethren. A sweet rest
(believe me cousin) and yet such as his poor uncle the Tailor at Lambeth fares
nere a whit the better for. As for master Archpriest himself (whose rest you
may suppose is a great deal more, not in paternal Peuter but in pure ore) his
brother the Peuterer is able to live of himself. And it is no marvel if the
fathers, Gerard, Standish, and Lister could not brook to be imprisoned from
such pleasures; the latter choosing rather to be perjured then so deprived. So
sweet a rest the Seminaries have not; but a sweeter (that is to say) Tiburne,
and so heaven.

How truly were the Seminaries in diebus illis before ever Jesuit was joined
with them chara deum foboles, magni Ionis incrementum, and so are yet too a
great part of them whom Iesuitisme has not attainted; but then specially when
they were not to be said in parts, but all one, anima vna, and opus vnum. Then
did charity flourish indeed as well in the Laytie as in the Clergy, and
heresy lose ground a pace; when both Catholic faith and Catholic life
marched together in each against it. Then nere sounded in our ears the terms,
Schism, Rebellion, Suspension, Excommunication, Irregularitie, Faction,
Appeal, Conquest, etc. All this came in with these Fathers, these Courtiers,
these soldiers; unworthy the name of Apostles, of Religious, of Jesus.
Graceless minded men, whom not the calamity of a church under persecution,
nor shame nor fear of correction past and to come, much less the laws of
charity and humility can contain from so gross scandals, but needs they
must be as bad, yea worse unto us within our church, then our common enemy is
without. Please God, Catay or the Canibals country were their abode, rather
then so civil a land as England; they being a far fitter Society to
persecute, then to be persecuted, and rather to make Spanish soldiers of for
the slaughter of those heathen people under drum and ensign, then to be
employed in Jesus name for our church and country. And (truly) I am
persuaded, that if as such manner of men they might be ransomed from hence by
our State as they happen to be apprehended (setting round ransomes on their
heads) it would sooner rid them out of this land, then any other course
whatsoever, and help to bring home from their foreign Bancoes some part of our
English-coyne again, or at least wise save the rest from their singers.

The Archpriest was not ashamed in a certain absurd letter of his to his
Assistants, to term our reverend Patriots the Appealants, pestom plane
Ecclesiae nostrae, wherein you may note the spirit of the man, how much it ods
from Jesus by being so Iesuited. With how much more reason might these men
retort those terms upon his own and the Jesuits vndeserts, and notably on
Father Cowbucke, his, and with him all mischiefs primum mouens? For the
Archpriest himself is in truth but motum mouens in the present Schism (to
wit) between the said Cowbucke at Rome, and the Prouinciall-Iesuit here;
betwixt whom, as betwixt two dishes he is served up to our table for such
dainty as you see. This is that Arch which the Jesuits have made, or rather
which makes the Jesuits, and with them, way for the Spaniard to pass over into
England if God defend not. This is our ecclesiasticall-Triumnirate at this day,
vere pestis ecclesiae patriaeque nostrae as they have used the matter, and not
the Opponents thereunto.

As for the first of them, besides the disparage of his birth and name before
touched, he is so notable a coward, that since his fugacie from Christ's Camp
here, he thought Paris too near the broiles; for which cause, or whether for
that his turbulent humor wanted employment there; he had not been there long,
but wishing to be farther off, and rather ill occupied then unoccupied (though
the short while he tarried there he wanted not his brabbles with some of his
fellowfathers in the college) he made it a request to his Rector to let him
go to Rome. Which his said Superior seeing no just reason for, and thereupon
refusing it him, mark the shift. Within a few days after, he tells the Rector
how that by letters from England he had received advertisement that our State
had suborned, and expressly sent over certain persons thither to murder him
howsoever. And to make this good, he himself subbornes certain Suresbies his
special votaries (whereof one I know) de facto to come one evening late to
their colledge-gate, with pistols half in sight and half out, and so with
angry looks to ask to speak with him. Which accordingly was effected; whom
the lay-brother the Porter opening the gate unto, and seeing in that suspicious
fashion, came straight unto this reverend person, and told him what he saw: who
presently taking him along with him to their Rector, with pale look and
trembling member, willed his said brother to tell him what he saw: which the
Rector understanding, and no whit suspecting the pack by reason of his well
fained fear the while, straight credited his aforesaid suggestion; and so to
so^e his life, that very night conuaid him privily out of the college with
money enough in his purse; who on the morrow took his journey toward Rome,
where within a few days after he diu'd up like a Dux all in Buffe, as though
he had bin the greatest champion in all our church. Twenty of these gulleries
has this Parsons brat played both before and since this pranke; but thus much
for that.

Perhaps you will object that this was before his Resolutions: what of that? It
was since he was a Jesuit, and true nevertheless; even as true as those
resolutions were none of his own but another man's collections, and he but the
bare penner of them; for, had they been his own, he would have showed it in
his life hitherto, or yet atleast, seeing that nunquam sera est ad bonos mores
via. But whether they were his own or no, or but collections of another, and
his only the penning; sure I am, the man might have bin much better occupied
to have continued his hand still in that vain though he meant not to live
according; and more credit it would have been both to him and his Society,
and also more profit to our Church here, then his becoming since an
ecclesiastical Steuklie, an Archpriest-maker, and a King-munger. But soft, the
king is not yet made; there is a certain Queen must be first asked leave for
that course in her Park. Nor are the 40000. Catholics, no not so much as one
(I trust) nor (God willing) will ever be in so disloyal address, as to
entertain the Catholike-king or his sister on our shore, as this man has
suggested unto them. Wherein he gulles them both, seeing that (thanks be to God)
England has as true English-Catholickes in it, as it has Catholicke-English.
Nor ever shall (by Gods help) the Archpriest with his conformable dousen make
good that plot with all their brains.

Let therefore father Cowbucke no longer abuse the Spanish king with such vain
hopes; neither yet make so dainty of his (Council of Reformation) as he does.
See the doting man: he has framed an Ecclesiastical- Eutopia to himself,
whereunto he has given that title, the same to be exhibited at the next
Parliament to be holden after the Conquest (viz.) Anno 1. of Phillip the third,
importing that all Bishops, Deanes, Prebends, Parsons, and generally all the
secular clergy of this land, must be Pensionary to the Popes Holiness: for
which he to have a standing revenue and Exchecker here in England, out of
which to defray those Pensions; the surplusage (if any be at the years end)
to be purst up to Saint Peter. And four Jesuits, with only two secular
Priests of their choosing, to be his Holiness Collectors of such his revenue
throughout the land, and also the disbursers of those Pensions. He has
besides, I know not what Assessements and in what manner, of all our Laytie
toward this Exchecker; in consideration whereof, all Abbay-lands and other the
old Church Lands of England, to bide as they do to their present possessors,
and the Peter Pence released. Over and above all this revenue to the sea of Rome
by assesseme^t (as is said) he also awardeth all deuotionarie-supplements to
come to the same Exchecker, and both the one and the other to pass through the
aforesaid Collectors hands. This book he bears in his bosom, as a most
precious jewel, and far more charie he is of it, then the Dukes of Florence
of their Tullie de Republica, which not all the world has but they. Only
once on a time to a very dear friend of his, he did communicate the same out
of his sight for a day; which day was a very saucie day, seeing that from that
day to this there has been a copy of it, and out of that copy sundry more,
which ere long (I suppose) will come forth in print, and (as I verily think)
long before the Conquest. What for this and other his like fopperies, as
procuring boys hands of the Seminaries, yea, and women's for want of men's to
the Lady Infantaes title to the crown of England, and also to his
Cardinalate, I do not see how a Cardinals hat will become the man, or how he
has deserved so much as the linings thereof.

I could therefore wish him (if he aim so high) to betake him to better
business then of State; namely, to the penning of more Resolutions like the
first, which (truly) was a good work, and better beseeming a Parson then a
Parsons son; very good (I say) whether it be good for him to be a Cardinal or
no. For, though it be true, that qui Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus
desiderat, yet if he were truly humble he would think himself far unfit for
it, much more to be a Peer and pillar of the Church, as most men do that know
him rightly, and better then he knows himself. Had he continued still in
his Resolutions, a man cannot tell what honor he might have come unto; for,
that desert was good, howsoever by his miscariages since, he has and daily
does verify the Spanish proverb true in him, that is, Come Santo, y caga
Diabolo, as much to say, as: he has eaten down Saints and voides forth
Devils.

A man would have thought that his disgraced presumptions in Oxford, where he
confessed himself macht, yea, and ouer-macht, would have humbled him for ever,
especially being become since a Catholic, nay and religious, and having
taught others religious Resolutions; that he of all men would no more faoere
ascensiones in cord suo (I mean so bad) but rather seek to rise by falling
flat down (as it were) into his grave, knowing upon what foundation the
Babell-builders became confused, and on the clean contrary S. Paul rapt in
tertium Caelum; and how in especial it is part of the blessed virgin Mary's
song, that Deus exaltat humiles. If in the name of Jesus this man have not
amended, but rather more and more offended, inuoluing all the Seminaries in his
and his Societists vndeserts in the opinion of our State, namely, for
treachery against the State, whereby Gods Church has bin and is the more
persecuted amongst us, and the good alike with the guilty: if in process of
such his peevish practices he has sought the lives of some excellent Priests
his Opponents by sleight and suborned treachery, laboring to make his
practices to be thought theirs: if he have deluded the Sea-Apostolicke with
false suggestions to the prejudice of the Catholicke-cause, erecting by means
thereof Iesuitisme amongst us, and a Spanish faction under an Archpriest:
Brief, if he have been a Judas to Gods Church and his country, to the
disparage of the Seminaries and their Founder, whose Souls were sincere to the
good of each: if he have been a firebrand amongst brothers to the disjunction
of their unity, and a great deal worse, and all this in the name of Jesus: no
marvel if he be a false-prophet in threatening some fourteen years since,
ones neck to be broken adowne the Alps, in steed of a Viaticu^ which he ought
to have given him as out of the Popes Pension, which the said party had
through his fingring: but such was his covetousness of S. Peter's pence to his
Holinesses dishonor; and withal he so lewd a Prophet. Far sweeter spirit
had good Doctor Allan, being shortly after called to the Cardinalate, who then
and there (to wit at Rome) blist and reblist the said party against such the
bastards malediction, and all other harms; so as he yet lives to tell him
hereof in detestation of his so malignant spirit. Lastly, if in the serene
name of Jesus, this man have all this while bin so tempestuous a creature, it
is no marvel if Cucullus non facit monachum. Rather is it to be marvelled why
in that respect Cardinal Bellarmine should say of late that S. Peter's Court
needs no Cucullatos to grace it, more then togated Jesuits, whereof he
himself was once one. For which saying of his, I verily persuade me, that well
may his Grace continue as he is a Cardinal, but never to see him higher, so
improper, and too Jesuitical was that speech of his. At leastwise I dare
assure me never to see father Cowbucke the one or the other, he being already
high enough, to make his fall seem so odious as it does through his disloyalty
and turbulence. Oh no, the Cardinalate is (questionless) an honor too high
above his desert, though inferior to his heart; nay not only (supra) but
also (praeter) thereunto: whereby I do not see how it going one way, and he
another ( viz. he doing all his deeds sinisterlie) that they can possibly
meet. His greatest credit therefore will be, to say he went (beside) it, or as
the Fox did to the grape above his reach, to swear he will none of it.

And (sure) it is enough for master Archpriest to be so dignified a man
another day, who is already come to his Dei gra^ia; which as well ye may
apply to bare. Georgius Blackwellus, as to Archi-presbyter: so grossly the
good man is mistaken in his singularity. It is enough (I say) for him to be a
Cardinal, and be but for calling in of late so maiesticallie the Appealants
books, forasmuch as (quoth he) the Popes Holiness has not done it: which it
is very likely if his Holiness had seen reason for, he would either
himself have done it, or willed him to do it; namely his Holiness having
seen the Latin book (as he himself confesses) by his means. Again, and
lastly, worthy to be a Cardinal, if it were but for his prompt acceptance of
the Archpriestship, and maintaining by his said authority, censures, and
decretass, so learned a tract as Listers against his own brethren, as yet he
does.

But what shall I say of master Lister himself for the same? other then that
he is very worthy not of any honor at all, but still to abide as he is a
Jesuit till he repent and amend. What? a libeller and a periurde person too?
that is pergo and propero too fast to perdition. Giving his faith in verbo
Sacerdotis to be true prisoner to the Knight-Marshall, and yet to break that
word, that oath, whereby to be the cause, that two reverend Seminaries were
that, or the next night apprehended and committed prisoners in his steed, was
flat dishonestie. But the good father perhaps had in taking that oath the moon
his ascendant, or some mental evasion wherewith to rescue his soul at least
from remorse, though not from the devil if he broke it: (as for example) as
he was in that mind he would be true prisoner; or that for any thing the
keeper should know to the contrary until he were escapt; or that he meant
(...) run away on his head, but on his feet, or that he would not break
away so long as the knight Marshall or his deputy stood by and looked on; or
that he would not break away as a Priest but as a Jesuit; or that he would
not escape with a mind over to come again with his will; or that nulla fides
fernanda haereticis; or, oh how many ors might I make upon this point, seeing
that as veritas vna est and simplex, so is mendaciu^ multifarium; a large scope
for a Jesuit to escape away by from man, but not from God, and but with shame
enough. But what talk I of shame in him, who has no grace? but rather (as I
credibly hear) is the man that stalks up and down for all his scandal, as
iocund as the fellow that burnd Dianaes temple in Athens for same; or as Nero,
who almost laughed his heart out to see how he had done the like to Rome. Were
Attilius Regulus alive, he would dart not only all the iro^ nails of his tub
at his head for such his perfidiousnes, but also his very eyes. A shame that
so a heathen soldier should excel in the honor of his word, a religious
Catholic Priest though nere so lunaticke; especially he having since used his
said liberty so little in ordine ad deum, as to libell upon most excellent men,
and be a Schismaticke.

A plainer minded Jesuit a great deal was he of the two (setting aside his
aboue-told night-works) who being (belike) ouer-busied with charitable and
cheating gettings, and therefore the less able to attend his function of
inditing Sermons, wrote over to Father Cowbucke to do so much as to furnish
him with some English ones of his penning, assuring him that he would conne
them exactlie without book, not doubting but that coming from his spirit they
would greatly fructisie his auditors, and be well applauded. This was a letter
from the best Jesuit (I assure ye) at this day in England, in that he is a
gentleman, though no wiser then you see. The letter is yet exstant, and that in
a Protestants hand, no whit (you may think) to his edification.

As little is it to the edification of the hearers how Father Wartford (he that
wrote the Resolution from the mother City) told a very friend of his a little
before his going over, how that he meant to become a Jesuit, because he could
not brook such a one (naming the party) to take place above him in the shire
where he remained, for only being a Jesuit, and a man otherwise (he said) of
no desert, but a very dunse. Was not this (I pray) to become a Jesuit of
frailty, rather then for more perfection that he hoped to find in being such
a father? I omit the baudie heresy of father Edmonds (viz.) that Lupanaria
Romae approbantur, so highly to the reproach of the mother-Sea and City; for
that both for it, and other his gross scandals, he has already felt God
miraculous reproof from heaven in the eyes of a many.

I could thus in particular discover unto you much trumperie of the Society
here in our country, but their present Schism may suffice for all: as also
for that I shame to seem so much the Jesuit in detraction, though to Gods
honor well it might be done, and (as I hear) ere long such a subject will
come forth. For my own part, I reverence the Institution of the Society, as
authorized and commended for good and holy by our holy mother, and for having
had many good Scholars of it; being sorry that it digresseth so much from
her initiall and fundamental honors. Not but that there have been some two or
three of it, of good and reverend desert to our Church, though not altogether
so to our country; their martyrdomes being to them as a pr^mium for the one,
and (no doubt) a sufficient Piaculum for the other: of whom one (being my near
kinsman) was so temperate in his opinion of this his Society, that in
particular, my self questioning him on a time about the case and loftines
thereof, and of her degenerating so from her original by being too to secular,
persuading me that it could not long last in the Church; his answer was: yet
is it my comfort to think, that whiles it is yet somewhat aflote, my poor
Bark may fleet away in her stream to heaven: and if hereafter through
disorder it do sink more and more to a shallow, Ipsi viderint that come
after. A right modest saying, and importing plainly (besides what else he
told me) that somewhat he saw in it which he himself disliked, and for which
he feared a shame coming toward it: and so likewise did old John Haywood, when
seeing his son Iaspar now become a Jesuit he blessed himself, and said unto him
though merrily, yet in earnest. Jesus Iaspar who made thee a Jesuit?

And for these two or three Martyrs which have bin to our Church of the
Society (which I think are all that have bin in all this time of persecution)
there have bin of it a father Cowbucke, who (as is showed) ran away most
cowardly from the like honor, and is at this day an arrant traitor to his
Prince and country: Father Haywood who got himself to be banished, giving
thereby the first president (if I mistake not) to others of the like frailty:
and lastly, father Lister a libeller and a rank Schismatike, etc. It is most
strange to see how this latter, but specially Cowbucke, carry men away with
their impostures under the habit of Religious and the color of virtue; even
such (a great many) as what for their travails, and what for their reading,
should be both wiser and more virtuous. How do they extol their flat evils
before others virtues, and their notorious wrongs before others notable
innocence? As for women, their Sexes ordinary frailty excuses them; they
having little or nothing besides a will and a tongue. Amongst whom how many
could I name unto you both wives and maids, who being aforetime modest, meek,
religious, charitable, yea very Saints under the discipline of the Seminaries;
are since their leaving them, and delivering their souls over into the hands
of Jesuits, become hautie, captious, detractious, factious, immodest,
irreligious, and what not? and yet for all this, with the Puritan are sure to
be saved. But for men, and such as are or ought to be wise for having years
and gray hairs on their heads, and many good means so to be, they (I say) to
be strooken so blind with the Jesuitical planet, as to prefer so much a
Jesuits driuell before all the brains and soul of a Seminary, deserves
(certes) a motlie coat. What talk I of a motlie coat? seeing that God is
just, and even his hand has fallen heavy of late upon some of those men, if
not to the making them ere a whit the wiser (through their extreme obdurance in
their error) at leastwise to their being an example to others (less foregone)
to recant.

I could name ye some of them, as for example; a kinsman of mine own the great
Executor of the North, and as great a Persecutor of the Appealants in the
Jesuits behalf, has not God within little more (I take it) then one year,
taken away first his wife, and next his only Son and heir, whereby his
living is excheated out of his name amongst his daughters, he nevertheless
continuing as spleenatiue against the good men as ever to fore? It was no less
or little less obdurance in wrong with the Jesuits against the same parties,
in another kinsman of mine, who ought to love the Seminaries better for the
good Cardinals sake their Founder, whom he sometimes served, and pretended to
honor: as also to be more affiant in Gods providence toward innocence, he
himself not being foild in his fortunes at this day, for all he has heretofore
holden up his hand at the Bar, and passed the pikes for the same; then to
persuade one of the Appealants (as lately he did) that the Jesuits being so
mighty men as they are at Rome and every where, he to let fall his Appeal,
and so his honor and all. Thus get the Jesuits all the coat-cards they can into
their hands, weening thereby to outface innocence that little Ace.

I have blushed unto my self for curtesie-sake to hear the reasons that some
of these Gaudies (being my kinsmen) have given for such their Iesuitisme
against the Appealants; reasons (insooth) as were able to make a horse break
his halter. One says, how that the Priest contradict authority and all good
rule, which is as just as Germans lips to the matter: another, that he ought
not to read their books being prohibited by the Archpriest, whereby neither
to know ye truth of the case, otherwise then as his authority prompts it unto
them; so to agree with authority, though here so much to the prejudice of
Priesthood and innocents: another, that he heard a good Queen Marie Priest
(being a man well nigh a hundred years old, and so by intendment a dottard)
say that (sure) he thought in his conscience the Appealants would fall ere
long, and become flat heretics: a fourth, that their co^merce with heretics in
the process of this business is enough to condemn them and their cause: a
fifth, that Jesuits are good Scholars and good men. Are not these and the like,
sweet reasons (think ye) of men otherwise very worshipful and worldie-wise,
to be carried away with, from their true spiritual Fathers? or rather is not
Iesuitisme so very a witch?

Brief; all that is Jesuitical must be esteemed rare, though nere so homely:
their very Lay-brothers, Cursitors, Charlatagni and Apparators, must be all
said to be rare men; much more what proceeds from a Jesuits own pen (that is
to say) from his profound, his religious, his acute, his irrefragable
judgment, must needs be double-oh rare: ye need not run far for examples.
Father Lister his treaty of Schism so foolish, so spiteful, so reproachful
to the Appealants, how have they not hitherto, and yet do be-rare it in
despite of the man's moon? Also, how do not other their books which I could
name, and (I am sure) you have seen most toyish some, and treasonish other
some, pass current and applauded not only amongst the vulgar, but (which is
a shame) amongst the upper sort of Catholics. As for their Agents, I know and
so do you, more then three or four, who being men of no good tallent, fashion,
or deportment at all, but contrariwise rude, malapert, humorous, yea, and
dishonest; are nevertheless accepted amongst Iesuited-Catholickes, for rare and
singular men. The fellow that has a good full mouth, to resound them and their
doings, and to calumniate their Opponents (though otherwise a villain) they
esteem, and make estimable over all; yea, they make him their Entretenido de
la Boca, that is, a kind of Pensioner they have, whom they call of the (mouth)
which is a matter of some crumbs unto the party: and generally all their
vassals of employment they have a ninth Beatitude in store for (viz.) that
living under their beard, they receive now and then a drop of fat that falls
from it.

On the other side, all other men, their doings and writings that smacke not of
their Society and Father-hoods (though otherwise excellent and of singular
edification) they do distaste, disgrace, yea and dischace with many a mock,
and many a Flounders-mouth. Much more their express Opponents, their persons
and pens tending to their detection (as namely these late printed books
concerning the Appeal) no marvel if with all their kennell they lowdlie
reproach, and Porcupine-like dart their quils against them. No marvel, if in
such their charity and good manners, they assayed this other day by a forged
letter taken up at the Clinke-gate, and delivered to my Lord of London,
importing matter of disgrace to a certain reverend person therein specified,
and likewise to the supposed author thereof (being each their known Opponents)
whereby to cross the good successes of their several futes then to his
Lordship. In few, no marvel if reuiling, and slaundering men for not being of
their Tribe, and within their circle; they accurse and denounce Gods heavy
vengeance on their distasters. How many (even some now Saints in heaven) have
they threatened misfortune unto, as loss of friends and goods, sickness,
lim-wracks, sudden death, yea and their souls eternal hazard, for either not
being with them, or flat disliking them. In so much, as there is no mischance
whatsoever so much as ordinary, that happens to any such; but straight they
right holilie attribute it to their not being Jesuitical: so hypocritical, or
rather so magical and their deceptions.

The comfort against which their so great seduction of our Catholicke-Laytie,
is, that the Seminaries themselves (whom indeed the mischief chiefly
concerns as yet) begin now to open their eyes toward their brothers of the
Appeal and their own honors, taking the case aright, and subscribing
thereunto. Insomuch as from but six or seven of them (which were all that
opposd in the beginning) they are now (God be thanked) grown to between six
and seven score; which (considering the great number of Neuters, who^ the
Jesuits do not trust) we hold to be as great a party as theirs at this
present, expecting daily more and more of those Neuters to come in. God of his
great goodness daigne it so, that so the Jesuits being left in the lurch like
Aesops Iay (each bird plucking away his own feather) and alone to themselves in
all their treacheries; they may see and be ashamed of their ingratitude and
insolence against so loving friends as they, who to give them upper place, and
honor in our Church and country, have therein neglected their own, and their
good Founders the good Cardinal, but Gods most of all.

A man would think that were not the cause Gods, his Church, and our
countries, but meerelie man's; that even the deformity of their manners against
morality and nature, might alien affections from them, as namely, their
extreme ingratitude to their friends and Benefactors, and tyranny to their
slaves. For example, certain of the now Appealants then Prisoners in Wisbich,
were the charitable men that trauaild to bring to light a certain townes-man
there, who had libelled against a Jesuit, and other Iesuited Priests their
fellow Prisoners in that Castle, which they performed to the condign reproach
of the party and yet the Jesuits nevertheless, as well since as before, gave
out with great Emphesis, that those men themselves were the Libellers. A fair
requital (sure) of courtesy, and right Jesuitical; far short, even of that
of the Fox, who held it a reward good enough to the Crane for plucking the
bone out of his throat, he not to have bitte^ off his head when he had it in
his mouth. It had bin a decorum in them, to have showed themselves thankful
unto such the parties kind office (though but from the teeth outward) were it
but for holding their loves suspect toward them, as then they did, and now much
more by reason of the Appeal. You may guess by this how homely they use
their own drudges, and how many flaps of Fox-tayles they have in store for
their services.

Here will I, end touching Jesuits and Iesuitisme at this time, being more then
time, though no less then due what I have here said, and worse might say of
them and it; not doubting but one day, English Catholics will be both wiser to
themselves, and more charitable to their true spiritual Fathers of the
Seminaries, then thus to wrong them for adulterate and intruding ones. Dear
ought to be to us the memories of Allane, Harding, Bristoe, Martin, Stapleton,
Vaux, Cope, Reignalds, etc. all excellent Seminaries, besides no less worthy
men of the same now living; all whom both quick and dead, this libell and the
Arch-priests partaking with the Jesuits therein, concerns to disparage
utterly, to the honoring of a few seditious and newfangled Sirs, which must
not be; but better it were they were all as far as India from us, there to take
their fortunes, such (I fear me) ere long, as befell the Templars for their
like Libertinisme from the sacred sea. It is now above twenty years, since
this Society coming first into our country, it has lain so long time like
a tub, heavy upon the grasse-plot both of it and our Church, whereby many an
ugly Toade, Euet, Sow-worme, and other like venom-vermin have bred under it,
the grass being clean withered away. High time therefore it is, that it be
removed hence to her outlandish place again, whereby both those vermin may
either fly with it, or die here; and fresh flowers grow up in the plot, such
as before time did, and such as the Seminaries have been all this while, and
yet at this day are round about it. Nor let the Archpriest in those Fathers
behalfes, any longer bite his brothers and whine over them saying: what a Gods
name aile these men? what lack these men? what would these men have? I answer
for them, and so do all honest and true minded Catholics; they aile their
honors which the Jesuits by libell deprave; they aile the Churches liberty
and Hierarchy which they would prejudice and supplant; they aile the peace
thereof which they have disordred; they aile the safety and reputation of
their Prince and Country, which they have betrayed. All this the Appealants
aile, this they lack, and this they would have; yea, this they will have at
the Jesuits hands if God say Amen. Belike the Archpriest thinks he is at
hot-cockles with his brethren like Pilates soldiers, who blindfolding Christ
after his condemnation, struck him, saying: Dic, quis est qui te percussit. So
he in these his interrogations, though the ods be, that Christ was so used
after his condemnation, and these before; the dice thrown upon his garment
after his death, and upon these men's before trial; he so wronged by soldiers,
these by Jesuits and anointed Priests. Again, the Jews their saying of
Christ, Si filius dei est, descendat de cruce: does not his saying that their
book of Appeal to his Holiness could never have come to his hands but by his
means, sound as much against their innocence, and their abilities to make good
the same? Well, well, had the Jesuits but half as just matter against the
Appealants, they would soon descendere de cruce; Rome should soon have it,
and all christendom ring of it, so expedite means they have both of purse and
post, whereas our good men must go as they may, pean, peano, and bear their
quips the while, as, what aile these men? what would these men have? But as
fluent as they are of their flouts, let them remember that soft fire makes
sweet malt, and frustra iacitur rete ante faciem pennatorum.

To the last point now of your letter, where you say that these scandals in the
clergy have and daily do quarre (as it were) the consciences, and quail the
constancies of the Lay Catholics, even to the manifest and manifold fall of a
great many out of the Church: it is true (cousin) as you say, namely, of the
Jesuits Pupils, of whom some have (indeed) of late given very gross scandals
in matter of Faith, which (I hear) shall ere long be published in cautelam to
others. But what? as much is God honored on the other side in the constancy of
his friends and those that stand. Greatly are those souls to be pitied that
come not into Christ's fold; but more those that go out, because, who knows the
will of his master, and leaves to do it, multis vapulabit plagis: and great
pusillanimitie it is, that but seeing a fray and not needing to be in it, a man
to go hang himself. Oh no (cousin) let no scandal within the Church drive us
out of it, how ever it make men dainty to come in; but still let us stick to
the grounds of our salvation, which in it and not else where are infallible.
Ever let us know the pipe of our Pastor, and follow it in all occurrents over
down and dale like good sheep, and in all affairs sort our selves according
thereunto. It was David's zealous prayer vt inhabitet in domo domini omnibus
diebus vitae suae; so ought it to be ours, yea, much more ours, drinking (as we
do) of the fore-fount of the rock of life, and he but of the hinder: in which
drink is no remorse, for that it procures no surfeit. Let us amid the floods of
Babylon still remember Sion, sweet Sion here in earth, and her triumphant
sister the high Jerusalem, and sooner forget we our right hand, then the one or
the other of them. At a word, God and his Church need none, but all need them:
Omnes egemus gratia gloria dei, and but by the one we cannot attain the other.
For, Non habebit Deum Patrem, qui non habuerit Ecclesiam matrem.

Here (my good cousin) I will end for this time, not doubting but if you
communicate this my discourse to any Jesuit, it will seem ouer-long and
unsavory unto his Father-hood: but as for both Jesuit and Spain, I am at a
point, having set up my rest upon true-Catholicke and English loyalty. And as
little hold I it misbeseeming me (being lay and a soldier) to tax a Jesuit of
dishonestie, especially in the behalf of the Catholicke-cause and my
country; as for a Jesuit (being religious) to usurp so arrogantlie and
contumeliouslie upon the secular Clergy, and be an Elboer betwixt States. Ill
beseemes it them to be such, but specially any man to be disloyal to his Prince
and country: but what will ye have of Vbiquitaries, other the^ mis-nature, or
rather no nature at all, and all because Vbiquitaries, and for never having a
head of their own nation but of a stranger over them, whereby to be directed
Englishly. This is the reason that like those ye call Egyptians, they range
lawless over all, regarding neither Prince nor people, friend nor stranger,
grace nor nature, but only to serve their own turns, and maintain their
own commonwealth. Wherefore as a certain Spanish gentleman to his kinsman
(reprehending him of a hard-heart, for letting a Moore-slaue he had, go so
extreme bare and naked in the dead time of the winter, saying that it was a
shame unto him) answered; Pass he over the cold as he ca^, and as for the
shame i will shift well enough with it: the like is my answer to all
contradiction hereunto (viz.) pass the Jesuits over, their blames, their
scandals, their Schism, their treasons both to God and my country, as well as
they can, and as for this shame to me in the mean time i will abide it. Easily
can I justify my doing herein, as namely, in that being a member of the
Catholic Church, and of my country, I ought (unless I would seem a rotten
and a perished one) to feel my part of any prick or spraine that is to either
of them; and also by how much to kill a Viper within doors, is a better deed
then to kill one in the fields; such as these Fathers are both within our
Church, in which they have stung almost to death our true Fathers of the
Seminaries; and also in our country our other dear home, which they labor to
betray to Spain. Wherein whatsoever I, or any other have said or written, if
the Jesuits take it (as hypocritically they boast) rather for a Probate of
their patience, then a just detection of their guilt: much good may it do
their consciences (I pray God) I, for my own part no whit envying such their
security, but rather resting very well satisfied of my own. And thus (my
good cousin) if I have hereby complied ought to your avail toward the right, as
well as I have with God and my conscience, toward the honor of good Cardinal
Allan and the Seminaries his blessed brood, namely, the Appealants so innocent
and yet so injured men; and also of all our Church and country, against the
impostures and disloyalty of the Fathers: I rest a glad man, not doubting but
that according to the Apostle, I have all this while bin angry and yet not
sinned; and also not doubting, but to find this mite of mine with the poor
widow (viz.) this depositum of my love to you, and duty to God, his Church,
and my country in heaven another day. Very heartily fare ye well. London
this last of November. 1601.

FINIS.
Postscript.
SInce the departure of the three B-ees onward into their exile, and defense
against these Hornets, you have heard (I dare say) of the fatal Auguries which
have been blown out of the Iesuiticall-trunke after them (to wit) how that no
sooner shall they enter into Rome, but straight they shall be clapped up into the
Inquisition, or sent away to the Galleys: so much (belike) they have wrought
the king of Spaines Ambassador there, to their Spanish faction against these
Opponents. But God bless them from all their hazards by the way, and then as
for Rome, we make no doubt but to find it just. The Presidents which they
carry with them concerning all their business they will ingrosse at Paris of
public record, that howsoever their persons should happen to miscarrie by the
way through Jesuitical treachery; yet those may serve for the next that will
follow after. Nevertheless, Brag is a good dog on the Jesuits side, or
rather it is Iesuitisme it self; though much too blame to calumniate so S.
Peter's Bar of injustice aforehand. Is not this worse (I pray) then to converse
with Protestants, which is all they have to make their maine suggestion of at
Rome against the Appealants, for want of better matter? But give we their
illuminated fatherhoods leave to brag and br^ue, and deprave, as hitherto they
have done, their matter being stark naught, and wholly subsisting on such
supports. Full little know they (for all their illuminations) what grounds the
Plaintifs go on, or what cards they carry with them. Wherefore be not you
(good cousin) ere a whit staggard with such Iesuitisme in the mean time, though
nere so big-bon'd, for (no doubt) but you shall see shame the end of it, when
upon his Holiness hearing of the Case, the holy Ghost will strike the stroke,
whereby it is to be expected that both the Appealants shall be restored to al
their honors again, and these Droanes quite heau'd out of our English hiue,
and the Seminarie-Bees confirmed therein against all both Iesuitisme and Spain
for ever after, to the infinite comfort of all true Catholics, and namely all
true English men. God of his great goodness grant it so, that no more we may
behold this Schismatic and Jesuitical skurfe on the sweet face of his
Spouse our holy mother, but as heretofore in eius lumine videamus lumen.

Master W. W. his late treaty the Jesuits persuade the vulgar and all such as
dare not (through the Archpriests inhibition) read it, that it concerns the
disparage of all the Seminaries from the beginning, as well as of the Jesuits;
namely, that none of them have in all this time of Persecution dyed expreslie
for Religion, but all for treason: which how contrary it is both to the whole
drift, and the very letter of the book, all readers may perceive. See, how
still they would inuolue the Seminaries in their guilt, and with what slight
and impudence they seek to set them still one against another: insomuch, us
one or two of the Appealants party (though not Appealants) are thereby (I
bear) upon present terms to s^agger. But what loaf have ye that will not
crumble? and what may such their frailty expect at those Fathers hands, then
the Fox-taile flappes aforesaid. God and their good Angel therefore be their
guard against so wayward humor, and make them see that in so doing, well they
may mar themselves, but not the matter: and what shame it were for them to
go from whence so many depart. To conclude then this brief Apology for (The
Important reasons) I say no more, and so may the sincere Reader find it: then,
oh slander, oh Jesuit; or rather no slander a Jesuit.

All this discourse is wholly submitted to the censure of holy Church.

Faults escaped.
Fol 10. l. 13. read Complainants. ^ol. 15. l. 9. read i^. fol. 11. l. 16. read
then a blow at a brothers. fol. 45. l. 23. read (I mean. fol. 113. l. 3. read
grown to.

Auspicante Christo Ecclesia, Patriaeque salus. Aduocant^ Maria Ecclesia,
Patriaeque salus.

