GOOD NEVVES FROM CANAAN.

Full of heavenly comfort and consolation, for all those that are afflicted
either in body or mind.

With a proof of true repentance for the same.

By William Cowper, Minister of Gods Word, and B. of Galloway.



LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shops,
at the South door of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, JOHN MVRRAY, one of his Majesty's Bedchamber.
RIght Worshipful, being so far obliged to his Majesty's favor, as I confess
I am never able to requite it, I can of duty do no less, then with David,
show such kindness as I may to Mephiboseth, for Ionathans sake, that is, take
me to the lowest, where I cannot reach to the highest, endeavoring to love and
honor all such, as I can know are beloved of his Highness, specially whom God
has called to serve and attend his Majesty, and the more nearly by calling
they stand in this service, the more entirely shall mine affection be toward
the^. Among these, as God has honored you to be one; so is there reason why
these, who love you, should thank God for you, not so much for your place of
preferment, as for your fidelity in it, these four and twenty years, by
which you have deserved the commendation of a faithful servant, and increase
of your Masters favorable affection toward you.

It is a common speech, that familiarity breeds contempt, and most excellent
things by consuetude become the less regarded, but this holds not always
true, for of such as are wise, a known and tried good is liked, ever the
longer, the better. And I do so verily think of all his Highness loyal
servants which attend his Majesty, that as they know better then others by long
experience the rare qualities, wherewith his Highness is endued from above; so
they esteem much more of his Majesty then others can: yet is it not amiss
they should still be wakened with warnings, who have such an incomparable jewel
in their keeping, as is called by the Prophet, The breath of our nostrils; and
in whom, not only these famous kingdoms under his Highness dominion, but all
the Churches in Christendom have such interest. In the conseruing of This one,
in whom under God we are all conserved; no circumspection, no care, no
vigilance, no service can be sufficient.

It was a just imputation of David to Abner, and his fellow Captains, that
their Master, King Saul being sleeping, they were careless of him, and
suffered Abishai, who both would and might have slain him, if David had not
stayed him, to take away his spear, and pot from his head, Ye are worthy
(said 1. Sam. 26. 16.
he) to die, because ye have not kept your Master, the Lords anointed. But
here, as there is no comparison between that cursed King, and our sacred
Sovereign: so the superexcellencie of his person makes the least omission of
any dutiful attendance in such as are called unto it, a double offense.

Alexander the Great being enquired of where his treasure was, pointed with his
finger to his friends, and domestique servants; and indeed, where they are
faithful, they are singular blessings of God: for as Solomon says, The
pleasure Prou. 14. 35
of a King is in a wise servant. And again, Righteous lips are the Prou. 16.
16
delight of Kings, and the King loves him that speaks right things. Amicus aut
seruus fidelis protectio fortis, munitum palatium, viuus the saurus: A
faithful friend or servant, is a strong protection, a fenced palace, a living
treasure, said Nazianzen. Neither do I think that ever Alexander, Nazianzen.
Orat. 22.
or any Monarch, or King in the world, did countenance and credit such as serve
them, more confidently and lovingly, then the King of Britain does such as
attend his Highness, which cannot but oblige every loyal heart the more
carefully and willingly to serve his Highness again.

And this, as in regard of your Christian profession is most seemly for you, it
being a duty the Apostolic Canon requires of all Christian servants, That
they should please their Masters in all things, showing all good faithfulness,
that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior; so is it also fitting for
that place wherein ye stand in the world, that ye may be answerable to that
fidelity in his Highness service, for which your Honorable predecessors have
been greatly praised before you. For it is known that the honorable house of
Cokepoole, whereof ye are a son, being a principal family of that ancient,
populous and flourishing tribe of Murray, notwithstanding their dwelling be in
a part of the Kingdom, of old greatly given to misorder, troops of rebels
compassing them on every side; yet did they still retain the honorable state
and fashions of other honorable houses in the land, their house ever being a
terror to the evil, a refuge to the good, a bar to the adversary, and a
public example in most turbulent times, of loyalty to their Sovereign. Thus
have they lived unstained in honor, feared of the worst sort, loved of the
best, ever gracious to their King, never blotted with the remission of any
offense done against his Crown, but always beautified with manifold proofs of
their fidelity in his Highness service; wherein sundry of them have borne
honorable offices both in Court and out of it, unto this day. And all these,
by their example provoke you to leave the name of that house as honorable for
your part, as you have received it from them: which as hitherto you have done,
so I hope for the time to come it may happily be enlarged, but shall never be
impaired by any deed of yours.

And hereunto (right worshipful) remember it is piety and the true fear of
God must advance you. God has conjoined these two precepts together; My son
Pro. 24. 21.
fear God and the King: he cannot keep the one who violates the other;
therefore your love, fear, reverence, and fidelity toward the King, must be
grounded on your love and fear of God. Keep always within you a humble heart;
for beside that it is the way to honor, it will keep you from falling. Among
many privileges, wherewith humility indues such as possess it, this is one,
Humilis non habet vnde cadat. Think frequently upon your end, make ready ere
it come upon you; it is no wisdom to begin to prepare, when of necessity we
must remove. The foolish men of the world, de mortalibus immortalia cogitant,
dream of immortality in mortal things: but look you to others who have bin
great before you and now are not, and by them learn to be wise. Live at
continual enmity with sin; this is the only enemy that is able to hurt
you; subdue it and ye shall fear none other. Such sins as you have done, undo
them by godly sorrow; such as of weakness you may do, prevent them with
godly care. Keep so your Court on earth, that you still learn to be a Courtier
in heaven, holy in life, fervent in prayer; by these has a man fellowship with
God, and access to the Throne of the heavenly King, to speak to his Majesty
when he pleases. In this holy disposition, if this my little Treatise may
serve any way to confirm you, I shall be abundantly contented. I have
dedicated it unto you as a token of my love, for the good which is in you
toward all that fear God, and your courteous favor showed to my self in
particular. And so hoping that with as good an heart ye will accept it, as I do
offer it. I rest,

Your own in Christ Jesus, William Cowper, B. of Galloway.

ESA. 1. 18. 19. Come and let us reason together, says the Lord: Though your
sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow: though they were
red like scarlet, they shall be as wool.

If ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land.



GOOD NEWS From CANAAN.
My help is in the Name of the LORD.
To him that excels. A Psalm of DAVID, when the Prophet NATHAN came unto
him, after that he had gone in unto Bath-sheba.

THE inscription This Psalm is a Psalm of Repentance, and the use of it is
threefold.
of this Psalm being considerede, will let us see that it is a Psalm of
Repentance, made by David, after he had defiled the wife of Vriah, and
murdered Vriah him self. It serves unto us for this threefold use. First, as
a preservative to keep 1. A preservative to keep us that we sin not.
us, that we fall not into the like sins; for why shall we commit that,
which we see by example of others, will either commit us to eternal damnation,
or at least breed us much grief, pain and dolor, before we can be quit of
it? This sin of David thorough Gods mercy, prevailed not against him to
damnation, yet ye see what anguish of Spirit, what terror of mind, what
sighing, what tears, what roaring night and day he sustained, before he could
be delivered from it, and find himself restored to his former joy! thus shall
all flesh find it, that the falls momentarie, and perishing pleasures of
sin, shall have sorrow in the end. For the motions thereof are like these
Locusts of the bottomless pit, having faces of men, and their hair like the
hair of Revel. 9.
women, but a tail like a Scorpion, which stingeth unto the death.

Next it serves as a corroboratiue 2. A coroboratiue, to keep such as have
fallen in sin, from despair.
to keep such as have fallen into the like sins, that they fall not further
into the deep of desperation, so the Apostle Saint Paul says, that the mercy
of God showed unto 1. Tim. 1. 16
him after that he had been a blasphemer, persecutor and oppressor, was for an
ensample unto all them, who shall in time to come believe in Christ unto
eternal life. Thus the children of God, when they look to the sins of other
Gods Saints recorded in holy Scripture, do not hereby confirm themselves in
sin, but comfort themselves against despair. It is true of them all, Basil
de paeniten.
which Basil spoke of Peter's threefold denial, they are Registered, Vt tu
quoque consolationem haberes, Let us meditate upon the sins of others, as
Bernard Bernard.
did; Omnino propter mansuetudinem quae in te est, domine Jesus, currimus post
te, audientes quod non spernas pauperem peccatorem, non horruisti confitentem
latronem non lachrymantem peccatricem, non Cananaeam supplicantem, non
deprehensam in adulterio, non supplicantem publicanum, non negantem discipulum,
non persequutorem discipulorum: In odore horum currimus. Surely LORD JESUS for
the meeknes which is in thee, we run after thee hearing, that thou despisedst
not the poor sinner, thou abhorredst not the penitent thief, the mourning
sinful woman, nor the woman of Canaan when she requested thee, nor the woman
apprehended in adultery, nor the Publican praying unto thee, nor the Disciple
that denied thee, nor yet the Disciple who persecuted thy Disciples, in the
smell of these thine ointments, we run after thee.

to raise up such as A restoratiue to raise up such as have fallen. Augu.
have fallen in the same manner, for here, Non cadendi exemplum, sed si
cecideris, resurgendi propositum est. There are many who delight to hear or
read the sins of God his Saints, as if they were unto them patrocinia
peccati, defenses of their sins. But alas, what folly is this, to love that
in David, which he hated in himself? Hoc non est defensionem parare animae
tuae, sed comites inquirere ad gehennam: This is not to prepare a defense for
thy own Soul, but to seek companions to go with thee into hell, flattering
thy self that thou art in state good enough, because thou art not matelesse:
but rememberest not that albeit thou had never so many inuolued with thee in
the giltinesse of thy sins, what comfort can that be unto thee, Non enim
propterea minus ardebis, quia cum multis ardebis, Shall thy fire in hell be the
less, because many will there burn with thee? Nay, by the contrary the more
matter, the bolder fire.

It were great wisdom to Great wisdom, to make other men's sins a medicine
for us. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 27.
embrace that counsel of Chrysostom, that we should not so much look to
David his fall, as to his rising. Consider what he did after his fall, how he
put on sackcloth, how he watered his bed with tears; how he roared night and
day, sighing and crying continually till he found the forgiveness of his
sins, Sic medicamenta nobis Augu.
de alienis vulneribus faciemus, So shall we make medicaments to our selves of
the wounds of others, and not be like unto phranticke persons, who slay
themselves with the yrons of the Chirurgian, by which they have seen him cut
the flesh of others, he did it of skill for curing, and they of their madness
for killing.

In this inscription of the Three things considered in the inscription of this
Psalm.
Psalm, we consider three things: First, how David goes into Bethsheba and
commits Adultery with her. Next how Nathan comes to David sleeping in his
sin, wakens him and raises him up by Repentance: And thirdly, how he makes
this Psalm, and gives it to be sung publickely in the Church as the first
fruits of his Repentance.

In the first of these again, there 1. The consideration of David his person,
who sinned should make us fear our own weakness.
are three circumstances to be considered. The person, the sins which he
committes, and the time. The person that falls is David, a man endued with most
notable graces of the spirit, a man highly commended of God. A man who before
had endured strong temptations, and prevailed victor in them all. Now is
overcome, and falls most fearfully, this should waken us, to take heed unto
that warning of the Apostle, He that 1. Cor. 10.
stands, let him take heed that he fall not. In him let us consider our
selves, shall we presume of our strength, when we see a stronger then we
overcome? Nay, rather let us fear our weakness, and work out our own
salvation in fear and trembling, Sit lapsus maiorum, tremor minorum, Let the
fall of Aug.
the greater ones make the weaker afraid, Ille hodie and ego cras: Bern.
He has sinned this day, and we may sin to morrow, let others as they list
draw on sin by examples; But let us learn, it is a great point of wisdom,
to become wise by example of others, rather then by experience in our selves,
Gregor. moral. lib. 2.
thus Si maiorum casus ad humilitatem nos accingat, we shall not readily fall
in the like snare of the devil.

As for the sins he commits, 2. David's sins are adultery, murder careless
security.
they are very heinous: first Adultery, next Murder, by the one thinking to
cover the other: And thirdly, with them both he falls into no small contempt of
GOD, that for the space of nine months he keeps close his sin,
frequenting the external sacrifices of Gods worship, but not touched in his
conscience, with a sense or remorse for his sin, for he was so far from
being troubled for it, that when he wrote to Ioab to expose Vriah to the sword
of the enemy, he willed him not to be troubled for the matter. Thus we see
from one sin he goes to another, Erranti enim nullus terminus, and so for any
thing we can perceive in him, had still walked on in his sins, till he had
fallen in the bottom of hell, if the Lord by grace had not recalled, and
recovered him.

There is such a fellowship Of the fellowship and combination that is among
sins
among sinful affections, they are so combined together, that if we give place
to any one of them, many more perforce shall enter upon us, they are like the
servants of a Tyrant, who finding one that has been fugitive from their Lord,
do join themselves together to bring him back again: And every one of them
helps an other, to keep him under bondage, having once subdued him, Sic open
vicaria fugitiuum suum vitia Gregor. moral. lib. 7.
retinent, and vbi semel amissum sub dominij sui iure recipient, sibi vicissim
ad vindictam tradunt. Thus is it a great work of Gods mercy and power, when
any of his Saints are delivered from their servitude.

As to the third, the time 3. The time when David sinned warnes us, how
perilous is prosperity.
when David falls into these sins, it is noted 2. Sam. 11. being at peace,
and quietness at home himself, new arisen from his after-noones sleep,
walking upon the rooffe of his Palace, he sees Bathsheba washing her self in
the Garden, and by unsanctified looking unto her is snared. His people are
fighting against Ammon, himself is sleeping at home and pampering his body, and
Bathsheha forgetting her husband in the battle, falls too her pleasure and
bathes her self, and that not secretly at home, but even in prospect of the
Kings palace. In all the persecutions which David suffered by Saul, in all his
troubles by Absalom, he received not such a wound; As a man, the stronger the
Wind blows, holds his garments the faster about him, whereas the beating
heat of the Sun, makes him to lay them aside: so David under temptation was
the more fervent in prayer; the more he was troubled by men, the faster did he
cleave to the Lord his God: but now being freed from trouble and living in
prosperity, what a great advantage does Satan get over him?

Sure it is, a man has never A man has most cause of fear when he is least
crossed.
more cause to fear, then when he finds his estate most quiet. It is a most
dangerous thing to live without some cross, or temptation, that may chase a
man to God. As an idle man readily falls asleep, and being asleep, any Jewel
he has in his hand, does easily fall from him: so carnal prosperity casts
men in careless security, whereby spiritual graces are greatly weakened into
them, Facilior cautio, vbi manifesta formido, Cyprian. de simplicitate praelat.
and ad certamen animus ante praestruitur, quando se aduersarius confitetur,
When our adversary shows himself most plainly, then is it most easy for us
to beware of him, Plus metuendus est inimicus cum latenter obrepit, cum per
pacis imaginem fallens occultis accessibus serpit, vnde etiam illi nomen
serpentis. But then have we most cause to fear him, when beguiling us by the
show, and Image of peace, he creeps in by secret ways, insinuating himself
craftily to get vantage over us, for the which cause also the name of a Serpent
is attributed unto him.

The second thing to be considered Nathan visits David like a whole Physician
coming to cure a sick Physician.
in the inscription, is how Nathan comes to David, and raises him up, Astat
post peccatum propheta prophetae, veluti medicus medico agrotanti; Here one
Prophet comes unto an other, like one Physician visiting an other Physician in
his disease. This is the duty of Christians, since they are of one communion,
to edify one another in the most holy faith, to exhort one another. He that
is stronger in the faith, ought to confirm the weaker, and he that stands
should raise up with the spirit of meekness him that has fallen, considering
Every Christian should edify another.
also himself. It was the voice of Cain, am I my brothers keeper, and it
should be far from Christians. That Law pertaines to us all, Thou shall not
hate thy brother in thine Leui. 19. 17
heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke him, and suffer him not to sin; for it
is no love but hatred, to know thy brother in a sin, and not to rebuke him.
And truly it is no small blessing of GOD, when among Christians, such
instruments of grace as Nathan was, do a bound, who being endewed with grace
from above, are able by grace to comfort the feeble minded, to strengthen the
weak, and to raise them up that have fallen.

Again, that David having Man sins by nature, but cannot rise without grace.
sinned, rises not till the Lord sent Nathan to raise him, learns us a lesson,
which should humble us all, and bind us to acknowledge the great mercy of God
toward us, he falls by him self, he rises not by himself. Nine months lies
he as it were dead in that grave of sin, till the Lord who called upon
Lazarus, called upon him also, and made him come out of it. It is easy for any
man to fall into a pit, but not so easy for him to come out of it. Si stare
Bern.
non potuit humana natura adhuc integra, quanto minus poterit per seipsam
resurgere iam corrupta, as it was with him, so is it with us all, perditio tua
ex te, o Israel: thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel; but our salvation
is of the Lord, and from the Lamb that sits with him upon the throne.

Thirdly, we see this difference Reprobate men sin and repent not, not so
the godly.
between the godly and the wicked, the one falls and rises not. Judas
betrayed Christ; Peter forsware him, the one goes on in his sins, and
perishes, the other is renewed by repentance. The difference then is not in
sin, wherein we are also as deep as they, but in this that the Lord has
had mercy upon us. O how are we obliged to bless him, who has put a
difference by grace between us and them, where there was no difference by
nature. And this is to be marked for them who have an eye to see, how David
sinned even as they have sinned, and therefore account the less of their
sins, but have not an eye to see that they have repented, as David repented,
and that therefore being far unlike him in Repentance, they can have no
comfort, that he was like them in sin.

The third point of the inscription The order of singing Levites under the law
Leuiticall.
is in these words, To him that excels: A Psalm of David. Wherein we see
how he dedicateth this Psalm, as the first fruit and testimony of his
Repentance, to be sung publicly in the Church, for understanding whereof we
must know how David ordained some of the Levites, skilled in Music to praise
the Lord by singing, and playing upon Instruments, these were in number four
thousand, who 1. Chron. 23. 5.
by course served the Lord in his Sanctuary. They were divided in several
classes; and over every one of them, some that were Masters of Music,
Precentors, who in singing and playing excelled the rest, such as Asaph, Heman,
Idithun, etc. and to these it is, that David dedicateth this Psalm to be sung
publicly, for the word Natseah in Piel, signifies one that is an ouerseer, or
president over others, for his excellency in strength, or skill, or
otherwise, and so here and in other Psalms David uses it, to signify a
master of Music.

The instruments they used in praising the Lord, are most Two sorts of
musical Instruments used in the Leuiticall Law.
of them reckoned up in the last Psalm; all of them may be reduced to two
sorts, whereof the one are called Neginoth, such as made a sound by touching,
from the word Nagan, pulsauit; the other called Nechiloth, such as being
hollow, made a sound by breathing, from the word Halal. Sometime the musical
Instrument was premitted, and the singing voice followed, and then the Song was
called Canticum Psalmi, for Psalterium properly is a kind of musical
Instrument, called of the Hebrews Naula, but is translated to signify the
Psalms. Sometime again the Song was first sung with the voice, and the
musical Instrument followed, and then it is called Psalmus cantici. What upon
this is to be observed, see our notes upon the one hundred and nineteen Psalm.

Only now we mark, how The godly are content to shame themselves, by
Confession of sin that they may give glory unto God.
David cares not to take shame to himself, by confessing his Murder and
Adultrie publicly in the Church, that he may give glory unto God; So is it
with all Gods children, who has felt the terror of an accusing conscience for
sin, who are grieved in themselves for displeasing the Lord, and are
earnestly seeking to be reconciled with God, they refuse not to manifest their
own shame, yea and as it were with that filthy Leper under the Law, with his
clothes rent, with his head bare, with a covering upon his lips, to cry out
before all the world, I am unclean, I am unclean, Leuit. 13. 45.
that so they may get peace from God, and may give him glory by their
repentance as they dishonored him by their sin. I speak not this This is
not to be under stood of private sins.
of private sins, the example whereof has not offended thy neighbor; Such
sins I rather wish to be buried, as Israel with their paddles buried their
filth without the Camp under the earth, nor laid open to the eyes of others:
but of public sins, it is not our shame to confess these for removing of
the slander, but double sin and shame to conceal them, how so ever it be
current now, as an undoubted axiom among carnal men, that no man is bound to
swear to his own shame, sure we are, it is not warranted by any Divine
authority, for so Achan might have excused himself when Joshua, willed him by
confessing of theft, to give glory to God, and so David here might have
shifted himself from this public confession; where the conscience is
sleeping, any warrant A sleeping Conscience excuses sin.
is thought sufficient to excuse a sin, and man fears not to defraude the
Lord of that glory, he should have by confession of it, but where the Lord
wakens the conscience, all excuses are set aside, and man is glad to disburden
himself, by confessing his sin unto the Lord. This the Lord will have of all
flesh at the length, for so has he sworn, As I live says the Lord, every
tongue shall confess to me, he shall then force them to give him glory by
confessing, who now wickedly defraude him of it by concealing: But happy and
wise is he, who does it in time when Mercy is to be found with the LORD.

PSALM. 51. VERSE 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving
kindness, according to the multitude of thy compassions, put away mine
iniquity.
HItherto the inscription The sum and order of this Psalm.
or preface of the PSALM: Now follows the PSALM, wherein David first
prays for himself to the 18. Verse; Next for the Church of GOD Verse 18. In
the prayer for himself, he has first a general petition, have mercy on me,
O God, Verse 1. then three particular petitions, first, the remission of his
sin, which he expresses by putting away, washing, purging, to the Verse 8.
Next the restitution of peace, and joy to his conscience, which by his sin he
had sore empaired, Verse 89. Thirdly, the renouation of his Heart and Spirit
within him, which most fearfully he had altered from the love of God, to the
love of iniquity, Verse 10. 11. etc.

This Psalm is frequently They cannot rightly use the words of this Psalm,
who want David's disposition.
sung in the mouths of many men, but sure it is these words which were true,
when David spoke them, are but lies when they are pronounced by many men, for
so they pray, O Lord consider my distress, when as in very deed they had
never such a thing, as a distressed soul for sin. Is not this a mocking of
God to pray him to look upon that, which is not in thee, to pray him consider
that, which thou never consideredst thy self, learn therefore when ye sing
this Psalm of David, to take on so near as ye may David his disposition,
though ye have not sinned as he did, yet look unto your other sins, and be
ye humbled for them, otherways your confession of sins shall be but a
profession of sin, to say with David, against thee only have I sinned, and
then either to have no remorse for sin, or no confidence in Gods mercy, shall
profit thee no more then the confession of Saul or Judas: I have sinned, said
the one; I have sinned in betraying innocent blood, said the other, their
confession was somewhat like David's, their heart no way like David's: And it is
certain that the Lord, Radicem attendit, non florem.

Have mercy on me. What Where Sin persues no refuge but to mercy.
was David his estate when he brake out in these words, ye may see out of the
32. Psalm, his conscience being wakned by the ministry of Nathan, he is so
terrified with the lively sense of his sin and sight of that wrath which by
it he had deserved, that his bones were consumed, and the moisture of his body
turned in the drogth of Summer: In this perplexed estate the first comfort that
he finds is by looking up to the mercy of God.

Natural men may marvel No external comfort can sustain a man troubled for
sin.
what is this that should have troubled David so sore, was he not King of
Canaan, his sins were murder, and adultery; but was there any in the Land
to put him to an Assize? was there any to punish him? what needed he to fear?
But he himself tells thee what ailed him, the hand of God was heavy upon him
night and day, the Lord had erected a Tribunal in his own conscience, and did
there sit and judge him, where no man might judge him, there the Lord convicted
him of sin, and threatened him with terrors, for sure it is all the comforts
of the world, if thou had them in one, cannot sustain thee when God in thy
own conscience persecutes thee for sin, examples are Balthazar and David: The
spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit, who can
bear it?

And therefore David sore David's appellation from God to God.
straightened with the judgment of God, turns him to the mercy of God, he
finds no other thing whereupon to rely his faith, he can get no other gripe
whereby to hold him, that he fall not in the pit of desperation, but this
mercy. O Lord, in regard of thy power thou art invincible, who can resist
thee? who can endure the stroke of thine hand? In regard of thy wisdom, thou
art all-seeing, nothing can be hid from thee In regard of thy justice thou art
most holy, and can not be corrupted, in none of these can I find comfort,
the only hope of mine heart is in thy goodness and mercy, so that now he
flees ad co^munem peccantium Chrysostom.
portum, to the common harbor of all poor penitent sinners, who are tossed too
and fro with the tumbling thoughts of an accusing conscience, threatening more
fearful death, then the raging waves of the Sea to Jonas, never can settle
nor rest til they come within the Port of God his mercy, even so here does
David, terrified with Gods judgment, before which he could not stand, he
appeals to Gods mercy, tanquam ab inferiori sede ad superiorem, as the higher
bench wherein the glory of God shines most eminently, for mercy reioyses
against judgment. Iam. 2. 13.


When we hear that David, Nothing in the world to be esteemed misery, but
only iniquity.
and others of Gods Saints, cry for mercy, we must remember that this
includes a humble confession of their misery, and what was David's misery
which he craves to be cured by God his mercy, he tells you in the end of the
Verse, no other but the misery of sin: Nathan 2. Sam. 12. 10.
had threatened him with the sword, and that he should make his Son, who came
out of his bowels, a scourge unto him, but David counts none of these his
misery, for which he craves mercy, his misery is his iniquity, and the
mercy he craves is the putting away of his iniquity. This blind age counts
bodily infirmities and want of temporal things misery, but sin they count
no misery, blinder then the Egyptians of old, who esteemed sheepe-heards
abominable, but Idolaters not abominable: but indeed it is far otherways:
were thou so poor as Lazarus, filled with biles in thy body from head to foot
as Job was, yet if thou be freed from sin, thou art freed from misery, and
be the contrary, were thou so rich as that glutton clad in purple, and faring
delicately every day (...) thou health and honor, and all the comforts of the
world after the desire of thine own heart, if yet thou be in thy sins, the
end shall declare thou art a miserable creature.

This will be manifest at the Even the wicked at the last shall fear find more
then death.
length in all the wicked, that their misery is not in sickness, nay not in
death it self, but in an evil conscience guilty of sin, though now they
abhor nothing but death, and esteem sin but a pastime: the day is coming,
wherein they shall seek death and not find it, saying, hills and mountains fall
upon us, and cover us, they shall be glad to be smothered to the death, and to
suffer the greatest misery that can come to their bodies, upon condition they
were freed from the misery of an evil conscience; which sin has brought
upon them.

But howsoever this misery A comfortable meditation of Gods mercy.
of David was exceeding great, he espies in God by the eye of faith a greater
mercy to cure it, and therefore cries he for mercy according to the
multitude of his commiserations; O Lord, I know that whatsoever is in thee is
thy self, thy mercy is no less then thy self. Cum sis misericors, quid es,
nisi ipsa misericordia, Hieron. Sauanarola.
seeing thou art merciful, what art thou but mercy it self? and what can
mercy do but thine own work? can thou deny thy self? can thou depart
from thine own nature? what is the work of mercy, but to take away misery,
here am I Lord before thee a miserable man, and my greatest misery is my
sin, do thy own work, O Lord, cure my misery with thy mercy, show the
virtue of thy mercies upon me, abyssus abyssum inuocat, abyssus miseriae
inuocat abyssum misericor diae, one deep calls upon an other, the deep of
misery calls upon the deep of mercy, greater is the deep of mercy then the
deep of misery; let therefore the deep of thy mercy swallow up the deep of
my misery, and put thou away mine iniquity.

On me. David does not now The humility of a penitent thinks not his name
worth to be named.
as at other times express his name, as when he said, Lord remember David,
etc. neither takes he here to himself the name of Gods servant, as customably
he does in other places, but concealeth his name, ashamed of himself, not
unlike that forlorn child, I have sinned against heaven and against Luke 15.
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

According to thy loving kindness. David depends on Gods mercy not on his own
merit.
We have heard David his petition in general: Now the reason whereby he will
move the Lord to grant it, is not from any merit in himself, he utterly
disclaimes that, but only from God his loving kindness and commiseration, upon
these two does he now fasten his gripes, and by the meditation of them he
conceiues some hope of favor in the Lord, even when in himself he had
received a condemnatorie sentence of death, by reason of his sin.

Two things are requisite in The two eyes of a penitent sinner, and what loss
it is to want either of them.
a sinner, that would have mercy; first, an eye to know his sins that being
ashamed of himself, he may resolve, there can be no life for him, if he rest
in himself. And next an eye to see Gods mercy, many have not the first, and
therefore think that either without a Sacrifice, or with a small sacrifice,
God will be pleased, they cannot mourn for sin, esteeming their sins so
small that they need no great mourning: Others again have not the other eye
whereby to see Gods mercy in Christ, they see their own sin, but see not God
his mercy, and therefore are carried either to a temporal desperation, which
may befall the godly that for a time they seem to themselves utterly undone, or
then to a final, us all the reprobates do: examples whereof we have in Cain,
Saul, and Judas, from whose miserable condition the Lord preserve us.

Now David finding nothing Two things in God David grounds upon.
in himself to comfort him, when he looks up to God he sees two things, as I
said, that sustain him; first, the kindness 1 His benignity or kindness,
this is either general.
of God; next the manifold compassions of God; the word expressing his
kindness is Chesed, the benignity of God, and this is either general, where by
he loves his creatures conseruing them, as he made them, and delights to do
good unto them, in so far as they are the works of his hands. Thou Lord Math.
5. 45
sauest man and beast, he makes his Sun to arise on the evil and the good,
and sends rain on the just and unjust. And this howsoever it rendered some
comfort, yet could it not give full comfort to DAVID, considering that sin,
the poison of the Serpent in him, made him justly Or special.
abominable to God. And therefore he casts his eye further unto that special
benignity of God, which in effect is his mercy, whereby he loves his own in
Christ redeemes them from their sins, and saues them by his grace when they
have lost themselves by their iniquity.

And this is evident by the other word immediately he adioynes The special is
in effect Gods mercy and tender compassion.
of God his compassion which is the other ground, whereupon the faith of David
reposed, for the word Racham signifies to love from the very bowels and
inward affection, being deduced from the name Rechem, which signifies the What
great comfort we have into it.
womb or matrice, that with most kindly and tender affection, compass and
nourish the Infant within it, suppose it cannot be thankful for the present,
nor do the duty wherein it is bound, but rather be offensive to the mother
that carries it, David knew that the like tender affection was in God toward
his own poor children, yea and much more greater, then the heavens are higher
(...)
from the earth; so far are the thoughts of God his love and compassion,
above all that can be in us, it is possible the mother may forget the birth of
her womb, but the LORD cannot forget them who are his.

Therefore does he not only Compassio^s in the plural number are ascribed to
God.
ascribe unto God compassions but great co^passions, or a multitude of them,
and so he speaks for two causes, first because where God shows mercies, he 1
Because where he shows mercy, he shows many mercies together.
shows many mercies together a heap and a very mass of mercies. The royal
heart of Alexander thought it not honorable for him to give a small thing, what
then shall we think of our God? The ods is so great that there can be no
comparison. But sure where he gives any of his chief blessings, there he
gives such a treasure forth of his infinite riches of mercy, as we are not
able to speak of.

Yet for our comfort in our Six ranks of mercy.
meditation, his mercies showed unto us, since we could 1 Preventing mercy.
know, what mercy was, we may reduce them to six ranks, the first I call
preventing mercies, whereby the Lord did us good when we knew him not, and
kept us from many sins, which otherways we would have committed: O quanta
dignatio Bern. de Euang. 7. Panum Ser. 1.
pietatis, quod ingratum sic gratia conseruabat, Many sins have we done
against him, but far more should we have done if his mercy had not prevented
us, Agnosce ergo gratiam eius cui debes, etiam quod non admisisti. Augu.
Mihi debet iste quod factum est and dimissum vidisti, mihi debes and tu quod
non fecisti. Acknowledge therefore Gods mercy toward thee, even in these
sins, which thou have not done. If thou see one who is debtor to me for a
sin, which he did and I forgave him; understand also that thou art debtor to
me for keeping thee, that thou did not the like, for there is no sin which
any man has done, but an other man would do the like, if God by grace did not
preserve him from it.

his sparing mercies, or the mercies Sparing mercies.
of his patience, though we have been kept from the doing of many sins, yet
have we done enough to condemn us. There is an other sort of mercy, Peccabam
and tu dissimulabas, non continebam a sceleribus and tu a verberibus
abstinebas, I sinned and thou heldst thy tongue, I transgressed, thou sparedst
and killedst me not, when we look to Zimri and Cosbi slain in the act of
harlotrie; to Ananias and Saphira stricken to death in their sin, what shall
we say, but it is a great mercy of God, that hitherto we have not been
taken away in the midst of our sins?

his pardoning mercies, for a 3 Pardoning mercies.
man may think what benefit is it to me, to be long spared, seeing at the
last, judgment will come, and quo diutius expectat, eo districtius iudicabit,
but this fear is taken away from the godly by God his pardoning mercies, he
forgiues their sins in Christ, he will never impute their iniquity unto them,
but takes them utterly away, Peccatum non imputatum, est quasi nunquam fuerit
commissum.

But with these is also given 4 Renewing mercies.
us the fourth sort, that is his renewing mercies. There are many quorum
infructuosa est poenitentia, who repent of their sins, but are not renewed by
amendment of life, in whom nouissimus error peior est priori, their returning
like Dogs to their vomit, is worse then their first transgression: but the
Lord when he gives to his own children the grace of remission, does also give
with it the grace of renouation, whereby he makes them new creatures,
abounding in the fruits of righteousness, to Gods glory, the edification of
their brethren, and the comfort of their own consciences in Christ.

And yet all these were nothing, if it were not that the fifth 5. Corroborating
and continuing mercy.
rank of mercies were also heaped upon us, which I call continuing mercies,
whereby we persevere in that estate of grace, whereunto we are once called.
Adam in his best estate of innocence continued not, and would we stand in
grace, if perseverance, which he wanted, were not communicated unto us. As
mercy brought us to this state of grace, so it is by mercy also that we are
kept in it.

And the last rank is of Gods crowning mercies, whereby he 6. Crowning mercies.
shall perfect his own work, finish that which he has begun in us, he
shall perform to us his promised Kingdom, fear of evil shall be far from
us, in that Paradise no tempter shall be to snare us, mercy shall compass
us, no good shall be lacking to us, the Lord shall be all in all unto us, and
from that blessed fellowship and communion with him, shall we never be divided
again.

And as this way Gods mercies Compassions in the plural number, are ascribed
to God, because the proof and practice of them is manifold.
are manifold, so likewise are the praises of them in respect of innumerable
persons, on whom they have been declared, for miserationes Dei sunt opera and
processus misericordiae eius, and so his meditation is, O Lord thou have showed
compassion to many a penitent sinner, since the beginning of the world, thou
never reiectedst any that sought thee with a penitent heart, for number they
cannot be told to whom thou have been merciful, quot enim iusti, tot
miserationes, let them al be gathered that are in heaven and earth, if it be
demanded of them, how is it they have been saved, they will all answer, Not
unto us, O Lord, but unto thy name be the praise; And therefore seeing thou, O
Lord, art the same; And no shadow of change is with thee, I beseech thee close
not that door of mercy on me, which has opened to receive so many sinners
before me, and these Rivers of compassion which have flowed so abundantly
toward others, let them not be dried up to me.

This earnestness of David's Feeling of our wants, make earnest Prayer.
prayer, flows from the feeling of his great sins, he knew his sins were
great, and therefore craves he great mercies, magna siquidem vulnera paribus
indige^t Basil.
Pharmacis, yea that in this one transgression, manifold sins were included,
and that therefore he needed not one, but a multitude of divine
commiserations: Vniuer sam in se Dei gratiam effundi, and totum miserationum
fontem in peccati sui vlcera euacuari orat.

But how soever the mercies The mercies of God are plentiful, yet not extended
to all, and why
of God be plentiful, yet are they not extended unto all, they are free
indeed; I have mercy (says the Lord) on whom I will have mercy, but so that
if there be any man, to who^ they flow not, he may always find the cause in
himself, in his hard heart that cannot repent, it holds true in all the
reprobate, which the Apostle speaks of the rebellious Jews; Ye put it from
you, meaning the word of the Gospel, wherein mercy and grace is offered, and
judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, therefore that mercy which is
here craved by David, Act. 13. 46.
by a most fearful decree was denied unto them, God gave that people a name
Lo-Ruchamah, I will no more have pity Hos. 1. 6.
on them, whereupon followed another name, expressing their Such as will not be
Gods people, shall not find Gods mercy
misery after that once God for their sins had cast them away, Lo-Ammi, that
is to say, they are not my people, and I will not be theirs. No tongue can
express the misery of that man, who for his proud continuance in sin, and
contempt of grace offered unto him, receives most justly from the Lord, that
decree of Lo-Ruchamah, I will have no mercy on him; where the Fountain is
stopped the Springs of necessity must dry up, where mercy is denied, all
good things flowing from it must decay. This will be the cursed condition of
the damned. All fat and excellent Revel. 18. 14.
things shall depart from them, from which the Lord deliver us.

Put away mine iniquities. Hitherto David enters to his particular petitions.
we have heard David his general petition for mercy, now follows his three
particular petitio^s, expressing what mercy it is he craved, as we showed in
the beginning of the Verse.

His first particular petition Whereof the first is a petition for the
remission of his sins.
is for forgiveness of his sin, the fact was past, but the gilt remained,
the pleasure of it was soon done, but the terror of it still vexed him, all
the comfort of his Kingdom could not make him merry, the torment of an
accusing conscience for sin was more strong to deiect him, then all the
pleasures of Canaan were to sustain him, yea it is most sure that external
comforts are so far from comforting a troubled conscience, that by the
contrary they increase the trouble thereof, and the more worldly comforts be
presented, the greater is the heaviness of that soul, which is afflicted for
sin; and therefore now when he comes to The grief of sin can not be
assuaged by any worldly comfort.
the point, he tells where his sore was, what grieved him most, iniquity,
iniquity; he cries out for this in the 32. Psalm; Blessed is the man whose
wickedness is forgiven, whose sin is covered, and to whom the Lord imputes
not iniquity. As if he would say, he that has not this, has no blessing,
all comforts without this are comfortless.

Where we have to take up What a fear full evil sin is.
what a cursed and miserable thing sin is, a sparkle of fire come from hell,
that burns up all the pleasures of the Paradise of a good Conscience, a seed
of Satan, a piece of leaven that sowreth and infecteth all it comes among,
turning sweetest things into bitter. It is but a small thing to look to, soon
done in the twinkling of an eye, but has an enduring sting, and produces
manifold and great evil effects, it perturbeth all being but one, and spoil
man of the comfort of all God his creatures, miserable men bewitched with the
deceit of sin, drunken with the present false pleasures thereof cannot
believe this, it is but a pastime to them to do wickedly; but let them know it
shall turn to bitterness in the end. But of this more in the third verse,
where he complains that his sin was ever before him.

The word that in this petition God has his account Book, wherein the debts
of men, that is their sins are Registered.
David uses is Machah, signifiing a scraping and a blotting out; he alludes
as it seems to the manner of them, who have their account Books, wherein they
write up their debts, whereof they purpose to have payment, although they spare
for a time, whereupon David says, I know Lord thou have thine own account
Book, wherein thou writest the transgressions of them, with whom thou mindest
to enter in judgment according to that, The sin of Judah is written with a
Pen of iron, and Iere. 17.
the point of a Diamond. Let not O Lord my debt stand Registered there, but of
thy mercy put it and blot it out, I have done enough for my part to put my
own name out of the Book of life, and insert it in the Roll of them that must
come to judgment. I know there is a standing decree in thy Book, That death
is the wages of sin; If my sin stand in thy Register, I am but a dead man,
Lord quicken me, forgive me my trespass, and put away the Colos. 2. 13.
handwriting of thy ordinance, which is contrary to me.

But here let us mark, how The books are two, the book of his Science, and
the book of our Conscience.
it is that the Lord puts sin out of his twofold Register, First out of
the book of his own science, he puts the sins of his children utterly,
both the gilt and the memory of them he puts away, so that out of his
account book he scrapes our debt clean away, that it appears not again,
according to his promise, I will remember their sins no more. But out of the
Register of our conscience, he puts the gilt, the accusing, and tormenting
power of it, but abolisheth not utterly the remembrance of it. He reserues some
monument of our sins in our memory, after that they are forgiven, partly to
humble us, when we look back unto them, and partly to preserve us from
committing the like in time to come.

And further we see how David Blind are they who think they can make
satisfaction to God for their debts.
acknowledges, his debt was more then he was able to pay, and therefore
disclaiming his own sufficiency, he appeals to Gods mercy, beseeching the
L. to blot it out, for he had not to pay it. It is a pitiful blindness in the
adversaries of the truth, that teaches poor people to lean unto man's
satisfactions, which they must make to God for their sins, either here or in
Purgatory, how will thou satisfy that infifinite majesty of God for thy
manifold sins, Ille figulus, tu Ber. Scr. de quadrup. debito.
figmentum. When thou have given unto him all that thou art able, either by
doing or suffering, Nonneistud est, sicut stella ad solemn, gutta ad fluuium,
What is it, but as if one should compare a Star with the Sun, or a drop
with a river, Nemo est qui millesimae imo nec minimae part debitorum suorum
valeat respondere. I see it was blindness, and so it is, whatsoever show of
learning be in them, who maintain it, if they knew how great is the debt that
man owes unto God, they would say with Bernard, There is none in the world
able to answer the thousand part; nay, not the smallest part of that Debt,
which man owes unto God. Away therefore with that blasphemous word of human
satisfaction, for except the Lord have compassion on us, and for Mattb. 18. 27.
give the debt, there remains nothing for us, but to be pined in prison for
ever.

And this also is to be observed, By three words, David expresses his sin, to
show the greatness thereof.
how David making mention of his sin, contents him not with one word, but
changes there sundry words to express it, whereof the one Pashang, signifies
defection and rebellion; the other Gnauah, signifies peruersuesse or crooked
doing; the third Chatta, signifies to err or wander from the mark. Men who
do weigh sin in the balance of consuetude, can never know the weight of it,
they esteem it but a light thing, but godly men who weigh it in the balance of
the Sanctuary, and examine it according to the rule of the word, find it such
a horrible evil as wherein manifold evils do concur.

VERSE. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
David insists, and Three things which make fervent Prayer.
in other terms he repeates his former petition: There are three things which
make earnestnes and feruencie in prayer. First, Conscience of sin. Secondly,
fear or sense of wrath. Thirdly, ardent desire of mercy; these three were at
this time strong in David, and therefore sends he up fervent and strong
petitions to God.

More particularly we learn Sin, a vile uncleanness.
here, that Sin is a filthynesse which defiles a man, there is no
uncleanness can make us so vile, and abominable in the eyes of man, as sin
makes us in the eyes of God; what more vile thing in the world then a
Menstruous cloth? If even our righteousness be like unto it, as Esaias
witnesses, I pray you whereunto shall our unrighteousness be compared, or
what similitude can be gotten sufficiently to express it. Now as it is an
uncleanness indeed, would to God we could so esteem of it; we can suffer no
uncleanness in our bodies, but incontinent we wash it away; Neither can abide it
in our garments, but without delay we remedy it: yea, the smallest
uncleanness in the vessels that serve us for meat and drink, makes our very
food loathsome unto us; But alas, we have not half of that care to keep our
Souls and Consciences clean, from the filthy pollution of sin, nor yet to
wash them in that Fountain, opened to DAVID'S house for sin and for
uncleanness, when we have defiled them.

And yet a great necessity to do so, lies upon us, for we are No part can we
have with Christ, if he wash us not.
warned that no unclean thing can enter into heavenly Jerusalem. That answer
given by the Lord Jesus unto Peter, Ioh. 13. 8.
stands for a warning to us all; If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part
with me; Oh that it moved us, as it moved him, that we might also pray with
him. O Lord rather then my uncleanness banish me from thy fellowship, wash I
beseech thee not my feet only, but my hands and my head also, Wash my feet,
that is my unclean affections: Wash my head, that is my unclean imaginations
and senses. And wash also my hands, that is the uncleanness of mine actions.

But the word that David uses A comfort able meditation of Gods manifold
mercies.
imports much washing, he knew his sin was a deep spot, not easily rubbed
away, and therefore craves he much washing, so then, his meaning is, Many
sins have thou Lord forgiven me, now I pray thee yet further wash me from
this sin also. Are thy mercies numbered, or are they so narrow that they
cannot cover this transgression among the rest, how great so ever it be. So
that here David does still depend upon the greatness of Gods compassion, and
by it is he sustained, that the greatness of his transgression drives him not
to despare, when the Apostle Saint Peter enquired at the Lord Jesus, how often
shall I forgive my brother in Since he will have us to forgive an other seven
times in the day, what will he do himself?
the day, if he offend me, shall I forgive him seven times? Our Savior
answered, not seven times only, but seventy times seven times also. O word full
of consolation, how does it animate us to repose on the the Lords mercy. Nonne
mayor Deus homine? nonne melior homine? Is not the Lord greater then man? is he
not better then man? If he will have so great compassion in a man to forgive
his brother so often in a day: what compassion is in himself to forgive his
own poor penitent creature, that prostrates himself for mercy before him.

VERSE 3 For I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me.
Here is subjoined a reason of his Confession from a penitent heart obtaines
mercy.
former petition. O Lord, I do not hide and conceal the iniquity of my
bosom, I seek not now to cover it as I did before, but now I acknowledge it,
and I confess it to thee against my self, therefore, Lord have mercy upon me,
and forgive it: this is a good reason, for it is grounded on the Lords promise:
He that hides his sins shall not prosper: Prou. 28.
but he that confesses, and forsakes them shall have mercy. And again, If
we confess our sins 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
God is faithful and just to forgive them. Or otherways we may take up these
words as Vatablus does, Lord thou know that I seek not mercy from thee
dissemblingly, or for fashion, as the manner of hypocrites is, who make
supplication for mercy, of custom rather then of contrition, nay Lord I feel
my sin a burden which troubles me, the very sight of it terrifies and afraies
me, therefore Lord take it away from thee.

So long as sin is in a man's So long as sin is in the affection that a man
loves it there is no remission of it.
affection that he likes it and has pleasure in it, it is but a mocking of
God to desire him to forgive it, shall he forgive that which thou will not
forgo? shall he pardon thine offenses so long as thou have pleasure to offend?
No, no, unless thou put thine iniquity from thee out of thine affection,
unless thou find it a burden unto thee whereof thou art weary, go not to him
to seek mercy: for so his promise is, Come unto me all ye that are weary,
and laden, and I will refresh you: But alas, it is far otherwise with many,
who use in babbling manner these words of David. O Lord consider my distress,
when as they had never such a thing as a distressed soul for sin; and cannot
say with David, I know mine iniquity and my sin is ever before me.

But when is this, that David An example of that deep security wherein Gods
children may fall.
comes to know his sin? after that Nathan had reproved him without, and God
had wakned his own conscience within to accuse him; and this was nine months
after the committing of the sin: all this time he slept in a careless security,
albeit he haunted the exercises of religion, and had some general knowledge of
his sins, yet it moved him not, till now God lets him see an other sight of
his sins, then he had before.

In him we see an image of To sin is of our self, to repent is of grace.
our corrupt disposition; we fall easily into sin, and when we have fallen,
we can do nothing but lie still in sin, except the Lord put under his
merciful hand and raise us up. As Adam when he had sinned, ran away from the
Lord, so is it the manner of Adams children; after sin, insteede of running
to the Lord, to run away always, the longer and the further from him, if the
Lord do not follow and recover them.

For this is a piece of Satan's policy that as he is subtle in Satan's
policy, first draws a man to sin then keeps him unto it.
alluring man to commit sin, so when he has done it, he labors to blind the
mind, that man should never come to the knowledge of his sin till he be
past remedy: a fearful example whereof we have in Judas. And therefore it is
a great mercy of God toward his own, that he opens their eyes in time to see
their sin, so long as he sits upon his mercy-seat to pardon and forgive them.
Satan knows he has no vantage by sin, when true repentance follows it.
For, where sin has abounded, there grace has much more super abounded. It is
not sin so much which condemns men, as impenitency that despises mercy, and
therefore Satan contents not to draw his miserable captives into sin: but
when he has done it, hides the sight of it from them always till the time of
grace be expired, and they be past recovery, then lets he them see the
ugliness of their sin, and with restless torments disquiets their souls for
it.

Further we see here that there are two sorts of the knowledge A twofold
knowledge of sin.
of sin: one which is but general, idle, and works no reformation, and an other
which is effectual to work conversion. David, as I said, before that Nathan
came to him, he knew that One, that is idle and works no remorse: another,
that breeds repentance.
murder and adultery were sins, but that troubled him not. But now God works
another know ledge of sin in him, he sees his sins in another manner, he feels
now the just weight of them, he tastes now the bitter fruits of them, his
spirit is filled with anguish for them and his soul abhors them. It is to be
lamented that the knoweledge of sin which now is in most part of the world, is
but like that knowledge of sin which David had in time of his security; they
confess they are sinners, they know that blasphemy, drunkenness, fornication,
and such like, are sins, but their conscience being sleeping, they walk
still on in their sins, and thinks it is Christianity good enough, if every
morning they say, God be merciful to me, for I am a poor sinner, but alas
poor art thou indeed, and pitifully deceived, this knowledge will but make
thee inexcusable, because in thy words confessing, and condemning sin, in thy
works thou practisest it: but there is an other knowledge of sin, which the
Lord shall once discover unto thee, either in mercy for thy amendment, as he
does here to David, or in wrath, as he did to Judas. Pray unto the Lord that
this knowledge of sin may be given you in his mercy for your conversion, and
not in his wrath for your consusion.

And my sin is ever before me, What means David by How sin looks not
always with one face.
this? was not sin before him ere now? It was indeed ere he committed it, it
stood before alluring him and he liked it, and sought occasion to commit it;
when he had committed, it was before him also. But it looked with so ill
favored a face, that he sought to hide it, and now when his conscience is
wakened, it stood before him, directly to accuse him and it troubles him so,
that he would feign be quit of the sight thereof. Oh that men could consider
this in time, how sin will change her countenance; before the action, sin
comes like a laughing enemy purposing to slay, but in flattering manner
pretending friendship. In the action, like sweet poison, deadly and yet
delights the sense, but after the action a stinging Scorpion leaving no other
fruit behind it, but guiltiness in the conscience, terror in the mind,
anguish in the spirit. Si cupis peccati cognoscere Chrysostom. in Joan. 8. hom. 51.
turpitudinem, commissum considera, cum liber non amplius eius perturbaris
affectibus, If men could think of this in time, they would not be much moved
with the beautiful face of sin, at the first coming to them, because it is
certain that sin which at the first is before a man to tempt him, and will
not let him to rest till he do it: that same sin at the next time shall stand
before him to torment him, and not let him rest, because he has do it.

And this he further amplifies, The action of sin is momentarie, the effects
of it remains.
when he says, it is ever before him, both night and day, sleeping and waking,
go where I will, it goes with me; no change of place changes my trouble. Sine
intermissione video Basil.
malorum meorum imagines, and it is so before me that it is against me, Semper
coram me Saua.
opponens se mihi, ne ad te transeat oration mea. Sin is soon committed, in a
moment passes the pleasure of it, but the gilt, and terror is not so soon
done, Paruum est ad horam peccatum, Cyrill, Catechis. 12.
longaeua autem est ex eo, and aeterna verecundia. That for which a man sins,
shall not abide with him: try when ye will, ye shall find it so; will thou
slay Naboth for his Vineycard, thou must go from it; will thou incur the
curse with Achan for a wedge of gold, thou shall not keep it, the curse bides
with thee, the gilt of sin remains, but that for which thou did sin, shall
be taken from thee, and thou from it. The remembrance of this were a singular
preservative against sin.

It is an opinion of carnal men blinded with the deceit of sin, that when
sin is committed, Sin is not always done when it is ended, as the foolish
think.
they think it done, and away, and so casts it behind their back, as a thing
never any more to be remembered; but truth shall teach them by experience, when
they are judged that it is before them. It is now nine months since David
sinned, yet he finds his sin before him, the cruelty of Jacobs sons against
their brother Joseph, which they committed in Canaan, met them twenty years
after that, in Egypt, though for a long time they believed it had been done,
and forgotten. No No length of time takes away sin without repentance.
length of time can we are sin away, if it be not taken away by repentance,
the sins we have done many years since, if we mourn not for them till we
get mercy, shall stand up as fresh and young against us, when we come to be
judged as they were, the first hour that we committed them. The Lord make us
wise to think upon it: our selves wax old, our bodies are declyning to the
grave, our years are near an end, and will we take no pains to wear away
our sins, to make them as if they had never been, or shall we let them stand
in their strength and vigor against us, this were a pitiful folly which will
not fail to trouble us at the last: happy are they who are judged in this
world, that they be not condemned in the world to come.

Further, we note here the The folly of sinners, they redeem a perishing
pleasure with an enduring pain.
folly of sinners, and just manner of the Lords dealing with them; their folly
is here, that that they redeem a perishing pleasure with an enduring pain;
Gods justice is here, that he punishes the wicked with their own sinful
deeds, and lets them eat the fruit of their own labors. This he threatens
by Ezechiel, I shall turn your ways upon your own heads, and truly it were
a punishment greater then men are able to bear, if the Lord should set their
iniquities before them, and let them see them as they are. Let wicked Psalm. 50.
men consider this, that while they are multiplying sins, they are but
pletting coardes, wherewith they shall be whipped the next day with their own
hands, they are heaping up wrath to themselves. No place of complaining against
the Lords justice, shall be left Romans 2.
unto them, when they shall clearly see, it is their own iniquity that
vexes and torments them.

But now seeing Nathan the Remembrance of sin, remains after remission in
the godly, and why.
Prophet had proclaimed to David the remission of his sin, how is it, that yet
it is before him? I answer, in his dearest children after remission of sin, he
will have the remembrance of sin to remain; First, to keep them in mind of
God his great mercy, who slew them not in their sins, as he has done
many, that so he may make them the more thankful. Vt gratior sit misericordia
dei, vt sentias quid tibi Chrysostom.
concesserit. Si enim semper memor fuer is cumuli peccatorum tuorum, eris etiam
memor magnitudinis beneficentiae dei. Next the memory of sin past, serves as
a preservative to keep Gods children from the like sins in time to come. And
thirdly, it teaches us to have compassion on others, when they fall in the
like sins, and to restore them with the spirit of meekenes, considering also
our selves.

VERSE. 4. Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in
thy sight, that thou may be just, when thou speak, and pure, when thou
iudgest.
NOw David breks forth, and gives Confession of sin most needful.
glory to God, by an open and plain Confession of his sins, he knew it was
needful for him to do so; Because remission of sins, is promised upon a
condition of the confession of them. He that hides his Proverb.
sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsake them, shall have
mercy. And again, If we confess our sins, God is faithful 1. John 1. 9.
to forgive them.

But here we have first to consider, Before men confession defiles, before God
it cleanses.
why is it that God requires confession, is it to get knowledge of that which
we have done? Or to get out of our own mouth, a point of Dittie against our
selves? Nouit omnia Deus, sed expectat vocem Amb. de paenitent. li. 2. cap. 7.
tuam, non vt puniat, sed vt ignoscat. He knows all things, when thou
committedst thy sin in secret, he saw thee, what then craves he? nothing
but that thou in thy heart may know thy sin; In thy mouth may confess
it to the end, that he may forgive it. Optat soluere confitentes, ne contumaces
punire cogatur. The best Augu.
medicine for a sin, is not to hide, or excuse, or extenuate it, but humbly
to confess it. Que^admodum nobis peccatorum vulnera nunquam desunt, sic and
confessionis medicamenta deesse non debent. For it is not with the Lord as it
is with men, before earthly Tribunales confession of sin defiles the
confessor, makes him guilty and culpable, but before the heavenly it absolues
him. And this is the cause why the Lord requires confession of a sin from man.

Now we have to see what Private sins in what case should they be publicly
confessed.
sort of confession pleases God, seeing it is certain, confession of sin
has been made by many, which the Lord has not accepted; here first we must
distinguish the sins to be confessed, public sins whereby God is openly
dishonored, and his Church slandered, out of all doubt required a public
confession to God, and before men; In private sins the confession is required
to God only: Plerumque non expedit Ber. m. Cant. ser. 42.
innotescere omnibus, omnia quae nos scimus de nobis, atque ipsa charitatis
veritate and veritatis charitate, vetamur, palam fieri velle, quod noceat
agnoscenti: yet with this exception, that when the private sin is done in such
a manner, as that the evil thereof redounds to the hurt of many, and that for
this cause also God persewes it to bring it to light, in this case private
sins committed by thee, known to none but to thy self should be publikly
confessed, that thou may give glory to God, and do good to his Church as is
evident in the example of Achan and David.

Next we must take heed to Three things required in the true confession of
sin. Ber.
the manner of the confession, if it be true, it must have these three
properties. First it must proceed from contrition of the spirit for sin:
Primum opus fidei 1. Contrition.
per dilectionem operantis, compunctio cordis est, e quo sine dubio eij ciuntur
daemonia, cum eradicantur e cord peccata, confession of sin in the mouth,
which proceeds not from contrition for sin in the heart, will never draw
down mercy to thee, more then it did to Saul, whose mouth said, I have
sinned, but his heart was not grieved for sin. Secondly, true confession 2.
Faith.
proceeds from faith in Christ Jesus, for there is a confession which is the
daughter of desperation, and can not profit thee: An example whereof we have in
Judas, I have sinned in betraying of innocent blood, but wanting faith he got
no remission of his sin. And thirdly, true confession has always 3.
Correction.
with it an amendment of life: otherwise Confessio sine emendatione vitae est
professio peccati, confession of sin without amendment is a profession of
sin, thou that every day confessest sin, and yet walk on in the same
sins, art no other, but a plain professor of sin. A threefold happy fruit
of true confession.


Now confession of sin with these properties, brings down to the penitent
sinner, a threefold fruit: first union and reconciliation with God ensewes, for
sin the cause of division between God and man is now removed, quasi duaeres
sunt homo Augu. in Joan. Tract. 12.
and peccator, quod audis (homo) deus fecit, quod audis (peccator) homo ipse
fecit, dele quid fecisti, vt saluet deus quod fecit: Man and sin are two
sundry things, destroy sin which is man his 1. It reconciles thee with God.
work, and God can not but love, and embrace man, as his own work. So long
as man keeps his sin, he works directly against the Lord, hyding that
which God will discover, and harboring within him the rebel, whom God is
persewing, but when man turns against sin, confessing it, bringing it to
light, that it may be destroyed, then works he with Ibid.
God, qui Confitetur peccata sua et accusat, iam cum deo facit, accusat deus
peccata tua and si tu accusas, iam coniungeris deo. Yea, he that in humble
manner confesses, gives to the Lord the praise of justice, that knows if he
did continue in these sins the Lord ought to punish him, he gives him also
the praise of wisdom, that no secret thing can be hid from the Lord, and the
praise of power, he knows there is no way to flee from the Lord, and
therefore in time he flies to him, and at last he gives him the praise of
mercy, that he is gracious and ready to forgive.

Bis deum laudamus,
vbi pie nos accusamus.
The second fruit of it is confusion 2. It brings Confusion to Satan.
to Satan, it is a chief point of his labor to accuse us night and day, for
in one of these three he is always exercised, either to tempt, or to accuse or
to torment, when he tempts let us resist him, that we sin not, if we have
sinned, let us prevent the accuser, and be the first accusers of our selves,
so shall we stop the mouth of our adversary, that he shall have nothing to
say. Non circumueniet te ante iudicem, cum enim tui ipse fueris accusator, and
dominus liberator, quid erit ille nisi calumniator?

The third is that true confession which brings comfort, It brings peace and
quietness to a man's own heart.
peace, and quietness to a man's own heart. As a sick stomach is eased by
vomiting, so a guilty conscience by confession. They who will not sow, how can
they reap? we must sow in tears, the humble confession of sin, if we look
to reap the sweet consolation of the spirit, let us not do the one sparingly,
if we hope to enjoy the other abundantly, Modica Sementis Ber.
de tractio, non modicum messis est detrimentum. So long as we keep in the
heart the pleasures of sin, we can not taste of the joys of God. Vis vt
intret mel, Aug.
vnde acetum nondum fudisti? funde quod habes, vt capias, quod non habes, no
more then it is possible to power sweet honey into that vessel, which is filled
with sour Vinegar already, but as after great showers of rain, the air
becomes more calm and clear, so after that sin is powered out with
confession and tears, the heart is pacified, and freed from her former
perturbations.

Furthermore we perceive Public sins would have public repentance.
here, how David contents not himself with a secret confession of his sin to
the Lord, and to Nathan the Prophet, but will have his repentance declared in
public, and a memorial of it extant for benefit of the Church of God. No
doubt many impediments had David to hinder him from so clear a confession, but
such is the force of true repentance, that it ouercomes all impediments and
makes the penitent man heartily well content to give glory to God, although it
were with never so great shame to himself.

Such as had fallen in public offenses were not received The form and order
of public repentance in the primitive church. Ambros de paenitent. li. 1. c.
16.
but upon their public repentance, yea and their supplication made to all the
assembly of Gods people, Petat veniam reus cum lachrym is, petat gemitibus,
petat populi totius fletibus, vt ignoscatur obsecret and cum secundo, aut
tertio fuerit dilata eius communio, credat seremissius supplicasse, fletus
augeat. Let him that is guilty seek pardon with tears, seek it with groans,
let him seek that all the people may mourn for him, and if twice or thrice
his receiving to the communion be delaied, let him think he has prayed but
slackly, and has need to augment his tears, and because many then thought
shame to do this, he gives them a notable admonition, Si homini satisfacien
dum Lib. 2. c. 10.
esset, multos obsecrares vt dignentur interuenire, hoc in ecclesia facere
fastidis, vt deo supplices, vt patrocinium tibi ad deum obsecrandum sanctae
plebis requiras, if thou hadest to do with men, thou would request many to
sue for thee, think thou evil to do that in the Church, to make there
supplication to God, and to seek the help of the Saints of God. Vbi nihil est
quod pudari esse debeat, nisi non fateri, cum omnes simus peccatores, vbi ille
laudabilior, qui humilior; and iustior qui abiectior, fleat itaque pro te Matter
ecclesia, where there is nothing whereof we should think shame except not to
confess our sins, seeing we are all sinners, and he is most worthy of praise
who is most abject. Let therefore thy mother the Church mourn unto God for
thee.

It is a common policy of Satan takes away shamewhere it should be, and
brings it in where it should not be.
Satan, to take away shame where it should be, namely in the committing of
it; and to bring it in where it should not be, to wit, in the confessing of
sin: But if men be moved with shame, I would wish they were moved with the
greatest shame, for it is a greater shame to confess sin before the Angels and
the whole world, God sitting in his judgment seat to condemn it, then to
confess it before his Church, God sitting in his mercy seat, ready to
forgive it. Concealed can it not be, for the word of God has confirmed it with
a solemn oath. As I live (says the Lord) every tongue shall confess unto me.

Two ways in this verse, By two arguments David amplifieth his sin.
does David amplify his sin: first that it was done against God, Next in the
sight of God. To sin against a King his commandment lawful, is a great sin,
but to sin against him in his own face, is a double rebellion. Sin is
counted a light thing among men, because they commonly weigh it in Statera
suarum consuetudinum Aug. cont. Parmen. lib 3. Cap. 2.
dolosa, The deceitful balance of custom: but if we come and weigh it in the
balance of Gods word, we shall find it heavy, which otherwise we think
light.

This first circumstance that That it was done against God.
it was against God, does greatly aggrauate his sin. Whether ye look to the
goodness, or to the greatness of God. The Lord was good many ways to David,
of a Shepherd he made him a King; and did in every state of life so bless
him, that as he himsefe confesses, he was loaded with the benefits of God.
Now it cannot be but a great ingratitude to offend so loving and gracious a
God, who daily delights to do good unto us.

Or otherwise if we consider his greatness we must say it What a fearful
thing it is to fight against God.
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Lord. Are we stronger then
he? why then do we provoke him to anger? This is a great argument of his
power, that he turns against us those things which we do against him, and
punishes us with our own deeds. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee,
Ierem. 2. 19
and thy turnings back shall reprove thee, and thou shall know that it is an
evil thing, and a bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and
procured this Verse. 17.
unto thy self. The Sidonians sought peace from Herod when he intended war
against them, and all because they were nourished by Herod's lands, and might
not want his favor: and foolish man thinks it nothing to fight against God,
who is offering him peace, which is so great a good, that he is able to drive
back man's weapons upon his own face, and confound him with his own thoughts.

But here it is to be demanded, How says David he sinned against God only,
seeing he slew Vriah, and defiled Bathshebath.
how says he that he sinned against God only, seeing he sinned against
Bathsheba, entising her to the snare of Satan: he sinned against Vriah, whom he
slew with the sword of the Ammonite; and he sinned against the whole Army,
casting them into danger for Vriah his sake: and lastly, against the whole
Church in his kingdom by his evil example. The answer 1 In all sin God
properly is the party offended.
is, that to speak properly, In all sin, properly God is the party offended;
whether it be done imediatly, as in sins against the first Table, or
mediatly, as in sins against the second table: and so the wrong done to the
creature is not for the hurt of such a creture, but for the interceding command
of God, which is broken, for sin is the transgression of the Law; and were it
not for that, no wrong were 2. David speaks this acording to his sense, for at
this time he had no party, but God.
done to the creature.

Next David speaks this, according to his own sense and feeling, at this time
he had no party that troubled him, but the Lord, for as to him that got the
wrong, Non timebam Chrysostom.
eum, miles meus erat, non poterat me iudicare. He was my servant he could not
judge me. As for others, Rex sum, caeterorum omnium Dominus, te solum
commissorum ^uthym.
a me scelerum iudicem habeo. I am their King and Lord, and find nothing in
them to trouble me, but thou O Lord, art he to whom all creatures must render
an account, thou art higher then the highest, and iudgest the King and the
subject alike. What peace then can* be to me, so long as thou art against
me, pursuing me for my sins.

Hereof first arises, a lesson to men of power in the world, let them not
think the less of Let not men think the less of their sins, because they
are done against weak men.
their sins, because they have to do with a weak party, that has neither
power nor means to redress their wrongs; let them remember, that God is their
party, who will judge the cause of the poor, the widow, and the fatherless:
this should restrain them from doing wrong to any, albeit they might do it
uncontrolled of men; this was a means of awe to Joseph, he might have revenged
the wrong in Egypt which his brethren had done him in Canaan, but he would not
because he feared God, and considered that he himself was also under God.

Secondly, we learn of this that seeing in all sin, God is No discharge of
sin is sufficient but the Lords.
the party offended; the remission and discharge of the sin should be sought
from him. This is for these carnal Atheists, who if they can obtain pardon
from the earthly Judge; or a discharge of the party, care nothing for the
Lords part, but he will stand to his own part and make thee find by
experience, that albeit all the world would forgive thy sin, yet if the Lord
forgive thee not, it shall nothing avail thee. Men of mean estate should have
patience when they are wronged because the offense is done unto God.


Last of all, let this learn them of mean estate patience, for no wrong can
be done unto them, which first of all is not done to the Lord, he is the
principal party offended. If men could, as I have said before, ponder this, it
might learn them with patience to commit their cause to the Lord, and not
rashly to step in into his room, either by imprecations, or raylings, or any
other such carnal mean, but to reserve unto the Lord his own honor.
Vengeance is mine and I will repay it, says the Lord.

And done evil in thy sight. 2 The other argument whereby he amplifies his
sin, is that it was done in Gods sight.
The other circumstance whereby he amplifies his sin, is, that it was done in
the sight of God: when he did the sin, God saw him, but he forgot then that
God was looking upon him: but now when his conscience is wakened, and he
looks back again to his former iniquity, he sees now that he did it in the
sight of God.

This is also one of Satan his Satan's deceit is to make man conceive that God
sees him not.
customable policies whereby he draws men unto sin to cover their minds with
a veil to darken their understanding, to steal out of their hearts the
remembrance, at least the reverence of the divine Majesty, so that he is
brought to think for a time, that either God sees it not, or then does not
regard it. But this is a pitiful blindness, like the folly of children, who
when their own eyes are closed that they cannot see, do therefore conceit that
none other sees them: so is it, I say with them whose affections are captiued
by a sin, they are blinded and have not an eye to look up to God, and
therefore think that he is not looking down upon them.

The best remedy for this is to sanctify the Lord always in The remembrance
of God is a new band to sin.
our hearts, let us set the Lord always in our sight, esteeming of every place
as Jacob did of Bethel, The Lord is in this place, and I was not aware, that so
his countenance may be an new band to keep us from sin, otherwise it
cannot be but a deep contempt of God, when in our estimation we set him
inferior to his creature, not ashamed to do that under the eye of GOD, which
we would be ashamed to do under the eye of man.

That thou may be just. His The Lord strikes not without a cause.
meaning is not, that he sinned for this end: that God might be justified,
quod dicit vt iustificeris, non habet causae significationem, non eam ob causam
peccauit David, vt Deus iustificaretur. No, but that for this end he confessed
his sin, that the justice of God, judging, reproving, and threatening him by
Nathan, might be manifested to others. It is not Lord without cause that thou
have denounced so sharp punishments against me, by thy servant Nathan, Ego
haec mihi mala conciliaui, I have deserved them all, and given thee just cause
to speak and judge against me as thou have done, and now I humbly confess it
before the world, that thou may have the praise of righteousness in all thy
speaking, and judging.

The children of God humbled Men visited with his rods should give him the
praise of righteousness
with a sense of their sins, spare not to shame themselves that they may
glorify God. So Daniel ascribes shame and confusion to himself and his
people, but gives tho praise of righteousness to the Lord. Where the Lord
strikes with his rods which men may see, and he that is stricken will not
acknowledge his sins, in effect he blames the Lord, as if he did strike
without a cause; therefore Joshua, when Achan was taken by Lot for his sin,
and the wrath of God on Israel was manifest, but the cause procuring the wrath,
was hidden from them, exhorted him to give glory to God, thou see does he,
say that God is angry with Israel, he has suffered his people to fall before
their enemies, this cannot be without a cause: seeing the lot is fallen upon
thee, and the finger of God points at thee, that thou have procured this evil.
I pray thee give glory to God, by confessing the sin thou have done, that
all the people may know that the Lord is not angry without cause. It is a
dangerous thing to hide our sins, where the hiding of them, may hide and
obscure the glory of God; as the manner of hypocrites is, who grudge and
murmr when God strikes them with his rods, as if either they were punished
without a cause, or then worse handled, then they had deserved.

Again, let us mark here Happy are they whom God judges now in such sort
that he corrects them.
the manner of God his dealing with his own, he judges them in this life, that
they should not be condemned hereafter. This he does partly by his word,
reproouing them of sin; partly by his rods, correcting them. Happy are they
who now are so judged, for they who profit not, neither by his rebukes nor his
rods; what else do they, but reserve them selves to a sharper judgment.

VERSE. 5. Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me.
HE still proceeds David serches out the first original of his sin.
in the amplification of his sin, and now he rippeth it up from the very
foutaine and first original thereof, entering in a deep consideration of the
universal corruption of his Nature. It is not in this fact only will he say
that I am culpable, I confess my whole Nature to be so corrupt from the very
womb through sin, as most justly making me odious and abominable in the
eyes of God, yea now when by occasion of this one sin, which has broken out
in external action, I look to my inward disposition and consider the
original corruption of my nature con-containing all sorts of sin within it,
proceeding from the want and privation of original righteousness, I am
ashamed of my self in the sight of God.

To express this he uses two words; the first Cholel signifying How original
sin is expressed by David.
to creat or form, whereby he will declare that even in his forming in the
womb, he was infected with sin, the other is Iacham signifying to warm:
thereby declaring that while he was warmed, fostered and nourishedde in his
mothers womb, he was defiled with sin original. At the beginning he was but
an unclean Creature.

Where we are not to think Marriage is not blamed, when it is said that man was
conceived and borne in sin.
that he accuses the formation or fostering of a birth in the mothers womb,
these are the great and maruailous works of God. Neither yet that he reiects
the blame on his parents, or condemns marriage, or use of the mariage-bed,
these are the ordinances of God. Non Aug. cont. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 21. De
nupt. et concupiscen.
est malum quod natus es, sed cum quo natuses. And again, Natura humana quae
de coniugio nascitur, opus est Dei. And to this same purpose said Basil, non
accusat Basil.
hic nuptias, sicut quidam stulte sunt suspicati. Sed praeuaricationem quae ab
initio mundi a progenitoribus nostris est commissa, in medium producit, and
hanc fontem esse factam ipsorum fluentorum dicit. He does not here accuse
marriage, as some have foolishly suspected, but the transgression committed by
our first Progenitors, he brings out as the fou^tain of al these floods of
iniquity, that since sin have broken out in our nature.

Here first we may perceive, The rhetoric by which godly men move the Lord to
mercy.
what is the Rhetoric, which godly men use whereby they would move the Lord
to be merciful unto them, namely to present to the eyes of his compassion
their heavy diseases and the deep, wide, and inueterate wounds which they have
received from their deadly enemy, let us learn by their example not to cover
nor hide our sins, if we would have mercy. A wise man desires his wound to
be ripped up, and not to be ouerplaistred, albeit the Physician would forget
it, he will remember and request him to do it. How much more should we lay
open our wounds to Christ, that he may cure them, he is that sweet Samaritan
who at the first sight of the wounds of that poor Traveler between Jericho
and Jerusalem was moved to compassion and powered wine and oil into his wounds,
when Priest nor Leuit had pity upon him, what mercy here he preached in that
parable, he has it ready to practice upon all that from a penitent and
believing heart, present their miseries unto him.

Secondly, we see here how Particular sins move the godly to a detestation
of the whole corruption of Nature.
these particular sins of David leads him to a narrower inquisition and
greater detestation of the whole corruption of his nature, thus the children of
God are moved by some particular sins, wherein they are fallen to grow in the
hatred of all sins whatsoever. Whereas by the contrary carnal men excuse
their particular sins by the common corruption of man's nature, as if their
sins, were the less because all men by nature are sinners, but they deceive
themselves, for the less they think of their sins, the more shall God
think of them when he shall visit them, let us not sparingly judge our selves,
if we would have the Lord merciful unto us.

And lastly, since this is true in What great need man has to be changed out
of Natures estate.
us all, that we were conceived, and borne in sin, what great need have we of
regeneration: for unless a man be borne again, he can not see the kingdom of
God? Let natural parents who have been instruments to their children of a
natural generation, whereby they are borne heirs of the wrath of God, do what
lies in them by prayer and good education to make them pertakers of
regeneration, otherways they will curse the loins that got them, and the
womb that bare them, and children again who glory in the external
privileges of blood and heritage, which they have gotten from their parents,
let them remember unless they be borne again, it had been better for them
never to have been borne.

VERSE. 6. Behold thou love truth in the inward affections, and haste taught
me wisdom in the secret of mine heart.
HE proceeds still The vileness of sin appears in this, that it is contrary
to Gods holy disposition.
to amplify his sin by consideration of that contrary holy disposition,
which is in God: the Lord is holy, his eye is so pure that it cannot behold
iniquity, he loves truth and delights in the holiness, and cleanness of the
heart, but alas I am unclean, and therefore so much the more miserable, that
my disposition is contrary to his.

Of this we learn that the The true knowledge of God works true humility.
best way to humble us in regard of that sinful corruption which is in us, is
the knowledge of God, when Esaias in a vision saw the majesty of God as it
pleased him to show it, then he cried out woe is me. I am a man of polluted
lips, he knew before that he was a sinful man, but a new sight of God his
holiness, discouers to him a deeper sight of his own corruption, the spots of
the face not perceived in darkness, are manifested in the day, and then do
men think shame of them, when they are discovered by the light. So long as the
eye looks to the earth, and creatures which are in it, it seems to be quick
enough but turn it upward toward the sun, the weakness of it is soon
perceived: when we look to our selves, and compare our selves with our
selves, and with men like our selves, we seem to be some thing, but if our
eyes were open to see the Lord, and that most excellent purity and holiness
which is in him, then would we cry out with Job. Now mine eyes has seen the
Lord, therefore I abhor my self. The holy Angels cover their faces at the
brightness of his glory, what shall man do who is dust and dwelles in
lodgings of clay?

Again, seeing God loves Sin is but a lying vanity.
truth in the inward affections, let us also study to love it, for in a
conformity with God stands man's felicity. By truth here we understand two
things: holiness, and sincerity, opposite to sin, and hypocrisy: sin is
in very deed but a lie, a falsehood, and a vanity, and therefore so named by
the spirit of God. It seems to be an other thing then it is indeed, all that to
this day have been inamoured with it, have found it in the end to be but a
lying vanity, and yet vain man cannot learn to despise the deceit thereof.

And this evil becomes so Then is it worst when it is covered with hypocrisy.
much the worse, when it lurketh under a show of holiness, hypocrisy is a
general lie of the whole man. In a common lie the tongue lies against the
heart only, but in hypocrisy not the tongue only, but the eye, the hand, the
feet lie also, when the hand is lifted up to heaven, and eye looks up, but the
heart follows them not, when the knee is bowed, but the heart is not bowed
before the Lord.

Nothing distinguishes a true The proper difference of a true Christian from a
counterfeit.
christian from a counterfeit, but this truth, and sincerity in the inward
affections, the bastard Christian can counterfeit the true Christians behavior
in all things, but he cannot follow him in this one, the sincerity of his heart.
As a Painter can paint the color of the fire, and the form of the flame
thereof, but cannot paint the heat of it, so a hypocrite can resemble a
Christian in any thing, but not in his heart. Esau can mourn and weep bitterly
like Ezechia: Ahab can put on sack cloth, like Mordecai, Saul can confess in
word, I have sinned, like David, but none of their hearts were upright in the
sight of God.

Thirdly, when we hear If the Lord require truth in us, how much more is he
true himself-
that God loves truth we may consider that he is true or rather truth it
self, what he loves in his creature is but a sparkle of that goodness, which
is in himself, we have here then strong consolation against our natural
doubtings, and distrusts, if we consider how God is verity. Of his nature he
can not break his promise, if he require such constant truth in his Psalm. 15.
creature, that when he swears, he will not have him to change, but to perform
the good which he promises, how much more may we look to find this truth in
himself?

Therefore thou have taught me wisdom. This is the last argument An other
amplification of David's sin, it was against knowledge.
whereby David amplifies his sin, that he had done against that knowledge,
wherewith God had indewed him, for the Lord had dealt favorably with him, and
had taught him the knowledge of his will, but he like a beast suffered that
light to be suffocated by the fury of his own affections.

Of this we see that the light A fearful thing to sin against knowledge.
which God gives men, if they do against it, is a great augmentation of their
sin, The servant that knows his masters will and does it not, is worthy of
double stripes: If I had not come, and spoken to you, ye should have had no
sin, the Gentiles who had no more but the light of nature are co^uinced,
because that when they knew God, they Romans 1.
glorified him not as God: what then shall become of us, who beside the light
of nature have also the light of the gospel, if still we walk in darkness,
it shall certainly aggrauate our sin, and make our condemnation more
fearful, then that of Sodom and Gomorrha. From which, the Lord of his great
mercy preserve us.

VERSE. 7. Purge me with Hyssop and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be
whiter then snow.
AFter that DAVID After confession the godly join petition for mercy, not so
the wicked.
had made a confession of his sin, and that not coldlie, or for fashion, as
they do, whose consciences are not wakened with the sight of their sins, but
had by all circumstances aggrauated his sin, now he returns to his petition
of mercy.

This hyssop, wherewith The hyssop by which David craves to be purged.
David craves to be purged, it is as Basil calls it, Alterius reioenigma.
Natural hyssop is an herb humilis, calida, and odorifera, of excellent virtue
in medicine, Est enim in hyssopo vis purgatoria Aug. de doct. christ. lib. 2.
maxim pulmonum. The typical use of it in the ceremonial Law was threefold;
first, the Israelites sprinkled the posts of their doors, with a bunch of
hyssop dipped in the blood of the Paschall Lamb: Exodus 12.
secondly, a bunch of hyssoppe dipped in blood, was used in the besprinkling
and cleansing of the Leper: and thirdly, in the Sacrifice for sin. Numbers
Leuit. 14.
19.

All these were typical, and did signify no other, but that All typical
purgations figure the blood of Christ.
all his people should look for purgation from all their leprosy and
uncleanness in the blood of the Lamb Christ Jesus: who takes away the sins
of the world, and his blood cleanses from all sin. David knew that these were
types and figures instituted for signification of better things, and therefore
did he not neglect them, yet on the other part, he would not lean unto them,
as if remission of sins were to be gotten by these Legal purgations, but by
them he ascended to the spiritual thing signified by them, he had enough of
the typical hyssop at his commandment, and the Priest ready to spinkle him
with it, when it pleased him, but he knew this would not serve his turn, he
looks to the Spiritual hyssop, and he prays that God would purge him,
without which no Leuiticall washing could make him clean.

The Spiritual hyssop then The purging virtue of Christ's blood.
full of blood, is Christ Jesus. Qui humiliauit se ad mortem, qui calore suae
immensae charitatis nos dilexit, qui odore manfuctudinis, and suauitatis totum
mundum repleuit. His blood sprinkles not the bodies so much as the souls and
consciences of men, for so the purging virtue which is in the natural hyssop
is internal, and by it is signified, Coram Deo opus esse non externa, sed
interna purgatione.

Seeing so it is, that the godly How carnal Papists are, who place so great
sanctification in external things.
Israelites in using these external types, which were not ordained for
themselves, but for other things, had a spiritual disposition looking ever to
the thing signified by them. Is it not a shame for Papists to be so gross and
carnal, as to place any sanctification in the like external sprinkling of
their body with their holy water, as they call it: with as great reason might
they bring in again all that ceremonial Law, which was but for a time, and
now is abrogated, But now seeing the truth is come, which is Christ Jesus, it
is good reason the type and figure should cease. The fountain is opened to
David's house, for sin and for uncleanness. He has made a perfect purgation
of our sins by his own blood. Now to retain the ceremonies of Iudaisme, or to
bring in from Paganism their superstitious washings of sin, as Papists
borrow from Pompilius these heathenish purgations, by sprinkling of water which
they use, is to offer wrong to Christ Jesus: for the first, in effect, imports
that Christ the veritic is not yet come, and therefore they will still retain
the figure: the second imports, that albeit he be come, he has not made a
perfect purgation of our sins by himself, but his wants must be supplied by
a purging with water on earth, and a purging by fire in the second house of
hell.

But here it is to be demanded, Sin not imputed is as if it had not been
committed.
how it is that David says, if the Lord wash him, he shall be cleaner and
whiter then the snow, does he mean, that after sin is forgiven, there
abides no more any remainder of sin unto him. No, this is not his meaning,
but that if the Lord forgive him his sin, he shall he in as good estate with
the Lord, as if he had never done it, Peccatum enim non imputatum est quasi non
commissum, a sin not imputed, is, as if it had never been committed.

That we may understand A twofold purging of sin.
this the better, we are to consider, how there is a twofold 1 One by Christ's
blood, this is our justification.
washing or taking away of sin: one, that is made by the blood of Christ:
another, by the spirit of Christ. The taking away of sin by the blood of Christ
is perfect even now. For they to whom the merit of the blood of Christ is
imputed, have presently all the giltinesse of their sin removed fully and
perfectly; this in effect is the benefit of our-iustification. The other taking
away of sin by the spirit of 2 The other by his spirit this is our
sanctification.
Christ, is imperfect: his virtue has begun in us a mortification of our
earthly members; his spirit daily weakeneth and subdueth in us the life and
power of sin, that it reigns not to command us as it was wont to do, and
this in effect is the benefit of sanctification; but this taking away of sin
in this life is not perfect, for some remainders of sin even in them to whom
sin is forgiven, will the Lord have remaining, for the exercise of our faith,
and daily humiliation, as more at large we have showed in our Treatise upon
the 8. to the Romans.

VERSE 8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.
HItherto DAVID with his confession The second rank of David's petitions is for
peace of Conscience.
of sin has joined petitions for mercy. Now he proceeds and craves that these
evils which his sin had brought upon him, may be removed. Sin has many
evil effects, at the first it offends God, and grieves his spirit, but at the
last, it shall grieve the soul of him that did it. Let us learn to beware of
it.

This petition of David is to Sin spoils man of inward peace and joy.
be opposed to his present disposition, so shall we understand it. O Lord, I
hear within mean accusing voice of conscience, which terrifies and disquiets
me, I beseech thee, Lord let me hear the contrary voice of joy and gladness.
Here then he confesses that which all the children of God may find in their
own experience, that sin impaires the peace of conscience. If we could
remember how sweet is the joy and peace which we lose, for the vain and
perishing pleasure of sin, we would be loath any more to make any such
exchange.

Secondly, we see here that there is not any testimony save only the
testimony of Man's testimony of the remission of sins is nothing, without the
testimony of Gods spirit.
Gods spirit that can bring peace to the troubled conscience. Nathan had before
this witnessed to David, that his sins were forgiven him, but Nathans word
pacified not his conscience, the ministration of the word of God has credit
with men, the ministration of the Spirit, that brings consolation he has
reserved to himself. When Martha and Marie mourned for dead Lazarous, many
godly Jews came out of Jerusalem to comfort them, but they got never comfort
till Christ Jesus came, and so the godly may mourn for their sins, and for
the deadness of their heart, but there shall be no comfort till the comforter
come, and re fresh their souls,

But here it will be objected, The ministerial comfort of Gods servants greatly
to be regarded and why.
what then auailes the ministry of the word, and the consolations of the
servants of God given out of it. Yea very much indeed, for where the testimony
of the word pronounced by Gods servants goes before to witness mercy, there
the testimony of Gods spirit conforming it follows after, for the blessing of
peace pronounced Luke.
by the servants of God upon the children of peace abides upon them, this we
see clearly here in David: Nathan pronounced to him upon the knowledge of his
repentance the remission of his sins, he could not feel it for the present,
but the Lord follows and iustifies Nathans Ministry, witnessing that to
David's heart, which Nathan had witnessed unto his ear.

And this we have to mark Remission of of sins may be thine, suppose thou
feel it not.
for a comfort against these spiritual desertions, whereunto the Children of
God are subject. Remission of sins may be thine, the servants of God with a
warrant may witness unto thee, that thy sins are forgiven thee, as here
Nathan does unto David, and yet thou not feel that it is so, we must not
therefore be so discouraged; as to think we want that grace alwaie, which we
cannot Therefore David craves not only mercy, but sense of mercy.
feel.

It is now clear what is the benefit which DAVID here craves. To wit not
mercy only that he has sought before, but the sense of mercy also, make me
to hear joy, so that I may feel it. For all the inward senses of the soul
are in feeling; to hear the Lord, to see him, to taste how good he is, is no
other but to enjoy him and to feel his consolations. It is thy praise o Lord
that thou speak peace to thy Saints; among the rest, speak peace unto mine
heart also. O what a joy was it to that man sick of the palsy when he heard
that voice, thy sins are forgiven thee. And such like to that sinful woman
when she heard, go in peace, thy faith has saved thee. And how was the soul
of that converted sinner comforted in the mids of the dolors of death when he
hard that voice, This night thou shall be with me in paradise.

This is the exceeding great Great comfort, that God not only forgiues our
sins, but tells us they are forgiven.
love of the Lord toward his children, that he has not only provided a sure
salvation for them through the remission of their sins in Christ Jesus, but
also seals up in their heart the testimony thereof by his Holy Spirit of
adoption, and that for their present consolation least they should be
swallowed up of heaviness through continual temptations. Though he speak not
to all his children as he did to Daniel by an Angel; O man greatly beloved of
God, nor as he did to the blessed Virgin Marie; hail Marie freely beloved, yet
does he witness the same to the hearts of his children by an inward
testimony, when they hear it, they are alive; when they want it, they are but
dead, their soul refuses all other comfort whatsoever.

That the hones, which thou has A troubled mind sore weakneth the body.
broken may rejoice. By these Basil understands Ossa animae spiritualia, that
is as says Sauanarola and others, Vires animae rationalis but as this agrees
not with this sense, so there is no reason why it should be enforced. David his
words, Psalm 32. serves for a commentary to this, there he complains, that
through extremity of the anguish of his Spirit; the moisture of his body was
turned into the drought of Summer, now the marrow we know is the strength of
the bones, these being so extenuate no marvel, his flesh consumed, his skin
was parched, his face withered, his sight dimmed, his knees enfeebled, and the
whole external man greatly weakened, the Spirit of a man says Solomon will
sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear it?

Of this let us learn that if The miserable state of the wicked who must bear
the burden of their own sins.
the sight of sin presented to the godly from a just accusing conscience, do
so terrify them, and breed them such excessive trouble as for a time, does
sorely torment them. In what state shall the wicked be, when the Lord shall
present their sins to them and wake their conscience upon them not in mercy,
as he does to his own, but in wrath, not for a time, but for ever. O what
anguish and remediless tribulation shall be unto them, the days of wicked
men's sinning are compared to the time of a woman's conceiving, but the days of
their punishment are compared to the time of her traveling: they conceive
their sins with wantonness and pleasure, but shall bear them with dolor
unspeakable, their dolors shall exceed the dolor of a woman, for she knows
once to be delivered of her pain either by life or death, but the wicked
shall never be lighter of their sins, nor be delivered from the anguish of
their accusing conscience, from which most miserable condition the Lord deliver
us for Christ Jesus sake.

VERSE 9. Hide thy face from my sins, and put away all mine iniquities.
DAVID yet from Guiltiness of sin soon contracted, not so soon put away.
God the fourth time seeks the remission of his sins, the gilt of sin is
soon contracted, but not so soon gotten away, we are happy if the examples
of other men may learn us to be wise, he was a man dearly beloved of God, and
yet how many requests makes he, before he can get his heart assured of mercy:
but the presumption Foolish are they, who think they may get mercy for a word.
of this age is so great, that men fear not to offend the Lord, because they
think, mercy may be gotten for a word. But let men remember that fearful
sentence, which the L. pronounced upon the people of the Jews, for the abuse of
his mercy; When they fast, I will not hear their cry: And again; Thougb
Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection could not be toward this
people, that so our hearts may be humbled with holy fear, which may restrain
He that seeks not to hide his sins, prouokes the Lord to inquire it.
us from offending our God, upon presumption of mercy.

Hide thy face. All David his care, when he had committed his sin, was to hide
it from the Lord, for this cause he committed murder and slew Vriah, thinking
if he were not alive to perceive it, his iniquity should never come to light.
Now he sees it with a vain labor, Vriah is dead, but the angry countenance of
God looking upon his sin troubles him, As the fish called Sepia casting forth
a black liquor out of her mouth, of purpose to lurk under it, does thereby give
notice to the fisher of the place wherein they shall find her: so foolish man,
while he thinks to hide one sin by another, does but cast himself the more open
to the eye of God, who then looks most narrowly to a sin when man most craftily
labors to conceal it: Every sinner in sinning takes from God the praise of
righteousness as if the Lord were like him, and were not a God that loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity.

But he that thinks to hide He that seeks to hide his sin from the Lord
makes an idol of him.
his sin from the Lord, when he has done it, takes also from him the praise
of wisdom, and makes the Lord so far as he may, like an Idol of the Nations,
that has eyes and sees not. And therefore the Lord as he will be avenged of
every one that offends, so principally upon them who scorn him, by hiding
their sins from him. Woe be to them that seek in deep We to such.
to hide their Council from the Lord, their works are in secret, and they say
who sees it?

At this time David's sin was unknown to the world, no living No man knew
David's sin, yet is be sore troubled, because he knew that God knew it.
creature but himself Bathshabe and Nathan were privy to it, yet this
terrifies him, that he saw the Lord looking upon it: It is no comfort to a man
to have his sin hidden from all the world, unless he knew that the Lord
also has covered and forgiven it, alioqui Ambros. de paeniten. li. 2. cap. 11.
ita grauis est culpa conscientiae, vt sine iudice ipsa se puniat. So heavy is
the sin of any evil conscience, that albeit no creature were to judge it, it
judges and punishes it self.

He said in the third verse that God will look to our sins, if we look not
to them.
his sin was always in his sight, and now he prays that God would put it out
of his sight, this is a very good ordor, if we hold our sins in our eyes to
pursue them, God will cast them behind his back to pardon them, if we
remember them and repent, he will forget them and forgive, otherwise peccatum
vnde se homo non auertit, aduertit deus, and si aduertit, animaduertit, the
sin from which man turns not, God looks to it, and if he look to it, sure
he will punish it.

Thy face. The face of God is The face of God put sometime for his mercy,
sometime for justice.
sometime put for his favor, and with this he looks on the persons of them,
who are the children of his good will, this David prays may be lifted up upon
him Psa. 4. that God would not hide it from him Psalm. 27. the hyding of his
face did trouble him sore Psalm. 30. therefore it is his customable prayer* Lord
cause thy face to shine upon us, Psa. 4. sometime again it is put for his
anger or angry face, whereby he looks on the persons of the wicked, when he
will vex them in his displeasure, or upon the sins of his own children, when
he will humble them.

How fearful a sight this How fearful a sight Gods angry face is.
angry face of God is, see it in David, for his good, the Lord who loved David's
self, looked with an angry countenance at David's sins, but he protests he
may not endure it, and prays God to hide it from him. See it again in Christ
Jesus, who endured the looks of that angry face, not for himself but for us,
how did it make his soul heavy, and his flesh so weary that he did sweat
blood. How miserable then are the reprobates, who must endure for ever the
sight of Gods angry face looking upon them? for they and their sins are one, no
marvel they shall cry hills and mountains fall upon us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits upon the throne. Let us fear and look with anger upon
our sins in time, that God in mercy may look upon our selves, and we may
find joy in his face, wherein the wicked shall see nothing but terror.

VERSE. 10. Great in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
within me.
NOw follows David's third petition, The third rank of David's petitions.
wherein he craves the grace of sanctification, he sought before the
forgiveness of his sin, now he seeks to be delivered from it in time to
come: for it is for this end that he prays for a cleand heart, and a renewed
spirit, that he should not any more fall to the like uncleanness: This is a
good order in our prayer, when first we seek the Remission of sin and
renouation go together.
grace of remission, and then the grace of renouation, for these two go
inseparably together; to whom the Lord gives remission, them he makes new
creatures, so that renouation of the heart is always an undoubted token of the
remission of thy sins; and by the contrary he whose heart is not renewed but
abides still in his former uncleanness, he deceiues himself, if so be he
thinks that his sins are forgiven.

This is to be marked for the common sort of profane men They who seek
forgiveness and not sanctification seek but liberty to sin.
in this age, who seek from God mercy to forgive for fear of his plagues, but
not grace to renew them to his image for love of himself, this in effect is no
other but to seek a liberty to sin, while as men seek sin to be forgiven,
but not to be restrained, it is an argument they have not a right hatred of
sin, but we see in David what the disposition of the godly is, as they desire
mercy for be-gone sins, so also grace to renew them and preserve them from
the power and deceit of sin in all time to come, otherwise to crave that the
Lord would pardon these sins, which thou art of purpose to commit, it is but to
mock the Lord, by turning his grace into wantonness. The uncleanness of sin
original increased by actual. Job.


David his heart was two ways unclean, first by reason of original sin
wherein he was conceived and borne, Who can bring a clean thing out of that
which is unclean: and this uncleanness of heart is common to al mankind, but
beside this he had defiled it with many actual sins, specially this foul
adultery and murder, for every sin pollutes the heart, and leaves a new
giltines upon the conscience, wherewith now David finding his heart ouergrowne,
that it is not like the heart he had before, he prays the Lord to give him a
new heart. He had now not only sinned, but fallen as Basile expounds it in
Senium peccati into Basil.
the very old age of sin, and therefore he desires, that the Lord would begin
with him again, and make him to renew his youth like the Eagle.

Many circumstances are to be marked here, whereby Sin seeks the very life
of the soul.
David aggrauateth the greatness of his misery: as first, that his disease was
in his heart, which is the fountain of life. As the natural heart is the life
of the body, which when it is not well, vital humor, health, beauty, ability,
and all decaies in the body: so is the Lord the life of the soul. So David's
meaning is, O Lord, by my sin I have grieved thy holy spirit, and forced thee
to forsake me. Tu proprie cordis The heart of any Christian his heart.
mei proprium es cor and vita: thou properly art the proper heart, and life of
mine heart. Come again Lord, and restore life unto me, without thee I am dead
and senseless, and an abominable creature, like a body, which wanting an heart
is an unclean carrion, thou art the light of my mind, the peace of my soul,
the life of my heart. I have lost life by my sin, I am like a man wanting his
quickening spirit: when thou wentest away, my life went away: Lord come again,
and create a new heart within me.

Again, in that he craves a Repentance is a new creation.
clean heart may be created in him, he acknowledges that his sin had not
only wounded him, but slain him, and that he stood in need not of any
reparation, but of an new creation, wherein he utterly And so above the power
of nature.
distrusteth the power of his nature: yea the ability of his own free will
notwithstanding grace once resumed, he finds it so oppressed by the power of
his corruption, that he is forced to crave from God the benefit of a new
creation, Vt cor eius tale fieret per gratiam, Sauan.
quale non potuit esse per naturam. Of our selves we fall, but of our selves
we rise not again. Not only is our first conversion a work of Gods grace
altogether and alone; but the works of our restitution by repentance, after we
have fallen: as it is in the Lords praise, He quickened us, when we were dead.
So is it his praise, that he keeps Psalm. 100. As we created not our selves.
So we cannot renew our selves.
our souls in life. The Lord made us, we made not our selves. We are content
to give him the glory of our first creation, let us also give him the glory of
our second creation. Yea, so often as we fall into sin, let us consider that
our rising again, is no less a work of the great power, and mercy of God:
then was the raising of Lazarus out of the grave, for otherwise we should have
lien still with others, rotting and perishing in our sins. And so have we to
praise the Lord, not only for our first and second creation, but for the
renewing of that benefit unto us, as often as we by our transgression have lost
that life, which the Lord did once communicate unto us.

And this that our sanctification, A proper comparison of our first creation
with the second.
or restitution by repentance after that we have sinned, is called new
creation, renders yet unto us a profitable instruction, if we compare our new
creation with Adam his first creation. When shall we say that Adam was made a
natural man? never till the Lord breathed the breath of life into him: the
Lord first formed his body of clay, after the same shape and similitude, that
now ye see the body of man in all the porportion of the members thereof. No
image can be made by man's wit so lively representing a man, as did that
portraiture of clay, which the Lord at the first formed with his own hand, but
all this time it lay upon the ground, having eyes that saw not, ears that heard
not, a mouth that could not speak, and feet that could not walk: he was then
very like unto that which now man Many professed Christians are but carkases of
Christians.
is; but (as I said) was not a natural man, til God breathed the breath of
life unto him. Let us consider the like in the new creation, how many shall ye
find very like unto christians baptized in the name of Jesus. who have a mouth
to speak, and an eye to look up unto heaven, and an care, as a man would
think, to hear very reverently the word of the Lord: who when all is done,
what ever they seem in the eyes of men, are no other in Gods sight, but as the
carcases of christians: So to speak, destitute of that quickening spirit of
grace, which only gives life to the actions of men. Let us take heed to our
selves that we be not of that number; for then only have we this comfort
that we are Christians indeed, when we find that quickening spirit of grace,
which is in Christ Jesus, communicating life unto our spirits, that what we do
in the works of Christianity stand not in external show, but may proceed
from inward sense and feeling.

VERSE. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy Spirit
from me.
STill David continues David's feruency in Supplication.
his supplications, seeking a remedy of these manifold miseries, which he found
by experience, his sin had brought upon him. For we must remember, that all
these petitions proceeded from a sense of a contrary evil, which by his sin
he had incurred, and craves that God of his mercy would divert it. He lamemted
before that sin had slain him, and made him like a dead man wanting a heart,
or quickening spirit, and now he fears lest as the dead are abhorred by the
living, so the Lord should cast him out, as a dead and abominable thing out of
his presence.

Whereof we learn, this is The pleasures of sin are dear bought.
one of the just punishments of sin, it procures the casting out of a man
from the face of God, and it may let us see how dear bought are the pleasures
of sin, when a man to enjoy the face of the creature, depriues himself of
the comfortable face of the Creator, as David here for the carnal love of the
face of Bathsheba, puts himself in danger to be cast out for ever from the
presence of the Lord his God. If man could remember this in all Satan's
tentations, what it is For Satan seeks frous man better then he can give him
that the deceiuer offers, and what it is again that he seeks, he would be
loath to buy the perishing pleasures of sin, upon such a price as Satan
sells them, but would answer him, as the Apostle did Simon Magus, Thy money
with thy self go into perdition, thy gain, thy glory, thy pleasure, and what
ever thou would give me to offend the Lord my God, go with thy self into
perdition, for what can thou offer unto me comparable to that, which thou
would steal from me.

But how is it that he prays, A twofold presence of God.
Cast me not out from thy presence. May a man be cast any way from it: says
he not himself What way can I flee from thy presence? This is soon answered
by distinguishing his twofold presence: one in mercy wherewith he refreshes
and comfort his own; and this without intermission they enjoy, who are in
heaven: another, in wrath, whereby he terrifies and torments without
intermission the damned in hell. As to the^ who are upon earth, certain it is,
he is displeased with many, who because No casting out from the one.
they see not his angry face, regard it not, borne out with temporal
recreations of the cteature, which will fail them, and there are many again to
whom he looks as a loving father in Christ, and yet they see not his
merciful face, by reason of many interiected vailes: but to them who once have
felt the sweetness of his favorable face, it is death to want it. Absalom
protested he could not want the sight 2. Sam. 14. 32.
of David his Father, he spoke it out of his hypocrisy; but to such as are
truly godly, there can be no punishment so heavy as to debar them, and it
were but for a short time, from the comfortable face of their heavenly father.

Thirdly, let us learn how What an alsufficient good the Lord is.
the all-sufficiencie of the Lord our God, and his great power appears in
this. It is punishment enough to a man, suppose he were Monarch of the world,
and had all comforts earthly to uphold him; to want the countenance of God. O
It is life to see his favorable face, and death to want it.
what an infinite good, what an all-sufficient Majesty is he in himself! a
look of whose countenance refreshes his creature: and no comfort can comfort
him that wants it; as ye may see in Beltasar, how did he tremble in the midst
of all his pleasures, at the sight of Gods anger? and here in David, who once
debarred from the sight of Gods joyful face for his sins, could never rest till
he got it again. All the sports and delights of his Kingdom could not refresh
him. Doubtless he is an all-sufficient God, who lives by himself, whose only
countenance comforts his creatures, and without whose favor, life, yea, the
most honorable life that can be devised on earth, is worse then death.

But what moved him to The godly fear when they remember Gods judgments on
others.
fear casting out from Gods presence, who had so many both external and
internal testimonies of Gods favor toward him? Out of question the examples
of Caine, cast out for murdering his brother, and the example of his
predecessor Saul, justly rejected of God, did terrify him, left he for
merciless murdering his own servant, and fearful back-slyding from the
Lord, should also be rejected. He remembered well the example of Gods judgments
on others for their sins, and his conscience told him within, he was guilty
of the like or greater: and this made him afraid.

Yet was not his fear without hope sustained by consideration Yet their fear
is never without hope, if they fear God as a Judge, they hope in him as a
Savior.
of God his unchangeable love, but by the inward conscience of his own unfeigned
repentance, and by the manifold examples of Gods mercy showed to penitent
sinners. If Caine was cast out from thy face, it was because he sought not thy
favor: and Saul was rejected because he repented not. But Lord, I have opened
my heart to thee; thou see what grief is in my soul, for grieuing thee by
my sins; thou never reiectedst any, that from a penitent heart sought thy
mercy: Quis vnquam venit Sauan.
ad te and confusus abijt? Who ever came to thee, and went away ashamed? Shall
I be the first that sought thy face, and was rejected? Nay Lord, Cast me not, I
beseech thee, out of thy presence. Thus we see, how David at one time, Et timet
a iudice, Bernard.
and sperat a saluatore, is both afraid of God as his Judge, and has hope in
God as his Savior; sometime fear oppresses his hope, but at the length hope
ouercometh fear: Felix conscientia in qua eiusmodi luctamen.

And take not thy holy Spirit The uncleanness of sin, grieves Gods Spirit.
from me. The Spirit of GOD will not dwell in a polluted soul. Every
uncleanness diminishes his presence. The Apostle warns us hereof, when
he says, Grieve not the Spirit. And again, Quench not the Spirit. David felt
it by his own experience, and therefore makes he this prayer to God, that the
grace of his Spirit, which was weakened by his sin, should not utterly be
taken from him.

This is a petition necessary always to be used unto God: Without the Spirit,
no fellowship with God. Romans 8.
for without this Spirit we can have no fellowship with God. If any man have
not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his: and this Spirit, he is known
by his fruits, which are, Love, Peace, Joy, long Suffering, Gentleness, Gal.
5. 22.
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Where we find the presence of this
Spirit by his fruits, we are to cherish him; where we find a want, or decay of
them, we are to pray for them: but many profane men in this age are like
these, who know not whether there be such a thing as the Holy Yet profane men
cannot discern his presence from his absence.
Ghost, or not: they never felt his presence, neither had they ever experience
of his renewing, and comforting grace; and therefore feel no loss by his
absence. Let them enjoy such things as they love, they care not for him,
because they know him not: most like unto brute beasts, to whom pearls and
most excellent jewels are What an excellent guest and worthy intertainement the
Spirit of God is.
of no price; only such things as affect their sensual appetite, are pleasant
unto them.

But how excellent a guest this Spirit is, and how worthy to be harbored in
our hearts, may be gathered from this proper Epithet, which always is attributed
to him, A holy Spirit; both because in himself he is so, and does also make
them holy in whom he dwells. What notable effects he works in his own
children, is summarily comprised by Bernard in three Bern. in fest. Pentecost.
Ser. 5.
words: he is Pignus Salutis, the pledge of salvation: all speaking of
salvation without him, is but babbling: he is Robur vitae, the strength of our
life* without him we have no ability to any spiritual action; and he is
Scientiae lume^, the light of knowledge: for without his sanctifying grace, all
knowledge whatsoever, is but darkness.

But here it is demanded; May the spirit of God, once given Whether Gods
Spirit once given, may be taken from his children or not.
to Gods children, be taken from them? I answer, there are some of his gifts
which may be given and taken away again: these are secondary and common, such
as God gives indifferently to good men and evil. So Achitophels wisdom, and
Saul his gift of Kingly government, were at length taken from them: but there
are other gifts, which once given, are never taken away again. These are
principal and proper, communicated only to Gods elect; as the grace of
regeneration, adoption, sanctification: these graces are crowned with that
great grace of Perseverance. The reason whereof is not in us, nor in our
stabilitie; but in the unchangeable counsel and will of him who loved us, for
whom he loves he loves, to the end: his gifts and calling are without
repentance: We may fall after grace received, but the Lord puts under his hand
and raises us up again: Because I am not changed, therefore ye are not
consumed, says the Lord: And truly even at this same time when David makes
this prayer, it is evident, he wanted not this spirit of grace, restoring him
by repentance after he had fallen, and making him thirst for mercy: Nullum
enim certius praesentiae spiritus testimonium, quam desiderium amplioris
gratiae.

VERSE. 12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy
free spirit.
THree great evils Three great evils David's sin brought upon him.
did David bring upon himself by his sin; a giltinesse which empaired the
sense of Gods mercy, an uncleanness which perverted and corrupted all the
powers of his soul, upon which two, followed horror of a just accusing
conscience. Against these three he frames his supplications. Against the His
remedy against them all three.
first he seeks mercy to pardon and forgive his sin: Against the second he
seeks grace to renew him, and that God would create a clean heart within him.
Against the third he seeks to be restored to the joy of Gods salvation.

But as this is the last and The way of a penitent sinner is:
greatest petition that a sinner can seek to be comforted with the joys of
God, so are we to remember, that in this petition we cannot prevail, except
some other go before it, there then is the order to be observed by a penitent
sinner, let us first fall down at his feet, and mourn: ploremus coram domino
qui fecit nos, ea quae fecimus Bez. in Cant. ser. 3.
nos, let us therefore continue a long time lamenting our manifold sins, and
taking a view if possibly we may, of every one of them, that as by committing
them we contracted giltinesse, so by mourning particularly for them, we may
enfeeble their testimony against us. Then let us look up out From mourning at
Gods feet to go up to the kisses of his mouth.
of the assurance of faith, and require the helping hand of the Lord to raise
us up, these two being rightly done we shall find him like that merciful
father, embracing the forlorn son in his arms and kissing him, from his
feet we go to his hands, from his hands to the kisses of his mouth, such as
fall not down to mourn at his feet, how can his helping hand raise them up,
or the kisses of his mouth comfort them?

See here what a deceiuer, and Satan in tempting makes fair offers but indeed
is a robber.
supplanter Satan is, in temptation he seems to be a giver, for he makes great
offers to men, if they will obey him, but in very deed he is but a robber, and
so shall every man find him, when they are deliured from the deceit of sin,
and get their ears opened, they shall see, that Satan by alluring them to
sin, has taken excellent things from them, for which they have need to pray
earnestly unto God, as David here does, that he would restore them. Let us not
therefore harken to him when he flattereth us the fairest. Where God gets love
and obedience from man, there man gets comfort in his God, but Satan like a
subtle diuider does what he can to deprive God of that obedience which his
creature should give him, that so he may deprive the creature of that joy and
comfort, which otherwise he might have in his God.

And again we see how there No joy can comfort man's soul but the joy of Gods
salvation.
is no joy can content David, but the joy of Gods salvation, he was a King, and
wanted none of these earthly comforts wherein worldly men rejoice, but none of
them can comfort the heart of David, it is the joy which arises to the
conscience from the feeling of God his salvation that he craves, and indeed
what other joy can there be, albeit the Lord would give us all things that he
has made, unless we feel himself our father, and Savior in Christ, what
can they help us, it is true of them all, which Job in his trouble spoke of
his friends, Miserable comforters are ye, and yet many such miserable men are
there in the world, who know no joy, but that which arises of meat, and drink,
silver and gold, and such like things, this is but a brutish joy, for even the
beasts have their own delight, when such objects are presented to them, as are
agreeable to their nature, and thou if thou know no other, in respect thou
wast made for greater things, art more beastly then they. Three great graces
seeks David in this petition.


And stablish me with thy free spirit: In this short petition many notable
benefits, David seeks from the Lord, for by this free spirit Vatablus
understands Spiritum libertatis, qua proni and faciles reddimur ad faciendum
quae Deus praecipit, that spirit of liberty, which enclines our hearts
willingly to do, what the Lord commands according to that of our Savior, John
8. Then shall ye be free if the son make you free: So then the benefit David
here craved, is 1 That reason may command affection.
that he may find reason commanding affection, as Basil expounds it, and that
his carnal affections have no power to draw his heart toward external and
unlawful objects, away from his God as they had done: for affections once let
loose, are not easily bridled and restrained again, but after a furious and
inordinat manner caries away the heart of man, suffocates light, captives
reason, whereby they themselves should be ruled, and this David feeling in
himself, prays against it, that the Lord would establish him with his free
spirit.

Secondly, he is called Ruah 2 That the sense of Gods love may overcome the
terror of his accusing conscience.
Nedibah the spirit of liberty for an other effect which he works in our
hearts, whereof the Apostle speaks Romans 8. Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear again but the spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry abba father:
This effect is to comfort our heart with the sense of Gods fatherly love, David
was trouble with terrors of mind which his gilty conscience had wakened, and
now he craves the confirming spirit of God or as Tremell. translates it,
Spiritum ingenuitatis, thy kindly spirit, which in regeneration thou give to
thy own children, whereby I may know that I am one of them: Every sin
empaires in our heart the testimony of the spirit of adoption witnessing Gods
love, and therefore David craves it might again be renewed unto him.

Thirdly, the word Nadab signifies to be willingly moved 3 That a Princely
mind may be given him according to bis calling.
to give, therefore among the Hebrews their Princes were called Nedibim for
their free munificence and liberality and out of this sense he seeks a new
benefit David was not a private man, but a public and therefore crave so to
be governed by the spirit of God, that he might be made answerable to his
calling: For the pride of Nebuchadnezer the heart of a A admonition for men in
authority.
man was taken from him, and the heart of a beast given, and David having
misruled himself, found his gift decayed, by which he should have ruled his
people: And therefore now prays that as the Lord had called him to be a Prince
of his people, he would not cast him away for his sins, but restore to him
that measure of Gods spirit, whereby he might do that work according to the
excellency of his calling. Oh that al Kings and Rulers of people could ever
remember this, what shall purchase them reverence of their subjects? is it not
the image of God? what shall make them able to govern others? is it not the
spirit of God governing themselves? This was Pharao his reason why he made
choice of Joseph, Where can we find so meet a man as this to rule, in whom the
Spirit of God is. And therefore above al other men should they be most instant
to pray, that God would establish their hearts by his spirit: making their
affections servants to their reason, that so themselves being ruled by God,
they may the better rule his people.

Always we see, it is not a small thing, which David here seeks from God,
but he seeks It is an honoring of God, when we seek great things from him.
Sauan.
the greatest gifts that God gives on earth to his children, Rem magnam a te
peto domine, quia tu es Deus magnus Dominus, iniuriam tibi facit qui a te parua
petit. O Lord, I seek great things from thee, because thou art a great God,
they dishonor the Lord, who seek small things from him, and they are most
welcome to him who seek greatest things from him; as is evident by Salomons
petition: he offers himself to be our Father, his Son to be our Savior,
his Spirit to be our comforter, to confirm and establish our hearts. These are
his most excellent gifts let us covet these.

VERSE. 13. Then shall I teach thy way unto the wicked, and Sinners shall be
converted to thee.
HItherto we have With petitions David ioynes promises
heard DAVID'S petitions; now follows promises, which are of two sorts, in the
first, he promises to be a good instrument to convert others unto the Lord:
in the next that he shall publish the praises of his God.

There is a duty that goes Before remission of sin goes repentance.
before remission of sin, and that is a godly sorrow for sin, which causes
repentance to salvation: for how shall the Lord remit the sin whereof man will
not repent. And there is an other duty that follows it, and that is
thankfulness to God, and a loving care of the salvation of others. Our
Savior collected well, that many sins were forgiven to that And after
follows thankfulness.
penitent woman that did wash his feet with her tears, because she loved him
much. But alas, if it be considered how small is our love toward God, how
little is our regard of the salvation of our brethren. It may be said of many
in this age, they have but small, or no warrant, that there sins are forgiven
them, who have so little, or no love toward God, and their brethren, for the
argument holds sure, they cannot but love the Lord greatly, to whom great and
many sins are pardoned and forgiven.

Then: Mark his words, He is not meet to speak of peace and pardon to to
others, who is under the power of his own sin.
when will David teach others, when God has delivered him from his sins? A
man under the power and gultinesse of his own sin, is not meet to speak of
peace and pardon unto others. Obmutescit facundia, si aegra sit conscientia.
Eloquence is silent where, the conscience is sick and diseased. A pitiful
Nicephor. lib. 5. cap. 32.
proof whereof we have in Origin, who being compelled either to suffer the
abusing of his body by an Ethiopian, or to sacrifice unto Idols, made choice of
the last, and offered incense unto Idols, wherewith his conscience was so
troubled, that afterward coming to Jerusalem, and there being first requested,
and then upon his refusal forced to teach, he went to the Pulpit, and read
there these words of the 50. Psalm, What have thou to do to take my
ordinances in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, when thou see a
thief, thou runnest with him, and art pertaker with the adulterers. When he
had so done, he closed the book, and because he found his mouth closed by
the guilt of his conscience, he fell to weeping and mourning, whereby he prouokt
all the congregation to mourn with him, but was not able to teach any. whereof
all preachers have A warning to Preachers.
their warning, that with great care they should keep their conscience clean,
if they would speak to the conscience of others: and if at any time they have
hurt their conscience, without delay should they heal it by repentance Cum
eradicantur ex cord peccata Bern. in ascens. dom. Ser. 1.
exinde qui in Christum credunt, linguis loquuntur nouis. Then do they, who
believe in Christ, speak with new tongues, when old sins are rooted out of
The talent of mercy we have received, because it is greatest should be most
used to the edificatio^ of others
their hearts.

Again we see our duty craves, that when we have received mercy from God for
our selves, we should make vantage of it for the edification of others. Every
talent received from God should be put to profit, but specially the talent of
mercy, as it is greatest: so the Lord requires greater fruit of it, both for
his own glory, and for the edification of our brethren. Seeing we are the
vessels of mercy, should not the sent and sweet odor of mercy go from us to
others. This duty Christ craved from Peter, and thou when thou art converted,
confirm thy brethen. And this duty, as David here promises, so we may read
how he did perform it, Come unto me all ye that fear God, and I will tell
you what God has done to my soul.

The propetie of a Christian Basil.
is, fides per dilectionem efficax, faith working by love. How we are bound to
have a care of the salvation of our brethren
What auiles it to pretend faith toward God, where there is no love toward thy
neighbor, and wherein can thy love be declared more then in this, to draw thy
neighbor to the participation of that same merit, whereunto God has called
thee. By the Law a man was bound to bring home his neighbors wandering beast,
if he had met with it before, how much more then to turn again his
neighbor himself, when he wanders from the Lord his God? If two men walking
on the way, should both fall into one pit, and the one being relieved out of
it, should go his way and forget his neighbor, might it not justly be called
a barbarous and inhumane cruelty. We have all fallen into one and the same
mire of iniquity: since the Lord has put out his merciful hand to draw us out
of this prison of sin, shall we refuse to put out our hand, to see if
possibly we may draw up our brethren with us?

Thy ways. He says not, that Profane men not only commit sin, but teach
the way of sin to others.
he will teach sinners his ways; the ways of sin can be learned without a
teacher: but he will teach them Gods ways. There are many profane men in the
world, who think it not enough to commit sin with greediness, but will boast
of their sins, when they have done them, teaching and alluring others to
commit the like iniquity: these are but like unto These are like beasts.
dogs, and other such brutish beasts, who when they have avoided their
dongue, turn about their face unto it, delighting in the scent thereof; and yet
blinded man will glory in such a beastly quality.

But what are these ways Some ways of God are unsearchable, these a man
should not learn. Leuit.
of God, which David says he will teach? Some of Gods ways are unsearchable:
of these we should beware; neither to teach, nor learn that which God first
has not taught us. But there are other of his ways, which he has
manifested, as, the way of judgment, whereby he walks stubbornly against them
that walk stubbornly against him going far from them that depart from him:
and the way of mercy, wherein he shows himself upright Psalm. 18. But the way
of judgment and mercy we should both teach it to others, and learn it our
selves.
with the upright man, and comes near unto them, who with a humble and
contrite spirit draw near unto him. These are thy ways, O Lord, which I shall
teach, says David, when I shall learn them: I have learned the way of thy
judgment: I have felt thou art terrible to sinners, and that it is a fearful
thing to fall into thine hands; let me also feel thy sweet mercy, forgiving my
sin; then shall I teach the way of thy mercy to sinners also, and shall let
them know how gracious thou art, how ready to forgive, and what they must do,
if they would be received into thy favor.

All the ways of GOD are unknown to men by nature, The way of Gods mercy
naturally is unknown.
but especially the way of his mercy. Nature could never have dreamed of that
way of mercy, which God has discovered: it surpasses all light that is in
nature; if God had not revealed it, man should never have known it. Experience
may confirm this: for we see it is an easy thing to instruct a man in the
knowledge of Gods power, providence, justice, and all, but to bring a sinner to
the knowledge and assurance of Gods mercy, is a difficult thing. It is easy to
preach judgment by the Law, not so to persuade mercy by the Gospel: this is
the highest, and most difficult point of a Pastors calling.

And sinners shall be converted unto thee. Mark the words Conversion of a
sinner is Gods work.
of David; I, says he, shall teach, and they shall be converted. When the
conversion of a sinner is ascribed to man, we must understand, he is not the
worker, but the instrument of it. He shall not want his own recompense: For
they who convert many to righteousness, shall shine like the stars in the
Firmament. But the glory of the conversion is proper to the Lord: men may plant
and water, but God gives the increase. Paul preached at Philippi, but God
opened the heart of Lydia: Peter preached to Cornelius and his kinsmen, but the
Holy Ghost brought down the unction, which made them Christians. Repentance is
a work full of miracles. it makes the dead to rise, the blind to see, the
dumb to speak; and who can work these but the Lord? Vera Sanitas Macar. hom,
44. Repentance a work full of miracles.
a Domino solo proficiscitur, (...). As one sheep cannot heal another, but
their health comes from their shepherd; so the true health of our souls
comes from the great Pastor and Shepherd of Israel, Qui Leones mansuefecit
and igni vim adurendi ademit, etc. He that tamed the Lions, and restrained the
fire from burning, he it is that must tame our wild affections, and moderate
the fire of our desires. Let Preachers when they go to any such work, require
the helping hand of the Lord to work with them: and let people answer, and pray
with Jeremy, Convert us Lord, and we shall be converted.

As sin averts man from God, so it peruerts him: repentance An unpenitent
sinner is a peruers and monstrous creature, and how.
by the contrary turns a man to God again, and rectifieth all that is in him.
An unpenitent sinner is a perverted or monstrous creature: for in him, that
part is undermost which should be above. The soul that came from heaven,
cleaves to the dust by his body which was made of the earth: he can look up
to heaven but in regard of his soul: he is but earthly minded. Again, he
has his face where his back should be, and by the contrary, the world which
should be behind him, is ever before him, and the price of the high calling of
God: even the riches of that glorious inheritance, which should be before him,
he casts it behind his back, and has no thought of it. And where a wise
man has always his heart at his right hand, Eccles. 10. That is set upon best
and most necessary things: this fool by the contrary, has his heart at his
left hand, busy about vain and unprofitable things, neglecting that one
thing, which only is needful. And lastly, he has that without which should
be within: for he should be more beautiful within then without. But the best
sight ye will see in him, is that which is outmost: there* he looks like a
painted sepulcher, but within is full of rottenness: So confused a creature,
is miserable man in his sins; all is disordered in him, he is Tartarus, a
little hell on earth, a terror to himself, a trouble unto others, ever vexed
with restless and fruitless perturbations.

But from this time, by the But by grace he is rectified and renewed.
grace of repentance he conuerteth and turns to the Lord his God, then a
comfortable change and comely order is wrought in him, then the body becomes
subject unto the soul, then the affections begin to follow reason, and order
restored makes him a quiet and peaceable heart, by the which he begins his
heaven upon earth.

VERSE. 14. Deliver me from blood, O God of my salvation, and my tongue shall
sing joyfully of thy righteousness.
IN the midst of David can not satisfy himself in seeking mercy for his
sins.
his promises we see how he interlaces a new petition for mercy, for still he
found his conscience pressed with the greatness of his sin, and therefore so
often as he feels it, so often calls he for mercy, sin is soon committed as I
said, but the gilt, the terror and the secret accusing voice thereof not so
easily discharged.

And that now he discends A general confession of sin is not sufficient.
in particular, it is to teach us, that a general confession of sin is not
sufficient, we must come to a particular, for it may truly be said, that he
hates no sin, who hates not one above the rest, the sin which has wounded
our conscience deepest will grieve us sorest, this is manifest in David, who
having committed two abominable sins, Adultery and Murder, in his particular
confession makes mention of the blood, not of the adultery, for as in griefs
of the body the greater pain makes the less not to be felt, so is it in the
grief of conscience, though there be a grief for all sin in the penitent,
yet the grief for the greatest sin exceedes all the rest.

How heavy a sin the shedding Shedding of innocent blood a fearful sin.
of innocent blood is, may appear, if we consider these particulars. First it
is a destroying of the image of God, which cannot be without a great contempt
of the divine majesty. When Theodosius had resolved to slay many Citizens of
Antiochia for casting down the image of his wife, the Empress 1 Because it is
a demolishing of Gods image.
Placilla: It was a notable warning which a certain Macedonian sent to him: If
thou be so moved for demolishing of the brazen image of Placilla, how shall
God be offended at the destruction of man who is the lively image of God, the
loss of the one may soon be repared, but the loss of the other can never be
recovered, a Brasen-image cast down may be set up again in the same or a
better estate; let a man once be slain, and who can revive him?

Secondly, if a man be considered 2 It puts out the life of man for whom Christ
died, and so is injurious to Christ's death.
as he is a Christian, he is a part of the price of Christ's blood, I am
commanded not to offend my brother for whom Christ died in a matter of meat
and drink, which otherwise is lawful, how then dare I slay him? Oh what a
horrible crime is this to put out the life of that man, for whom Christ died,
that he might purchase life unto him! 3 It makes a man more unnatural then
beasts.


Thirdly, the similitude of nature makes it a grievous sin for a man to destroy
his own kind Every herb that grows out of the earth has a seed or some
other equivalent virtue, whereby it seeks the conservation of his own kind:
and brute beasts forbear on another: only unnatural man destroies his kind,
yea we read that Lions and Bears have Cent. 4. l. 1. c. 5.
spared christians presented naked before them, but whom the beasts did spare,
them man more beastly then unreasonable beasts did cruelly devour.

And lastly, the fearful punishment of it declares, how 4 It is punished with
fearful plagues.
fearful a sin it is. As in the first plague of Egypt all the waters thereof
were turned into blood, so is it with a murderer, all is turned in blood to
him, at his table his meat is seasoned with the thought of it, in his resting
bed he is troubled with the dreams of every one; whom he sees he deemes to be
a revenger of blood, and every noise which he hears, he fears as a messenger
or forerunner of blood.

This sin then being so In what security are they who think innocent blood
no burden.
grievous as it is, we may easily consider how it comes to pass, that profane
men think nothing of it, the reason is here that their conscience is sleeping,
and custom of sin has taken away sense: so long as David's conscience was a
sleep, he thought nothing of it, as appears by his letter of Vriah, let not
this trouble thee, hereof it is that men sleeping in sin count shedding of
innocent blood, some of them, but a pastime, and others to be a piety and
religion. Of the first Ethnikes esteem it a pastime.
sort were Ethniques, who used combats between men upon public theaters, that
by the slaughter of some men, they might make sport unto others: Of these said
Cyprian, Scelus Cyprian. epist. 2. Papists think it good religion.
non tantum geritur, sed docetur. Of the other sorts are bloody Papists, who
think it good service to God to murder and slay such, as are contrary minded
to them in religion, to who^ at this time I am content to speak with Erasmus,
Non conuenit vt hoc argumento nos Christianos Eras epist. ad volsium.
declaremus, si quam plurimos occiderimus, sed si multos seruauerimus, alioqui
citius futurum est, vt nos in Turcas degeneremus, quam Turcis in parts nostras
pertrahamus, Et vt faeliciter cadat Martis semper ancipitis alea, fiet vt
latius fortasse regnet pontifex aut huius cardanales, non vt latius regnet
Christus. It is not a good argument to prove our selves good Christians,
because we have slain many, but rather that we have saved many: otherwise it
shall sooner come to pass, that we shall degenerate into Turks, then turn
Turks into Christians: And albeit the event of battle which is always doubtful
should succeed as we would wish, it may well be that by blood shedding the
kingdom of the Pope and his Cardinals be increased but the kingdom of Christ
shall not by such means be enlarged.

But howsoever to such A great mercy to be kept from sheding innocent blood.
blind infidels the shedding of blood, be either pleasure or piety, yet to the
godly whose conscience is wakened it is an abominable sin: how joyful was
David when Abigail kept him from shedding of the blood of Nabal. How heartily
did he thank God for keeping him from it. And when he had shed the blood of
Vriah, how earnestly prays he that God would deliver him from it. When it was
told Constantine, Proof hereof in David and Constantine.
there was no way to cure his leprosy, but by bathing him in the blood of an
infant, (upon what respect I know not not) it was a notable answer he gave,
Malo semper aegrotare quam tali remedio conualescere. Let us flee the burden of
innocent blood, and this prayer for pardoning mercy that David makes, let us
turn it in a prayer for preventing mercy, Deliver us from blood, we are the
sheep of Christ Jesus, let us leave the shedding of blood to ravening wolves.

Deliver me: No doubt David Sin has first a commanding power after an
accusing or controuling power.
powered out these words from his sense and feeling: his speech imports a
captivity, he was not a free man, but bound with the cords of his sins; the
commanding power of it at this time he was freed from, though before it bound
him: but he seeks to be delivered from the controuling, and accusing power
thereof; this vexed him so that he thinks no shame publicly to ask God
mercy for these sins, by which he had offended God, and given evil example to
the Church: and men who have fallen with him in publik sins, and yet cannot
be induced to give glory to God, and remove offense from his people by as
public repentance, do plainly declare that they were never touched with the
conscience of their sin.

In the primitive Church The manner of public repentance in the primitive
Church.
such as had given public offenses, were not received without public
repentance, and humiliation, yea they made supplication to all the assembly,
Volo, veniam reus speret petat Ambr. de paeniten. li. 1. ca. 16.
cum lachymis, petat populi totius fletibus vt ignoscatur obsercret, and cum
secundo vel tertio fuerit dilata eius communo, credat remissius se supplicasse.
I will that he that is guilty hope for mercy, that he seeks it with tears
and mourning of the whole people: and if twice or thrice his receiving to the
communoin be refused to him, let him think that he has prayed more slackly
then he should and so humble himself more entirely then he has done. And
again to the same purpose, he says, If thou had a do to satisfy a man
whom How foolish are they who having committed public sins, refuse to make
public repentance.
thou had offended, how many would thou request to sue for thee at his
hands? Now seeing thou have to seek reconciliation with God, why imploiest
thou not the prayers of all his his people, Vbi nihil est quod pudori esse
debeat, nisi non fateri cum omnes simus peccatores. For among us nothing should
be a matter of shame, seeing we are all sinners, but not to confess our
sins, Vbi ille laudabilior qui humilior, and iustior qui abiectior. Here he
is most worthy praise, who is most humble, and he is most just, who is most
contrite, and dejected for sin. Fleat itaque pro te matter Ecclesia, let
therefore thy mother the Church mourn for thee.

But if men who have offended This is because they are not touched with the
sense of sin.
were touched with the sense of sin, as David was, they would not be ashamed
as publikly to confess it and seek mercy as he did. For as I said, he found
himself straited with his own sins. Infernus quidam animae rea est
Conscientia, a guilty conscience is a hell to the soul and a sore prison, not
like other prisons: for wheresoever the guilty man goes, he carries his prison
with him, and this is the equity of Gods judgments, who inwraps sinners in
their sins, and binds them with the coardes of their own trangressions,
whereof they cannot complain.

And this appears out of How sin binds and captives a man.
his own words, when he says, Deliver me, His speech tells, he found himself
captiued. Two manner of ways does sin strait, and bind any man; first, by
the commanding power, of it, for then it oppresses a man in such a sort, that
he can neither eat, nor sleep, till he obey it. An example of which tyranny
we have in Ammon, and many mo. Next by the controlling or accusing power
thereof, whereby in such sort sin committed, so straites a man, that it
suffers him not to hear nor think of any other thing, but of her accusations
only, whereby the soul of man is filled with restless fears, and horrible
perturbations. Now at this time David was not troubled with the commanding
power of sin, but only with the tormenting, and accusing power thereof; and
from it here he prays the Lord to deliver him.

From bloods: The word is plural, from bloods. Noting unto us, how David found
every Innocent blood when it is shed falls not to the ground, but biaes on the
head of him that shed it.
drop of Vriah his blood a burden unto him. By the phrase of holy Scripture,
the blood of him that is shed is said to lie upon his head that shed it. It
seems unto men, that the blood of the man slain is spilt on the ground: but
the spirit of God says, that it lies on the man slayer. A fearful thing:
the blood which before was in the body of thy neighbor, to conserve his life,
thou have now taken it upon thy head, to procure thy death, and to cry unto
God for a vengance against thee. If this were considered, it might serve for an
awe-band to keep murderers from hasting as they do, to shed innocent blood.

And albeit David was far Many ways may men be guilty of sin, albeit by
their own hands they do it not.
from Vriah, when he was slain; for the one was in Jerusalem, the other in
Rabbah of the Ammonites, yet the burden of that blood lies heavy on him,
because he was the man who counseled Ioab, how to slay him with the sworn of
the Ammonites. Many ways have men, whereby to excuse themselves in their
sin; specially, if they did not evil with their own hands, if they were
far off, when the turn was done: but you see how little all these avail,
where the conscience cannot excuse a man.

O God of my salvation. So the godly style the Lord; not only Praise of our
salvation properly belongs to God.
because he is the author of the beginning, but of the progress also, and
perfiting of our salvation: he not only gave life to our souls, when we were
dead in sin, but he keeps our souls in life: we fall, and he raises us up:
we wander, and he recalls us: we sin daily, and he forgiueth us. And it is
for these renewing mercies, whereby the Lord every day saues us from a thousand
deaths, in which otherwise we should perish; that we praise the Lord as the God
of our salvation: giving him this glory with the Apostle, The Lord has
delivered us from so great a death, he does deliver 2. Cor. 1.
us: in whom also we trust, that yet hereafter he will deliver us. For the time
past he has delivered, for the time present he does deliver, and for the time
to come he will deliver us: In all these respects we rejoice in him as in the
God of our salvation.

Again, he acknowledges Many great deliverances receive the godly but the
greatest is deliverance from sin.
that the deliverance of a man from his sins, is not a work of man's Power.
No, it requires the powerful hand, and saving health of the mighty God of our
salvation. Many great deliverances has the Lord given to his anointed; he
saved Noah from the deluge of waters, Lot from burning in Sodom, he saved
Israel in the Red sea, and Jonas in the Whales belly, he saved Daniel from the
Lions, and Peter that he did not sink, when he walked in the water: but the
deliverance of a man from the hands of Satan, and sin is a greater work then
any of these, let us be thankful to our God for it.

So shall I sing: a soul oppressed God has fitted the exercises of his
worship for our state.
and borne down with the terrors of sin, cannot sing to the praise of God* a
Christian in that estate, answers all that find fault with him, as the
Israelites of old did the Caldees, How can Psalm. 97.
we sing a song of the Lord in a strange land? (and how can I says the
Christian) sing joyfully, so long as the Comforter that should refresh my
soul is away? But blessed be the Lord who in every state has provided a
remedy for us, that when we are not disposed for one exercise of Gods worship,
the Lord should license us to go unto an other. Are we so afflicted Iam.
that we cannot sing, at least let us pray that we may be comforted?

And in that he says he will In singing psalms our affection should be
conformable to the word we sing.
sing joyfully, it learnes us how we should always conform our affections to
the words which God puts either in our ears or in our mouths. If the word of
the L. when we hear it or sing it, have a promise of mercy or a song of
thanksgiving, should we not receive it and utter it with joy? and if on the
other hand it contain a threatening, or a confession of sin, should we not
hear it with grief and contrition: this is it which is taught us in that
parable, if the Lord Pipe we should dance, if he mourn we should sorrow, And
as his word is, so should we conform our affections. But this discouers the
Atheism of this age, whether they hear the word or read it: no change of the
Scripture changes their heart: one Chapter or Psalm makes them not to rejoice,
and another to be sorrowful, because they hear all, they sing all after one
manner, that is, for fashion sake, without any sense or feeling.

Of thy righteousness. But A twofold righteousness in God worthy praises.
how is this that Gods righteousness is the matter of our thankse-giuing? Are
not his righteous judgments fearful and terrible to sinners? But we must
know the sorts of Gods righteousness: there is one whereby he punishes the
wicked and impenitent, another whereby he pardons the believing penitent. And
of this spoke Abraham: God forbid that the Judge of all the world should do
unrighteously; He meant in condemning godly Lot with the ungodly Sodomites. And
this is greatly for our comfort, that the Lord when he pardons our sins,
he is a righteous God, both because he has so promised, as also that our
sins are already punished in Christ Jesus: so that the mercy which we get
does no way violate his righteousness. And we whom he has received into
mercy, are in such sort to praise him for his mercy, that we may also sing
joyfully of his righteousness.

VERSE. 15. Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise.
THis Verse contains a new petition, The tongue to speak, a great benefit of
God.
wherein he craves that God would open his tongue, which his sins had closed,
that he might praise God, as he was wont to do. The natural use of the
tongue is Gods great benefit, yea, and a miraculous work, that a member of
flesh should be an interpreter of a heavenly mind, and as it were, a
Trenchman, whereby the spirit of one man knows what is the meaning of another.

But as Consuetude draws Gods most excellent works in Dis-esteemd now,
because it is common.
contempt: so among the rest this is thought nothing, to speak with a tongue
only, because it is common; yet Gods children acknowledge it to be Gods
benefit, and the Lord glories in it as in his own work. When Moses complained
that he was not meet to be the Lords Ambassador, because he was not
cloquent, but slow of speech, he received this answer, Who has given the
mouth to man, or who has made the Exodus
dumb or the deaf, or him that sees, or the blind? Is it not I, the Lord?
When he will he makes the dumb to speak, and the cloquent to be silent: Out
of the mouths of babes has he ordained Psalm.
strength: he opens the mouths of children to confess his name, and closes
the mouths of ancient men, as we see in Zachary, and all to teach that the
benefit of the tongue is from the Lord.

This benefit sin took away from man that now naturally, Sin takes away the
use of the tongue, that man cannot speak as be he should.
when he opens his mouth and moves his tongue, he speaks to the offense and
dishonor of God who made him: the benefit to speak he has it given of God,
but abuses it so through the corruption of his nature, that he speak's not as
he should like unto a man sick of the palsy, who by natural strength moves
his hand; but through his corrupt humors moves it inordinatly, and as this way
the It had been good for many men that they could never have spoken.
moving of the hand is a pain to the one, so is the moving of the tongue
without order both a sin and punishment to the other. Of these it may be said
that Satan opens their mouths, and not God, and good had it been for them to
have been stricken with natural dumbness all their days, for so should
their sins have been the fewer, and their punishment the less.

And this is the loss, of the The manifold evil effects of sin.
tongue, whereof now David complains, and which he craves to be redressed.
Where we have to mark, how many fearful evils his sin had brought upon him:
it had stolen away his heart, perverted his spirit, stopped his ears, and
closed his mouth, that he could not think, nor will, nor hear, nor speak as
he was wont to do; therefore prays he against all these in several
petitions, that God would create a clean heart in him, renew a right spirit in
him: that God would make him hear joy and gladness, and open his mouth to
speak again the praises of God.

Such are the miserable effects Sin takes away sense of misery, duty and
all. Ephesians. 4.
of sin: it takes from man all senses both inward and outward, and leaves him
without feeling; so that he is no more moved when he does evil, then if it
were good, yea, not touched with fear of the judgment due to sin: but as Lots
kinsmen made a mock of Gods judgments, when they heard it, so do they make a
mock of sin, and of all that may follow it; but one day they shall feel the
bitter fruits thereof. Men in their sins are like unto fools or young
children: when their parents or friends perish they mourn not, for they know
not the loss, and they care not to exchange the charters of their inheritance
with trifles, but when they come to the years of discretion, and feel the
loss, then they mourn, and lament for that which in their ignorance they
little regarded. It is even so with men, who as long as their sin blinds
them, cannot mourn, but when God shall waken them, and they see the evil of
it, then they take up a bitter lamentation for it, and can get no rest night
nor day, til God of his mercy pardon and forgive it.

Again ye see, that if we be They who can not speakc to the prise of God are
stricken with a sore plague.
governed by the spirit of God, we will account that we are stricken with
dumnesse, when we cannot speak to the praise of God. Many are such in this
age, who have a tongue for every purpose, but none for the praises of God, they
are stricken with a sore plague, and yet they feel it not, their heart is
bound by Satan with the cords of their sins, and so their tongues cannot be
loosed to glorify God: from this most miserable estate the Lord deliver us.

VERSE. 16. For thou desire no sacrifice though I would give it, thou
delightest not in burnt offerings.
IN this verse David Joy for Gods mercy and sorrow for our own sins agree
well in the godly.
gives a reason, why he promised no other duty of thankefullnesse to the
Lord, but to praise him, as he protested he would do in the former verse:
the reason is, because the sacrifice in man or from man which God likes best,
is the sacrifice of a contrite spirit. Then ye see, that David when he
sacrificed praise, sacrificed also a contrite spirit, what is it to give
thanks for Gods mercies, if all the same time we be not sorrowful, that we
should have offended so merciful a God? The thanks given by many is tastles
to God, because when they are touched with some sense of that God has done to
them, they feel no remorse of that evil, they have done against him: happy is
the soul wherein these two meet together; a joy for Gods mercies toward us,
and a sorrow for our sins against God.

And again, ye see that if a What praise is acceptable to God.
man praise God truly, he offers with praises himself, and all that he may
do: My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that Psalm. 103.
is within me praise thou his holy name: As he shows in the subsequent verse;
The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit. Wherein he declares, that in
thanksgiving to God, he offered a thankful heart for bee-gone mercies, a
sorrowful heart for bee-gone sins, a resolute heart in time to come to amend:
And this is the praise wherein God delights.

But here arises a threefold A threefold doubt moved.
doubt: first seeing the legal sacrifices commanded by God; how can it be said
the Lord desires not that which he commanded? secondly, is not the Apostles
praecept To do good Heb. 13.
and distribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased? And
thirdly, are not we commanded to offer up our bodies a living Romans 12.
sacrifice holy and acceptable to God, how is it then that here David speaks
that God desires no sacrifice.

To these it is answered, that The first is answered, David does not simply
reject legal sacrifices.
David speaks not simply, but by way of compariso, these external sacrifices,
if they be alone wanting the internal sacrifices of a contrite spirit, are not
acceptable to God, and of this for the first doubt, we learn that if under the
law external worship without the inward pleased not the Lord, far less will
it now please him under the gospel: Cursed (said Malachie) is the man who has
a male in his flock, and vows an sacrifices a corrupt thing to the Lord: And
this curse is now double upon them, who give not the best they have to the
Lord, drawing near him with their lips, but far from him in their hearts.

As to the second, external The second answered, alms and such sacrifices are
accepted of God if they flow from faith.
sacrifices of alms and such like now commanded, please the Lord out of all
doubt, if they proceed from faith in Christ, offered out of a contrite spirit,
not puffed up with conceit of merit, the humble heart makes a small gift to be
great, an example whereof we have in the widows mite, it was a small thing but
because it proceeded from a great affection, Christ accounted it the greatest
gift was offered that day: And the want of a good heart on the contraty makes a
great gift to be small, an example whereof we have in Cain his sacrifice, in it
self rich enough, but because it proceeded from a poor affection, it was not
acceptable to God: Ten thousand rivers of oil, and all the beasts on thousand
mountains, yea in all the Forest of Lebanon are nothing to the Lord, if the
heart be not rightly set that offers them.

And as to the third, we are The third answered we are bound to offer our
bodies but every offering of the body is not acceptable to God.
bound to offer up our bodies unto him, but remember every offering of the
body pleases him not, some of a blind zeal becomes the buriers of their own
bodies, like Baal his Priests, Turkish Derbies and Popish Penitentiaries,
cutting, lancing and renting their flesh; or else defrauding their bodies of
that due, which they owe unto him, prodigal of them in their blind zeal, not
moderatly subdueing them by discipline. If every such sacrifice had pleased God,
the Apostle would not have said, though I feed the 1. Cor. 13.
poor with all my goods, and though I give my body to be burned, if I have no
love, it is nothing: we must first see, that the heart be sacrificed to the
Lord, and then the body in the reasonable service thereof, for no unreasonable
suduing of the body pleases God.

But what shall be said of many Atheists convinced who do not so much as offer
external sacrifice to the Lord.
profane Atheists, who now do not offer so much as external sactifices? they
will not resort to the assemblies of Gods saints, to give God in his house
external prayer and praises: neither offer they to the poor external alms,
nor to God the external service of their bodies, they bow not the knee, they
lift not their hand, they use not the members of their body as weapons of
righteousness, and how then shall we think they make conscience of Gods
internal worship. But now to the words in particular.

VERSE. 17. The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and a
broken heart, o God, thou will not despise.
WE first learn that Some offer to the Lord that which is theirs, but not
themselves. Sauan.
if any man would offer a sacrifice convenient for the Lord, let him prepare
the spirit and the mind, God himself is a spirit, and will be worshipped in
spirit, he loves truth in the inward affection, Corpora fecit propter
spiritus, ideoque etiam spiritualia non corporea quaerit: he made also the
bodies for the spirits, and therefore seeks he not bodily without spiritual
service. Some there are qui sua dant, non seipsos, who offer to him not
themselves, but that which is theirs, but it is a blind folly to think thou
can please him with gifts, when thou will not give the service of thine
heart, and spirit unto him.

But least we should think Contrition of spirit many ways* expressed in
scripture.
that every spirit is acceptable to God: he adds this epithet, That a Contrite
spirit is Gods sacrifice, or as after he calls it a broken heart* it is called
by Joel a rent heart, by Esaias it is compared to a bruised reed, and it is also
called a pricking of the heart and a melting heart: such as was in Josiah. All
which imports none other but that inward unfeigned sorrow which is in a penitent
soul, for offenses done against God.

Then were beasts under the As beasts in the Law were 1. bound, 2. slain, 3.
sacrificed, so must our spirits be.
law said to be sacrificed to the Lord, when they were taken from common and
prophan uses, bound with cords to the horns of the Altar, afterward slain and
offered by fire unto God. And so is it to be done with our affections, if we
mind to sacrifice them to the Lord, we must first separate them from their
wonted wanderings, we must bind them with the cords of Gods word, and lay
them down at the feet of Christ as his captives, by godly sorrow: we must
slay that sinful pleasure which was the former life of our affection, and then
become they sacrifices unto God.

But here the difference is But in these sacrifices beasts offered lost their
lives, here men sacrificed recover their lives.
great: for beasts sacrificed under the law lost their lives, and became dead
creatures, that they might be sacrificed. But we, when we are sacrificed, of
dead creatures are made living: we being dead in sins and trespasses, then
begin to live when sin is slain, and sinful lusts mortified in us. Oh that
we could remember this, that the strife between us and sin, is here, Who
shall slay other: if sin live, we must die: if we slay it, we shall live:
except we bind our affections, and deliver them captives to Christ, they shall
bind us, and deliver us captives to Satan.

And that yet better we may know the quality and valor Three things concur
to a contrite spirit.
of a contrite spirit, let us consider these things in it: first, an inward
sorrow for sin, which causes repentance to salvation, 1 An inward sorrow.
not to be repented of. Sin is contracted with carnal pleasure, but is
dissolved with spiritual displeasure: even as the cause of sickness is
removed by medicine, which is contrary to it. And this godly dolor is not only
profitable to cure sins past, but also to prevent them in time to come. Cum
dolemus admissa, admittenda excludimus, Amb. lib. 2. de paeniten. cap. 10.
and fit quaedam de condemnatione culpae, disciplina innocentiae: for when we
mourn for sins done, we close the door upon sins to be don, and the
damning of our former faults, becomes a discipline, whereby we are instructed
to amend in time to come.

Secondly, in a contrite spirit there is a great sincerity: it is 2 Sincerity
without dissimulation.
that blessed spirit, wherein there is no guile; no covering nor dissembling of
sin: for as in a thing which is brayed and stamped, the very inward parts of
it are made manifest, and that which before was with a skin or shel, is now
presented to the eye of man: so is it in a soul truly humbled: these sins
which were secret and covered, the contrite spirit casts them out, and makes
them open to God and man, fearing no shame in the eyes of man, if so be it may
find mercy in the eyes of God. And therefore said Augustine of contrition,
that it was Sanitas animarum, holocaustum medullarum, a health of the soul,
and an offering to God, not of any outward matter, but of the inward marrow.

And thirdly, this true contrition is never without faith, 3 True faith with an
earnest desire of mercy.
which causes such a vehement desire of mercy, as makes the soul of man to
long, to wait, to faint, to cry, to hunger, to thirst for Gods consolation:
the delay whereof makes the soul of the creature pine away with inward grief,
and he becoms like that book, wherein Ezechiel saw written, lamentations Aug.
Ezech. 11.
and woe: for still he cries, Woe is me, always til the comforter com, and
assure him that his sins are forgiven him.

Now this being spoken of A contrite spirit called sacrifices in the plural
and why.
the contrit spirit, we are to see, why he calls it sacrifices in the plural
number, the reasons hereof are two, first because this is more worth in Gods
eyes then all the legal sacrifices, though they were joined in one, this one
excels them al, and next because in the contrite spirit are many sacrifices,
for it strikes the life of every sinful affection, and so sacrifices many
beasts to the Lord: Nam si Gregor. Moral.
vis compunctionis in intimis afficit, omnis strepitus prauae suggetionis
obinutescit, for if once the sting of godly compunction touch the heart,
incontinent the whispering of wicked suggestion is silenced.

Under the law such as we Nobles and Princes offered As Princes under the law
multiplied external sacrifices: so now powerful Christians are discerned by
manifold internal oblations. 2. Chro. 7.
great oblations, which far exceeded the offerings of the poor. We read at
one time Solomon offered many thousand sacrifices, the common people contenting
themselves with the offering of Pigeons and such like more simple sacrifices:
But now Princes among Gods people in Gods estimation are they, who sacrifice
most of their sinful affections unto him. If the Lord should send us to the
bosom of the earth, to the deep bottom of the sea, to the uttermost ends of
the world, to seek a sacrifice for him, we might most justly be astonished,
and specially the poorer sort, whose means may not extend to the furniture of
so great a sacrifice, but now O man, since They are inexcusable who sacrifice
not to God, seeing that which be craves is within them.
the Lord requires no thing, but that which is within thee, or at least may be
and should be, if thou have not to offer him a contrite spirit, a sorrowful
heart for sin; is not all excuse taken away from thee? God has proclaimed to
men, what is the sacrifice that pleases him, and if any man offer it not unto
him, it is not because he may not, but because he will not: for in this
sacrifice the poor may excel the most rich and honorable men in the world. A
contrite spirit is called Gods sacrifice, because he is the giver of it.


And yet further, that he calls the contrite spirit the sacrifices of God,
imports that he is the giver of this grace: he powers upon his people the
spirit of grace and compassion, which causes them to mourn: he takes away the
stony heart and gives them a heart of flesh. Even as he provided a sacrifice
for Abraham, when he called him to worship on Mount Moriah, so does he not
only honor his children to be worshippers of his majesty, but also gives us
grace, whereby we do it: that such worms as we are have place to stand before
so great a majesty as he is, it is of his favor: that we have hearts disposed
to pray to him or praise him, is of his grace: and that he answers us, is of
his own unspeakable mercy. And in these respects is the sacrifice we offer
called Gods sacrifice.

He is not like unto other Earthly kings love mirthbetter then mourning, the
Lord does not so.
Kings, for commonly they love mirth better then mourning, Joseph mourning for
Jacob his father, might not come before Pharao: Nehemiah with his sad
countenance was afraid to stand before Artarxerxes: Mordecai with his mourning
weed, entered not the courts of Ahasuerus, but we are most welcome to the Lord,
when we come with our mourning weeds: Achabs sackcloth profited him
something, but Iezabel, her attiring and painting of her face auailed nothing,
she was cast to the dunghill, as a portion for dogs: Our face is never so
pleasant, as when it is watered with the tears of a penitent heart. My Dove
that mourns Cant.
in the clefts of the rock, let me see thy face.

Now in this that we have spoken concerning the sacrifices The great sacrifice
of Christians which maks al other acceptable, is Christ.
of God, let us remember, that there is one great and principal sacrifice,
which for the valor of it self is acceptable to God, that is the sacrifice of
Christ once for all offered upon the cross, all other only in this and for
this are acceptable to him.

Thou will never despise. What The end of godly mourning is joy. Macar. hom. 15.
fruit arises of a mourning heart for sin he now subioynes, the Lord never
dispiseth it, at no time, in no person. It renders comfort not only for the
time to come, but also for the time present, ipsaelachrymae sunt vice
delitiarum, for even tears are in steed of delights, and Gods children find
more solid joy in their present mourning, then worldlings can in their mirth
and greatest reioycings. And as for the time to come, we know that our mourning
will be turned into joy, and all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes,
sicut post vehementes Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 6.
imbres aer purus efficitur, ita lachrymarum pluuias serenitas mentis sequitur.
For as after the showers of rain the air is clearer, so after the tears of
repentance, the mind becomes calm, perturbations cease, and the soul is
pacified. Contrition of spirit an excellent grace and we should delight in it.


Since a contrite spirit is so excellent a grace, as brings comfort presently,
and much more for the time to come, for they that sow in tears shall reap in
joy: Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. What a folly is
it that we cannot mourn, how shall the Lord gather our tears, which we scatter
not? or how shall he wipe those tears from our eyes, which we never shed? or
shall he comfort us that mourn not? No sacrifice is more acceptable to him,
none more pleasing to him, none more profitable for our selves: and why then
are we not careful to be more abundant in it? Nemo potest, and in hac vita and
in Aug.
futura gaudere: Necesse est vnam amittat, qui alteram vult possidere: No man
can have pleasure here, and hereafter also. He that receives his consolation
here, let him look for desolation hereafter, that answer given to on, serves
for all the wicked, In thy life time thou receiuedst pleasures, Esa. 65. 13.
and Lazarus pains: now therefore is he comforted, and thou tormented: And
again, My servants shall eat and ye shall be hungry, my servants shall drink
and ye shall be thirsty, my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed, my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
shall houle for vexation of mind, God make us wise, that we may make choice
of the best, to mourn now with Gods servants, and hereafter also be comforted
with them.

VERSE. 18. Be favorable unto Sion for thy good pleasure, build up the walls of
Jerusalem.
NOw follows the The second part of the Psalm, containing a prayer for the
Church.
second part of the Psalm. wherein he prays for the Church of God, after that
he has prayed for himself. His order is very good; to have done the second,
and neglected the first had been unprofitable: for with what success can
thou pray for others, who art not reconciled with God, thy self? And again if
he had contented him with the first, and neglected the second, he had been
undutiful.

For all they who are lively The gody prefer the welfare of the Church to their
own private (...).
members of the Church, prefer the good of the whole body, unto their own
particular welfare; as we see in good Nehemiah: all his honor and preferment in
the Court of Artahshast, was not so pleasant unto him, as the desolation of
Jerusalem was grievous. The wicked by the contrary, like Tobiah and Sanhallat,
with the rest of these Samaritans, are grieved, when they hear that Ierusalems
walls are a building: and miserable Haman made a plain confession, that all his
honor, whereunto he was advanced, did him not so much good as the welfare of
Mordecai, and of the people of the Jews, did him evil. Woe be unto all them
that are of such a disposition; not only strangers, but enemies to Isreal's
Commonwealth, they shall never rejoice with the joy of Gods children: but we
will pray for Jerusalem, That prosperity may be within her walls, and peace
within her Palaces.

David had hurt his people, Repentance teaches us to repair wrongs we have
done.
not only by giving them an evil example, and by wakening Gods wrath against
them; but by delivering a number of them to the sword of the Ammonites for
Vriah his sake: and now he benefits them by his prayer. This true repentance
will teach us, first, to restore the Lord to his glory, and then to repair the
wrong we have done to any man, so far as we may.

Again, we have to mark An example of happy love between a good King and
his people.
David his father love to his people: he had hurt them twice, once now by his
adultery and murder, and after by numbering the people, for the which God
diminished their number by pestilence. And both the times his heart was sore
grieved for them, as he declares by his prayer, that both here and there he
makes for them: It is I (said he) that have sinned, and committed the evil,
but these poor sheep, what have they done? O Lord God, let thine hand be on
me, and on my fathers house, and not on thy people for their destruction. What
a love is here! he wishes himself to be stricken, that his people may be
spared: and they again repayed him with the like loving affection, for when he
would have gone out to battle against Absalom, they would not let him hazard
himself: Thou art (said they) more worth then ten thousand of us. A happy
harmony, where a King with tender affection embraces his people as his own
children, and they again esteem and reverence him as their father.

For thy good pleasure. He neither The Church is preserved by Gods mercy, not
their merit.
pretends his merits, nor his peoples innocence, but appeals to Gods mercy:
the good pleasure of his own will moved him to choose a Church, and it is the
same that moves him to conserve it. Even when the sins of his people procure
that he should destroy it, if there were no more to preserve the Church, but her
own deseruings, or the favor, fidelity, and constancy of Kings, protectors
thereof, it could not continue long; but God is the builder of Jerusalem, his
favor is the wall thereof, and therefore is it, that neither the sins of
them who are within, nor malice of them who are without it can overcome it.

Build up the wales. He prays Ierusalems material walls were four.
both for the material and spiritual walls of Jerusalem. In regard of
material walls, Jerusalem was a strong City, of four quarters, every one of
them by walls divided from another. The first and highest was mount Sion, in
it was the City of David, called by Josephus the superior city, exceeding
strong in regard of the natural situation thereof: the second was called the
daughter of Sion, because it seemed to come out, as it were, of the bosom of
the other, in this was the mount Moriah, whereupon the Temple stood: this City
was compassed with a strong wall wherein stood threescore of strong Towers. The
third was beautified with many ample streets pleasant ports, and compassed with
a wall, whereupon were fourteen Towers. The fourth was inhabited by all sorts
of Artificers, compassed with the third wall which was twenty and five cubits
high, and had in it fourscore and ten Towers strong, high and four cornered.

And albeit in David's days External state of a city depends on Gods
blessing* Psalm. 127.
the city was not as yet brought to this perfection, but was rather in the
building, yet David knew, except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain
that build it, and except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in
vain, and that many flourishing Cities and strong Castles have been made
desolat for the sins of them that dwell in them: and therefore fearing least
his sin had procured a curse in Jerusalem, like the curse of Jericho, he
prays even for the external state thereof.

But much more may we think he had regard to the spiritual Ierusalems
spiritual walls.
walls thereof, which his sin had demolished, and he prays God to repair
again. The first, innermost, and strongest 1 Gods protection.
wall of Jerusalem, is the Lords favorable protection: this is called by
Zachary a wall of fire compassing Jerusalem, which will burn and consume the
enemies that invade it: the 2 Holiness and unity.
secondarie walls are holiness and unity, for an unholy people are naked, like
the idolatrous Israelites, after their worshipping of the golden Calfe, and
this breach of holiness ever procures breach in unity among people, and makes
a rupture in the wall, whereby the adversary may easily get vantage. Now David
knew that by his sin he had procured to be deprived of Gods favor, and that
his sons and servants should rebel against him, as he had rebelled against the
Lord his God: and therefore he craves that these evils may be removed, his
filthy sin pardoned, the favorable protection of God continued, and unity
between him and his people preserved* And this for Ierusalems wailes.

Whereof let us learn what No enemies can destroy the walls of Jerusalem, only
the sins of inhabitants.
it is that makes the Church a prey to her enemies: what destroys the walls of
Jerusalem: No force, no multitude, no policy, nor engine of the enemy, only
the sins of them who dwell within it. God make us wise to take this to heart,
lest our sins make a breach in Ierusalems walls.

VERSE. 19. Then shall thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness, even the
burnt offering and oblation, then shall they offer Calves upon thine Altar.
HIs petitions are An heart to offer praise and prayer to the Lord, is an
argument of mercy.
concluded with a promise of thanksgiving. When thou shall be favorable to
us, then shall we offer, and thou shall accept. Multiplicatio^ then of
sacrifices is an effect of Gods favor, to have a heart rightly set to pray to
the Lord, or praise him, is an argument of mercy. When God was angry with
Israel, he sent upon the^ the Caldeans, who took away the daily sacrifice; but
it is an effect of a far more fearful wrath, when God delivers up men to
the hardness of their own heart, suffering them so to be captiued by Satan, that
they can neither repent of their sins, nor pray for graces which they want, nor
yet give thanks for benefits that they have received: where the heavens become
brass, and send down no dew: what marvel the earth be like iron, and can
render no fruit; but if the Lord look on us in mercy, as he did on Peter,
then shall we mourn for our sins, and if he be favorable unto us, as here
David prays, then shall we be willing sacrificers of praise, and thanks unto
him.

The order of his words If our persons be not first in favor with God, our
actions cannot please him.
makes this clear unto us. When thou shall be favorable to us, then shall
thou accept our offerings. Except first our persons be in favor with God, our
actions were they never so good in show, will not be acceptable to him.
Examples hereof we have in Abel and Cain, God looked first to Abel, and then
had respect to his sacrifice. Let us therefore above all things have a care
that we may be in favor with our God, reconciled with him in Christ, otherwise
all our prayers and oblations whatsoever, are but an abomination to the Lord.

And last of all, we see here Thanksgiving an eternal duty we must
discharge to the Lord.
how the greatest and most enduring duty we owe unto God for all his
benefits, is thanksgiving, he is content the profit of them all be ours, he
craves no more but praise. We want not matter for which we should praise him;
only we want affection: and therefore have we to pray, that the Lord among all
the rest of his great goodness, wherein he is daily abundant toward us, would
also bless us with a thankful heart, that in this duty also we may abound
toward the Lord our God. To whom be praise, glory, and honor for ever.

Now unto the King Immortal, Everlasting, Invisible: Unto God only wise be
honor and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

