A SAD MEMORIALI. OF HENRY CVRWEN ESQUIRE, THE MOST WORTHY AND ONLY CHILD OF
Sr PATRICIUS CURWEN Baronet of Warkington in Cumberland.

WHO WITH INFINITE SORROW OF all that knew him departed this life August: 21.
being Sunday: 1636.

IN THE FOURTEENTH year of his age; and lies interred in the Church of
Amersham in Buckingham shire.

OXFORD Printed by W. TURNER. 1638.

TO MY HONORABLE FRIENDS Sr PATRICIUS CURWEN Baronet, and his virtuous LADY,
peace and comfort.
Right Noble and R. Virtuous,
YOu were pleased to put into my hands a Jewel of great price, your only
Child, I received him with joy, I lost him with grief. Upon this paper I have
spent more tears than ink, sighs than sentences: could my groans have
fetched him, the grave had yielded him. But now, you and I must learn, (God
prosper the Lesson) We must go to him, he cannot return to us: God has
taken but his own, and we may not murmr; my love to the deceased, my
devotednesse to You, has drawn into view the substance of five hours
meditation, and those distracted with sorrows: as love has composed these
lines, so love, I trust, will shelter them: if I may do any thing to You
acceptable, to the memory of my Jewel friendly, that day in all my life shall
be accounted by me a great day; for no longer shall I live, than I shall also
live

Yours ever devoted to Your service Chapter C.

THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
THese papers have lien two years in Cumberland in a Manuscript, which privacie
not satisfying the great affection of Noble Parents toward their deceased Son,
they are now come to thy view. The memory of the Gentleman (the mournful
subject) you will soon perceive was worthy all continuance: Achilles is yet
remembered for Homer; but if I Be thought on, it is for worthy CURWEN; Achilles
for the excellency of the writer, I of the subject: for I freely acknowledge,
the Penman will deserve little of his Reader, but the Gentleman that is
described, all imitation. Fruere and vale.

Job. 14.2. He comes forth as a flower and is cut down.


HOly, but yet afflicted Job, from the sad meditation of man's frail condition
in general, Man borne of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble: and
sharp sense of his own in particular, verse. 3. deprecates very earnestly
Gods judgments, do thou open thine eye upon such a one, and bring me
into judgment with thee? me a man of few days, me a flower, me a shadow? will thou look narrowly upon the actions of mortals, says Pineda, and try them
summo jure, in rigor? will thou set an appointed day for man to answer thee
as at a fearful bar of judgment? will thou open thine all seeing eyes to
prye severely into this creature? This manner of expression speaks thus much,
it cannot be, thou will not do this thing. Thou will not condemn him that in
poenitentiall sorrow judges himself; nor afflict beyond measure so weak a
creature. but v. 6. thou will turn from him that he may rest, and accomplish
as a hireling his day.

In brief Job inferres from man's frailety that he stands in need of the
compassion, indulgence, and tender mercies of his maker. A great part of
frailty here bewailed, is man's transitory estate, and subjection unto death,
man, and doluit, are couched in the same (...). so long as he is man, he is in
pain, he wears away, which momentany condition, Job expresses by
resemblances taken from a flower and a shadow, the one withers or is cut
down; the other suddenly passes away. The one has a short being, and the
other is nothing.

This flower may signify either whatsoever is of eminency, strength, vivacity,
comeliness in man's life, all which like Jonah his Gourd, is withered as soon
as grown up: or it may signify the spring, and flourishing time of man's age,
his youth, which has no more privilege against death, then the grass, and
flower of the field has, against the sith of the mower.

The flower to which the most flourishing men are resembled has two properties
here laid before us 1. to flourish, 2. to decay, or to be cut down, it is thus
with the flower, it is thus with all the glory of man, hear it and be
instructed by it.

First, man is as a flower, it may be admitted in the growth, fragrancy,
comeliness, beauty of a flower, youth has much of this, and our blessed
friend departed had all of it God has made of mean matter, of a little red
earth an excellent fabric; he has put miris modis, blood into the veins,
into the bones marrow, into the limbs proportion, into the lineaments
comeliness, in the complexion beauty, into the hands strength, the tongue
pleasantness, the eyes majesty, and the head capacity, that ex venustate and
dignitate the beauty of man might be complete. (...). Basil. in hexam. hom. 6.

Understand O man thine own dignity, thou art earth by nature, yet the work
of divine hands; the work of those hands, that give the flower out of dust,
beauty out of ashes.

This beauty, this flourishing of the flower is not a mean favor, if any be
lifted up for this gift, we say with Saint Austin. lib. 15. d. c.d. c. 28. it
is temporale, carnale, infimum bonum, yet let the modest know, let such as
cannot hear of beauty without the beauty of a blush know, it is bonum quid,
and given bonis. God gave it to Rachel, and David and Joseph. and Job cap, 42.
verse 15 it is said as a thing to be noted, none were found so fair in all the
land as the daughters of Job, as those daughters God gave him for a comfort and
reward after his patient abiding of sorrows. Their beauty is mentioned, as
commending and setting them forth unto posterity, as mentioning a solace to
comfort those eyes of Job, that had seen so much evil and deformity in his
own flesh, when c. 2.8. he scraped himself with a potsheard, and sat down
among the ashes. Though his body was Leprous by the stroke of Satan, yet he
lives to see the most comely issue of his loins, mentioned in Scripture as a
gift of Gods power, and goodness. The heathen Goddess not meanly did express
her power, and kindness to her favorite to whom she would give a fit consort,
and pulchra faciet te prole parentem, gifts show the doner.

Beauty is called by Tertullian: foelicitas corporis, de cult. mulier. animae
urbana vestis, a holy days apparel, which even resurrection will not diminish
but augment. But let us hear these things with Sobriety, and add comeliness
of life, to that of body. Some read Job 42.15. for none so fair, none were
found so good in all the land as the daughters of Job, beauty is then complete
when it is joined with virtue. (...), give me to be fair in the inward
things, Cl. Alex. out of Plato strom: Lib. 1.269. and whatsoever outward
things I have, let them be helpful to things within me. would any know when
they have this beauty? go to the looking glass, the word of God, into which
all of both sexes should look more carefully for composure of life, then the
fairest Bride does for ornament of body into the clearest Crystal, and never
should we think our selves well dressed but by direction of that undeceiving
Glass. But now when your beauty is truly amiable like Job's daughters none so
good in the land, like Susanna a very fair woman, and one that feared God. Yet
such is Gods ordinance, and man's frailty, you must wither, you must like the
flower of the field be cut down. Hebr. 9.27. it is appointed to all men once
to dye, a decree is gone forth against these beautiful flowers, some lasted a
long time, not the Oak now, as the flowers did once, I mean the Fathers
before the flood; yet all came under Adams Epitaph Genesis 5.5. and he died, so
that no man now may presume of a long life, no not when the flower is most
vernant, Eccles. 14.12. remember that death will not be long a coming, but
remember it without sadness, eamus laeti and agentes gratias. Cic. Tusc. 1.

In the vulgar it is testamentum hujus mundi est, morte morietur, you have the
legacy Genesis 2. in the day thou eatest thereof morte morieris. And this is fallen
hastily upon us, our birth is an entrance upon death, beauty is decayed,
Libitina and Venus were the same, eadem Deaortibus and interitibus praesidente.
Plutarch. Moral. wise men never put the remembrance of death far off, Joseph
of Arimathea makes his Sepulcher in his health, and strength, and in his garden
amidst his pleasures.

The glory then of man must go into the dust, and into ashes, as the flower
which is cut down, nay as the flower which though not cut down will wither
and decay. debemur morti, nos nostraque: not we only that are a mouldring
dust, but our stately houses, our curious works, time will gnaw on them, and
consume them, and us. Yet have we nothing to complain of; 1 Man is in the
hands of his maker, as tenants at the will of the Lord, as money lent, Data est
usura vita tanquam pecunia, nullo praestituto die. Tusc. 1. Cic. life is given
unto man as money lent without nomination of day of payment, due in Law
presently, God has his divine purpose in it. Si mors certae co^stituta esset
aetati fieret homo insolentissimus, and humanitate omni careret. Lact. l. 1. c.
4. de opif. Dei. were death appointed at a set age, man would be most insolent,
and void of all humanity, for that man who is so forgetful of himself now, in
this uncertainty, while he may dye in hoc nunc, I while I am speaking, you
while you are hearing; O how unbrideled would man be if he had certain
assurance that he should not this 20.30.40.50 years be called to account, for
things done in the body. 2 we cannot complain that dye we must, and
suddenly we may, every dieing friend may say to us as dieing Calanus to Alex:
then in health, and young, brevi te videbo. neither should it daunt us.
Socrates triduo concesso primo bibit, having three days of death given him,
underwent it the first, though his Consolation in death was but philosophical,
the Athenians have adjudged thee to dye, and the^ nature: he replieth he knew
not that through Christ withering is flourishing, death a passage to life, that
life that dies no more, vita vobiscum est and de morte solliciti estis? Orig.
tom. 2, p, 443. with you is life of angels, and are you troubled at the
cogitation of death? what is the cause says he tom. 2. page, 522, the mind of
wise men, of old men, is hardly brought ut cedat naturae legibus, this Hagar of
fear must be cast out, if she be immoderate she cannot be he ire with the
child of the free woman, Hope of Salvation.

Ejus est mortem timere qui ad Christum nolit ire, ejus est ad Christum nolle
ire qui se non credat cum Christo incipere regnare. Cyprian. de mortalit. p,
341, it is for him to fear death, who would not go to Christ, and it is for
him to be unwilling to go to Christ, who does not believe that he does
already begin to reign with Christ. But some men happily can resolvedly dye,
who cannot without great sorrow look upon deaths stroke in their friends,
such as was our beloved here taken from us, for which loss, I see your great
heaviness, I feel my own. The council is good, Eccl. 22, 11, if we could
obey it, make little weeping for the dead, he is at rest, sorne we may, nay
great mourning for some dead, Gen, 50, 10, at the threshing flower of Atad was
a great and sore lamentation for Jacob, and from that sore lamentation I will
take my exhortation, that according to Saint Paul none do sorrow as men without
hope v, 1. Joseph mourning wept over his dead father, and kissed him. Tears
do express sorrow, kisses comfort, we must mingle in our mourning, our
Tears with Kisses, not as if Corporal presence of dead friends could still
be enjoyed. Abraham entreats room to bury his dead out of his sight, he
looked for no more of that content, but no doubt he never ceased upon fit
occasions to remember and delight in the manifold comforts once enjoyed: which
pious remembrances are as so many Kisses of present and beloved friends, our
kisses take not away our moderate tears, mourn we may as sensible of our
loss, none have lost more, none may sorrow more then my self: hear a little
of his person, and you will be very sensible of my sorrow.

This gentleman whose Corpse lies before us, was the only, and most justly
beloved child of Sir PATRICIUS CURWEN Baronet, and his virtuous Lady ISABELLA,
of a most ancient and noble family in Cumberland: the child I could perceive
(for I looked thoroughly into him, and may be a competent reporter) was modestly
sensible of birthes privilege; and knew (which much his elders forget) that of
Cicero, nobilitas est nihil aliud quam cognita virtus, which posterity is to
imitate, and perpetuate; otherwise Et genus, and proavos, and quae non secimus
ipsi, vix ea nostra voco.

Plutarch notes of Lysander that he yielded nothing to the posterity of
Hercules. unless they did imitate the virtues of Hercules. and Cicero ad
Quint. fratrem: vides ex amplissimis familiis homines, quod sine nervis sint
tibi pares non esse. you do see how men of very great families, are not equal
to thee an upstart, because they have not other worth.

Come we then to what was this gentleman's own, not borrowed from his
honorable progenitors, if you consider him in his bodily parts, he was a
flower, a Lilly, we found it in his fragrancy, I would we had not found it in
his withering. gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore vir tus, and such
gracefulness had he amongst us, he adorned beauty with humility, and modesty,
and fortitude even (...) appeared in his tender years, who carried out a weak
constitution, with manly patience.

As for his general carriage and gifts of mind, O how beautiful was this
Lilly! 1 for his piety to God, never did I see the age of 14 so seasoned with
piety and devotion, so free from all appearance of faction, or superstition,
the common rocks many do now fall upon. This under God we must ascribe to
judicious, and careful parents, who bred a son in very remote parts of this
Kingdom, almost ultima Thule, which for piety, and generous carriage, might be
a pattern to the youth of our nation, certainly they were careful to avoid
that reproach, magna culpa Pelopis qui non erudierat filium. Cic. Tusc. 1.

His delight was in Gods house, where he sat as you noted, I doubt not,
comely and with attention above the Condition of his years; he profited, as I
had cause to observe it, exceedingly; his first mornings work, in which I
could discern antecedent custom, was prayer, and a portion of scripture,
which he performed with manly and serious attention, he loved the Sunday and
the Temple, and he died on the Sunday, and almost in the Temple, having been
in reverend manner on that day at morning and evening solemnities in the
Temple. I cannot here omit how through Gods providence I walking in the fields
with him the evening before, (as by reason of his weak body I mixed his study
with recreations) we fell into above an hours communication, not as often we
did in rudiments of humane learning, but our talk was then (so God disposed
it) about many fundamental points of religion, and some polemicall; I found
him so apprehensive of reason, so delighting in truth apprehended, so able to
discern a weak objection from a strong, so prompt to conceive an answer and
give it some addition of confirmation, that Apollonius looked not on his Cicero
with more admiration and affection, then I on him. I conjectured then, and by
some other marks taken at other times, that some enemies to the truth had
attempted him, but Trialls are confirmations, to the judicious.

For his carriage toward man 1. for parents he joyed at any mention of them,
was obedient and Dutiful toward them, his wishes were tender and pious for
them, his soul was able to discern they affected really his good, his spirit
was captivated to their will, he thought no thing good for him, but what they
directed; he was more guided by commandes of them absent, then most children
are (and yet I know some good ones) by intreatings or threatenings of parents
that are present.

He well remembered the council of Solomon Prove. 1, 8. my son hear the
instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother, some read
diminish not the Law of thy mother, and so his life expounded it. 2 for parents
of the mind teachers, certainly he divided his soul betwixt the parents of
the body and them, they gave him earnest directions to show obedience to me,
as to themselves, he yielded all obedience willingly, with love, he was never
usually out of the teachers society, which children and vain youth does desire
to shun. So tractable he was to all my ways, a frown would deject him, a
harsh or hasty word would melt him into tears, the man must have been very
rough, and most indiscreet, that had used Stripes, sour discipline was not for
him who never did in so many mo^thes (you are present that know it) the thing
vain, light, or childish, and all this obedience was mixed as I said with love,
the life of it If at any time crasinesse and distemper of body came upon him
(good God how should I forget it!) he would say to servants tell them not, they
grieve too much, I shall quickly be well again, nay when the very stroke of
death came, he would have hid it from me and my consort, but God so disposed
we were both at hand, in our arms this Lamb of God expired, and in his very
dissolution we might perceive his grief for our tears. 3. for his behavior
toward others, if among superiors, it was reverent, if equality, if
inferiors with kindness, and with dignity, for his literature and hopes
therein, had his body been strong enough for the diviner part, he might have
out-gone even the great desires and hopes of careful parents; his memory was
quick and would have been tenacious, such was his diligence; his apprehension
clear, his judgment solid, his invention above his years, savouring of man's
age, his speech was discreet, his gesture comely, his wit pleasant, unoffensive,
his presence delectable, and the loss of him has filled us with mourning,
judge you what blessed gifts were in him all cannot be set before your view,
and all that I have said of this noble gentleman, I have spoke it, and so do
you receive it, not as from an Orators desk, but as from a sacred Pulpit.

Touching his dissolution I have not much to say, I would I had nothing, I wish
that in maturity of his age he might have closed these eyes of mine, that I
might have been so happy to have seen some of the glorious actions of his
great hopefulnesse, His death was sudden. Julius Caesar desired such a one, were
it that even great spirits are too weak to look the prepared assault of death
in the face, or that war, in which he delighted, was likely to give him no
other death, so that he would seem to turn a necessity into a choice, let him
judge that has leisure. The sudden fatal stroke came from an aposteme
ingendered about the heart (as the most learned in Physic were of opinion)
which not possibly finding passage, soon drowned that vital and noble part,
quickly taking, sense, life, motion, from this Lamb of God, by which we are
in grief, he in glory.

But some may demand, why has so much been spoken of a youth of 14. years, a
child of Adam? I do not willingly exceed in this kind, Cicero notes 2. de
legibus: postquam su mtuosa fieri funera et lamentabilia coepissent, Solonis
lege sublata sunt.

But a wiser and greater Lawgiver then Solon does warrant Funeral decencies,
2. Chron. 35.25. and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men, and
singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations, set out his excellent
virtues: Anthems, Verses, Sermons, are fit means to honor, and bewail the
death of Gods Saints.

And for this gentleman, whosoever knew his ornaments of grace and nature as I
did, will rather wonder how in so large an argument I could speak so little,
inopem me copia fecit. why is so much spoken? 1. that we may know the goodness
of God toward a child of Adam, we are all conceived in sin, we are by
nature children of wrath, omnis homo in patre and matre pollutus est. Orig.
tom. 2.164. and the mercy is most worthy our remembrance, this gentleman should
arrive so early, at such a height of grace. honori tempestivus, qui virtute
maturus, let virtue have honor. 2 why so much? it is to stir up young men to
imitation, I hope God sent this Flower out of the North for that purpose, they
will leave childhood, and vanity, they will certainly aim at such perfections
as youth is evidently capable of. children sang Hosanna unto Christ, Timothy is
commended from a child, amongst moral men Alexander the great, Hannibal,
Scipio, Augustus Caesar, atcheived great things; (...), it is an age in which
we may do all things.

3. why so much? to admonish parents that they make impressions of virtue in
their children in youth, when it will stick longest, argilla quidvis imitaberis
uda, never say, O willingly deluded parents, your children have time enough,
they are young enough. Qui non est hodie cras minus aptus erit: you will find it
to your great grief, when it will be too late to redress it. I am not so
unreasonable or sour, that I would advise any, to overcharge a child, or
prejudice health, of which in this sickly gentleman I was most tender, but when
you have the happy opportunities of youth, strength, capacity, use the time,
trifle it not away. magni refert says Erasmus praefat in opera Orig. ubi
nascaris, in Turkey or in Christendom, magis a quibus of ill natures or good,
maxim a quibus instituaris, that makes the man.

4. why so much? to abash elder ones that in thrice his age have not expressed
half his virtues: ju ventutem tuam nemo despiciat, S Cyprian excellently
paraphraseth, multo minus senectutem, the Poet expresses it though to an ill
purpose jura senes norint, and quid liceatque nefasque, it should be so.

5 why so much? to see our loss, Cumberlands loss, the righteous perish no
man regards it; these are heavy strokes to a people, when God takes away noble
and hopeful youth; what an example, what a comfort, what a patriot, might this
gentleman have been in his country, what might they not have hoped in him? But
he is gone, ergo Quintilium perpetuus sopor urget! it is the Lords doing, it is
wonderful, it is severe in our eyes; yet dare we not say why have thou done
this, rather with Job, the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name the Lord, as the Lord will so comes it to pass. This is
a hard lesson to learn, to me as hard as to any, but he that gave it to us in
his word, of his mercy write it in our hearts by his spirit. To God the
father, god the son. etc.

Laus soli Deo.

The body was borne to the burial by gentlemen that waited on the young nobles.

The two former corners of the sheet were borne viz. by Mr George Mountague Mr
Sidney Mountague
sons of the right hon. Hen. E. of Manch. L. privy seal.

The two hinder corners by M. George Berkley son of G. Lord B. M. William
Bridges son of the Lord Chandos deceased.


The following verses were upon the hearse. Friends accompanying the body to C.
Hennage Proby Esquire. High Shriffe of Buckinghamshire. S. David Watkins
Knight with their Ladies. S. Thomas Sanders Knight with their Ladies. William
Drake Esquire. Henry Hastings Esquire.
with Gentlemen and gentlewomen of quality.

IN EXIMIAE VIRTVTIS Adolescentulum HENRICUM CURWEN Armig: obiit Aug. 21. 1636.
die solis.
Domini Patricii CURWEN Baronetti filium unigenitum variorum Tumuli.
Iste dies solis socio mala funera praebens
Nigro scriptus erit qui fuit ante rubro.
Fata tamen scelus est nimium deflere Sodalis,
Ille etenim coeli culmina sancta petit.
George Mountague. aetat. 13. fill. illust. comitis Manchestriae.

Passer qui matrem latis amisit in agris
Quaerit ubique cibum, sed cibus omnis abest.
Pipilat incassum, matter fit surda vocanti,
Clamitat ut veniat, non tamen illa venit:
Sic te dum quaero querulis ululatibus ether
Impletur, sed te non reperire queo:
Ast ubi te quaeram toto defessus in orb,
Scandisti coelum regna beata Dei.
Grego. Norton Baronetti fill. not. max. aetat. 14.

Heu quid agam tristis, summus dolor ossibus haeret,
Cor dolet, a nobis noster amicus abest.
Ista dies memoranda mihi est qua, chare Sodalis,
Horrendo gladio mors tibi membra ferit.
Occupat ossa dolor, stimulant praecordia cura
and nostris lachrymis arida terra madet.
Heu perii! nostrum non est reparabile damnum.
non bona, non nummus, charus amicus abest.
O utinam possem precibus tibi reddere vitam,
lassarem precibus, nocte dieque deum.
Sed quid me macero? quid corda doloribus ango?
namque animam coelum, terraque corpus habet.
Johannnes Trevour equitis aurati fill. not. max. aetat. 12.

How is that morning flower so freshly blown,
Touched with an envious breath, and breathless thrown!
Those limbs like Parian marble curious framed,
Those eyes like gemmes in the silver orb inflamed,
Those comely locks resembling Phoebus hair
Those fingers which with Bacchus might compare,
Those lovely looks as had ye blushing grace,
Ladies, you would but wish for such a face.
Those all and better parts which lay within
Have paid deaths obligation made by sin.
Dust we are all, to dust we must return,
But rise we shall again; then cease to mourn
Do not exceed as those that quenched have
All joy with tears, and sunk all hope in grave.
Yet mourn, lest whilst you too strong hearted prove
Men Censure you for wanting love.
Guil. Short Art. Magist.

Si pia pro vestra valuissent vota salute
chara patri soboles, charior ipsa Deo;
Tuque tua vita, nos te potiremur amate
Curwen, boec nobis invida fata negant.
Nec tua te virtus, genus, ars,, pietasne colenda
aetas, nec facies, pellere morte potest.
Sed tam rara fides, and cultus numinis alti,
advexit citius sedibus Elisiis.
Postquam luminibus vidi te morte peremptum
praepropera and tetigi pollida membra manu.
Obstupui, flevi, mea vox et faucibus haesit,
attonitusque steti, morte recente tui.
Attamen ut sensi divina particulam aurae
Tempore festino scandere templa poli,
Tum laetus dixi, tua sors coeleste, quid optem
quam tecum ut celebrem numina sacra Dei?
Joh. Richardson Art. Magist.

So drops the blooming rose, so fades
The lilly in unwelcome shades.
No want of sprightly juice, clear air,
T'in large the sweet, to deck the fair.
But secret venom closely creepes,
To blast the heart whilst nature sleeps.
And as the worm which undescryed
Nipt Jonah's gourde, so Curwen dyed.
Why thine elected spirit so swift
Should quitt earths fabric, and make shift
T'ore'top the Stars, thy sudden start
Works admiration, and my heart
Led by thy trace concludes from hence
Heaven is thus caught by violence.
Nature invites, but grace denies
Thy longer pilgrimage, heaven espies
Thy rip'ned virtue, to which Station,
Thy Enochs life finds his translation.
Thou'hast paid thy debt too soon, whiles we
Must run on score to follow thee.
Thou did more nobly then dull age,
Who feels the slow paced Hecticks rage.
The Gowte, or Palsy, yet out-lives
The long wished legacy he gives.
Thy soul like elementall fire,
Mounts to it is sphere, and thy desire
Out strips thine have; as if delay
Had staid thee here beyond thy day.
Oh why so soon (dear Saint) oh hear
Thy Fathers groan, observe the tear
Thy tender mother sheds, thy friend,
Whose love admits and brooks no end
Of thy society, envites
Thy longer day: but Heaven delights
Have rapt thine eagre soul, whiles we
Weep to behold thine obsequie.
Farewell brave spirit, I Will not envy
Thy glory, he must more then dye
That means to purchase heaven, thy days
Though short unparalleled, we praise
Thy pattern, he that lives like thee,
Can never dye too suddenly.
There needs no Epitaph, thy name
Is thine own marble, modest fame
Shall sing this distich, here lies he
Whose fourteen spoke him sixty three.
Stephen Axtill Bac. in Medic.

Heu nimium nimiumque patri jucundus ocellus
Eripitur, Parcae sic mala pensa volunt.
Nec possunt flecti juvenili Tartara vultu,
Rumpere saevitiam nec probitatis amor.
Invida dic quaeso cur unguibus optima curvis
Carpere gavisa es, gaudia nostra malum.
Vernantes quare secuisti falcibus annos,
Sub pedibus sternens spemque decusque patris?
Cessandumque tibi quid ni violenta putabas
Vulnere, namque gravi tota sepulta domus.
Respice quid damni nobis inimica tulisti.
W Vulnera nam patitur flebilis ista domus.
Vix possunt animo luctum tolerare sodales,
Et moesti lacerant ungue rigente genas.
Nec tales Niobe duxit de pectore questus,
Vel Priamus, natus cum raperetur equis.
Sis nimium licet vili contenta Sepulchro,
Haud erit vili fama reposta loco.
Ingenium, probitas, aevo cantabitur omni,
Et quem non norunt, secla futura scient.
Paul Solomeaux Gallus Vandomiensis.

Sweet soul enjoy thy happy rest
Prepared for thee, whose harmless breast,
Never harbored ill, but the disease,
That suddenly thy life did seize.
So the apple falls unperfected
By that which inwardly it bred:
What could be wished to make complete
Body and mind in thee were heap't.
Such radiant virtues did appear
In thy rich soul, which made thee here
Shine like a Star, and though but green
In years, yet was there clearly seen
In all thine actions such a grace,
As did proclaim thy birth and place,
To be the only hope and heir
Of noble parents; and a fair
Large fortune did no whit elate
Thy wiser Genius, but to fate
Thou did submit, to let us know,
Thou valuedst not these things below.
These could not tempt the, but away
Thou hastes as if thou had known the day
Of thy solution, being come
And spent in meek devotion,
With winged speed thou did address,
To meet that coward merciless
Pale tyrant death, who in despite
Has ravished us of our delight.
Sleep on sweet soul, whose every lim
Threatened to conquer death, and not death him.
F. K.

Heu mors parce precor paulisper, surripis ipsum
E gremio puerum delitiasque patris.
Non Deus est aliquis fraenet qui jussa sororum?
Est, sed parcarum jura dat ipse Deus.
Restant grandaevi, multis optata fuisti
Cura immaturo flore teratur hama.
Vel mors tu timida es nimium, aut consector Erynnis,
Sternere nam plures non solet illa simul.
Cum tu permultos simul, and tot tristia nobis
Volvas, quo luct^ nunc Schola tota jacet.
Rarius aut mitis nunquam, crudelia siste
Vulnera, spem multam sustulit una dies.
Eludat nullos immunes morte juventus,
Nam quae Curwenum sustulit, illa furit.
John. Hoare.

A Dialogue. Passenger. Poet.

Passenger. Tell me I pray what does this Marble close?

Poet. A bud it is of a new blooming rose.
A rose that would such an odor infuse,
As to walk by none would refuse.
A rose bereaft of sharp and pricky thorn.
A rose as fair, as ever could be borne.

Passenger. Why so soon cropped? why was it not let stand,
To grace the rest? whose was the fatal hand
That did the fact!

Poet. A blast, a chilling blast,
Did nip it so, though it stood pretty fast.
And ere it could its full perfection show
Most hastily it was enforced to bow.
O cruel wind, oh blast unfortunate,
To blast that flower kept for to propagate:
None of the stock is left, the branch decay,
Why did thou then against it thy force assay?
If thou must rage, why do thou not down crush
Those empty buds, that are not worth a rush?

Passenger. Lament no more, thy complaint and thy moan
Is good for naught, for be it late or soon
Both good and bad perish and fall away,
For every man there is a certain day.
Thou must thy lot bear with a constant mind,
And yet not think the fates to thee unkind.
As for thy bud the sent did recreate
Men here below, so it will elevate
It still on high, even to the heavens above,
Where mercy dwells, peace, charity, and love.
And in the place wherein too soon it fell
Perpetuate ever its most pleasing smell

Poet. I hope it shall, and ever from it rise
Nothing but Musk, or Myrrh, or Ambergriese.
And let me now this Epitaph engrave
In future times to stand upon his Grave.

Hold off, I cannot pass this hallowed shrine.
Ere I have paid due tribute of my tears.
Nothing of Horrour's here, all is divine.
Rare melody enchaunt the listening ears
Yielding such sweet content expel all tears;
Come nearer friend who in this dead of night
Visit's with me pale Tombs, see see this light,
Regard that voice, for me no tears, no cries.
Wast not thy precious drops in vain, thy eyes
Ere let be two alimbecks to distill
Numbers of tears for thy own passed ill.
Paul Solomeaux Gallus Vandomiensis.

FINIS.

