A BRIEF ANSWER TO CERTAIN Objections against the Treatise of Faith, made
by EZ. CVLVERVVELL. Clearing him from the errors of Arminius, unjustly laid to
his charge.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the entrance in out of Lumbard street into Pope's Head Alley. 1626.

Christian Reader,
Although my great care in setting forth A Treatise of Faith, was to deliver
that truth which I gathered out of the holy Scriptures, and, keeping in mine
eye, the mark I aimed at, To strengthen the weak in faith, I purposely
avoided all controversies which might entangle weak Judgments: Yet now of
late I perceive, that, as my Labors have had good approbation of the Learned,
and have been profitable unto weak Christians, so some few have by speech and
writing manifested their differing judgments from me, and an hard censure of
me; which I had purposed to pass by in silence: but meeting of late with a
brief confutation in print, of some chief points in my Book, which might
stumble many weak ones, I hold my self bound in Conscience to maintain the
truth by me delivered, and to clear my self from many unjust imputations.
Wherein passing by the Author, and all his intentions, I will touch the
principal points gainsayed. This formerly I had done, and sent to the Author
before he published his Confutation. Therefore he had no just cause to make my
defect of answer a cause of putting his Confutation to the press, as he
alleges in his Epistle to the Reader.

HIS page 4.
first exception is against these words, Many of Gods children do not enjoy
that sweet life and blessed estate in this world, which God their Father has
provided for them. Any indifferent Reader may see his gross mistaking herein.
For what I speak of Gods bounty in providing means, whereby his children
might live more comfortably, if the fault were not in themselves, he
vndersta^ds of Gods Decree, which is unchangeable, and cannot be frustrated. So
that all his Discourse hereof, as many others, might well have been spared.

The page 7. 8. etc.
second, and indeed the only point in question is, Whether Salvation in
Christ, be in the Gosp^ll proclaimed and offered in general to all that hear
it, or only to the El^ct. The former I hold and prove by most evident
Scriptures, as, I doubt not, the Learned will approve.

Herein I have, beside many other Orthodox defenders of the truth, both ancient
and modern, the consent of that famous Synod at Dort, wherein were assembled a
great number of leared Divines, out of the Reformed Churches. Their own words I
will set down, that all may see how I agree with them.

Chap. 2. Art. 5.
It is the promise of the Gospel, that whosoever believes in Christ
crucified, should not perish, but have life everlasting: which promise,
together with the iniunction of Repentance and faith, ought promiscuously and
without distinction to be declared and published to all men, and people, to
whom God in his good pleasure sends the Gospel.

But for as much as many being called by the Gospel, Art. 6.
do not repent nor believe in Christ, but perish in their Infidelity, this
comes not to pass for want of, or by any insufficiency of the sacrifice of
Christ offered upon the Cross, but by their own default.

This shall suffice for my defense in this point. As for further Confutation of
his arguments to the contrary, it is not my purpose to charge the Press with
more Controversies among our selves. Only this I will say (which may be a
sufficient answer to all his Allegations) that all the Scriptures which
restrain the merits of Christ to some only, are to be understood of those
that shall enjoy them: but those Scriptures which enlarge Christ's Merits to
all, are to be meant of the Offer only, or proclaiming them to all, though
many of them never partake of Christ. So then the General offer does not make
all partakers of Christ: nor the Special Partaking of Christ, hinder the
general offer.

By Offer I mean only the outward Calling by the Gospel, Math. 22.14.
which none can deny to belong to many that are not chosen. This I affirm to
be the only ordinary seed to beget saving Faith. My Adversary takes this
Offer for a Promise to have Christ (which I confess that none shall have but
the Elect) and so he spends much labor in vain.

Whereas page 16. etc.
he chalengeth all the Scriptures by me alleged, to prove the general Offer,
to be misapplied, for that he would have them to be understood of the Elect
only, I must refer this also to the judgment of the Learned: with
submission to their censure, I profess, I cannot find any one clear place
where the WORLD must of necessity be taken for the ELECT only. For the
wicked in the world it is often used; and more generally, for all Mankind, as Mr
Calvin, with sundry other great Divines understand it, even Io. 3.16.
in the place where he misalledgeth him to the contrary. In this Scipture (God
so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life) I desire may be
considered, if the World be not divided into believers, who shall be saved, and
unbelievers who shall not be saved: which cannot be understood of the Elect
only. As for Mar. 16.15.
this most manifest scripture preach the Gospel to every creature) to
understand the Elect, is unreasonable. Therefore I profess that his Accusation
is unjust.

He comes page 20. etc.
in the next place to my maine argument, wherein he fowly mistaketh my meaning,
not well considering my words. For what I speak of the knowledge of a pardon
proclaimed, he understands of the knowledge of a pardon embraced, which belongs
only to a believer: but the proclamation of a pardon, must be known to an
unbeliever before he can believe; which is that that I maintain.

After this page 26.
he obiecteth, that there be many other strange passage; wherein he does much
mis^ake my plain meaning. One of the supposed strange passages is, that I say,
By diverse considerations in a man void of faith, faith may be gotten, as if I
meant that this might be effected without the help of the Spirit: whereas to
show my self an enemy to universal grace, and so to clear me from Arminius
his errors, I plainly say, that None can attain unto faith without the
special grace of Gods Spirit (page 42.82.) to which purpose I cite sundry
Scriptures prooving the same.

page 27.
Another of the objected strange passages is, that I make sorrow for sin, and
desire of remedy, causes of faith. But those words are none of mine, they are
his collection from these words of mine, (page 44.) Under the causes I
comprehend all that work of God, whereby he works faith in any. Under that
work of God, among other things, I mention sound sorrow for man's misery, and
fervent desire after Christ the remedy. Let any indifferent Reader now judge if
I make not Gods work the cause of faith: and these, with other particulars,
such gifts as God works in us before faith.

In the next place page 29.
charging me with Arminianisme most unjustly; he takes in hand to confute
Universal Redemption by many Arguments. But seeing I have purposely avoided
that question, and do from my heart deny, that every man is actually
reconciled by Christ, and affirm, that none have any benefit by Christ, but
Believers and their seed: I leave the scanning of his arguments to his
adversary whosoever he be: and I do here testify under my hand, to all
posterity, that I renounce all Arminius his errors: and give my full consent
to the Synod of Dort.

As for these phrases, ( God has made a deed of gift, and grant of Christ to
mankind, yea to all sinners excepting none,) and other like to them, which he
presses against me, they are to be taken of Gods dispensatio^ of his mind in
and by the Gospel: and so much is expressed by me (page 36.) in these words;
Making so free a grant thereof, in the Gospel, to all sinners excepting none.

Any indifferent Reader may see, that my maine scope is, to draw every one that
hears the Gospel, to believe, by this, that Christ and his benefits be
proclaimed to him, and shall never be bestowed on him, unless he believe;
which is far from Arminius his errors.

Lastly, where he conceives some contradictions in my Book, it is clear they
be his co^ceipts, as will evidently appear by the particulars.

Concerning the first pretended contradiction, his words are these, page 39.
You say, that all Gods promises made to the Elect, are absolute, (page 141.)
And again, Most of the free promises of the Gospel be propounded with some
condition. What contradiction is in these words? Are these terms ( absolute
and upon some condition contradictory)? Are not the conditions required in the
Gospel, absolutely promised to the Elect? The distinction which I make of
promises absolute and conditional, shows, that there is no contradiction in
those words. These well agree, that The Elect cannot fail of that which God
promises to them, and all others to whom God offers salvation, shall not
obtain it, because they believe not.

Another pretended contradiction he thus expresses, I take it that the
manifestation of GODS counsel to the heirs of promise (page 209.) crosses
the general offer. Who would so take it but he? it being Gods eternal
counsel to save none but the Elect, which he manifests to Abraham and his
seed according to the Faith; this nothing hinders the general offer, and
proclamation of pardon to the Reprobate, to make them inexcusable for refusing
mercy offered.

A third pretended contradiction is, that I say, God out of his faithfulness
freely bestows that which he offers and seals (page 357.) and that Many do
not receive that which is promised and sealed (page 358.) What contradiction is
it to say, that Many for want of faith receive not that which is promised? God
faithfully performs what he offers in the Word, and seals by the
Sacraments, but only to such as by faith receive both.

FINIS

