THE HARMONY OF the LAW and the GOSPEL.

Wherein is plainly showed, that howsoever they differ in time and some other
circumstances, yet in substance they are one and the same.

And By way of application, the pretended antiquity of Popery is discovered,
and found to be a mere nouelty: Delivered in a Sermon at Pauls-crosse, the 9.
of Aug. 1607. by GEORGE CRESVVELL, Minister of Gods word.



Imprinted at London by H. L. for WILLIAM LEAKE.

1607.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Thomas West, Knight, Lord Lawarre, all peace,
prosperity, and happiness.
RIght Honorable, having at the request of a religious Knight (an Alderman of
the City of London) gathered this my Sermon into writing, and delivered him
the Copy; I was soon after desired (nay, importuned) by others (my worshipful
good friends) to give consent for the printing of it. Which, when I could not,
in good manners (as I thought) farther put off; I was at length induced to
condescend unto: the rather, both in regard of the benefit, which by this my
weak means may grow to the Church of God: as also, that (by seeking shelter
under your Ho: protection) I had now a fit opportunity (long wisht-for) to
manifest my dutiful respect, and humble affection to your Lordship. This your
Patronage, if it please your Honor (as an addition to your former favors)
graciously to vouchsafe me; I cannot but also acknowledge my self herein the
more obliged in all bounde^ duties. Thus, humbly craving your Lordships
favorable acceptance of my faithful endeauours, I take my leave.

Your Honors, ever in all duty: GEO. CRESWELL.
Dated the 8. of October. 1607.
Galati. 3. verse. 17. 18. 19. 20. 17. And this I say; that the Law, which was
400. and 30. years after, cannot disannull the covenant that was confirmed
before of God, in respect of Christ, that it should make the promise of none
effect.

18. For, if the inheritance be of the Law, it is no more by promise: but God
gave it unto Abraham by promise.

19. Wherefore then serves the Law? It was added because of the
transgressions, till the Seed came unto the which the promise was made: and it
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.

20. Now, a Mediator, is not a Mediator of one: but God is one.


THe Apostle (right honorable, right worshipful, and well-beloved Christians)
in all this whole Epistle, does gravely, and sharply confute them that in his
time mingled the Law with the Gospel, and (as if that Christ had been
insufficient for us) did teach that Circumcision and the observation of the
Law was necessary for the Gentiles, that had already believed in Christ.
Further, he demonstrateth, that the Law did subdue al men to the curse, and
therefore they did very unwisely, that hoped for any blessing from the Law.
Yea, God would have it to be so, that all men might know that they should be
blessed and saved in Jesus Christ: in whom God had promised the same unto
Abraham. Now, when he had confirmed this by the testimonies of the scripture;
he uses a similitude, or example of testaments or wills: wherein he teaches
us, that they were too rash that thought it lawful for them to do that in the
covenant of God, which is unlawful to be done in the will of a man being once
well confirmed and sealed; a matter worthy of our best consideration: because
God was willing to comprehend the whole manner of our salvation, under the word
or form of a Will, or covenant: and such a one, as could no otherwise be
fulfilled or ratified, but by the ensuing death of his only begotten son;
which was an argument of Gods goodness, and mercy, full of most sweet and
excellent comfort. God was willing that his only begotten son (obedient to
his decree, by whom he made and governs all things) should be made man, and
delivered him up to the bitter and ignominious death of the Cross, that he
might adopt us into his children, and make us fellow inheriters of his
kingdom: Even us (I say) who, how honorable, rich or great soever we be, yet
are we of our selves sinners, and the sons of wrath. Therefore, it is
manifest that our salvation does proceed and come unto us from the free mercy
of God, without any desert of ours: And, as this scripture does maintain the
certainty of it, so does it admonish us of our duty: which is to be contented
with Christ only, and remember that we owe our selves and all that we have unto
God, who has advanced us miserable wretches unto the dignity of his sons.
Thus much be spoken, as an Introduction into the Text. Now, let us proceed in
the words of the Apostle: who does more amply declare that which before he had
spoken concerning the covenant of God, in these words; And this I say, that the
Law which was 403. years after, etc. The sum of this is, that the Covenant
of God, was so firm and sure, that it could not be abolished by the Law. So
that the Apostles words are as much as if he should have said; It may be, I may
seem unto many to speak obscurely; yet I will speak truth, as the matter is:
for as God (touching his essence) is eternal, and is not changed, so also his
will is constant in it self, and his decrees are immutable. For, as says the
Prophet Esaie, When the Lord of Hosts has determined any Isai. 14. 27
thing, who shall disannull it? Wherefore although God gave a law afterward to
our forefathers: yet notwithstanding, this law, which followed, 400 and 30
years after, was not able to abolish or any way to corrupt that ancient
covenant that God before had made with Abraham, and confirmed it by authority.

The Apostle, here, draws an argument from time: in the which (that we may
note this by the way) appears with what diligence the Apostles read and
searched the scriptures. Many other such like places we have in the word of
God. Steven the protomartyr, in his Apology in the seventh of Acts. 7
the Acts, from the succession of time, draws a reason, whereby he proves,
that what excellent thing soever our fathers had, it came unto them from the
free mercy of God. Our Apostle does the like in that famous Act. 13.
sermon that he made unto the Jews at Antioch, a City of Pisidia: And in his
Epistle to the Romans, does teach us, from Romans 4.
the circumstance of time, that Abraham was Justified by faith only, and not
by circumcision; it being no other but a seal of that righteousness he had
already obtained by faith. In all which is proposed a notable Instruction, for
ministers, to imitate this diligence of the Apostles: remembering that the holy
scriptures were not written by the private will, or motion of man; but the
whole scripture as said the Apostles Peter and Paul, by 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21. 2.
Tim. 3. 16.
the inspiration of the holy Ghost, who does nothing rashly, but all things
with discretion and judgment. For, there is nothing so small in the
scriptures, but is very much available to our instruction and comfort, if it
be diligently considered. And the scriptures are the inestimable riches of this
treasure: to the destroying and confounding whereof, no industry and endeavor
of man is of it self sufficient. But, arguments that are taken from the
circumstance of time, are firm and sure, when men do speak of God and of the
action of eternal salvation; because God is subject to no alteration, or
change of times. For, as says the Apostle Peter, One day with the Lord, is as
a thousand 2. Pet. 3. 8.
years: and a thousand years as one day. And Jesus Christ, (who is
constituted and made unto us of God the Father, the author and Mediator of
salvation) is yesterday, and to day, and Heb. 13. 8.
the same for ever: He is the Lamb of God who was offered from the beginning
of the World, because that in his merit the ancient Apoc. 13, 8
fathers, who (from Adam) believed his coming, were saved: and by him also
shall be saved to the end of the world, all that do apprehend him with a true
and lively faith.

That this should be thus effected, is necessary. For, if we were justified
and saved by any other means then our ancient Fathers were; there would
follow a double manner of Justification, and a diverse, or double mean of
salvation: which cannot be; because Christ has said, that he is the John.
10. 9.
door by whom we must enter into the society of his sheepfold; that is of his
Church and Salvation: calling all them thieves, and robbers, that endeavor to
clyme up by any other means. To whom the Apostles Acts. 4. 12.
consent, seeing they affirm no other name to be given unto men under heaven,
wherein we must be saved, but only the name of Jesus. This may be confirmed
by diverse reasons in the word of God. Abraham; Now, how can they be so called,
if they should be justified and saved by any other means then Abraham was?
Daniel and other Prophets foreshewed they should arise and come to their end.
And shall we then think, that God would be so unmindful of himself, that he
would set up and pull down the Laws of his kingdom, or in those Laws (for
men's sakes) would alter and change any one of those things, that by his
eternal decree, he had determined before we were in natura reru^, yea before
the foundatio^s of the world were laid. the discipline of the Law) was not
able to abrogate the Covenant of eternal salvation, which God (in times past)
had made with Abraham: then what foolishness, yea rather madness shall it
be, that in changing of this covenant, we should attribute any thing to
humane traditions, which God will not entertain in his worship; as being
manifestly condemned by authority both of the old and new Testament.
Abraham: shall we then grant this to superstitious and foolish men, that they
should set down new means to attain unto salvation, whereby Justification
by faith (already confirmed by the authority of the new Testament) should be
abolished, or any way corrupted?

Then hereby are they confuted, that defend Popery by Antiquity; but do
accuse the Gospel, and faith (that is grounded upon the only merit of
Christ) of novelty. Beloved, if we consider the whole matter, we shall then
see, that there are few things in Popery, that deserve the name of
Antiquity: because it may be showed out of credible histories, both at what
time, and by what men the most part of all those things that by papists are
esteemed, had their beginning. First, to begin with their supremacy: It is
manifest it was in the year of Christ, six hundred and seven, or
thereabouts. The Apostles being mindful of the admonition of Christ, never
thought of any such matter, neither amongst their successors was there any
contention about the supremacy, until the days of the Emperor Mauritius,
when John the Patriarch Popish supremacy.
of Constantinople, an ambitious man, calling a synod, determined that the
Supremacy ought to belong to the Church of Constantinople; that like as all
the Christian world was subject to the Emperor of that place: so in like sort
all Churches ought to acknowledge the Patriarch of that City, for the
universal pastor and chief Priest. This was in the year of Christ five
hundred fourscore and five. Against the ambition of this man, Pelagius the
second, being then Bishop of Rome, opposed himself, and by letters written to
the Synod disallowed and abolished this decree. His words are thus recited,
Decret. Distinct. 99. Cap. 4.
Nullus Patriarcharum vniuersalitis vocabulo vnqua^ vtatur; Quiae si vnus
patriarcha vniuersalis dicitur, patriarcharum nomen caeteris derogatur. That is
to say, Let no Patriark hereafter use the word of Universality; for if any be
called universal Patriarch, the name of Patriarch, is taken away from the rest.

But when this Patriarch of Constantinople for all this would not cease his
ambition, then Gregory the first, (whom we commonly call Gregory the great)
more strongly opposed himself against his pride; and by many Epistles written
to the Emperor Mauritius, to the Empress Constantia, to the Bishops of
Alexandria and Antioche, he calls the Title of the Universal Priest a new
Title, foolish, proud, perverse, wicked, and profane: to which if they did
yield, were all one as to deny the faith.

And amongst other things, he thus writes; Ego fidenter dico, quia quisquis se
vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat, vel in elatione Libro. 6. Epist. 30
sua vocari desiderat, antichristum praecurrit. I speak it bouldly, whosoever
calls himself Universal Priest, or desires in the pride of his heart so to
be called, is the forerunner of Antichrist.

And that this was true, the event afterward declared. For, this proud
Patriarch by his ambition gave occasion to Boniface the third, that was Pope
next but one after Gregory, that (being puffed up with the like pride) he
demanded, yea, and obtained of the Emperor Phocas, still being imbrewed in the
blood of his Master Mauritius, the supremacy over other Bishops, that the
Church of Rome should be called the head of all Churches, and all the Churches
of the whole world, should be obedient to the Pope of Rome. This same murderer
Phocas, hated of all men for his cruelty, seems to give consent to the
ambition of this Boniface, to the end he might have the Romans obedient unto
him.

But how unluckily, and unfortunately, this happened to the Church, not only
the event and profaning of the holy things and of all religion which then
followed did declare; but also many sad and sorrowful prodigies, terrifying
the minds and hearts of men, did demonstrate: all which are recorded in ancient
histories. For, a burning Comet appeared, a child was borne at Bizantium
having four Annal. Palmer.
feet: another without eyes and hands, whose inferior parts from the loins
downward, were like a fish; bloody spears appeared all the night: God
witnessing thereby, that the fatal time was now at hand, wherein the Popes or
Bishops of Rome, who ought to follow celestial things and teach all men to
lift up their hearts and minds unto God, were now degenerated into four footed
beasts, and the Church (deprived of her lights and of her hands, that is to
say, destitute of faithful Seers, trusty guides, and vigilant watchmen)
should now as a fish swim and floate amongst the waves of the world and
unstable alterations of superstitions, For, such Bishops followed, as troubled
the whole world with great wars and cruel murders, and usurped to
themselves an authoririe or power over Emperors and Kings. Let the Popes of
Rome then by their flatterers, Jesuits, and Seminaries, boast and spread
abroad the antiquity of their supremacy, which (all histories being
considered) had no being before the days of Boniface the third: neither can
they bring forth any other author of the same, but only Phocas; then whom
amongst the Emperors, that professed the name of Christ, none lived that was
more wicked, nor more cruelly minded. I so speak of him, because to make
himself Emperor (as he did) he murdered Mauritius, his Lord and Christian
Emperor. Is then the supremacy of the Pope so new? but newer are those
things whereby superstitious men do measure religion in popery; amongst which
the worshipping of Images is chiefest. Every Images.
one knows, that God in the old Testament forbade Images: and Christ
teaches us that the same was ratified in the new Testament, when he says
that he came not to abolish the Law, or to Mat. 5. 17 1. Io. 5. 21
break the commandments of the Law, but to fulfill them: to whom consents
the Apostle John; saying, Babes keep your selves from Idols. It is manifest in
the Primitive Church, there were no Images at all tolerated, no not so much as
of Christ. Ierenaeus an ancient writer, about Ire. lib. 1. cap. 24.
the year of Christ, 185. makes mention of the Gnostickes, that they had the
Imamages of Christ, which they proposed to be worshipped with the Images of
Pithagoras, Plato and other Philosophers: but this father condemns and
reproues the same in them. Known is the action of Epiphanius, Bishop of
Salamina in Cipres: which in an Epistle written to John the Bishop of
Jerusalem (Saint Jerome being the Latin Translater thereof) is thus cited; When
I came (says he) to a Village that was called Anablatlia, and there passed-by,
seeing a candle burning, demanding what place it was, and understanding that
it was a Church, I went in, to pray.

Now, there I found hanging, behind the doors of the Church, a veil washed
and painted, and having an Image as it were of Christ or some other Saint; for
I do not well remember whose Image it was. Therefore, when I saw in the
Church of Christ, contrary to the Authority of the scriptures, the Image of a
man hanging, I cut it down, and gave commandment to the keepers of the same
place, that therewith they should bury some poor man. And a little after in
the same Epistle, Precor vt iubeas presbyteros eiusdem loci deinceps
praecipere, in ecclesiae Christi istiusmodi vela quae contra religionem nostram
veniunt, non appendi. These things then do demonstrate and declare how the
Fathers of ancient time understood the commandment of God concerning Images,
when as Epiphanius does affirm the Images of Christ to be against the
authority of the scriptures and enemies to Christian religion.

But, after the supremacy of the Popes before spoken of was confirmed, Images
also crept into the Church about the year of Christ 707, by Constantine the
first, for hate of the Emperor Philip. By which action grew great
contention, in the whole Empire, and at the last was the occasion, that the
Greek fell from the Latin Church: In which schism the Turkish Empire
increased, which GOD ever from that day has used as his rods and scourges
to purge the filthiness of Idolatry.

And yet for all this, foolish and superstitious men, do reckon the
worshipping of Images amongst the exercises of ancient and Catholic religion,
oppressing and burdening us with the name of novelty, because we condemn
this worship, and would rid it away by the authority of the word of God.
But now let us come to their Mass, the supporter and pillar of their popish
kingdom: Mass invented and increased.
The author hereof they feign Jesus Christ to be, constantly affirming that all
the Apostles, but especially Peter and James, celebrated the Mass. Now how
frivolous this is, every man may easily know, that does but consider the
Euanglicall history and the writings of the Apostles. Christ instituted his
supper in remembrance of his death, in that form 1. Cor. 11. 23.
and manner, that the Apostles after delivered it to the Church. But what
communion can this mystical supper have with the Mass, wherein the
sacrificing Priest does all alone, eats alone, drinks alone, speaks alone,
behaues himself like a fool in a play* all the rest behoulding him as an
idle spectacle? Or has Christ made any mention of a sacrifice for the quick
and the dead? in the which notwithstanding they fix the chiefest use of their
mass. Christ instituted his supper in remembrance of his death: he never
commanded to apply it to the dead; much less to offer his body and blood
daily for their sins.

The Mass then is a new Invention, the authors whereof are superstitious men
that have patcht it and pieced it up, at diverse times: which (that we may
omit other histories) we will declare out of Platina, the Popes secretary.
For he upon the life of Sixtus the first thus writes; In celebratione (de coena
domini loquitur) mandauit, vt sanctus, sanctus, sanctus dominus Deus Sabbath,
cantaretur. These words were at the first evident and did, says he, touch all
things as it had been instituted by Christ.

Peter when he consecrated, used the Lords prayer. Saint James the Bishop of
Jerusalem increased these mysteries: Basil increased the^: others increased
them. First Peter consecrated; a new word, whereof in the new Testament,
when there is any speech of the Supper, the Apostles make no mention at all:
neither by it can any other thing be understood, but only the reciting of the
first Institution and words of Christ which he used when he delivered bread
and wine to his Disciples. Again, the ancient fathers never knew any other
consecration but only that wherein common bread was made mystical, and a
sacrament or sign of the body of Christ, as touching the use of it; and not
that the substance of it was turned into the substance of a fleshly body.
Secondly, he says, that Saint James increased these mysteries; James had
added any thing to the institution of Christ, he had been too bold, and also
had sinned against the Law of Christ, who had commanded his Disciples to
teach no other thing, but that which he had delivered unto them. Secondly, if
the Matt. 28. 20.
Apostles had suffered any such matter, they had been unfaithful in their
office, and had neglected the Church; which Christ will have free from burden
of humane traditions. But the writings and actions of the Apostles do teach
us to judge far otherwise of them. When the Corinthians had changed the
mystical Supper of CHRIST into a luxurious or want on banquet; Saint Paul
testifies, that he delivered nothing unto them, but that which he had
received from Christ: recalling them in such sort to the first institution,
that in the history thereof he differs not one word from those things that
other Evangelists had delivered; and pronounces all them to be accursed
(whether they be men or Angels) Gal. 1. 8
that durst add any thing to the Gospel already preached by the Apostles.

And shall we then think, that he would tolerate so filthy a profaning of
the mystical Supper, who withstoode Gal. 2 11
Peter to the face, when he (as touching the conversation of life) something
varied from the truth of the Gospel?

Most vain therefore and foolish, is all that the Popes speak concerning the
Apostles, that they instituted or celebrated their Mass. But let us return to
Platina, that the vanity hereof may be more apparent. For, when he had said
that others increased it, he adds; for, Celestinus gave the Introit: Gregory
the Kyrielison: Symmacchus the Gloria in excelsis deo: Gregory the third to
the secret of the Mass, Quorum solennitas hodie in conspectu tuae maiestatis
celebratur, domine Deus noster in toto orb terrarum: Alleluia was taken out of
the Church of Jerusalem: the Creed in the Council of Niece: Pelagius the
Commemoration of the dead: Leo the third, Frankincense: Innocent the first, the
kissing of the Pax: Sergius, the Agnus dei. Nicolas the first, the Sequences:
Gelasius Africanus (as says Nauclerus) the Hymns, Collects, Responsories,
Graduals and Prefaces: Jerome, the Epistle and Gospel: Leo the first, Orate
pro me fratres and the Deo gratias, the Cannon also sanctum sacrificium
immaculatam hostiam, etc. Now, beloved, if all these things, which Platina and
others affirm to have been instituted at diverse times, and by sundry men,
were taken from the Mass, what I beseech you would be therein remaining, that
should deserve the name of a mass or a sacrifice? Why then should that be
called an ancient faith or religion, whose chief foundation being first laid
many years after Christ's Ascension into heaven, was afterward confirmed by
new rubbish being added unto it?

But admit, that some of those things, of the which we have hitherto spoken,
being added to the institution of Christ, are in some sort tolerable; yet our
ancient fathers were altogether ignorant of the Corporal presence of Christ
in his Supper, and transsubstantiation of bread into his body, whereupon the
authority of the Mass depends.

The first disputation here of was in the Bertram
year of grace 844. as may be gathered out of the books of Bertram, which he
writ at the commandment of Carolus Calvus concerning that matter. Then
Sergius the second, who was the first that changed his name sat in the Romish
sea; Sergius 2. Pope.
For, whereas before he was Pope he was called Os porci, swines-mouth: he
then took upon him the name of Sergius: by which action God was willing to
testify to the whole world, what a boar should come out of the Forest, whom
David affirms Psalm. 80. 13.
to be the destroyer and waster of the Church; and that the time of defection
was at hand, wherein they that by baptism had given their names unto Christ,
by denying him should follow after superstitions. For, ten years after
ascended into that place a womanish harlot to be Pope, having to name John the
eight, or rather Ioane the first. God manifesting thereby, that now that harlot
began to show her self whereof Apoc. 17. 3.
Christ had prophesied in the Revelation.

But as yet they were not able to persuade all men to worship this their new
Idol: but always GOD sent some to testify of the truth, until in the year
of Christ 1215, under Innocentius the third in the Council of Lateran there
was a decree made concerning Transubstantiation, which in the Decretals is thus
read; Vna est fidelium vniuersalis ecclesia, extra quam nullus omnino
saluatur: in qua idem ipse sacerdos est sacrificium, Jesus Christus, cuius
corpus and sanguis in sacramento altaris sub speciebus panis and vini veraciter
continentur; transubstantiatis pane in corpus, and vino in sanguinem, potestate
diuina: vt ad perficiendum mysterium vnitatis accipiamus ipsi de suo, quod
accepit ille de nostro.

There is one universal Church of the faithful, without which none can be
saved: wherein the Priest himself Christ Jesus is the sacrifice, whose body
and blood in the sacrament of the Altar under the forms of bread and wine are
truly contained; the bread being transubstantiated into his body, and the
wine into his blood, by a divine power: and that the unity of this mystery
might be effected, we receive from him that which he took from us.

In the same Council also was constituted Auricular confession: whereby men of
every state and degree being fast chayned together as with fetters and linkes
of Iron, durst never speak against the decrees of the Romish Church. Ten
years after that, Honorius the third, commanded dark places, or Chestes to
be made, wherein the bread already consecrated (or rather as they speak
transubstantiated into the body of Christ) was reserved to be worshipped:
which without all doubt are those secret places whereof Christ speaks, Mat.
24. 23.
commanding us not to believe them, who show us Christ to be contained in
them.

And to fulfill and finish all this superstition, Urban the fourth in honor
Urban. 4. invented the Feast of Corpus Christ. 1264.
of this sacrament, at the request of a Recluse (with whom, in times past, he
had been overmuch familiar) invented the solemn Feast, which they call Corpus
Christi. Who is it then that can affirm the whole worship of the Mass to be
ancient, seeing it has not always been in the Church? neither has it been
instituted and received at one time; but, being brought in by little and
little, was augmented with new additions daily. So to that to the Mass
neither less nor more has happened then to a pilgrims scrippe or to an old
cloak of a beggar, that beggeth from door to door: upon such a Cloak, the
elder that it is, the more patches do they set upon it; so that in time,
nothing is seen, but here a little piece, and there another of the cloth
whereof it was first made. And this clothe is so used, so wasted, so
discolored, and so without being, that it no way appears to be that which it
was. In this cloak are not seen but patches of cloth corrupt and rotten, very
ill placed and worse sowed together; so that it causes loathing to those that
have bin delicately brought up. Such another cloak is the Popish Mass. The
cloth whereof it was made, was the Supper of the Lord: which, men not
celebrating according to the institution of Christ, waxed old, lost it color,
being nothing worth. Then comes one and casts a piece unto it: afterward,
comes another and casts unto it, etc. So that now it is not the Supper of the
Lord, but the mass of the Pope: now it is not the robe of an honorable man,
but the cloak of a shameless beggar. In conclusion, their Mass is their
Helen, for whom they trouble the whole world.

What we have spoken of all the aforesaid popish trumperies, the like may also
be said of the Invocation of Saints: Invocation of Saints.
which they can prove by no testimony nor example of the scripture. For, by
the scripture we are taught to invoke one God, through the only Mediator
Christ Jesus: neither has any one of the Saints either of the old or new
Testament, being alive, prayed unto any of the Saints in heaven. Now the
Leyturgie (which Durandus makes to be twofolde: to wit, the mayor and the
minor) is also confessed to be instituted by men: the one by Mamertus under the
reign of Zeno, in the year of Christ, four hundred foure-score and ten; the
other by Gregory the great, in the year of Christ five hundred fourscore and
ten. The hymn of Salve regina, was made by Hermannus Contractus: and
Gregory the ninth commanded it to be sung to the praise of the Virgin at
certain hours of the day; in the year of Christ 1241. The very same may be
spoken of the whole worship of the Saints: which how great soever it is, yet
it is nothing but only the invention of superstitious men.

But, if we should come unto other points of their popish religion, as of
monkish orders, choice of meats, single life of their Priests, fire of
Purgatory, prayer for the dead, satisfactions, popish pardons, and multitudes
of such matters; it would then appear, that they were all the inventions of
man, and had their beginning when the pure doctrine of the truth was for the
most part extinguished, by the corruptions and traditions of men. In conclusion
then, if the law, which was 400 and 30 years after the promise, was not able
to disannull the covenant that was confirmed before of God in respect of
Christ, to make the promise of none effect; much less the Popes supremacy,
the worshipping of Images, the sacrifice of the Mass, the invocation of
Saints, or any popish superstition whatsoever shall be able to corrupt,
abrogate or disannull it, but that the promise should be performed to the
seed of Abraham; that is, to the faithful in all ages.

That then, which we our selves must hold concerning faith only justifying,
and the sole savior Christ Jesus, is all grounded upon the eternal covenant
of God, which in the beginning was made with our first parents: Secondly,
renewed with Abraham: Thirdly, set forth by the Prophets: Fourthly, confirmed
and fulfilled in the death of the Son: And lastly, divulged by the ministry
of the Apostles, through the whole world. This faith was kept by all those that
pleased and served God before the coming of Christ in the flesh; the martyrs
sealing the same with their blood. Who the^ ca^ deny, but that the Papists do
wickedly and shamefully sla^der us, who tax us with nouelty, because they would
under a lying title of antiquity thrust upon the common sort their popish
superstitions: which indeed are new, and altogether unknown unto Antiquity.

But it is more then time for us to come to our Apostle: who, being about to
confirm that which before he had spoken, says; for, if the enheritance be of
the law, it is no more by promise: but God gave the inheritance to Abraham by
promise. In which words the Apostle opposes the law and the promise one
against another, as things contrary, and divided, which cannot stand the other in
the cause and action of our Justification. For, the law requires works,
saying, Qui fecerit ista praecepta, viuet in eis: Lev. 18. 5
he that shall do these commandments, shall live in them: but the promise
requires that we should believe; neither is it apprehended by any other means
then by faith. Therefore, as merit and grace cannot stand together: no more
can the law and the promise. To set forth the sense of the words, we will
frame this argument; If we deserve the inheritance of life by the works of
the law, then it is not obtained freely, nor by faith only. But God gave the
inheritance unto Abraham by promise. Therefore, this inheritance comes unto us
not by merit, but by the free promise of God. The Apostle co^firmes this
argument by the word of giving; whereby is understood a free gift: and every
gift excludes all merit of every work whatsoever on our part.

Again, the Apostle fitly uses the example of Abraham; because he did not
sustain a private but a public person, in whom God was willing to propose to
the whole world an example of all that were to be saved, together with an
assured and common means of salvation to all the elect. The Apostle handling
this example in the Romans, after the same says thus* Romans 4. 23. 24
Now it was not written for him only, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness; but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed for righteousness,
which believe in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead: which was the
very cause that those promises that were made unto Abraham are extended unto
the seed of Abraham; that is, unto all the posterity of Gods children. For,
unless it were so, there would be no profit of that sacred and holy history.
But at this instant the Apostle does thus strongly urge this example of
Abraham, that he might press and beat to the ground the hautinesse of the
confidence of the Jews: who whereas they boasted themselves to be the
children of Abraham, yet would they not enter into the inheritance promised,
by the faith that Abraham did: The Apostle therefore teaches them, that whilst
they urged the righteousness of the law, they did (as much as in them lay)
frustrate and make void the covenant and promise of God, in which all their
dignity did consist.

As this was an error in the Jews, so is it no less in the Papists, who
would be accounted the only worshippers of the Saints, and the maintainers of
their glory. For, whilst that they enuiously contend against us for the same,
they do euert and confound their doctrine, and do very far vary from the
example of faith and life, wherein the Saints went before us.

But, if they will maintain the cause of the Saints; why do they not hear
the Apostles? who knew no other thing but Jesus Christ and him crucified; 1.
Cor. 2. 2 Act. 4. 12
affirming no name to be given unto men under heaven, wherein we must be
saved, but only the name of Jesus. Why do they not obey the Virging Ioh. 2. 5.
Marie, speaking of CHRIST, and saying; Whatsoever he says unto you, do it.
He himself commaundes Mat 1. 28 Ioh. 14. 6.
all that do labor and are heavy laden, to come unto him; testifying
himself only to be the way whereby we must come unto the Father. All this
truly considered, then I conclude thus; that our justification and salvation
is by the Apostles so ascribed unto the free mercy of GOD, performed to
vs-warde in Christ, that from thence is excluded the whole law, with all the
merit of our own works. But, our adversaries will object and say: If the law
do not justify, and that we must not hope for salvation by the law, why has
God given a law? Again, if faith only justify, and Why the law was given.
that our ancient fathers were justified and saved by faith, what necessity
was there that there should be a law given to posterities afterward? For, what
hinderance was there, but that we as well as they might be saved without a
law? Again, if we be now saved without a law, and (forsaking the law) upon
necessity must come unto Christ; then vainly has God given and delivered a
law afterward. For, thus the natural and carnal man (if he do abuse any
thing, and therefore be accused) is always accustomed to condemn the same,
and cast it away as a matter hurtful and unprofitable. Neither does he make
any other use of good and necessary things, then drunken men do of their
wine. For, if thou accuse a drunken man for the immoderate and excessive abuse
of wine, he presently will make answer and say; If it be not lawful for me
to drink, why has God given wine unto us? why do we receive so plentiful a
vintage from him? as if there were no other use of wine, but for their
drunkenness. Might he not have spoken more simply, and plainly, that we
should have taken his words otherwise; shall we now reprove God of a lie, or
affirm him to be a deceiuer, such a one as is willing to beguile with
magnificall words? Again, they do the like, that bind salvation to the
merit of their works. For, accuse them of error, presently they will affirm,
that we altogether deny, and tread under foot good works: because they
know no other end nor use thereof, but that which they have inverted in their
own brainesicke humor. Like unto all these, was the confidence of the Jews,
and of such as by them were deceived in the time of the Apostle: from whom were
often heard these words; Has not GOD given us a law? Then, what is the use of
the law, if faith only justify? and if the law be nothing available to
salvation, wherefore (as says my text) then serves the law? Is it not
altogether unprofitable and superfluous? To this question, and so to all the
rest that are joined to it, the Apostle in few words making answer says, It
was added for transgression, till the seed came unto the which the promise was
made. Here the Apostle expounds that which before he had spoken: Namely,
that the covenant of God was not able to be frustrated by the law that
followed, 400. and 30 years after; for, he says that the law was added unto
the promise or covenant. Now, that which is added unto a thing, is added not to
abolish it, but to confirm it. And therefore, the Apostle writing to the
Romans affirms, that the law entered, for this purpose, that Romans 7. 7
the fault of our sin, might be apparent unto us; and that we, better
knowing the horror thereof, might flee unto the promise of the free mercy of
God made unto us in Christ. Again, when he says that the law was added
unto the promise, he manifestly thereby teaches us, that in the action of our
salvation the chiefest part thereof is due to the free promise or covenant of
GOD: unto which, the law was added, not to abolish or take it away; but to be
serviceable unto it, and more to confirm it. And thus the Apostle does reprove
the ignorance of the Jews, who did not distinguish between the law and the
promise; and therefore attributed unto the law, that which indeed was due and
belonging unto the promise of God.

Abraham and other Fathers; that thereby he might show us, that salvation
comes unto men from the free mercy of God. Afterward, he gave a law: not
because the promise and covenant was defective or imperfect, or that he would
abolish the same; but only to admonish them of their duty, who already were
heirs of these promises and of free salvation. But, as the Jews (in times
past) not observing the order of God, supposed that this inheritance came from
and by the law, altogether neglecting the promise: which is all one as if a
son should avouch himself to be his fathers heir, by the merit and desert
of Obedience, and should deny himself to be an heir borne. The same error
is committed by many in the Sacraments. The chiefest points of the Sacrament of
Baptism are Baptism.
these. The grace of Adoption, Washing away of our sins, Regeneration and
Renouation of the whole man. The duty of the commer is this: faith is
required of the baptized, and they are admonished of their duty, namely to
lead and live a life beseeming their Christian profession. Now the
Anabaptists (a contentious and stubborn kind of men) do pause (nay, stand
Anabaptist.
still and stick) upon this last point; and because they see, that faith and
the obedience of faith have not as yet any place in Infants, therefore they
exclude them from baptism: never observing that the more principal and chief
points take root and place in them, to wit, the grace of adoption, washing
away of sins by the blood of Christ, Regeneration, and other things that make
us heirs of eternal salvation. For, if they did but perceive this, then would
they conclude with the Apostle Peter and say, Can any man forbid water, but
that these who are capable of the holy Act. 10. 47
Ghost, should be baptized as well as they that are well grown?

The like is the error about the mystical Supper of Christ. The chiefest point
The Lords Supper.
therein, is the remembrance of his death. For Christ himself, when he
instituted it, shows, and the Apostle afterward commends this to be the
proper end and use of it. Now, unto this is joined the communion of the body
and blood of Christ with his Church, the sealing of our Redemption; admonishing
us continually of our duty, that we should not only abstain from strange
sacrifices, but also embrace mutual peace and love together: All which, that
we might truly and willingly perform, Christ (in a sacramental manner of
speech) has called the bread his body; and the wine, the blood of the new
Testament. Now, our adversaries (the Papists) cleaving to the last words, do
contend and dispute about the presence of the body of Christ, and corporal
eating of the same: and thus have they made an Instrument of division and
distraction of that which should be the bond of Christian concord. These things
then do admonish us, that in every matter we should have a respect unto that
which is the chiefest; referring all the rest, unto such a scope, that will not
suffer us to decline from the truth. But, let us return to the exposition of
our text; in the which are three things to be considered. First, why the law
was added to the promise? Secondly, how long the law was to continue? Thirdly
and lastly, by whom and how the law was given and delivered.

As touching the first, the Apostle says it was added for trangressions. This
may be taken two manner of ways. Saint Jerome referres it to the Fathers that
abode not in the covenant; but being corrupted with the superstitions of Egypt,
and drowned in all manner of sins, made themselves like unto the heathen,
whom GOD had cast out before their eyes; and therefore must be bridled, and
reduced into the way by a law. From which, this sentence seems to take his
beginning, Ex malis moribus, bonae leges natae sunt. Now S. Augustine he takes
this to be spoken more generally; and says, that the law was added to
reprove transgressions, and to humble the proud and confident minds of the
Jews. For, because they bragged, and boasted themselves in their nativity, as
if from thence they had natural righteousness, it was necessary says he to
humble them by a law; applying unto them the saying of the Apostle, Quaecunque
lex dicit, Rom, 3, 19
ijs qui sub lege sunt, dicit. Whatsoever, the law speaks, it speaks to them
that are under the law. Which opinion of Saint Augustine comes near unto the
mind of the Apostle: who teaches us that by the law we are convicted, that
we might have our recourse unto Christ, who has delivered us from the curse of
the law. And therefore says Saint Ambrose, in his first book Ambros. lib. 5.
in Auxentium.
against Auxentius; Iustu^ fides, non lex facit: quia, non est per legem
Iustitia, sed per fidem. Faith and not the law makes a righteous man: for,
righteousness is not by the law, but by faith. That the law does thus manifest
our corruption, the Apostle demonstrateth: Rom, 7. 7. and 9. 10.
saying, I knew not sin but by the law: and a litte further; I was once alive
without the law; but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I was dead.
And again: the Romans 5. 20
law entered, that the offense should abound. Therefore the use of the law is
to manifest and reprove our sins, that men might be brought to the knowledge
of their own guilt. For, because we flatter our selves in our sin, therefore
we will not willingly acknowledge sin to be in our selves, but delight in
our sin, until we feel our selves convicted thereof in our consciences.

Therefore as the law does not abolish the promise, which is the Gospel it
self: so the Gospel does not condemn the law or the doctrine thereof, but
rather delivers the true use of it. For, the law of it self is good, and holy;
finally, the teacher of true righteousness, because it brings us wholly unto
God, and to our neighbor: But by our own corruption it comes to pass, that
we do not only disobey the law, but our desires are accustomed to be
provoked and set on fire by the commandments of the law. Which wickedness of
our nature, the Poet acknowledging has said, Nitimur in vetitum semper,
cupimusque negata. Wherefore, we are not to make this use of the law, as that
by the same we should be justified and saved: (for August. de vera innocentia.
says Saint Augustine; Lex data est, vt gratia quaeretur, Gratia data est vt
lex impleretur: vitium prudentiae carnis per legem demonstrandum, per gratiam
sanandum fuit. The law was given that grace might be sought for: grace was
given that the law might be fulfilled: the law demonstrated our corruption,
but grace took it away. But, in the law we must behold our selves as in a
glass; that being convicted of sin, we should flee unto Christ, whom the
father has made righteousness for us, and our Mediator unto himself. Secondly,
1. Cor 1. 3
the Apostle teaches us how long the law was to continue: namely, until the
seed came unto which the promise was made. By the seed properly is understood
Christ, in whom all Nations are blessed. The continuance of the law.
But in this place the Apostle co^prehends, with Christ, the whole body of
Christ; that is to say, the Church gathered both of Jews and Gentiles; unto
which properly this promise does belong, which is twofold: the first part
appertains unto Christ himself; to whose kingdom all Nations of the world were
to be subject, according to the saying of David, Ask of me, and I shall give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, Psalm. 2. 8.
and the ends of the earth for thy possession. The second part belongs unto the
Church, because that in Christ all were blessed that out of every Nation did
come unto it. That therefore, which the Apostle does in this place obscurely
and briefly touch, he afterward in the 23 verse of this Chapter does more
apparently set down: saying, that the Jews before faith came, were kept under
the law, and shut up unto that faith, which should afterward be revealed.
And in the Ephesians it is said, Ephe 2. 13. 13. ^4.
that the partition wall of the law is taken away from the Gentiles, that
hitherto had been strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and now called
unto the faith; that of Jews and Gentiles there might be one Church of Christ
Jesus. For which cause, afterward it was called a Catholic Church, by reason
it was extended to the elect, of all ages and places.

Now as touching the doctrine and use hereof, the Apostle does teach us that
they do offend and sin, that extend the law beyond the bound of it, and now
seeing the true seed Christ Jesus is already come are still willing to thrust
the law upon Gods children. For, as S. Augustine says, Qui dedit 1. Cap. in
Episto. Galat.
seipsum pro peccatis nostris, aperte etc. That is, He that gave himself for
our sins, does plainly show that the law did profit nothing: seeing it
says that Christ gave himself that he might suffer for us, that he might
Justify us whom the law made guilty: that being delivered from the law by the
faith of Christ, we should be no longer sinners, but righteous, by our second
birth the children of God.

Christ fulfilled the law.
this I answer, that Christ indeed kept the whole law, because he became
subject unto it, when he was made man of the Virgin: and the law had not as
yet attained to his full end, which followed only in the death of Christ, by
whose merit and power the veil of the Temple rent asunder; that all men might
know, that the legal worship was now abolished. Secondly, Christ kept the
law, not by constraint but willingly, not for himself but for us; that he
might both free us from the intolerable yoke and burden of the law, and also
might abrogate that sorrowful sentence of condemnation which the law denounced
against us: because so long as the same endured, blessing and salvation whereof
he is the mean for us, could take no root in us. Nether by this is there
opened any window for the liberty of sin. For although they that are in Christ
are to fear no more condemnation from the law, yet is there remaining a duty
of obedience, whereunto we must always be subject, and which they only truly
and heartily perform, that are endued with a true and lively faith. Now, we
come unto the third part of this place, wherein is showed, by whom and how the
law was given; of which the Apostle does in such sort speak, that thereby we
may understand, how far more excellent the Gospel is then the law: that thereby
it may be manifest how much they are deceived, that secke for righteousness
and salvation in the law. Of this point the Apostle auerreth two things: first,
that it was ordained and given by Angels, or as Steven speaks, by the
disposition and ministry of Angels. And being thus given, upon necessity it
must be glorious: But, much more glorious is the Gospel, because it was
preached by the only son of God Christ Jesus; by the which argument the
Apostle commends the doctrine of Christ unto us in the beginning of his Epistle
to the Hebrews. Therefore as much as Christ Heb. 1. 1. 2.
does excel the Angels, so far does the Gospel excel the law. Neither is
this any hinderance unto the comparison, That God when he gave the law did
speak. For in holy scripture oftentimes does God speak to men by the ministry
of Angels.

Romans 1. 16
to salvation to every one that believes: It is the word of reconciliation and
of eternal 2. Cor. 5. 18. Act. 10. 6.
life. So that truly has the Angel spoken of Peter the teacher of Cornelius;
He shall speak unto thee words whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved.
Finally, with the Gospel is joined the enheritance of salvation and of the
kingdom of God. Now, these things are of such sort, that they cannot be given
unto us by the benefitte of an Angel or any other creature whatsoever. For,
how can he make them the heirs and sons of God, who is neither son nor
heir himself, but adopted by grace? Therefore that the authority of the
Gospel might be firm and certain, it was necessary to be preached by the
eternal son of God. Cirillus makes Cirillus.
an excellent difference between the law and the Gospel. circumcision of the
flesh which (as says our Apostle) is nothing: but Christ brought in the
circumcision of the heart and the spirit by faith. Moses by the law condemns
the whole world: but the Son delivers the world from the curse of the law; and
with the multitude of his mercy heals and cures the sickness and malady of the
world. Like as Moses brought the children of Israel Theodoret.
out of Egypt, but Joshua into the Land of promise: so the law brings men unto a
sight of their sins: but the grace of the gospel has brought us into the
kingdom of heaven. And therefore says S. Chrysostom. Ego Chrysostom.
qua^do lego Euangeliu^, and video ibi testimonia de lege, testimonia de
Prophetis, solu^ christum co^sidero. For, ye Gospel says Theod. shows the
reconciliation of God: the destruction Theodoret.
of the devil: the remission of sins: the departure of death: resurrection
from the dead: life eternal, and the kingdom of heaven: for the scope and
end of the Gospel is the salvation of men. So that as well by the testimonies
of Antiquity, as also by the scriptures, we may see plainly how far more
glorious the Gospel is then the law. The second thing that the Apostle
speaks concerning the law, is, that it was given in or by the hand of a
Mediator. Thus he calls Moses, who in the giving of the law was used as a
mediator between God and the people. For, when the people were not able to
endure the voice of God, then God was willing to make him an interpreter of the
law: and God tendering the peoples infirmity called Moses unto himself, to
whom he did not only declare his law by word, but also writ down the sum of
the same in Tables of stone, and gave them to Moses to be delivered to the
people. That this is the true sense of this place appears by the words of
Moses himself which he spoke unto the Israelites, saying: When ye hard the
voice out of the midst of the darkness Deuteronomy. 5. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.
(for the Mountain did burn with fire) then ye came to me all the chief of
your Tribes and Elders and said, Behold the Lord our God has showed us his
glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the
fire, etc. And afterward, if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any more
we shall die. For, what flesh was there ever that hard the voice of the living
God out of the midst of the fire as we have, and lived? Go thou therefore, and
hear all that the Lord our God says: and declare thou unto us all that the
Lord our God says unto thee: and we will hear it and do it. Here then
observe Samson, in Daniell that man of desires, in the well-beloved Disciples of
Christ; whom the taste of Gods majesty shining in Angels did so terrify, that
they fell to the ground, and wist not what they said. This only argument then
is sufficient to convict the papists, who trust unto the strength of their free
will, and the merit of their works. But to let them pass, and come unto our
selves; we are hereby taught to embrace the goodness of God, who for us
miserable and unworthy wretches so far abased himself that he speaks unto us
by every manner of means. This goodness Moses does worthily commend unto us,
teaching us to make this use of it: namely diligently, and attentively to hear
and perform those things that God speaks unto us. But how much greater then
this was the readiness and mercy of God toward us, who in the end
vouchsafed to speak unto us by his only begotten son, least any one should
pretend the ignorance of his will? Being mindful hereof, let us submit our
selves to his will with all our hearts, always remembering the saying of the
Apostle to the Hebrews; For, if the Heb. 2, 2. 3, and 10. 28. 29.
word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward: how shall we escape if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be preached by the Lord, and
afterward was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? And again, if he
that despised Moses law dyed without mercy, under two or three witnesses; of
how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be worthy, which treads
under foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the new Testament as an
unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and does despite the spirit of
grace. But, to the last part of this Text: wherein because the Apostle had made
mention of Moses the mediator, he now draws an argument from the person or
condition of a mediator, wherewith he confutes them who would be justified by
the law. A mediator, is not a mediator of one; that is to say, he is not a
mediator between such as are at unity and peace one with another: but rather
he is one with them betwixt whom he does mediate. But our Fathers when the law
was given, stood in need of a mediator, lest they should be compelled to endure
those grievous and terrible voices of God himself proclaiming the law: of
which their need whereas before they were ignorant, then they only
understood it when the law was to be given. By this argument, the Apostle
evidently gathers, that the law is not that means, by which we are reconciled
with God: but rather by the law our miserable estate (as before has been
declared) is made known unto us;

Namely, that being separated from God, we have nothing in our selves, that can
defend us before Gods tribunal seat. For God (indeed) professed himself to be
their God, and delivered unto them a law: but unto the same he added such
conditions, which whereas they were impossible to be performed, they did
terrify rather then comfort miserable men. Therefore Moses himself did send
them to that great Prophet Christ Jesus, of whom as touching his office of
mediatorship, he did bear a type and figure. But now some will object and
say, Had God then broken his covenant, Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
that there must be a new reconciliation, and therefore a mediator? But the
Apostle makes answer hereunto saying, But God is one: as if he should have
said, God never has broken his covenant; for as he is one in essence, so is
he constant in himself, and is never changed. But because men do not always
stand to those conditions which GOD prescribes unto them, he deals after
another manner with them. And therefore then also (for matters before spoken
of) there was a Law given, which continued for a time, so long as there was
use of it: But now is the time of the new Testament, when the Law and the
Prophets do yield unto the Gospel, that there might be a place as well for the
Gentiles, as the remnant of the Jews, who forceably entered into the kingdom of
God. I know that others do expound this place otherwise, and speak much of
Christ the Mediator, of the unity of God, and equality of the Son with the
Father: but the whole Text of the words does sufficiently teach us, that it is
not agreeable to the purpose of the Apostle. Therefore let us aim at the true
scope of the Apostle: which is to show, that righteousness and peace of
conscience, cannot be looked for from the Law; seeing the ancient Fathers, to
whom the Law was given, were not able to endure the giving of the same: much
less then shall we be able to abide it, if God should be willing to judge us
according to the rigor of it. Therefore as the Jews stood in need of Moses,
to be their Mediator: so we stand in need of Christ, who^ God has made the
Mediator of the new Testament for us.

Let us therefore acknowledge this so great a benefit: and least we should
make the goodness of God unprofitable for us, let us with a true and constant
faith embrace Christ Jesus; that he being truly united unto us may live in us,
and that we may lead in him a life beseeming the profession of Christ:
applying always unto our selves that which Christ said unto his Apostles upon
the Mount Olive, that Luke 22. 39. 40.
they should watch and pray.

Let us therefore apply our selves unto that vocation whereunto God has called
us: let us watch against the deceites of the world and the devil. Let us
continually meditate in the word of God, that is able to comfort us and teach
us. Let us give place to the spirit, which God has made an advocate for us.
Let us pray continually, that he will not suffer us to faint under temptations.
Finally, let all our hope be fixed and fastened in Christ Jesus, who is the
good shepherd, and will suffer no man to take his sheep, which he has
redeemed with his blood, out of his hands. To him therefore with the Father and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Understand, Christian Reader, that part of the matter contained in the
ninetenth and twentieth pages aforegoing, was (by him that copied out this
Sermon, for the Press) set down in the Margent, without certain direction
for us, where to bring it into the body of the Book. And consequently, for want
of a guide, we have somewhat failed (as we understand since) of the due order
observed by the Author, in his original Copy: which was as follows;

Symmacchus, the Gloria in excelsis Deo: Jerome, the Epistle and Gospel:
Alleluia was taken out of the Church of Jerusalem: the Creed, in the Council
of Nice: Pelagius, the Commemoration of the dead: Leo the third, Frankincense:
Innocent the first, the kissing of the Pax: Sergius, the Agnus Dei: Nicolas the
first, the Sequences: Gelasius Africanus (as says Nauclerus) the Hymns,
Collects, Responsories, Graduals, and Prefaces: Gregory the third, to the
secret of the Mass, Quorum solemnitas hodie in conspectu tuae Maiestatis
celebratur, Domine Deus noster in toto orb terraru^: Leo the first, and so
forward in order, as it stands in the book.

Furthermore
In the 3 page, line 27, read 430: page. 14. line 10, read Anablatha:


