price: 3s 4d

A brief discourse against the outward apparel and Ministering garments of
the popish church.

psalm. 31. I have hated all those, that hold of superstitious vanities.

1566.

The Book to the Reader.
THe Popes attire, whereof I talk,
I know to be but vain:
Wherefore some men that witty are,
to read me will disdain.
But I would wish that such men should
with judgment read me twice:
And mark how great an evil it is,
Gods Preachers to disguise.
I know a cocks comb can not take
from wise men any wit:
So do I know that such attire
is for no wise man fit.
Good minds can not but much mislike
to see good men displaste:
But better minds would sorrow more,
to see such men defaste.
Their persons if ye do respect,
the matter is but small:
But on their office if ye look,
then are they guides of all.
The Preacher is a messanger,
sent from no worldely wight:
But from that Prince that pearless^ is,
and made all by his might.
King David could not take it well,
but thought himself dispisde:
When Hanon sent his servants back
dishonorde and disguisde.
And shall not God, think you, revenge
himself upon that route:
That to deface or else displace,
his Preachers go about?
Yes doubtless, for the mighty God,
will not long time endure:
The spite of such as so do seek,
to work him displeasure.
All wise men therefore will beware,
How they do such men wrong:
As have such one to take their part,
as for all is to strong.
God grant that all men may once see,
on which side truth does stand:
And pray to him for such as be
made Rulers of the land,
That they having before their eyes
the fear of God above,
May seek to set Gods word in place.
and all vain toys remove.
FINIS.
A declaration of the doings of those Ministers of Gods word and Sacraments,
in the City of London, which have refused to wear the outward apparel, and
Ministering garments of the Popes church.
COnsidering how hurteful a thing it is to a christian common weal, to have
the ministers of Gods word despised, and brought into co^temt: we have thought
it our duty, briefly to declare in writing, and to set forth to be seen of al
men, some part of the reasons and grounds of our doings, in refusing to wear
the outward apparel, and ministering garments of the popes church.

First, we consider that the power that God has given to his Ministers, is
given them that they should thereby edify or build up the Church of Christ, and
not destroy it, or pull it down: according as S. Paul writes to ye Corinths.
2. Cor. 13.
Of which edifying or building of the church of Christ, ye same S. Paul
speaks in that Epistle that he wrote to ye Ephesians. It were to long to cite
all his words in order, we will therefore set down certain sentences,
referringe the Reader to the places, where the same are written by S. Paul in
that his Epistle.

First he says thus, I am non estis hospites. etc. Ye are not now strangers
and forreners, but ye are Citizens together with ye saints, and of the
household of God, being builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2.
Jesus Christ being the Head stone in the corner. In whom whatsoever building
is increased, it grows into an holy temple in the Lord. These words does S.
Paul write, to signify that the church of Christ, which is builded of living
stones and timber, taken out both from among the Jews and the gentiles, must
be builded upon the firm and sure foundation Jesus Christ, and not upon any
other (for he was that foundation that the Apostles and Prophets builded upon)
and that the building which is set upon yt foundation, does grow in to an holy
Tempell in the Lord. The builders must not suffer it to decay, but they must
still labor diligently, that it may grow into an holy temple, and that till
it be as large, and as beautiful, as it is possible for it to be in this vale
of misery. So far of would S. Paul have all ye builders of gods temple to
be from the pulling down, or defacing any part thereof.

Again, the same S. Paul says in ye same Epistle. Idem dedit alios quidem
Apostolos. etc. Ephesians. 4.
The same has given us, some to be Apostles, some to be Prophets, some to be
Evangelists, some to be Shepheardes, and some to be teachers, to furnishe the
Saints unto the work af administration, for the building up of the body of
Christ, till we do all come into the unity of faith, and the acknowledging of
the son of God. That we may be a perfect man, and come into the measure of
the full age of Christ. That we be no more babes, to waver and to be carried
about with every wind of doctrine, through the craftiness and wiliness of
men, whereby they set upon us to disceiue us. etc. And afterward in ye same
chapter, he says: I speak and testify these things, even on the Lords
behalf, that ye should not walk as other nations do, in the vanity of their
own minds.

By these words S. Paul does plainly teach, ^^e duty (...) a faith^ll
prea^^er.
that al such as are appointed to minister in the Church of Christ, must be
still occupied in building, and never in pulling down, neither in staying the
reast from going forward with the building they have begone. And that such
should not be so babishe, that they may be carried away with every strange
Doctrine, or deceived with every subtle persuasion, nor walk in the vanity
of their own minds, but be stayde by the holy word of God, and in all things
acknowledge ye son of God, by exercising their Ministeries according to his
institution, so nere as possibly they may: utterly renouncing and forsaking all
those unprofitable ceremonies and rytes, that men have devised without sure
ground in Gods holy word, in following the vanity of their own minds. We
therefore, knowing that we have received power, to edify and not to destroy,
and that a day will come wherein we shall be sure to receive at his hands, whose
builders we are, according to our doings, either in building or plucking down,
or in staying and hindering of that which should have been builded by others:
dare not be so bold as to admit the outward and ministering apparel of the
popes church, til it may manifestly appear unto us, that the same may help
forward, and not pull down, stay or hinder the building up of the Lords
temple, which is his Church or congregation, purchased and bought with so dear
a price, as the heart blood of his most derely beloved, and only begotten Son
Christ Jesus.

We would not therefore in these days refuse them, if we might but conceive an
hope, that the use of them might help forwards with ye Lords building: but
forasmuch as we see plainly the contrary, we may in no case admit them.

We grant, that of themselves, they be things indifferent, and may be used or
not used, as occasion shall serve: but when the use of them will destroy, or
not edify, then cease they to be so indifferent, that in such case we may use
them. For S. Paul has taught us, that in the use of things indifferent, we
must always note, whether ye same do edify or not. For he has said, Omnia
ad aedificationem fiant. 1. cor. 14
Let all things be done to edify withal* If the using of the outward and
ministering garments of the popes church, cannot now edify the church of
Christ, then do they cease to be indifferent that we may use them. And how
ye church of Christ is edified by the using of these things, is plain to as
many as will see.

^mple ^hristia^s.
First, the simple Christians (over whom we should have the chief care) are
by these things so grieved, when they see us receive them, that they sorrow
and mourn in their hearts. And such amongst them as be not altogether so
strong, but that they do yet somewhat depend upon our example and doctrine
(as the nature of man is so long as he is but a Nouice in Christ) those are by
us beaten back to superstition, from which they were before making have to
fly. And unless God do by his spyrite stay them: they shall by our example
in reuolting to those things, which we have taught to be superfluous and
superstitious, take occasion to think that there is no truth in any thing that
we have taught, and so cleave to that false religion, whereof these indifferent
things are relics and remnaunts, and utterly forsake the true Religion of
Christ, that by our labor and travail began to take root in them?

And when we have thus sinned against the brethren, and wounded their weak
consciences, and so sinned against Christ: what may we look for, but that
heavy curse, 1. Cor. 8.
which our Savior has pronounced against all such as lay stumbling blocks
in their brothers ways. It were much better for us, that mylstones were
fastened about our necks, and we taste into ye depth of the sea, Mat. 18.
than that one of these little ones should be so offended by us. We dare not
therefore admit these things, and so incur the danger of this curse. For it
is an horrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10


Secondlye, the blind, stubborn, and obstinate papists (whom we ought by
all means possible to draw out of the darcke dungeon of ignorance, Stubburn
Papists.
superstition and error) shall by our receiuyng of these things be encouraged,
not only to continue in ignorance, superstition and error, but also to
increase in the same, being more confirmed therein by our retourning again to
those things, that we have both by doctrine and example disalowed and forsaken:
than they could have been by the persuasions of many of their own opinion.
For they must needs think, that we, which have so earnestly refused and
spoken against these things, would never have received them again, unless it
had been made manifest unto us, that without them our Ministry is sore
defaced, and almost utterly profaned.

The Lord God therefore, when he brought his own people into the land of
Canaan: he commanded them, al monuments of Idolatry must be destroyed
utterly to destroy all those things, that the heathen nations (whom he had
cast out before them) had devised for the furniture of their Idol service,
least they in using of any of those things, should give occasion to the
Heathen to think, that the God of heaven and earth, had any pleasure in those
things, Deuteronomy. 12
or need of the use of them in his true service. Why should not we then
fear to give the like occasion to the papists, to think that the true
service of Christ can not lack their glittering gear, and that it is more
acceptable to God, when it is furnished therewith?

the bishops aduertissementes.
But this doubt is answered thus, It shall be leefull for all ministers to
teach and to protest, that they do not use these things, as things without the
which the ministration should be profaned or defaced: but only for decency
and comely order, uniformity, and obedience to our Prince. Yea, and the same
is plainly set forth in the aduertisements, that are published in print. This
doubt therefore is out of doubt.

All men shall understand that these things be not enforced, as things that can
not be lacked, but as things decent and comely, and that in the church there
may be an uniformity in outward apparel and ministry, and consequently
mutual love and unity.

This wisdom and policy, Man's polici.
passes the wisdom of God: And it is much like the wisdom of them that
will have Images in Churches, not to worship them: but by them to exercise
their strength in refrayning from the worshipping of them: for (say such) to
have Images, and not to worship them, is a token of more strength, than it is
to refrain from the worshipping of them, when we have them not. Even so, to
have and to use these things, and yet not to have any supersticion or opinion
of holiness in them, is much more perfection, than to have no superstition in
them, when they be clean set aside and left.

But the wisdom of God, Gods wisdom.
who knows what we are, and how ready to abuse even his good creatures which
he has made to serve our necessity, and without ye use whereof we can not
continue in life: has plainly forbidden his people the having of Images, and
has commanded them to destroy them, and all the furniture of them, as things
which he does detest and abhor. Deuteronomy. 7.
And in things not commanded, and forbidden, he has said, that his people
shall not follow their own fantasy in adding any thing to his commandment,
but by the mouth of his Prophets, he has utterly disalowed their additions,
saying: Mat. ^
Frustra me colunt docentes doctrinas, praecepta hominum. Esa^e. ^^
In vain do they worship me, which teach doctrines that are but the
commandments of men.

The wisdom of God has said, Take heed that ye offend not one of these
little ones that believe in me. Mat. 18.
Woe unto that man by whom offenses come. It were better for that man, that a
millstone were tied about his neck, and he cast into the deep of the sea, than
that he should offend one of the least that believe in me.

A wise shippers, that knows where dangers do lie in the sea, will not of
purpose sail so near those dangers, as he may possibly and escape: but
contraryewise, he will hale aloufe, and be sure (if the weather will suffer
him) not to fall upon those dangers. Yea, and if he see, that the weather will
not suffer him to hold his straight course, withour danger to fall upon the
Rocks or Flattes, he will rather run upon an another point where he is sure to
find sea rome enough. And shall we that be lodes men the ship of Christ (to
try our cunning) creep so near the flattes or rocks, ye we put our whole
charge in danger of perishing by falling upon them? God forbydde.

That wise and politic governor of Gods ship S. Paul, would not venture so
far. But seeing danger in the use of indifferent things he says, Omnia mihi
licent, sed non omnia conducunt. Omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia aedificant.
1. Cor. 10
It is leeful for me a to do al things (meaning of things indifferent) but all
things do not profit. It is leefull for me to do all things, but al things do
not edify.

Again, he says. Bonum est non manducare carnem, and non bibere vinum, neque
quicquam in quo frater tuus impingit, aut offenditur, aut infirmatur. To. 14
It is good (says S. Paul) not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor to do
any other thing, whereat thy brother does stumble, or is offended, or made weak.

Yea, and the same S. Paul, exhorting the Corinthes to set them selves free
from all the superstitions of the Heathen: says thus unto them: Eandem autem
habentes remunerationem (tanquam filiis dico) dilatemini and vos. 2. cor. 6.
Nolite iugum ducere cum infidelibus. You also having the same reward with me
(I speak as unto mine own children) set your selves at liberty, be not
willing to draw in one yoke with the infidelles. What confort can there be
betwixt righteousness and vnrighteousenesse? Or what fellowship has light
with darkness? And what agreement is there between Christ and Beliall? Or
what part can a faithful man have with an infidel? And how agrees the temple
of God with Images? You are the temple of the living God: as says God, I will
dwell in them, and I will walk amongst them, and I will be their God, and they
shall be may people. Wherefore, get ye out from amongst them, Esaie. 52
and separate your selves from them, says the Lord. And see that ye touch no
unclean thing: and I will receive you. And I will be your father, Iere. 32.
and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord almighty.

These places of scriptures do move as to fly from al such things, as have
been brought into the church of Christ, either contrary or besides the word of
God. And to embrace and use those things only, which are commanded or have
good ground in the holy word of God. Not despising the authority that God
has given to Princes, and other Potentates: but preferring the commandment
of him that is the giver of authority, before the commandment of those that
have none authority of themselves, but have received their authority at his
hand, and shall answer to him for the use thereof.

And herein we follow the commandment of God, and the example of all good
men. The servant of God Moses, has said: Non addetis ad verbum quod ego
vobis loquor, Deuteronomy. 4
nec auferetis ex eo. Custodite mandata Domini Dei vestri, quae ego praecipio
vobis. Ye shall not add any thing unto ye word that I speak unto you:
neither shall ye take any thing from it. Keep the commandments of the Lord
your God, which I do command you. And again he says, Non declmabitis,
neque ad dexteram, neque ad sinistram: Deuteronomy. 5.
sed per viam qua^ praecepit Dominus Deus vester ambulabitis, vt vi uatis, and
been sit vobis, and protelentur dies vestri, in terra possessionis vestrae. You
shall not bow neither to the right hand, nor to the left: but by the way that
the Lord your God has commanded you, shall ye walk, that ye may live and
prosper, and that your days may be long in the land of your possession.

King Saul walked not in this way: 1. Re. 15.
but bowed to the right hand of his own good intent. And therefore he
prospered not, but was rooted out with all his offspring, and one set up in his
place, that had a pleasure to walk in that way.

3. Re. 12
King Roboham walked not in this way: but bowed to the left hand of his own
malicious tyranny: and therefore ten of ye twelve kindreds of Israel were
taken from him, and given to his neighbor.

4. Re. 20.
King Ezechias walked in this way: and therefore in his trouble he found favor
and help at the Lords hand, and when he was sick, he found health, and
had.xv. years added to his life, and ended his life in the Lord.

As many as have walked in this way, have done it, because they have had and
assured hope of a far better life, and more blessed estate after this life.
Heb. 11.
And therefore, the trouble that they sustained here, has not been grievous
unto them, for they had the reward always before their eyes.

The true Prophets
The true Prophets would never pleasure Princes, by addyng to the
commandments of God, nor yet by taking anithing therefore, by bowing to the
right hand, or to the left: But they did always walk straight forth in his
co^mandeme^s although they did oftentimes sustain great displeasure at Princes
hands for so doing. false prophets.
But the false Prophets did always mark the inclinacion of Princes: and
fashion them selves to ye pleasure of Princes. For they were al brought up in
Gnatoes school, and had learned to say, Aiunt, aio: negant, nego. If they say
it, then I say it too: If they do deny it, then do I deny it also.

Such were the false prophets in ye days of King Achab, who being in number
four hundredth, did with one consent prophecy that the King should prosper in
the wars that he purposed to take in hand against Ramoth in Galaad. But the
true Prophet Michea could not flatter, for he had not been brought up in
flatterers school. 3. Re. 22.
And therefore he said, Vidi cunctum Israel dispersum in montibus, sicut oues
non habentes pastorem. Et ait Dominus, non habent isti dominum, Reuertatur
vnusquisque in domum suam in pace. I saw all Israel scattered abroad in the
mountains, as sheep without a shepherd. And ye Lord said, These men have no
master, let every one return into his own house in peace. This plain man
that could no skill of flattering, was stricken and cast into prison, and
threatened a worse turn: but the false Prophets were highly esteemed, till
their prophecy was proved false, and Micheas prophecy true.

It has always been the manner of the true prophets to be sure that they
might truly say: Eze. 13.
Haec dicit dominus. Thus says the Lord: but the false Prophets could never
truly say so. For they used always to prophecy out of their own fantasies.

Mat. 15
Our Savior Christ taught none other thing than the will of his heavenly
Father: but the Scribes and Pharisees taught their own traditions, aduauncing
them above the commandments of God. Mat. 16
Wherefore our Savior commands his disciples to beware of their Leven, that
is, of their doctrine.

The Apostles were commanded to go in to all the world, and to teach all
nations, and to baptize them, Mat. 28
etc. And to teach them to observe all those things that he has commanded
them to observe. Which commission they did truly and faithfully exec^^. For
none of them preached his own dreams, Mar. 16
but every one of them preached that which they had learned of Christ.

1. cor. 11
Saint Paul says not, follow me and do whatsoever I shall devise for you to
do, but he says: Phil. 3.
follow me as I follow Christ, and look on such, as walk as ye have us for
example. 2. cor. 4
And again he says: we preach not our selves, but Jesus Christ to be the
Lord, and our selves your ministers.

We therefore, in refusing to admit those things which neither have
commandment nor ground in the holy scriptures, follow the commandment of
God, and example of al good men, which were builders of the house of God before
us.

But what is all this to the purpose? (say some) The things that you refuse,
are ^iche as God has neither commanded nor forbidden: and therefore, Princes
have authority over them to command them, either to be used, or not to be
used. In refusing therefore, to use them at the commandment of ye Prince, ye
do not only resist the ordinance of God your selves, but ye do also fall
into that inconvenience, which ye would so feign seem to be most afraid of.
That is, ye be made stumbling stocks to the simple Subjects, who seeing your
disobedience, are encouraged to think, that it is none offense at all to
disobey a Prince. And so seming to fly from the gulffe, ye are fallen upon the
most dangerous Rocks.

To this we must answer thus: The things that we do refuse, are such as God
neither has commanded nor forbidden, otherwise than in the use and abuse of
them. And therefore, Princes have no authority either to command or forbid
them otherwise than so. For this is the power, that God has given to Princes,
To see his commandments executed, to punish such as break them, and to
defend those that keep them. Thus does S. Paul write to the Romans, Will thou be without fear of him that is in authority? Do well then, and thou
shall not need to fear him: To. 13.
for god has ordained him for thy wealth. But if thou do evil, then fear:
for he bears not a sword for naught. Nam Dei Minister est, vltor ad iram, ei
qui quod malum est fecerit. For he is gods Minister, a revenger to execute his
wrath upon that man that does the thing that is evil. We must therefore be
subject, not only for fear of punishment, but even for very conscience. But
this subjection is not to do at the Princes commandment, whatsoever the
Prince shall for pleasure command: but humbly to suffer at the Princes hand
such punishementes as the laws (whereof the Prince has the execution) do
appoint us to suffer for the transgression thereof.

And if the Prince shall take in hand to command us to do any of those
things which God has not commanded, ^e bo^des ^d limits ^f true o^edience.
in such sort that we may not leave them undone, unless we will thereby ruone
into the penalty of the law (when we shall see that in doing thereof, we can not
edify but destroy) we must then refuse to do the thing commanded by the
Prince, and humbly submit our selves to suffer the penalty, but in any case
not consent to enfringe the Christian liberty, which is to use things
indifferent, to edification and not to destruction.

And if the Prince shall forbid any of those things to be done, which in
their own nature be indifferent, so that when we shall see that the leaving of
them undone, shall destroy or not edify, then may not we leave them undone,
but do them to the edification of the Church, and submitt our selves lowely to
suffer at the hands of the Prince, the execution of that penalty that the law
does appoint for doing, that thing which the Prince shall in such case
forbid to be done.

And this is not to give example of disobedience (as it is before objected) but
by example to teach true obedience both to God and also to man. First we obey
God, in that, both in doing and leaving undone, we seek the edification of his
Church. And then we obey man, in that we do humblye submit our selves to
suffer at man's hand, whatsoever punishments man's laws do appoint for our
doing or refusing to do at man's commandment.

Considering therefore, that at this time, by the admitting of the outward
apparel and ministering garments of the popes church, not only the Christian
liberty should be manifestly enfringed, but the whole Religion of Christ also,
like to be brought to be esteemed, no other thing, than the pleasure of
Princes: we have thought it our duetye (being Ministers of gods word, and
Sacraments) utterly to refuse to show our co^firmity in receiving of those
things that now are urged and enforced, and yett willing to submit our selves
to suffer whatsoever punishment the Laws do appoint in this case. And so to
teach by our example, true obedience both to God and man, and yet to keep the
Christian liberty sound, and the Christian religion to be such, that no Prince
or potentate, may alter or change the same.

We hope therefore, that our Prince and all good men, will like well with this
our doing, understanding by Christian liberty, that freedom that Christ has
brought us unto, by beating down the particion that was between the Jews and
the gentiles, which was the law of ceremonies contained in the law written:
Ephesians. 2.
In which liberty, S. Paul willed the Galathians to stand. Gal. 5.
Not for that the Christian liberty does consist only in this point, but for
that this is one of the three points, wherein that liberty does stand.

Christ has delivered us from the thraldom of sin, the curse of the law,
and the ceremonies of the same. By that sin, that the first man committed, al
mankind became so bound unto sin, that none of Adams natural posterity
can be able (without regeneration or new birth) once to desire to refrain
doing that which is against god: From this has Christ delivered his elected
and chosen children, so that our inward man, our spirit, our new creature or
new borne part, has now a delight in the law of God, as S. Paul writes
to the Romans: To. 7.
From that curse of ye law also, he has set us free. For the sentence that
the law pronounces against al them that break any point thereof, is fallen
upon Christ, and he is become accursed for us all, Deuteronomy. 27.
and has thereby delivered us from the curse. The ceremonies also, he has
ended: Galat. 3.
for they served but for the time before his suffering of our sins. Being at
the point therefore, to give up the ghost, he said: Consummatum est. John. 19
It is finisshed. The whole deliverance of my people is now perfectly wrought.
They are delivered from the tyranny of sin, John. 4.
the curse and condemnation of the law, and from the servitude of ceremonies.
We are therefore that people that must serve God in Spirit and truth, and not in
figures and shadows.

Least we therefore should by admitting these things (which were at ye first
brought into the Church with opinion of necessity) bind our selves and our
posterity to the same or like necessity, or at least confirm, that
necessity in the minds of them, which never thought them other than
necessary: we do utterly refuse the admitting of them, choosing rather, (with
clear conscience) to suffer the penalties of the law for so doing, than by
receiving any of them to fall into that horrible hell of a troubled conscience,
from which God for his mercy keep all those that with some trouble of
conscience have not refused them.

^euerall ^oparell ^r Mini^ers not ^ecessarie
How unnecessary a thing it is for the ministers of Gods word to be known from
other men, by any outward apparel, may easily appear by that which we read
of Samuel, and other Prophets, of Peter, of Paul, and other holy men.

When Saul sought his fathers asses, and came where Samuel was, and met him:
he did not by his apparel know him to be a Prophet, but said unto him,
Indica oro mihi, vbi est domus videntis? I pray thee tell me, where is the
sears house? Reg. 9.
When the messangers of Ahaziah met with Eliah: they did not by his apparel
know that he was a Prophet. But when they had declared to their master, 4.
Re. 1.
that it was an hairie man and one that was girded with a leather girdell: the
King knew by those signs of austeritie, that it was Eliah the Thesbite:
because it was not a kind of apparel, that served for Prophets to be known
by, but such homelye apparel as Eliah alone used to wear.

John Baptist, who was a Prophet, and more than a Prophet, wore not any kind
of garment whereby he might be known to be a Prophet: Mat. 3.
but his appareil was such as was commonly worn in the wilderness or forest
where his abode was.

Peter, when he followed Christ into the high Priests house, was not known
by his apparel to be one of Christ's disciples, but by his speech. For they
that stood by, said not to Peter: Mat. 26.
thou art apparelled like one of them, but they said, thy speech does show
that thou art of Galile.

Saint Hierome in his Epistle to Eustochium, wherein he does instruct her,
how to keep her virginity, according as she was purposed to do: does amongst
other lessons give her this instruction for the manner of her apparel. Vestis,
nec satis munda, Hierom ad Eustochium.
nec sordida, and nulla diuersitate notabilis: ne ad te obuiam praetereuntium,
turba consistat, and digito monstreris. Thy garment must be neither to clenly,
nor to sluttishe, neither notable by any diuersytie: least the multitude of
them that come against thee, and pass by, should stand still, and point at
thee with the finger.

And the same Eustochium, writing to Mercella, persuading her to leave the
City of Rome, and to come and dwell with her and her mother Paula at
Bethlehem: says thus, Concurrunt ad haec loca, and diuersarum nobis virtutum
specimen ostendunt. Vox quidem dissona, sed vna Religio. Tot pene psallentium
Chori quot gentium diuersitates. Inter haec quae prima in Christianis virtus
est, nihil arrogant sibi de continentiae supercilij. Humilitatis inter omnes
contentio est: Quicunque nouissimus fuerit, hic primus putatur. In vest, nulla
discretio, nulla admiratio, vtcunque placuerit incedere, nec detractionis est,
nec laudis.

Men run together to this place, and do show us the example of sundry
virtues. The language is diverse, but the Religion is one. There be almost as
many quiers of singers, as there be diversities of nations. And in the midst
of these things, they take upon them no pride of continency, which in
Christians is the thief virtue.

The contention that is amongst them all, is who shall be the most base or
humble of them. And whosoever shall be in the lowest rome, the same is thought
to be the chief. In garments, there is no difference, no admiration or
strangeness. Howsoever it shall please a man to go in his apparel, it is
neither occasion to be evil spoken of, nor to be praised.

The whole Clergy of Rauenna, in the days of the Emperor Carolus Caluus,
about the year of our Lord.876. did write an Epistle to the Emperor, wherein
are these words. Discernendi a plebe, vel caeteris sumus, doctrina, non vest:
conuersatione, non habitu: mentis puritate, non vultu. Docendi enim sunt populi
potius quam ludendi. Nec imponendum est eorum oculis, sed mentibus praecepta
sunt infundenda. We must be discerned from the common people, or other men, by
doctrine, not by garments: by conversation, not by apparel: by purity of
mind, not by countenance. For the people must rather be taught than mocked.
We must not deceive their sight, but fill their minds with Precepts and
Rules. This the Clergy of Rauenna did write, following the judgment of
Celestinus the first Pope of that name. As appears in the first tome of the
Councelles.

In the Decrees also, the.xxj. cause and fourth question, we read thus. In
priscis enim temporibus, omnis sacratus vir, cum mediocri aut vili vest
conuersabatur. Omne quippe quod non propter necessitatem suam, sed propter
venustatem suscipitur: elationis habet calumniam. Quemadmodum Magnus ait
Basilius: In the old times all such men as were appointed to the Ministry,
did use mean and base apparel.

For every thing that is taken for the beauty of it and not for the
necessity, brings with it the reproach of pride. As says Basilius Magnus.

By these places it is manifest, that it is nothing necessary, neither
according to the example of ye first church: that there should be in the
outward apparel of Ministers, any such difference, as we are now required to
admit.

As touching the ministering garments that are now enforced: how unmeet it
is that we should now admit them, shall easily appear to all that will
consider, whence they first came, how they have been used, what opinion men
have had, and have in them, and what shall happen unto us if we shall now
receive them.

For the first, they are partly Iewishe, and partly Heathenishe. the original
of the Popish garments.
For the Jews, because they were a people much given to have a sensible gods
service, had many goodly glittering things prescribed them, to stay them from
receiving of those things that ye heathen nations from amongst whom they came,
and that dwelt round about them, had and did use. But none of those garments
that Aarons priests wore, did lack their lively significations, to be
fulfilled in Christ and his church*

When Christ therefore was come, and had fulfilled all those things that were by
those garments figured to be fulfilled by him: then was there no more use of
those garments: but it remained that the people that should serve god under
grace, should not serve him in figures and shadows. John. 4.
but in spirit and truth.

Such parts therefore of the Popes ministering garments, as have been borrowed
of the Jews: ought not to be received of us, because the receiving of them,
should argue, that we are not persuaded that the Messiah is yet come, which
were as much as to deny our selves to be Christians.

Some part of the Popes ministering garments were heathenish, as is the
Surplesse, the Tunicles, the Chesible and Cope. And some mixed of both, as is
the Albe, or white linen garment, wherein the Priest uses to say his Mass*

It appears by Glossa ordinaria upon Ezechiell, Ezec. 44.
that the Egiptian priests used a white linen garment in their sacrifices. Of
what fashion ye same was, it is not showed there. The like matter writes S.
Hierome upon the same place.

The Jews had also Ephod lineum. A linen Ephod or garment, much like to the
popish Albe. Platina in his book de vitis Pontificum, writes, that Syluester
the first about. 320. years after Christ, ordained that the sacrament of
Christ's body should be ministered in a white linen garment only, Rational.
deuinoru. 3
because Christ's body was buried in white linen cloth.

Of this linen garment Durandus in his third book entitled, Rationale
diuinorum, says, that of necessity it must be had in all holy ministratio^.
His words be these: Vestis linea, qua quibuslibet seruitiis altaris and
sacrorum vacantes, super vestes communes vti debent.

A linen garment, which all such as be appointed to any manner of services of
ye Altar and holy things, ought to wear upon their common garments.

The Surples with the significations thereof.
Moreover, he does in the same place note ye significations of it. The shining
witness, signifies, the cleanesse or puritye of chastity. The name in latin,
which is Superpelliciu^, does signify the mortificatio^ of our flesh, and
does put us in mind of those garments, that God made for the first man and
first woman, which were Tunicae pelliceae, Cotes made of pelts. The often use
of it, does signify innocentie. The largeness of it, charity, and the
fashion of it, the passion of Christ, and the crucifying of Christians, Vitiis
and concupiscentiis. To vices and fleshly lusts.

All this writes Durandus of the necessitye and significations of the
Surplesse*

These words being well wayghed, all men may see, that the ministering garments
of the Popes Church, were taken partly from the Jews, and partly from the
gentiles. And as Polidorus Vigilius, Cap. 5.
does note in his fourth book, De inuentoribus rerum, they came from the
Egyptians by the Hebrews.

How these garments have been abused, Idolater co^iurers and sorcerers, can do
nothing wit^out the Popish garme^te
is manifest to as many as have considered the doings of Idolaters, sorcerers,
and coniurers. For all these do nothing without them. The Idolater dare not
appear before his Idol to offer any sacrifice, unless he be in his
sacrificing garments. For without his prescript garments, he is not only
without hope to purchase anything for others by his sacrifice: but also in
great fear to sustain great displeasure him self at the hands of his god,
whose wrath he is persuaded, that he has deserved by enterprising to do
sacrifice, lacking such ministering garments as are of necessitye required
therein. And hereof it comes, that no massyng Priest will take upon him to
say Mass, if he lack any one thing yt by the order of his Mass is appointed
to be had, his Albe, his Stoale, his Fannel, his Amias, his Chesible, his Cup,
his Corporasse cloth, his Altar or Superaltare.

And if any of al these things be lacking, or not hallowed by the Bishop or
Suffragane: then can he say no Mass, yea if his Cup or Corporasse cloth has
been touched by any seculer person, it will not serve his turn, till it be new
hallowed. Thus joins the Massing priest with ye Idolaters, and is him self
the greatest Idolater of all.

The Sorcerers and Coniurers also, can neither have the instruments yt they
work with, nor use them, when they have them: but they must have some help of
some of these things. Their Aarons Rod, wherewith they work wonders, can
not be had without much help of these things. Their Aqua lustra^^s, their
coniured water (without which no Circle can be made to keep out the devil) can
in no wise be made without Surplesse or Albe. The devils can neither be called
up, nor bound, when they be called up, nor yet coniured down again, without
an hallowed Stoale.

If there were no more in us therefore, but a desire, not to seem to be
Idolatours, sorcerers or coniurers, it were enough to move us to refuse to
admit the Ministering garments of the popes church. but there is more to move
us. For we see what opinion men have had, and have still in them: and what
shall happen unto us, if we shall now receive them.

The blind and obstinate papists suppose, The opinion that three sorts of me^
have of these garments.
that without these things no holiness can be in ought that we do: and
therefore they will not be partakers with us in any thing.

The weak papists, which are contented to be partakers with us, do find
none so great fault with us, as for that we Minister without their Ministering
garments, and startche bread*

The simple gospellers do suppose, that forasmuch as the Papists do hold
that without these things there can be no right ministration: they ought not to
communicate with those that use them.

And we our selves (although we know the indifferency of them in their own
nature) yet when we consider how these three sorts, do esteem them, cannot
be persuaded that we should show our selves meet to occupy the place of
Pastors or shepherds in the church of Christ, if we should now use them.

A learned Father, and one whose bones were burned after his death, for the
doctrine that he preached in his life, Martinus Bucerus
and left behind him in wrytinge, being required to write his judgment what
he thought meet to be done in this case: answered that he could be content
to suffer some great pain in his own body, upon condition yt these things
were utterly taken away. And in such case as we are now, he wills, that in
no case they should be received: as does most plainly appear in that which he
wrote upon the xviij. chapter of S. Mathewes gospel, and upon these words:
Bucers opinion of such as maintain ye popish ceremonies.
Vae mundo ab offendiculis. Woo to the world by the reason of offenses or
occasions of fallings: wherafter many words to this effect, he says: That
no man will earnestlye strive to maintain these superstitious ceremonies, but
such as be either open enemies to Christ, or else backeslyders from Christ.
Hosts aut desertores.

And because it is said of some men, that this Father is against us in this
matter: we set down his words written from Camebridge, to a most dear
friend of his beyond the seas, cited by Theodore Beze in his answer to the
calumniatio^s of fraunces Baldwine, which words were written the.xij. of
January in the year of our Lord 1550. The words are these: Quod me mones de
puri^ate rituum, scito, hic neminem extraneum de his rebus rogari. Tamen ex
nobis, vbi possumus, officio nostro non desumus, scriptis, and coram. Ac in
primis, vt plebibus Christi de veris pastoribus consulatur. Deinde etiam, de
puritate purissima, and doctrinae and rituum. Where as ye write unto me
concerning ye puritye of Ceremonies, ye shall understand, that no stranger is
here called to council in those matters.

Notwithstanding, when occasion does serve us, we are not slack in doing our
duty, both by writing and word. And especially, that the people of Christ
may be provided of true Shepherds, and then also, that both doctrine and
ceremonies, may be brought to most perfect purity. And in the same Epistle he
says: Sunt qui humanissima sapientia, and euanescentibus cogitationibus,
velint fermento Antichristi conglutinare Deum and Belial. There be some which
by most wordly wisdom and vain devises, would with the leven of Antichrist
glewe together God and Belial. Here is the judgment of Bucer, concerning the
retayning of Ceremonies, plainelye set forth, speaking expresselye of this
Church of England.

And Peter Martyr, whose judgment has in this matter been oftentimes asked,
does more than once in his writings call them Reliquias Amorraeorum, leauings
or remnaunts of the Amorites.

Martyr.
And although he do in some case think that they may be borne with for a
season: yet in our case, he would not have them suffered to remain in the
church of Christ.

Doctor Ridley late Bishop of London, when one Doctor Broches with others at
^xforde came to degrade him a little before his death, persuaded the said D.
Ridley to put on the Surplesse with the reast of the Massing garments, which
he vtt^rlye refused to do. Saying (as in the history of Martyrs appears,)
truly if it come on me (meaning the Surplesse) it shall be against my will.
Then the said D. Brockes caused the said Surplesse with the rest of the
trinkets appertayning to the Mass, to be by force put upon him. Whereupon he
did vehemently inuey against the bishop of Rome, Ridl^ (...)
calling him Antichrist, and all that apparel folish and abominable, yea, to
fond f^r a ^ice in a play. Wherewith Doctor Brockes being very angry, bad him
hold his peace, for he did but rail. Hereby it appears what estimation that
worthy Martyr of God had of the Popish garments at the time of his death.
Albeit in the days of King Edward, he did stoutely maintain them against
b^sh^p ^oper.

Bishop ^uell.
Bishop ^uell in his replye to D. Harding in the.442. page against the breaking
of the Sacrament, has these words: Verilye in the house of God, that thing is
hurtful, that does no good. All the Ceremonies of the Church ought to be
clear and liuelye, and able to edify. If these things now in controversy
can be proved such, then will we not refuse them. But in case they want all
these properties (as undoubtedly they do) then by this man's judgment we may
well reject them.

What shall happen to us, if we shall now receive them, shall be plain enough
to them, that will but waighe these few lines before written? It shall happen
unto us, as it should have happened unto Moses if he would have consented to
bring the Hebrews back again into Egypt, after he had brought them out of that
land, and through the read Sea.

We have by doctrine brought many out of the Romish slavery of Idol service,
and now by example we have begone to go before them, in ye utter abolishing
of all those chains of darkness, wherewith they, and we have been long time
holden in miserable captiuitye: and were it meet, that we should now a fresh
bind our selves and them with the same chains?

Whilst we our selves were in those chains, although we did know them to
be bonds: yet we were for a season content to bear them, till we might be
able to cause others to see yt which we our selves did see. And now that we
have by the help of god caused some men to see what these things are, and
have in their sight shaked them of from our own necks, and loosed the same
from their necks also: what should our receiving of them again be other than
a going back again into Egypt, and a leading thither again, of all such as
we have labored to bring thence?

We have taught that which Tertul. writes: Nihil dandum Idolo, sic nec
sumendum ab Idolo. Si in Idolio recumbere alienu^ est a fide, quid in Idoli
habitu videri? We may give nothing to the Idol, ^e Cor^ilitis.
so may we take nothing of the Idol. If it be a thing against the faith to
sit at meat in the Idolles feast, what is it to be seen in the habit of an
Idolater?

We have taught that the popish mass is Idolatry, that all the popes holy
creatures, as his wax, his ashes, his palm, his fire, his holywater, and
other his holy things made holy by his coniurations, are derogations to
Christ's glory, and therefore to be refused of all Christians: and shall it not
be as meet for us now to fly in like manner from the use of those garments
that they taught to be so necessary in their coniurations?

Surely we can not be persuaded, but it is as great an evil for us, now to
wear in our Ministration any of those coniuring garments, as it is for any of
them that do know what these coniured things are, to be partakers of them.

Lest we should therefore encourage the obstinate and blind Papists to stick
still in their popish puddle: the causes that move the pr^achers of the gospe^
to refuse the co^iuring garments of the papists.
lest we should beat back those that are by our cryinge unto them beginning to
craule out of that puddle: lest we should shake off and hurl headlong into
that puddle, those that are by our means plucked out thereof, and yet not so
freed from the filth thereof, but that they have need to be made clean by our
help, and stayed from slyding in again: yea and lest we should make
sorrowful and pyerce the hearts of them, that be quite escaped, when they
should see us by whose means they have escaped, bewadled in ye same filth our
selves: and so bring all that we have taught into doubt, and all that we shall
teach into suspicion, we have thought it meet for us, utterly to refuse all
these things that now are urged.

For if we, that have by doctrine proved these things to be superfluous, and in
the abuse of them superstitions, shall now receive them our selves, and so in
doing (although not in words) affirm them to be necessary? What obstinate
Papist will not be the more confirmed in the reverend opinion of them? what
young nouice in Christ, will not afreshe embrace them? what weakling will not
again inclyne to them: And what perfect Christian will not weep in his heart
to see them?

And shall not the blood of all these be required at our hands: shall not we
once hear that horrible saying that Christ shall once pronounce against such
as we should herein show our selves to be: Tollite seruum nequam. etc. Take
up that naughty slave, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter
darkness: there shall be weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth.

Fearing therefore to lose our selves with the loss of so many souls, besides
our selves: we have chosen rather to venture the loss of worldely commodity,
than to hazard that which no earthlye treasure can bye. Trusting that our
Prince and all other in authority will favor our just cause, and not mislike
with us, because we fear god more than man, and are more loath to lose the
heavenly Kingdom, than earthly commodity.

We hope that all wise men do see, what mark the earnest soliciters of this
matter do shoot at. They are not, neither were at any time Protestants: but
when time would serve them, they were bloody persecuters, and since time
failed them, they have borne back as much as lay in them. Shall we think then,
that such do seek the aduau^cement of gods glory, in the setting forth of his
true religion? no, no. Their purpose is, in us (sielly wretches) to deface the
glorious gospel of Christ Jesus, which thing they shall never be able to
bring to pass.

For though we, like cowardes, should run from our Captain, and yield our
weapons into the hands of our enimyes: yea though we should (like
traitors) turn our pikes against him yet will he have the victory. For he
has the hearts of his enemies in his hand, and can cause them to take his
part, and to use us as traitors should be used.

Our goods, our bodies, and our lives, we do with all humble submission yield
into ye hands of gods officers upon earth: but our conscience we keep
unspotted in the sight of him that shall judge al men. Desiring no thing, but
that it may be free for us by doctrine to teach ye flock of Christ, whereof we
have taken charge: and when we have so taught them, to go before them, in
doing that which we have taught according to the truth of gods holy word. That
when we shall appear before that great shephearde Christ, our flock with us,
and we with our flock may hear these joyful words, Euge ser ue bone and
fidelis, etc. Well done thou good and faithful servant: because thou haste
been faithful in the thing that is of small value, I will make thee Ruler over
much: enter thou into thy Lords joy. Which joy shall undoubtedly be given to
as many as unfeignedly shall love the coming of that shepherd. To whom, with
the eternal father and the holy ghost, be all honor, glory and dominion for
ever.

Amen.
Ecclesiasticus. 4. Strive for the truth even unto death, and the Lord God
shall fight for thee.


A godly prayer, agreeable to the time and occasion.
O Almighty God, great Judge of all, Father of mercy, and loving Lord of thy
flock and congregation: we do acknowledge they goodness, through which thou
have vouchedsafe to choose and call us into the society of thy Saints, the
fellowship of thine elect, the fold of thy sheep, wherein always thou haste
dealt with us in all things, as with thine own inheritance, thy chosen
sheep, and beloved Lambs. For this thy great kindness, we do yield to thee
our most humble and hearty thanks. We do confess also, that on our
behalf, for want of due consyderation of this thy goodness, and our duty, we
have grievously offended thee, not only in unthankful vsinge thy benefits,
but also in wilful and sinful abusing thy mercy.

To holy assemblies we have joined our selves in the exercises of thy word
and sacraments, of prayer, and charity, yet not with such zeal and diligence
as we ought, but with that lothsomenesse and contempt, which we ought not. In
coming to them daily, we have filled our fancy, rather than feed our faith,
we have come to them more of custom than of conscience, we have heard much
more with our ears, than we digested in our minds. And thus with hard
hearts, hearing much, doing little, promising fair, performing nothing in
effect, we have remained uncorrected, not amended, to the great offense of thy
divine majesty.

Of thy displeasure kindled heretofore against us, we have been diverse ways
admonished. For even as thou did leave a remnaunt of ye Cananites, not cast
out from amongst thy people Israel, to be snares, whippes, and thorns in their
sides and eyes, because they did not fully clean unto thee: so do the
remnants of the Remishe ad^omination, (...) still amongst us, to witness thy
wrath against our cold love of sincere serving thee, and yet is not our zeal
inflamed to better. The sharp scourges which we have seen and felt, together
with strange signs showed in heaven and earth, have testified thine anger
against us, but we earth and ashes, are not yet by them taught our good.

The ministers of thy word, seeing our sinful state, have severely threatened
greater plagues to fall on us, but we have tryfled of our time, and not heartly
turned unto thee. And therefore it is, that even now we see (as a beginning of
greater vengeance) their hearts (whose power should procure the correction
of our mischief) not only holde^ in neglect and contempt of that they should
do, but bent also to maintain that they should destroy, to the hindering of ye
course of thy gospel, which they should set forward.

Are not the relics of Romish Idolatry stoutely retained? Are we not
bereaved of some of our pastors, who by word and example, sought to free thy
flock from those offenses? Ah good Lord, these are now by power put down from
pastural cure, they are forbid to feed us, their voice we can not hear. This
is our great discomfort. This is the joy and triumph of Antichrist his lymmes,
our enimyes: yea, and that is more heavy, increase of this misery, is of some
threatened of the wicked hoped for, and of us feared, as thy iu^t judgment
against us for our sins.

And now Lord, what can we say, confusion of faces is ours. We have sinned
and done amiss, we confess our fault. As justice is thine iustelie to
correct, so mercy is thine also to pardon and to help the miserable. We
persuaded of thy goodness toward us in Jesus Christ, do know, that of love
thou do now chastyse us as children. Correct us O Lord, but not in thy
wrath. Remember thy loving kindness, and in the riches of thy great mercy,
pardon and forgive all our sins, through which, we have thus offended thee.
O Lord blot them out of thy remembrance, by the blood of thy son Jesus. And
let thy good spirit now transform us from our old evils, so that we commit
them no more, yt there apeare no cause to move the memory of them any more in
thy holy sight: but rule us to grow in regeneration, that this our mortal
life may bring forth plentifully those fruits of the spirit, which do please
thee. O heavenly Father, stay thy stroke now begone. Restore our helps to us
again. Yea of thy liberal goodness, give more of such aid and help, as thou
know needful to work the through reformation of our state generally, and
of each one of us particularlye.

Much good have thou wrought unto us by our sovereign, and the ministers whom
thou have appointed to government. Do not withdraw thy graces from them for
our sins sake, but rather increase thy good gifts in them, for thy mercy
sake. Indue them with increase of knowledge, zeal, and diligence, that they
may do that which is to be done, to give thy glorious gospel the full course,
so that by it perfyte stablishment may be wrought of thy religion in
sincerity, and of civil regiment, in peace and equity.

Look Lord and Judge most just on the proud brag and boast of antichrist
thine enemy, cut his courage, co^founde his counsel, disapoint his hope,
break his power, and give him that utter overthrow, that there do not remain
so much as a memory or token of him, to be had in regard, but that his
memory may be had in confusion. O Lord set up thy glory, remove thy wrath,
restore thy mercy, comfort thine afflicted, turn thy loving countenance to
us, pour forth thy grace on us, build us up in Christ, and love us still. Let
the trumpet of thy gospel with such power and plenty be blown, that all
flesh may hearken and yield thereto, thine elect to their comfort, the
reprobate to their confusion. And let this blast continue without ceassing with
due effect, until that last trump be sounded by thine Archa^gell, at the day
of Christ, And come Lord Jesus. In thy name, O Christ our Captain, we ask
these things, and pray unto thee o Heavenly father, saying. Our Father, etc.
O Lord increase our faith whereof we make confession. I believe in God, etc.
Arise O Lord, and let thine enimyes be confounded. Let them understand that
against thee they fight. Let them fly from thy presence, that hate thy godly
name. Let the groans of thy afflicted, enter in before thee. And for thy name
sake wash away all dregs of Popery and superstition that presentlye trouble
the state of thy church. And preserve the Vine which thy ryghthande has
planted, that the glory of thine anointed Jesus Christ our Lord, may
clearly shine here and before all nations.

So be it.
To my loving brethren that is troubled about the popish aparrell, two short
and comfortable Epistels.

Be ye constant: for the Lord shall fight for you, yowrs in Christ.

To all my faithful brethren in Christ Jesus and to all other that labor to
weade out the wedes of popery, Peace in the Lord Jesus be with you, and make
you perfect in all good works to do his will, working in you that which is
pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Dear Brethren,
because we are creatid for gods glory the edification one of another in
Christ, and are bound to serve thereunto by wealth or woo, life or death, and
chiefly, they to whom God have given the greter gifts, and whom he has called
to higher romes, are most bound to be zealous for gods glory with godly
zelousie to profyt the church and sponse of Christ under their charge, and
that by no subteltye as the Apostel warnithe, they should be corrupted from the
symplicitie of Christ: therefore there is no doubt of your good zealle and
diligence. My good fathers and dear brethren, who at first callid to the
battle, to strive for gods glory and the edification of his people, against the
Romish relics and rages of Antichrist, I doubt not but that you will
coragiouslye and constantlye in Christ, rape at these rages of Gods enemies,
and that you will by this occasion race up many as great enormites that we all
know, and labor to race out all the dregs and remnants of transformid
popery, that are crept into England, by to much lenite of them that wylbe namid
the Lords of the clergy: what is he that has the zeal of gods glory before
his face, that will not join both in prayer, and in sufferinge with you, in so
good a cause, that is so much for gods glory, and the edificacion of gods
church, in the pure simplicite of Christ's word and sacraments, wherein our
enemies and persecutours are strangely bewitchid. I wot not by what Circes
cupe, that they do make such a diversity betwixt Christ's word and his
sacraments, that they can not think the word of God safelye enough
preachid, and honorably enough handlyd, without cap, cope, surplis. But that
the sacraments the maryinge, the buryinge, the churching of women, and other
church service, as they call it, must needs be decored with crossinge, with
capping, with surplessing, with knelinge, with preti wafer cakes, and other
knackes of poperi. O Paul that thou were a live, thou durst tell those
politic gentelmen, that there has bin to much labor bestoued upon them in
vain, thou durst say unto them, as thou did to ye Corinthians, that they
eat not the Lords supper, but pley a pagent of their own to blind the
people, and keep them still in supersticion, fare from the symplicite of
Christ's supper: but how many sely sowles is there that does believe verily,
that they have an English mass, and so put no difference between truth and
falshod, between Christ and antichrist, between God and the deuell, they are
strangely bewitched. I say that thus will bind their English presthode and
sacraments, but much more enchauntid that can find no garments to please them.
But such as have been polutid openly with popish supersticion and Idolatry, but
most of all in this point shall their madness apere to all posterites, that they
make these Antichristian rages Causam sine qua non, that is, a cause without
which there is no holy ministry in Christ, so that this shall make an English
priest, be he never such a dolt or vnlearnid in the knouledge of the scripture
as we have very many, and without these romisshe relics not Paul him self
shall be admittid (as one of them did blaspheme and the rest of them in effect
do affirm) well against such popish chaffer and popery, has byne long
agone foughten with all, when the great captains of that religion lyuyd, and
yet God gave the victory. Therefore let us not fear now, although it does begine
to sture again, for there is no craft, conuinge, counsel, wysdom, or policy
against the Lord. We have Christ and his Apostells and the Prophets ever
stryuing against the Ipocrites of their time on our side: a strau for popish
polici we have the word of God to warant us, to rote out al monuments of
supersticion and Idolatry, and are charged to abhor them, to account them,
accursed, and to defy them, and to detest them as menstreous clowtes, they have
not the word of God for them. And what wysdom is in them, says god by his
Prophet Ieremi, they talk of obedience and concord, but there is no obedience
against the Lord, no nor concord to be desired, but where gods glory and
verite is preserved, Else better to have all the world in hurly burleis, and
heaven and earth to shake, then one ioyte of gods glory should decaie. So far
forth as in us leithe, we have their own laws and proclamacious, to rote out
all monuments of supersticion and Idolatrye, and their oune words are
contrary to their doings. Yt should apere that they repent their reformacion
proclamid, as did ye Isralites, they build again that which ons they have
distroied and this is done openly that all the world may wonder, and behold:
but what is done secretlye, god will one day have it declarid openly, ye they
make the name of god and this doctrine that we profess to be evil spoken of
already. By many of their doings, their judgment hastes that for such causes
persecute Gods true preachers. Wherefore let us not fear their threteninges,
there can none persecute the godly for this cause and trasshe. but either such as
are nether hot nor cold and then they shall be vomyted out unless their zeal
increase, or such as have no God before their eyes, whose god is their belly,
or else open papists, whom god has given up to a reprobate sense, wherefore we
must thus take it, that they are gods rodds for our sins, because we have not
ben more zealous in Gods cause, nether careful to seek his glory, that wolf
Wynchester and blodie bucher Bonar fought once against many godli men for the
ground of this gere, and they had all the power of the Realm seruinge their
lusts, but behold how the Lord in short time overthrew them al, to give us
coradge to go forward, the Lord forgive us, we are to slack and neglygent in
heavenly things, this monster Bonar remainithe and is fed as papists say, for
their sakes, and it must be grauntyd, it is for some purpos, although he be a
traitor and an enemi to the crown and realm, and both to God and man, which
brunnid gods holy testament, murderid his saints and his serva^tes. But what
the Lord requyrith to be done with false Prophets it is manifest: we have
both the law of god and man for us, But we are answerid nay, you your sealues
shall be compellid to turn your coats and cappes, and get you into his leueris,
and to be like him in your garments. O Elyas that thou lyuedste, or that thy
spyrit wear amongst us, thou would say with the Prophet Sophoni, that God
will vysit the werears of this Idolatours garments or strange aparell, thou
would say, that things dedicatid once to idolatry, is not indifferent, thou
would say reverence to the sacrament is wrought by doctrine and discipline,
and not by popisshe and Idolatours garments, thou would say, what decency
can there be gaynyd to the sacraments, by that which has been deuisyd and vsyd
to deface it, if the gold ordeinyd by god for the reverence and decenci of the
Jews temple, is not to be admittyd to beutify the church of Christ, much
less copes brought in by papists the enemies of god, and always continwyd in
their service as orname^tes of their religion in no wise ought of us Christians
to be retaynid. But the papists triumph and glory in their assembles, that
the hot gospelars shall be driven to their doltishe attires, for the Lords sake
let us never give them any cause of Joy, though we should dye for yt: Moses
would not yield on hoof of a best in gods business, he would not leave the loupe
unmade nor make a button or a claspe more or less. Eleasar will not decemble
by eating of unlawful meats the faithful Isralites would not receive so
much as an yui bushe. Contrariwyse Orygen caryinge a branch and professynge,
that he bare it for Christ at the first. But was afterward compellid to open
Idolatry, so cursid a thing it is to give any place to the wicked: all the
papists that say, they worship Christ in the cross, and God in the
sacrament, do still under these words continue still in their Idolatri, beware
of deceitful words, that cover wickid purposes, to draw us from Christian
symplicite. Let us stand constantly against all abuses, and repent for our
former coldness in religion, and our sins, and call for healpe from above, for
the hand of the Lord is not shortenid: we are assured that we seek Gods glory,
and our adversaries may see, if they can se any thing, that this thing that
they seek is not for gods glory, seeing the papists the enemies of God, do so
desire yt and glory in yt. And rejoice, that we, whom they most hate, cannot be
safe but under their garments: we are assurid that we seek gods glory in
folowinge Christ his Aposteles and Prophets. who ever despised these
pharisaicall outward faces and visures, Christ fyndethe fault with the
garments of the phariseis. Paul counts all his pharisaicall, show to be
donge. Zachari says, that the false Prophet shall be ashamed of his prophecye,
and forsake his garments wherein he deceyuid. and shall the true Prophets be
feign to crepe into their coules? for by the same autorite may be comaundid any
peace of popery, so that it be named policy. Ezechias and Josias knew no such
authority, but they say: It is for policy, For it plainly apearithe that
there is less care for religion, then for policy. But beware that the example
of Ieroboham be not followed, that made such like prestes for policy as would
do as he commaundid them. Achaz of policy brought the fashion of an alter into
Jerusalem, as he saw at Damascus, where he had overcome the Idolatours and
their Idols, but cursed was his policy, and so ar all they that will retain
any thing of their Idolatry. Nabuchodonosors Idol was for unity and
policy, but without the warraunt of gods word, there is neither good unity
nor police. The godly father Bucer callithe the tenthes and the first fruits
sacrilege and roberie, they be kept still for policy. Cross and candelstickes
at supersticious, though they be kept. I wot not for what policy the
adoration of the Sacrament in the countres, where they knock and knele to a
wa^^r cake is a popish policy. That women baptize, that pluralites, tot quots
impropriacions, non residence, despensacions, suspensions, excomunications, and
absolucions, for money ar grauntyd, yt is evell, like as are many other
inormites borrowed from Rome, which remain in the name of policy. All these
things were abhorryd as popish supersticions, and Idolatries, among our
gospellers both bishops and others, when they were under gods rods in
pouerte. But how they now have learnid courtely deuinite, to ground all upon
policy? Humble them again o Lord, that they do not forget the, and thy great
kindness and mercy shewid upon them, and sture up their hearts and minds, that
they may be careful over thy pore flock. O Christ, whom thou have dearly
bought, by this their policy ar blindid, and carithe for no more, but that they
may have this supersticious show which is so stifely maintained. Let him mumble
as he list, if he be thus apparelid, al his service is well enough, otherwise
yt is nothing worth. Thus cause you them to perish by your polices, for whom
Christ has dyed. further more, if poperi be superstitious and idolatrous,
evel and wicked, as yet therwas never a worse thing in the world, then ar we
commanded to abstain from all participatio^ thereof, and from all the show
thereof ab omni specie mali, that is, from all show of wickidnes. These
garments were the show of their blasphemous preisthod, herein they did singe
and say their supersticious idolatrous service, they did sense their Idols
and healpe forward their Idolatrous masses, what policy can it be then to
wear this gere. But a supersticious wickid and popish policy, they do it
for policy, they say, that their priests may be known and magnified of men.
Did not the Pharisees use the same policy, to do all their works and make
all their garments both Philacteris upon their headdes, and their wide and
side robes and borders, that they might be more expectable, and notorious to
the people? but their woo is thretenid above al other sinners. To such
ypocrites, as being void of all true holiness, delight in all outward shows,
their curse is most inculcate, their polyci is that ye preistes shall wear
white in the churches to signify their virtue, their pureness, and holiness. and
when they go fourth of the church they must wear black gowns and black
horns, for contrary polycies, and for diverse significacions, Our master
Christ's polycie was expressyd in one word, feed, feed, feed. and the
Prophets before, and the Apostelles afterward, if Christ be the wisdom of
the father, the true ministers shall be well enough known, by that one mark
which he gives: and if that he have not that mark better unknown then
known, both for him self and others, therefore let them not say for shame,
that they seek gods glory, Christ's will, or the edification of his church, by
their polycie. Whiles they threte^ and stope the spredinge of gods word and
fedinge of Christ's flock, co^mandyd by writing to excommunicate the most
faithful laborers in the planting of the gospel, because they will not wear
the rages of popery, to expulse ye most valiant soldiars against the Romish
Antichrist, the most earnest ouerthrowars of the kingdom of satan, which
standith in sin and blindness. O beware you, that will be Lords over the flocks,
that you be not sore punyshed for your pride, toward your brethren, and your
cowardlines in gods cause, that for Princes pleasures and pompose liuinges, do
turn poperi into policy, and to become our persecutors under the cloak of
policy: it were better to lose your livings, then to displease god in
persecutinge of your brethren, and hinder the course of the word. But as our
deutie is, we will pray for you, and for all our brethren in the ministeri,
that god of his grace would grant us more zeal for his glory, than any of
us has had heretofore, more desire to edify, Christ's people in pure
simplicite, to present them a chaste virgin unto Christ then hitherto has
apeared, that when the he deshepherde shall call to accounte, we be not ashamyd.
But being found perfect in all good works, may receive the crown prepared,
as for you dear brethren whom God has called into the brunte of the batell,
The Lord keep ye constant, that ye yield nether to tolleracion, nether to any
other subtelte persuasions of dispensacions, or lycences which were to fortify
their Romish practices. but as you fight the Lords fight, be valiant. God will
not leave you, nether forsake you, as you seek gods glory, god will glorifye
you, and as by you Christ's church is edifyed, comfortid and confirmid in
Christian simplycite, so shall you receive comfort by Christ your heed
captain, when you shall be called to give acomptes of your stewardshippes, and
to be rewardyd for your fidelite, the matter is not so small as the world do
take yt, yt will appear before all be endyd, what an hard thing it is, to
cut of the rages of the Hidra of Rome, it is beutifull, but poysonful, there is
no daling with such a mounster, beware of lokyng back to Sodom or delyght
any wit in the garments of Babilone, neither once touch the poysonid cupe,
though yt be of gold or gliteringe. Let us repent of our former sins
vnfaynidlye, and then shall we abhor and stamp under our fette these rages,
that were apoyntid to supersticion and idolatry, Let us hate the blasphemous
preasthode, so injurious to Christ's preisthode, that every pache and token of
it be in execration, detestation, and accursed, and take no part of yt upon
our heddes nor backs, least we be accursed as it is. Let us not make the
heritage of god as a bird of many colors, holdinge of diverse religions, Let
us not mixte the Jews with the gentills, let us not in no wise mixed this our
religion with any thing of Antichrist, let us not confyrme the blind in their
blindness, neither the weacke in their supersticion. But rather let us take
away, if we can, the names, memories, and all momuments of poperye and that
Antichrists priesthood. Let us open our wyndous with Daniel, and profess what
we are: their cruelte shall be our glory. Let us follow Paull, that knew that
the truth gospel cold not be retainyd, if any Iewishe ceremonies were
mayntainyd. Let us rather never wear any garment, then we should wear
those, whereby our brethren should be weakened, offendyd or boldenyd to take
part with the idolatours, and so through our hautines in knouledge, our weak
brethren perish, for whom Christ died. Behold and mark well, how they fall
backwarde that yield in any jot, and se how they are edifyed, and increase in
godliness, which hold that right way that you go in, the which the Lord
increase you, and us all, and strenthen us with his holy spyrit, that we may
continewe to our lives end, al ways both by our thoughts, words, and
works, to avaunce his glory and honor daily more and more, now and for ever.

Amen.
Grace and peace with all manner spiritual feling and living worthi of the
kindness of Christ, be with all that thrist the will of God.
TO my faithful and dear brethren in Christ Jesus,
as in comen dangers of fire, or such like, welbelouyd, they that be fare of,
com to socoure those that have need, so I being out of iepordie and far of,
true Christian love.
can not but of deuty wyshe well to those that be touchyd about the popish
apparel in this liberty of Gods truth, which is tought plainly without
offencis, in ye greatyst misterys of our religion and salvation, yt is much to
be marvayled, that this small controuersye of aparell should be so heuely
taken. But this is the mallis of satan, the practis^ of the wickid.
that where he can not overthrow the greatist matters, he will cause great
troubels in trifels. Peter and Paul agreyde in the greatyste articles of our
salvation, and yet they differyd so about meattes, that Paul withstode and
rebuckid him openly. the infirmites of the godly.
Paul and Barnabas fell at such bitter contencion, whether Mark should go
with them or no, that they partyd companyes, and either of them went sundry
ways. God defend us from the like. the constance of the godly
Paul circumcisyd Timothe when there was hope to wine the Jews: but when they
would have it of necessite, he would not circumcise Titus, therefore compellinge
would not be vsyd in things of liberte, yt is a lamentable case, that among
them that are civil and full of knouledge, that yt should come thus to pass.
Consider dearly beloved, I beseech you, how that all countres, which have
reformid religion, have cast away the popish aparell with the pope: and yet we
that will be taken for the best gospelars, are contentid to keep it as an holy
religion. Mark well also how many godly and learnid ministers there be here in
all countres, that be so zealous not only to forsake the wicked doctrine of
popery, ready to leave the minystry, and to lose lyuinges, rather then to be
like the popish teachers of supersticious order in aparell or behavior. This
realm has such skacite of teachers, that if so many worthy men and learnid
should be cast out of the ministry for such small matters, many placis should
be destitude of preachers, and yt would give an incurable offense to all the
fauourars of gods truth here, and in other countres, also shall we make so
much and so precious of the popes rages, that other reformyd places, exteme as
vile and filthye, God forbid. S. Paul byddith women use such aparell as
becomith them that profes true godliness, which rule is much more to be
obseruid of men, and especially of preachers. But if we forsake popery as
wickid, shall we say that their aparell becommith saints, and professars of
true holiness. Saint Paul bydith us refrain from al outward show of evell, but
surely in kepinge of this popish aparell, we forbear not an outward show of
much evell, if popery be iudgid evell, as greter wickidnes can not be, as we
would have a diverse show of aparel to be known from the common people, so is
yt necessary in aparell, to have a show, how a protestante is to be known
from a papiste. Yt has pleasyd God to call us to preach his heavenly word to
that hye office, God give you grace and us all to seek his honor and glory if
we so do with a pure heart and mind, he has promised, He that honorith me, I
will glorify him, and he that contemnith me, I will contemn him. Let there be
no curtisye made to healpe gods people now they be in danger. Call to your
remembrance Queen Easter, she be gave to make curtisy to speak in yt cause,
but Mardocheus said unto her: If thou now hold thy peace, God shall deliver by
an other mean, and yet thou and thy fathers house shall peryshe. You that can
and may do good, do it while time is offerid, the time will come when it wylbe
to late: yet god will comfort his by some other mean: It is a perilous thing,
not to healpe in the time of neade, and not to suffer religion to go forward
in all syncerite, and to further gods cause when ye may, when Terenti a good
Christian captain returnid with great triumph and victory, the Emperor
Valerius bade him are what he would, and he should have it for his good service:
he having God before his eyes, desyrd nether riches, nether honor, but those
which had aduentered their lives for true religion, might have a church alowid
them, to serve their god purely in, and several from the Arrians. The Emperor
being angry with his request, pullyd his supplicacion in pecis, and bade him
axe some other thing. but he gathered up the pecis of his, paper and said: I
have receuid my reward, I will axe nothing else, God encrece about Princes the
small number of such zealous suitors and promoters of religion, and then no
doubt gods glory shall florishe when we seek his dew honor, and not our own
profit. But to avoid contencion and scisme Austen gevith good counsel to
godly and quiet men, that they mercifully correct that which they can, and
that which they can not, patiently bear, groan and morn, with love, until god
either correct or amend them. But how this Christian love should be kept in this
church, when so many godly for so small things shall be thruste out, and also
how many already is from the ministry and their lyuinges, yt passyth many
good and godly wits to conceive. S. Paul's rule in such things, says: All
things to me is lawful, but all things is not expedient: all things to me
is lawful, but all things edefye not. Therefore in this case we must not so
suttelly dispute, what Christian liberte will suffer us to do, but what is
metist and most edefying for Christian charity, and promoting Christian and
pure religion. But surely how popish aparell should edefie, or set forward the
gospel of Christ Jesus, it can not be seen of the multitude, nay, it is to
much fealt how gredly it reioysith the adversaries of the truth, when they see
what we borowe of them, and contend for the same as things necessary. mark
well the bysshopes wearing of their white rochets, what ground they first
had, and from whence they receyuid it. There was a certain man, namid Sisinius
an heriticke bishop of the Novacions, and he first begane yt. all those other
popish trashe has the like foundacions, but they have to long contineuyd and
pleasyd popery, which is beggarly patchid up of al sorts of cerimones, and
that they could never be routyd out sense, no not from many professors of the
gospel. Wherefore you that se others that is come to a better perfection, grudge
not at yt, but be thankful to God, though things may be borne with for a
time for Christian lybertes sake, in hope to win the weak. yet when lyberte
is turnyd into necessite, yt is evell, and no longer lyberte: and that, that
was for wynning the weak sufferid for a time, is become the confyrminge of the
froward in their obstinacy. Paul vsyd circumcision for a time as of lyberte,
but when it was vrgyd of necessite, he would not bend unto it. That famous
father Master Bucer, when he was aryd why he would not wear a square cape,
made answer, because his head was not four square. wherein surely he notyd
well the comlynes of aparell to be, when yt was fassionyd like the body, and a
great folly when a square cape was set on a round head.

God be merciful unto us, and grant us uprightly to seek his honor with all
earnestnes and simplicite. The Lord comfort his afflictid church, and grant
that in this oulde age of the world, we may serve the Lord of hosts in
synglenes of heart, and labor to rote out all stomblinge blocks in religion,
that Christ's glory may nakydly shine of yt sealue, without all tradicions or
inuencions of men, as in the beginning when yt was purest, and all such
deuyses unknown, but inuentid of late to bleare the eyes of the ignorant, with
outward show of holiness. God grant that we may give all honor to whom al
honor is deue, both inwardly and outwardly, to serve him unfeignedly all the
days of our life. Fare well dear brethren in the Lord Jesus, who ever keep
us in his faith, fear, and love, for ever.

Amen.

