GODS TRIBVNALL AND MAN'S TRIAL* Represented in a Sermon at Pauls-Crosse, upon
the fifth of September. 1630.

By ISAAC CRAVEN, Pastor of Felmersham in Bedfordshire.

2 COR. 5. 11. Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men.

AMBROS. Nihil est quod magis proficiat ad vitam honestam, quam vt credamus cum
iudicem futurum, quem and occulta non fallunt, and inde^^ra offendunt, and
honesta delectant.



LONDON: Printed by I. B. for James Boler, dwelling at the sign of the
Marigold in Pauls-Churchyard. 1631.

To the Worshipful, his much honored Friend, OLIVER BOTELER, Esquire, all
happiness in Jesus Christ.
Worthy Sir,
THE Subject of this ensuing Discourse, is for commonnesse and familiarity,
like thunder; the oftener heard, the less feared: did men but seriously recount
how it will be the last trial, and upon it an euerduringestate, either in
heaven or hell, they would rather desire to be often remembered of what they
must once be called unto. These Notions not long since delivered to the ear,
were never intended for the eye. Consciousnesse of mine own meandness, and
withal the great disparity twixt a lively voice, and breathless lines, have
easily dissuaded me hitherto from appearing in Stationary view. If now too
soon, I must borrow my Apology from your self; whose request not only
commands, but passes with me for an Approbation. Otherwise (as curiosity
ouer-rules the case) it is neither nature, nor the God of nature that satisfies
all. This critical Age of ours has at once revived and verified Tertullians
complaint; Nisi Deus homini placuerit, Deus non erit. The best is, as I cannot
be confident of immunity from censure: so I am taught to neglect it. Gal. 1.
10. Should I seek to please men, I were not the servant of Christ. Such then
as these reuised Papers are, I am bold to commend to the use of Gods Church,
under the patronage and protection of your name. Reasons hereto inducing, a
stranger will not enquire after; and they that have known my reference to such
a pious Parishioner, a real favorer and encourager of my Ministry, need
not. Only may they find that acceptance, which the Author before them, and in
any proportion further you in the way to heaven* ^ have no more to desire, but
as Saint Paul for Onesiphorus, The Lord grant unto you, that you may find
mercy of the Lord in that day.

Your Worships in all duty and service, I. CRAVEN.

GODS TRIBVNALL, AND MAN'S TRIAL.
ROMANS 2. 16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel.
THere is a dangerous erroneous conceit lodged within the hearts of graceless
men, that because God is merciful, Eccles. 8. 11
he will never revenge: as if in regard of his Mercy, it accorded not with his
nature to be also Just: The discovery of which error, for prevention of
greater danger, is the the Apostles maine business in the beginning of this
Chapter.

First for the Error, God indeed is Merciful, as appears by his patience,
forbearance and long suffering: but examine the cause; is it to make man secure
in sin? nothing less: but to mollify his obdurate heart, and to work a
reformation within him, ver. 4. The goodness of God leads thee to repentance.

Secondly, for the danger, it has a woeful expression in So 2 Pet. 3. 9.
the progress of the Chapter; a heaping up of wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, and such a God as is no
respecter of persons, no partial Judge, but will render unto every man (...),
according to his works. So that he who will therefore sin because God is
good, must look to be damned because God is just.

Hebrews, the Circumcision; he is taken up now with the Romans, uncircumcised
Gentiles. Howeuer therefore the Jews had a Law whereby to be judged forsin, it
were manifest injustice for the Gentiles to be damned having none at all. And
indeed it might seem an unavoidable sequel, had the Heathen in all respects
bin destitute of a Law to direct them. Isay, it might seem an unequal course
to adiudge them to damnation for the breach of that which they knew not. David's
grandest fool, who has said Psalm. 14. 1.
in his heart there is no God, has a Conscience to school him at one time or
other, and to tell him that God will judge him. And although for a while it be
silenced and tamed with sleep in vessels prepared to destruction, it shall at
length awake and arise for a witness against them. In the day when God shall
judge the secrets of men by Christ Jesus according to the Gospel.

This being the reference and dependence of the words, they offer to our
consideration these several points:

1. A time of Judgment, [In the day] come when it will. 2. Who shall judge?
[God.] Iudicabit Deus, God shall judge. 3. Whom? [Men,] all men; no exception.
4. What? [Secrets.] Occulta hominum, the secrets of men. 5. By whom? [By Jesus
Christ;] He that was sent to save us. 6. And lastly, the warrant of
Confirmation,
For nature the [Gospell,] (...). according to my Gospel.
By dispensation Paul's,
Thus within a little compass we have a Day for appearance, a God to judge,
Men to be questioned, Secrets to be disclosed, Christ Jesus in Commission, and
the Gospel for our assurance. In the day when God shall judge, etc. Of all
these in the order as I have ranked them: and first of the time, In die.

It is the witty curiosity of one that affected it, that Gorran.
the time of Judgment has in Scripture four appellations:

1. It is called the Day, for manifestation of secrets.

2. The Night, for suddenness of event.

3. The Even, for the ending of time.

Morning, for the beginning of eternity. But to Comment upon the time so, would
be loss of time to us. It is best, by Day, to understand the time in general,
and to build upon it no more then it bears: that there shall be a day of
judgment. A truth of infallible cerainty, because a day of the Lords setting:
(...), Act. 17. God has appointed it: and as Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good
Warranted by Scripture.
is the word of the Lord Isa. 39. 8.
. A truth likewise for revelation, of great antiquity, and in order to the
fountain, from all eternity. Saint Jude deriues it from Enoch, the seventh
from Adam, in his 14. and 15. verses; Behold, the Lord comes to execute
judgment upon all: and the last Apostle agrees with the first Prophet; for,
behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him Apoc. 1. 7.
. See him? yea, that blessed Favorite had an exact vision, Apoc. 20. he saw the
Throne, and the Judge, and his awful Majesty; he saw the dead, and the
books, the persons and the causes, the judgments and the proceedings, in
discussing, in discovering, in condemning: a complete Assise,

No day like to this day, no judgment to this judgment. Other are lightsome
days, this of darkness and gloominesse; the greater lights shall be darkened,
the lesser fall from heaven Mat. 24. 29.
. Other are familiar days, this of terror and amazement; the trumpet of God
shall blow 1 These. 4. ^6.
, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken Luke 21. 26.
. Other come when they are looked for, this is a sudden day; Sicut fur in nocte
1 These. 5. 2.
, as a thief in the night. Other are preventing days, this is the last day;
Horizon temporis and aeternitatis Corn. a Lap.
; for the Angel has sworn it, Time shallbee no more Apoc. 10. 6.
. In a word, Other are our days, this is the Lords day; they of his Patience,
this of his Vengeance; they of his Mercy, this of his Justice and Judgment.
For the Lord has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness Act. 17. 31.
.

Not a Judgment of Legal direction, as the Statutes and Testimonies of
Morality; nor of fatherly Correction to prevent Condemnation with the world 1
Cor. 11. 32
, nor of temporary infliction, such as now this dispersing contagion; nor of
ordinary administration, whereby God stands in Councels: but a general
Conuention for trial in the highest Consistory, an universal inquisition, a
final Judgment, discharging the righteous, discarding the ungodly, as the day
for particulars shall discover what we cannot.

So certain, that even Humane Reason enlightened with holy Scripture,
conceiues, concludes no less: for Seconded by Reason, and
look but upon the face of this present world, and who sees not the strange
inequality of humane dispensations? Piety is molested, iniquity spared,
ambition exalted, humility scorned; which occasioned that of the Poet, Ludit in
humanis diuina potentia rebus; as if earths miseries were for nothing but
heavens May-games. But has God forgotten the cause of his Chosen? Will his
Justice never be known in Judgment? Out of all question, Psalm. 58. Verily
there is a reward for the righteous: doubtless there is a God that judges the
earth. And if here he conceal his glory, there must needs be a time for
Manifestation; if here he conniue for argument of his patience, yet no time
past for evidence of his Justice. He has appointed a day for men and for
Angels to behold and admire his righteous Judgments.

But take a nearer course, and ask thine own Conscience; Conscience.
that will tell thee as much: It is that which affrighteth or cheareth,
accuses or clears Romans 2. 15.
, commends or condemns, sits in Commission, and calls thee to often
reckoning. Well, if Conscience do this now, it is but as Tertullian anciently
styled it, Praeiudicium extremi Iudicij, a forerunner of the last Judgment.
If men have their peculiar Courts of Conscience here 1 Ioh. 3. 20.
, let none make question of Gods Tribunal hereafter, but accord with
Scripture, and Reason, and Conscience, that there shall be a day of Judgment.

Quando haec? When shall these things be? for that was the Apostles quaere,
Mat. 24. A demand that cannot be satisfied at once, for precise definition not
at all.



1. In general, it shall be in the end of days, the expiration of years, the
worlds dissolution, the Common Resurrection. It is appointed unto men once to
dye, (...), but after this the judgment, Heb. 9. 27.

2. In more particular, it shall be when the signs are accomplished, the
Gospel of the kingdom resounding to a reformation, Antichrist revealed and
dis-throned, the faith eclipsed, manners depraved, tribulations multiplied,
terrors dispersed, the Jews, in some measure, recalled; then Leuate capita
vestra; lift, up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh Luke 21. 28.
.

3. But indiuidually to assign it, surpasses the sublimest knowledge of men
and of Angels. The Disciples (we must think) had learned it, if any in the
world, for Vobis datum est, Mat. 13. Unto you it is given to know the mysteries
of the Kingdom of heaven. But what if all mysteries be not alike? There are
Mysteria Regis, and there are Mysteria Regni: Mysteries of Religion, and they
might, nay, they must be known: Mysteries of men's hearts, and them none
knows, save he that formed the heart b. Mysteries of future Events, and such
the time Ier. 17. 9, 10
must manifest, as vltra Sphaeram, removed from our reach. Secret things belong
to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 29. The Father has put them in his own power, Acts 1. It
was not for the Apostles then, it is not for us to know them now.

Such a reserved Mystery, such an indeterminable season, is the time of the
last Judgment; unknown to us, to the Angels of God, to Christ himself as
concerning his Manhood Cyril.
, at least for the days of his flesh Orig.
. Otherwise, impossible for the everlasting Father to be ignorant of the last
day. But he knew it not necessary for us to know: it was better concealed; and
that

1. For the exercise of our faith, the trial of our patience, the perfection
of our hope; faith to believe it, patience to attend it, hope to rely upon it,
resolving in all our troubles, that sooner or later, a day of release will come.

2. For restraint of Curiosity, that would be prying into veiled secrets, to
keep us within our Compass from fingring the forbidden fruit, to season us
with sobriety, and to teach us in such a subject (...), not to be wise above
that which is meet.

3. To contain us in awfulnesse, and make us watchful in our callings Mat.
14. 42. 1 These. 5. 6.
, provident out of ignorance, and circumspect in uncertainty. Latet vltimus
dies (says Aug.) vt obseruenter omnes. We are kept from the knowledge of the
last day, to have in suspicion every day.

4. And lastly, concealed, that the Non-conuerted may be drawn to a speedy
repentance, lest the day surprise them when lamentation will be too late, and
that regardlesse sinners may be taken without excuse for not considering the
time of their visitation.

Such then is the nature of the day of Judgment, Certain for the (...), it
shall come, uncertain for the quando, we know not when: Nothing more sure,
nothing more sudden; yet this I may boldly auerre, it cannot be far from us:
it was at hand in the Apostles times 1 Pet. 4. 7.
, therefore nearer now; hora nouissima, the last hour in Saint John's time 1
Ioh. 2. 18.
, wherefore rather now: if the ends of the world were come upon them 1 Cor. 10.
11
, they are close upon us. I dare not go along with our aduenturous Calculators
to the determination of the year (God keep us from that height of
audaciousnesse.) Only if wickedness know not how to be more wicked, nor
vanity how to be more vain These are such perilous times as Saint Paul
foretells. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
, if pampering Epicurisme, transcendent pride, covert Atheism, open
profaneness, unmerciful oppression, ouer-mercifull conniuence to sin, if
wastefull prodigality, insatiable avarice, Simoniacall Sacrilege, unbridled
luxury, if beastly drunkenness, bloody treachery, slanderous detraction,
cunning fraud, if envious underminings, ambitious temporizings be the
ripenings of the world to Judgment, I say it again, it cannot be far from
us. When we see in an old man the signs of age, as a doting brain, a
languishing stomach, a cold body, a wayward mind, we gather his time is not
long, though the article of his dissolution we know not. Beloved, long has the
world doted with heresy, languished in the faith, been cold in charity, and
wayward in vanity, all signs of an approaching dissolution, and tell us like
so many Baptists, appropinquauit regnum; The kingdom of heaven is at hana.

And therefore the issue is this, seeing most of the signs are already
accomplished, seeing the world is aged and betrays no less, and that the
general Judgment is even at the door Ier 5. 9.
; the point is clear (be the moment never so uncertain) that there shall be
a day of Judgment.

I cannot dismiss it so. For

First, (me thinks) the certainety of the day should Applic.
be to the sons of Belial, as that fatal hand to carousing Belshazzar Dan. 5.
, which wrote his doom upon the wall: and secondly, to every regenerate soul,
as that little Cloud to Elijahs servant, which arose out of the sea, like a
man's hand 1 Reg. 18.
.

For the wicked. 1. Matter of terror.
signs; the Trumpet sounding, the graves opening, the earth quaking, the
stars falling, the Judge preparing in seuerest manner to take their last
accounts. Accounts for themselves, how they have lived; accounts for their
brethren, how they have loved; accounts for their bodies formerly abused,
accounts for their souls before neglected, for their inmost thoughts, for
their idle words, their omissions of good, commissions of evil, all in such
rigorous manner, that neither honor, nor riches, nor favor, nor friendship
shall advantage, exempt or excuse them. Latere erit impossible, apparere
intolerabile Anselm.
. O fearful case of miscreant forsaken wights! whither should they look?
which way should they turn? Look to the Clouds, and the Son of man ready to
damn them; down to the ground, and Hell mouth ready to devour them; look
before, and the infernal fiends ready to hale them; behind, the glorious
Saints, and some their dearest friends, to cashiere, to forsake them; turn to
the left hand, their sins accuse them; to the right, Gods Justice threatens
them; whithersoeuer they look, whithersoeuer they turn, their loss is
heaven, death is their doom, and Hell their portion for ever.

O consider this all ye that forget God, (for it is needless in a subject of
such infallibility to deal against ancient Heretics; and I hope, they are
unborn amongst us, that Atheistically scoff and deride it,) but you that with
carnal Gospellers contradict it by scandalous living; that crown your heads
with Rose-buddes, and make a Covenant with hell, and with death, and with
judgment; that with the old Italians ring your Bells to avoid the noise of
Thunder, and expel the remembrance of the last with the vanities of your own
day; you, I say, should consider (had you love to your own souls) how the day
is approaching, when accounts must be given for all. Peradventure it comes
before your decease; or happily Mortality first arrests you, all will be one; no
auoydance by death; Quia, qualis hinc quisque egreditur, talis in iudicio
praesentatur Greg. Dial. lib. 4. cap. 39.
; Such a departure hence, such an appearance at last: such a dissolution, such
a Resurrection. Wherefore think not to presume with the ungracious servant
Mat. 24. 48.
, Tardat Dominus; the Master i^ slack in coming; think not that God will
slight it, because he deferres the time. The old world had a long warning, yet
drowned at length; Sodom was long spared, yet burnt at length; Jerusalem long
entreated, yet spoiled at length; and the general Judgment, though long
delayed, yet at length it comes. The Rainebow, (says one Disce mori. page 408.
) as it has a watery color to show us what has been past, so also a fiery to
signify what is to come. And then Vaeridentibus; Woe be them that laugh, for
they shall mourn Luke 6. 25.
. Woe be to them that now presume, they shall then be quelled. For to men of
any sensible conscience, the very name of Judgment is by nature dreadful; and
if there be terror in the name, needs must the day be exceeding terrible; if
the Israelites feared when the Law was delivered Exodus 20.
, what shall the ungodly when the breach shall be doomed? If Felix trembled
when Paul foretold it Act. 24. 25.
, what shall a world of sinners, when God reueales it?

O then that a word of Exhortation might prevail amongst 2. Exhort.
you! that you would make advantage of this black affrighting meditation, and
now in the days of patience bethink your selves against the day of vengeance:
for yet the weather is fair and seasonable, ye may frame an Arc to save you
from the future deluge; yet are the Angels at the gates of Sodom; your souls
may be a prey to your selves by escaping thence; yet Jonas prophecies in the
Streets of Niniuie; there is hope of mercy if you turn from your evil ways:
yet wisdom calls unto wandering passengers, Vsque quo? Prou. 1. How long (ye
simple ones) will ye love simplicity? What should I say more? yet the
Bridegroom tarries and stays the Virgins leisure; the Prophet wooes you
Ezech. 18.
with Israel to repent and live; the Apostle beseeches you in the name of
Christ, that ye would be reconciled unto God 2 Cor. 5. 20.
; and lastly, for enforcement of all, your own Consciences, as so many
Cassandra's presage within your breasts a manifestation of sin and justice. O
neglect not the oportunities and means of grace, suppress not the liberty of
that private remembrancer, but in time consider the things that belong to your
peace, and work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; recounting
with a blessed Father, how, Maxima est poena peccati, metum and memoriam
amisisse extremi iudicij; It is the sorest punishment of sin in this life, to
have lost the remembrance and fear of the last Judgment. Many vials of Gods
wrath were powered upon Jerusalem; and of many prouocations this was the maine,
Non est recordata finis; She remembered not her end Lam. 1. 9.
. Loss of children, and mournful widdow-hood were threatened to be brought
upon Babylon; all for this, Ero in Saeculum Domina; I shall be a Lady for ever
Isa. 47. 7.
. And even so at the revelation of Judgment, shall thousand thousands be
plagued for this, that the thoughts of their last end were the last end of
their thoughts. Wherefore, knowing the terror of the Lord, we dare not affect
you quasi Carmen musicum, as a lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice;
but must cry full loud to awaken your drousie souls; and by those shaking
Powers, falling Stars, darkened Lights, consuming Flames, and those old
things that then shall pass away, beseech and exhort you to become new
creatures in all holy conversation and godliness. Whereas, if you be so
ungrateful as to recompense our pains with neglect, if you make our Gospel a
reproach unto us, if nothing will please you but peace, peace, alas! we can but
prophecy, and importune you to embrace the season; nay, cannot but prophecy,
and proclaim the desolations and terrors which accompany the dismal day, When
the Lord shall judge.

And this is the hand upon the Wall.

For the godly.
the hearts of true believers, (for what patience should it work in us? what
Heroical couragiousnesse? what contempt of the vanities and miseries of this
world? whole Clouds to that purpose will deliver themselves anon.) So in the

1. Place, seeing the Lord has prepared such a day 1 To prepare themselves; by
attending
for us, it calls for our Wisdom to prepare our selves for it; and that he
grants us a day of such a general hearing, to provide in the interim that our
cause be good. Ante languorem adhibe medicinam; ante iudicium interroga teipsum
Ecclus. 18. v. 1^, 20.
. Look how for prevention of sickness thou would purge thy body; so, to
escape the rigor of Judgment, examine thine own soul. What sincerity of
profession? What integrity of conversation? What purity of Conscience? all must
be looked unto, would we plot to have all well.

1. Our profession in well believing, considering that 1. To their faith.
of our Savior, Ioh. 5. 24. 2. To their lives.
He that hears my Word, and believes in him that sent me, shall not come
into condemnation.

2. Our conversation in well-doing, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
37. 38.
Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right, for that shall
bring a man peace at the last, (...), (by the Testimony of the Judge) Blessed
is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing Mat. 24.
46. 3. To their Consciences.
.

3. Our Conscience in well-assuring, apposing it with Iorams question, Is it
peace, Iehu? 2 Kings 9. 22
Peace, O my soul? and peace that embraces righteousness? Angels of the
Churches, are you conscious of fidelity in mannaging the Ministry of
reconciliation? Magistrates, have you labored to snape the growth of sin?
Officers* are you clear from the piercing clamor of corruption? Lawyers, have
you applied your selves to the thing that is lawful and right? Tradesmen,
have your minds been set upon righteousness, to the approving of your ways
to God? Men and brethren of all degrees, there is a time approaching, when all
the world for a good conscience: that if our hearts in the mean can acquit us,
(...) (with the Apostle) we have confidence toward God 1 Ioh. 3.
, and may assure our hearts before him. But

2. Since the day is indefinite, and comes we know not when, Incertum tempus
semper paratum vult animum. An 2 To watch and pray continually.
uncertain time requires a mind prepared at all times. Wherefore as a godly
Father in whateuer he did, thought he heard the sound of the last Trumpet
Jerome.
: So to urge his carfulness in the counsel of another, Nobis certam
sollicitudinem imponat incerta Conditio Eus. Emiss.
. Because we are uncertain of the last day, let it make us watchful every
day. First, in religious meditation, that it come not unlooked for; and then in
fervent prayer, that it come not unwelcome. Never would our lives be so
culpable of Judgment, were our thoughts but inured to remember it; and never
would the time be so dreadful to remember, could we pray with believing
hearts, In the hour of death, and in the day of Judgment, Good Lord deliver
us.

Once then to conclude this point; As we heartily tender the gayning of this
great day, look into our Faith, that we be found in the Lord Jesus; look into
our lives, that we walk as becomes Christians; look into our Consciences,
that we make them our friends beforehand: Watch and pray continually, that we
may be able to stand in the day of trial. O remember how we live in the last
and worst times, and know not how near we draw to the last and strictest
Judgment; and though God should procrastinate and slacken his last coming,
yet Tibi prope est vt eas hinc: The Decree is irreuersible, that sooner or
later we must all away to our long home. Take heed therefore, lest at any time
our hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this
life Luke 21. 34.
. Let us walk honestly as in the open day, with circumspection as in the last
age: and herein let us exercise our selves to have always a clear conscience
toward God, and toward men Act. 24. 16.
. That so when the Trumpe shall awaken us with a Summons to the last Assizes,
we may appear with boldness for our plenary Justification, In die cum
iudicabit Deus. In the day when God shall judge.

And let this suffice to have been spoken of the first point, to wit, The day
of the last judgment.

Who shall judge, For to whom can the Judgment essentially appertain, save to
him who alone is essentially just? To whom can it belong to judge the world,
save to him who in the beginning made the world? And that can be none but God
(you will say) which must draw us along to resolve with the Text; Iudicabit
Deus, God shall judge.

Where it matters not whether we understand the Father, or indifferently
assign it to the whole Trinity; seeing Opera Trinitatis ad extra; Such works
as pitch upon the creature, admit not of division in the persons of the Deity.
Their acts are the same for matter of substance Ioh. 5. 19.
, though different in manner of administration; another way, but the same
work. So Creation at first, and Judgment at last, are jointly ascribed to the
sacred three in one, and to God in all.

Indeed we have it not in terms irrespectiue, (...), [God] without further
addition, but God shall judge by Jesus Christ; and therefore upon a second
examine it may seem to be personal rather than essential: The Father by his
Son, not the whole Trinity. Well, but if the judgment belongs to them, we
cannot exclude the person proceeding from both; there is an Ordine quisque suo,
every one in his own order. No dissolution of consent, for by unity of essence
the three are one 1 Ioh. 5. 7.
: no inequality of degrees, for in dignity of persons the same are equal Symb
Ath.
. This is enough; the Father judges by the Son in the virtue and power of
the holy Ghost.

Thus then God shall judge; and he that shall do it at last, sits not in the
mean time as an idle Spectator. He judges now in particular causes, then
universally all in all. Now successively, one by one, then conioynedly all
together: now remissely with a temper of mercy, then severely in the rigor of
justice: now he begins it in separated souls, to accomplish it then in
reunited bodies. In a word, now he deals amongst us (as we make up a politic
body) by Kings, and Potentates, and inferior Magistrates, and yet only in
palpable conuictions, chiefly in the case of notorious crimes, and at sharpest
by infliction of temporary punishments: But alas! these authorized Judges,
these gods that must thus dye like men Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
, as the best may be deceived through humane frailty, so the most may be
perverted by private ends; and of men in subordinate places, some may be
seduced with bribery, others transported with partiality: few seen to be
zealous in the Lords cause; to regard the supplications of the poor, the cries
of the fatherless and widow, the grieuances and plaints of the Leuite;
laudable enactions: but the misery is, Athenienses sciunt quae recta sunt, sed
facere nolunt* lamentable executions; Idolatry, Blasphemy, Profanation,
Oppression, Whoring, Swearing, Drinking, Reuelling: Small reformation; nothing
abated.

But Lord! Are not thine eyes upon the truth? Ier. 5. 3.
and shall not the Supreme disposer of all things visit for these?
Questionless, for in the words of the Poet, (...); yea, (...). The righteous
God has an auenging eye, though he hold his hands for a season. Noui opera
tua, I know thy works, Revel. 3. 1. and he knows his time too (would we leave
it to his wisdom) for a final abolishment of these sinful deeds and days
of sin together, when as one impatient of any longer delay, he will come down
himself to undertake and avenge his quarrel, to confound the justifying Ezec.
16. 52
sisters of Sodom and Gomorrah, to purge this Augaeum staebulum, this
receptacle of noisome sins, and to make up the measure of his justice begun,
by taking the matter into his own hands. And then come near ye Nations, and
assemble all ye people, keep silence ye Inhabitants and Tribes of the earth;
for the Ancient of days has remembered at length to decide the old
controversy: his spirit is weary of any further striving Gem 6. 3.
, and contending by subordinate powers: he will no longer defer it in
expectation of amendment, or leave it to the heads of the people, but will end
it in a moment, with his own immediate sentence, Iudicabit Deus, God shall
judge.

And therefore for a

Use. O hear it, and fear it, ye that walk so unworthy of God, that will not
apprehend him as a just rewarder of sinners, but remain insensible either of
sin committed, For terror to the wicked.
or grace conte^ned, or judgment threatened. Think not the riches of Gods
lenity to be arguments and signs of your innocence; conclude not upon escapes
in humane consistories, an impunity to your souls for ever: but know, that
Divine forbearance has a time to be inexorable for any longer patience, and a
mild indulgent Father to assume the robes of an austere Judge. And how
presumest thou to be able to stand before such a presence, no less then the
Lord of Hosts? whose glorious majesty is inaccessible 1 Timothy 6. 16.
, might irresistible Acts 9. 5.
, justice intaxable Ier. 12. 1.
, anger intolerable Psa. 2. 12.
, and his all-discerning eyes insufferable of the least uncleanness Hab. 1. 13.
, before whom the very Angels tremble 2 Esd. 8. 21.
, as conscious of their own impurity Comparatiue, vid. Job 4 18.
: at whose dreadful displayes of judgment both Saints and Angels shall be
moved in a manner, and seem to be stricken with amazement. And if the Judges
selected Favorites are in likelihood to fear (the judgment of some of the
Ancients Chrysostom. super illud, Mat. 24. 29. vid. Thom. Suppl. 3. partis Qu. 73.
art. 3.
) if they (I say) shall fear, who notwithstanding are out of peril; if the
pillars of heaven shall shake with astonishment at the terrible descent of the
Almighty, what then shall become of a world of enemies and utter despairing
Cast-awayes? if it shall thus fare with the green tree Luke 23. 31.
, quid fiet in arido: what shall be done in the dry? if the righteous scarcely
be saved, vbi impius? 1 Pet. 4. 18.
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? especially when laid against
by so many Accusers, convicted by such a multitude of conspiring witnesses. O
man, think with thy self (if thou can for hardness of heart) what a
wonderful perplexity shall come upon thee on that day! when, besides the
objections of an omniscious Judge, the Devil Praesto erit aduersarius
Diabolus. August.
(that old Promoter) shall lay to thy charge: thy brethren, whom ever thou have
hurt or wronged, shall declare against thee: the creatures voluptuously and
wastefully abused, shall cast it upon thee Iam 5, 3, 4, 5
: and lastly, after all the rest, thine own Conscience (as a thousand
witnesses) shall enforce thee to become thine own accuser, and to apprehend in
the bitterness of thy soul, how Deus and diet vltienum conuenerunt; The day
of vengeance which thou never remembredst, and the God of vengeance, whom thou
never fearedst, are come together upon thee. O fearful distractions and
tortures of Conscience! These be desperate cases, and lamentable streights: no
place for repentance, no hope of release, when the Lord chief Justice of the
world shall have passed his sentence. For (as Eli to his ungracious sons 1 Samuel 2. 2^.
) If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Man may be persuaded by
intercession of friends, and easily drawn with respect unto persons, be
corrupted with rewards, and emblinded through affection: Hic Iudex nec gratia
praeuenitur, nec misericordia flectitur, nec pecunta corrumpitur, etc August.
. No such matter in the Court of this righteous Judge, the transcendency of
whose ways above man's is infinitely greater then the altitude of the highest
heavens above the lowest parts of the earth.

O think of this all ye that make so little conscience of sin; apply it as a
corrosiue to your wounded corrupted souls; peradventure it may cause you to
fly from the wrath to come: to consider, that when man's impiety has advanced
it self to the highest: when the iniquity of the Amorites is come to the full,
the world shall end, and God to reveal his justice, shall exalt himself in
his own strength. Or if thou be sworn against reformation, well, Rejoice (O
Man) in the iniquity of thy days, delight in the sweetness of stolen waters
Prou. 9. 17.
, make thy boasts of the pleasantness of the bread of deceit, but know, that
for all these things God shall bring thee to judgment Eccles. 11. 9.
. Man may be deluded with appearances, and guld with shadows: but Gal. 6. 7.
non illuditur Deus; God is not mocked; there is not dissembling before him. He
that hitherto has passed by thy sins in silence, and but laid the axe to the
root of the tree; that as yet has been taken up in whetting his Sword, in
bending his Bow, and preparing his Arrows, shall hew up by the roots, and
strike to the quick, and pierce thy very soul with the doom of damnation;
Iudicabit Deus, God shall judge.

For godly fe^re in the best.
religious fear even the choycest and dearest of Gods children; as

1. With a fear of Humility in regard of their damnable 1 Of Humility.
deseruings, menstruous righteousness, their drossie perfections; where if God
should make inquisition, Nihil inueniret nisi quod damnaret. He should find in
us nothing but matter of condemnation. Yea, the holiest Christian, upon terms
of his own uprightness, were not able to answer him one of a thousand. Job,
though never so highly approved by the Testimony of God Job 1. 8. and
himself, yet would he not answer his Judge Cap. 40. 4, 5.
, nor lift up his head in his own cause. Paul, though never so clear and
unblameable as concerning the discharge of his Apostleship 1 Cor. 4. 4.
, yet would he not justify himself, nor thrust into the Lords harnest. Alas
(beloved) we are but shrubs in comparison of those tall Cedars. High time for
us to abhor our selves in the dust, when Jobs and Paul's can cover their
faces; to disclayme our own pretended integrities, and by way of supplication
to the Judge, implore protection under the shadow of his wings, till the storm
of his indignation be ouerpast. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O
Lord Psalm. 143. 2.
, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Vae etiam laudabili vitae
hominum Aug. Confess. lib. 6. cap. 13.
. It were woe with the most commendable life of man, if thou should examine
it without mercy.

2. It should affect us with a fear of sedulity and carfulness to abstain
ftom sin, to evidence the truth of 2 Of sedulity.
our profession in all sobriety and godly demeanor. For when the Master is
known to be strait in exacting Mat. 25. 26, 27.
, i^ is not for the Servant to be careless in mannaging: and God to be so
strict in examining, it is not for a Christian to be dissolute in living. We
see, when a man is to answer at the bar, how strangely, many times, he is
surprised with aguish passions, what slipping of eyes, beating of pulses,
panting of heart, houering of thoughts, for fear of the least miscarriage
before the Judges of this world, those little globes of earth (as one calls
them) and pictures of living clay? Well, Si tantum pertimescis iudicium
pulueris Greg.
, qua formidine praeuidendum est iudicium Maiestatis? He is the Judge of Judges
that in the end must try and take notice of our doings: and a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God Heb. 10. 31.
. How then can it be but that the thoughts of such a powerful Majesty should
cast us along upon our faces? Quid faciam cum surrexerit ad iudicandum Deus Job
31. 14.
? What shall I do when God rises up, and when he visits, what shall I
answer him? O let it arm us against the fiery darts of Satan, and serve to
scare us from the unfruitful works of darkness; let us not wound our souls
by consenting to lying vanities; let us not fear Consciences by conniuing at
known corruptions; let us not bless our selves in the addition of
drunkenness to thirst, of sin to sin; but abstain from all ensnaring
sensualities, and fight against all rebellious imaginations, and labor to slay
them with this twoedged Sword; as a judgment at hand, so a God to reveal it:
Iudicabit Deus: God shall judge.

For a timely prevention.
us for a timely prevention to be strict and severe in our own trials.
Quantum potes, teipsum coargue, inquire in te. (A divine piece of counsel from
a mere Moralist Senec.
.) As far as thou art able, attache thy self, search into thy self (says
he) and at once sustain the person of an Accuser, a severe Judge, a
remorsefull Supplicant. To borrow these a while;

1. Be thine own Accuser in the free confession of thy sins. Peccaui pater
(as the prodigal child) Father, I 1 By an humble confession of our sins.
have sinned against heaven and against thee. For it fares not in the Court of
heaven, as it does in our earthly Tribunals. With men a free confession makes
way for a condemnation; but with God, the more a sinner endeares his offense,
the more he extenuats the anger of his Judge. Sin cannot but call for
justice, as it is an offense against God; yet when once it is a wound to the
soul, it moves him to mercy and clemency. Wherefore as David having but
resolved to confess his sins Psalm. 32 6.
, was accosted eftsoone with an absolution: So, Tu agnosce, and Dominus
ignoscet August.
: Be thou unfeigned in Confessing, and God will be faithful in forgiving ^oh 1.
9.
. Only let Confessio peccati, be professio desinendi Hila^.
: The acknowledgement of thy sin, an obligation to leave it; and then thou
may build upon it, He that confesses and forsakes, shall have mercy. d
Prou 28. 13.


Be thine own Judge, and that in the strictest censure 2 By a severe
condemnation of our se ues.
and seuerest condemnation of thy self; considering that of the Apostle, If we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged 1 Cor. 11. 31
: for there must needs be a Judgment one way or other. Nothing shall go
scot-free that has been done against Gods Law. All our enormous acts, Aut
homine puniente, aut Deo iudicante plectentur, must either be punished by our
own censure, or by the sentence of God: And therefore to prevent the latter,
(...) (says Saint Chrysostom Expos. in ps. 4. 4.
,) Erect a Tribunal for thine own Conscience; and when that has accused to
the full, pass sentence upon thy self with the returning unthrift, Luke 15.
21.
I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Tibi Domine iustitia Dan. 9. 7.
, etc. To thee, O Lord, belongs righteousness, but unto us confusion of face.

3. And lastly, after sentence given, be an earnest supplicant unto God for
pardon, in the tears and sobs of 3 By supplication to God for pardon. Psalm.
51. 1.
the Psalmist, Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according
to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses i. For (as Chrysostom
sweetly notes) Vbi misericordia flagitatur, interrogatio cessat Hom. 2. in ps.
^0.
, etc. Where mercy is entreated, accounts are answered; where mercy is desired,
even Judgment it self relenteth. Indeed it might seem a very desperate
course, to make our address unto the Judge, were it not in a time of grace, in
a day of salvation: This it is that puts life into the penitent soul, to wit,
That God is in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself 2 Cor. 5. 19.
: And if any man sin, we have an Aduoeate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
. And therefore as Themistocles, having offended King Philip, caught up in his
arms his young son Alexander, and craved for the Princes sake what he could
not obtain for his own: So albeit thou have highly provoked and incensed the
Judge against thee, yet if by the hand of Faith thou apprehend and interpose
the Lord Jesus, Hic est filius meus dilectus Mat. 3. 17.
He is the Fathers beloved son, in whom he has declared himself to be well
pleased. Thus then, let us be mindful of these important directions, and
practice them to the furtherance of our reckoning with God: straightly accuse,
severely condemn, and humbly implore forgiveness, that we may find the Lord
propitious in the day when he takes up his Throne to avenge himself upon all
unrighteousness.

Iudicabit Deus; Is it so that God shall judge? Here is abundance of
consolation to relieve For our manifold consolation.
us in our deiections, and a sweet encouragement in all our distresses to bear
them with godly patience: For,

1. Does the world condemn thee for thy zeal in 1 In the case of holiness
reviled.
the service of God? reproachfully scorn thee for thy care to maintain good
works? not blush to traduce thee with imputations of preciseness, conceited
singularity, pharisaicall hypocrisy? O, but if thy conscience condemn thee
not all this while, if that be rectified by the sacred word of God; if thou
aim at his glory in pursuing thine own salvation, and side not with the
disturbers of the Church: Go on, (good Christian) in the practice of Piety,
discourage not thy self in thy laudable endeauours, but recount with comfort
that the Lord is thy Judge 1 Cor. 4. 4.
, with a Scio cui crediderim: I know on whom I have believed 2 Timothy 1. 12.
. And,

2. Art thou wrongfully adjudged in the erroneous 2 In the case of justice
refused.
Courts of men? are truth and righteousness gone aside from their proper
places? is equity neglected, and poverty over laid? well, have patience a
while, cheer up thy fainting spirits; there is a God that beholds the
innocence of thy cause, unto whom thou have liberty c Ad Tribunal aeternum
iusti Judicis prouocatio salua est. Penar.
to make thy last appeal. Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive
with me, and fight against them that fight against me Psa. 35. 1.
. Or,

3. Art thou otherwise iniuried by the hands of malicious men? and does a
penurious estate disable thee to sue for amends? Does a Nimrod oppress thee? a
Laban 3. In the case of innocence oppressed.
defraud thee? a covetous Landlord gripe thee? well yet, take not the matter
into thine own hands, by attempting unlawful courses; presume not to be Judge
in thine own cause, for default of a present redress; but often remember what
the Apostle taught his Thessalonians, 2 These. 1. 6.
It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation unto them that
trouble you.

Lastly, and is thy spirit wounded with repining admiration, 4. In the case of
impiety advanced.
at the flourishing estate of the wicked? to consider how thine enemies
prosper, and are mighty, and many in number; whereas commonly the righteous are
humbled with sorrows, and fed with the bread of tears? well, but ne
accendaris; fret not thy self because of the ungodly Psa. 37. 1.
: call not into question the dispensations of the Almighty; but as Abraham in
another case, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right Gen 18. 25.
? Go but into the Sanctuary of God Ps. 73. 16, 18.
with dependence upon the truth of his Word, and cause of emulation shall
easily vanish away. Tarry but the Lords leisure, and he comes full suddenly to
reconcile and clear the difference: Iudicabit Deus, God shall judge.

Thus (good brethren) of what nature soever our troubles and grieuances are;
whether holiness reviled, or justice refused, or innocence oppressed, or
impiety advanced, yet in consideration of a God for our Judge, Let us run
with patience the race that is set before us. Behold (says S. James Iam. 5. 7,
8.
) the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience for it until he receive the former and the latter rain. Be ye also
patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. With,
which words of comfort

I close up the second Point, the Quis iudicabit? God shall judge.

[Men] and that not by exclusion; only men (for the Angels Tho. 3. p. qu. 59.
art. 6.
shall be judged, especially they that fell Jude 6.
; inanimate creatures also 2 Pet. 3. 7.
, suo modo, according to their manner;) but by universal inclusion, all men;
of all Nations, Ages, Estates, Qualifications, Periods: Nations, be they never
so different in their manners and behauiours, in their Idiomes and Languages,
in their Rites and Ceremonies, in their Laws and Customs, Omnes
congregabuntur, They shall all be gathered before Christ Mat. 25. 32.
. Ages, from the worlds Genesis to the Exodus and dissolution; from the first
man Adam, to the last of his line; male and female, young and old, all must be
cited: Estates, from the tallest Cedar, to the lowest shrub; from the mightiest
Monarch, to the poorest beggar: high and low, noble and base, in hoc pares, all
must be conuented. Qualifications from the profoundest Gamaliel to the silliest
Ignaro; from the soundest Christian to the son of perdition: Sheep and
Goats, good and bad, all must be judged: Periods, whether alive to be changed,
or dead to be revived 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52.
: how ever they have passed through several transmutations, all must be
presented upon this public stage: 2 Timothy 4. 1. The Lord shall judge the quick
and the dyed at his appearing, and his Kingdom.

We must all appear (says the Apostle) before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his hody, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad 2 Cor. 5. 100*
.

And yet this universality might prove a nullity, were all exceptions of force:
For,

Psalm. 6. 5. and therefore the dead are incapable of judgment.

2. And according to the Original Text, He that believes in God, shall not
come into judgment (...).
, Ioh. 5. 24. therefore the good are exempt from that. Yea, and

3. The bad have their doom beforehand. For, Ioh. 3. He that believes not, is
condemned already.

How then can this Doctrine be avouched for truth, That there shall be a
judgment of all men? To take them in order.

sensu composito, dead in that instant; but in sensu diuiso, raised from the
dead; as also to give them their difference from those that are found alive.
For we shall not all sleep, 1 Cor. 15. Some shall remain alive, 1 These. 4.
And the powerful voice of the Archangell, whom ever it takes not so, it shall
make so: Even they that are in the graves, shall hear his voice and shall come
forth, Ioh. 5. The Sea, and Death, and Hell, all shall surrender their dead,
Reu. 20. Wherefore no contradiction in the judgment of such, seeing first they
be raised, and afterward judged.

2. For the good, it is beyond all question, (...). Romans 8. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. God has exempted them from the
judgment of condemnation; but yet they must be judged with the sentence of
absolution. For that which they have here in part, must then be perfected; and
that which they have here by Faith shall then be revealed; a final deliverance
from the thraldom of this world to the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

Lastly, concerning the bad, it cannot be denied, but that (...), in some
respects, they are doomed beforehand: As

1. In Gods infallible prescience, unto which all futures are present. 2. In
the volume of his revealed will, condemned upon supposall of infidelity. 3. In
the books of their own Consciences, accused and adjudged for sin. 4. In
respect of torments begun, either here while they are in their bodies, or
elsewhere in their deceased souls.
I say, they are doomed already in regard of these beginnings: but,

1. To the Judgment already passed, there wants an open manifestation of
Equity and Justice. 2. To the pains already inflicted, there rests an
aggrauation by their bodies resumed. 3. To the vengeance of former prauity,
there wants an infringement of further liberty.
Then only are they judged to the full, when their doom is proclaimed, their
bodies reioyned, and themselves from the Saints of God everlastingly parted.
All then must come forth unto judgment, though not all alike: The wicked like
thieves that are brought forth pinnion'd and bound with chains and fetters,
with hearts despairing, hands trembling, consciences accusing, and their own
tongues condemning them. The godly, like the Innocent unjustly emprisoned, that
has confidence in the goodness and uprightness of his cause, exceedingly
ioying at the coming of his Judge, who (he knows) upon good intelligence will
strike off his shackles, and set him at liberty. Wherefore albeit good and bad
be reserved to a day of appearance, yet the faithful only long for it, and
expect it as a day of reward; vt intra eum diem and victi erubescant, and
victores palmam adipiscantur victoriae Ambros.
To the end that on that day the convicted may be clothed with shame, and
valiant conquerours obtain the glorious prize of their blessed victory. In
consideration whereof the believer has cast off the spirit of bondage to fear
any more; and the day which affrighteth others, is the happy ambition of his
desires; while he says with the Prophet David, Ps. 42. 2.
My soul is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God; when shall I come b
Psalm. 42. 2.
to appear before the presence of God? But the point thus euidenced to our
hands, I need not enlarge: let me only enforce it with a word of Application,
and so proceed.

all, from the first generation to the last. Consider then a while (O Christian
For admiration of Gods wisdom and power.
soul) and admire the unlimited Generality of the last Judgment. For what a
wonderful multitude shall we then behold, when sea and land shall have emptied
themselves in a moment, and rendered up all their spoils! when Adam and Eve
shall marvel at the sight of so many ages together; the Patriarchs bless
themselves at the sight of so many reaching posterities; the Christian world be
ravished at the sight of such a populous confluence of Jews, of Turks, of
Infidels in one place. How strangely will it affect us to behold in their
several stations Xerxes, Darius, Alexander, Croesus, with all the famous
Monarchs and Princes of the world before the Tribunal of God? yea, what a
marvelous alteration shall we then behold, when all the persecuted and
afflicted Saints of God shall arise in judgment and eternally overcome? Abel
against Cain, Isaac against Ismael, David against Saul, Martyrs against
Tyrants, Poor against Oppressors, and God for his chosen against all their
enemies. All which considered, we are too too stupid (beloved) if we pass
without admiration, if we break not into his praises who is Lord and Judge
over all, (...): the strong and immortal God. Blessed Creator, how
bottomless is the depth of thy wisdom! incomprehensible the transcendency of
thy power! that art able to put life into the dust, with such facility to run
through so many ages, and in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, to separate
the Sheep from the Goats for ever.

But I list not to rest in admiration. Rather in the second place, For
intimation of our incuitable appearance.
us from the highest to the lowest, of the incuitable necessity of our last
appearance. Nemo latebit, nemo euadet: no lurking under Mountains, no
consulting for escape in that day; but Adam, vbi es? Adam, where art thou?
Cain, vbi frater tuus? Where Is thy Brother? voca operarios: Mat. 20. 8.
Call the laborers: if the laborers, no exemption of loyterers. Man,
whosoever thou art, Prince or Priest, or one of the People, Read rationem,
Luke 16. 2.
give an account of thy Stewardship. Then foolish Plato (says Hierome) shall
appear with his Scholars; Aristotle shall be confuted with all his arguments:
Herod's pompous state shall be turned to shame, cum filius pauperculae, when
that Son of the Virgin shall come to judge the world. 'Twas a morning alarm
to that wise Macedonian Prince, Philippe, memento te esse hominem. O King,
remember thou art a man. An excellent memorandum to admonish of his frailty, to
tell him that he must dye. O but after death comes the Judgment; and happily
that was more then he apprehended. Well, if the extent of the one be as c Heb.
^. 27.
general as the other, if judgment begin where mortality makes an end,
measure not your lives (ye Elders of the People) and reckon not your
happiness by the fading glory of the world; let not the rich man presume upon
his abundance; let not the poor man dream of a Forma pauperis; but let every
man assume for his own particular, Et ego sum homo: (as Austine in another
case) Even I also am a man, borne to be changed, and so to be judged.

For proparation, that the day may go with us.
against us; that as by nature we are men, and with the world to be judged, we
may be graciously prepared with all the Saints to be acquitted and saved
eternally. It is written of the Ephraimites in the 12. of Judges, that no less
than 42000 were taken at the passages of Jordan, discovered by their
pronunciation, and slain by the men of Gilead. Need I moralize? For the
passages then of Jordan, we have the straights of the last Judgment; and for
those wrangling Ephramites, remorselesse sinners; who albeit in this life they
may escape unpunished, and pass securely by the Censures of men (especially
your grand Impostours, whose Religion consists in formality) yet at length they
are known in their different natures; a wrong pronunciation betrays these
Ephramites; Sibboleth for Shibboleth, Hypocrisy for Sincerity,
unrighteousness for faith, and a good Conscience discouers their Tribe, and
damnes their souls for ever.

To prevent such a woeful desolation, let it be our providence, like so many
native Gileadites, to take heed unto our ways, that we offend not in our
tongues, to live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world, and to
frame our selves to the Apostles dialect, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my Course, I have kept the faith; 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness.

And so from the parties to be judged, I am come to the Causes to be examined;
Occulta hominum; The secrets of men.

(...)] Not by way of Restriction, but of amplification, A twofold
and to distinguish from Humane trials.

That there is no corruption so privily fostered, no iniquity so covertly
contrived, but the Lord shall severely examine, and openly judge it at the last
day. The secret conueyances, and practices of bloody hands, the secret
susurrations and buzzings of false tongues, the secret imaginations and
thoughts of unsanctified hearts, all fall within the compass of this
Judgment. Though that is not all.

No righteousness of the Saints so virulently traduced, no innocence so
mistaken, no sincerity so besmeared with the aspersions of damned Hypocrisy,
which shall not then be most clearly manifested, and rewarded openly. They are
the words of the Preacher, God shall bring every work into Judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil Eccl. 12. vlt.
. To take them promiscuously together.

Heb. 4. 1-3.
. All things are naked and open, anatomized (as it were) and cut up before his
eyes. No heart of man so darkely imprisoned, but the Lord beholds it; no
thought in his heart so silently conceived, but the Lord discries it; no lust
in his thought so secretly blown and kindled, but the Lord discernes it; no
seed of ungodliness so inuisibly rooting in the soul, but the Lord perceiues
it. He searches all hearts (says David) and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts 1 Chr. 28.
. He knows our downe-lying, and our vp-rising, he understands our thoughts
long before. He is about our paths, and about our beds, and espyeth out all our
ways Ps. 139. 1, 2.
. Wherefore rightly is he conceived under the name of (...), from (...), to
see, as a God unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
(says our Church) no secrets are hid ^ui silentium confitetur, and sine voce
men's loquitur. Aust.
.

Man may know the secrets of his own, he cannot of another heart; nor those
of his own but by examination, nor after exactest Scrutiny but with
inadequation to the truth. No, for the heart is deceitful above all things:
Who can know it? (says the Prophet Ier. 17. 9.
.) Well yet, Si nemo, non tamen nullus. The Lord knows it (beloved) and
beholds it from his holy place: No need of an Informer to promote the cause:
He has for failing seven eyes, which run to and fro through the whole earth
Zech. 4. 10.
. Upon which if you require a Comment, Totus oculus est (says S. Austen) God
is all eye; and so considers our ways (says Gregory) Vt minutissimae
cogitationes indiscussae non maneant. Every man's work, nay, every thought must
be brought to trial. For his knowledge of the worlds concealements, and the
unobserved sanctity of his Chosen, is nothing less than an vnpracticke Theory.
He sits not in the heavens as an idle Spectator, with a regardlesse
reuengelesse eye; but that which he knows, he records; and what he records, he
will censure at the vnclasping of his book of remembrance; (...): The secrets
of men.

For discovery of the fearful estate of close sinners: As
in the 10. Psalm. Tush, God has forgotten, he hides his face, he will never
see it. As if they held it for a safe position, Been qui latuit, been vixit;
and sin were no sin, where man had no sight. But Hypocrite, will thou
outwardly The Hypocrite.
appear like a goodly painted Tomb, and be lined with rottenness and
corruption? Will thou dig full deep to hide thy Counsel from the Lord? and
think with outward services to ouer-shadow an ungodly heart? Intus Nero, foris
Cato, totus ambiguus? Adulterer, can nothing Adulterer.
scare thee save the eyes of a mortal man? art thou waiting for the twylight,
and expecting till the Sable hangings of the night bespread themselves about
thee? can thou mantle thy self with the darkness, in the morning wipe thy
mouth, and think it shall never be known? Temporizer, is this the height of
thy soaring wisdom Temporizer.
to maintain correspondencie with the times? and neglecting the Common good to
deuote thy self to thine own? is this thy Religion to conform to the present
state with indifferency of affection to a change? Slanderer, Privy slanderer.
is this thy occupation to wound with insensible blows? and secretly by false
information to draw men into open disgrace? Tradesman, and whateuer dealer in
Unconscionable Tradesman, etc.
the commodities of this world, art thou priuileged by deceiuable words to set
a gloss upon unanswerable wares? to pretend commutatiue instice with intention
of unconscionable gain? Think thou it is enough to discharge thee, that thy
brother cannot punctually discern thee? Well (whosoever thou art) if thy
carriages be so cunningly, so handsomely conueighed, that neither industry nor
policy can vnueyle and disclose thee, yet know, there is a God who is perfectly
acquainted with thy inmost vaults and concauities; a consuming fire Heb. 12. 29.
, that searches out thy hypocritical simulation; a Father of Lights Iac. 1.
17.
, that espyes thee through palpable darkness. Though with Thamar thou muffle
thy face Genesis 38. 15.
, with Adam art behind the bushes Genesis 3. 8.
, with Sarah behind the door Genesis 18. 9.
, or posting with Gehezi for a bribe 2 King. 5.
, yet the eye of the Lord is fixed upon thee, and in case of impenitency he
will declare against thee. That (as once Epicurus in Seneca) Quid si tuta esse
possint scelera, si secura esse non possint? Well may thou be able to hide
the fact, thou can not for ever be secure from the Judge. Quem nulla vnquam
humana vis elidet, aut acumen eludet Lips. de constable. lib. 1. cap. 17.
. No means of deluding Gods Tribunal: no sig-leaues to cover the nakedness
of sin. Neither Achans theft, nor Saul's hypocrisy, nor the Curtezans
curtains, nor Iehu's policy, nor Hamans treachery, nor Ananias sacrilege,
nor any other secret impiety, but the day of account shall clearly reveal it,
and the God of spirits condemn for all. Insomuch, as if here thou would
often blush for shame, had thy breast but a Momus his grate before it, for men
to be prying into thy thoughts; if here thou would loath and abhor thy
self in case of a sudden surprision as thou actest thy secret folly (happily
with a number inuenisti 1 Kin. 21. 20.
? have thou found me, O mine enemy?) how then shall it abash thee, when after
so long concealment from the notice of men, the very heart of thy heart shall
be plainly unfolded, and the darkness of thy clanculary delights irradiated
with the glorious beams of justice in the face of God and his holy Angels?

Go to then (every lurking Tenebrio) applaud thy self in thy shifts and
devises, sing a requiem to thy soul upon withholden Judgments; but know, that
as Conscience which is a thousand witnesses, has a time to accuse thee: So
God, who is infinitely more then a thousand consciences, a day to reprove thee;
(they are the words of his own mouth) I will reprove thee, and set before thee
the things that thou have done Psa. 50. 21.
.

Thus having dealt with the delinquent in occulto, we may seem to have
forgotten the sinner in propatulo, whom the presence of men and Angels deters
not from ungracious courses: but,

To exaggerate the judgment of notorious transgressors.
be the end of notorious villainies, proclaimed abominations? If the secrets of
the night shall be clearly manifested, how then can it be but that the
out-brauings of roaring Ephraimites should be censured with a merciless doom?
If publicly in the open Sun thou dare fly in thy makers face, not fearing
to dishonor the glorious name of Christ Jesus, to stabbe his sides, to rip his
wounds with direful blasphemous oaths, to profane his day, to disgrace his
Ministers, with other the like enormities: Certainly, if a timely repentance
prevent not approaching vengeance, thou can not avoid it, but be so much the
sorer punished, as the very secrets of sinful men shall not be exempt from the
last Judgment.

This for the ungodly and the sinner. But,

demensum in the further application of it. For whereas this To enforce upon
professors a walking with God in sincerity.
Judgment is of such a discovering nature, that not the closest wickedness
can possibly be shrouded from it; O let it persuade us to observe our ways,
and to keep our hearts with all diligence; to make a Mittimus for hypocrisy
and gilded piety: for Covetousness, that secret kind of Idolatry; to beware
of retired as well as of open sins; and to reckon it with that wise Moralist,
Senec.
for the greatest glory and triumph of innocence, non peccare vbi liceat: Even
there and then to give back from offending, where circumstances of time and
place might jointly concur to favor us. 'Twas wholesome counsel which a
Rabbin gave to his Scholar, to remember there is an eye seeing, an ear
hearing, a book written: gravely advised, could we make our advantage of it.
Presume not (I beseech you) to sin with security, because of supposed
secrecy; let no man dissemble himself out of policy, or semble another in
hypocrisy: but let us strive unfeignedly to approve our selves unto God by
walking uprightly before him; make search into the Labyrinths of our
selfe-deceiuing hearts; find out those ugly monsters that are lurking within,
to destroy us; forget not that sacred discerning spirit, from which there is no
withdrawing: but amidst the greatest priuacy a Psalm. 139. 6.
that fear to it self can imagine: I say, in the closest closets, the darkest
groves, the blackest nights, and fairest opportunities, repel whatsoever
temptations, and crush the very motions of ungodliness with this or the like
thought, there is a sun arising will manifest all, and a day of the Lords
appointing, when all maskes shall bevnpinned, and all disguises taken off; when
hearts shall speak, and tongues shall hold their peace.

One Use more before I leave it.

In the case of rash judgment, 1 Passiuely to neglect it.
passiuely to neglect it, actiuely to forbear it. For,

1. Does all thy righteousness and integrity pass unobserved? and is the
world unable to discern thy spiritual estate? does zeal go for madness,
piety for hypocrisy, and charity for vain ostentation? Well, yet (with the
blessed Apostle) 1 Cor. 4. 3.
reckon not to be judged of man's judgment; yield not, to slack the fervor of
thy zeal: grow not into a weariness of thy former profession, but remember
how we must all ere long be manifested in our realties and native colors
[(...)] 2 Cor. 5. as much as in Theodorets gloss to be made transparent and
clear as Crystal: in the day when an vnguilefull Israelite shall not fail
of a Testimonial, but be openly honored with the witness and praise of God:
yea, and rather then fail, ex ore tuo serve nequam (by the doleful
recantation of the ungodly.) W^s^. 5 3, ^, 5.
This was he whom we sometime had in derision, and a proverb of reproach: we
fools counted his life madness, and his end to be without honor: how is he
numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the Saints?

That for censures passed upon our selves.
Next for ours concerning others. For,
2. Is the opening of all manner secrets put over to the 2 Actiuely to fo^be^^^
it.
last day? Let it teach us in all things to be patiently ignorant where we
cannot infallibly judge. In use of things indifferent, and in carriages of a
doubtful interpretation, non reprehendamus ca quae nescimus quo animo fiant
August.
: never condemn the man, where we know not his meaning. It Is for itching
censorious obseruers to be peremptory and Pope-like in their definitions: it is
for them to hold a Dictatourship over the souls and consciences of their
brethren: Non sic didicimus Christum. If I will that he tarry till I come, what
is that to thee? follow thou me Ioh. 31. 22.
. Conscientiae latebras nudare (says Austin,) hominibus hand permissum.
Encroach not then upon Gods prerogative royal; judge nothing before the time 1
Cor. 4. 5.
; incur not the condemnation of [(...) 1 Pet. 4. 15.
.] Bishops in another Diocese. For what, have we not hearts to examine of our
own? is it for want of secrets in our selves? Call out our houses where we
have lived, our Chambers where we have lodged: Summon the seats where we have
sat, and the pillowes where we have rested: ask the fields and the gardens,
and the walls, and the hedges, where we have often walked, and what fearful
testimonies of unsanctified reseruations would not every one of these produce
against us? Wherefore (vain Man) stand aloof with the poor dejected Publican
Luke 18. 13.
, and take up the words of the Psalmist; Lord who knows how often he offends?
cleanse thou me from my secret faults Psalm* 19. 12.
. Thus if we would needs be Judges, let us sit at home in discussion of our own
ways: and as touching the secrets of others, exceed not the rule of charity.
They stand or fall to their own Master Romans 14. 4.
: of whose second appearance (as the Samaritan woman of his first) say, When
the Messiah is come, he will tell us all things Ioh. 4. 25.
. (...) (in the expression of our Apostle) he will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make apparent the counsels of the hearts 1 Cor 4. 5.
.

And thus much for the fourth part, the Judicial reserved causes: occulta
hominum: the secrets of men.

Jesus Christ. He is the immediate manager and administratour of the Judgment;
All things were made by him Ioh 1. 3. 1 Trem. per manum Ieschua Christi.
, and by him shall all be judged, Act. 17. 31. by that man whom God has
ordained. For,

First, though it belong to the whole Trinity in point of Judiciary power,
(which the Father communicates to the Son, generando, non largiendo Ambros.
: by eternal generation, and not by donation in time) yet take it in regard of
the visible act, the Judicature is Christ's after a b Dan. 7. 9. 13. Prop in
Senten. 337. Aug. tract. 19. in Ioh.
special manner: For he only shall be seen to descend with a guard of
Angels, to open the book of accounts, to examine the several causes, to
pronounce the final sentence; it being altogether meet in the wisdom of God
that man by man should be tried and judged: that like as in respect of his
Sonship, he is judge Coauthoritatiue, by a common undivided power: So
Subauthoritatiue, in regard of his Mediatourship, and by peculiar deputation,

Secondly, how ever the twelve Apostles be to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel
Luke 22. 30.
; no fear of a riualship and competition with Christ: it being chiefly meant
(if not solely) in respect of their Gospel, which shall serve to convince or
to clear them. Yea, and

Thirdly, Whereas all the Saints be to judge evil Angels and Men 1 Cor 6.
verse. 2. 3.
, it is only as attendant Justices on the Bench, Testimonio, Exemplo,
Suffragio; by Testimony, Example So also the Ninevites, and the Queen of the
South. Mat. 12. 41, 42
, approbation; Membrorumiure (at most) by Communion with Christ their head;
there lies plenitudo potestatis: the fullness of Judiciary power, it being
altogether congruous, that the heir of his Fathers glory should be sole in the
swaying of his Fathers Scepter.

Where it will not be amiss to consider his Commission. Qualification

The one to prove him a lawful: the other a sufficient Judge.

1. For his Commission, The Father judges no man, 1 Christ is a lawful Judge.
Ioh. 5. 22. but has committed (...), all judgment unto the Son; Yea, and
he has given him Authority; verse. 27. to execute judgment because he is the
Son of man. A plain Commission, if we stick not at the reason; what,
therefore Quia filius hominis? Yes, and upon very good reason, if that of Saint
Austin may stand: Humilitas claritatis meritum, claritas humilitatis praemium.
He humbled himself in the form of a Servant Phil. 2.
, and God has exalted him to the honor of a Judge. Or (as others) (...) and
(...) Pelarg. in locum.
: It was by and according to his Humane Nature.

For first the Father of mercies (says Bernard Ser. 73. in Cant.
) will have judged per hominem homines, that while the wicked tremble and are
full of perplexity, the similitude* of Nature may make the Elect confident.

Secondly, it is as much to Saint Cyril, as in quantum homo factus est Lib. 2.
Cap. 140.
: Not so much Causally, for his Manhood, as formally, according to it: Vt
intelligamus omnia sibi data esse vt homini Cap. 144.
: to teach us (says he) that as according to his Deity he has this power
naturally: so according to his Humanity 'twas given him. That Is his Commission
then.

2. And for his Qualification, he is in nothing 2 An absolute Judge for
defective that should make an accomplished Judge. The ^. Wisdom.


1. And maine thing required in such a person, is Wisdom, the Salt of
Science, to understand and know the Law: For, Ignorantia Iudicis calamitas est
innocentis August.
; Down goes the party innocent, where the Judge is to seek for knowledge. O
but Jesus Christ is the eternal Wisdom Prou. 8. 22.
and Word Ioh. 1. 1.
of his Father; a discerner of Spirits; a reuealer of secret intentions: In
whom (as the Apostle speaks) are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge Col. 2. 3.
. The

2. Is Justice, the Salt of Conscience, impartially 2. Justice.
to determine Causes; for (according to the ancient rule) Tamdiu Iudex dicitur,
quamdiu and iustus putatur Cassiod. Compare Genesis 18. 25. with Romans 3. 5, 6.
. No longer Judge than just. Which if we examine in Christ, A Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of his Kingdom, Hebr. 1. 8. No exorbitancy of
affection, no acceptance of persons in proceedings at his Tribunal; For
behold, my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall
be Apoc. 22. 12. 3. Courage.
.

3. A Judge must have Courage and vndauntednesse of Spirit, that Justice may
receive no affront: He must not fear the face of man, because the judgment
is Gods Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
, And accordingly Jesus Christ is for Majesty and presence, the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah Apoc. 5. 5.
. The hand of God is upon the man of his right hand, and upon the Son of man
whom he has made so strong for his own self Accommodatitie a psalm. 80. 17.
.

4. And such a Commissioner must be constant in his 4. Constancy
warrantable Decrees; not starting aside like a broken bow; not guilty of an
Aliud stans, aliud sedens. O but Jesus Christ is yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever Heb. 13. 8.
; the eternal Son of that Father of Lights, with whom is no mutation,
neither shadow of change Iac. 1. 17.
. Has he said, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken, and shall he not make
it good?

Lastly, and he must have sufficiency of power for Execution 5. Power.
of sentence given; for to small purpose does he judge the fact, that cannot
suppress the offender. Yea, but Jesus Christ is that victorious Michael Apo.
12. 7. 8.
, and the Captain of the Lords Host Josh. 5 14.
; and has all the world at his command to effect his Royal pleasure; Angels
are his Ministers; the Devils his Slaves; his (...) is his (...): let him but
say: it is done. Take him and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter
darkness.

And therefore the sum is this;

Seeing there is nothing behind for Commission or Qualification, seeing the
Father has appointed him, and his Attributes jointly commend him; Wisdom to
know, Justice to decide, Courage to resolve, Constancy to uphold, and Power to
put in Execution: What Pilate scoffingly said to the Jews, Ecce Rex vester,
Behold your King Ioh. 19. 14.
; This Doctrine seriously proclaymes unto the world, Ecce Iudex vester; Behold
your Judge.

The task were Catecheticall to enlarge in particulars; as how he shall
summon, and how he shall separate, and the manner of his discussion, with his
sentence and retribution: That laudable revived Exercise has (I hope)
prepossest you with those Notions Let me crave your patience for two or three
deductions, and there cannot much more remain.

O quantum mutatus ab illo! Great To difference his first and last Appearance.
^ Ioh. 4. 25, ^6. Phil. 2. 7. 8.
difference betwixt his first, and the state of his second Appearance. He came
as a Prophet, to teach and instruct a: he comes as a Judge, to examine and
censure. He came as a servant b, to suffer in humility: he comes as a King, to
triumph in Majesty. He came as a Lamb, in meekness and patience c: he comes
as a Lion, with Is. 53. 7.
fierceness* and indignation. Then, to give light to them that sat in
darkness d: Now, to bring darkness on such Luke 1. 79.
as refused light. In a word, he came to deliver men out of the strong holds of
sin, with a Venite ad me omnes e: Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
And, God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved Ioh. 3. 17.
: whereas he comes to give over the servants of unrighteousness to perpetual
imprisonment in the lowest hell: For then shall he say unto them on his left
hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels Mat. 25 41.
.

O think upon the difference 'twixt these Appearances; and recount in your
deepest meditations, how the heavens shall shriuell together like a Scroll, and
the whole frame of nature be dissolved and melted with flaming fire; how the
great and mighty hills shall start out of their places like frighted men, and
the great and mighty sinners shall call upon those hills to fall upon them;
yea, and lastly, how the crew of unbelievers shall wish but for one of the
days of the Son of Man, and shall not prevail to see it. Upon serious
thoughts whereof, foreslow not (I beseech you) the season of Regeneration;
neglect not the Halcyonian days of Christ; but as ever you desire to have
comfort at his last, make your advantage of his first coming: Receive his
Ambassadors and Messengers of peace, observe his gracious example, repent from
dead works and live by faith in his name, that ye fail not to meet him as a
merciful Savior in the day when he comes to judge. That Is the first.

To affect us with comfort and desire of his return.
Conscience we had interest in the Judges favor! For there is no Condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus; no possible separation from the love of God
in him Rom, 8. 1. and ver. 33. 38, 39.
. Is it Christ that justifies? Quis intentabit? Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of his Chosen? He is our Brother, Heb. 2. 11. Our Bridegroom, Mat. 9.
15. Our Advocate, 1 Ioh. 2. 1. Our Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Shall we then be
affrighted at the mention of his Appearance? Disheartened with a slavish
degenerous fear? Vae mihi de die illo terribili, says Saint Chrysostom In
Mat 24. hom. 77.
) Woe is me as concerning that dreadful day; forasmuch as when we ought to
rejoice at the remembrance of these things, we pine away with grief and
sorrow. Yea, but let not these things be so (my brethren) lose not the benefit
of such a comfortable truth; It is I (says our Savior) be not afraid Mat.
14. 27.
; The voice of our Beloved; let not our hearts be troubled. Only make him our
friend by the bond of Faith and Charity, and then, if our sins be a
distraction, the Judge has forgiven us; Our Corruptions a Molestation, he
comes to translate us to the freedom and life of Angels. Insomuch, as the Heart
may bray, and David thirst, and the Saints long, and the Spouse importune his
return; Make haste (my beloved) and be thou like to a Roc or to a young Heart
upon the Mountains of Spices Cant. 8. 12.
.

It was a strange infirmity of the Church in Tertullians days, when they
usually prayed pro mora finis Tertul. in Apolog. aduers. Gent. cap. 39.
, for a protraction of the last end; As if they had scarce bin acquainted with
adueniat Regnum tuum; Like Idiots in our own times, who hope that they shall
never live to see such a terrible day; Not live to see it? Nay, rather fear,
thou shall never see it to live. Wherefore Christians better principled should
give diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, to be persuaded of
their Communion with the Son of God, and to possess their souls with this,
that he comes to deliver us from a world of temptations, to wipe away all
tears from our eyes, to solemnize our Marriage, and in full and perfect manner
to endow us with heaven and all happiness; In Consideration whereof, let the
Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that hears, say Come: (...): Even
so come Lord Jesus Apoc. 22. 20.
. To terrify the enemies of Christ and his ordinances.


Lastly, shall the Judge be Christ? It may be matter of terror to the souls of
remorselesse sinners, the contemners of his sacred ordinances, and as Ezekiels
roll wherein was written, Lamentations, and mourning, and Woe Ezekiel. 2. 9, 10
. For how dreadfully shall it confound the Malicious Jews to behold in the
place of Judgment whom they crucified? How strangely shall it affright and
astonish unjust Pilate, to behold the Supreme Judge whom he condemned? How
fearfully shall it discountenance and quell those barbarous soldiers, to
behold the Lord of glory whom they pierced? Nay, if in the time of his
Humiliation, he ouerturned so many armed Champions with Ego sum, I am he; Quid
faciet iudicaturus, qui iudicandus hoc fecit August.
? What shall he do when he comes to judge, who did this when he went to be
judged? What a dismal overthrow shall the voice of his Majesty make, when he
shall say unto damned Reprobates, as once to the ungracious Jews, Ego sum: I
am he. Ecce hominem quem crucifixistis: Behold the man whom ye crucified. Ecce
vulnera quae infixistis: Behold the wounds which ye imprinted. Ecce latus quod
pupugistis: Behold the side which ye pierced. For every eye shall see him, and
they also which pierced him, Reu. 1. 7. Now if Joseph's brethren were perplexed
at his presence, btcause they had formerly sold him Genesis 45. 3, ^*
, what a world of perturbation may they justly expect, that exchange their
Christ for the worlds vanity? What shall the traiterous Judas do, that sells
him for pieces of silver? What shall the suborned Accuser do, that leads him
to be condemned? What shall the Glutton and Drunkard do, that frets him with
gall and vinegar? What shall the blasphemous swearer do, that pierces him
with outrageous oaths? And lastly, what shall the unmerciful oppressor do,
that crucifies him in his poor members? O the cries, and lamentations, and
rufull complaints that shall then be flying through the vastness of a
dissoluing world! What confusion for the loss of a Savior, and the wilful
prouokements of a severe Judge! In the day when the Kings of the earth, and the
great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and
every bondsman, and every freeman shall hide themselves in the dens, and in
the rocks of the mountains, and say to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us,
and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb Apo. 6. 15. 16
.

Men and brethren here assembled, I cannot believe, but that the thoughts of
such amazing terrors have long ago prepared some souls among you, and
seasoned you for the kingdom of heaven. And for you that with benumbed
consciences proceed in the ways of sin, oh that my words were powerful to
the rending of your flinty hearts, and of virtue like Moses his Rod Exodus 17.
5, 6
, to fetch water out of the hardest Rock! Either now or never bestirre you
about the means of grace; and begin to bethink your selves: Quid faciemus?
What shall we do to be saved? Ye have yet the offer of Salvation in Christ
Jesus, and as yet he deferres the execution of the Judgment, and during the
accepted time, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the
world. Whereas, if with disgraceful neglect ye spurn at so great Salvation,
if ye will not admit the son of man to reign over you, but despise his
Doctrines, doings, fastings, prayings, bleedings, gronings: I must refer you
with sorrow, from the Cross of a Mediator, to the dreadful Throne of an
auenging Judge. Durus Sermo, (I ween) to as many as are cross with God. And
shall our Sun thus set in a Cloud? The mistake is too ordinary for menaces of
Judgment to be confounded with Legal austerities. But let the Remains excuse
me upon the warrant of Confirmation, it is Secundum Euangelium meum: according
to my Gospel. That will be all. (...)] Norma and rule of the last Judgment
Bucan. Scharp.
. And I deny not but in the sentence of Absolution it shall: No ruse but the
Gospel for bestowing of life; as no Instrument but faith to apprehend it.

The like also for some in the sentence of condemnation, according to that of
our Savior: He that retecteth me, and receives not my words: (...), the
selfsame word that* I have spoken, shall judge him in the last day Ioh. 12. 48.
.

A sense that cannot be refused, so far as it may extend. Shall a Minister of
the Gospel in a lewd Congregation conceit, after all his pains, that he has
beaten the air? or a formal Auditor, having sat out a Sermon, that he shall
hear no further of it? Let me tell you in the name of the Lord, (...), that
word which now you hear, deny it entertainment, it shall serve to judge you at
last. Thus far it holds then; but --

Non omnibus datum est: all have not attained to hear the Gospel. A great
part of the world never heard of the Written Law. If as many as have sinned
without the Law, shall without it also perish Romans 2. 12.
: the sequel is clear, that sinners without the Gospel, shall not be tried
by it. And consequently, Secundum Euangelium makes nothing for an absolute Rule.

Paul had preached him for Judge of quick and dead: so according to this
Gospel the Judgment should be holdden by him Prouocat ad Euangelium, non
v^doceat secundum quid Deus si^ iudicaturus, sed per quam, nempe Mediatorem,
etc. Par, in loc.
. And indeed the Moral Law, howsoever it threatens a Judgment, yet speaks
not a word of a Mediator to manage it: gives not the least inkling of the man
Christ Jesus. That Is extra Cancellos, without the rayles and lists of the Law;
peculiar to the tongues of Evangelical Prophets and appropriate to the pens of
Prophetical Evangelists; (...): according to the Gospel. But --

Nuncium ac praeconium (as Calvin upon the words) The tidings (in part) and
proclamation of the future Judgment. As if the Apostle had said, There shall
be a day, when God shall judge by Christ, Sicut testatur Doctrina haec, cuius
ego sum praeco constitutus Annot. bren. in loc.
: As witnesses this Doctrine, whereof I am made a Preacher: Or (as Theophilact
to the same purpose) Secundum quod de die Iudicij Euangelizare and docere soleo.

Not a Gospel then that should make him a fifth Evangelist (as some Heretics
would have gul'd the world De quibus Ambr. in Luc. in Prooem [(...)]
, Nor a Scripture to be distinguished from the Gospel of Christ
(notwithstanding the Pronoune annexed) for Paul's Gospel is Gods Gospel, Romans
1. 1. thy word, and their word (as our Savior in the 17. of John) theirs by
dispensation, thine for revelation: so Christ's originally, Paul's Ministerially
Christi vt Autb^^is, Apostoli vt praedicatoris. Lyra.
. Accepi a domino, 1 Cor. 11. Paul. receives it from God, and so delivers it to
the Church. But I remember where I speak, and would God (with Moses) that all
the Lords people were Prophets Number. 11. 29.
. Let the point of observation be this:



It is one of the preferments of the Gospel above the Law in the 12. to the
Hebrews From v. 18. to the 13.
, that instead of access unto the Mount that might be touched, unto
blackness, and darkness, and tempest. The believing Jews were come unto
Mount Sion, and to God the Judge of all. A strange Paradoxe in the opinion of
the world. Can God the Judge of all, be the subject of the covenant of Grace?
or the Gospel, his Mercy-seate be reconciled with the Tribunal of Justice?

Indeed the Pontificians glory in it, and think their conclusion impregnable,
that the merit of Works, and the doctrine of Grace may very well stand
together Cornel. a lap. in lo.
. But to answer them in the words of Pope Gregory; Aliud est secundum opera
reddere, aliud propter ipsa In Psalm. paeni^en. 7.
. Its one thing to render according to our works, another for the worthiness
of them. The former (we grant) is both Mercy and Justice, though in a sense
little helpefull to them: Mercy in crowning those poor performances which have
no condignity Romans 8. 18.
with the reward: and Justice in accomplishing those gracious Promises Compare
Heb. 10. 23. with 1 John 1. 9
, which were made in the Lord our righteousness Ier. 23. 6.
: But then, if we speak of the latter, no Mercy, but Justice, propter opera;
for the value and merit of our works: and if God should deal with us so, no
justice but punitiue: for what place (says that Father Mor. lib. 35. cap. 16.
) is there left for salvation, when as our evil doings are merely evil; but
the good things, which we believe we have, cannot be purely good? Non est quo
gratia intret (says Bernard Super Cant. Sermon. 67.
) vbi iam meritum occupauit: No room for the grace of God, where intrusion
has bin made by man's merit. They are strongly opposed, Romans 11. 6. If by
grace, then no more of works; of of works, it is no more grace. I conclude
this digression with that speech of Prosper, Lib. 1. de vocat, Gent. ca. 5.
Nulla possunt tam praeclara opera existere, etc. There can be no good works
of that excellency and dignity, as may challenge by the judgment of
retribution, what only comes by free gift; and consequently Judgment and
Gospel are (...) in this respect.

In this (I say) incompatible, though without any prejudice to the maine: For,

Ioh. 5. 22. 27
, exalted upon the throne of his Majesty Mat. 25. 31.
, to consummate the beatitude of all his chosen Heb. 9. 28.
.

Quod annunciat nobis res faustas Theophyl.
: that comforts the languishing spouse, and tells her of a glorious redemption.
Behold in the Article of the Judgment, the very season of refreshing from the
presence of God Act. 3. 19.
, the expectation of the Saints Phil. 3. 20.
, and restitution of all things Act. 3. 21.
. A day of Mercy for such as Onesiphorus 2 Timothy 1. 18
, a ground of comfort for such as the Thessalonians 1 These. 4, 18
, a crown of righteousness for such as Saint Paul 2 Timothy 4. 8.
, which the Lord the righteous shall Judge give unto them that love his
appearing.

Thirdly and lastly, if that be Gospel, which calls for Evangelical duties,
for Faith and Repentance, and the practice of Sanctification: behold the
Judiciary return of our Savior, persuading us to live by Faith Heb. 15. 37,
38.
, to repent Act. 17. 30, 31.
and renounce our sins, and to have our conversation in heaven Phil. 3. 20.
. That (a little to vary his speech) Dr Whitaker Aut boc, etc.
Si hoc non est Euangelium, neque no^ sumus Euangelici. They are as blind as
Sodomites, that discern not Gospel in these: and such as may justly be
feared, they never felt the Gospels power.

Tell me then, ye that hearken after Mercy and Peace, and disrelish the
explanation of this Article of our Faith: For answer to the exceptions of
selfefauouring Hearers.
Have ye appealed unto the Gospel? To the Gospel ye shall go. In the words
of our blessed Apostle, Non pudet me Euangelij Christi Romans 1. 16.
. Far be it from the Heralds and Proclaimers of these tidings to be moved
with the censures of the world. Let the roaring Sons of Belial make songs of
us at their iouiall comporations, brand us for unmerciful Doctors of despair:
let the guilty conscience go trembling away with Foelix Act. 24. 45.
, (such an aguish fit may peradventure turn to good.) At worst, what matters
it, so long as to the friends of God we come as so many Doves with our
Oliue-branches. No rarity for a full surcharged body to be Sea-sicke: for a
sinful distempered soul to be Sermon-sicke: with ill-disposed Palates the
sweetest Potions have a bitter taste; and so with disaffected souls,
Euangelicissimae conciones a: the very quintessence of the Gospel is the
savor of death As the Apoc. ^s styled by ^ullinger, E^angelicissimus ^ber.
unto condemnation. The Trumpet which sounds in an Army, formidolosi militis
mentem deijcit: disliueneth the heart of a cowardly soldier: while it enflames
the valiant spirit with greater courage: so the Priestly trumpet in an
Auditory, deiects the soul of an impenitent sinner, animos viri sancti
corroborat: confirms and strengthens the resolutions of a holy man b: Great
difference then twixt the native intention, and the cross Aug. de temp. ^r.
106.
accidental Issue. The doctrine of the judgment is of it self life Ahimaaz 2 Samuel 18. 27
, a good man, and comes with good tidings: and where-euer it fails of an
answerable apprehension: If our Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that are
lost 2 Cor. 4. 3.
.

Sampsons Riddle in the foureteenth To be moved upon this doctrine with
Evangelical affections.
of Judges; Ab^edente prodijt edulium: Out of the Eater came meat, out of the
strong came sweet. Have you heard of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, of the
strong and immortal God? that his Judgment shall one day devour, and his
strength confound the ungodly? O labor to make your advantage of it, to find
meat within this eater; to extract honey out of this strong, and to relieve
your souls with the sweetest consolations that by faith are hence deriueable.
Let graceless sinners emplunge themselves upon it into a gulf of despair:
Ecce Euangeliz^ vobis: to you that walk worthy of Christ, the gladsome tidings
of the happiest day that ever time conceived: of an everlasting Iubilee: of a
marriage Apoc. 19. 7.
, a coronation 1 Pet. 5. 4.
: (...), unspeakable words: such as is not possible for a man to utter.
Acquiri potest (says Austin) aestimari non potest foelicitas istius dici. Well
may we come to enjoy, never can we perfectly estimate the happiness of that
day: when the enemies of God and his Church shall be clad with dishonor and
everlasting shame Dan. 12. 2.
, and the Bridegroom with his prepared spouse Apoc. 21. 2.
shall appear in triumph and perfect glory Mat. 25. 31, 33.
, and an everlasting period be at once imposed to s^^e, and to time Apoc. 10. 6.
, to tears and to death Cap. 21. 4.
: when the souls under the altar shall cry no more Cap. 6. 10.
, Vsque quo Domine? Lord, how long? But Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace Luke 2. 29.
, (...), according to thy word: and now awakenest thou thy love to the
resurrection of life, (...): according to my Gospel. To say no more; If there
be any comfort and consolation of the spirit, any faith in the Lord Jesus, any
peace with the Father; peace of conscience, desire and hope of heaven: Let him
that has an ear, hear, and let him that has heard, consider; return an
Echo of devotion to these heavenly tidings; expecting with patience the
consummation of his hope, In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel.

FINIS.

