I H S. MEDITATIONS of the whole History of the Passion of CHRIST.

Written by the Reverend Father, F. Francis Costerus, Doctor of Divinity, of
the Society of JESUS.

Translated out of Latin into English by R.W. Esquire.

1. Pet. 4.1. Christo igitur passo in carne, and vos eadem cogitatione
armamini.

Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh, be you also a^med with the
same cogitation.

Printed at Doway. 1616.

The Preface. To the Sodality of the most blessed Sacrament in Aquicincts
College, in the University of Doway. Of the best manner of Meditation of the
Passion of Christ.
IT is manifest, that the end, for which Almighty God created Man, was, that
being endowed not only with that inferior part, which is common to him with
other Creatures; but also with the peculiar privilege and pre-eminence of a
Celestial mind; he should only employ his exterior senses in the
mannaging of outward and transitory things, and with his minds surpassing all
humane affairs should aspire wholly to God, and be carried to him, as to his
first beginning. Wherefore it is wonderful, and much to be lamented, that
some being unmindful of their condition and end, do with such earnestnes
follow these temporal Vanities, as if they wanted this divine understanding;
having not their minds elevated on high, but fixed on the earth, and creeping
like Worms upon the ground, so as the very bru^e Beasts accuse them of
ingratitude, which by a certain instinct of Nature seem to retain a memory of
the benefit they have received. Whom least you should seem (dear brethren)
to resemble, you are accustomed together with the frequent participation of the
holy Sacraments, to give your selves daily to the pious meditation of Heavenly
things: That although in your bodies you be here on Earth, yet your mind is
transported into Heaven, where you converse with the blessed Saints, and with
Christ himself, laboring to unite your mind to him, from whom at first it
did proceed. This Godly endeavor both of you, and all pious persons, that I
might in some sort promote and further, I have gathered together diuors
Meditations of the Passion of our blessed Savior, which may minister unto you
occasion and matter of many devout and profitable contemplations. Which
Meditations I have thought good to commend unto you for diverse reasons: First,
because nothing is of such force to move men's minds, and to inflame them with
the fire of the love of God, as the serious cogitation of benefits, especially
such as are so great, and proceed from so great a Lord and God. Some indeed,
whose consciences are oppressed with the burden of sin, are oftentimes
re^laimed from their wickedness with the horror of Death, Judgment, and the
pains of Hell: b^t the virtuous sort, and such as serve Almighty God rather
for love than fear, are wholly set on fire with the love of their Redeemer
through the remembrance and meditation of his Death and Passion. Secondly,
because nothing does so easily present it self unto our understanding, as the
meditation of the pains, torments, sorrows, and tribulations, wherewith in
our whole life we are environed, and beset on every side. As for Heaven, Hell,
and the last Judgment, because they are not subject to our sight, and seem to
be a far off, we do not sufficiently conceive or apprehend the same: but for
the afflictions of the body and the anguishes of the mind, we understand
oftentimes by experience more then we would. Thirdly, because I know no
meditation to be more acceptable to our blessed Savior, then that which we
conceive of the bitter passion, that he suffered for us. For as a Conqueror
does rejoice at the remembrance of his battle, so we may well think, that
Christ our Lord is delighted, when we do often remember his Passion; both
because by so bloody a combat he has obtained a perpetual and renowned
victory both for himself and us; and also because herein he sees our
thankefulnes which we render unto him for so great a benefit. Fourthly,
because I perceived that the meditation of no other thing could be so
necessary for Mankind, as of that, from which alone is derived unto us the
remission of our sins, our justification, our works of merit, and our whole
salvation. Which certainly is the principal cause, why the Catholic Church,
according to the institution of the Apostles, has ordained that the memory of
this Passion should by sundry ways be so often iterated; as, by making the
sign of the Cross with our hands: by Pictures and Images of the P^ssion,
which the Lay people are accustomed to use in stead of Books; by fasting on
Fridayes and Saterdayes; by the yearly celebritry of the Passion in the end of
Lent; by Sermons, by Lessons, by sounding of Bells and such like, yea Christ
himself has instituted a most sacred and daily remembrance of his Passion, to
wit the holy Sacrifice of the M^sse, wherein his death, and shedding of his
blood is most clearly represented unto us. Fifthly, because greater vtility
redoundeth unto us by these Meditations, then by the contemplation of any other
thing whatsoever. For as all good things are purchased for us by the merits
of our Saviors Passion, so in the same as in a well furnished shop all precious
wares of virtues and good examples are to be found.

But that you may more easily reap these fruits, I think it requisite to
propose unto you certain aduertisements touching the best manner of
Meditation. For many are deceived, which think it is sufficient to repeat in
their minds the history of the Passion, or by consideration thereof to feel an
inward delight; whereas notwithstanding, that avails little to their
salvation, if withal, the affection and will be not thereby moved. For meat
never satisfies a man, if he only look upon it, and do not put it into his
mouth, chewe it with his teeth, and let it down into his stomach. The
knowledge indeed of the History is the ground of Meditation, and the discourses
of the understanding do afford the matter, but all the profit consists in
this, that the will, which bears the greatest sway in man, be moved with
many affections: for she only meriteth, she only loves, she only directs
all our thoughts, and actions toward God.

Therefore to comprehend all in few words, those which have treated best of
this matter of Meditation, have designed and set down unto us seven
affections of the mind, which may be moved with this consideration of the
Passion: To wit; Compassion, Compunction, Imagination, Thankesgiving,
Admiration, Hope, and the Love of God. Which I will explicate unto you briefly
and in few words, to the end you may understand, after what manner you may
be employed with profit in these ensuing Meditations. For by these seven
ways, as by seven teeth, the matter ministered by these Meditations may be
chewed, and with the affection tasted, and d ^gested.

The first therefore is Compassion, Compassion.
that is, an affection of the mind, by which we participate of other men's
griefs, and afflictions, feeling the same though not in body yet in mind: by
which affection, the grief of the Patient seems to be divided and
communicated with another, and is thereby greatly mittigated and assuaged; as
on the contrary side it is much augmented and increased, if either we ^eride
him, or be not moved with his afflictions. Christ our Savior, to diminish our
sorrows, would suffer for us, and condole also wish us, as the Apostle says:
We have not a High Priest, that cannot have compassion on our infirmities, but
tempted in all things by similitude, except sin. And truly although we
cannot lessen by this our sorrow the most grievous and exessiue sorrows that
our Savior suffered for us; yet this our compassion is most grateful to him,
whereby we make his dolours ours, and apply his sufferings unto our selves.
Wherefore the Apostle has said very rightly: We are coheires of Christ, yet if
we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him. For he that will
not be a partaker with Christ in his sufferings, cannot be a partaker with him
in his kingdom. There are two things which are most availeable to provoke
this commiseration. First the condition of the person, that is to say, his
nobility, his goodness, his piety toward men, and such other things, which
do aggrauate the indignity of his inflicted misery. Secondly, the cruelty and
immanity of his torments. If therefore we desire to fee^e in our hearts this
co^miseration, we must consider in every article, First, who it is that
suffers: As first, that it is God, who with his Majesty fills Heaven and
Earth; secondly, a most honorable man, descended of the house of David, and
conceived by the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin; thirdly, one most
learned in his understanding, and most holy in his will, who by no error or
sin, did ever offend either God or man; fourthly, most grave and sober in his
conversation, being never seen to laugh, but often to weep, and that for our
sins; fifthly, more beautiful in his body then all the sons of men, and of
a more tender and delicate complexion. Secondly we must set before our eyes
the greatness of his torments, and with what particular pain every member was
afflicted. Considering first, that all the senses of his body, and all the
powers of his soul sustained their proper and peculiar tortures. Secondly,
that his tormen^s were most grievous, both by reason of the most tender
constitution of his body, and also because he wanted all interior comfort to
endure the same. Certainly it is the undoubted opinion of all Divines, that
never any creature endured such pains and torments as our blessed Savior did.
If we see a wicked man suffer such punishment, as he has most justly deserved,
we cannot but be moved to compassion and grief: and if we see but a Dog or
an Ass cruelly whipped or beaten, we are presently touched with commiseration.
Ought we not then to condole with the Son of God, suffering so unspeakable
tortures, and that for our sakes?

The second affection is, Compunction, Compunction.
or sorrow for our sins, when we are induced to an horror and detestation of
our sins by the remembrance of our Saviors passion: which may easily be
done, if we ponder what the malice of sin is, and what torments it has
drawn upon Christ our Savior. As God is infinite, so the malice of sin,
which is committed against God, is also infinite: and this malice in the
justice of God (which ought not to be violated) could not by any satisfaction
be taken away, but by that, which was infinite. Wherefore either an infinite
pain was to be endured, which no finite creature could endure; or for an
infinite time, which the damned in hell endure; or by an infinite person, which
is God himself. Hence let us proceed, and consider, what it was that drew
God from Heaven to earth, and induced him to undergo his passion; which was
nothing else but our sins. For if man had never sinned, God had never been
incarnated, n^uer suffered, never dyed. Wherefore, like as for the sinner, his
sins prepare a place in hell; and for the thief, his theft prepares his
punishment: so for our blessed Savior our grievous sins have procured a
necessity of suffering death. The malice therefore of sin is above all things
to be detested, which caused even our Lord God himself to be crucified. But
least thou should imagine perhapps, that the grieuousnesse of sin is
hereby extenuated, because Christ did not suffer for thy sins alone, but for
the sins of all the world; be thou assured of this, that the malice of sin
is not thereby diminished or impaired, but the singular virtue of our Saviors
passion is declared, which has washed away the sins not of this or that man,
but of all the men in the world. For the merit of his passion is infinite, and
no malice whatsoever is able to counteruaile it: which thing alone does
sufficiently discover the grieuousnes of sin, because without the infinite
merit of Christ it could not be forgiven. As therefore if one only man see the
Sun, it will shine no more to him alone, then it would do to him, and all
other men together; and as a man does no less kill another when alone he
stabbeth him to the heart, then if he should take ten or twelve others to
assist him in the same: so even one mortal sin (for redeeming whereof the
death and passion of the Son of God was necessary) is no less the cause of
our Saviors death, then all the sins of the world joined together. Neither
does the passion of our Savior bring us less profit, being undertaken for
the universal salvation of the world, then if it had been undertaken for me
alone.

The third affection is Imitation, Imitation.
whereby we desire to follow and imitate those rare excellencies, which we
discover in Christ, as the Apostle teaches us: Christ suffered for us, 1 Pet.
2.
leaving you an example, that you may follow his steps. And again: Christ
having suffered for us in the flesh, be you also armed with ye same cogitatio^.
1 Pet. 4
There are two things principally to be imitated in our Saviors Passion. The
one is a desire to suffer for us. The other is, a great heap of virtues, which
appeared so plainly in this his Passion, that though our Savior spoke nothing,
yet by his example from the Pulpit as it were of the Cross he taught all kind
of virtues; yea and taught them most perfectly, both for that he was destitute
of all interior comfort, which does ordinarily accompany our virtuous acts; and
also because there wanted not means, whereby he might have resisted his
Passion. Wherefore in every Meditation we must search out, First, what virtue
is chiefly commended unto us therein; Secondly, how our Savior exercised the
same; And lastly we must stir up a desire, and firm purpose to obtain that
virtue, devising the means wherehy it may be acquired, and imploring the
assistance of our Savior to accomplish our intent. Christ in his Passion gave
us a pattern of all virtues, but especially of those which the Scriptures do
so often commend unto us. Of which the first is Humility, whereby being most
bitterly scoffed at, clothed in a white and purple garment, crowned with a
crown of thorns, less esteemed then the murderer Barrabas, crucified
betwixt two Thieves, and suffering many other mockings and contempts, he
always humbly behaved himself. The second is Meekenes, whereby he ever showed
himself mild and gentle to all men, endured torments most patiently, was
silent in all reproaches and injuries; never used any excuses, never offended
any body with his language or froward actions. The third is Obedience, which
then deserves greatest commendation, when hard things are commanded, and by
wicked men. Christ was not only obedient to his Father even unto death, Phil.
2.
yea the death of the Cross; but also to wicked Judges and torturers, whom he
obeyed simply, chearefully, and constantly, when he put off his garments, put
on the purple, received the Crown of Thorns, carried his own Cross,
stretched out his hands and feet to be nailed, and did many other things that
they commanded him. The fourth is Charity, which then only seems to be
perfect, when as for Gods sake we love, not only our friends, but also our
enemies, esteeming them not our enemies, but our friends. Which our Lord
seems to have performed most abundantly, when speaking of his most perfect
love toward us, he said, No man has greater charity then this, that a man
give his life for his friends. For albeit, it may seem greater charity to
yield our life for our enemies; yet that charity is indeed most perfect which
acknowledges no enemies, but reputeth those for our friends, which are our
enemies, and does good no less to them then to our friends. Now Christ was so
tenderly affected toward his enemies, that the more injuries and wrongs he
received at their hands, the more his love increased toward them, and the
greater benefits he bestowed upon them; like unto fire, which the more it is
blowed, the hotter it burns. Therefore in the whole time of his passion he
prayed unto God his Father for his enemies: For this that they should love me,
Psalm. 108
they detracted from me, and I prayed in mind but not in voice, But when he
was fastened to the Cross, and the blood ran out of the four fountains of
his hands and feet, then with a loud voice he prayed for them that crucified
him: and at the last when he yielded up his spirit, he moved with exceeding
charity the hearts of the standers by to faith and penance. The first is
Mercy, which is the daughter of charity. By this our Lord gave unto us his
garments, honor, fame, estimation, flourishing age, strength, health, and
life. The sixth is Contempt of the world, by which he refused all things which
the world admireth, and accounts good; and took upon him those things which
the world abhors; for riches choosing poverty, for honors contempt, for
pleasures pains, for comme dations mockings. The seventh is Perseverance,
through which being neither overcome by his Mothers sorrows, nor moved by the
heaviness of his friends, nor conquered by the derision of his enemies, nor
wearied with the torments of his body, he would not come down from the Cross,
which he had ascended for thy salvation.

The fourth is Thanksgiving, Thanksgiving.
by which, pondering the benefits bestowed upon us, we break forth into
praises, not in words only, which is the least praise, and action of thanks,
but rather in heart and works; that weighing in our minds the great benefit
bestowed upon us, we should esteem much thereof, and take heed of all
offending our Benefactor, and omit no occasion in all things to requite it.
There are five things, which do move much unto this thankfulness. First,
the evil, which we have escaped. Secondly, the good, which we have received by
the benefit. Thirdly, the worthiness of our Benefactor. Fourthly, the manner
of the benefit bestowed. And fifthly, the condition of the person upon whom
the benefit is bestowed. Therefore that we may be moved to thankfulness, we
must consider: first, the evils, which we have escaped through this passion of
Christ; as sin the greatest of all evils; blindness of mind; hardness of
heart; bondage of the devil; fowlenes of the soul; the present peril of
eternal fire, so grievous, as cannot be conceived; so long, as it has no end;
so certain, as without Christ it cannot be avoided. Secondly, the goods,
which we have gained; as grace, justice, the adoption to be the sons of God,
Sacraments, Sacrifice, virtues, the promise of everlasting life, and to be
brief, all the goods both of body and mind. For there is no good thing in
man's life, which the passion of Christ has not either given or preserved.
Thirdly, the dignity of the person: for even as we use to allow a greater
stipend to a Nobleman, or Doctor, for a smell office, then to a plain country
man, for a great labor: so we ought to be more thankful to the more worthy
person. How thankful then shall we be to Christ, who is of infinite dignity?
Fourthly, the manner of the benefit bestowed, to wit, gratis, and not without
great labor. God made Heaven and Earth without any trouble by his only word:
but thee he redeemed with pains, blood, and his own life: and for all these
benefits he requires nothing of thee, but praise and thankefulnes. Fifthly,
the condition of the person, upon whom the benefit is bestowed; if base, if
an enemy, if ungrateful. What are we then? If (as the wise man says) The
whole world before God is as a drop of the morning deawe, Eccle. 11.
which falls upon the earth: What in comparison of God shall one silly man
be, who being compared with the whole world, and with all the multitude of men
is nothing. Holy Job has expressed our baseness: I said to rottennes, thou
art my Father; Job. 17.
and to the worms, my Mother and my Sister. Now, we are not only base, but we
were also enemies, estranged, and averted from God, neither seeking, nor
desiring his grace, but rather rejecting it, when it was offered. When
therefore thou shall consider, first, that thou art delivered from the
greatest, most certain, and everlasting miseries; secondly, that thou art
endued with most high and infinite goods: thirdly, by the most mighty God, of
infinite majesty; fourthly, with so great labors and pains, as never any
mortal creature sustained: thou can not choose but think, whether it is fit
that so abject a creature should be dissolved into praise and thanksgiving.

The fifth is conceiving Hope. Hope.
By the consideration of three things our hope is much shaken and weakened.
First of the purity which is required for eternal life, Apoc. 21.
into which nothing defiled or unclean shall enter. Secondly, of the strict
examination of the Judge, who will demand an account of every idle word, and
will reach even unto the division of the soul and the spirit, and will search
out the cogitations and intentions of the heart. Thirdly, of our baseness, who
both offend the justice of God with our daily sins and live full of
concupisence and imperfections, and do not enter into the inward cogitations of
our hearts. Heb. 4.
And if I be simple (says Job) ^uen this my soul shall not know. Job. 6.
To this diffidence the Passion of Christ gives help and remedy, and lifts
up the heart of a sinner to confidence and hope. For first, as the glory of
eternal life requires great cleannes: so the Passion and blood of Christ
washes away all our iniquities; it causes our souls to be more bright then
the Sun; it makes us the sons of God, it gives us right unto everlasting
life, that now we go not into a strange, but into our own inheritance.
Secondly, the judgment of Christ is very strict; but the merits of the Passion
of Christ can well bear the severity thereof; because the satisfaction is
greater then the debt; and our sins being in number infinite, his merits are
in value infinite; and to be brief, he shall be our Judge, which was our
Aduocat, Mediator, and Redeemer, who, that he might give us heaven, paid the
price thereof for us, that is to say, his blood, which he shed for our sins,
being not ignorant of the value and dignity of that which he shed with so great
pain and labor. Thirdly our baseness is very great, being able to do nothing
of our selves; but his grace being communicated unto us through the merit of
his Passion, adds an admirable splendour and brightness to our souls,
remitteth all our sins, gives us strength nnd power to work, and adds
such dignity to our works, as to be able to merit everlasting life. Therefore
our hope will be much confirmed, if we consider, that all the wealth of Christ,
all his merits, all his fastings, labors, pains, and, to be brief, all that
ever he did, or suffered, is ours, no less then the goods of the husband
belong unto the wife, which she may use for the payment of her debtes, and her
other necessities.

The sixth is, the Love of God. Love of God.
And first the nobility and beauty of the thing beloved stirs up the
affection of Love; even as we are enflamed with the desire of virtues and
sciences through their beauty and excellency. Secondly, Love, when we see our
selves first beloved. And to increase this Love, it avails much: First if we
see the love of our Lover proved, not only by word^s, but also by great
benefits. Secondly, if he procured these benefits for us by his own great
labor and discommodity. T^irdly, if we often repelled him, and did him
injuries, and yet his love was not diminished thereby. Fourthly, if by all his
labors and troubles he desires nothing but to be beloved again. All these
has Christ done for us in his Passion. First he loved us in deed and truth,
and gave us all good things. Secondly, he to his great disco^modity became
poor, that he might enrich us; and took upon him self all evils, that he
might replenish us with all goodness. Thirdly, being so often repelled by us,
he abated nothing of his Love. Fourthly, he requires nothing of us, but our
Love. Love (says he) and it is enough. Moreover, that thou may love, thou
must observe the Laws and conditions of a Lover, which Christ expressed in
this his Passion. The first is, that we always think of that which we Love;
and this by the example of Christ himself, who, because he would never forget
us, ingraued us in his own hands. Secondly, that we speak often of it: for
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: Mat. 12.
and this also by the example of Christ, who on the very Cross spoke to his
Father of us, and prayed unto him for us. Thirdly, that we fear nothing more,
then to offend him whom we love, as Christ has taught us, who referred his
Passion, and all that he had to this end, that he might induce us to love
him. Fourthly, that we bestow all our labors and endeavors to help our
friend: for Christ labored not for himself, but for us. Fifthly, that we
should desire to be always with our friend: for The delight of Christ is, to
be with ye sons of men, who has sought us, in Sea and Land, in the Air,
and in Hell; that having found us he might join us with him in everlasting
bliss, and communicate his Divinity unto us.

The seventh and last manner of meditating upon the Passion proceeds from
Admiration. Admiration.
This Admiration is commonly provoked by some new, strange, and incredible
accident. Now, there are four things, which show the Passion of our Savior
Christ to be exceeding admirable. First, because he suffered, whose Majesty
cannot suffer, who is the glory and joy of Saints, whose dignity is infinite,
whose life is eternal, and whose Power is incomprehensible. Secondly, because
he suffered for them, by whom he was punished, base men enemies, and
ungrateful persons. Thirdly, because he suffered so many torments, as never
any mortal man endured, as well if you consider the torments themselves as also
his ignominyes, his irrisions, his poverty, and other miseryes of his life.
Fourthly, because when he redeemed Mankind by his Passion, he used admirable
means for the fulfilling thereof. For first, with the great weakness of his
body he joined great power, wherewith he beat down and ouerthrewe the Devil
the Prince of this world. Secondly, he joined perfect Justice with perfect
Mercy: for taking compassion upon man, he suffered the rigor of Gods Justice
upon himself. Thirdly, his excellent Wisdom shined forth in that, which to
men seemed exceeding folly: For the Cross of Christ to the Jews is a
scandal, 1 Cor. 2.
and to the Gentiles folly. Great wisdom also it was; First, to overcome his
most subtle enemy by Art and suffering, and to cast him down with the same
weapons, by which he had overcome. Secondly, to deliver us by such a kind of
punishment, in which he might lay up for us a medicine for all diseases, and
set before our eyes an example of all virtues, and kindle the flames of Love in
us. For nothing does so much incite us, either to the imitation of Christ, or
to the love of God, as this bitter Passion of our Lord. And thus much shall
suffice to have spoken of affections.

Now that we may use these Meditations with fruit and profit for the salvation
of our souls, these few things ought to be observed. First, that we come
not unprepared to meditate, but (as the wise man advises us) Let us prepare
our soul before prayer. Eccl. 18.
Which preparation consists in this, that laying away all will to sin, we
commit our selves wholly into the hands of God, and put out of our mind all
external cares and cogitations, and pray unto Christ very earnestly for his
grace, that we may obtain wholesome fruit by this meditation. Secondly, that
first of all we read the Evangelical text of that Meditation; and then the
meditation it self either in whole or in part. Thirdly, that we lay aside the
book, and repeat in our memory, what we have read; and consider what
affections may be stirred up thereby, and laboring to excite, and move them
in our selves. Fourthly, that we break forth into some speech and prayer unto
God, through that affection, which is now stirred up in us; and that we either
praise, or admire God, or pray for the forgiveness of our sins, or for some
other benefit: or (to be brief) that we speak those things, which our
mind so moved shall dictate unto us. It will profit us also to begin first at
the beginning of these Meditations; both because we shall better understand the
History of the Passion; and also that by little and little we may proceed from
the lesser to the greater.

Also to the end that these Meditations may be more grateful and profitable,
I have incerted nothing, which is not sound and approved, because the
uncertainty shall not diminish the authority, nor be a hindrance to devotion.
For nothing is affirmed in this History, but what the Scriptures say, or the
Fathers confirm, or tradition undoubtedly delivers. The documents
themselves, which are joined to these meditations, are for the most part taken
out of the ancient Fathers, or out of the later Writers, which have written
best of the manner of meditating upon the Passion of our Lord. I have drawn
out some Meditations of purpose somewhat long, especially such, as are either of
great force to move our affections, or may be used severally for Sermons; as
namely, those of the seven words, which our Lord spoke upon the Cross. For I
was desirous in this Book, not only to set forth the manner of
contemplation, but also to help the Preachers themselves, that they may teach
the people profitably, and stir up their minds with diverse Meditations.

And I have thought good to dedicate this my labor to you, my best beloved
brethren and fellows, as to those, whose peculiar institute is to honor and
receive the blessed body of Christ our Lord in the most holy Eucharist, and to
defend the honor thereof against the blasphemies of wicked Heritikes: that
coming to Christ his most Holy table, you may (according to the Commandment
of our Lord) repeat in your memory his Passion, Death and Burial; and make
your bodies sit Sepulchers for the body of our Lord; and with your minds
render unto him praise, and thankesgiuings: and to be short, being inflamed
with the love of him, who gave himself wholly for you, you may likewise employ
your selves wholly in his service, and the help of your neighbors. To
conclude, I pray you that in recompense of this my Labor, ye will vouchsafe
to offer up your prayers to our Blessed Savior for me, that by his grace I
may be partaker of those benefits, which by his Death and Passion he has
purchased for us.

Farewell.

Your Servant in Christ. Francis Costerus.

IHS. Of the Passion of our Lord.
The first Meditation of his going out of the house from supper.
The Hymn being said Jesus went forth beyond the torrent Cedron according to
his custom, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. Joan. 18.
and his disciples followed him.
CHRIST began his passion first from prayer: Secondly from his going out of
the place of supper, both because he would not be apprehended as an eater and
drinker, but as one praying unto God, and the patron of mankind, and also
because his Host with whom he supped should sustain no damage by his passion,
which ought to profit all men and to hurt none. Thirdly, 2 Reg. 15.
he went beyond the torrent Cedron, by which way in old time David fled from
his son Absolon: A torrent in the holy Scriptures signifies the inco^modious
things of this life, as in this place, My soul has passed the torrent: Psalm.
125
all which calamities being very great, our Savior overcame with exceeding
constancy of mind. Fourthly, he went into the Mount Oliuet: Mount signifies
excellency, and Olive Charity. Here do thou consider that Christ began his
passion with great, earnest, and fervent prayer, with much co^stancy of mind,
and exceeding charity, in which virtues he was well exercised, as appears by
these words (according to his custom.) He inuiteth thee likewise to the same
virtues when he carried his Apostles with him: For except thou be diligent in
prayer, except thou auoydest the perils of evil occasions, except thou make a
resolute purpose, except thou be enflamed with the love of God, and, to be
brief, except thou do diligently use virtues, thou shall never overcome thy
temptations. Follow then our Lord with his Apostles, and pray him that he never
leave nor forsake thee.

Then he said to his Disciples all ye shall suffer scandal in me in this
night. Mat. 26.
For it is written, I will strike the Shepherd and the Sheep of the flock
shall be scattered: Mar. 14.
but after I shall rise again I will go before you into Galilee.
CHrist in his passion took the beginning of his griefs from his Disciples,
who seeking to save themselves by flight, did all either waver in faith, or
openly deny our Lord: Consider every word, (All) First not one shall stand for
me, (ye) Secondly, whom I have bestowed so many benefits upon, and loved so
dearly (shall suffer scandal) that is, shall sin being estranged from me,
and none of you in this time of my passion shall be free from sin: ye shall
suffer scandal, but I will not give it (in me) of whose words and deeds after
the sight of so many miracles ye can justly take no manner of offense: (in this
night) that is, by and by, or in the night of ignorance. Now call thy wits unto
thee, and mark whether these same things may not happen unto thee, I say, unto
thee, on whom God has bestowed so many good things at whose counsels and
deeds nevertheless thou take offense, for that trouble of thy vicious mind
in adversity is referred unto Christ our lord, who either sends them, or at
the least permits them. But such kind of scandal rises always in the
night, that is, from thy blindness; for if thou would all at once look
upon the benefits received at Gods hands, and the rewards prepared for thee,
and the evils which thou have committed, thou would resolve in thy mind
never to be moved with any adversity. Consider here the cause of thy offense
and scandal, I say, thine own evil and troubled will, and pray unto God; that
he will lighten thy darkness, because thou have never any just cause of anger
and discontent: Christ promises that he will go before them into Galilee, in
which promise he declares his own goodness, who never foretells any
afflictions, without hope of consolation. Admire here the benignity of Christ,
and pray him that he never suffer thee to be tempted above thy power, but that
he will increase his grace in thy temptation, that thou may be able to
sustain it.

And Peter answearing said unto him, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
although all shall be scandalized in thee I will never be scandalized: Jesus
said unto him Amen, I say unto thee, O Peter, that in this night before the
Cock shall twice give forth his voice, thou shall deny me thrice: Peter said
unto him, although it behooved me to dye with thee I will not deny thee: and all the disciples said the like.
THe Apostles after the Communion of the body of our Lord had made a firm
resolution to live well, and were fervent, and followed Christ, as thou often
times, especially after the receiving of the holy Eucharist do seriously
resolve to amend thy life, but in time of consolation thou must also think of
the time of desolation, and of the expectation of contrary things, least thou
should desist from prayer through vain confidence; resolve therefore to do
well, but before God, and praying for his help, be vigilant and observe all
thine own actions; be not rash nor negligent, for if the prince of the
Apostles did slip being the foundation and rock of the Church, who spoke
confidently out of his love and charity, how can he stand that through pride
and ambition, or for some other cause has too much confidence in him self,
and that does seldom resolve to amend his life, nor set God before his eyes?
Contemplate here also that the sorrow of Christ was not small, to leave his
Disciples whom he loved so dearly, troubled and sorrowful for his departure.
This place is very fit to meditate upon those things which a man feels in
time of consolation, as quietness of mind, joy, illustration of the
understanding etc. And contrariwise on such things as he feels in time of
desolation, as perturbatio^, sowrenesse, and darkness of understanding, to the
end that he may in time of prosperity propose unto him self such good things,
as in adversity he shall not change. Pray unto Christ that he never forsake
thee in time of adversity.

The second Meditation of his entry into the Garden.
Then came Jesus with them into a village which is called Gethsemani, Mat. 26.
Mar. 14. Joan. 18.
where was a garden, into which he entered and his disciples.
BEhold the place where Christ began his passion: First near unto a village or
farm: Secondly, in Gethsemani, which signifies a fat valley: Thirdly in the
Garden: For through sin we got an unclean village, that is, worldly and
frail things, which by their own instinct and nature slide down to the earth
again, and Christ would begin our rede^ptio^ from thence, whence we were fallen
through sin. Gethsemani or the fat valley as it does rightly signify the
valley of mercy, so it does plainly declare that the passion of Christ had
need of great mercy and clemency, which changed this world being full of
miseries, into a place flowing with mercy. Consider then that this world is
like unto a durty valley, in which is much dirt and filth, with which men being
polluted do forsake God, but to such men as follow Christ, this fame world is
like a shop of the mercies of God, and of our merits, in which so long as we
live mercy is offered abundantly, and such rewards gotten by good works as
never shall have end: But it was a garden, wherein Christ prayed; for Adam
sinned in a garden, and in a garden we have all offended: For what is the
world but a little garden, pleasant to behold, wherein diverse herbs and fair
flowers do delight the eyes, but not the mind: All things which the world
admireth are buds and flowers, which, as they take their beginning from the
earth, so in a short time they wither away: to be brief, Christ carried his
Disciples forth to the place of his passion, being the last place to which he
lead his Apostles, that thou may know thereby that Christ does earnestly
require of thee that with great diligence and study thou should meditate and
imitate his passion. Pray unto thy Lord that thou may despise this world,
which was all the cause of the passion of Christ.

Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
Then he said unto his Disciples, sit here, whilst I go yonder and pray, pray
ye least ye enter into temptation.
COnsider, that if thou will not enter into temptation, that is, if thou will
not be overcome and swallowed up by temptation, thou must sit down and pray;
but we sit when we enjoy quietness of mind, and that inward peace which true
humility brings, (for he which sits humbles his body that he may rest in
quiet) we must pray, because by prayer victory is obtained against the Devil,
and we must pray as long as Christ prayerh for us. Here again consider thine
own sloth and sluggishnes, which art not touched in conscience when as Christ
is careful for thee how thou may be saved, and sitting at the right hand of
his Father prays still for thee: To enter into temptation is, to be occupied
and drowned in wickedness both inwardly and outwardly; for he which is
overcome by temptation has neither inward peace, nor ca^ enjoy any true
outward comfort, where every thing oppresses the mind, but nothing can
satisfy it; whereupon also it follows, that he which in this world enters
into temptation, shall in the next enter into Hell, even as he which in this
world is in Gods favor shall afterward enter into the joy of God.

And he took Peter, and James, and John with him. Mar. 14.

COnsider with what great grief our sorrowful lord left his other sorrowful
Disciples, he took these three for his companions with him, that he might open
his heaviness unto them, who only amongst all his disciples saw his glory in
the Mount Thabor, and who were present at the wonderful miracle of the
daughter of Iayrus the Arch-synagogue being raised unto life, Mat. 17. Mar. 9.
for by how much a man is more perfect, and nearer joined unto God, so much the
more he feels the force of the passion of our Lord in himself, as Saint Paul
confesses of himself: Consider therefore what manner of men these were whom
Christ chose for his companions, Peter the Pastor of the Church, John a
Virgin, who afterward should be the keeper or the Virgin his Mother, and
James the first Martyr of the Apostles: That hereby thou may understand that
nothing does so much lighten our cares, ease the labors of any office,
encourage us to chastity and to other virtues, to be brief, nothing helps
man so much in all his labors undertaken for Christ's sake as the memory of the
passion of Christ: he took unto him also his two Cosins, that thou may see,
to what dignities our Savior exalts his best friends, to wit, to suffer
innumerable calamities in this life that hereafter they may have the greater
rewards in the life, to come. Do thou desire rather to be afflicted in this
world for thy sins, then after thy death to be separated from Christ with
everlasting punishment.

The third Meditation of the great perplexity of Christ in the Garden.
Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
And he began to fear, to wax weary, to be sorrowful, and to be sad.
BEcause that sins are first committed in heart before they be done in work,
Christ would suffer the sorrows of heart before the pains of body, that thou
may know that he was grievously afflicted not only in body, but also in
mind, and there are four principal kinds of sorrows assigned by the
Evangelists, which Christ admitted of his own will in the Garden, and retained
them even till his death: The first was a certain terror and fear of the most
grievous pains now at hand, and also of a most terrible death, which nature
always abhors beyond measure, and also of the sins of all mankind which
he took upon him in the Garden, and clothed himself therewith as with a
garment weaued of all kind of filthiness, with which in the person of all
sinners he must suffer the severity of God. The second grief was
loathsomeness, being weary of all things in this life, seeing himself forsaken
not only of all men, but also of his heavenly Father. The third was
sorrowfulness first, for the grievous sins which the Jews should commit in
his death, and also for the small number of them which should be pertakers of
this his so great affliction, and likewise for the unfaithfulness of thee and
of other Christians, who by their blasphemous words and grievous sins should
shed and defile the most precious blood which he was now ready to offer for
them. The fourth was sadness, that is, a grievous trouble or anxiety of mind,
when he saw there was no means for him to escape: For of the one side the
commandment of his Father, and the great love of mankind encouraged and
pricked him forward; and on the other side nature feared and repugned. These
four affections Christ took upon him, that he might prepare a medicine for
sinners who are troubled with the like passions: For they which are not content
with any estate live in continual weariness and loathsomeness; and they which
are always pricked in conscience live in perpetual sorrow; and they which are
troubled with the remembrance of death live in continual fear; and they pass
their life in sadness and doubtfulnes which know that their sins shall be
examined by the strict judgment of Christ, which happenneth chiefly at the
hour of death, when Christ our Judge stands at our doors. Do thou pray
unto our Lord that those his afflictions may bring unto thee fortitude, joy,
alacrity, and security.

Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
And he said unto them, my soul is sorrowful even unto death.
LEt us weigh every word wisely: for he does not say, my soul is fearful, or
I am weary of life, or my soul is doubtful, least; he should seem to go to
his passion rather against his will, then willingly: but he says (it is
sorrowful) not only for the sundry causes of sorrow, but that thereby he
might show that he was very man that suffered. (my soul) he does not say I am
sorrowful, because his will rejoiced and was desirous to dye, but, my soul,
that is my nature, which never moved his will. Again, (my soul) that is,
grief has inwardly entered into my soul; least perhaps you might think
through the continual contemplation of his divine nature, that he felt no
grief in his soul. (Even unto death) that is, either because that sorrow
continued until his death, and no longer, or else because it was so vehement
that man's nature could endure no more without peril of death. Pray unto our
Lord that this his sorrow may bring life unto thy soul.

Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
Stay ye here and watch with me, and he was drawn away from them, and he went
as far as the cast of a stone.
COnsider first what every one must do in his troubles, to wit, he must stay,
that is, expect patiently, and he must watch, that is, he must be careful
that no evil happen unto him; for to an unquiet and troubled man many vicious
and evil things are suggested. Consider secondly how unwillingly Christ left
his disciples. For this word (drawn away) discribeth a violent pulling, and
going, he went not far, but (as far as the cast of a stone) like as
mothers are wont to go a little way from their young children, when they teach
them to go, so as they may catch them again, when they are ready to fall. All
these things declare the love of Christ, and his grievous inward sorrows, by
which he was moved to pray unto his Father, that he might have some comfort
from him. Be thou moved with the sorrows of Christ thy Lord, who was forsaken
of all men, and because he loves nothing better then to be with thee, apply
all thy endeauours, that he may always remain with thee.

The fourth Meditation of the first prayer of Christ.
And kneeling down he fell on his face upon the ground, and prayed, Mat. 26.
Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
if it might be, that, that hour might pass from him: Saying, O my Father,
if it may be, let this cup pass from me: but yet not as I will, but as thou will.
COnsider first the ceremony which Christ used in this prayer: For he kneeled
down on the ground, as one guilty of death for thy sins; he fell down upon
the earth, prostrating himself to be sacrificed for thy salvation, and
representing (whose person he had now taken upon him) the most abject estate
of sinners, who as they are unworthy to look up to Heaven, so lying upon the
earth with the weight of their sins, they are worthy to be trodden and
trampled upon by all men. Consider secondly his wonderful affection in this
prayer, and the force of every word, (My Father) that is, I am thy Son, that
must suffer most bitter pains for most vilde men: O father, will thou not
spare me thy only begotten Son? (If it may be) he understands that saving
Gods justice, there was no other means left for the redeeming of mankind,
but only by the death of the son of God. Consider here in thy mind the love
of God, who spared not his own Son, that he might spare thee. (Let pass from
me) This prayer was to escape so cruel a kind of death. Yet in these words
there lies hidden some secret meaning, as if he should say, I would not that
this affliction should remain in me, but that the fruit thereof may pass
unto all Christians: I will drink, and they shall be satisfied: (This cup) he
calls his passion a cup, as that which contains the cause of all our joy.
And eeuen as those torments made Christ as it were dru^ken with ye greatness of
his love, so all just men are made drunk with ye heat of the love of God through
the mediatio^ and merit of ye passion of Christ. In this place we may call to
mind the quallities of excellent wine, when men drink plentifully thereof: for
by wine the inward parts of man are warmed, it makes men merry, it causes
sleep, it lifts up the heart, it makes men eloque^t, and it is dru^ken with
ease and pleasure: Apply all these things to ye passion of our Lord, which
Christ began with great charity, sustained with cheerfulnes, and as one besides
himself became foolishnes to the Gentiles, and scandal to the Jews, and so
his charity was not only diminished by his pains (as in men it often
happens,) but rather inflamed, even as stones by rubbing wax hot: And to be
brief, our Lord was laid asleep in death. If thou, when thou suffer any
thing for Christ's sake, do feel the like affections in thy self: be thou
assured that the passion of Christ shall bring much profit unto thee. Consider
thirdly the forsaking his own will in so hard a case, and offer thyselfe ready
for all things, and desire of God to grant thee a will indifferent in all
occasions.

Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
And when he was risen, from his prayers, he came to his disciples, and found
them sleeping, and he said to Peter, Simon, sleep thou? could thou not
watch one hour with me?
COnsider first: Christ was troubled, and his disciples slept, the Church
suffers, and we grieve not thereat. Thou also how slack art thou oftentimes
in the service of God, and how earnest in thy private business. Consider
secondly that after a short prayer, our Lord rose presently up, as if for
grief of mind he could not stay long in one place, desirous to have some
comfort, sometimes of his Father, and sometimes from his disciples. Every word
spoken unto Peter has force: (Simon) he says not, Peter, which new name
signifies constancy, but Simon, his ancient name: So in every Christian may
be found a new name of the sons of God, with which being endued they sin
not; and a name of nature, by which they are accounted frail men, and subject
to many vices. (Do thou sleep?) Peter is reprehended, not for any great
fault, but because he slept: and believe thou, that God valueth much the least
faults, which thou do commit. (Could thou not?) he teaches us to labor,
and be diligent in doing good works though they be hard, seeing that
temptations, infirmity of nature, and such like, which we pretend for excuses,
shall not excuse us. (Our hour) he touches the shortness of time, wherein
we must labor: And where he says (watch) he shows the easiness of the
service of God, in which is only required of thee, that thou shall watch, that
is, that thou be watchful in all thy actions, to wit, that in all thy
senses thou be careful, and watchful, least the Devil creep into thy
mind: (with me) that is, not alone, but having me for thy guide. Here examine
thy conscience what hitherto thou have done for Christ, and what labors thou
have taken for the world, and now at the least refer all things to the glory
of God, which thou do for the world, and pray him that he will be thy guide
in thy spiritual warfare.

Why do you sleep? watch and pray, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
least ye enter into temptation, the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is
weak.
COnsider first the sharp reprehension of the disciples after the admonition
of Peter: for thou shall not therefore be excused, because thou do offend in
imitatio^ of thy Superior. Consider secondly that thou must watch and pray, for
except thou do work with God, and God with thee, thou shall do nothing
Consider thirdly what that spirit is which is said to be ready, and how the
flesh is weak; First, the spirit, that is the will of a good man is ready,
and does often apprehend very notable things. Secondly, ye holy Spirit is
prompt and ready, but men being allured by the pleasures of the flesh do not
always follow and obey it. Thirdly, the evil spirit is always busy and
ready to hurt; but we are weak to make resistance. These things may worthily
move thee to watch and pray, for it is a matter of great moment not to be
dejected in time of adversity. Pray unto Christ to give thee not only a ready
and willing desire; but also power to effect, and to grant unto thee
whatsoever he commands, and command what he will.

The fifth Meditation of the second and third prayer of Christ.
He went away again the second time, and prayed the same speech, saying, Mat.
26. Mar. 14. Luc 22.
Abba father all things are possible unto thee: if thou will, transfer this
cup from me, but yet not mine, but thy will be done.
CHRIST, acknowledges, that he has not yet obtained that, which he prayed
for, therefore he prays the second time: because thou shall not be grieved,
if thou art not heard by and by, which art neither so worthy a person, nor so
earnest a prayer, Mark every word of this prayer, (Abba pater) that is,
Father, father, which repititio^ is a sign of a most vehement calling to him
which is far off. God truly is far off from sinners; wherefore we must say
with David (Out of the depth I have cried unto thee O Lord, O lord hear my
voice:) And because Christ in this place did represent the person of all
sinners, which he had now taken upon him, know thou that our heavenly Father
is a loving Father of all sinners, that whenever thou shall fall into sin,
thou shall not be dismayed therewith. And he does not a little comfort us, when
he adds (all things are possible unto thee) for nothing is impossible or hard
unto God: and this word (if thou will) does expres that God can easily help
us, and that he needs not to work or labor, because by his will only he can
do al things. And the reason why he will not, when we pray unto him, is,
because through his continual love toward us, he guides al things to our
salvation. Now join these three together (Father) which word imports the
love of God: (All things are possible) whereby is declared his omnipotency:
(if thou will) by which thou see the easiness to perform it, and thereby
thou shall take great comfort of thy sorrows: It is ye surest way in all
prayer to lay aside our own will, for God will guide thee much better according
to his will, when thou do not interpose thine own judgment and senses. Pray
therefore unto God that he will direct thee like unto a plough Ox, without
thine own will.

And he came again and found them sleeping, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
for their eyes were very heavy, and they knew not what to answer him, and
leaving them he went away again.
COnsider first how often Christ does visit his Disciples, whereby he shows
the passing grief of his mind, who received no comfort by his prayer, though
he prayed with great affection, nor yet could be refreshed by the presence of
his Disciples, even as sick folks are wont to turn this way, and that way to
ease their wearines. Consider secondly that Christ was never so troubled with
any occasions, no not now, when he was ready to suffer, but that he always
thought upon thy salvation: Yea and even now, when he is in Heaven, he has
his eyes always bent favorably toward thee. Consider thirdly how little man
can do without Christ, how soon he falls a sleep, how soon he faints
if Jesus depart never so little from him. Consider fourthly what it is to have
our eyes heavy, that is, when we are not so apt and ready to meditate on
divine and heavenly things; by reason of earthly cares which hinder the mind:
As the immoderate desire of honor and riches, ambition, the vanities of this
world, and such like affections of the mind: Therefore thou must pray unto God
to take from thee that slouthfulnes and heaviness, and acco^modate thee to his
own will. Consider fifthly how much ashamed the Apostles were, who being
admonished now the second time, could not yet contain themselves from sleep;
wherefore amongst themselves they did carefully both accuse, and excuse their
own infirmity: Note also this, (they did not know, what they should answer
unto him.) For if the Apostles themselves, being men excelling others in
sanctity, and holiness of life, in a matter of no great fault, wherein they
might have aleaged their own frailty, were so sorrowful, and knew not to
answer: what answer will thou give to Almighty God, when thou shall be cyted
before him for matters of great moment, and many grievous sins shall be
objected against thee, which thou have committed, not only by frailty, but also
craftily and maliciously. Consider sixthly that our Lord did not complain, that
he was left alone in prayer and labor: Because thou should resolve not to
be grieved, if at any time thou be enforced to take great pains, whilst
others be idle. And pray unto our Lord, that he will stir thee up, when
thou art slothful.

And he prayed the third time, Mat. 26.
and prayed the same speech, saying, O my Father, if this cup cannot pass from
me, but that I mmst drink thereof, thy will be done.
COnsider first that Christ runs again to his Father, and craving still one
and the same thing is not heard. This prayer comprehends the wonderful
submission of Christ, yielding himself, and all that he had into the hands of
his Father, taking it in no evil part, that he was not hard. Learn thou hereby
not to be troubled in thy mind, when things succeed not according to thy
desire, when thou have done thy best endeauours. Consider secondly the great
necessity that Christ should suffer: For the eternal Father would never have
suffered his son to have prayed so often unto him, if thy salvation might
have been gotten by any other means. Consider thirdly this manner of speaking
(if it cannot pass, except I drink it) for he would be understood; that all
ye benefit of our Lords passion should pass unto us, who are the members of
his body, but as it were drawn through our mouth, that is, through Christ, who
is our head. Moreover as a potio^ is bitter and unsavory to the taste, yet very
profitable for the members of ye body: So the dolours of Christ were bitter
unto him, and profitable unto us. And ye passion of Christ passes unto us,
partly because his merit is communicated and imparted unto us, and partly
because our tribulatio^s and labors are sanctified. Therefore so often as thou
shall suffer any adversity, so often do thou think, that thou do participate
with the passion of Christ. And pray him to mittigate thy miseryes through his
dolours, which he endured.

The sixth Meditation of his agony, and bloody sweat.
And there appeared unto him an Angel from heaven, co^forting him. Luc. 22.

COnsider first, that though in Christ ye divine nature was joined with human
nature, into the same person; yet in this time of his passion he took no
comfort at all from thence. Consider secondly how great and grievous those
torments were, that man was not sufficient to mittigate them, but that it was
necessary for an Angel to come from Heaven. Consider thirdly what was ye cause
why Christ would be comforted by an Angel; to wit, because he would know to
suffer with us, when we are afflicted, and teach us not to have recourse to
frail and vain delights, such as are commonly drawn from creatures; but unto
spiritual, angelical, and heavenly things. Consider fourthly that God never
forsakes them, that trust in him. For although he do not always free us from
our troubles, yet he does ever give us his grace and strength, that we may be
able to bear them. Consider fifthly that Angels are always present at our
prayers, therefore thou must be careful and diligent to worship them being
present, in a religious and comely manner, and pray unto God according to the
Psalm (in the fight of Angels I will sing unto thee.) Epiph: in an corato and
Haeresi. 69.
Consider sixthly how the Angel did comfort Christ; for he did it not by any
inward comfort or grace, (because Christ admitted no comfort in all the time of
his passion) but used some outward words, wherein he propounded unto him, both
the absolute necessity of such bitter pains, and the great profit, that shall
come thereby, and also the resolute will of his Father, and the oracles of the
Prophets, etc. Consider seventhly whether there be any thing, wherein thou
may comfort and confirm Christ, and encourage him to do something for thy
sake: which will be effected, if he shall see thee behave thy self well, and
wisely to employ the tallent, which he has delivered unto thee, and that thou
do endure thy labors courageously: For then he will behold thee lovingly
and exalt thee to higher honor. In the mean time do thou pray unto Christ, to
comfort and instruct thee, not only in outward words, but especially in inward
virtue and wisdom.

Luc. 22.
And being in an agony, he prayed longer.
THis agony was a certain inward striving, not of the flesh against the spirit,
but of nature against Death: and in all this bitter time Christ was to fight in
three several co^flicts, and he was superior in every one. First with nature
abhorring to dye so cruel a death: Secondly with the justice of his Father,
exacting grievous punishment: Thirdly with the most cruel enemy of mankind.
But he began with the battle against nature, that thou may know how to
behave thy self in thy conflict for thy salvation: that is, that first of all
thou must endeavor to subdue thy inclination. and to restrain thy desires,
which being overcome, thou shall find God pacified, and the Devil will fly
from thee. Consider first with what contention, and with how great labor
Christ thy Captain does fight; and do thou hope to be saved without fight?
Consider secondly that in this agony he prayed longer, because thou must
continue longest in prayer in time of affliction. Consider thirdly what that
is, which he desired in his long prayer? not that the cup might be taken from
him (for he had before used shorter words to that end) but, since he must
needs suffer, that thou might obtain profit by his torments. Admire here
that excellent love of Christ, who alone is ye true comfort of Angels. Lament
for thy sins which were the cause of his suffering, stir up also in thy
self the other affections of love, confidence, and co^miseration, whereof this
place administreth abou^dant cause.

And his sweat was made like drops of blood, Luc. 22.
running down to the ground.
COnsider first by the quality and quantity of his sweat the great grief, of
thy Spouse, without which neither the blood could issue with the sweat, nor
yet so great plenty, as should fall down to the ground. Consider secondly that
our Lord both began, and ended his passion with a prodigious effusio^ of blood
and water: That thou should know, that the divine nature did bring this
chiefly unto Christ, at that time, that he might the longer be able to
suffer those most bitter torments, which humane nature al alone could never
have endured. Consider thirdly that blood issued out of every part, both
because every member of the Church, of which number thou art one should lament
the death of Christ; and also because every Christian might gather one drop of
his blood, to wash away their sins, and also that thou may know, how
liberally he offers his blood for thee, by as many fountains, as he has
members. Consider fourthly how much this great effusion of blood and water did
weaken the most tender body of Christ. Consider fifthly that it ran down upon
the earth, to take away the sins of men, which are adicted too much to the
pleasures of the world. Consider sixthly that the drops ran down upon the
ground, that thou may understand, that thou must make haste, if thou will
be partaker of this precious blood, which no sooner issues forth, but that
it runs away most swiftly. Therefore except in this life thou do gather,
and lay up some of this blood, it will all run away after thy death, so as
none will be left for thee.

The seventh Meditation of the coming of Judas with the Soldiers.
And he came the third time, and said unto them, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
sleep now, and rest, it suffices: the hour is come: Behold the Son of man
shall be delivered into the hands of sinners, arise, let us go: behold he,
that shall betray me, is hard by.
COnsider first that Christ having three times visited his Apostles, and found
the^ sleeping, did the first time reprehend them, the second time held his
peace, and the third time bad them sleep on: That thou may learn, first to
bear with the infirmity of another; Secondly to assent presently to divine
inspirations; for if Christ perceive that thou do contemn his admonitions,
he will afterward hold his peace, and more sparingly suggest these things,
which tend to thy salvation. Thirdly that when thou have begun any good work,
thou should not waver, nor change thy mind: for Christ after he had
subdued the inclination of nature, and had resolved even against nature to dye,
did not at any time after, show any sign of sorrow, inconstancy, or doubt.
Consider secondly that Christ framed himself to take a little rest or sleep
with his Disciples, but that could neither be great, nor long, especially in a
man so over wearied, and shortly after to be apprehended. Consider thirdly this
word (It suffers) as though he taught us to use a mean or measure in our rest
and human commodities. Consider fourthly that this word (behold) is twice
repeated because it was a strange thing that any man could be found, which
would betray the Son of God and man. Consider fifthly (Arise let us go.) It is
not enough for thee, if thou do not sleep, when Gods glory is in hand; but
thou must arise, go forward, and prevent evils, and suffer all adversities
courageously for Gods cause. Here shake off thy sleep, and pray unto God, to
stir thee up effectually to labor for his names sake.

As he was yet speaking, behold Judas one of the twelve came: And Judas, Mat.
26. Joan. 18
which betrayed him, knew the place, because Jesus had come thither often with
his Disciples.
COnsider first that Judas had no need to be warned to watch; for it happens
commonly, that when mischief is to be done, wicked men never sleep. Consider
secondly ( behold Judas one of the twelve) It is a strange thing, that he,
who had received so great a benefit at Christ his hand, could ever come to
that malice, and ingratitude, that he would betray his Lord and benefactor.
Thou may learn hereby not to trust in guiftes freely bestowed upon thee,
but how much the more God has bestowed upon thee, so much the more to fear,
because God in the hour of death will weigh all his gifts, as ye Scripture
here with great emphasis says. ( Behold Judas one of the twelve.) Consider
thirdly that an evil man fears not to abuse good things as Judas came to the
place of the prayer of Christ to betray him: how much better had it been for
him to have left his treason, and to have joined himself with Christ and his
Apostles in prayer: Consider fourthly that ye knowledge of many, yea of divine
things, shall not help a wicked man, but rather shall condemn him, even as it
did not help Judas to have known Christ, and the time and place of the prayer
of Christ, etc. In this place if thou do consider thine own ingratitude,
who having received many good benefits, do restore nothing but wickedness,
thou will admire and detest thy self, and thou will pray unto Christ not to
suffer thee to perish with wicked Judas.

Therefore Judas, Joan. 18. Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
when he had received, his company and the ministers, from the Priests and
Pharisees: he came thith r with lanthornes and torches, with swords and staves
and armor, sent from the chief Priests and Seniors of the people, and he,
which was called Judas, went before him.
COnsider first what a great company of men assembled together to apprehend
Christ: First a company of ye Gentiles, with their tribune, perhaps five
hundredth soldiers; then no small number of the ministers of ye Jews, with
some of the chief Priests, Seniors, and Magistrates of the people: there were
therefore two companies, one of the Gentiles, and another of the Jews, armed
with sundry weapons, and prepared to hurt: the ringleader and captain of all
these was he (who was called Judas) that is that famous Judas, who was known
to all those Jews and Gentiles. Consider secondly what they talked among
themselves as they came, what minds they bare toward Christ, and how they
thirsted after his blood.

Consider thirdly this title of Judas (who was called Judas) that is, he which
a little before was known to the Disciples, and to good people, when by the
commandment of Christ he distributed the alms, when he wrought miracles, when
he followed Christ, he is now renowned amongst knaves, and famous amongst
thieves. Be thou careful to celebrate thy name in Heaven, rather then in the
world or in hell. Consider fourthly what a grief it was to Christ, to see him,
who was one of the principal of ye Church to become chief among knaves: and
do thou take heed, least by the like change of thy self, thou give him
cause of sorrow, by falling from being the son of God to be a slave unto the
Devil; and pray with all thy heart, that it never happen unto thee.

The eight Meditation of the falling of the Jews to the earth.
Jesus therefore knowing all things which should come upon him, went forward,
and said, whom seek ye? they answered him, Jesus of Nazareth.
CHRIST went forward to meet them, that he might teach thee, first that he was
not ignorant of the practizes of the wicked: Secondly that he made have to die
of his own free will: Thirdly that he is ready to receive a sinner, if he will
reclaim himself. Wherefore stir up thy self to the love of Christ: and
offer thy self wholly unto him, who yielded himself cheerfully into his
enemies hands for thy sake. (whom seek ye?) as if he should say, consider I
pray ye whom ye seek, a just and innocent man, who has used to do every man
good, and to hurt no man, who for your salvation descended down from heaven,
and who at last shall come to be judge over all creatures. Do thou consider
these things, whenever thou shall be tempted to offend God. Heb. 10.
For as the blessed Apostle St. Paul says: By sinning the son of God is
trodden upon, and ignominiously used. (Jesus of Nazareth) they knew not that he
was present, for they did not say we seek thee, but Jesus of Nazareth. Note
that for thee Jesus is sought for, to be put to death, that is a Savior, and,
of Nazareth, that is flourishing and adorned with all virtue, for none else by
his death could deliver thee from the flames of hell fire: Therefore in all thy
necessity thou must seek for him, and pray him that thou may not seek him
to his shame and death, but to thine own salvation, and in seeking thou may
find him, and having found him, thou may always keep him.

Joan. 18.
Jesus answered them: I am he: and Judas, who betrayed him, stood with them:
Therefore as he said unto them I am he, they went backward, and fell upon the
ground.
COnsider first the power of Christ, overthrowing a whole company by his word
only. His wrath therefore is to be feared, when he shall come to Judge,
which showed so great power being ready to suffer. Learn hereby to esteem
much the word of God, which brings salvation to the belieuer, and perdition
to ye incredulous. Consider secondly the miserable change of Judas, who a
little before sat at our Lords table with the Apostles, and is now ouerthrown
amongst ye wicked: For neither shall the dignity of thy order, or religion
excuse thee, nor the goodness of others defend thee, nor the piety of thy former
life profit thee, whenever thou shall forsake Christ, and follow his enemies
and sin. Consider thirdly, that one and the same word is a comfort to the
good, and a terror to the wicked: This word (I am he) did comfort the Apostles
sailing on the sea, Mat. 26. Joan. 18
provoked the Pharisees to watch, and here ouerthrewe the armed men. Thou
therefore, if thou be good land, wilt receive the word of God with
plentiful fruit; but if thou be naught, thou will take hurt by the best
seed. Consider fourthly, the difference between the ruin of wicked men, and
the fall of the just: the wicked man falls back, and not upon his face
because when he suddenly goes out of this life, he falls shamefully upon
things which he sees not, and unto punishments, which he was ignorant of: For
to fall upon the face, is to acknowledge our sins in this life, and by penance
to lament them: D. Greg. lib. 31. Mora, ca: 18. and ho. 9. in Ezechielem.
The wicked man falls backward because he becomes worse by that, which
should amend him, that even against his will he shall be compelled to look up
to heaven. Do thou admire the goodness of Christ, who by so many means sought
the salvation of his enemies; and pray him that he will so strike thy heart
with his word that falling upon thy face thou may by humility reconcile the
Majesty of God, who is offended with thy sins.

Therefore he asked them again: whom seek ye? they say unto him, Jesus of
Nazareth: he says unto them: I have told you that I am he: If therefore ye
seek me, suffer these men to go away, that the Speech may be fulfilled,
which said: Because, whom thou gave unto me; I have not lost any of them.
COnsider first the malice of the wicked, which is pacified, neither with
sweetness, nor punnishment. For the blindness of indurate malice does increase:
as in these men who being taught and admonished who Christ was, did not yet
acknowledge him: For they answered not, we seek thee, but, speaking as it
were of another, they said Jesus of Nazareth. Consider secondly ye great care,
which Christ had of his people, of whom in so great perils he was more
careful, the^ of himself. This is the perfect love of our neighbors to help
them though it be to our own loss. Thirdly if in so great adversity he had
care of a few Apostles, will he not now being free from all perils, and quiet,
be careful in heaven for his only beloved spouse ye whole Church? Yes verily he
is careful and desirous to help every particular member thereof. This place
is full of comfort, to consider that our Lord thinks on thee. Consider
fourthly how our Lord does glory in this, that he had not lost any any of his
Disciples. In like manner how much cause of joy may thou conceive, if no man
be the worse by thy words, example, or negligence; but thou have rather gained,
and preserved many. Lastly pray thou unto Christ, that he will never cease to
have care over thee.

The ninth Meditation of the kiss of Judas.
Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
And the Traitor had given them a sign, saying, whom soever I shall kiss,
that is he, hold him, and carry him warily.
THe great name of an Apostle wherewith Judas was honored, is now turned into
the name of a Traitor, and so this name, Judas, which amongst the ancient
Israelites was most honorable, is become through detestation of that sin
almost ignominious amongst Christians. This is the fruit of sin, that good
men avoid all conversation with the wicked. Consider the careful diligence of
this traitor, who least he should not have his money, taught them the way how
to apprehend him, and also how to keep him, and so of a master of virtue, he
became a master of iniquity: He was before sent, for the conversion of people,
now he teaches others to destroy the Author of life. Thou do learn hereby
the quality of sin, which rests not in this, to make a man a sinner, but
proceeds further, to make him also a teacher of wickedness. Pray thou unto
God, that he never suffer thee to be drawn from him, least thou fall into
sin like Judas.

Luc. 22. Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
Judas went before them, and drew near, that he might kiss him, and coming
presently he said, hail Rabbi: and he kissed him.
Here admire the goodness of Christ, who admitted him to kiss him, who^ he
knew to be a traitor. Neither do thou flatter thy self, if thou be called
into Religion, or by Gods permission exalted to divine misteryes,
Ecclesiastical offices, or Holy functions and dignityes; because Christ does
suffer thee, as he suffered the kiss of Judas. It seems that the Apostles
used to kiss Christ, when they came from any strange place: For otherwise
Judas would not have dared to do it, and Christ objected unto the Pharisee,
saying (thou have not given me a kiss.) Luc. 7.
Here thou may learn the facility of Christ in admitting sinners, and his
great desire to be with the sons of men. Come therefore with great
confidence, for he will never reject thee, who addmitted a traitor. Secondly
do all things sincerely, for he betraieth Christ with a kiss, which under
pretense of holiness deceives his neighbors; and he which receives the
body of our Lord in the Eucharist, with an unclean heart, is guilty of the body
and blood of our Lord, which he puts into the foul sink of his naughty
conscience.

And Jesus said to him: Friend wherefore art thou come? Mat. 26. Luc. 22.
O Judas, do thou betray the Son of man with a kiss?
Mark every word, (Friend.) First hitherto thou have been a friend: Secondly
thou come in the habit of a Friend, offering a kiss, a token of love:
Thirdly I do not hate thee, but offer thee reconciliatio^, and am ready to
shed my blood and to offer my death also for thy sake, which I must now suffer,
if thou thy self wilt. I desire not that thou should deliver me out of the
hands of these Jews for I am borne to that end to suffer death, but that thou
should repent thee, of this thy great sin, and return into grace and
favor. (Wherefore art thou come.) First I am not ignorant with what mind thou
art come hither, I have searched already into the bottom of thy heart: return
again therefore unto thy self, for I thy Judge am not ignorant of thy fraud.
Thou wretch, whither art thou fallen? Late an Apostle now a traitor; of late a
principal pillar of the Church, now chiefest amongst Thieues: behold thine own
baseness, and now at least repent thee of thy fault. (Judas) If thou likest not
thy name of a friend, because thou will not be a friend, yet hear me calling
thee in my accustomed manner. Secondly remember thy ancient parents, Judas the
Patriarch, and Judas Machabeus, from whose manners thou do degenerate. (The
Son of man) him who is admirably the son of man, begotten in heaven by his only
Father, and borne in earth by his only mother, who did never any evil unto
thee, but labored three and thirty whole years for thy sake, and is now ready
to dye for thee: what cause have I given thee, that thou should betray me
an innocent? (with a kiss) thou do abuse ye sign of peace, and turn it to
a mark of treason; as Ioab in times past kissing Amasa, 2 Reg. 20.
killed him. Thou know, that nothing is more dear to me, then to be joined
in firm love with thee, and do thou convert this conjunction of love to my
death? (do thou betray) do thou give me to them, that hate me deadly,
which will do me all manner of hurt, and which will never be satisfied with my
miseryes? Admire in all these things the benignity of Christ and imitate it:
suffer with thy Lord, who suffered so many indignities by his servant, on who^
he had bestowed so many benefits, and never hurt him in any thing; and
considering what, and how effectually he spoke for the conversion of the wicked
traitor, thou may be assured he will never forsake thee, if thou come unto
him with a contrite heart. Pray therefore to Christ, that he will remain thy
friend, and give thee grace to suffer al iniuryes patiently, and to love them,
that offer any unto thee.

The tenth Meditation of the ear of Malchus being cut off
They which were about him, seeing what would come, Luc. 22. Mat. 26. Joan. 18.
said unto him: Lord if we strike in the sword? and behold one of those
standers by, which were with Jesus, Simo^ Peter, drew his sword, and striking
the servant of the chief Priest, cut of his right ear, and the name of the
servant was Malchus.
COnsider first: the feruor of the Disciples, who being but a few in number,
feared not to oppose themselves against two companyes; and to adventure present
danger in defense of their Lord: that thou spare not thy self when soever
Christ his cause shall be handling. Secondly: (And behold,) a new thing that the
Apostle of our Lord should use his sword: Christ taught mildness, not fight,
which nevertheless is to be undertaken, when Gods glory is in danger. Thirdly
Peter the chief of the Apostles drew his sword, whose office is to cut off
the rotten members from the body of the Church with his spiritual sword.
Fourthly, he cut of the right ear, because all which are excommunicated by
Peter, are excluded from the divine premises of heavenly things, and they keep
ye left ear with which after the pleasures of this life, they may hear the
maledictio^ of ye severe Judge. Fifthly: (Malchus) (which name signifies King)
is the servant of the wicked Priest: for they which in this world are delighted
with vain tytles of honors, are indeed the bondslaues to vices. Consider
sixthly the power of Christ's word (suffer these men to go away:) For by the
power thereof all that great company of men did his disciples no hurt at all.
Consider seauenthly the goodness of Christ, who would not suffer Peter to do
any more harm, least by his passion which ought to profit all men, he should
seem to have hurt some man. Pray thou unto Christ never to deprive thee from ye
hearing of heavenly things, nor to shut thy ears against good things, but
rather to open the ears of thy heart, that thou beng deaf to the babbling of
wicked men, may hear what our Lord shall say unto thee.

And Jesus answering said, suffer now: Luc 22.
Then Jesus said unto Peter, put thy sword into thy scabbard: Mat. 26.
For all which take the sword shall perish with the sword: 2. Do thou think
that I cannot ask my Father, Joan. 18
and he will give me more then twelve legions of Angels? 3. The cup which my
Father has given unto me, will thou not that I shall drink it? Fourthly,
Joan. 18.
how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled? because so it must be done.
COnsider, first (suffer now) that is, it is enough, proceed no further with
thy sword and defense. He does not reprehend the fact of Peter, but he says it
is enough, that thou in thy defense and in thy wrath may keep a mean:
according to that, Be angry, and sin not: Secondly consider these four
reasons, by which he admonished Peter not to go about to hinder his passion.
Thou may learn hereby the willingness of Christ to suffer, who used so
many reasons that he might be permitted to suffer. But thou do avoid all
troubles for Christ's sake, and seek out all reasons that thou may suffer
nothing. Thirdly (which shall take the sword) that is, they which by their own
authority shall use the sword, not receiving it from God, deserve by the law to
be put to death; and although they escape ye sword of men in this world, yet
they shall perish with that sword which keeps the entry into Paradise: Learn
to leave all revenge unto God. Fourthly consider ye great multitude of Angels,
which are always ready to help good men, that thou may learn to trust in
God, which has assigned so many Angels to have care over thee: For Helizeus
had experience in him self of that which Christ here affirms of him self:
4 Reg. 6.
Consider fifthly (the Cup which my Father has given unto me:) He calls his
passion a cup, thereby diminishing rather then increasing the greatness thereof,
that thou should not lightly complain of the grieuousnes of thy miseries:
He acknowledges that his father gave it him; because thou shall not ascribe
thy afflictions to men or to devils, but to God alone, which blessed Job, who
was vexed both by devils and men; Job. 1.
Our Lord has given, our Lord has taken away and know that God does not leave
to be a father, when he does afflict, but rather shows himself to be a
Father, when he chastises. Sixthly consider that the Scriptures are fulfilled
by ye passion of Christ, and are likewise fulfilled by thy passions: For
through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. Give thanks
to Christ; who with so ready and so prepared a mind came to his passion for
thy sake. Stir up his love in thee, and pray him that he will stir up in thee
a desire to suffer for his name, and that in all things, which shall happen
unto thee, thou may find out ye reasons that it was just which thou did
suffer.

And when he had touched his ear, he healed it. Luc. 22.

COnsider first, with what great benignity Christ cured the Ear of this
malepert Soldiour, and cruel enemy, whom he foresawe would be never the
better for such a benefit, that thou may learn to be readier to mercy, then
to severity; and to do good for evil, though thy adversary deserve it not.
Secondly the force of the touch of our Saviors hand, that thereby thou may
know the virtue of the body of Christ: For if the only touch of his hand did
restore his enemies ear, will not his whole body received in the Eucharist
cure both the body and soul of his friend? Thirdly that Christ being ready to
suffer, did heal the ear; for this is one of the chief fruits of the
passion of our Lord, to make our souls capeable of the word of God, and to
cure them through Faith and Sacraments. Therefore God would admonish his
enemies by this his last miracle before his death to open their ears to hear
the word of God, and by hearing to lay aside all malice. To be brief, admire
the bounty of God, and pray him that he will show thee the like mercy, for thy
innumerable sins.

The eleventh Meditation of the captivity of our Lord.
In that hour Jesus said unto the multitude, and to those, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
which came to him, the chief Priests, the Magistrates of the people, and the
elders; ye went forth as to a thief with swords and staves to apprehe^d me: I
was daily with you in the Temple, and I sat teaching, and you did not hold me,
Luc. 22.
nor stretch your hands against me: But this is your hour, and the power of
darkness: And all this was done that the scriptures of the Prophets might be
fulfilled.
COnsider first what account was made of thy Lord, to wit, as of a thief, for
the suppressing of whom there needed so great an army Secondly how he showed
that he was no thief, as he which had hurt no man nor lain hid like a thief,
but had done good, and had taught nothing in secret, but always publicly,
and called those men for witnesses thereof whom he saw stand ready to be ye
officers for his death, therefore he admonishes them to call to remembrance ye
doctrine which he had taught the^, and to change their minds; for they should
find nothing in it but holy, learned, and wholesome counsel. Consider
thirdly by what words he gave his adversaries power to rage against him,
without which they could have done nothing, and every word has his force:
(this is) as if he said, you care only for the present, and respect not the
time to come, which is the property of sinners, not of just men: (hour) all
present time is short, all the pleasure of sinners passes like an hour, also
al ye affliction of the just passes away: (your) this this short time is
granted unto you to do every thing either for your salvation or damnation: I
say this precious time which after this life will not remain, (and the power
of darkness) that is to say a dark power, both because they deserve it through
the darkness of their sins, and also because they, which use it, are carried
to the darkness of Hell, and also because darkness remains in the power of the
wicked, and, to conclude, because power was given to the Devils, the princes of
darkness to do all mischief unto Christ. Consider therefore the multitude of
the pains of Christ, and their greatness when it was permitted to wicked
Spirits being practiced and most ready in doing hurt, to persecute Christ by
these his most willing ministers. Admire here also this most willing
permission of Christ, give him thanks and offer thy self ready to endure al
labors and torments, for his sake, and pray him that thy power may not be in
darkness, but that all thy actions may be perfected with the light of faith
and of his divine grace.

Then came the company and Tribune, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
and the Ministers of the Jews and laid hands upon Jesus, and so they held and
bound him.
COnsider first the wonderful insolency of these men in taking thy Lord, and
think of the greatness of their envy, whereby they desired to do all mischief
unto Christ, and that our lord had given them power to satisfy their desires.
Acts. 22
The Apostle Paul was taken with great cruelty, pulled out of the Temple by
force; presently beaten with their fistes, and almost killed with stripes, but
it was nothing to this cruelty, which surpassed all cruelty: Consider the
ancient predictions of this his captivity: Many clogs compassed me about, they
took me as a Lion prepared for his prey, Psalm. 11
Psalm. 16.
casting me down, they compassed me now about: they compassed me like Bees,
and they burned like fire in the thorns: being pushed I was overthrown, that
I fell. Secondly mark the words of the Evangelists: (a company, the tribune
and the Ministers) not a few, but the whole army labored for this captivity,
every one went about some thing, (they came) they leaped with great violence as
blessed Gregory Nazianzene affirms. (Laid hands on him) not only
apprehending him, but grievously beating him. (They held him) as St. Leo says,
In Christo patie^te ser. 7. de pas domini.
they pulled him hither and thither, (and they bound him) O how many cords were
pulled, not by one, but by many, both because he should not escape, and also
because being seen in such habit he might be judged worthy of death by all
men. These bands were due unto thee for thy sins, and except thou be
partaker of them thou shall be bound with everlasting chains in hell. Suffer
then with thy lord, who was so cruelly bound for thy cause, and endeavor to be
thankful, and pray him that by this his captivity he will deliver thee free
from all the power of the Devil, and from all bonds of evil desires, which
according to the Devils will might draw thee into any sin, and restore thee
to spiritual liberty, that being delivered out of the hand of thy enemy thou
may serve him. Mat. 26. Mar. 14.


Then all his Disciples leaving him fled: but a certain young man did follow
him, clothed in linen upon the bare: and they laid hold of him, but he
leaving his linen fled away naked from them.
COnsider first, that here are two things declared, whereby thou may
understand the great fury and cruelty which was used in taking Christ, and
carrying him away: One was the flight of his most dear Disciples, who were
stricken into so great a fear, that although they burned in love with him, yet
every one of them fledd away: The other, that a young man in one of the next
houses being moved with the tumult, rose out of his bed, covered only with
linen, came forth to see what was done in the street, whom they thinking to
be one of his Disciples, would have apprehended, but he leaving his linen,
fled away naked, whereby thou may gather what a clamor they made, as if their
prey were now taken; and how much they raged and desired to hurt all them,
which belonged unto Christ: Consider secondly that Christ was forsaken by all
his friends and followers, and cruelly carried away by the hands of the wicked.
Learn hereby not to trust in men which oftentimes in this life, and ever in
death do forsake all men; and pray thy Lord that he never forsake thee;
although thou be forsaken of al men, especially in the hour of thy death,
when thou must go into a strange country, without the company of any man with
thee.

The twelfe Meditation of the acts in Annas house, and his sending to Caiphas.
And they brought Jesus first to Annas, Joan. 7.
for he was father in law to Caiphas, who was the high Priest of that year:
And Caiphas was he, which gave counsel to the Jews: Because it is necessary
that one man dye for the people.
COnsider first that Christ was brought to Annas, either because he should be
carried to his father in law Caiphas, an old man, which should succeed ye next
year in the high priesthood, and dwellling in the way to the high Priests
house, or else for the traitor, to whom (as Saint Cyrill says) Annas was
appointed by the Priests to pay the reward of his treason, Lib. 11. in Joan.
cap. 37.
for the taking of our Lord. Behold thou the affections of every man; the
cruel joy of this most wicked Annas, tryumphing that at the last his enemy was
taken, the flattering congratulations of the Soldiers, the covetousness of
Judas having now received his money, the modesty of Christ and his cheerful
mind to suffer for thee. Consider secondly that mention is here made of the
counsel which Caiphas gave, for the putting of Christ to death; that it may
be showed that he prosecuted his death who first gave the counsel of his
death. Secondly that thou may learn that al things which our Lord suffered in
his passion, did not happen unto him so much by humane counsel, as by the
will of God. For those words of the death of our Lord, although Caiphas uttered
them out of a wicked mind, yet he spoke them by the instinct of the holy
Ghost, who uses to apply the words of the wicked for the profit of the just,
and that he might teach thee, that God the Father enjoined, and God the Son
took upon him this cruel passion, only for the love of ma^kinde, that thou
again might be carried into ye love of God with all thy heart and mind.
Thirdly that thou may know, that God never forgets sins past, though
perhaps they are out of thy mind. For all things are kept in memory, and an
account shall be demanded at the hour of death.

And Annas sent him bound to Caiphas the high Priest, Joan. 18 Mat. 26.
where the Scribes and Seniours were assembled.
COnsider first, that Christ suffered many wrongs in the house of Annas, for
this word (he sent him) signifies that he did not lightly suffer him to go
away, but that he made some stay: But search out with thy self what those
things were: For blessed Cyrill says, that the blow was given him in the
house of Caiphas, and many affirm that this word (he sent) should be taken in
ye Hebrew for this word (he had sent.) Consider secondly what this word
signifies (bound:) to wit, that either he was newly bound, or else that his
former bo^ds were not loosed, that he might be accounted and condemned as
guilty and worthy of bonds by ye judgment of this grave man: But as the wicked
Priest did take no compassion upon him that was bound, so neither do thou
take any pity upon thy poor afflicted Neighbor, nor yet upon thy own
soul, which is grievously tied with the bonds of sins. Consider thirdly
this wearisome journey, in which thy Lord was cruelly drawn with with cords,
and whipped on with stripes, whether soever it pleased the wicked people to
earye him. He walked indeed the hard ways, that he might make the way to
Heaven easy and plain for thee, and that thou might go in the way of ye
Commandments of God without trouble. Consider fourthly, and enter with thy
Lord into the counsel of the wicked. Behold here many Calves and fat Bulls
compassing ye most innocent Lamb: Psalm. 21.
(the Scribes) the Doctors of the Law: (the Elders) the Magistrates of the
people: (the Pharisees) the religious people of the Jews, being Gluttons,
insolent, and cruel. Consent not thou to their counsel, nor their deeds;
but take the poor out of the hand of the mighty; that God also may have mercy
upon thee in the day of thy trouble.

And Simon Peter followed Jesus a far off, Joan. 18.
and another disciple: and that disciple was known to the high Priest, and
entered with Jesus into the high Priests court: but Peter stood at the gate
without: Therefore the other disciple who was known to the high Priest went
forth and spoke to the porter, and brought in Peter even into the Court of the
high Priest, Mat. 26.
and being come in, Mar. 14.
the fire burning in the midest of the Court, and they sitting round about it,
Luc. 22.
Peter was in the midst of the^, and sat with the ministers at the fire, that
he might see the end, and warm him self.
COnsider first whether these flying Apostles went, being amazed with so great
fury of the Soldiers, and now wavering and doubtful in their belief of the
divinity of Christ. For who would believe, that God should ever suffer such
things especially if according to the received opinion of the Jews, he thought
that virtue should be rewarded with temporal goods. Behold Peter following a
far off, and loving more then the rest, took some courage unto him, so as he
doubted not to thrust himself into the company of the Ministers, but yet
fearfully and inconstantly, hoping that he should not be known. Consider
secondly the other Disciple, either Saint John as the common opinion is, the
inseparable companion of Peter, or else some secret Christian, a rich Citizen,
who by reason of some acquaintance with the high Priest, did enter into the
house, whilst Peter, as a poor and unknown man stayed without doors. For
poor men are not admitted to come into the houses of great men, and if at any
time they are permitted, it is accounted a great favor to be placed amongst
their slaves. Be not thou delighted with such a Court, neither thrust thy
self into the company of wicked men: If necessity enforce thee, depart as soon
as thou can, least thy innocence be defiled with the familiarity of wicked
me^. Consider thirdly. that Peter came not in directly, but through the favor
of a friend; and of a woman. Seek thou therefore no honor by favor or by the
love of women, nor yet by any vicious or fraudulent means, least, according to
the example of Peter, thou may expect a most certain and assured downfall.
Also if thou chancest to get honor lawfully, and art entered into the Bishops
Palace the direct way, do not join thy self with the wicked, nor follow
their examples, but enter into thine own heart, and set our Lord always
before thine eyes, who has called thee to that estate. Desire these things of
Christ, and pray unto him to draw thee after him, and not to forsake thee for
ever.

The 13. Meditation of the blow in the house of Chayphas.
Then the high Priest asked Jesus of his Disciples and of his Doctrine? Jesus
said to him: Joan. 18
I have spoken openly to the world, I always taught in the Synagogue and in
the Temple, whether all the Jews assemble, and in secret I have spoken
nothing: Why ask you me? Ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them,
behold these know, what I have spoken.
COnsider first that when hitherto they had obsereued nothing in all the life
of Christ worthy of death, nor yet of bonds, the high Priest began with
certain fraudulent interrogations to draw something out of his answers, which
might be objected as a crime unto him. For the offense of Christ was not the
cause of these bonds, but the envy of the Jews, of which envy the Scripture
in the book of Wisdom numbreth fourteen causes: Because he is vnpr fitable
for us, etc. Secondly he asked him of his Doctrine, whether it differed nor
from Moses, and of his Disciples, with what mind he had chosen them, what
Doctrine he had taught them, and what minds they carried to the Law. Here
inquire thou the Doctrine of Christ, that thou may follow it, and of his
Disciples that thou may immitate their manners. Thirdly Christ answered
boldly, nothing fearing the high Priest, nor that assembly of Noblemen; that
thou should not be afraid in Gods cause. But he held his peace concerning
his Disciples, both because he could not commend them, (and accuse them he
would not) that thou should never hurt any manns fame; praise, if thou
can, but if thou cans^ not, yet detract not; and also because the question of
his Disciples was mixed with the question of his Doctrine, the answer
whereunto satisfied the high Priest. Consider fourthly the purity of the
doctrine of Christ, which our Lord propounded to be examined by his enemies.
(I have spoken openly) Which is a sign of the purity of his Doctrine: (To the
world) no man is barred from the hearing thereof: (Nothing in secr^t) nothing
impure, which need to hate or fly the light; For those things which I said in
private: I would have published to all men, and preached in all places.
Consider fifthly that it was accounted a fault in the high Priest to be ignorant
of those things, which Christ had taught so openly. In the same manner many
great and learned men will not go to Sermons, either because they will not be
pricked in conscience, or else because they are so overwhelmed with worldly
cares, that they esteem all things concerning their souls unnecessary. Do
thou meditate continually upon the words of our Lord, and pray him that he
will always put thee in mind of his words.

When he had spoken this, Joan. 18.
one of the servants gave a blow to Jesus, saying: do thou answer the high
Priest so?
COnsider first that this blow was given, both because these very Servants
were secretly pricked, which being sent to apprehend Jesus, returned home
saying; Never did man speak so: Joan. 18.
And also of flattery, because it seemed not to be reverently spoken to the
high Priest: (Why do you ask me) Proud and high minded men desire to be
dealt honorably withal, and will loose none of their titles; and yet they
violate the name of God with many oaths, periuries, and blasphemies. Learn
thou hereby that there are many ready to revenge the wrongs of rich and mighty
men; but no man will defend the cause of Christ and of the poor. Consider
secondly the iniquity of this Judgment, where every one had power to hurt
freely with applause and allowance of the Judges. Thirdly, that this blow was
of great cruelty, because particular mention is made thereof above all other,
being many in number, which our Lord had already received, and should
afterward suffer. Learn thou to bear patiently the admonitions of Christ,
and of other men, and pray unto God, that he will never permit thee to commit
any offense without reproouing thee, either by others or by thy own conscience.

Jesus answered unto him, if I have spoken evil, Joan. 18.
bear witness of the evil: but if well, why do thou strike me.
COnsider first that Christ, who had taught his Disciples to turn the other
cheek to him, that had stricken them, did here nothing repugnant to his own
Doctrine; both because he did not only offer his cheek, but his whole body to
be whipped and nailed; and also because in this place he did not complain,
he offered no injury again, he made not any resistance, but taught him, that
struck him, and modestly referred him to his own conscience. Secondly that
our Lord would not altogether hold his peace, least he might seem to suffer
something justly for his own offense, who suffered all things for our faults
and nothing for his own. Admire here and imitate the goodness of our Lord, who
would not revenge so great a wrong, neither in word nor deed. And pray unto him
for constancy and meeknes of mind, that thou may be mild and humble of
heart.

The 14. Meditation of the denying of Peter.
And Peter sat abroad in the Court below, Mat. 26.
whom when the Maid portresse of the high Priest saw sitting at the light, Mar.
14.
and warming him, Luc 22.
and had beheld him, she said: And this man was with him: Joan. 18.
and the maid came unto him, saying: and art not thou of the disciples of this
man? he said, I am not: and he denied before them all, saying: Woman I know not
the man, neither do I know, nor have k^owne, what thou say: And he went
forth before the court, and the Cock crowed.
COnsider first that whereas all the Apostles, (as our Lord had foresaid) had
suffered scandal, yet only Peter's denial is repeated by the Evangelists, and
by all of them, both because it seemed so strange and incredible, that Peter
could deny Christ, that this his sin could not be comprehended by the
Evangelists themselves; and also because many men mark the faults of their
superiors. And lastly considering that he who was the foundation of the Church
did sin, that thou should neither doubt, but that the other Disciples
suffered scandal, nor yet presume of thine own strength. For no man
commits that sin, which another would not do; if the guide be wanting,
which created man. Consider secondly, when Peter denied Christ? In the night,
and when it was cold. If thou will not behold the light of truth, and convert
thy self wholly unto Christ, in thine own conscience, and if the love of God
and thy neighbor wax cold in thee, doubt not, but thou shall fall into errors
of faith, or into more grievous offenses. Consider thirdly, where he denied?
where Christ was taken and bound, in the company of wicked men, in speaking
with a woman: avoid these occasions if thou intendest to be holy. And although
St. Cyrill affirms that St. Peter denied not Christ so much through fear of
any hurt, which might happen unto him, as through a kind of love, least he
should be thrust out of the house, and so deprived of his presence. Yet it is
most certain, that he committed a most grievous sin. Beware thou, least
under any color of devotion or virtue, thou do transgress the law of God
and of his Church. For evil is not to be done that good may come thereof.
Consider fourthly that Christ is not denied by him only, who says that Jesus
is not Christ, but also by him, who being christened denies himself to be a
Christian, and the Disciple of Christ, and this may be done not only in
words, but also in deeds, by those which profess to know God, but in their
deeds do deny him. For do thou think (says Saint Bernard) that any man
thinks Jesus to be the Son of God, who neither fears his threatenings, nor
is moved by his promises, nor obeys his commandments, nor allows his
counsels? How often then have thou denied Christ, and yet have not done
penance with Peter. Fifthly ye Cock crowed, but he being otherwise busied,
observed it not, for our Lord did not yet look upon him. Be thou at no time
so overwhelmed with business or sins, but that thou always attend the voice
of God speaking in thee, and that thou may hear thy neighbor admonishing
thee.

Mat. 26.
But he going out of the gate, another Maid saw him, and said to them, Mar. 14.
which were there: And this man was with Jesus of Nazareth, Luc. 22.
and another seeing him said: and thou art of them. But Peter said, O man, I am
not, and he denied with an oath, for I do not know the man.
COnsider first how Peter burning in desire to see our Lord, who stood bound
before the Council in an inward and higher Chamber, did not go out of the
house, but out of the lower room, and began to enquire something of Christ:
that thou may devise and try all ways and means to enjoy thy Lord in thy
meditations, and to obtain him through the works of virtue. Consider secondly,
that where the devil does once get the victory, he does at his return rage
more cruelly, and wound more deeply. First there came one maid, and spoke
unto Peter somewhat modestly: Then some other servants came to that Maid, and
at the last a great number came together and did as it were oppress him with
their words: wherefore Peter at the first did only deny: Secondly he added an
oath: Thirdly he began to curse and blaspheme. Take thou heed therefore that
the Devil never overcome thee; for he being once subdued by the death of
Christ, is driven away by resistance only, according to that saying, Resist
the Devil, Daniel. 7
and he will fly from you. Consider thirdly the fall of Peter: First he
presumed of himself: Secondly he slept in the Garden: Thirdly he left his
fellow Disciples: Fourthly he thrust himself into company amongst wicked men:
Fifthly he denied. Therefore the beginning of his fall was presumption, and the
neglecting of the service of God.

ANd the space as it were of an hour being past, another affirmed, saying:
Verily and this man was with him; for he also is a Galilaean: Then they said
unto him: Whether art thou one of his Disciples? he denied and said. I am not,
Joan. 18
and they came which stood by, and said: Verily thou also art one of them, for
thou also art a Galilaean, and thy speech does make thee manifest: Then said
one of the Servants of the High Priest to him, his cousin whose Ear Peter had
cut off: Did not I see thee in the Garden with him? Then he began to curse, to
detest, and swear, for I know not this man of whom ye speak: And forthwith
as he was yet speaking the Cock crowed again: Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
And our Lord turned, and beheld Peter: And Peter remembered himself of the
word of our Lord, Luc. 22.
as he had said, that before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice,
and Peter going out of doors wept bitterly.
COnsider first, that when Peter was come again to the fire, he began to
speak more freely with the servants, to the end that he might take away all
suspicion from himself: For by his speech he was judged to be a Galilaean.
Thou therefore who art the servant of Christ take heed of familiarity with the
wicked. Let thy communication be of Heavenly things, as thou may perceive
the Apostles speeches were in the Acts of the Apostles, and by their Epistles:
For he which is delighted with the vain speeches of secular men, will easily
be drawn to imitate their ma^ners, and to be warmed with their fire, and
intrapped with their delights. Secondly, Peter was known by his speech to be
the Disciple of Christ, and a Galilaean. Do thou likewise so govern thy
self, that all men even by thy outward co^uersatio^ may know thee to be the
follower of Christ, and a Galilaean, that is, one flying from the worldly to a
spiritual life, and aspiring to Heaven. Consider thirdly the benignity of
Christ toward his servants. He being oppressed with so many miseries, did as
it were forget himself, and take care of his Disciple: He restrained him from
sinning any deeper, and caused him after his third denial to stay, beholding
him, not with the eyes of his body (for that he could not do, being in an
upper chamber, and compassed round about with officers) but turning to him with
the inward beams of his mercy; with which he touched his heart, illuminated
and mollified it. For the beholding of Christ does illuminate the Conscience,
that sins may be known, even as the beams of the Sun do lighten a
Chamber. Consider fourthly the order of his Conversion: First the Cock crowed:
Secondly our Lord beheld him: Thirdly Peter remembered the word of Jesus:
Fourthly he went forth: Fifthly he wept bitterly: If Christ look not upon
thee, the Cock crows in vain. Do thou therefore give ear unto the
Preachers and Admonishers, as unto Cocks; and pray that our Lord will turn
unto thee. Observe the words which thou hear: Fly all occasions of evil,
and do Pennaunce. Here thou being a most grievous sinner may have great
hope of pardon, seeing that the mercy of our Lord gave so free pardon for this
grievous sin, that Christ never objected it unto Peter. But thou who have
offended with Peter, go not about to excuse thy self with Adam, but weep with
Peter, who (as St. Clement witnesses) did all his whole life time after the
first crowing of the Cock rise up to his prayers, and slept no more that night.

The 15. Meditation of the false witnesses in the house of Caiphas.
But the chief Priests, and all the counsel sought false witness against
Jesus, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
that they might put him to death, and they did not find it, whereas many false
witnesses were come in. For many spoke false witness, and their testimonies
were not convenient. But at last came two false witnesses, and rising up they
gave false witness against him; for we heard him speaking: I will destroy this
Temple of God, made with hands, and after three days I will build another, not
made with hands, and their testimony was not convenient.
COnsider first when the high Priest could draw nothing worthy of death from
the words of Christ, then he asked the standers by, who had been often at his
Sermons, and every one spoke that, which they thought might help to condemn
him, and were very earnest and desirous to find out some capital crime,
according to that saying: They searched for iniquities, searching they fainted
in their seaarch, Psalm. 69
they invented counsels which they could not establish. Consider secondly the
purity of the life of thy Lord, which was so great, that it was hard to frame
such a lie of him, as might carrye any color of truth, even by the testimony
of his adversaries themselves. Learn thou first to accuse no man unjustly; For
a Detractor and false witness are bound to restitution of good name Secondly
to avoid all lies: For a Liar cannot please even the wicked. Thirdly according
to the example of Christ to live in such order that the very enemies of Faith,
may find nothing in thy life to object against thee, but considering thee by
thy good works may glorify God our Father.

Fourthly never to seek out reasons against thy conscience to excuse thy
sin: Joan. 18.
For those testimonies are false, and not convenient, whereby God is not
deceived, nor thy Conscience pacified, Consider thirdly these two false
witnesses standing up amongst the rest, whose testimonies are especially
related, either because they were of greater moment, that by them thou might
know the vanities of the others, or else because they contain the mystery of
the death of our Lord, which was then in handling. But they were not
convenient: First because the witnesses could not agree together, the one
saying (I will destroy) and the other (I can destroy) Secondly because our Lord
had spoke no word of destroying and building again; Joan. 12.
but he said (dissolve) and (I will raise) speaking of his death, and
resurrection. Thirdly because he had hurt no man, if he had restored in three
days, that, which he had destroyed. Fourthly because it seemed not to be
beyond his power, who had raised Lazarus from death after he had been dead
four days. Fifthly because such kind of braging words seemed rather worthy of
laughter and contempt then of death. Learn thou first not to wrest ye words of
Christ to a contrary sense: Secondly not to relate any thing otherwise then it
was done: Thirdly never to judge evil of ye mind or intention of others, when
their words or deeds may be well interpreted. Do thou also suffer together
with thy Lord Christ, for whose death and destruction so many men took so
great pains; and pray unto him, that thou may be instructed in the true
understanding of the Scriptures, and that he will never suffer thee to fall
into haeresie.

And the high Priest rising up in the midst of them, Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
asked Jesus saying: Do thou answer nothing to those things? which these
men object against thee, and whereof they bear witness, against thee? but Jesus
held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high Priest said: I adjure
thee by the living God that thou do tell us, if thou art Christ the Son of
our blessed God?
COnsider first, when nothing was found worthy of accusation, which might seem
as a fault to be objected before Pilate the Gentile President, the high Priest
being angry, invented certain questions, to the end that he might gather some
things from his answers. His own conscience informed him, that nothing of any
moment was alleged: Yet he urged those things which he knew to be false.
Consider secondly that Christ held his peace, both because he knew, that his
conscience did answer all those things, and also because he would not avoid
death by his eloquence. He teaches the first to contemn all injuries and
lies, and to suffer them patie^tly, partly because, though perhaps thou art not
guilty of those things, which are objected against thee, yet thou have
offended God in many things, whereof no man accuses thee; and partly because
thou art never ye worse, because other men think thee to be evil, For every
one is such as he appears to be in the sight of our Lord. Secondly not to
think them worthy of an answer, which do offer wrong; because their own
conscience does reprove them. Consider thirdly what our Lord did when he held
his peace. For this (says he) That they should love me, Psalm. 108.
they did detract from me: but I did pray. He prayed then that the fruit of
his Passion might pass unto thee: Therefore in every trouble of thy mind
convert thy self unto Christ; For it cannot be that he remembering this
unjust accusation, can be unmerciful unto thee in thy troubles, and false
accusations. Consider fourthly, that the high Priest evil interpreting this
silence of our Lord, did use adiuration in these words (I adjure thee) or as
the Greek text is (I conjure thee) which word is used in the coniuration of
Devils. Mark here whom thy Lord is accounted to be, to wit, one obsessed of
a devil. And the high Priest by his coniuration demanded two things. First
whether he be Christ, that is to say, the Messiah promised in the Law.
Secondly, whether he be the Son of God. For therefore was he put to death
because he was Christ: and therefore he redeemed mankind by his death,
because he was the Son of God, that is to say, of equal Majesty with God the
Father.

Jesus said unto him, thou have said: Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
I am; but I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting at
the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of Heaven.
COnsider first, that Christ being admired by the name of the living God, did
hold his peace no longer, both because he would not seem to avoid death by
holding his peace, and also that thou should always reverence the name of
God. (Thou have said,) That is, so it is, as thou have spoken, and as thy
conscience does witness unto thy self. Consider secondly, that he makes
mention of the Judgment to come in the words of Daniel. First that he might
take away the jealousy of his affecting a Kingdom, because he sought not an
earthly but a heavenly and eternal Kingdom. Secondly that they should
abstain from this evil judgment, for fear of ye Judgment to come. Learn
first in all thy actions to remember thy last end. Secondly in all accusations
to have patience, because power shall be given thee to Judge thy accusers, and
those which have afflicted thee. Thirdly always, but especially at the end of
thy life, to confess a truth, even though it be great loss both to thy body
and goods. And pray thy Lord, that he will strike thy flesh with wholesome
fear, and inflame thy heart through ye Meditation of his Passion.

The 16. Meditation of the first condemnation of Christ and of his mocking.
Then the chief Priest rent his garments; Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
saying: He has blasphemed, what need we witnesses any further? behold ye
have now heard the blasphemy, what think ye? they answering said, he is
guilty of death.
IF in any great matter there happened any grievous evil, as without doubt
blasphemy is, then the Jews did cut or tear their garments, and by that sign
did show the grieuousnes of the matter, which should cut the heart with grief,
and be revenged even with the loss of honor and goods. But the high Priest
was forbidden to cut his garments by this Law, The high Priest shall not
uncover his head, he, Leuit. 21
shall not cut his garments. Nevertheless this unlearned Priest being ignorant
of the Law, did cut his garment, and by cutting it made an end of the
Priesthood of the Jews. Learn thou to be moved with the injuries offered unto
God, though it be to thine own loss and hinderance. Consider first what
opinion the Jews had of thy Lord. He was first accounted an Imposter or
Inchanter, whereupon Judas said, (Carry him warily least in wrapping your eyes
with his iugling he slip from you.) Secondly injurious unto men: do thou
so, says he, answer the high Priest? Thirdly obsessed by a Devil, in the
exorcisme and coniuration of ye high Priest. Fourthly blasphemous against God.
Fifthly a false Prophet, in the Officers scoffing and mocking him. Behold with
what Titles thy Lord was honored in this his passion. Consider secondly with
what mind Christ heard this general voice of the people, (He is guilty of
death,) and even of that people, whose dead he had raised, whose sick he had
healed, and whose profit he had procured. Admire the malice of wicked men,
and the gentleness of Christ, who being nothing moved with this sentence of
death, offered himself ready to dye for them, which killed him. Pray therefore
that by this sentence of his death, thou may be delivered from the sentence
of eternal death.

And the men, Luc. 22. Mat. 26. Mar. 14
which held Jesus, mocked him, beating him, and they spet in his face, and
beat him with blows, and they covered him and struck his face, and asked him,
saying: Prophecy unto us, O Christ, who is he, that struck thee.
COnsider first that Christ in ye counsel was not only tied with bonds, but
also held by ye hands of many, who after ye sentence of death pronounced did
handle him most cruelly, as a condemned man, against whom they could not sin.
The devil increased their cruelty, who because he had observed no sin in him
in his whole life, desired by these torments to move him to some impatience.
Consider secondly that then they raged most against Christ, when he confessed
himself to be the Son of God. For then thou must expect most temptations both
by men and devils, when by the amendment of their life and manners thou shall
show thy self to be the Son of God. Consider thirdly there were four kind
of mockings. First they beat him with their fists and hands about the head,
face, and neck. Secondly they spit their filthy fleame in his face. Thirdly
they covered his face, which by the sweet aspect thereof seemed to hinder, and
stay their fury and wickedness. Fourthly, they used reproachful words:
(prophecy) as if they should say, thou art not a true, but a false Prophet.
Take thou heed of these kind of illusions: For first thou do strike
Christ, when thou hurtest thy neighbor; and thou do strike his head with
blows, when secretly thou do hurt thy superiors, and his face, if openly.
Secondly thou spittest upon him, when thou pollutest thy conscience with evil
thoughts. Thirdly thou couerest his face, when oppressing thy conscience thou
perseuerest in sin. Fourthly thou reuilest him, when thou do not believe his
promises, nor threatenings. Look unto thy self, least by imitating the sins
of the Jews, thou incurrest the same punishment. For they have a veil over
their heart, so as they cannot know Christ: They are in all places derided of
all men, and many times they are reuyled and beaten, being hateful both to God
and men. Pray unto thy Lord, that these his reproaches may free thee from the
eternal reproaches of thy soul,

Luc. 22.
And blaspheming, they spoke many other things against him.
ENter thou into the high Priests Court, and consider what these wicked
Officers did all night, and what Christ suffered. in Luc. 22
Saint Theophilact says, that they being drunk at their supper did many
things very want only, according to that saying: They did sing against me
which did drink wine. Psalm. 68
And because the Evangelist does conclude the labor of the whole night in
these few words, look thou into the writings of the Prophets what they say
of these illusions: Isaias: Isa. 50.
I gave my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to the pinchers: I have not
turned my face from them that rebuked and spit upon me: I have put my face as a
most hard rock. Hyeremias: Hierom. 3
He shall give his cheek to him that will strike him, he shall be satiated
with reproaches. Job: They opened their mouths against me, and vpbrayding they
stroke my cheek, Job. 16
they are satiated with my pains. Hereby is signified: Fist that the whole
body of Christ was stricken most cruelly, beaten with staves, fistes, and
feet; for these words seem to signify so much: I gave my body to them that
would strike. Secondly, that his beard was pulled off, and his face bloody.
Thirdly that the visage of Christ was beaten with fistes, and made blewe:
Fourthly, that he sufferd diverse kinds of mockings and illusions: and to be
brief, that nothing was omitted that could be devised for his pain: They are
satiated (says he) with my pains: for think, that the officers used our Lord
this night by the consent of the high Priests in such manner, that although he
should not be crucified, yet he could not by nature continue long alive.
Therefore it is not to meruailed at, though he were dead sooner then Pilate
expected. Do thou also behold Christ, mark his face, (which was exposed to
blows) so amiable, his eyes breathing forth love, expressing so much more
charity in them, by how much our Lord was beaten with stripes. The Priests
departed now to take their rest, and the officers likewise framed themselves to
sleep: only the Spouse of thy soul could take no rest, for he must take no
other sleep then in the bed of the Cross. Pray him that his unquiet rest
may bring everlasting rest to thy soul.

The 17 Meditation of the second condemnation of Christ in the house of Cayphas.
Mat. 27. Mar 15 Luc. 22.
And presently in the morning as soon as it was day all the chief Priests, and
the elders of the people, and the Scribes assembled together against Jesus,
that they might put him to death: and they brought him into their counsel,
saying: If thou art Christ tell us.
COnsider first that now the second time they assemble into council, both
because more should consent to the condemnation of Christ (For perhaps in the
night many were absent) and also that they might confirm in the day time, that
which they had judged in the night. There assembled 3. sorts of people, the
Priests, ye Elders of the people, who had the civil government and the Scribes,
in wc sort the Pharisees also are understood, being ye Religious people of ye
Jews: that thou may understand; 1. That all men gave cause of the death of
our Lord. 2. That Christ dyed for all. 3. That all men ought worthily to
acknowledge themselves to be sinners, and to seek help by the death of
Christ. Consider secondly that this question (If thou be Christ) wc was
handled al night, Mat. 4.
was the question of the Devil tempting Christ, If thou art the Son of God,
and also of them which mocked our Lord on the Cross, Luc. 13.
If thou be Christ save thy self, whereby is signified first that they
which doubt of their faith, are the sons of the Devil, and live in
darkness: Secondly that this is the fault of all sinners, not to know who
Christ is: Some will have him rich, noble, etc. they will not have him spit
upon, despised, and poor: Others think him austere and sour, and are
ignorant how sweet our Lord is: Others contrariwise will have him so
merciful, that he will not be offended with any sins, nor punish any
offenders. Do thou acknowledge in Christ both mercy and justice, and learn,
that herein consists the highest wisdom, that thou know the true God,
and Jesus Christ whom he sent. Joan. 17.
Then enter into the counsel of those wicked men: Behold thy Spouse foulely
and euilly used by the Jews: Admire first and inquire, art not thou Christ?
Can it be, that thou, which art the Son of God, the Author of all Creatures,
the glory of saints, wilt suffer such things for me, poor and vile worm? By
these questions stir up thy self, that whilst Christ suffers and is full
of confusion, thou in the mean time seek not after gain and worldly honor.

And he said unto them: If I should tell you, you would not believe me: And
if I shall ask, ye will not answer me, nor let me go: But hereafter the
Son of man shall be sitting at the right hand of the power of God. And they
all said: art thou then the Son of God? who answered; you say, that I am.
COnsider first that our Lord, before he professed himself to be Christ, did
use a preface, for whereas he professed the same most plainly in the night and
was so far from profiting, that thereby a greater accusation was framed
against him; here being asked the second time, he seems to make some
difficulty in answearing: That thou may learn that the suggestions of God,
being once rejected, do hardly return again. Consider secondly, how often
they asked, and never believed. For there are some, which always repeat the
self same question, not because they are ignorant, but because thereby they
may find out something, which may please their own will, and not be
repugnant to their desire, 2 Timothy 3.
ever learning, and never coming to the truth of knowledge. Thou also how many
things do thou know, and how few do thou perform? Doubt not, But the
Servant, Luc. 12.
which knows the will of his Lord, and does it not shall be beaten with
many stripes. Consider thirdly (if I shall ask, ye will not answer me) the
pride of the wicked, who would not vouchsafe to answer Christ their Lord: What
will they do at the latter judgment, when they shall have him for their
Judge, whom they judged unworthy of their answer. Think thou hereof as often
as thou shall be admonished by God in thy conscience, and thou do reject his
inspiratio^. Consider fourthly that our lord being asked, whether he was
Christ, did answer out of David's Psalm of the sitting of the right hand of
his Father, Psalm. 109.
which Psalm he alleged to them another time, that by that argument (which
otherwise they could not solue) they might know that the Messiah was the Son
of God, Mat. 22.
which they did easily understand, for they inferred upon his answer, Art thou
then the Son of God? Admire the goodness of God which ceased not to admonish,
and to withdraw them from this grievous sin, wherein they should sin not
against man only, but against him, who was the Son of God. Pray thou unto
Christ, that the reverence and respect of him may move thee, that whenever
thou shall sin; thou may think of that saying: To thee alone have I
sinned, Psalm. 50.
and I have done evil before thee: For it is God, who is offended, and not man
alone.

But they said, what need we testimony any further, Luc. 22. Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
for we our selves have heard from his own mouth. And all the multitude of
them rising, and binding Jesus, brought him bound to Pilate the President.
COnsider first from an excellent answer an evil conclusion; because he is
Christ, and the Son of God, therefore he must be offered to Pilate to dye.
Thou oftentimes concludest in like manner: God is merciful, therefore let us
sin more freely. Consider secondly out of St. Chrysostom, Hom. 85. in Mat.
that the Jews would not put Christ to death secretly, but openly: that the
glory, which he had gotten by his miracles, might be taken away by the public
shame and ignominy of his death, and that he might generally be esteemed a
wicked man in all places. But God permitted it upon a far different reason:
First that he, which should dye for all men, should be put to death not
secretly by the Jews only, but openly by the Gentiles also before all men.
Secondly yt this death, which seemed to be infamous, and full of ignominy,
should sanctify all Nations, and should be glorious for ever throghout the
whole world. Galat. 6.
Do thou with ye Apostle Paul Glory in nothing else, but in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Ser. 8. de Pasc. Do^.
Consider thirdly out of St. Leo, that after Jesus was offered being bound with
hard knottes, beaten with many boxes and blows, defiled with spittings,
condemned beforehand with clamours: To the end, that amongst so many
fore-iudgments, whereby every one desired to have him die; Pilate should not dare
to discharge him. Follow thou thy Lord in this journey, as near as thou can,
and offer him up for thy self, not to Pilate the President, but to God the
Father, and desire him, that he who was once adjudged to dye for thy sins,
may by his death deliver thee from all evils.

The 18. Meditation of the death of Judas.
Then Judas, who had betrayed him, seeing that he was condemned, Mat. 27.
repenting himself brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the high
Priests, and to the Elders, saying: I have sinned, betraying just blood: But
they said, what is that to us? Look you to it.
COnsider first that Judas hearing of the condemnation of Christ by the high
Priests, being led by repentance, either good, through the greatness of his
offense, or false; through the shame, whereby he thought he should never be
able to endure the reproaches, which would ensue, brought again the money.
This also was permitted by God, whereby the innocence of Christ might be
manifested to all men, least the Jews by this argument might confirm the
death of our Lord to be just because his inward disciple; who knew all secrets
had delivered him up to them to dye. But Judas betrayed our Lord, not that
Christ should dye, but because he would have the money, hoping that as at
diverse times before, so at this time also our Lord might escape. Learn first
the innocence of our Lord, which the Traitor himself confessed openly, with
most earnest words, and by throwing down of ye money. Secondly the bitter
torments of our Lord, which moved the very Traitor to repentance. Thirdly the
quallityes of the Devil, who bewitcheth our eyes, before the sin be
committed, least we should fee the foulness thereof; but after the sin, he
opens ye same, that we should despair. Consider secondly the answer of the
Priests (What is that to us) Peter after his sin committed, went out from the
company of the wicked, and obtained pardon: Judas contrariwise came to the
wicked, and fell into desperation. Learn hereby yt they which offend the
Majesty of God because they may have ye favor of other men, are after forsaken
by them, and yt always after this life, when every one shall bear his own
burden, and often times also even in this life. Consider thirdly the grievous
burden of an evil conscience, wc feared neither shame nor death. Do thou
lamenting for thy sins, say with Judas, I have sinned, betraying just blood:
yt is to say, I have through my sins cast oftentimes from my self the
passion of Christ, which was given me for my souls health. But trusting in the
mercy of Christ, despair not, but in thy prayer add this, O Lord restore it
thou unto me, that it may profit my soul. Consider fourthly, that it is
manifest by the answer of ye Priests, that Christ dyed not for any fault
committed by himself, but of mere malice and envy. For this (What is that to
us) is as much to say, it skilleth not, whether he dye justly or unjustly, so
he dye. Consider fifthly, (Look thou to that) that evil men give only matter
of despair: Learn hereby first the disposition of wicked superiors, who care
not how their subjects live, so as they may enjoy their own profit, and
pleasure. Learn secondly, to suffer with the afflicted, and to comfort them,
at least with good words, if otherwise thou art not able. Learn thirdly in
thy afflictions, not to repair to every one, but to seek out those, whom God
has appointed to be the guiders of thy soul, and are commended for their life
and wisdom.

And casting down the pieces of silver in the Temple, Mat. 27. Act. 21.
he went aside, and going away, he hanged himself in a halter, and being
hanged, he brake in the midst, and all his bowels were scattered.
COnsider first that the fact of Judas, which exceeded all measure of revenge,
deserved no other Judge, or executioner, then Judas himself. For if he had
bin put to death by another, De Leo ser. 3. de Pasc Do^.
he might have hoped for pardon: But hanging himself, he committed a new
sin of murder, and desperation. Behold how one sin is increased by
another, if thou do not prevent them in time. Consider secondly how wickedly
ye Apostataes from faith and religion do commonly perish. Take thou heed
least thou forsake the Church or thy vocation: For thou shall fall into the
snare of the Devil, and the Devil will stand at thy right hand, (wc David
fore-spake of Judas) tossing thee here according to his will, Psalm. 108.
and at last casting thee down into Hell. Consider thirdly, what is the end of
sinners: Even this, yt hanging in the air they shall touch neither Heaven nor
Earth, and possess nothing but the rope. For rhey reject heavenly things and
are deprived of temporal goods, wc only they sought after, and being
inchayned with the chain of sin, they are detained and held up by the Devil
the Prince of this air. And certainly at ye end of their life, these things
do always happen to sinners, and oftentimes even in this life to some, who
being despoyled of their earthly goods, are ^^uertheles so choked up with
wicked desires, that they can hardly lift up their eyes to Heaven. Consider
fourthly, that he cracked in the midst, and his bowels powered out: that he,
which had lost the bowels of charity, might also loose his own bowels, and
that he which employed all his care to enjoy many things, might loose also
his own entrels. Do thou with Judas cast away money, riches, and all worldly
things, but go to no other tree, then the Cross of our Lord, and pray him
that he will tie thee fast unto him, and loosing all the knottes of thy sins,
bind thee with the chain of his love: For if Judas himself (as St. Leo
affirms) had obtained remedy from Christ crucified, Ser. 11. de Pasc. Do^.
if he had not hastened to the halter, thou may have an assured hope to
obtain pardon and grace.

But the chief Priests taking the monye said: Mat. 27.
It is not lawful to put it into the treasury, because it is the price of
blood: and taking counsel they bought therewith a potters field, for the burial
of strangers, and for that cause the field is called Haceldema, that is, the
field of blood, even to this day. Then it was fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet Hieremy: And they took thirty pieces of silver being the price of the
appriced, whom they priced of the Sons of Israel, and they gave them into a
potters field, as our Lord has appointed me.
COnsider first the goodness and gentleness of God, who would have his servants
so far from all effusion of blood, that in the old law he would not permit
them to have the money wherewith the death of any man was procured. Consider
secondly the preposterous religion of these Priests, which feared not to
defile their consciences with innocent blood, and yet were affrayd to pollute
their treasury with the price of blood. Thou art like unto them, so often as thou
make great account of small things, and have small regard of grievous sins
against God, strayning a Gnat, Mat. 23.
and swallowing a Camel. Consider thirdly the Jews converted not this money
to their own use, but to ye behoof of other men: That by this thou may
learn, 1. That Christ was wholly given unto us, his very price also being
bestowed upon us. 2. The liberality of covetous men, who give Alms, not of
their own, but of other men's money. Consider fourthly that with this money a
field was bought for the burial of strangers: that thou may learn, first
that not only our souls, but our bodies also received great benefit by the
death of Christ: For whatsoever good is bestowed upon man, we ought to
acknowledge all to proceed from the passion of Christ. Secondly that through
the death of Christ we have true and everlasting rest. Thirdly according to
St. Ambrose and Saint Hierome, Ser. 51. and in Luc. In Mat. 27
that this word (which in another place is called a field, which God the
workma^ made of nothing) was bought with the price of the blood of Christ, not
for the burial of all men, Mat. 23.
but only of strangers, yt therein only they should rest with a quiet
conscience, who making themselves strangers on earth, look still to the
heavenly country. Therefore if thou intendest to be partaker of this price, be
a stranger, shut thine eyes to worldly things: desire no earthly goods, to be
brief, dye unto the world that thou may rest sw^ (...) Christ. Consider 5.
That this was confirmed unto us, either by the prophecy of Hieremy, in those
books wc came not to us, or of Zachary (as the common opinion is the name of
Hieremy being put in, not by the Evangelist, Hiere. in Mat. 17. Zach. 11 Aug.
lib. 3 de co^sensu Euang. Haere. 38 Genesis 37.
but by some other writer) or of both, as Epiphanius affirms. Thou may
learn hereby yt the price of Christ was not only prefigured in the price, for
which Joseph before time had been sold, but foretold also by the Prophets,
with admiration, that for the price of thirty pieces of silver (whereof every
one is valued at half a Doller) the Messiah expected so many ages should be
bought and sold. Do not thou sell Christ, and everlasting life for a baser
price, when thou refusest and reiectest his grace for a little filthy lust, for
money, or vain desire of honor? Return then unto thy self, consider the
inestimable value of the blood of Christ, and suffer any thing rather then he
shall be taken from thee.

The 19. Meditation of the first accusation of our Lord before Pilate.
Then they brought Jesus from Caiphas into the Palace, Joan. 18.
and it was morning, and they entered not into the Palace, because they would
not be defiled, but that they might eat the Pasch.
COnsider 1. yt they made have betimes in the morning to procure the death of
our Lord, least perhaps if it should be deferred, it might be hindered through the
favor of the people: for it is the subtilty of the devil, to carry men
headlong into mischief, least by delay they might alter their purpose. Be you
on ye contrary part quick to good (for the grace of the holy Ghost admits no
delay) and slow unto evil, for the feet of wicked men are swift to do
mischief. Take heed therefore that thou omittest no occasion to do good, and
in temptation resist, expecting, Pro. 1.
that the Devil being driven away, Christ may come and help. Consider
secondly, that Christ thy Lord being the lover of purity, was put into the
house of a Gentile, as an unclean person, guilty of many crimes, (which house
the Jews of Religion refused to enter into, least they should be defiled with
some spotte whereby they might be forbidden to eat the Pasch) and was thought
unworthy to be nu^bred amongst the children of God, or to be put to death by
the hands of the Jews. If thou be accounted base, or a sinner, imitate this
patience of thy Lord, and let thy chiefest care be to be better esteemed of
God, then of men. Consider thirdly, that that thing happened to the Jews which
they feared: For they did not eat the mystical Pasch, because Christ the true
Pasch took it away by his death, and that which they did eat, they celebrated
with polluted minds and hateful unto God. Be thou therefore careful not so
much for ye outward beauty and cleannes, as for ye inward purity of thy mind,
yt thou may receive the true Pasch of our Lord in the Eucharist; and praying
unto God yt thou may be pure in heart, whereby thou may often eat worthily
this holy Pasch.

Joan. 18.
Then Pilate went forth unto them, and said, what accusation do you bring
against this man? they a^swered him if he were not a malefactor we would not
have delivered him to thee: Then said Pilate to them, take ye him and according
to your Law judge him. The Jews said to him: It is not lawful for us to kill
any man: that the speech of Jesus might be fulfilled, signifying what death he
should dye.
COnsider 1. The humanity of Pilate, who might have interpreted their refusing
to come into his house as to an unclean person, as a contempt of him; yet he
yielded to their religion, being better then thou and many other Christians who
being contemned, yield contempt again, and by no entreaty will yield in any
point or title of honor. Consider 2. The proud answer of the Jews, by which
they abused the outward face of Religion to the death of an innocent. We (say
they) being Priests, making conscience to break the least commandment of the
law, would never have delivered this man unto you, except for many causes he
had been most worthy of death. So great was the innocence of our Lord, that
without compulsion they would not have come to accuse him. Consider thirdly
Pilates answer, more wise then the answer of the Priests: For many times
secular men have more goodness then Priests. The Gentile seemed to be not a
little offended, that he should be required to put him to death without
hearing or co^uicting him, as if he should say, If your Law permit this, yet
the Law of the Romans does not. But the Jews had no consideration of this
just scandal: whom thou do immitate, so often as thou do give cause of
scandal, whom thou do immitate, so often as thou give cause of scandal or
reproach to the weak, or to Heretics. Remember the word of our Lord: It is
better that a mil-stone should be hanged about his neck, Mat. 18.
and he thrown into the bottom of the Sea, then one of those little ones
should be scandalized. Consider fourthly the other answer of the Jews,
saying: it is not lawful for us to kill any man; Act. 7.
that is to say, upon the Cross. Joan. 8.
For they stoned Stephen, and they prepared to stone the Adulteress. For our
Lord must be put to death, not with stones, hut upon the Cross, and not by the
Jews, but by the Gentiles, which is showed by that which follows, that the
speech of Jesus might be fulfilled, who had foretold them both. Give thanks
therefore unto thy Lord, that he passed from the Jews to the Gentiles, and
pray him that he wc by the hands of the Gentiles would undergo the Cross,
and suffer death, will accept for thee the unbloody sacrifice, which in
remembrance of his Passion is offered in the Church of the Gentiles world
without end.

Then they began to accuse him, Luc. 23.
saying: We have found this man subuerting our people, and forbidding to give
tribute unto Caesar, and saying, that he is Christ our King.
THey began (says he,) as the beginning of many accusations, wc should
follow. (We have found) we have not heard of others, but we our selves have
seen. Consider 1. three accusations, al wc depended upon one. He does affirm
(say they) yt he is the Messiah, and King of ye Jews, promised to our
Forefathers, and thereby draws the people unto him, and he commands
neither to obey Caesar, Joan. 6.
nor to pay tribute unto him. Lying plainly; who knew that our Lord did shun a
Kingdom, did teach obedience, did pay tribute, Mat. 27. Mar. 22.
and did answer, that it should be paid. Hereby thou may learn, how envy
makes a man blind, so as he cannot perceive ye ignominy and reproach, that
he does unto himself. For by these words they proved themselves liars before
Pilate, who could not be ignorant of Christ his answer to ye Herodyans. Render
unto Caesar those things which are Caesar's. Mat. 22
Avoid thou therefore all perturbation of mind, which does both much hinder
the seeing of the truth, and weaken thy reputation. Consider secondly whereof
Christ was accused. First that he did subvert the people. His office is to
move the people, to turn them up and down, to subdue the flesh, which ruled
the spirit, unto the spirit, to place poor and base Fishermen above Kings,
and after his life to throw the proud rich men down into Hell, and to lift
poor Lazarus into Abraham's bosom. Secondly that he forbad to give tribute
unto Caesar. Our Lord does forbid to pay tribute unto the Devil, who is called
Prince of this world; and requires no small tribute of the actions of men,
whom he would have to attempt or execute nothing without some mixture of sin.
Christ contrariwise commands to this tribute unto God and that thou shall
refer all thy actions to his glory. Thirdly that he is a King and the Messiah.
Thy Lord is truly a King and the Messiah, who governs and feeds all his
people, both with his body and holy spirit. Yeilde thou thy self under the
government of this King, fight against his enemies, and follow him thy Captain
in all things.

The 20. Meditation of the examination of Pilate.
Joan. 18
Then Pilate went again into the Palace, and called Jesus, and Jesus stood
before the President. Mar. 27.
And Pilate asked him: art thou King of the Jews? Jesus answered: do thou
speak this of thy self, or have others told it thee of me? Pilate answered:
am I a Jew? thy people, and thy Priests have delivered thee to me, what have
thou done?
COnsider first Pilate dealt with Christ, not before the multitude, but
privately in his house, of whom (says St. Chrysostom) he had conceived a
great opinion. Hom. 85. in Joan.
Thou in like manner, if thou will deal with Christ, avoid company and much
business; enter into the chamber of thy heart, that thou may more clearly
hear our Lord speaking. Consider secondly that the Lord of all creatures
stands as guilty before the Gentile President, to whom he must render account
of his life. Live thou so, that thou need not blush to render an account of
all the actions before any man. Consider 3. the question of Pilate. (Art thnu
King of the Jews?) That is to say, can it be, yt thou being so poor and
miserable and so many ways afflicted, can call thy self King of the Jews?
Answer thou for thy Lord, yea certainly, he is King of the Jews, whom the
true Jews do acknowledge, that is, such as know and confess their sins.
For they will obey this King, that being brought out of sin, and delivered
out of the hand of their enemies, they may serve him. Admire thou this King,
whose beauty consists not in gold and precious stones, and outward
ornaments; but in contempt, disgrace, and external ignominy. For these things
have both made Christ famous through the whole world, and also have beautified
thy soul. Consider fourthly, the answer of Christ, the sense whereof is this,
did you ever see, or hear any thing of me, whereby I might be suspected to
seek for a Kingdom? This question signifies the absurdity of the accusation.
Ponder here with thy self, whether thou do know thy Lord Christ, that is,
whether thou do feel Christ reigning in thy mind; or else whether thou art
a Christian without any outward sweetness. Consider fifthly the proud answer of
Pilate, disdaining, and taking it in evil part, that a guilty person durst
ask him a question. He excuses himself with ignorance of the Jews causes: I
know not (says he) what your Nation dreameth of the coming of a Messiah.
Thou can not plead ignorance in Gods cause to whom Christ has made manifest
even the secrets of God. And if ignorance did not profit Pilate, how can it
profit any Christian, to whom God has given so great knowledge? Consider
sixthly (What have thou done) the great innocence of thy Lord, that when
accusations failed, he himself must be asked. Answer thou what he has done.
He has made Heaven and Earth, and all Creatures: he has done all good and
no evil. But for the good done for thy sake, which thou do abuse unto
sin, he must suffer the punishment, wc thou did deserve. This place is fit
to meditate what Christ has done for thee, and what thou have done again for
him; that admiring his bounty, thou may give him thanks, and detesting thy
own ingratitude, thou may be confounded with shame.

Jesus answered, my Kingdom is not of this world: If my Kingdom were of this
world, my Soldiers would fight for me, that I should not be delivered up to
the Jews; but now my Kingdom is not from hence. Pilate said unto him; then
art thou a King? Jesus answered, thou say, that I am a King.
COnsider first ye Christ answered Pilate plainly, who dealt sincerely with
him; but to the Jews, who went about to intrappe him, he would not answer
but adjured. For our Lord detesteth fiction, and with the simple in his speech.
Consider secondly that he applied himself to this Ethnicke, deriuing his
argument from the use and custom of men. You may understand (says he) by
this, that I seek not a Kingdom of this world, because I have no Soldiers,
nor Cha^pions for my defense. But with the Jews, that knew the Law, he used
the Scriptures. Thou may learn hereby that God uses all ways and reasons
to convert thee and others. If thou would consider those means, which our
Lord used to help and cure thee, thou would admire Gods prudent love and
charity toward thee. Consider thirdly (My Kingdom is not of this world.) He
does not say in this world: For he reigns in his Church, and in thee: But
he says, of this world, that is to say, It is not like ye Kingdoms of this
world, neither does it consist in the multitude of Servants and Soldiers, nor
in solemnity and pomp, nor in riot and bravery of apparel; But in the
ornament of the soul, in voluntary obedience and multitude of virtues. And
perhaps in this Kingdom of Christ there are more poor, beggarly, weak, and
unlearned; then rich, noble, mighty, and wise people. Be thou careful therefore
that Christ may rule thee and thy affections, and reign in thee. For if to
serve Christ is to reign, then Christ reigning in thee will make thee a mighty
King, ruling over thy self, and the whole world.

I was borne in this, and to this I came into the world, Joan. 18
that I may give testimony unto the truth: And every one which is of the truth,
hears my voice: Pilate says unto him, what is the truth?
COnsider first for what cause Christ came into the world, to wit, first that
he might free the world from the falsenes of Idolatry, and of diverse errors,
and of sin. Secondly that he might declare the vanity and folly of those
things which the world admireth, and set before our eyes those things as they
are indeed, and not as they seem to be. Thirdly yt by this truth he might
rule the minds of men. Thou may learn hereby, First, what thou ought
chiefly to seek for in ye kingdom of Christ, to wit, to be delivered and
made free from al vanity, falsehood, and sin. 2. That they are the chief
servants and inlargers of the Kingdom of Christ, wc labor in teaching the
truth. 3. That it appertains especially to the charge of Christian Princes,
and superiors to keep and increase their subjects in the faith of Christ. For
they are not superious like Gentiles, to maintain their people only in a civil
and peaceable government, but they are also Christian Princes over Christians,
that they may enlarge the Kingdom of Christ. Consider secondly: I was borne in
this, and to this I came into the world. A high sentence, which Pilate might
have understood, if he had persisted in simplicity. I am not borne (says he)
like other men, for I was now, before I was borne of my mother; I was borne,
not thorough the necessity of nature, but of mine own will, and for certain
causes which moved me to take humane nature upon me, to wit, that I might teach
men the truth. If therefore thou will listen unto Heavenly Doctrine, and deal
sincerely with God, Christ will reveal unto thee the secrets of Heaven.
Consider thirdly (I was borne) and (I came) For by his birth he is our Christ,
and also has done all his actions for our profit; that thou again should
refer all thy time, thy studies, and thy labors, to his glory. Consider
fourthly that Christ did answer secretly to ye question propounded by Pilate,
What have thou done? for I have taught the truth, I have reproved vice: For
this was the only cause that moved the Jews to put him to death. Do thou
seek out the truth, and pray unto God to lighten thine eyes, yt thou sleep
not in death, and consider earnestly with thy self, whether thou be of ye
truth, that is, whether thou be moved with the truth, or with pride, lust,
avarice, and other passions of the mind: For he which is of truth, Joan. 18.
he is of God, but he which follows lies is of the Devil his Father, whose
will he fulfilleth.

The 21. Meditation of the second accusation before Pilate.
Pilate went forth again unto the Jews, Joan. 18 ^uc 23. Mar. 27.
saying: I find no cause in this man: But the high Priests accused him in
many things; and Jesus answered nothing: Then Pilate asked him, saying to him:
Do thou not hear how great testimonies they speak against thee? do thou
not answer any thing? behold in how great things they acuse thee? But Jesus
answered not him to any word, Mar. 15
so as the President wondered greatly.
COnsider first, that Pilate expecting no answer to this question (what is the
truth) went forth, either because he thought that question appertained not to
him, or else yt it was not convenient at yt time. To whom thou may know thy
self to be like, so often as thou passest over lightly heavenly things; or as
often as thou shall think, that those things which are spoken of everlasting
life, of perfection, or of christian life, appertain not unto thee; or as often
as thou do lightly leave yt which before thy God thou had justly purposed.
Think no time unfit for divine instructions. Consider secondly that Pilate
found no cause of death in Christ; the Jews a false cause; and God the Father
a true cause, to wit, the purging of thy sins for the salvation of thy soul.
Ponder earnestly with thy self upon this cause. For the reason why thou love
not Christ so well as thou ought, nor art so thankful as thou should be;
nor art sufficiently moved with this his so great and bitter pain, is, because
thou do not earnestly acknowledge, nor reuolue in thy mind, that thou were
the cause of these his bitter pains. Consider thirdly the great and manifould
crimes objected against thy Lord in the sight and hearing of all the people,
who wondered exceedingly at such new and strange things. Do thou patiently
suffer for thy Lords sake all slanders, injuries, and reproaches. Consider
fourthly the deep silence of our Lord, wherein Pilate the Gentile admired the
wisdom of Christ, and the Jews were made more audacious to add more and more
grievous accusations. Admire thou the patience of God, who being hitherto
offended with so many and so grievous sins, both of thee, and of other men,
does not only still hold his peace, wink at them and par^o^ them, but also
does bestow many benefits upon thee; that thou being moved with his
bountiful liberality, may at last remember thy felfe.

But they were more earnest, saying: Luc. 23.
He moved the people, teaching through all Jury, beginning from Galilee even
hither:
COnsider first the clamors of the Jews, who having no hope to effect any
thing by truth, raised up troubles, tumults, and clamours, like those which
defend an ill cause wherein they imitate the Devil, who when he can do
nothing by his own suggestions, the^ he stirs up friends, parents, and
companions; he moves the inward concupisc^nce; he hinders and darkneth the
understanding. Do thou nothing impatiently, imitating our Lord, who was not
provoked nor moved by any injuries, except to love the more dearly. Consider 2.
that Christ was here reputed captain of the sedicious: Thou know (say
they) O Pilate, the Galilaeans to be factious people, whose blood thou did
lately mingle with their sacrifice: behold he is the head and Ringleader of
all mischief, borne to raise sedition among the people. Verily O Lord, thou
do move the people, but not to sedition, treason, robberies, and
man-slaughters, which is the property of Heretics, which stir up such
motions in their Sermons; but to the change of their life and manners, that
forsaking their pleasures and sins, they may all give themselves to the
exercise of virtue. Thou fillest the Monasteries with religious people; the
Deserts with Anchorites, the Prisons with Confessors, and the gallows with
Martyrs. Through thy motion Virgins cast away their brave artyre, Rich men
choose poverty, Noble men submit themselves to the wills of others, and young
men by a vow of religion offer themselves as a Holocaust unto thee. Pray thou
also that our Lord may move thee. Consider thirdly whom he is said to teach,
to wit, the Galilaeans, that is, Passengers; and Jews, that is, Confessors,
and praisers of God. But he began from Galilee: For the beginning of Christian
doctrine is, to pass from sin; the middle is, to confess our daily defects,
with sorrow of heart, and purpose of amendment, and to praise God in true
obedience; and the end is, to behold the face of God in Jerusalem in the vision
of peace. Pray our Lord to bring thee to the perfection of this wisdom.

And Pilate hearing Galilee, asked if the man were a Galilaean, and as soon as
he knew that he was under the jurisdiction of Herod, Luc. 23.
he sent him to Herod, who also in those days was in Jerusalem.
GAlilaean, is here to be separated from the man, in this sense, whether this
man be a Galilaean. Consider first, that either Pilate did not know the name
of Jesus, or else that he disdained to name him. Wicked men know not Jesus,
suffering, mocked and bound; they know the honors of the world, but not the
ignominy of the Cross: Therefore they shall not be known of Jesus, that is,
their Savior, and they shall never reap the fruit of salvation, which reject
the Passion, being the instrument of salvation. Consider secondly, that Herod
the Jew came to Jerusalem against the feast of Pasch. For sinners use to
celebrate the Feasts of the Faithful with outward ceremonies only, in brauer
Apparel, with daintyer Dishes etc. But they do not receive the inward fruit
of the Feasts, neither do they labor so much for the inward ornament of their
Soul, to the which they ought to be carried from the outward ceremonies.
Consider thirdly, thy Lord is said to be under the jurisdiction of Herod, a
wicked man, Incestuous, Adulterous, and a Murderer: that thou may willingly
obey thy Superiors, though they be not very good, having respect not to their
vices, but to the virtue of obedience. Consider fourthly the sower Judges of
Christ, two Priests Annas and Cayphas, and two secular men Herod the Jew, and
Pilate the Gentile. For Christ was adjudged to death by all states of men; he
was slain for the sins of all men; he suffered and dyed for the salvation
of all men. Therefore do thou confidently lay all thy sins upon him, that
being freed from them, thou may receive eternal salvation prepared by him.

The 22. Meditation of the acts in the house of Herod.
Herod, when he saw Jesus, rejoiced much, Luc. 23.
for he was desirous a long time to see him, because he had heard many things
of him, and he hoped to see some sign done by him: And he examined him with
many questions: but he answered nothing unto him.
COnsider first, that this Herod never came unto Christ, never heard his
words, nor never saw his miracles; but yet he knew many things of him by the
report of others. Wherefore he was glad, that he had occasion to see and
behold him; but he was not moved with hope or desire of salvation, but with a
desire to see some sign. Thou may learn first, what this King thought our
Lord to be; an Inchaunter, a Iugler, a Fool. Secondly, that the custom of
worldly men, is, more willingly to hear new things, wc may delight, then
good things, wc may profit. Consider 2. that Christ admireth not ye outward
pomp and royal dignity, but beholds the beauty and foulnes of the heart;
neither would he vouchsafe to speak unto him, seeing he expected no profit
thereby. Learn thou 1. not to esteem too much these outward shows: for in the
future examination of the Judge the humble poor man shall be better esteemed,
then the proud rich man. 2. Not to utter thy words in vain, but to direct
thy speeches always to some good purpose, remembering, yt in the day of
Judgment thou shall render an account of every idle word. 3. To flatter none,
to avoid ostentatio^, not to expose Religious and Holy things to be laughed at,
not to abuse the Scriptures or divine ceremonies to Jests and profane matters.
Consider 3. what questions were propounded to Christ by Herod, to wit,
unprofitable and curious: Perhaps, whether he were John Baptist; whether he
could destroy and restore the Temple; and whether his Father in times past
killed the Infants for his cause. Do thou ask profitable things of our Lord,
and pray him to answer to thy questions for ye profit and salvation of thy
soul.

And the chief Priests and the Scribes stood constantly accusing him; but
Herod despised him with his Army, Luc. 23.
and mocked him, clothing him in a white garment, and sent him back to Pilate.
COnsider first, that Christ suffered 4. things in this Kings Palace. For 1.
he was grievously and constantly accused by the Priests. Secondly he was
despised and mocked by Herod. Thirdly he was evil entreated by the malepert
Soldiers, no less then by the Servants in the house of Cayphas. Fourthly, he
was clothed in a white or (...), that is, a bright garment, in sign of an
affected Kingdom, or of folly, as one that was able to say nothing before the
King in his own defense. Consider secondly that Herod was offended at the
silence of Christ, less then the Priests, who pronounced him guilty of death,
but more then Pilate, who by his silence admired the prudent gravity of our
Lord. Thou may learn that by the same causes some fall more grievously then
others, and those most grievously, which are in highest estate and calling.
Pilate was a lay Gentile; Herod a lay man, but a Jew; Cayphas, the high
Priest of the Jews. Consider thirdly, that Christ is a King, but such a one,
as the world knows not, but does accuse laugh at, and despise. By these
irrisions our Lord deserved for himself to be exalted above all Kings, and
for us, that we should be endued with true wisdom, be made immortal Kings
in the Kingdom of Heaven, and be clothed with the white garments of
immortality. Rejoice therefore, if thou do suffer irrision and persecution
with Christ for justice, because thine is the Kingdom of Heaven: And beware,
least Christ be mocked by thee, if thou do contemn the poor, and his
Servants, and neglect his Sacraments, words, and Commandments. Lastly do thou
accompany ye spouse of thy Soul, clothed in this scornful garment, in his
journey to Pilates house: mark what scoffings he heard; observe his eyes, and
what countenance he showed; and pray unto him with thy whole heart, yt thou
may be a fool unto ye world, so thou be accounted wise unto Christ.

And Herod and Pilate, were made friends in that day: Luc. 23.
for they were enemies before, one to another.
COnsider first a double mystery. 1. That wicked men agree together against
Christ and his followers: Heritiques oppugning the Church; and the Devils
vexing the just man. The other, that the death of Christ made peace between
the Jews and the Gentiles; and so yt the first and principal Office of the
passion of our Lord was to bring and maintain Peace. Therefore presently after
his Resurrection, in his first and second meeting, he said to his Disciples,
Peace be unto you. He would, that we should have peace with God, to who^ he
paid the price of our sins; with our own conscience, which he delivered from
sin, and filled with inward grace; and with our neighbors, whom he
commands us to love, having infused his divine love into our hearts. As
often therefore as thou feel inward war within thy self; as often as thou
seeest yt thou have lost peace with God; as often as thou shall perceive thy
neighbor angry at thee, or do experience his hatred against thee: Presently
turn thy self to the Cross of Christ, as to him, which is thy only true
Mediator, and will restore thee unto peace with all men. Consider secondly, (In
that day) that is, the very same day: That thou may learn how easy it is
for our Lord to make peace, and to pacify minds, that are most incensed, and
to help thee in thy greatest afflictions, although there be no humane means.
Pray therefore unto God, that he will bring tranquillity unto the Christian
common wealth, cease the troubles of war, and give a constant Peace unto his
Church.

The 23. Meditation of the requiring of Barrabas.
But Pilate calling the chief Priests, Luc. 23.
and the Magistrates, and the people, said unto them: ye have offered unto me
this man, Mar. 27.
as auerting the people; and behold I examining him before you, Mar. 15
find no cause in this man of these things in which ye accuse him, no nor
Herod neither, For I have sent ye unto him, and behold nothing worthy of death
is done unto him: therefore I will dismiss him, being corrected: And on the
solemn day, the President had a custom, and must of necessity dismiss one of
the prisoners, whom soever they should require. And he had the^ a notable
prisoner called Barrabas, who was taken with the seditious, who in the sedition
had committed murder: Then Pilate said: ye have a custom, that I dismiss
one in the Pasch: whom will ye that I dismiss unto you? Barrabas, or Jesus,
who is called Christ? for he knew, that the high priests had deliuerd him by
envy.
COnsider first, that Herod though he saw nothing worthy of death in Christ,
yet he did not deliver the innocent out of the hands of the Jews; but to
gratify the Priests, and the President, he referred the knowledge of the
cause to Pilate. In like manner every one desires to please man, but none to
please Christ. Consider secondly, that so many Judges sought the life of
Christ, and nothing was found worthy of death, or of imprisonment. Do thou so
order thy life like unto Christ, that the Devils at the hour of death may
find nothing of their own on thee. Purge thy soul with daily examination of
thy conscience, and often confession of thy sins; so as nothing pass out of
this world with thee, but that which is holy. Consider thirdly (corrected or
chastised I will let him go) Pilate thought to deliver our Lord, but
corrected: not because he deserved it, but in favor of the raging people, that
they might be satisfied with his stripes. Thou see first, that the people
could not be satisfied, but with the blood of Christ: both because evil men
are delighted only in sins, which draw blood from our Savior; and also
because just men have no sweetness but through the blood of our Lord; nor any
rejoicing, Galat. 6.
but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Consider fourthly, that Pilate
intended a good work, when he purposed to set Christ free, but not pure, but
mingled with much evil, to wit, with beating and whipping Christ. And thou
do imitate him, as often as thou attemptest any good thing, mixed with sin;
when thou give alms out of money evil gotten; or go to the Church, that
thou may seem religious, or do any other thing not with a true
intention. Consider fifthly, when Pilate thought of the delivering of our Lord
after this manner, then he remembered a more mild way. For he saw the people
assembled together, that according to their custom one of the prisoners should
be given unto them, whom they should choose out of many, which the President
should propound unto them, of what crime soever they were accused, and that in
remembrance of the people of Israel, which about that time of Pasch were
delivered out of the bondage of Egypt: When he remembered this Custom, he
resolved to name Christ alone, (whom he knew to be well liked of many for his
noble acts, and hated only of the Priests and Pharisees) with a Murderer, a
Captain of the seditious, and a hateful man, making no doubt, but that they
would choose Christ before that most wicked man. Thou see first, that the
Author of life is compared with a turbulent murderer: and thou art angry if
never so little be detracted from thy honor and tytles. Thou see secondly the
holy custom of delivering a prisoner in remembrance and favor of the benefit
of their delivery out of the bondage of Aegipt. Thou being so often delivered
from the snares of the Devil, and from the bonds of sin; succor and help
also thy neighbors in memory of this benefit, that by thy labor and help,
they may be freed from the bonds of their debtes, sins, miseries, and of all
other evils.

And as he was sitting in place of judgment, Mat. 27.
his wife sent unto him, saying: have thou nothing to do with that just man:
for I have suffered many things this day in my sleep for him.
COnsider first when the people were sent away to deliberate whom they would
choose, Pilate sat in judgment, and received this message from his wife, Hill.
ca^. 33 In Mat. Chr. ho. 8 in Mat. Am. lib. 1 in Luc. Hiero^. in Mat. Augu.
ser. 121. de. te^. Ori. tract. 35. in Mat Au. Epist. ad Philip. Cip. se. de
Pasc. Do^. Gre. li. 33 Mor. c. 21 Rab. citatur in Cathena diui Thom. Ber. ser.
1. de Pasc.
admonished either by her good Angel according to the opinion of Hilarious,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, and Origin; or else by a wicked
spirit, who perceiving his own power by little and little to be weakened, and
that his judgment was at hand, and that the holy Fathers in Lymbo did exult
for their speedy deliverance, endeavored to hinder the death of Christ,
according to the doctrine of Ignatius, Ciprian, Gregory, Rabanus, and Bernard.
Thou learnest here the innocence of Christ, witnessed by the very Angels,
either good or bad. And if this vision came by the help of the devil, thou
may see the malice of men; whom when the Devil has once incited to evil,
he cannot call back from sin: For the malice of concupiscence, and the force
of sin is so great, that it cannot be taken away, but by the help of God
alone. Therefore the Priests which were provoked by envy, were not warned; but
Pilate, whom the disease of concupiscence had not yet stirred up. Labor thou
with all thy strength to subdue the force of thy concupiscence. Consider
secondly the Epitheto^ of Christ (that just man) for he is truly our Justice,
perfectly just in himself, without sin, and always doing most just works,
by which he satisfied his Fathers wrath for us, and left an example for us to
imitate. Consider thirdly (have thou nothing to do with that just man) that
is, meddle not with his business, let there be no dealings between thee and
that just man. Learn, yt this just man does not appertain to wicked men, and
that only good men are partakers of his justice. Do thou pray this just man
to vouchsafe to admit thee into his commerce and society, that thy wares from
his wares, that is, thy good works from his merits may bring much profit to
the salvation of thy soul.

But the chief priests and elders stirred up the multitude, and persuaded the
people that they should demand Barrabas and destroy Jesus: Mat. 27.
and when the multitude were come up, Mar. 15
they began to pray Pilate, that he would do as he did always unto them.
Luc. 23.
And the President answering said to the^: which of the two will ye have
dismissed? Joan. 18.
They all cried out together, not him, but Barrabas take away him and dismiss
unto us Barabas: And Pilate answering again said to them: What then shall I do
with Jesus, who is called Christ? but they cried out again, let him be
crucified, crucify him crucify him: but Pilate said unto them the third time:
for what evil has this man done? I find no cause of death in him: therefore
I will correct him, and dismiss him: but they urged with many cries, desiring,
that he should be crucified, and their voices increased, and they cried more,
let him be crucified.
COnsider first, that ye people inclyning to Christ, were ledd by the Priests
to demand Barabbas, and to destroy Christ: That thou may know first, that
one speech of wicked men does more hurt, then many exhortations of Saints can
profit. For that which Christ had builded with great labor in three years,
is here ouerthrown in a moment. Beware therefore of the speech of evil men,
especially of heretics, whose words creep like a canker. Thou see
secondly, that the authority of Superiors is of great force, either to good or
evil. If therefore thou have any of Christ's sheep under thy charge, use thy
authority to the glory of God. Consider 2. the ingratitude of ye people, which
esteemed so great a Benefactor less then a Thief, and chose him to the
Cross. Thou learnest first to contemn the applause of the world, which has
so cruel an end. They cried a little before Blessed is he, which comes in
the name of our Lord: and now in other words (Not this man) but (Let him be
crucified.) Secondly thou see the blind judgment of the world, which
contemning the highest good chooses the worst things, hates a benefactor, and
imbraceth an enemy. Take thou heed, least for a small gain or humane favor,
thou do betray Christ against thine own conscience, least the same happen to
thee, which fell unto the Jews, to whom in stead of the Messiah which they
expected so many years, and at last rejected and condemned) came Barrabas
(which signifies the son of the Father) a Murderer, a Rayser of sedition, a
Devil, by whose will they are ruled: that they wc refused to hear Christ
coming in the name of his Father, might hear Antechrist speaking in ye name
of his Father the Devil. Consider 3. the fearful speech of Pilate, (What
shall I do with Jesus): the wicked Judge seeks the allowance of ye people.
Bend thou thy mind in all thy judgments and actions not to the will or
manners of the people, but to the Commandments of God. Consider fourthly
(For, what evil has he done) the innocence of Christ, so often repeated:
That thou may ever remember, that Christ dyed, not for his own sins, but
for thine; this word shall condemn all sinners at the last Judgment. Why
(will our Lord say) have ye forsaken me, and fled unto the Devil? For, what
evil have I done? What have you found in my manners and Doctrine, that is not
pure, and agreeable to reason? What evil have ye had from me, or what good
have you found in the service of the Devil? Do thou now meditate upon these
things, and persevere in the faith of Christ. Consider lastly, how these
clamours did wound the heart of Christ, and how he was more grieved for this
so great and heinous a sin of his beloved people, then for the torment of the
Cross. Do thou comfort him with thy devout prayer, and forsaking the Devil
and his pompes, yield thy self wholly a slave and servant unto Christ.

The 24. Meditation of the whipping of our Lord.
Then Pilate apprehended him and whipped him. Then the Soldiers of the
President taking Jesus carried him into the Pretors court, and they gathered
together all the company unto him.
COnsider first, that the spouse of thy soul that he might betroth himself
unto thee, was diverse ways mocked, spit upon, pulled, and beaten: but now he
is come to wounds and blood; that he, which gave unto thee his honors,
liberty, and other corporal goods, and suffered himself to be spoiled of all
these for thy sake, might now in like manner plentifully shed his blood, and
power out his bowels, that he might see, what liberality thou will use toward
him again. Consider secondly two causes, why Pilate used this whipping. The
one was, that by the sight of the body of Christ torn with so many stripes,
he might somewhat pacify the fury of the Jews, and stay them from the desire
of the Cross. The other was, that if nevertheless they persisted in their
fury, this whipping should go before his crucifying. For by the laws of the
Romans, such as were to be crucified were first whipped. But ye true cause of
ye whipping of Christ according to the will of his Father, Luc. 23.
was first that thou, which were sick in every part of thy body, might be
wholly cured by the wounds of his whole body. Secondly that he might receive
thee wholly, who gave himself wholly for thee. Thirdly, that thou should open
the bowels of thy love toward him, who by these stripes opened his body to
thee. Consider thirdly, that Pilate delivered Christ to the Pretorian
Soldiers, who assembled their whole band, which was the tenth part of a
Legion, to wit; Six hundred sixty six Soldiers) by whom he was carried into
the court of the Praetor, that is, into a more spacious room, and forsaken of
all friends was exposed unto ye prey, like a Lamb in the midst of Wolves.
Enter thou into this Court; mark attentively the cruel wantonness of the
Soldiers, and the modesty of Christ in all these miseryes, his clear and
amiable countenance, and his incredible patience. First they despoyled him of
all his clothes, and set him naked amongst them. Consider the shamefastnes of
thy most chaste Lord set naked before so great a company of men, and keep the
clothes, which he put off, to cover thy nakedness. Then they tied his holy body
to a pillar, with his arms stretched up, that his whole body might be subject
to stripes. Then every one made a whip, either with rods brought thither of
purpose, or else of cords, (for this word (...), which we call a whip, as
Euthemius notes, Cap. 67. in Mat.
is a scourge wouen with little cords or leather thongs) and every one fell to
work. Pray thou thy Lord, that this his nakedness may cover thy soul with
his heavenly grace and virtues; and these his bonds free thee from sins; and
this his being alone amongst his cruel enemies, may deliver thee from the
hands of thy enemies.

Secondly, of the whipping it self.
COnsider first how cruel it was. By the ancient Law the Jews were forbidden
to give any man above forty stripes, this being added for the cause of the
Commandment, Least thy brother should depart before thine eyes fowly torn
with so many stripes. Deuteronomy. 25.
But the Gentiles who were neither tied by the Jews Law, nor moved with any
commiseration, exceeded this number so far, St. Gert. lib. 4 diuinam
insumationu^, Cap. 35.
as it was revealed unto some Saints, that he received to the number of 5.
thousand 4. hundred stripes: wc will not seem improbable, if these few things
be diligently considered 1. The Law of beating, by which it was decreed that
the guilty person, should be stricken by every one of the Soldiers, a
Freeman with staves, and a Bondman with whippes. By which Law thou do
learn, that thy Lord Christ was beaten with whips like a Bond-slaue, that he
might restore thee to liberty, and that he was beaten by Six hundred and
threescore Soldiers, according to the will of every one. Secondly, the cause
of the Law of this whipping of the^, which were condemned to the punishment of
the Cross, to wit; that the body of him, that was to be crucified, should be
so disfigured, yt the nakedness should not move the beholders to any dishonest
thoughts, when they should see nothing pleasing or beautiful, but al things
torn and full of commiseration. Thirdly the purpose, of Pilate, who hoped to
spare his life by this so great cruelty used against him. He would therefore,
that this correction should be most sharp, by which he might pacify the
desire of revenge in his most cruel and inhumane enemies. Fourthly, the hatred
of the Priests, whom to please, the Soldiers used all extremityes against
Christ. Fifthly, the great care and have, which the Priests used in the carrying
of the Cross of Christ, least Christ should dye before he was crucified:
Which does plainly show, that he was beaten with so many stripes, that he
could not long continue. Consider secondly the manner observed in this
whipping. For first his breast was fast tied to a pillar, and they cruelly rent
his back, according to that: Upon my back have sinners builded: Psalm. 128
or according to the Hebrews: Have Ploughmen ploughed: that is to say, have
most cruelly torn it. And when that part was cut with stripes, then our Lord
was untied, that the forepart of his body, his breast, his belly, his thighs,
might be as cruelly used, according to the Prophet: From the sole of his
foot, to the crown of his head there was no wholenes in him. And yt this was
so, thou may know by this, when Pilate shortly after bringing forth Christ
unto the people said: Behold the man. He did not show his back covered with
Purple, but his breast and his forepart for them to behold. Do thou with the
eyes of thy soul behold the cruelty of the Soldiers, and the amiable
patience of Christ. Listen with thy ears to the words, laughters, and
scoffings of these deryding Soldiers, wc they uttered blasphemously, whilst
they were whipping, tormenting, and binding the body of Christ. Admire the
deep silence of Christ in all these stripes, who complained of no pains,
neither in cry, nor sighe. To be brief, do thou inwardly feel the pains
of these stripes, which peirced even to the very bones and bowels. Gather up
the blood, which dropped down upon the ground; apply it to thy sins and
wounds; and pray thy Lord, that he will not suffer it to be shedd so
plentifully for thee in vain.

Thirdly after his whipping.
COnsider first, the tormentors were wearyed; the whippes and rodds failed; and
Christ, being spent with pains and loss of blood, was sca^t able to stand
upon his feet. Spare not thou thy self, but spend thy youthful years and
strength in the service of thy Lord. Consider secondly how thy Lord crept up
and down to gather up his scattered clothes, and put them on, not without
great pain, which cleaued to his wounds, and were spotted with blood, and hurt
his soars. Do thou gather together the Church being the vestment of Christ:
and spare no labor to gain souls which are washed with that blood. Wash the
wounded body of Christ with thy tears, and anoint it with the oil of Charity
and Devotion, and omit nothing which thou think may help toward the cure
of this body, and of the members thereof. Consider thirdly, that Christ our
Lord did drink his blood thus plentifully unto thee in this his whipping, and
in his coronation following in ye third hour, in which same hour after his
ascensio^ into Heaven, he sent down the holy Ghost into the hearts of his
Apostles and of his whole Church. That thou may learn, first that the blood
of Christ was plentifully shed, that the grace of the holy Ghost might
plentifully be communicated unto thee. Secondly that at the same time, when
the effusion of this blood is remembered, and renewed in the Church by the
Sacrifice of the Mass, thou being present should with open heart
plentifully receive the fruit of this blood, ye grace of the holy Ghost, and
diverse other guiftes. The Meditation hereof stirs up admiration, increases
confidence, in kindles love, moves compassion, brings sorrow for sins,
exhorts to labor, and melts the soul in giving thanks.

The 25. Meditation of the Crowning of our Lord.
Then they vncloathing him, put a scarlet Garment about him, Mat. 27 Mar. 15
Joan. 19
and weauing a Crown of thorns, they put it upon his head and a Reed in his
right hand.
COnsider first, that those Torturers devised a new kind of torment, which
might both afflicte, and also make him to be mocked: That he, which called
himself King of the Jews, might be clothed in royal ornaments. Consider
secondly, in this place four kinds of mockings. First, they pull often al his
clothes, wc a little before he had put on, renewing the grief of his wounds,
to wc the cloth cleaued, and stripping his holy and virginal body naked, not
without shame and confusion. Secondly, they put on a scarlet garment, that his
purple blood shed all over his body, and the purple garment put upon him might
show forth a royal ornament. Thirdly, in stead of a Dyademe they set upon
his head a Crown, wouen of many bushie thorns, which (says Tertullian) did
tear and deface the Temples of our Lord. Li. de corona militis.
Fourthly, they gave him a Reed in his hand, in stead of a Scepter. O thou
Christian, behold thy King, behold the triumph of his coronation. Consider
thirdly, that ye great benefits which our Lord prepared for us, are signified
by these illusions. For first the taking off of his garments, whereby our Lords
body deformed with so many wounds, spotted with blood, spittle, and dirt, and
loathsome to behold, was uncovered; signifies the foulness of thy soul,
defiled with the spots of so many sins; which foul spots Christ by his
passion removed from thee upon himself, that he might cleanse thee from all
filth. Secondly, by the scarlet Garment is signified our nature, which is
bloody and guilty of death, which Christ assuming to the unity of his person,
did Sanctify; and also thy sins, Isa. 1.
being as red as a Worm, which Christ took away by his Passion; and also
the members of the Church the body of Christ, which being in this world
diversely afflicted, are covered with this garment of Christ, that they shall
not faint, but increase in merits. For nothing does fo much comfort the
afflictions of a Christian man, nothing does so much advance piety, as the
earnest meditation of Christ. Thirdly his Crown of thorns is thy barren and
sharp pricking sins, sprung through concupiscence out of the cursed earth of
thy body. Fourthly ^our Lord holds a Reed in his hand, whereby is signified,
that by things accounted base in the world, as his Cross, Passion, and
Humility, he wins the Kingdom of the whole world, and vpholdeth all
frail, vain, and scrupulous men by his Passion, and right hand. Do thou pray
our Lord to make thee partaker of all these things, and remember that it is
indecent for dainty and delicate members to lie under a head full of thorns.

And they came unto him, Mat. 27. M^r 15. Joan. 19
and bending their knee, they adored, and mocked him, and they began to salute
him, saying: Hail King of the Jews.
COnsider first four other kind of irrisions: First (They came unto him) as
servants use to come unto their King, asking him in mockage, if he wanted
anything. Whom thou do imitate, being a Christian only in name, and
indeed a bondslaue unto the Devil, confessing Christ in words, but in thy
deeds denying him. Secondly they adored (bending their knee) or as Saint Mark
says (their knees) none of them bending both their knees, but every man one.
His adoration is fraudulent that kneeleth on the ground with one knee, and
holds the other upright, upon which his body may rest. Who^ thou do imitate,
when in thy outward gesture thou adorest God, and in thy mind thou followest
pride, lust, and other vices. 3. (They mocked him) diverse ways, as their
wanton wickedness did provoke them. He is mocked upon earth, whose Majesty the
Angels in heaven adore. But yet, because God cannot be mocked, do thou show
thy self before him with all submission and purity of heart. 4. (They saluted
him, saying, hail King of the Jews) an excellent speech, wherewith thou also
may salute the King of those Jews, wc acknowledge their sins, and sing
praises unto God. Blessed art thou if thou have a King, by whom thou may be
sweetly gouernd in this world, and after this life be made partaker of his
Kingdom. Consider 2. that Christ by seeing and hearing those ignominies, did
cure all posterity from the Serpents hissing into the ears of Eve, and from
the vanity of her eyes, through the curiosity whereof she infected our eyes.
Pray our Lord to convert all these to the profit of thy soul.

And they spit upon him, and they took a reed, Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Joan. 19.
and struck his head with the reed, and they gave him blows.
COnsider first, 4. other kinds of mockings. 1. (They spit upon him) defiling
in so unworthy and scurrile manner, not only his face, but his breast also, and
his whole body: Yea the body of him, Who is the brightness of glory, and the
substance of the Father, Heb. 1. 1 Pet. 1
whom the Angels desire to behold. 2. (They take a reed) faining to do him
service, as though they would ease him, being weary of the burden of his
Scepter. 3. (They strike his head with the reed) that the Thorns might be
deeper fastened into his head. Mark how by these blows the thorns pierced to
ye very Scull of his head, and fastened in the ioining of ye bones, and were
there broken. 4 (They gave him blows) not with their bare hand, but being
armed against the pricking of ye thorns. Here do thou admire together with his
other virtues, our Lords Charity, Patience, Meeknes, Benignity, and above al,
his humble obedience, by wc he yielded himself to the will of his tormentors,
and being commanded to sit down, to lift up his head to the Thorns, to hold
the Reed in his hand, to expose his Face to blows, he obeyed without delay.
Consider secondly, that these Ethnicks, though they offered many iniuryes to
our Lord; yet they never covered his face; that Christ with the eyes of his
mercy might behold us lovingly, and forsaking the Jews might of Gentiles make
us Christians. Thou learnest first, not to cover the truth with new opinions,
nor to decline to Haeresie; but openly to profess the true Faith, how great a
sinner soever thou be. Thou learnest secondly, not to neglect thy
conscience, when it pricketh and warns thee of thy sins: For the beginning
of thy conversion is, when thy conscience reprooueth thee. Pray unto thy Lord,
that he never turn his face from thee, that he preserve thee in the true
Faith, and adorn thee with true virtues, especially with humble and willing
obedience, that thou may faithfully obey thy betters, not only in light and
easy things, but also in great, sharp, and difficult matters.

The 26. Meditation of Pilate his bringing forth of our Lord to the People.
Pilate went forth again, and said unto them: Joan. 19
Behold I bring him forth unto you, that ye may know, that I find no cause in
him.
COnsider first, that when Pilate thought our Lord had been so cruelly used,
that it would have moved a stony heart to compassion, then he brought him
forth, yet going himself a little before, to prepare the hearts of the Jews
to pity. The wicked Judge does herein condemn himself, when he confesses
him to be innocent, whom he had handled so cruelly, to please other men.
Consider secondly (Behold I bring) for it is a wonderful thing, that God, who
has bestowed upon men so many and so great benefits, should suffer so many
wrongs and wounds by me^. Admire thine own ingratitude. God has brought thee
into this world, adorned with all goodness: and thou bring him forth, and
castest him out of thy heart, shamefully misused with thy grievous sins, and
do not suffer him to rest in thy house, which thou have filled with theft
and other sins. Do thou rather bring him forth to be praised and adored by
the people. First by preaching him, and his will to the people, and then by thy
good works, expressing his holy life: That thou may say with the Apostles
(And now I do not live, Galat. 6.
but Christ lives in me.) And bringing him forth let all men understand,
that there is no cause to be found in him, why he should not be admitted by
all men, when as thou can see nothing in him, but signs of love, blood shed
for thee, stripes, and wounds, so as it may be truly said of him: Cernitur in
toto corpore sculptus amor.

In all his members Love engraven is.



Then Jesus went forth, carrying his thorny Crown, Joan. 19.
and purple garment.
COnsider first, how thy Lord came forth amongst the people. Behold a high
place, to which they ascended by twenty three marble steps, (which are kept
till this day at Rome with great reverence,) and before that a most spacious
Court, filled with many thousands of people, who had assembled themselves out
of all Iudaea against the feast of Pasch. All these so soon as they espied our
Lord coming forth with Pilate, came preasing nearer, that they might better
behold this sad and horrible spectacle. Go forth also, ye Daughters of
Jerusalem, Cant. 3.
and behold King Solomon in the diadem, wherewith his Mother the Synagogue of
the Jews has crowned him. Go the^ also forth, O my Soul, and behold the
Diadem, and the royal otnaments, which thy sins have set upon thy God.
Mark attentively the whole body of thy peaceable King, cruelly torn with his
enemies hands: that he might gain a most assured peace with God for thee, and
for thy conscience. Behold his Crown wouen of boughs, decked with thorns, and
drops of blood in liew of precious stones: His hands and arms carry cords in
stead of bracelets: His neck and all his body, is tied with a rope, in stead
of a belt, and Chain of gold: The works of his apparel is scars and wounds:
His divine Countenance with fleame, spittings, blood, and filth, is as it were
painted, or masked, and disguised. Let these things move horror in others, and
compassion in thee. Mark ye words of Isaias. He has no beauty nor comelines;
we saw him, Isa. 33
and he had no countenance: That is, he looked not like a man, and his
countenance was as it were hidden, and looking down; and we esteemed him, as
a Leaper. Do thou reverence this attire of thy Lord with the inward affection
of thy heart, in wc he fought against thy enemies, and got victory and glory
for thee. For even as thou esteemest those things, and keep them carefully,
by which thy friend has gotten riches, and honor for thee; so thou ought
religiously to meditate, worship, and embrace those spittings, whips and
reproaches, wc have brought abundance of so great goods unto thee. For our
Lord knows his own attire, and he will more easily receive thee coming in
such garments, then in worldly pomp and bravery: And he had rather have thee
to pray, and worship him in this poor array, then in all thy brave attire.
Consider secondly, that this sack of the body of Christ which came down from
Heaven, Joan. 1
full of grace and truth, is now opened, and torn in all parts, breathing out
of his holy bowels a wonderful savor, so sharp, that it drives away Devils;
Mat. 24.
so peircing, that it enters into stony hearts, and so sweet, that it draws
the Eagles from all parts of the world. For where the body shall be, Mat. 24.
thither also will the Eagles be gathered. Purge thou the nostrils of thy
heart, purge thou the filth of thy vices; that being stirred up with ye
sweetness of the savor of God, Thou may run into the sweet savor of these
ointments. Cant. 1
And pray unto our Lord to draw thee after him with his sweetness, and to
instill into thy heart the love of his Passion, that thou may contemn the
world in respect thereof. (And he said, behold the man) by this word, Pilate
endeavored to move some commiseration, showing first the bitterness of his
punnishment, as if he had said, know that he is a man and not a beast; if
he have committed any fault, he has paid well for it: therefore o me^, take
pity upon a man, it is the part of beasts not to spare the conquered. And
again, behold he is a man, and a most miserable man, whom ye have accused as
King of the Jews; there is no cause, why ye should be afraid of this King,
whom through the great deformity of his body, and cruel torments, ye can
scarce know to be a man. Do thou apply these words profitably unto thy self
in this manner. 1. (Behold the man) he is set before thee to imitate, in this
habit, in these gestures, and in this shape of body, and mind. Abraham was
proposed to our Ancestors for an example of life. Isa. 51
Mark the Rock (says Isaias) out of which ye were cut, Here a man is
proposed unto thee, of whom our Heavenly Father says: Hear him: and the Son
of God: Learn ye of me, Mat. 27.
for I am meek and humble of heart. Look therefore not upon other men's
manners, but upon this man's, upon this face of Christ: who although he be God,
whose virtues and deeds thou can not attain unto, yet he is true man,
endued with the same frail and humane nature like thee and other men. Thy
first Father Adam made thee of a man like to foolish Beasts: Psalm. 84.
If thou will return to the ancient dignity of humane nature, join thyselfe
with this man. Secondly (behold the man) to whom thou may fly in all thy
necessities: these spittings are suffered for thee; this blood is shedd for
thee; and all these evils are endured for thy sake: both that thou should
take away thy sins, and cure thy wounds by these medicines, and also that
thou should pay them to the eternal Father for thy infinite depts. Thirdly
(behold the man) mark what thy sins have brought unto this man: thy pride
has caused these irrisions and this contempt; thy covetousness, this
nakedness; thy drunkenness, this effusion of blood; thy lust, these thorns;
and thy sloth, these bonds. O man, behold this man: but who art thou, and what
is he? thou a man like a worm, he a man and God. Oh how great glory is due
unto him, and how much shame unto thee? yet what is he become for thy sake? and
what suffer, or do thou for him? Psalm. 21
he is made a worm and no man, a scorn of men, and an abject of the people.
And this, because he would carry thee up to God. But thou being careful of
nothing less, then of exalting his glory, applyest thy self about thine own
honor, wealth, and commodity.

The 27. Meditation of the third accusation of our Lord before Pilate.
Joan. 16
Then when the high Priests and the Ministers saw him, they cried, saying,
crucify him, crucify him.
COnsider first, the people holding their peace, and inclyning to
co^miseration, the Priests and their ministers, and flatterers were not
pacified. That thou may know first, yt no man is moved more hardly to repent
his sins, then he, which sins of set purpose and malice. For they, which
fall thorough weakness and ignorance, are sooner recalled, and deserve
pardon; but they, which wittingly and willingly are evil, are rather hardened
and indurate, the^ any way amended by admonitions. 2. That the enemies of
Christ and of his Church, are never ye better for being used ge^tly and
courteously. For these kind of me^ are to be subdued by thretnings, terrors and
constancy, and not by sufferance. Consider 2. That even as these wicked men did
upon the sight of the blood of Christ thirst after his death, like dogs upon
the sight of the blood of a wild Beast: So thou ought to be inflamed with
the love of the passion of our Lord by the contemplation of his pains, Psalm.
38.
that the fire of Devotion may be inkindled in thy meditations. Consider
thirdly how the words of these wicked people did pierce the bowels of thy Lord
(crucify him, crucify him) of which he foretold in the Prophet: I have left
my house: I have put away my inheritance: Hiere 12
I have given my beloved soul into the hands of her enemies: my inheritance is
made unto me like a Lion in the wo^d. S^ffer with thy Lord, and lament thy
sins, which continually send forth the same cries, and are bloud-suckers,
instantly crying, Pro. 30
Bring, Bring.

Pilate said unto them, take ye him and crucify him: Joan. 19.
for I find no cause in him.
COnsider first that Pilate being moved with disdain, answered somewhat
sharply unto the Jews. Admire thou thy own coldness, who art a Christian, and
know the dignity of Christ, and the greatness of his pains, and do
confess, that thou were the cause thereof, and yet art not moved, neither with
commiseration toward Christ, nor with disdain against thy self. Learn
justly to be angry at them, which go about to incite thee, and others unto
sin: that is to say, at the Devil, and his ministers. Say unto him, if thou will offend the goodness of God, I find no cause in him, but of love,
reverence, and thanksgiving. Consider 2. Though Pilate was loath to pronounce
ye sentence of death aganst our Lord; yet he did not hinder his death, but would
put it over to other me^. Who^ thou do imitate, as often as thou leauest to
the will of others that mischife, wc thou thy self dare not commit. Consider
3. That this wicked President, after all this grievous punishment, found no
cause in him, either of death, or stripes. Do thou inquire the cause in the
opened bowels of Christ, to wit, his burning love, wc cut and brake asunder
this sack of his body, and poured forth his blood so ple^tifully. What will
the holy Angels do wc were astonished in ye nativity of this Lord, at the
wonderful love which caused almighty God to take upon him a frail and infants
body. How will they be amazed both at this love of God, wc for man was content
to be esteemed a worm, rather then a man, and to be the scorn of men, and the
outcast of the people, and the scum and laughing stock of all men; and also at
the raging malice of the Jews, who would never be satisfied with the pains
and punishment of their Messiah, which so many ages before was expected, and
promised unto them; and likewise at the hardness of thine own heart, which is
not softened and melted with this burning charity of thy Creator. Admire thou
these things, and pray thy Lord to inflame thy heart with the love of him.

Joan. 19
The Jews answered him: we have a Law, and according to the law he ought to
dye, because he made himself the Son of God.
COnsider first, the proud answer of the Jews (we have a Law.) They believed
in the law, which they had in writing; and did not fulfill it in work. Those
men do imitate them first, which boast of the word of God, and continually
object the same, and are wholly in the commendation of faith: when in the mean
time they do nothing worthy neither of faith, nor of the holy Scriptures, nor
yet of a Christian man. Secondly, they which place all piety in outward
ceremonies only, and not in ye worship of God, and in brotherly charity.
Consider 2. That according to the Law Christ ought to dye. For the whole law
of Moses, and of the Prophets, foreshewed the death of Christ; for all the
sacrifices of the old Law, were shadows of the sacrifice of the Cross: and
all the Prophets referred their prophesies to the death of the Messiah.
Therefore the Jews said true, but not according to their own intention, whose
meaning was, that the sin and blasphemy of Christ deserved death by the Law,
that thou may learn, that God turns to thy good those things, which are
badly spoken or done by the wicked: and also that thou should draw goodness
even out of wicked men. Consider third-the cause of his death (Because he made
himself the Son of God.) A most true cause of death: First if thou do
consider, God the Father; for the Son of God being made man, made man the Son
of God, assuming humane nature into one person of the Son of God. For we
should never have come into grace with the eternal Father, but by the death of
that man, who was the true and very Son of God Secondly, if thou consider the
Jews; because he lived the life of the Son of God. For therefore their envy
was exasperated to the death of Christ, because his most Holy life reprehended
their wicked behauiours. Take thou heed, that never any other fault be noted
in thee, but only that thou art the son of God. For if thou do suffer for
that cause, thou art happy, and the faithful Disciple of Christ. And because
the Son of God did undergo this death to make thee the Son of God, pray
him that he will lighten thy soul with his Grace, and exalt thee to be the
Son of God, and after this life by communicating his Divinity unto thee, he
will number thee amongst the Sons of God, and grant thee thy portion among
his Saints, which shall be called the sons of God.

The 28. Meditation of the second examination of Christ made by Pilate.
When Pilate heard that speech he feared more, Joan. 19
and entered again into the Palace, and said unto him, whence art thou? but
Jesus gave him no answer.
COnsider first, that Pilate being an Ethnicke, and possessed with the error of
the Gentiles, feared least Christ was ye Son of some God, as perhaps of
Jupiter, or Ma^s. For so the Poets feign of Romulus, and Remus, and of diverse
others: and Christ his modesty in answering, and his gravity of manners
confirmed this opinion. He feared therefore the indignation of the God his
Father, whose Son he had so unjustly whipped. The Gentile feared the vain
wrath of the Gentile God, and feared not the grieuousnes of his sin: neither
did the Jews fear the most just wrath of the true God. Thou likewise do
fear sometimes shadows, dreams, and childish fancies; and art not afraid of
the Devil, who is always at thine elbowe, when thou sinnest; nor the district
judgment of Christ, whom thou do offend; nor Hell mouth gaping for thee.
Consider secondly (Whence art thou.) Evil men neither know God the giver of
all good things, nor from whence any good comes to them. The Ox knows his
Keeper, and the Ass, the manger of his Lord. Hens, Cattes, and Hogs when
meat is cast unto them, lift up their heads, and look upon them, that cast
the same: And man, who has received so many benefits from God, does neither
thank, nor know God. Consider thirdly, that Christ made no answer. First,
because it was not necessary seeing he had manifested his innocence before;
and also satisfied this question, saying: My Kingdom is not of this world: I
was borne for this, and for this I came into the World, etc. For our Lord spoke
but seldom, and necessary things, and (as St. Chrysostom says) least he
might seem proud by his continual silence. Hom. 87. in Mat.
Secondly, least by his answeares he might be thought desirous to escape, and
to avoid death, which he might easily have done, if either he himself, or
any other for him had seriously defended his cause. Thirdly least he should
give holy things unto Dogs. For at this time Pilate by his great sin of
whipping him, had made himself unworthy of an answer at Gods hands.
Fourthly, because an Heathen man could not understand the answer of that,
which the Angels cannot conceive. For from whence is that Person, which with
his Majesty fills both Heaven and Earth; which always springing in the
bosom of the Father, Isa 53
is always borne and perfect; whose generation noe man can declare. Thou
therefore pondering in thy mind the Majesty of thy Lord, and seeing him before
this wicked President thus fowly torn, deformed, with so many stripes, and
covered with so many spittings, filth, and torments, admire and ask him,
whence art thou? Art thou he, whose Father is God, whose Servants are the
Angels, and whose Kingdom is Heaven? For if we may Judge of a man according
to his habit, thou seem to be a Worm, rather the^ a Man, brought forth of
the durte, rather then coming from Heaven.

Then Pilate said unto him: Do thou not speak unto me? Joan. 19
do thou not know, that I have power to crucify thee, and power to
dismiss thee?
COnsider first, the pride of Pilate. First because he thought he was
contemned by this silence of Christ, he threatens him with his power and
authority. For a proud man is soon angry, and will not suffer indignity at
another hand, and yet cares not what injury he offers to them himself.
Secondly, that he attributes to himself the power, which he has received
from another: that thou may learn, first to refer all thy good things
unto God from whom thou have received them, least he take them from thee for
thy ingratitude. Secondly to acknowledge those guiftes, and to use them to the
honor of thy Lord, least by abusing the^ thou be grievously punished.
Consider therefore earnestly with thy self thine own wealth, authority,
learning, strength of body, and thy other gifts; and how much good thou
may do thereby, either for the increasing of Gods glory, or the salvation
of thy neighbors; and how much good thou have done: and labor instantly to
do as much as thou art able; for neither work, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor
knowledge shall be in Hell, to which place thou make have. Eccle. 9.
Consider secondly, that Pilate acknowledges free power in himself to
crucify our Lord, and to dismiss him: That thou may learn, first, that
thou do not want free will to do well, or ill; and that thou may use it
to the exercise of virtue, and not to commit sins. Secondly, that it is an
evil freedom, whereby we may do evil; Au. Epist 45.
and an excellent necessity, which brings us to better things. Do thou
then join thy self so unto Christ, that it shall not be in thy power to do
ill, but that thou may will and do only good and virtuous things. For
that is true Christian liberty, so to be able to work through virtue, and to
effect those things, which reason and faith does dictate; that we would not
sin, though it were lawful, the will being so confirmed in good, that it
cannot be diuerted by any impediments, either of concupiscence, or any other
thing.

Jesus answered, thou could have no power against me, Joan. 19
except it were given thee from above. Wherefore he, which has delivered me
to thee, has the greater sin.
COnsider first, that by these words Christ abated the pride of Pilate,
teaching him, that he had of himself no power, but that, which was either
given him from above by Caesar, whose Vicegerent he was (as St. Augustine
interprets this place, Tract. in Joan 116.
) or granted him from God in Heaven, without whose special permission no man
could do any thing against Christ the Son of God. Pilate received this power
with the enemies of our Lord, when he gave them license in the garden to rage
against him, by these words: This is your hour, and the power of darkness. And
although it was necessary to have a more peculiar permission to rage against
Christ, Luc. 22.
then against any other Christian. Yet thou may learn truly with Saint
Cyprian, Beat. Leo. ser. de pas. Dom.
that the Devil can do nothing against man, except God permit him. Consider
secondly, (he which delivered me to thee, has the greater sin) to wit, then if
he had offered any other man to be put to death by thee: or greater sin then
thou; partly because thou may be much moved thereunto by reason of thy
authority, and by the people, and the chief men, whereas he did it of
himself by private hate, and settled malice; partly because thou know not
the dignity of my person, and office, wc the Jews must needs know by the
prophesies of ye Prophets, having seen so many miracles, wc could not happen,
but by the Messiah, so as they had no excuse of their sin Thou see first that
al sins are not alike (as some men feign) but that those sins are more
grievous, Joan. 15
which come of deliberate malice, then those wc are committed through weakness
or ignorance: and they sin more which mock and persecute the godly, then they
which deride wicked men: and they offend more which induce men to sin, then
they which are induced; for the sin of such redoundeth also to the inducers.
Secondly, thou learnest to abstain from all sins, but especially from those
wc are committed against God; as Heresy, blasphemy perjury, irrision and
profanation of holy and divine things. For although in the blind judgment of
men (which think nothing to be a fault, but that, which tends to the hurt
of our neighbor*) those things seem small: yet God will revenge more sharply
the wrong done unto him self, then to any other creature. Admire thou the
bounty of Christ, who so lovingly taught the wicked Judge: and pray him, that
he will never give thee liberty to sin.

The 29. Meditation of the fourth accusation of Christ before Pilate.
From thence forth Pilate sought to dismiss him: but the Jews cried, saying:
if thou do dismiss him, Joan. 19
thou art not friend to Caesar: for every one that makes himself King,
contradicts Caesar: but when Pilate heard these speeches, he brought Jesus
forth, and sat in the judgment seat, in the place called Lithostrotos, but
in hebrewe Gabbata; and it was the paraseene, about the sixth hour.
COnsider first, that Pilate, when he heard mention of sin thought earnestly
of the dismissing of Christ, for fear of co^miting a greater offense: that
thou may learn hereafter to absteyne from sin for the love of Christ; for
thou have offended God long enough, and defiled thy conscience with the filth
of sin: but be thou more constant then Pilate, upon whom God has bestowed
more grace. Consider secondly, the burning hate of the Jews, who wanting
matter of accusation, terrifyed the Judge with threatenings, and as it were
enforced him to do wickedly: as if they should say: We will complain of thee
to Caesar, whose enemy and competitor of the kingdom thou have favored.
Wicked men use to threaten, when they cannot prevail by truth. If thou fear
none but God, thou shall overcome all thy enemies. Consider thirdly, that
Pilate hitherto played the man, so long as it concerned not himself: but when
he thought his own honor and reputation was called in question, he yielded to
their threatenings, and was quite discouraged: like to those, who defend the
truth, as long as they shall suffer no inconvenience thereby: but if they
perceive any storm, they presently turn sail, and yield unto the tempest,
and will not suffer any kind of trouble. Do thou fly the world, least it
carry thee away from the affairs of Christ to some unjust action. For he which
makes himself a king and rules over himself, and over his desires, is not a
friend to Caesar, the devil (I mean) ye prince of this world, whose
friendship if thou seek, and do fear his wrath, thou shall get that,
which happened to Pilate, who by the complaint of the Jews in another cause,
lost Caesar's friendship, and dyed miserably in exile. The Devil follows
those that fear him; and flies and forsakes them, that hate him. Consider
fourthly, that the place, day, and hour of the condemning of Christ is
distinctly noted: first, to declare the greatness of the sin, when the only
begotten Son of the true God was condemned to dye on the Cross. Secondly, to
signify the mysterye which is contained in the same. It was the day of the
Paraseene, that is, the sixth day, in which man was created, in which man was to
be redeemed, in which the true Lamb was to be immolated, and in which the
typical Lamb was slain. (About the sixth hour) that is, a little before
noone, in which hour the typical Lamb was prepared to be sacrificed, and men
do commonly pamper and cherish their bodies. The place (...), yt is, strowed
with stones: and (...), that is, high, because Christ was condemned by men more
hard, and more proud then the very stones; and did receive this sentence of
death for thy pride, and for the hardness and blindenes of thy heart. Pray unto
thy Lord to lighten thy blindenes, to mollify thy hardness, and to suppress
thy pride.

And Pilate said to them, behold your king: Joan. 19
and they cried, away with him, away with him, crucify him.
COnsider first, that Pilate prevailing nothing by other reasons, began to
provoke them to mercy by laughter, as if he should lay: behold your great King,
who^ ye accuse of aspiring: for he which scarce looks like a man, how can he
hope to be a King? or else that he spoke these words, to make them deny their
Messiah, and to submit themselves to the bondage of the Romans, which was
hateful unto them. For yet there remained a little spark of pietye in his
mind: that thou may learn how hardly our Lord forsakes us. Consider
secondly, the three names given to Christ in this time of his passion by Pilate
and the Jews, A man, a king, the son of God: Mat. 2.
which three names the Sages acknowledged by their offerings. For salvation
could not be given unto us, except God and man should suffer, who by his
Passion took away the kingdom of the world from the devil. Consider thirdly,
the word full of comfort, (behold your king) by which word the conditions of
our King are showed unto us, who is not a sour, hard, and importunate exactor,
oppressing us with labors, and leading us with great burdens, and imposing a
grievous yoke upon us; but loving and gentle, bestowing on us through his
abundant charity, his own labors, dolours, blood, and life, and that blood
by which alone all the filth of our sins is washed away: who caryeth also our
sins and bears our burdens: briefly, who refreshes us with his body and
blood, and lifts up his sweet yoke upon our shoulders. Osea. 11
To this King thou have given thy name in baptism: thou have begun to fight
under his banner; behold therefore diligently his armor, and observe the
manner of his fighting with his enemy. For thou must use ye same weapons, and
fight in the same manner: and if thou do desire to be rewarded with the like
Honors, thou must strive for the victory, by humility, contempt, Charity, and
other virtues. Consider fourthly, the unbridled rage of the Jews, who rejected
the King of glory, together with his Kingdom. (Away with him, Luc. 19.
away with him) (say they) we will not have him reign over us. But do thou
take this king of the Jews, rejected by the Jews, and given to the Gentiles;
Cant. 3
and bring him into the house of thy Mother, and into the chamber of her, that
bare thee. Make him thy King, and not the World, nor the Devil, nor thy Belly,
nor Mammon. And say not now, Behold your King, but behold, our King, yea, my
King, who has loved me, and given himself for me. And beware, that thou do
not again by any sin crucify this King, whom thou have once admitted,
least he complain of thee, saying: Ye, all ye people, Mala. 3 Galat. 2.
Psalm. 118.
do nail me: But rather being fastened thy self unto the Cross with Christ,
pray him, that he will fasten thy flesh with his fear.

Pilate said unto them, shall I crucify your King? The Priests answered, we
have no King, but Caesar.
COnsider first, in this question of Pilate, how unworthy a thing it was, that
the Messiah, who was promised to Mankind from the beginning of the world, and
expected so many ages, and at last, thorough the mercy of the eternal Father,
sent for the salvation of the Jews; should come to such and so miserable a
death, and as an unworthy and accursed person should be demanded to the
horrible punishment of the Cross. Do thou look upon thy self, and mark
whether perhaps thou art not in the same error. Thou know that thou were
borne into this world to this end, yt at the last thou should enjoy God in
everlasting and heavenly felicity. Thou know that all the whole world was
made and framed by God for thy sake, and that for the same cause the very Son
of God descended down from Heaven, was borne of the Virgin Mary, and
consecrated all his labors, yea his Passion and Death unto thee. But thou
having no consideration of all this, do by thy sins drive away God from
thee, when thou ought to embrace him; thou shuttest up heaven, and
neglectest wholly thy salvation. Consider secondly the frantic choice of the
Priests. They refuse the Messiah sent by God, as if it were in them to choose a
Messiah according to their own will and pleasure, and not rather to receive
the Messiah, whom God gave unto them. O intolerable madness of me^! who will
make to themselves a God according to their own will; or devise a new
Religion; or frame the manner of serving God out of the holy Scriptures,
wrested and interpreted according to their own fantasies. Wherefore they are
truly called Haeretiques, that is, choosers. It is Gods office to appoint
Religion, and the manner how to serve him; and not ours, to choose. Consider
thirdly the nature of envy, which seeks the hurt of another, though it be to
his own loss. The Roman government was very grievous and hateful unto them,
and yet the Priests, both for themselves, and for the whole people, preferred
it before ye sweet yoke of Christ. Learn first to lay aside all evil
affections of thy mind, least thou fall into more grievous sins. Secondly,
not to esteem so much of outward Nobility, or power, that thou shall therefore
break the least Commandment of God, or swerve one jot from truth and
justice. For Nobility, power, and authority, are of no estimation, except the
same be under Christ, and for Christ, from whom all power proceeds, both in
Heaven and Earth, and unto whom all Honor and power is due. Consider fourthly,
that this foolish election of the Jews is confirmed by God: Mat. 22 Mat. 24.
Psalm. 78
for they have been both deptiued of their Messiah now so many years; and
also given into bondage to strange Kings, who burned their City, and
overthrew their Temple, leaving not one stone upon another, Did eat Jacob, and
made his place desolate, disperced them amongst the Gentiles, oppressed them
with grievous servitude, that they should be a reproach to their neighbors, a
mocking stock, and illusion to them which were round about them. Do thou
desire nothing of God, but to be guided by him, and to take from thee the
grievous yoke of that tyrant the Devil.

The 30. Meditation of the condemnation of Christ.
Mat. ^7.
And Pilate seeing, that he profited nothing, but that the tumult was made
greater, taking water, washed his hands before the people, saying: I am
innocent of the blood of this just man; Look ye to it.
PIlate who was a Heathen, being moved with the touch of conscience and
reason, and desirous to dismiss Christ vnco^demned; the Jews begin to
mutiny. Consider therefore, first, how much that afflicted the mind of Christ,
that a Heathen, being a stranger from the knowledge of God, and from the
Sacraments, should be careful for his delivery; and they, upon whom God had
bestowed the knowledge of himself, and honored them with many Sacraments,
should so tumultuously labor to have the sentence of death pronounced against
him. Learn, not to marvel, if some things happen unto thee, contrary to
equity and reason. Consider secondly, that the wicked do mutiny. For even as
Hell is replenished with tumult and horror: so all things, which are suggested
by the Devil, are referred to tumulte and perturbation, either outwardly
amongst the Citizens, or else inwardly in men's minds. Consider thirdly the
ceremony of Pilate, who washed his hands with water, but did not wash away the
guilt of conscience, for sins are not purged with outward water, but with
tears. Do thou apply this water of tears to thy sins already past; but do
not use them, to the end thou may sin more freely. For as all sins
committed may be cleansed by tears and pennaunce: so there is nothing, which
can give liberty to sin. Consider fourthly the words of Pilate: (I am
innocent.) He thinks himself innocent, because he condemned him against
his will. But he cannot be innocent, Lib 3. ad Auari. ca. 80
which sends Jesus to the Cross, with the same lips, by which he had
pronounced him innocent before. Thou learnest also, that they are like unto
those Jews, which will never take any warnings, nor be moved with any
reasons. And they immitate the sin of Pilate: first, which sin against
their own conscience at the request of others. Secondly, which under any
pretense excuse themselves, and lay the blame upon others. Thirdly, which cover
the wickedness of their mind with any color of good. But see that thou do
use this word of Pilate more warily to thine own benefit: O Lord, let me be
innocent by the blood of this just man. For seeing he only is just, and our
true Justice, nothing can bring me innocence of my soul, but by the blood of
this just man, shed for justice, for the remission of sins.

And the whole people answered, Mat. 27
saying: His blood be upon us, and upon our Children.
COnsider first the blind fury of envy: They do not deny him to be just, but
whatsoever he be, they demand him to be crucified: and yt they may give
courage to the fearful President, and hasten the death of this just man, they
bind themselves and their posterity to most greiuous miseries. This word
wounded the heart of Christ our Lord, by which the people of God, who should
have been delivered by this blood, desired the revenge thereof to light upon
themselves. Consider secondly, how great folly it is, to wish for that evil,
whereof thou know not the greatness. For if every sin deserves a great and
grievous punishment, for the eschewing whereof this blood was shed; oh what a
Hell is due for that sin, by which this blood was shed? They are like unto
these bloody Jews, first, who nothing esteeming the future pains of hell (the
greatness whereof they know not) continue in offending God with their sins. 2.
Which undertake difficult matters without consideration. 3. Which load
themselves with other men's sins, not weighing what will follow. Consider 3. The
bou^ty and goodness of God, who as according to ye desire and request of Pilate
he spared the Gentiles, so he dealt less seuearely with ye Jews, the^ they
required: for he received even many of them into favor and grace, and brought
many thousa^ds of there posterity into faith and salvation. Do thou take heed,
least thou through thy sins be guilty of the body and blood of out Lord: but
pray, that his blood may be upon thee and thy children, for thy salvation, and
the remission of thy sins.

Then Pilate willing to satisfy the people, adjudged, Mar. 15 Luc. 23 Mar. 27.
Joan. 19
that their petition should be done: and he dismissed unto them him, which was
sent to prison for murder and sedition, Barrabas, whom they demanded: but
Jesus being whipped he delivered to their will, that he should be crucified.
COnsider first, that the Priests sinned in the death of Christ of envy; the
people, through the persuasion of the Elders; Pilate, to satisfy the people.
None was free from sin: for the first sinned of malice, the second of
ignorance, the third of fraylty. For Christ underwent the punishment of the
Cross for all sorts of sinners whatsoever. Consider secondly the manner of
his condemnation, never used before: for First, omitting all crimes, for which
he ought to be condemned, he was pronounced, just, by the judge himself: I am
innocent (says he) from the blood of this just man: as if he should say, who
is not condemned for his faults, but for his justice. Secondly, a guilty
person, laden with most grievous crimes, is let go, that the just man may be
condemned: for our Lord dyed to this end, that he might by his death deliver
all sinners from eternal death. Thirdly, he was not only adjudged after the
accustomed manner to the Cross, but also to be tortured upon the Cross,
according to the will of the Jews. For these are the words: he delivered him
to their will, that he should be crucified. For he would be delivered wholly
to the will of the wicked, that thou should yield thy self entyrely to his
will. Pray therefore unto thy Lord, not to deliver thee to the will of thy
enemies, but that through this most unjust sentence of his death he will
deliver thee from the just judgment of everlasting death.

The 31. Meditation of the carrying of the Cross.
And the Soldiers took Jesus, Joan. 19 Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
and pulling off his scarlet garment, they clothed him in his own vestments,
and brought him forth that they might crucify him.
COnsider first, yt thy Lord, whom Pilate seemed hitherto a little to favor,
is now destitute of al humane aid, and delivered up to the executioners; least
thou should be forsaken of God, and delivered up to the Devil. Behold his
tender body, wounded in every part, and rubbed with their cruel hands. Thou
can not endure to be touched upon any light hurt: what pain then do thou
think our Lord endured by the rude and barbarous pullings of the soldiers?
Consider secondly, how the soldiers pulled off his garment, making his most
chaste heart ashamed to be seen naked before all ye people. Behold how his
purple garment cleaving to the congealed blood, being violently pulled off, did
renew the wounds, make them bleed afresh, and pluck away the torn skin
together with the flesh. But Christ put off this garment, yt he might with more
alacrity take up ye wood of the Cross. For even as work men, when they go
about any great labor, put off their clothes, that they may work the more
nimbly; so it is written of Christ, that in this his passion he did four times
put off his clothes when he was to effect any great work. That thou should
not be ignorant with how great desire he wrought thy salvation, First, when by
his whipping he was to shedd his blood for thee over his whole body. Secondly,
when he was to receive a crown of thorns upon his head, to prepare an assured
Kingdom for thee in Heaven. Thirdly, when he was to lay this wood of the
Cross upon his shoulders, as the Scepter, or Sovereignty of the Kingdom, or
as the Key of David, with which he should open heaven for thee. Fourthly when
he was to ascend that tree of the Cross, as the thron of Solomon. Consider
thirdly, that his own clothes were given him again, that his face being all
polluted, and as it were disguised with spittings, blood, and filth, yet he
might be known by his accustomed apparel. But our Lord put on those
vestments, that he might both consecrate unto God his vestment, ye Church, and
every member thereof, with his Cross, and his fresh bleeding Wounds; and also
that he might teach us to endure the Cross and all afflictions. It is not
read, that the Crown of Thorns was taken from his head; that according to the
old Prophecy of David, Colloq. cu^ Triphone Psalm 98.
(which Saint Iustine co^plaineth was razed out by the Jews) our Lord might
reign from the wood. Consider 4. That our Lord was brought forth out of the
city, yt as one unworthy to dye in the holy City, he might be put to death
amongst the wicked. But our Lord went forth, 1. To teach, that he offered
this sacrifice for the whole world, and not for the Jews only, for whom the
sacrifice was offered in the Temple; yea rather that this sacrifice should not
be profitable to the Jews so long as they trusted in their ancient rytes and
ceremonies; according to that saying: we have an altar, of which they have no
power to eat, who serve the Tabernacle. Therefore he went forth carrying his
Cross; yt he might as it were with his sheep-hook enforce thee, a stray
sheep, to come home unto his fold. 2. That thou should not think that
Christ is found amongst the cares of the world, the troubles of the Cittye, and
multitude of business. He is abroad in quiet of conscience, in contempt and
nakedness, and want of all things. Let us then go forth unto him (says the
Apostle) without the Tents, carrying his reproach. Fly the world, that thou
may find Christ.

And carrying his Cross, Joan. 19. Luc. 23.
he went forth into that place which is called Caluaria, and in the Hebrew,
Golgotha: There were also carried two wicked m^n with him, that they should be
put to death.
COnsider first, that in the whole City there was no man found to carry ye
Cross of our Lord to the place of punishment, The soldiers would not, and the
Jews esteemed the very touching of it an execrable thing, because the
Scripture says, yt accursed was every one, Deuteronomy. 21.
which should hang on the wood: therefore our Lord must needs take the wood of
his punishment upon his own shoulders. Consider and weigh with thy self,
whether thou do not imitate them, when it is grievous unto thee to have one
thought of the passion of our Lord, and a most hard thing, to suffer any little
affliction for the love of thy spouse. Consider secondly, with what insolency
they laid that wood upon his tender shoulders, being wounded with many
stripes. The world gives this grievous and troublesome Cross, which thou must
bear alone, without the help of any other but Christ: who imposes a sweet
yoke and a light burden, Mat. 11. Osea. 11.
and he himself lifts it up with his grace, and exalts it over the iawe
bones. Pray our Lord to lay thy sins upon this Cross, carrying them from thee
to his own body, and washing them away with his blood and death: For he is the
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Consider thirdly, Joan
3.
whither our Lord went: to wit to a hill near ye city, Hom. 84. in Joan. In ca.
5 ad Ephe. in Epis. ad Paula^ ad Marcel. Orig. tra. 35. in Mat. Cip in ser de
resur. domini. Atha^. de pas. dom Epip. haer. 40. Amb. epis. 19. Aug. ser. 7 de
Temp. Theop. and E^thy. in Joan. 19 Isa. 3.
called Golgotha, yt is, Caluaria, either by reason of the sepulture of our
first parent Ada^, and of his scull there found, (of wc opinion St.
Chrysostom, and St. Hierome report some to have been) or else of the sculls of
dead persons, which had suffered death in this hill, being the place of
execution. The place was filthy and infamous; but Christ sanctified it by his
death, and with his blood washed away the sin of Adam. Consider fourthly,
that 2. Thieves were carried to execution with Christ: that according to the
prophecy of Isaias, He might be reputed with the wicked, and a rumor be
spread abroad, yt 3. Thieves the same day were judged to dye. For it is likely,
that about the most famous Feasts, when the whole people use to assemble
themselves together, their custom was, to condemn and execute some guilty
malefactors, for example to the rest: and now at the request of the Jews
(whose will Pilate intended to satisfy) there were certain of the most
notorious malefactors chosen, of who^ thy Lord should be accounted ye captain
and leader. So great was the desire of ye Jews to obscure the name of Christ.
But our Lord chose to be crucified with those thieves and malefactors to
another purpose and intent. First, that thou should know that he dyed for
sinners, and that there is no offense so great, but it may be purged by the
death of Christ. Secondly, that by this his disgrace and ignominy he might
obtain eternal glory for thee, make thee of a thief to be a Judge in the
world to come. Pray then thy Lord to draw thee to the hill with him, and to
communicate unto thee the merits of his Cross.

And going forth they found a certain man of Cyrene, Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luc. 13.
called Simon, coming from the country, the Father of Alexander and Rufus:
him they compelled to take up his Cross, and they enforced him to carry the
Cross after Jesus.
COnsider first, yt the Jews perceiving the weakness of Christ, being spent
with labors and pains, and with the loss of so much blood; and fearing,
least he might dye before he suffered the most grievous torments of the Cross;
being moved, not with pity, but with cruelty, caused this Gentile to carry the
Cross after Jesus. But God directed this act of theirs to another end. For he
signified hereby; First, that the Cross, being consecrated with the blood of
our Lord, was given to Christians, converted from Gentilisme, who followed
Christ going before them laden with his Cross, being themselves also laden
with their crosses in sundry manners, as some by Martyrdom, some by fastinges,
some by watchinges, and by other voluntary afflictions, some by conquering
themselves, and subduing the wicked motions of the mind. Secondly that it is
not enough that Christ carry his own Cross, and that we only behold it by
faith and contemplation. But it behooves us to set our hand to it, and in holy
works to follow Christ, which says: He which will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. Consider secondly,
who he is, which does profitably carry the Cross of Christ. First, Simon,
that is to say, obedient to the Commandments and suggestions of God.
Secondly, Coming from the Country: who putting off the rudenes of sins,
forsakes his uncivil manners. Thirdly, of Cyrene of Pentapolis, that thou
should carry the Cross of Christ in thy five senses. Consider 3. that this
Simon, was constrained even against his will, to lay this cross upon his
shoulders: to teach thee, First to offer violence to nature, which abhors
such a cross and the change of manners, and mortifying of thy senses.
Secondly, not to thrust thy self rashly into perils, but patiently to suffer
the evils, wc others do unto thee. The Soldiers lay the Cross upon him; for
wicked men by their vexations and torments give occasion to the just to suffer
with Christ. Consider fourthly the profit, which this Simon had, as a reward
of his labor, though he carried the Cross even against his will. First his
name, by the diuulging of the Gospel through the world, is consecrated to
eternal memory. Secondly his City and Country is made known to all
Christians. Thirdly his children were not only Christians, but also famous
amongst Christians. Do not thou therefore fear the Cross, and troubles for
Christ his name, Chris ho^. 1. ad Pop. Antio.
for the Cross of Christ makes men glorious, and brings many commodities
with it. But thou must follow after, not run before Jesus; nor choose what
cross thou likest, but accept of that, which he sends: And pray him to
lighten thy burden with his grace, and to strengthen thy shoulders.

The 32. Meditation of the Women following Christ.
And there followed a great troop of people, and of women, which mourned, Luc.
23.
and lamented him: and Jesus turning unto them said: O Daughters of Jerusalem,
weep not over me, but weep over your selves, and over your Children.
COnsider first, that an innumerable multitude of people flocked together to
this sorrowful spectacle, to who^ perhaps (as the custom is in some places at
this day) there was some sign given of the future execution. And because the
women only are said to lament and weep, it is an argument, yt there were many
mockers, and curious spectators according to yt saying: They spoke against me,
which sat in the gate. Psalm. 68
But with what affection will thou follow thy Lord? With what mind will thou
suffer with him? With what eyes will thou behold him? Do thou want occasion
of sorrow and tears in this spectacle, since our Lord goes thus laden and
deformed for thy sake, and not for himself? Thou did play abroad in the
street, Beat. Ber. ser. 3. in not. Dom.
and in the Kings privy chamber, sentence of death was given against thee. The
only begotten Son of God heard it, and he went forth, putting off his
Diadem, clothed in sackcloath, wearing a Crown of thorns upon his head,
barefooted, bleeding, weeping, and crying out that his poor servant was
condemned. Thou see him come forth, thou ask the cause, and hear it.
What will thou do? will thou still play, and contemn his tears? or rather
will thou not follow him, and weep with him, and esteem the greatness of thy
danger by the consideration of the remedy? Consider secondly that the tears of
these women were grateful unto our Lord, who in sign of love turned himself
toward them in the midst of his torments. Yet he reproved them, because out
of a wrong co^ceipt of humane pity they lamented his death, as the greatest
evil, and extremest misery, without any benefit at all. Do thou mourn,
lament, and weep, First, because thou were the cause of all these so great
pains. Secondly because thou have hitherto born an unthankful mind.
Thirdly, because perhaps this death of thy Lord will not be the cause of thy
salvation and glory, but of thy greater damnation. Consider thirdly, the
difficulty of this thy Lords journey, which caused the women to follow him
with tears. Remember thou the seven hard ways, which thy Lord walked for
thee in this his Passion, that he might stop up the seaue^ ways of the seven
deadly sins, which lead thee unto Hell, and might open the way to everlasting
life, by the seven gifts of the holy Ghost. For he went, First, from the
house where he supped, to the Garden. Secondly from thence to Annas. Thirdly to
Cayphas his house. Fourthly to Pilate. Fifthly to Herod. Sixthly again to Pilate,
and seaue^thly to the Cross. Do thou in all thy travails meditate upon these
ways, and and for the love of thy Lord run in the way of his Commandments.

For behold the days shall come, in which they shall say, blessed are the
barren, Luc. 23
and the wombes, which have not brought forth, and the breasts, which have not
given suck: then they shall begin to say to the Mountains, fall upon us, and
to the Hills, cover us.
COnsider 1. the goodness of thy Lord, who in the midst of his pains,
seeks by his admonition our salvation, and by the terror of future miseries
endeauoreth to move us to penance. He speaks also to women, not to men; 1.
least because he was punished by men, he should seem to threaten revenge.
Secondly that by these evils, foretold unto women, who had offended less, men
might understand, that the like at the least should happen unto them. 3. By
this prediction to comfort those women, which lamented so much the death and
passions of our Lord; signifying thereby, both that he did unjustly suffer this
death, which in a few years should be so deeply revenged; and also that
they might escape this revenge, which would leave to be the children of this
earthly Jerusalem, and convert themselves to the faith of Christ. Consider
secondly, whereas in former times the barren were accursed, now the barren in
Christ are blessed. For there is given to Eunuchs: that is, to them, which
live chaste and single in the Church, Isa. 56.
a name better then from sons and daughters. Consider thirdly, that in all
troubles of this life we must say unto the mountains, fall upon us, and to
the hills, cover us: that is to say, we must have recourse to the help of
Saints, who in the Scriptures are called by the names of mountains and hills;
as in Isaias: Isa. 2.
the house of our Lord shall be a prepared mountain: that is to say, Christ
the head of the Church, in the top of the mountains, and he shall be
elevated above the hills, exceeding in dignity and worthynes, all Saints,
great and less. Consider fourthly, although these predictions of our Lord
pertain chiefly to the overthrowing of Jerusalem: yet they may and ought to
be referred also to all sinners, who by their sins were cause of the death of
our Lord, and yet are not made partakers of his merits, nor returned into Gods
favor by his death. For they which now live securely, and whom no danger will
make to refrain from sins, shall then run into the dens and Caves of the
earth, Isa 2. Osea. 11. Apoc. 6.
(as the Prophets have forespoken) From the face of God, sitting on the throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb. For there shall come a great day of wrath on
them: and who shall be able to stand? The countenance of the Judge shall be
terrible to the wicked, and his sentence intolerable. Then the barren shall
be called blessed, that is, they whom the world accounted unprofitable; and
the wombes which have not brought forth, that is, which have not followed the
concupiscence of the flesh, but have subdued the vices of their belly and
throat; and the pappes which have not given suck, that is, the humble, and
such as are not high minded. Pray thou thy Lord, that thou may not fear the
face of his fury in the day of wrath, and last revenge, and whilst time serves
be reconcyled unto Christ: For if they do these things in green wood, Luc.
23
what shall be done in the dry? Consider first, Christ is the wood, ever
green and flourishing, delectable to behold, moderating the great heat with
the shadow of his thick leaves, bringing forth fruit, pleasant both to the
taste and smell, delighting the earth with the singing of birds. For by his
divine nature, and by the inward grace of the Holy Ghost, he does not only
exceed all beauty, but also preserve, chearish, and comfort all creatures.
Thou also art wood, but dead without the sap of Grace, barren without the
fruit of charity; naked and unprofitable, without the leaves of good works.
Consider secondly, who they are which do these things in the green Wood: that
is, which gave these torments and death unto Christ thy Lord. First, Romans 8
God the Father, who spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us al.
Secondly, the Devil, who provoked his sernants to put Christ to death.
Thirdly, the Jews, and other ministers of his death But all these did not
concord in the passion of Christ to one end. For God the Father punished his
Son for the love of thy salvation, Genesis 22
and like Abraham, carrying the sword of justice in his hand against his son,
and the fire of Charity toward thee, he laid the wood upon his sons
shoulders, to be carried by him, for the burning of the holocauste. The Devil
greiuing at the conversion of many, indeauored to hinder the course of his
preaching, to entangle the Jews in the most grievous sin of innocent death,
and to overcome the patience of Christ by his torments. And the Jews being
moved by envy, could not endure to be admonished to amend their lives by the
words and example of Christ. Consider thirdly, the argument of our Lord: If
they do these things in green wood, what shall be done in the dry? First, if
I suffer this for other men's sins, what shall thou suffer for thine own?
Secondly, if the Father do so grievously afflict his innocent and obedient
Son, what will he do against his wicked and disobedient seru^at? Thirdly, if
the devils could by their officers do these things in another kingdom against
the son of God, what will they be able to do in hell in their own kingdom
against their own bond-slaues? Fourthly, if by the permissio^ of God wicked
men raged thus against the only begotten Son of God for the sins of men,
why shall any man marvel that God will permit men to vex and molest men,
when their sins deserve it? Pray thou thy Lord to ingraft thee into himself
being the green wood, and that never more punishment be exacted of thee, then
that which he himself suffered for thee.

The 33. Meditation of the crucifying of our Lord.
And they came into the place, which is called Golgotha, which is a place of
Caluaria: Luc. 23. Mar. 27. Mar. 15.
and they gave him wine to drink mixed mith gall: and when he had tasted, he
would not drink: and it was the third hour.
COnsider first, the ascending of this hill, how painful it was unto thy
Lord, how he enforced his tender and consumed body, that it should not fail
to procure thy salvation, but that in the mountain nearer unto heaven he might
stand before God the Father, and offer Holocaust as a savor of sweetness for
thy sins. Follow thou the Lord ascending his hill as near as thou can, and
stand by him in this hill even until death. Consider secondly, how the
executioners made ready the Cross: how they bored the holes for the nails,
and prepared nails, hammers, and ropes; thy Lord behoulding them with his
eyes. Do thou also behold them, and lament, and beware; because thou do
prepare a Cross for thy Lord, as often as by thy sins thou deseruest a place
in hell for thy soul, which is created to his own likeness. Consider thirdly,
that according to the custom of such as were put to death, they offered a cup
to Christ, but much differing from that was used to be given to others. The
drink was mixed with wine, Myrre, gall, and vinegar (for St. Matthew uses in
stead of wine this word (...): Vinegar) that none of his senses should want his
pain and punishment. His cruel enemies compass him round about, troubled his
sight; their cruel words, vpbraydings, and blasphemies tormented his hearing;
the stench of the of the place, and of the filth, which covered his face,
offended his smelling; his touching suffered most grievous pains all over his
body; and because no sense should be without his torment, this most bitter
drink was given him to afflict his taste. Is it not reason then (think
thou,) that thou should suffer some affliction or trouble for thy Lord,
which for thy sake had no part of his body free from pain? But Christ tasted
this sour potion for thee, to draw from thy soul to his own body all the
sharpnes and bitterness of thy sins; and left for thee sweet wine, mixed with
no sowernes, that is to say, the grace of God, and a pure and quiet conscience.
Consider fourthly, When he had tasted, he would not drink: for Christ took
upon him thy sins in his body as in his mouth, but he polluted not his soul
with the filth of sin: that thou also should as it were taste the malice
of sin with the sowernes of pennaunce, but by no means suffer it to enter
into thy soul. Consider fifthly, that the hour of his execution is noted, to
wit, the third hour, which in the Equinoctial is from Nine of the clock in
the morning till twelve at noone: whereby thou may note the great have,
which they made, partly least Pilate should change his mind, and partly least
Christ should dye before he was crucified. Saint John writes, that the
sentence was pronounced almost at the sixth hour, that is, a little before
noone: And Mark affirms that Christ was crucified the third hour, that is,
before the clock had struck 12. Consider the^ what have was made, how cruelly
thy Lord was pulled, drawn with ropes, and whipped forward. Take heed, least
thy feet run unto sin, but run cheerfully this way of our Lord, and
casting away all impediments, fly unto the Cross of Christ, and pray him to
remove all sowernes and difficulties from the exercise of virtues.

And there they crucified him. Luc. 23. Joan. 19

COnsider first, that the Apostles did not express, so great an action in many
words, which thou may easily understand, both by the accustomed punishment
of the Cross, and by the hatred of the Jews, and by the ancient oracles of
the Prophets. For first they pulled off his garment with great insolency, and
renewed the wounds, sticking unto it, making his sacred body bleed, and
appear all naked. Secondly, they outragiously threw him down upon the Cross,
which lay on the ground, thinking it sufficient if he were nailed alive on the
Cross. Thirdly, they pulled one hand to the hole, which they had boared, and
drove a nail through it with a hammer; and the blood issued forth
abundantly, according to the old figure: They stroke the Rock, Psalm. 77
and the waters flowed out, and the Rivers swelled up. Fourthly, when one hand
was fastened, they took the other, and stretched it to the other hole, which
being far distant, they pulled it, either with their hands, or with cords,
with all their force; and that being also fast nailed, they came to the holes
for his feet, and with great violence they brought his holy feet unto it,
Ser. de Pasc. Do^. Psalm. 21.
and (as St. Cyprian says) fastened them with nails. David did plainly
foreshew this stretching forth of our Lord in these words; I am spread abroad
like water: I am wasted and decayed with the extremity of pains, and destitute
of all strength, like water powered out, having no power to stay in any place.
All my bones are dispersed, that is, are loosened, and pulled out of their
places, the cold, drynes, and extensio^ upon the Cross dissoluing all the
joints of my members. They have dug my hands and my feet, they have
numbered all my bones: so cruel was this extension of his members, yt every
bone, being pulled from another, might easily be seen. Thirdly, they lift up on
high the tree of ye Cross, clothed with this solemn host; and let it fall
down with great violence into the hole, Number. 21. Exodus 29.
which they had dug for it: For so was the brazen Serpent lift up in the
wilderness, Leuit. 23
and the hoasts of the Sacrifices were wont to be offered unto God by lifting
them up on high. In all these things do thou ponder and think upon the most
bitter torments of thy Lord; behold the banner of the Cross lift up; look upon
the streams of blood running down from his hands and feet; go quickly and
draw whilst the springs are flowing, and before their veins be dried up.
Consider secondly, why thy Lord chose this death of the Cross for thy
salvation, and no other death. There are many causes thereof. First, because
there was no death more long, more grievous, more ignominious, nor more proper
and fit for the procuring of thy salvation. For he would not have his body
divided; that the Church his mystical body might be preserved whole: He would
not be burnt, with any other fire, then the fire of charity: He would not be
strangled with a halter, drowned with water, or smothered with earth, least he
might seem to have retained something to himself, and not to have shed all
his blood most liberally for thy sake. Secondly, that being lift up on high,
like an host, he might place himself, as a Mediator, between God the Father
and mankind, Being the only Mediator of God and men, 1 Timothy 2
reconciling the lowest things to the highest. Thirdly, to throw down the
Devils, the Princes of the air, quite out of the air into Hell; or at the
least to subdue their forces. Fourthly, that he might see thee with his eyes a
far off, draw thee unto him with the chains of his blood, receive thee at
thy coming with his arms spread, show thee his inward parts, and hide thee
in his wounds, bind thee unto him with the linkes of charity, have thee,
engraven in his hands, always before his eyes, keep thee imprinted in his
heart, and with his feet fastened to seek nothing but thy salvation. Fifthly,
that thou should no more fasten thine eyes upon the ground, but lift them up
on high, behold him a far off, run unto him, require of him thy salvation,
and all good things, think upon him always in all thy business, follow his
life, and fulfill his Commandments. Here do thou speak, whatsoever thy
spirit shall put into thy mouth.

And they crucified with him two Thieves, Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Joan. 19 Isa. 53.
one on the right hand, and the other on the left, and Jesus in the midst:
And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says: and he was reputed with the
wicked.
COnsider first, the malice of the Jews, who by this ignominy endeavored to
deface the name of Christ and in stead of the Messiah, to make him reputed a
notorious thief. But Christ used this their sin to show forth his own
glory, to prepare our salvation, and to give hope to all sinners. For first,
whereas there were three nailed on the Cross, and he placed in the midst, as
the chief offender: yet he alone with his Cross is glorious unto the whole
world. Secondly, dying between two sinners, he paid the ransom for all
sins. Thirdly, he gave hope of pardon to all sinners, and did fore-shewe
that hereafter he would be conversant amongst sinners, and be always ready to
assist them, when they call for help, and never forsake them as long as they
live. Consider secondly, that he chose to die amongst thieves, rather the^
amongst other sinners. First, that whereas theft is a most grievous sin, which
both offends God, whose image it takes away, and also hurts our neighbor,
whom it depriueth both of goods and life, he might signify that there is no
offense so great, which is not cleansed by this his death, nor any man so
wicked, which may not obtain remission of sins. Secondly because every
sinner is a thief and a robber, which by his sin kills his own soul,
takes away honor from God, defiles his creatures, and depriueth the Church
of a lively member, that is, of himself, whom he has bereaved of spiritual
life. Consider 3. that ye good thief, as well as ye bad, suffered the
punishment and death of ye cross with Christ: but the one turned his
punishment to the benefit of his own salvation, and the other, to the hurt and
loss of his soul. That thou should understand, that Christ is always
present, both to good and bad in their afflictions, and does send them troubles
and miseries, to this end, yt they should remember themselves, and lift up
their eyes and hearts unto him. Do thou then pray unto God, that in all thy
tribulations thou may have recourse only to his divine help, and not be
over careful to use other means.

The 34. Meditation of the Title of the Cross.
And Pilate wrote the title of his cause upon his Cross, Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
Luc. 23. Joan. 19
and the superscription was over his head, and it was written in Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin.
COnsider first, that Pilate set up the Title of the cause of his death, and
used the words following. First, that thy Lord might be thought worthy of this
death, as a traitor, arrogating the name of a King unto himself; and that
Pilate might be cleared before Caesar of the crime of not condemning his
competitor of the kingdom. Secondly to be revenged of the Jews, who had
threatened to complain of him: for he mocked them, yt he had crucified their
king, and that king also, whom their ancestors had fore-tolde, so many ages
before, and had expected with so great affection and desire. These were the
causes, that moved Pilate to make that title. And Christ also our Lord
ordained this title for himself; but for far other reason, drawn from the
mystery of our salvation. First, that thou should know, that he suffered
this death of the Cross, not as a guilty person, but as a Savior, adorned
with all virtues, that he might rule thy soul, and that thou should submit
thy self to be wholly governed by him, who being nailed both hand and foot,
cannot hurt his beloved people, but offers the^ all salvation from his open
wounds. Secondly, to let thee understand, what merchandise are offered to thee
to be sold out of this shop of his Cross. For all houses and shops have
commonly their signs. Here then thou may find all salvation in Jesus, all
flowers of virtue in Nazareth, and all security in the King. Run thou hither
in all thy necessityes, Isa. 55.
and buy, and take what thou list, without money, or any other excha^ge, for
this merchant requires nothing of thee, but thy company, and thy love.
Thirdly, that thou may know by the Table set before the house, what doctrine
and Arts are read and taught in this school. For School masters use to
write before their gates, what things are taught within their houses. Here
thou may learn to be saved, to follow all virtues, to rule thy self, to
conquer thy enemies, to govern wisely others, that be under thy charge. Our
Mr. Christ does now teach from the chair of his Cross, even as he taught
being an Infant in the manger of the Stable. But thou perhaps desire an
easier chair. But such doctrine is not taught, hut out of such a chair: for
there is no way to salvation, but by the cross and by many tribulations; and
the habits of virtues are obtained by painful actions. If thou will rule thy
self perfectly and subdue thy enemies, the world, the flesh, and the Devil;
thou shall not seek after the ease of thy body; but thou shall be severe
against thy body, and pull it out of the power of the Devil by fasting,
watching, works of humility, contempt, and tribulations, according to the
example of this Master, Neither shall thou be able to govern others rightly,
if thou relyest only upon thy power and authority; except according to this
lesson of Christ thy teacher, thou do out of the very bowels of thy
charity, apply thy self wholly and all things in thee to the profit and good
of thy subjects. Fourthly, that by this title thou may feel, of what force
the sign of the Cross is, which thou make with thy hands. For it is not a
iugling trick, or a fly flappe, as the blaspheming enemies of the cross do
term it: But it is the virtue and power of Christ, for the safety of all
believers; that thou being signed therewith, may be known by thy badge to
be the servant of the Messiah thy King; and be a terror to the Devil; and have
entrance into the house of Christ, and that all thy actions may tend to the
glory of God and to thy own salvation. Consider secondly, that this Title was
written in diverse languages. First, because it concerns all men to know this
King; and therefore it was set in a high place, that thou may behold it a
far off, stand still, read, understand and follow this King, forsaking all
other masters, whom thou have hitherto served. Secondly, because the crucified
Messiah is to be known and praised in all Languages. Consider thirdly, the
manner of the writing. A part of this Title being preserved with great devotion
of Christians at Rome in the Church of the Holy Cross in Jerusalem does
declare unto us: First, that the Title was of wood; Secondly not written with a
pen, but graven with iron; Thirdly, yt the Hebrew was first, then the Greek,
and lastly the Latin; Fourthly, that the Greek and Latin was written like
the Hebrew from the right hand to the left.

.SVNERAZANEI

ALL which things are not without their mysteries. For first these three
languages only were set upon ye Cross, which were most usual at that time,
and so continue until this day: the Hebrew for the Jews, the Greek for the
East Church, and the Latin for the West. For seeing that all Learning is
written in these tongues, the Scriptures in Hebrew, Philosophy, and Rethoricke
in Greek and Latin; Christ taught us hereby, yt there is neither any divine
knowledge, nor humane learning and eloquence of any force, except it be
sanctified by the blood of Christ, and referred to the glory of him crucified.
And therefore the holy Church uses these languages only in her divine
service, as the most common, and those that are consecrated with the blood of
our Lord. Secondly, the title was engraven, because it should last for ever;
and in wood, because by the wood he shall always reign over them, whom the
wood had ouerthrown. Thirdly, the Hebrew was first in order, which the rest do
imitate: For our salvation is from the Jews, to whose divine Scriptures all
humane wisdom is to be directed. Fourthly, they are written from the left
hand to ye right, to signify, that if thou desire to be exalted by wisdom
with Christ, thou must humble thy self, and not be proud in thy own conceit.
For knowledge puffs up, 1 Corr. Iac. 3.8.
and wisdom without Christ is earthly, carnal, and diabolical. Fifthly, the
Greek is before the Latin: for first the Grecians, and then the Latins were
converted to the faith, and leaving the manners and customs of their
forefathers, followed that doctrine, which God gave to the Jews in the
Hebrewe language,: that thou should not rely upon thine own wisdom, but
follow them with thy whole heart, whom thou know to be the servants of God.
Pray our Lord to ingraue this title in thy heart.

Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews. Joan. 19.

COnsider first, and mark every word of this title. (Jesus) a Savior: which
name our Lord received, when he first shedd his blood for thee. For then
seeking thy salvation, he gave part of his blood as a pledge, that he would
aftewrards give it all for thee. He then received at thy hands circumcision,
which was the sign of a sinner, (even as it is the sign of a thief to be
boared through the ears:) that the eternal Father omitting thee a sinner
might satisfy his wrath upon his son. This name until that day was obscure,
and of small reputation; but being fastened to the Cross it became so
glorious, that In the name of Jesus every knee is bowed. Phil. 2.
(Of Nazareth) not of Bethlehem, although he were borne in Bethlehem. First,
because there was a greater miracle and benefit wrought in Nazareth by the
incarnation and conception of our Lord, then by his Nativity in Bethlehem.
Secondly, because Nazareth signifies flourishing and Christ is an oderiferous
flower hanging on the Cross, which renders unto us the wholesome fruit of
grace and glory. (King) who being crowned with a Diadem clothed with blood
like a purple roabe, reigns upright, and fast tied by the feet, ready to
help thee; with his hands boared through because he would not keep his
guiftes, but bestow them plentifully upon thee; and with his arms spread,
that he may embrace thee, when thou come. He did not write Bishop, or
Priest, although he did the office of a Priest, but, King: both because he
once by himself immolated the bloody sacrifice; Heb. 10 Ezo 19 1 Pet. 2
by which he did consummate the sanctified, and reigns for ever and ever; and
also because it is a priestly kingdom, and a kingly priesthood, where Christ
being God is king, doing all things in power; and Christ being man is Priest,
obtaining all things by sacrifice. (Of the Jews) sent first to the Jews, not
to the gentiles. For I am not sent (says our Lord) but to the sheep which
perished of the house of Israel; Mat. 15 Romans 15.
and the gentiles do honor God for his mercy: that thou may thank God,
that the Messiah was taken from the Jews, and offered unto thee; and show thy
self in praising God a true Jew, not by carnal birth, but by spiritual
circumcision of thy vices, and true confession of thy sins. Consider
secondly, the true cause of the Cross was to save thee, to adorn thee with
virtues, and to govern thee sweetly. Pray thy Lord to suffer none to rule in
thee, but only himself.

Therefore many of the Jews read this title, for the place where Jesus was
crucified was near the City. Therefore the Priests said to Pilate: do not
write, King of the Jews but that he said, I am King of the Jews: Pilate
answered: what I have written, I have written.
COnsider first, that many Jews did see and read these holy words: but they
understood them not, and therefore scorned them: that thou may learn, that
none scoff at divine things, the holy Ceremonies of the Church, the Doctrine
and life of Saints, but only they which understand them not. Therefore because
it is written; He shall mock the mockers; Pro. 1.
and, I will laugh in your destruction: do thou take heed, and refrain from
these blasphemous scoffings. Secondly, because the name of Jesus was to be
highly honored, and this title to be celebrated over the whole world, and the
Cross it self to be imprinted in kings foreheads; therefore it was convenient
to have it first laughed at and scorned. For even as a brazen vessel does
shine brightest, after it has been fowled, and rubbed with dyrt and clay; so
he shall be most glorious, which has suffered most shame, and vexation for
Christ. Yield not then to thy afflictions, nor be dismayed, since there is so
great glory provided for thee: Consider secondly, that Christ was crucified not
far from the City: for though he be thrown out by the inhabitants of the
City, and of this world; yet because it is proper always to him to spare and
to be merciful, he goes not far, but stays hard by, knocking continually
at the gates of our heart, to try, if he may be let in. Consider thirdly, that
the wicked cannot endure the very name of the kingdom of Christ: because the
Cross of Christ is distastefull to sinners, who choose rather to have a
delicate king, then one nailed to the Cross. This was the cause (as St.
Damascene testifies) why the Jews crucified Christ with his face turned from
the City, Lib. 4. Act. 11. Cap. 13
and looking toward the gentiles; because neither they nor their children
should ever receive him for their Messiah. Give thou thanks unto Christ, that
he would behold the gentiles from his Cross, think upon thee, and bring thee
to the knowledge of him. Pray him never to turn his eyes from thee. Consider
fourthly, Pilates answer. He indeed set on this title, but moved thereunto
by the instinct of God. Therefore that ought not to be undone, which by God had
been done: for the glory of the Cross, and the kingdom of Christ, which is
his Church, will stand and continue, though thou should forsake it. For if
thou will refuse this King and his kingdom, another shall be called and
receive the Crown. Remember the holy Ointment and consecrated Oil in thy
baptism, and conformation; by which was imprinted in thee the title and sign
of the Cross, that the mark and badge of Christ might remain in thee (as
oil does penetract, is not easily washed off) and that the writing made upon
thee by the finger of God, Apoc. 3.
might always be imprinted in thy soul. Pray then our Lord to ingraue in thee
his new name, and the name of his holy City, and write thee also in the book
of everlasting life.

The 35. Meditation of the first word of Christ
But Jesus said,
COnsider first, what thy Lord in these great pains of the Cross did do, say
or think, when as amongst all those torments he found no comfort, neither
outwardly by men, nor inwardly in his own soul. If he moved his body, the
wounds of the nails tormented him; if his head, the thorns ran in deeper
and pricked him; if he stirred not at all, his torment was intolerable over
his whole wearied body. Think thou yppon these things in all thy labors and
afflictions which thou suffer for thy Lord. He reproved no man, although he
were slaundered diverse ways. But because the mouth speaks from the
abundance of the heart, his words even upon the Cross were directed to thy
profit and salvation, and do declare most manyfestly, that he prayed to his
Father incessantly for thee, when by reason of his torments he was not able to
utter one word. Consider secondly, his swan-like song, and note the last words
of thy Lord, which he spoke to thee at the point of death. For even as the
voice of the Serpent, hyssing out of the Tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, instilled the poison of sin; so the last words of Christ from the
Tree of the Cross were very effectual for our salvation, and full of burning
fervor, as proceeding from the depth of infinite charity. He spoke with a
loud voice, and weeping tears; with great affection, and deep sighs; in few
words, but with many tears, mixed with blood streaming down from his head.
His tears watered his prayers, Heb. 5
and his blood adorned them; his eyes pierced his Fathers ears, his sighs
moved his heart. Do thou listen to these words, mark them diligently, and
gather the fruit thereof. For by these seven words the words and forms of
the seven Sacraments are sanctified, the seven guiftes of the holy Ghost are
obtained, and the seven deadly sins are driven away. Consider thirdly, (but
Jesus said) First whilst the Jews were busy in crucifying, tormenting, and
mocking him, Jesus as if he had not marked these things, yea rather that he
migh render good for evil, said. Secondly, he, who hitherto in his own
cause, to the admiration of all men held his peace, and could not be brought to
speak, but being adjudged; and had also abstayned from the most just defense
of himself: now in the midst of his torments is not silent in thy most
unjust cause, but being not entreated, entreats, yea and entreats with most
effectual words. Jesus said: who? the Son of God. To whom? to God the
Father. Where? upon the Cross. When? being ready to dye, and his vital
spirits being spent. How? not sitting, nor lying easily; but upright upon his
feet, with his hands lift up and spread abroad, like Moses in former times,
Ezo. 17.
and all bleeding. For whom? for sinners, who were careless of their own
salvation: for Christ and his frtends pray for sinners, Heb. 5.
before sinners pray for themselves. What? he craves mercy, offering his
prayers and supplications, appealing from this cruel sentence of the Jews
(his blood be upon us and upon our children) to a better sentence and full of
mercy, and desiring, that this cruel sentence might be made frustrate. Before
whom? openly, in the hearing of his enemies, to teach them mercy and
sweetness; and in the presence of his Mother, and of his friends, both because
they should be witnesses of his pardoning them, and also that they should
never pray for the revenge of this sin. O excellent speech of highest merit,
and worthy to be imitated by all men, full of labor, charity, mercy, and
piety! Have confidence then in Christ, and pray him, who by speaking first for
sinners, before he spoke for his Mother, left to us a testimonye how much he
esteems the salvation of sinners, that he will vouchsafe to have continual
care of thee now in Heaven.

Luc. 23
Father forgive them.
PAuse upon every word. (Father) he does not say, Lord, which is a name of
severity and justice, but, Father, which is a name of mercy, and of the new
Testament, given unto us in this place by the blood and merits of Christ: that
even as he would be our Brother, so we should have all one father in Heaven. He
says therefore O Father, know me thy Son; the Father will deny nothing to
his son: I came into the world to this end, that thou should receive thine
enemies for thy children. Hear me then praying for them. For even as the
prayers of the Priests in the Church shall hereafter be very effectual, which
shall conclude in my name in these words, through Christ our Lord: so I do
now pray unto thee my Father, thorough me thy only begotten Son. Therefore
as thou love me thy Son, so receive these my prayers. For I ascended this
cross, and have suffered all these stripes that I might obtain mercy and
pardon for them. If therefore thou do reject the prayers of thy son, and
not hear thy son, thou shall impose a greater torment on me, then the Cross
it self; which I suffer, that I might take away a greater evil, that is, that
I might turn away thy wrath from them. Spare therefore the great dolors of thy
Son, least he seem to have endured them in vain. Thou give reward to others
labors; I desire only this reward for my pains, that thou will forgive these
men. (Forgive) here our Lord does the office of a Priest: for he prays for
the sins of the people, and he cries, Heb. 5.
not only as a Priest but as a sacrifice, desiring not a free pardon, but
offering a full satisfaction. His wounds cry, his blood cries, his spittings,
his pains, and all his members cry (Forgive;) accept of these torments for
their sins; I have paid their debtes; I give my blood for the price, my
pains for the ransom, my life in satisfaction, my body and soul for a
sacrifice. Be thou therefore merciful: for this is a copious redemption. A hard
thing is required, to wit, yt the Father should forget the death of his only
begotten Son, and of such, and so gteat a Son: but the Son beggeth, and
he beggeth with his blood. Secondly he asks it not conditionally, as he
prayed for himself in the Garden, If it be possible, if thou will, if it may
be done; but absolutely, (Forgive:) Both that thou may learn to pray to
God for pardon of thy sins, and for his divine grace, without any condition,
because that has always relation to Gods honor: And also that thou should
freely forgive thy neighbors faults without any condition. Thirdly, he
prays to have them forgiven presently, and not to be deferred till after his
death. For he would not leave this life, till peace was made with God.
Parents, when they are dying, do often leave unto their children small store
of goods, and those entangled with many difficulties, charges, debts, and
contentions: But Christ before his death paid all debts with his own blood;
took away all difficulties, and charges, and made a peace and reconciliation
with his Father. He says therefore, O Father forgive, and that by and by:
For the time of having mercy on him comes, P^al. 101.
for the time comes; to wit, the hour of sacrifice, the day of satisfaction,
the time of forgiveness, the last instant of my life, in which being presently
to yield up my breath, I now propound my last petition, and entreat only this;
O Father forgive them. Fourthly, he says not forgive the sins already
committed; but only (forgive,) even those evils, which they shall hereafter
commit against me, their irrisions their blasphemies, the bitterness of the
vinegar, my death, and the wound in my side: that thou also should quickly
forgive thy enemies, and remit all things, keeping no rancor at all in thy
heart. Fifthly, he says not, I forgive; both because the offense against his
Father grieved him more th^^ his own torments; and also because being intentive
upon the happiness, which should redound to all the world by this his Passion,
he seemed to esteem all the evils, which the Jews did unto him, rather as a
benefit, then any hurt. Like as a man, having a grievous ulcer in his side, if
his enemy, thinking to kill him, should wound him in that place, whereby ye
ulcer should be opened, and the corruption let out, would be glad of that
wound, which was the cause of his cure: So desirous was our Lord of thy
salvation, that he rejoiced at those his pains, which were the cause of so
great good unto thee. (Them) Note first that he says not, these wicked
Crucifiers, these Hangmen, these adversaries and enemies, both because thou
should refrain from all evil words and reproaches; and also because thy
Lord reputeth no man his enemy, who paid the price of his death for all men,
and offers salvation to every one, loving dearly even these very Jews his
executioners, Romans 11.
not for their own evil works, but for their Fathers sakes, who were holy
and just men: and therefore speaking of his stripes, Zach. 13.
(I was whipped (says he) in the house of them that loved me:) Not by them
that loved me, but the Sons of them, that loved me, that good might be done
unto the Children for their holy Fathers sakes. Secondly, (them) in the plural
number; not only those, which conspire now against my death, but also to all
those, who at any time by their sins have given cause of this my Passion. For
thou shall not be excluded from this prayer, whose sins have been cause of
our Lords death; and thou may have hope of pardon, if thou will join thy
prayer with the prayer of Christ. For if the prayer of Christ did profit them,
which never required it doubtless it will profit thee, requiring it of him,
and praying together with him.

For they know not what they do. Luc. 23.

COnsider first, that Christ, to whom all judgment is given, and whom his
enemies had offended, did not take upon him the office of a Judge, or an
accuser, but rather of a defender and patron. The Jews sought how to accuse
him, and found nothing worthy of accusation in him. Our innocent Lord, that was
offended, seeks how to excuse the offense; and the malice of the offense was
such, that nothing could be alleged for the extenuating thereof, but only
ignorance. And yet this ignorance, being voluntary, could no more excuse the
Jews, then him, who wittingly and willingly hides his eyes, because he will
not see him, whom he strikes, or kills. If Christ then in the midst of his
torments mittigateth the sins of his torturers, will he not now before his
Father excuse their sins, who call upon his name with faith, devotion, and
sorrow for their sins? Consider secondly, that the Father answered not his
Son by word; and yet Christ was heard for his reverence. Heb. 5
For God when he denied his Sons request, answered in the garden by an
Angel: but, when he granted it, he answered not in word, but in deed.
Joan. 19.
For first he restrained all creatures from rising against his enemies in
revenge of his death, all which would have fought for their creator, if this
prayer of Christ had not stayed them. Secondly, he reduced one of the Thieves
unto penance. Thirdly, at the death of his Son he changed the mind of the
Centurion, and others. Fourthly, upon the solemnity of Penticost he converted
sometimes three, and sometimes five thousand of ye same Jews unto his faith.
Therefore God the Father not by outward words, but by inward consent answered
his Son in this manner: O my Son, I grant that, which thou requirest, and
laying aside all wrath, I open the fountains of mercy, and I offer grace, and
pardon of sins, Justice, and adoption of children, as well unto these, who
have afflicted thee, as also unto all the Nations of the world for ever and
ever, so as they will admit mercy offered unto them. For I will compel none
against their will, but I give power to all to return into grace and favor
with me, if they will, and to be made the Sons of God, and to come into my
inheritance in Heaven, so as they will be partakers of the merit of this my
Passion through faith and the Sacraments. Do thou cry out now with great
affliction: great are thy mercyes; therefore we give thanks to thee our Lord
God. And pray him to bestow the gift of wisdom upon thee, that thou may
know and admire his bounty and goodness; and driving away all envy, to give unto
thee the virtue of charity, yt thou may be inflamed with the love of thy
neighbor.

The 36. Meditation of the division of his Garments.
Joan. 19
Then the Soldiers, when they had crucified him, took his garments, (and made
four parts, to every Soldiour a part) and his coat. And the coat was without
seame wouen all over.
COnsider first the poverty of Christ thy Lord: he had not change or many
suites of apparel, nor the same of silk and other costly matter* but his
garments were few and poor, to defend him only from the cold, and to cover
his nakedness. And by tradition it is delivered (as Euchemius witnesses) that
his coat without seame was the work of the mother of God, In Mat. 27
which she did weaue with her own hands for her son, when he was a little
infant: which grew miraculously as our Lord grew, and was not worn nor torn
out in all that long time: the like whereof is rehearsed in holy Scripture to
have happened to the children of Israel: that thou may learn by the
example of thy Lord to forsake all curiosity and superfluity, as well in
apparel as in other things. Consider secondly, the liberality of thy spouse:
he had already given his body, shed his blood, and spent his youthful years
for thee: and now he gives a few poor garments, leaving nothing for
himself, but nails, thorns, spittings, and blood, clodded on his body.
Behold the riches of thy spouse, who has no place to rest his head, but on the
thorny pillowes of his crown. Do thou ask him, where he feeds, where he
will rest at noone, Cant. 1.
in this heat of his charity? and esteeming this ignominious poverty of the
Cross, to be the greatest riches, run naked to him, that is naked. Consider
secondly the scoffing of the Soldiers in this division of his garments, and
casting of lotts, when every one catched a piece for himself, as of the attire
of the King of the Jews. Do thou also run and gather up at least the hemme
of his garment, that is to say, esteem highly of all those things, which any
way appertain to the passion of Christ, as, his Sacraments, his words, his
Church, and his iustifications. Consider fourthly, that the four executioners
of Christ cut his vestment into four parts; that the four Evangelists should
sow up our Lords coat in the four corners of the world: to whom be thou
also an aid and helper, and by thy holy life and doctrine join together the
Church of Christ, which is cut and divided by many Haeresies. Cover the poor
of Christ with thy garments, and pray our Lord, Psalm. 10.
that he being now clothed with light, as with a garment, will by the light
of his grace cloth thy nakedness, and with mercy adorn thy soul.

Then they said amongst themselves, Joan. 19 Mat. 24. Psalm. 21. Luc. 23 Mat. 16.
let us not cut, but let us cast lotts for it, whose it shall be; that the
Scriptures might be fulfilled, saying: they parted my garments among them, and
for my coat they did cast lotts. Therefore dividing his garments, they cast
lotts upon them, which part every one should take.
COnsider first the consultation of the Soldiers about the dividing and
casting of lotts for his garments. The counsel was good (let us not cut it)
but the advice was wicked (let us cast lotts whose it shall be) Thou learnest
first, that God is present at ye counsel of the wicked, that he may
restrain their malice, as he infatuated the counsel of Achitophell.
Secondly, 2 Reg. 17
that the effect of our Lords prayer did here appear, when the garment
without seame remained whole: whereby is signified, that the Church shall never
be divided by any malice of man, but that it shall continue to the end of the
world whole, and entyre under one visible head, Mat. 16.
neither shall the gates of hell prevail against it. For although the outward
garments of our Lord may be divided, that is to say, diverse companies and
societies of men may be distinguished by diverse laws, fashions, and customs;
yet the coat without seame being next to the body of our Lord, to wit, the
Catholic Church, wouen all all over throughout, spread over the universal
world, and orderly distinguished with several offices in several members,
agreeing in the Communion of Saints, wouen as it were with diverse threedes,
shall never loose his wholenesse and integrity. There shall fall from it
certain small boughs or branches, like withered leaves from trees; but the
Coat of our Lord shall be purged, and not violated thereby. Take thou heed,
least thou fall from this unseamed Coat of Christ, but remain in it as an
excellent piece of workmanship; and because this Coat was begun to be wouen
in the womb of the Virgin Mother, (for there the Son of God joined humane
nature to himself, and espoused the Church,) do thou commend it to the same
mother, by whose prayers and help it may remain untouched and vncorrupt.
Consider secondly their twice casting of lotts for his garments, to wit, First,
for the parts of his garments, and afterward, for his Coat without seame.
Whereby is declared, First, yt Christ himself, and all things belonging unto
him, were subject to the will and scoffings of wicked men. Secondly, that
wicked men do obtain the coat of Christ, that is to say, the cure of souls,
and also part of his garments, that is, the external goods of the Church, not
worthily, but by chance and fortune, and possess them by other means, then by
the will of our Lord the true owner of them: for they thinking of nothing less
then of him crucified, divide and take away his goods, himself looking upon
them, and holding his peace. Thirdly, that according to St. Ambrose the parts
of the garments of our Lord, Lib. 10 in Luc. ca. 23
that is to say, his divine gifts and graces, are distributed and given to
every one by lot, that is to say, by the secret council of God, and not by
our own election; but the Coat, that is, Faith, is given whole to every man.
If perhaps thou be a Clergy man, called into the service of our Lord,
gather under the cross of our Lord that part of his inheritance, which is
given unto thee. Take heed of seeking many parts and benefices, and use that
part before him crucified, which thou have received: for he beholds thee, and
observes how thou do administer his goods. Consider thirdly, that the
Prophets long before did prophecy of this casting of lots for his garments:
that thou may learn, First, that this casting of lottes for his garments
was a matter of great moment, which so many ages before, Holy men, and Kings
foresaw and lamented. Secondly, of what things the ancient Prophets and Holy
men did frame their meditations even before the coming of the Messiah, to wit,
of the poverty, nakedness, and reproaches of our Lord, that thou being exercised
in the same thoughts and cogitations, might be incyted to compassion and
imitation. Consider fourthly, that these Vestments and holy Relics of our
Lord were permitted to remain in the custody of wicked men, yt thou may know,
first that all men, which are called to holy offices, are not Holy men and
acceptable to God; secondly, that holiness is offered to all men in this life.
Pray thou unto God, to impart some of his Sanctity unto thee, and suffer it
never to be taken from thee.

And the Soldiers did these things: and sitting kept him, Joan. 19 Mat. 27.
Luc. 23.
and the people stood beholding.
COnsider 1. (And truly the Soldiers did these things) as if he should say,
Christ praying in the torments of the Cross, his Mother suffering ye sword of
sorrow, his friends weeping a far off, the Soldiers did these things.
Whilst the Church suffers persecutions, whilst the poor perish with hunger,
whilst the just man is punished; the wicked play and are merry, they cast lots
and dice, they are idle, and spend their time in vanities, neither is there any
man, which suffers upon the contrition of Joseph. And what do thou thy
self, Amos. 6.
whilst Christ, and his Church is afflicted? Consider secondly, that Christ is
kept more carefully, then the Thieves, least his disciples or any others should
free him from his punishment. But as it was then, so now also the fervor of
Catholics is too cold, to adventure any danger for ye name of Christ. Do
thou with all care keep Christ in thy heart, and conserve his grace. Consider
3. the people stood beholding, (for so it is to be read, for, expecting) some
of them scoffing, some marking every thing. Do thou draw near, and standing
on thy feet, ready to fulfill the will and commandment of thy Lord, behold,
and constantly look upon him fastened to the Cross. Do not slightly pass
over all his members, all his pains, all his reproaches: but behold him with
a constant view, and do not rest in the outward form only, but rather
meditate on those things, which lie hidden within. For under these wounds,
spittings and thorns, lurketh the hidden Manna, which no man knows, but he
which receives it. Stand then before this table of the Cross, like a little
dog before his masters table, expecting and observing the gesture of him, that
sits, and catching every thing that is cast from the table. Do not imitate
the people, curiously beholding Christ, and going to the church for vanity
only, and hearing divine service carelessly: But rather imitate the Virgin
Mother, Luc. 2
Who let no word pass, which she did not keep, Luc. 2
observing it in her heart. And pray thy Lord to cast large gifts unto thee
from his Cross.

The 37. Meditation of his mocking upon the Cross.
And they that passed by, blasphemed him, Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
shaking their heads and saying: Vah, thou that destroyest the Temple of God,
and in three days do build it again, save thy self. If thou be the
Son of God, come down from the Cross.
COnsider first, that Christ our Lord was mocked upon the Cross, by 4. sorts
of people, by those which passed by, by the Priests and Seniors, by the
Soldiers, and by the Thieves, that is, by all sorts of men; Jews, and
Gentiles; Priests and lay persons; Senate and the people, the executioners of
Justice, and those that were condemned by justice. For we deride and mock
Christ by all kinds of sins, contemning his promises, dispising his
threatenings, rejecting his benefits, breaking his Commandments, and neglecting
his counsels. Consider secondly, the difference between the words of Christ,
and the words of ye Jews; the words of our Savior, and the words of the
world. He being careful prays with tears, they being careless mock him
whilst he is praying. For the custom of the wicked is to scoff at all
things: and therefore in the Scripture they are called (irrisores) mockers; Pro.
1.
to whom God does threaten mocking again, when that shall happen to them,
which they feared. Have compassion here upon the spouse of thy soul, who in
the last hour of death received no comfort, but mockings: from which they
ought then especially to have abstained when he was ready to die, in the
midst of his torments. Consider thirdly, they blasphemed, Who passed by
(...), which may be interpreted, Walking, that he may be said to have been
mocked either by travelers, or else by such as walked up and down by the
Cross. Hereby are noted light and unconstant men, who carelessly say their
divine and holy office, who slightly run over their prayers, who in the
Church at the time of Mass and of Sermons have wandering thoughts, whose
minds do not rest only on God, but are carried wandering up and down after
sundry delights and pleasures of the world. Consider fourthly, what these men
did. First they passed by irreuerently. Secondly, they shaked their heads.
Thirdly by these very gestures they did blaspheme: for they signified hereby,
that he was worthy of all reproach that he might, to be taken from amongst
them, and that his doctrine and life was to be contemned and despised.
Fourthly, Isaias, according to the exposition of St. Hierome, fore-shewed two
other kinds of mockinges. Over whom did ye play? over whom did ye gape,
Isa. 57.
and put forth your tongue. Therefore they vpbrayded him with open mouth and
stretched out tongue. And even as Stageplayers in the Theaters use to make many
sportes before the Princes, which are placed in high rooms to behold them: so
these mocking actors used many kinds of scornful behauiours before this king
of the Jews. Consider fifthly, what words they spoke. First they falsify his
words, scoff at his preaching, and prophesies, and wrest his holy words to
an evil sense. Secondly, they ^est at his miracles: if thou have wrought true
miracles, show now thy power, and save thy self. Thirdly, they offer wrong
against his person, whom they deny to be the son of God. Do thou believe
the words of God, admire his miracles, preserve thy mind free from all error
in faith, receive Christ the son of God, and never forsake or pass by him.
For they which in this life passing by Christ, do blaspheme him, shall in the
next world pass by heaven and fall into hell.

In like manner with them did the chief Priests, and the Scribes, Luc. 13.
and Seniors deride him; and mocking they said one to another: he saved
others, himself he cannot save: if he be the king of Israel, let him now
descend from the Cross, that we may see, and believe him: he trusted in God;
let him deliver him now, if he will: for he said, that I am the son of God.
COnsider first, that the Priests religious men, and Magistrates did, contrary
to the dignity of their order, insult over a crucified man, and that they were
the leaders or captains of the people in these irrisions, For St. Luke says
thus: the Princes derided him with them. So great a desire they had to obscure
the glory of our Lord, and that there should never after be any mention made of
him; that all sorts of people thought him unworthy of commiseration even in
the midst of his torments being ready to yield up his ghost, and had
contemptuously rejected him as accursed, and as the shame and scorn of the
people, to be mocked both by the noble and vulgar people. But there is no
council against God, who changed this great ignominy of the people into
greater glory. Consider secondly, that Christ was blasphemed more grievously by
no kind of people, then by the Priests. For they provoked one another mutually
to scorn him, and also abused the words of the Scriptures, which were
fore-spoken of these blasphemies by the Prophet, Psalm. 21.
which they recyted by turns like the verses of a psalm. Sap. 6
Thou see therefore, that the faults of superiors are most grievous, who also
shall suffer mighty torments for their sins. Consider thirdly, and mark
their words: First they vpbraide him with his good deeds done to the people,
and scoff at his miracles. Secondly, they laugh at his royal dignity.
Thirdly, they object against him his trust in God. Fourthly, they contemn the
the majesty of the Son of God, and maliciously mock at the things, which
should bring honor unto Christ. The Magi did adore him in the stable with
gifts, as God, Mat. 2.
King, and man: and these men, after so many miracles showed unto them, to
mock and deride the son of God, the king of kings, and man trusting in God.
Consider 4. their evil collections: First, if he have saved others he ought
to save himself also. 2. If he be the king of Israel he ought to descend
down from the Cross. Thirdly, if he trust in God as the Son of God, God will
deliver him. But first he did not therefore save himself; because he would
save others by his death. Secondly, he did not therefore descend down from the
Wood, because the King of Israel should reign from the Wood. Thirdly, God did
not therefore deliver his Son, because he trusted, not to be delivered by him
from the Cross, but by the Cross to be exalted above al creatures, and to
place thee in glory with him. Consider fifthly, that evil men give council to
descend, the devil being the author, who said, If thou art the Son of God,
throw thy self down. Whereby thou may learn, that all those descend from
the height of perfection, which cast away the Cross from them. Do thou pray
devoutly unto Christ to rule and guide thee from his Cross, that is from his
throne of mercy, and also to take thee up with him unto the Cross.

The Soldiers also mocked him, coming, and offering Vinegar, saying, Luc. 23.
if thou art King of the Jews, save thy self.
COnsider first, the great contempt, wherewith our Lord was mocked by these
base tormentors both in words and deeds. First (they mocked him) using wanton
and scurrile gestures toward him. Secondly, they came nearer to him being
naked, and looked more curiously upon him, according to that of the Psalmist:
Psalm. 21
But they considered, and looked on me. Thirdly, they offered him vinegar,
like Cupbearers, offering a cup to their King. Fourthly, in their words they
allude to the title of the Cross. King of the Jews: they say he is a
rediculous King, which cannot save himself, upon whom depends all the
safety of his subjects. Consider secondly, that wicked men do acknowledge no
other commodity or saffetie, but only in this life: but good men desire and
seek after the salvation of their souls, as a thing which is common to them
with the Angels; respecting less the safety of their bodies, which the beasts
do enjoy, as well as they. Consider thirdly, the infinite love of Christ thy
Lord, and spouse of thy soul toward thee; who having once ascended the Cross
for thy sake, could never be moved to come down from thence, neither by
torments, nor by mockings, nor by the sorrow of his mother standing by him, nor
by the tears of John his kinsman, nor by the tears of Marie Magdalen, nor by
any sorrow of his friends, although he knew, that thereby he might easily end
all their troubles. Do not thou therefore, when thou have undertaken any thing
for the love of thy spouse, and for his honor, leave it off for any cause,
although the world frown thereat; although thy flesh be repugnant; although
thy mother show thee her breasts, wherewith she gave thee suck; and although
thy old Father lie in the gate: pass thou on, and tread upon thy Father; for
it is piety, to be cruel in this cause. Pray unto God, to give thee this
constancy of mind, and setting before thine eyes him that was crucified, take
courage before him, and in his presence determine of all thy business.

The 38. Meditation of the second word of Christ.
And the same thing did the Thieves, Mat. 27. Mat. 13.
which were crucified with him, vpbraide unto him: and one of the thieves,
which were hanged, blasphemed him, saying: If thou art Christ, save thy self,
and us: but the other answering, blamed him, saying: Neither do thou fear
God, which art in the same condemnation? We indeed suffer justly, for we
receive worthy punishment for our facts, but this man has done no evil.
COnsider first, the ignominy offered to our Lord in this place, either by one
thief, according to St. Epiphanius, Haere. 66 8. lib. 3. de con^. Eua^. c. 16.
^^o^. 7. ad Phil.
and St. Augustine; or else in the beginning by both, acording to St.
Chrysostom, but the one repe^ting, and the other perseuering. For they were
most wicked and infamous men, and did worthily suffer, the accursed death of
the Cross. But it did much more afflict our Saviors heart, that he, for
whom, and with whom he did shed his blood, should presently be carried
headlong into Hell. Learn hereby, that commonly he, which lives ill, dies
ill, as he lived ill, except he be changed by Gods special grace. For a sinner
is stricken with his judgment, Aug. ser. 3 de number.
that dying he forgets himself, who living was forgetful of God. Consider
secondly the words of the evil Thief (If thou art Christ save thy self and
us:) First he wanted faith, who desired a miracle that he might believe.
Secondly, he desired temporal life and safety, after the manner of all
sinners, who have no care of their everlasting life to come. Thirdly, he spoke
this perhaps to please the Jews, which stood by: but it profited him nothing,
to get their favor; because ye world ever gives a false reward to her
followers. Fourthly he once uttered this railing speech, but being rebuked he
held his peace; being better then thy self, who art neither amended by good
admonition, nor well pleased with him that advises thee. Consider thirdly, the
mercy of Christ in the good. Thief, whose heart he did not only instruct by
outward signs, but also did mollify it by inward grace, so as he profited
more in three hours by hearing him teach from the chair of the Cross, then
the Apostles did in three years by following our Lord continually, and seeing
his miracles. For so great is the force of the cross of our Lord that it does
nor only move the sense, but also gives understanding to the hearing, and
adds affection to the understanding. Therefore this good thief being deprived
of all outward things, and having his body stretched upon the Cross, gave
openly all that was left unto him, to wit, he consecrated his heart and tongue
unto Christ. For he believed with his heart to justice, Romans 10
and with his mouth he confessed to salvation, being made a teacher from the
chair of the Cross, openly confessing Christ, and freely reproouing the vices
of the standers by. Consider fourthly the words of the good Thief, First with
great charity he rebuked his companion, when he sinned, before he craved any
thing for himself of our Lord; and he puts him in mind of his iminent
death, for sinners ought to be repressed with the fear of Hell, when they will
not be moved with Gods benefits. (Neither do thou fear God?) a bold
word, but worthy of a Martyr. None of these (says he) fear God; and dare
thou imitate them, being now presently to go before God thy Judge? Secondly,
he confesses his sin and receives the punishment of the Cross in
satisfaction. For it is a sign of a good man to confess his own faults, and
to extenuate the sins of other men, if he can. Thirdly he declares the
innocence of Christ: But this man has done no evil, which saying is true only
in Christ, and in his most holy Mother; for he has done no sin, neither is
their any fraud in his mouth. But because he did no sin, therefore he ought
to bear the sins of all men, and suffer the punishment thereof in his body.
The good Thief teaches us here, that we should not complain in adversities,
but confess our sins, and give glory to God openly, and convert our souls
earnestly unto God. Do thou imitate this thief: for death is at thy gates, or
at least lies in wait for thee. And pray our Lord to strike his saving fear
into thy heart.

And he said to Jesus: O Lord remember me, when thou shall come into thy
Kingdom. Luc. 23

COnsider first, that this good Thief fulfilled the parts of justice: First
he declyned from the evil, which he reprehended in his companion; and then
he did good turning unto Christ. Secondly, according to the doctrine of
Micheas, Michea. 6.
He exercised Judgment, grievously accusing his sin; he loved mercy,
admonishing his companion to conuertion; and he walked carefully with God, of
whom devoutly and humbly he craved pardon. Consider secondly, the several
fruits of the cross and affliction, according to the several dispositions of
men. The wicked are not amended, but rather blaspheme: the good confess their
fault, and come nearer unto God. Do not marvel then, if our Lord grant
prosperity in this world to the wicked, and affliction to the good; which he
does mercifully for these causes; both because the wicked should not offend
more deeply by their impatience, and the good be joined more firmly unto God;
and also yt the wicked may have some reward in this life, seeing they are to
be deprived of everlasting life, and that eternal reward may be reserved for
the good. Consider thirdly, every word of the thief: (O Lord) a word of
reverence, fear, and subjection: I submit and promise my self to be thy
servant and bondslaue: he does not say, O my Lord, For he speaks to the
Lord, creator, and possessor of all creatures. Remember me, a modest and
humble petition; I ask not a Kingdom, nor any honous; but only yt thou will
remember me, knowing that thou can not remember me, and not help me. I dare
desire this remembrance, though I am a sinner. 1. Because thou have admitted
other sinners praying unto thee. 2. Because thou have done so many and so great
things in favor of sinners. 3. Because I a sinner, having given over my will
of sinning, do now believe in thee with my whole heart, do entirely love
thee, and with my mouth do openly confess thee. 4. Because I ask nothing but
remembrance, and pray for nothing but mercy. 5. Because it is reason, that he
be partaker of thy rest and glory, whom thou have vouchsafed to be a
companion with thee in thy labors, torments, and death. When thou shall come
into thy kingdom. I acknowledge thee to be a King, but thy kingdom is not of
this world: I know, that the Angels expect thee at thy death, and a whole
Army of Servants, who shall not carry thee, as they did Lazarus, but shall
attend and follow the coming of thy own will and power. Admire thou the
says of this Thief, who alone, when all others blasphemed, did believe, and
detest thine own infidelity, who when ye whole world belieueth, do scarcely
believe; and pray Christ to increase thy faith, and bring thee into his
kingdom with this thief.

And Jesus said to him: Amen I say to thee, Luc. 23.
this day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
COnsider first, that Christ answered nothing to the thief blaspeming; that
thou might learn to pacify thy anger with the virtue of mildnes: and that
he approved the counsel of the other, who thought it requisite in necessity
to have recourse unto Christ; that thou may obtain the gift of council.
Consider secondly, that Christ as a Priest of the new Testament did forgive
sins, and as a Judge does assign merit and rewards. For to the just Thief
he promises glory; and to the unjust, to whom he appoints no crown of
Justice, he declares by his silence that the fire of Hell was prepared. For
Christ gives glory; but the pains of hell are not given by Christ, but rather
proceed from our sins, according as the Apostle faith: Who shall render to
every one according to his works: Romans 2.
to those truly, who according to patience in good work seek glory and
honor, and incorruption, life everlasting: But to those which are of
contention, and which do not yield unto the truth, but believe iniquity, wrath
and indignation: That is, it shall be rendered, not so much by the will of
Christ, as through the malice and merit of sin. Consider thirdly the
benignity of this King of the Jews. 1. He does not reject a man infamous for
theft; who beholds not the outward opinion of men, but the inward disposition
of ye heart. 2. He presently hears him confessing, and forgiueth his sins.
3. He gives more the^ was asked. Remembrance only was craved, glory is
promised, and the same to be rendered by and by, even the very same day.
Consider 4. the words of our Lord (Amen) this is a word of confirmation: for,
that thou may give credit to my words, I affirm it by yt word wc I never
use, but in affirming great and serious things, and I promise it to thee
openly before all these witnesses. (I say) I the truth, who cannot lie, whose
promise is effectual, I the Lord of the Kingdom dispose of mine own, and of
no bodies else. (To thee) not to all, least they might take occasion to defer
their pe^nance to the end of their life, but to thee alone, lamenting
earnestly, confessing thy sins, and making satisfaction for them by this thy
punishment: that if perhaps any sinner at the last instant of his death will
convert himself, he may by thy example conceive hope of pardon. For before we
sin, we ought to set before our eyes the innumerable sinners standing before
the Cross of our Lord, and yet obtaining no pardon, least our Lord perhaps
leave us, and we perish amongst them: for he, who has promised pardon to the
penitent, has not promised repentance to the sinner. But after our sin we
must remember the Thief, least we despair. (This day,) presently after thy
death, that thou may acknowledge the virtue of the Cross. For even as a
Conqueror carries his noble spoils in triumph to show the greatness of his
victory, so Christ, having gotten the victory over the Devil, took this
notable prey from him, and carried away the spoil, and lead this Thief with
him into triumph, who had before been a most faithful slave to the Devil.
(With me,) that thou, which have been partner with me in my pains, may
not be deprived of my Crown: and that thou may not seem to have suffered as
a thief, but to have triumphed as a Martyr with me. Thus Christ converted the
punishment of the Thief into Martyrdom; so as he which was brought as a
Thief unto the Cross, did by this his notable and public confession, receive
the Crown of his testimony, Aug. lib. 4 deami. and eius originie cap. 9.
as a Martyr with Christ the Prince of Martyrs. (Thou shall be,) to remain
for ever. (In,) the joys shall be so great, that thou shall not comprehend
them, but they shall receive thee entering into the^: they shall fill thee
within, and compass thee without, according to that saying: Enter into the
joys of thy Lord. Mat. 25.
(Paradise,) he says not, an earthly Paradise, wherewith the souls and
spirits of the blessed are not delighted; but the contemplation of the divine
nature, in which is a full satiety and delight of the mind. He calls it not
a Kingdom, as the thief had requested, but Paradise, (which name he had never
used before;) First because by this key of David, to wit, the Cross of our
Lord, the gate of Paradise is opened unto us, with the wood of the knowledge of
good and evil, being violated by sin, had locked up. Secondly because after
forty days he was to ascend into his heavenly mansion, and the place of the
blessed. Behold here the liberal gift of Christ thy Lord, and be of good
courage: for he which promised a kingdom to the penitent thief on the
Cross, will render no less reward to thee for thy labors spent all thy life
time in his service. But because Paradise is not promised by the crucified, but
only to him that was crucified, do thou (if thou will be a partner in this
Paradise) crucify thy flesh with the vices and concupiscences thereof; and
pray the spouse of thy soul to call thee to Heaven, with these words at the
hour of thy death.

The 39. Meditation of the third word on the Cross.
And there stood by the Cross of Jesus, Joan. 19.
his Mother, and his mothers sister Mary of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
COnsider first, that when the Apostles fled, the women followed our Lord
even unto the Cross. And his Mother is first named, both because she was more
fervent, then the others, and remained more constant; and also because it was
strange, that a mother could endure so great torments, especially of such a
Son; and lastly that thou may learn hereby, that it is not comely for
women's modesty to be present at the death of guilty persons, and yet that it
is very glorious for them to stay with the Mother of our Lord before the cross
of Christ, and to set that always before the eyes of their soul. Consider
secondly, why the Mother of our Lord would be present at his execution: surely
not of curiosity or lightness; but First, that she, who loved such a Son so
dearly, and had followed him in all places, might not forsake him at his death.
Secondly, to be ready to do him any service, or to give him any comfort, wc
lay in her power. Thirdly, that she might behold, not only the death of her
son, but also the manner of the redemption of man; by the co^templation
whereof she might inflame her zeal of the love of God. Consider thirdly why
Christ would have his Mother present at this spectacle. First, that she should
be a witness, that he had paid the price for the sins of all mankind.
Secondly, that she might see the feruor of his love toward us, and thereupon
undertake to be our Patron. Thirdly, that the Queen of all Saints should not
be deprived of the crown due unto Martyrs, but yt she should suffer ye most
noble martyrdom of all others. For other Martyrs suffered their own torments,
inflicted upon the^ by the hands of ye executioners: But ye Mother of our Lord
suffered ye torments of her son being derived unto her from the body of her son,
as Simeon prophesied of her: Luc. 2.
And thine own soul shall a sword pierce. Fourthly yt the presence of his
mother might increase ye matter of his pain. For the Evangelist did not
without cause say (His Mother) signifying thereby the mutual affections of them
both. Admire thou here two great lights obscured: Christ the greater light, the
son of Justice, Which illuminateth every man coming into this world; Joan. 1.
and the lesser light, Mary, fair as the Moon. The Sun is made black (says
the Apostle) as a sack of hairecloath; Apoc. 6.
and the Moon is made all like blood, the mother bleeding with the blood of
her son. Consider fourthly, that she sat not idly; nor lay down, as half
dead; nor ran up and down amazedly: but she stood. First for reverence unto
her Son, whom she saw hanging straight upon the Cross for thy sake.
Secondly, as one ready to obey, and do any service. Thirdly, constant, and of
a good courage, with an assured faith of the redemption of man, and of the
resurrection of her Son. Fourthly, as prepared herself to go up to the
cross, and, if need were, to suffer death for sinners. Consider fifthly, that a
few others stood by the cross with the Mother of our Lord, a Virgin, a
Widow, and a Sinner, being sorrowful and destitute of all comfort: that thou
may learn, First, that our Lord crucified on the Cross was given us by God
the Father, to be a comfort to the afflicted, a Patron to Widows, and
Orphans, and a preserver and protector of Virgins. Secondly, that Christ did
communicate the feeling of the grief of his Passion especially to those, whom
he loved most dearly. Mark therefore whether thou be moved with this
passion or not, for thereby thou may understand how much he loves thee.
Consider sixthly. There stood by the Cross of Jesus. Few do stand by the
cross of Christ. Some only walk by it, and lightly pass over the mysteryes
of Christ: others stand a far off, looking so upon it, as if the mysteries of
the Cross did not appertain unto them: others stand by the Cross of the
Thieves, who suffer the troubles of their pride, their riot, their covetousness,
and of their other vices. Near the cross of Christ no sinners are tolerated,
no light behavior is committed, nor no pleasures are sought after. Here is,
whatsoever the world abhors, poverty, subduing of the flesh, contempt, and
reproach: and all things are wanting, which the world desires and esteems.
Come thou to the Mother of Christ, as near the Cross as thou can; because
this way only leads those that weep and mourn unto Heaven; whilst others,
laughing, jesting, and blaspheming, fall down into Hell: And pray the virgin
Mother to assist thee at the hour of thy death, and to comfort thee in thy
troubles, who with such constancy did suffer the sorrows of her Son.

Therefore when Jesus saw his Mother, and the Disciple whom he loved, Joan.
19
standing, he said to his Mother: woman, behold thy Son.
COnsider first, the good order in our Lords words, first, he prayed his
Father for the salvation of sinners; next he gave spiritual goods to the
Thief, and assigned him Paradise; and lastly, he gives temporal comfort to
his dearly beloved Mother. That thou should learn: first, why Christ came
into the world, and dyed upon the Cross, to wit, to save sinners, of which
number thou art one. 1 Timothy 1.
Secondly, that thou should be careful of the salvation and perfection of
thy neighbors, before thou applyest thy mind to worldly things. Consider
secondly, that he, who from his childhood had followed Christ, and had
dedicated his youthful years unto our Lord, stood by his Cross, when all the
rest hid themselves, and did receive for his reward the co^mendatio^ of
constancy, and the keeping of ye Virgin Mother, that thou from thy infancy
should honor Christ, and his mother, and should suffer the yoke of our
Lord even from thy youth. Consider 3. with what eyes ye most loving Son beheld
his most dear mother, and with what countenance she beheld him again. Love
and pity lifted up the Mothers eyes to her Son; and presently grief and
plenty of tears cast them down again. Think thou with thy self, what the
heart of the Son spoke to the heart of the Mother; and what the heart of the
Mother answered to the Son. Have compassion on them both, and to their
speeches join thy petitions. Consider fourthly, that John called not himself
by his own name, but the Disciple whom Jesus loved; that thou should
always set before thine eyes the benefits, wherewith our Lord has prevented
thee, and declared his singular love toward thee. Consider fifthly, that our
Lord both by his countenance and words, made his last will and testament for
his Mother and his friends. For beholding his Mother and his Disciple, he gave
unto them himself, and all that belonged unto him; his crown of thorns, his
nails, his spittings, his blood, his contempt of the world, his mockings and
shames; that we should not abhor these ensigns of Christ, but think there
are great treasures hidden in them and seek them by all diligence and labor;
and that his Mother might be moved by them to take compassion upon us; and
that we (being signified in John) should use them in our prayers to God, and
to the virgin his Mother, and should beseech them by these spittings, by these
nails and by this blood. Also by his words he bequeathed his Disciple to his
Mother, and his Mother to his Disciple, and to all us. Consider sixthly every
word of this testament: Woman: he says not Mother, but Woman: first because
he would not give occasion to his enemies to mock her. Secondly because he
would not afflict his Mothers heart with a name of love. Thirdly, that he might
show that this was she of whom God spoke long before: I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, Genesis 3.
she shall bruize thy head: for now the body of Christ taken of the Virgin,
and given by the Virgin to subdue the power of the Devil, did bruize the head
of the Serpent. Fourthly, that we might know the constancy of his Mother, to
whom the prophecy of Solomon agreed: who shall find a valiant woman? Behold:
Pro. 31.
it is not (says he) an equal change to take the Son of man for the Son of
God; or the Son of a Fisherman for the Son of so great a King: but the
guifte ought to be free, both because it was of necessity, and because it came
from the Son; and also because in him all mankind was commended. Son: I
have hitherto loved this John, and in him all Christians; I have counted them
my children; I have provided for them as for children; and I have fed them with
my flesh and blood. Therefore, o my Mother, do thou account them as thy
children for my sake. Thy: so love them, as if thou had borne them in thy
womb. This recommending of the Son was of great force with the Mother. Be thou
therefore confident in the benignity of this Virgin, and fly unto her, as unto
thy mother in all thy necessityes.

Joan. 19.
Then he said to his Disciple, behold thy Mother, and from that hour the
Disciple took her as his own.
COnsider first, that John, who for ye love of Christ had forsaken both Father
and Mother, had here a far more worthy mother given unto him: for so our Lord
had said He shall receive an hundred fold. Consider secondly, Mat. 19.
that virginity and all chastity is commended by our Lord, and that the
wantonness of the flesh is repressed through the passion of Christ, and the help
of the Mother of God. Consider thirdly, the piety of Christ toward his Mother;
that through the grace of Christ thou may obtain the gift of piety toward
God and thy Parents. Consider fourthly, the words of our Lord. Behold: a
great benefit, that God and man should both have one parent. Mother: whom thou
may reverence, love, and defend; to whom thou may fly; in whom thou
may have hope; who shall be a Mediator between me, and you my Children, by
whom I will accept your prayers. Thy: she is not only patron of all
mankind, but of thee also, as she that loves thee, and gave her only
begotten Son to dye for thee, suffering him to be crucified, whipped, mocked
and slain for thee. Consider filtly, that John being poor, who had forsaken
all, and vowed poverty with the rest of the Apostles, and had left himself
nothing, received this new Mother, not into his houses, lands, or possessions,
but into his dutiful care, service, and protection. Therefore he took care for
her, that she should want nothing, Au lib. 18 de ciuit. dei cap. 4.
providing sufficiently for her out of the alms of Christians. Pray thou our
Lord to command his Mother, to be also thy Mother, that thou may defend
her honor, increase her glory, and standing with her by the Cross, may
receive the guiftes and benefits of the Cross.

The 40. Meditation of the fourth word on the Cross. Mat. 27. Mar. 15.

And from the sixth hour darkness was made over the whole earth until the
ninth hour, and the Sun was darkened. Luc. 23.

COnsider first, that in the Passion of thy Lord the Sun was darkened, and
the universal world was compassed with darkness, whereof (as St. Cyprian
witnesses) Amos had prophesied The Sun shall set at noone day, Lib. 2. ad
Quirinu. Cap 23. Amos. 8. Hiere. 15.
and the day of light shall be darkened: and Hieremias: The Sun did set
before him, when it was midday. First, that even as when the master of a
family dies, all the house is hanged with black to move sorrow and
lamentation; so thou when the lights of Heaven mourn, and darkness
ouerwhelmeth the earth, should also morn and lament for the passion of our
Lord. Secondly, to declare, that Christ the true Sun dies, of whose
brightness the light of this our Sun no less depends, then the light of the
other stars depend upon the brightness of the Sun. Thirdly, that thou
should know the greatness of this sin, from which the Sun abhorring, did
as it were turn away his face and withdraw his light, and showed himself
ready to revenge, and offered to his Lord and creator to perish for his death.
Thou learnest hereby, that every mortal sin is so grievous, that it were
better the Sun and stars should perish, then that the majesty of God should
be offended by one sin. For by every mortal sin God is put to death,
whose death cannot be reco^penced with the perishing of all creatures.
Fourthly, that thou may know, that Christ suffered this death for the great
and thick darkness of sinners, and of the Jews; yt this darkness being driven
away through the death of our Lord, there might a now light of faith and divine
wisdom be restored unto the world; as at the 9. hour the light appeared
again. Fifthly, that thou may understand, that the fruit of our Lords death,
consists in the contempt of the splendour and favor of the world: for they,
wc are crucified with Christ, rejoice not in Honors and Nobility, but in
obscurity, neglect* and contempt. Consider 2. the manner of this Eclipse, with
St. Dionisius Areopagita, being an eye witness, Epist. 7. ad. policarpu^. and
11. ad Apolloph.
has described. 1. The Moon being at the full and opposite to the Sun,
returned from midnight to noone. 2. It returned, not by his ordinary motion,
from the West; but by a contrary motion to himself, from the East. Thirdly,
the Sun it self lost his light in it self. Fourthly, not in one only part
of the earth (as in other Eclipses,) but over the whole world this darkness of
the Sun was seen, in like manner as of the Moon eclipsed, and deprived of
her light by the shadow of the earth falling upon her. Fifthly, this eclipse
continued three whole hours, which usually lasts but a small time. All these
things are not void of their reasons and considerations. Christ is the Son
of Justice, the Moon is the world, and foolish sinners: Eccles. 27
For a fool is changed like the Moon. Therefore our Lord dyed, when the world
being opposite to God did shine in glory, riches, and wisdom. The world also
came to this eclipse, that is, to the death of our Lord, to wc, not only by
other sins, but also by this seeking of the death of Christ, it had given
cause. But because the majesty of Christ is not subject to humane power, he
could never have been obscured, and put to death by the power of man, except
he had bin delivered to death by the divine will of God. Therefore the Sun is
truly obscured, and Christ is truly slain, both by the malice of the world,
and by his Fathers wrath. For our Lord was like unto him, wc stands between
two men a fighting, and receives both their swords into his own body. The
world fights with God; and our Lord receives in his body, both the wrath of
God, and the fury of men. Thy wrath (says he) has passed through me, Psalm.
87.
and thy terrors have troubled me. Therefore when the Sun of Justice was
eclipsed, the Earth was covered with darkness; both because by this grievous
sin there was new matter given of lamentation and revenge; and also because
by the death of our Lord all power over men was taken away from the Prince of
the world, and in stead thereof he was bound in chains of fire, and condemned
to ye dark prison of Hell. But whereas the Moon by a contrary motion came
from the East to the Sun in the South, thereby is signified that the Jews
without all consideration of equity and justice, hastened the death of Christ,
contrary to Law, contrary to the right of nature, and contrary to their own
conscience, and did violently suppress all good motions in themselves. To be
brief, the Sun was eclipsed three hours, because our Lord lay hid three
whole days, partly in torments and in the hands of the Jews, and partly in
the Sepulcher. Pray thou unto Christ to preserve the true light of faith and
grace in thy soul.

About the nynth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice saying: Eli; Eli,
Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
lammasa bactani: which is interpreted: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me?
COnsider first, why thy Lord at the end of his life made this cry: Certainly
not to escape the pains; like unto us, who cry out, as soon as we feel any
pain; for now the end of his pain approached: nor to be revenged on the
Jews for this his death; for the blood of Christ speaks better then the
blood of Abell. But first, that he, who by the space of three hours, being
covered with darkness, had given no sign of life neither by word nor groan,
might be known to be still alive. Do thou consider with thy self what he
did all the time of his silence in the midst of his torments: surely he prayed
without ceasing unto God for thee in that admirable lyturgie and sacrifice; and
he rehearsed the holy words of the Psalms for thy salvation, speaking some
with a loud voice, that he might be heard of the standers by. Secondly, least
by the continual silence of Christ, and his admirable patience, and constancy
of mind, he might erroneously be thought to be but a vision and no man, and
not to have felt any pain at all. For he did truly suffer and feel pains;
but the love of thee restrained him from complaining. Thirdly, to teach thee in
all thy miseries, to cry only, and with all affection to almighty God.
Fourthly, yt thou should learn by this loud voice to obtain of God the
Father through Christ the fruit of his Passion. Fifthly, that thou should
earnestly po^der with thy self, what things, and how great; for whom, and by
whom our Lord suffered. For our Lord (says St. Epiphanius) spoke these
things in the Syriack tongue, Haere. 69
that all the standers by might understand him. Consider secondly, and mark
the words. (O God,) he says not, Father; First, because he was ashamed,
representing the person of all sinners, to call him Father; that thou, setting
aside all pride, should learn humility. Secondly least he should seem as a
Son to complain of his Father; but rather as a natural man of his
affliction. (My) that is, though thou art the God of all creatures, yet thou
art peculiarly my God, for many respects; both because thou would have
humane nature assumed into the person of the Son, and me to be exalted above
al creatures; and because thou with thy own hands did frame this body in
the Virgins womb; and also because I have ever loved and observed thee
sincerely without any vice. The repetition (My God, my God,) shows the great
affection of this speech: (Why) he asks not the cause, least the perfection
of his obedience should be diminished; but he complains out of a natural
affection. First, yt he is forsaken through no demerite of his own: Are (says
he) the words of my offenses far from my salvation? yt is, Psalm. 21.
do my sins hinder my salvation, and thy help? but I have committed no
sin. Secondly, of the unworthiness of the cause: that thou might (says
he) redeem a poor servant, thou have delivered thy Son to his enemies.
(Have thou forsaken) he shows that he received no help nor comfort from
the union of his Divinity, and that all the time of his Passion, he was left
as man to his own power. He says not, do thou forsake, but, have thou
forsaken; not only in this passion, but in all my life thou have not assisted
me in my labors. Amongst the Prophets many things were spoken hereof. Psalm.
87
I am poor, and in labors from my youth. An unworthy thing: I have a rich
Father, but he gives his riches plentifully amongst wicked men. For of thy
hidden things, Psalm. 16.
that is, of riches, which use to be hidden, Their belly is filled: but I thy
Son am left in the mean time poor and beggarly, and from my childhood am
enforced to great labors. Thou have removed far from me my friend and my
neighbor who might comfort me in my troubles. Thy fury is settled over me,
Psalm. 87
and thou have brought all thy floods upon me: thou have oppressed and drowned
me in calamities. (Me) thy Son, whom thou have begotten from all eternity,
whom above all creatures thou ought to hold most dear. In these things
behold the just cause of complaint in Christ, together with the most ardent
love of his Father toward thee; who because he would hear thy complaint,
refused to hear the complaints of his Son; whom he would have, not only to
know, but also really to feel affliction and misery; both yt he might take
compassion upon thy infirmityes; and also bestow on thee the gift of
knowledge, how to use all things to thine own salvation.

Mat. 27. Mar. 15
But some standing there, and hearing, said: Behold this man calls Helias.
COnsider first, that the Roman Soldiers (according to St. Hierome) being
ignorant of ye Hebrew tongue (for Eli is Hebrew, and Lammasabactani, Syriack)
and having heard many times among the Jews, with whom they co^uersed, mention
made of Helias, were deceived by the mere sound of the words, and thought that
our Lord had called upon Elias. Learn thou, not to use nor interpret rashly
the words of God, wc thou understand not. Consider secondly, that, all
those three hours of the eclipse, every man stood amazed, without motion, and
without speech; but as soon as the light returned, the wicked also returned to
their irrisions: that thou may learn, First, that the impiety of wicked men
may be restrained for a time, but cannot be quite taken away, without the
special favor of God. Secondly, to observe diligently and fear the miracles
and thratenings of God. For even as God by this darkness did foreshew unto the
Jews the iminent darkness, wherein for ever they shall remain, except they
repent; so by his threatening signs, by comets, thunder, earthquakes
pestilence, famine, and other strange things and events, he foresheweth the
calamity and mischief to come. Consider thirdly, whereas heretofore ye Jews
required a sign to be given them from Heaven; here they having a sign, are
made never the better: That thou may know, that they would not have
believed, as they promised, if he should descend from the Cross; because the
desires of the wicked are not directed to their salvation, but to vanity and
mocking. Consider fourthly, what comfort is brought from the world; to wit,
mocking, and contempt; for how can they comfort others, which want true comfort
of mind themselves? Consider fifthly, that these words were spoken by them,
which stood by, and heard: that thou may learn, First, ye idle men, which
are not occupied in their own affairs, do nothing but carp and scoff at the
words and deeds of others. Secondly that such wrest Gods words, to an evil
sense, which only hear them, and do not employ their time to the study of
virtue. Consider sixthly, that the wicked know no difference between Helias,
and Eli, and the honor, which is due unto God, and which is due unto
creatures. Therefore some leaving God, seek help of his creatures, to which
they use to fly in all their necessities; others give more honor to men, then
to God himself; others think those things to be done to creatures, which by
them are referred unto God, as the reverence and worship done to Images and
Saints, obedience to their Pastors etc. But do thou better interpret the
words of Christ, and pray him to inform thy soul with his divine gift of
knowledge.

The 41. Meditation of the fifth word of Christ on the Cross.
Afterward Jesus knowing, that all things were now consummate, Joan. 19.
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, he said I thirst.
COnsider first, that our Lord in all these torments of the Cross, did
nevertheless in his mind reuolue the Scriptures, and diligently view them
all, least perhaps there might be something in them unfulfilled for thy
salvation: that thou likewise, being always attentive to the will of God, and
to the commandments of thy Superiors, may never ouer-flip any thing
belonging to thy office and duty. Consider secondly, that Christ never spoke,
nor did any thing rashly, but referred all things to this end that the
Scripture might be fulfilled. Blessed art thou, if thou do nothing, but of
obedience, wc gives a great ornament to the dooer, and deserves an admirable
recompense for the work. Consider thirdly, that this thirst was most grievous;
which ye kingly prophet David foresawe so many ages before; which grew both
from the labors and torments of the Cross, and from the continual streams of
blood, and from his fasting all the day and night before. Mark the words of
the Psalmist: Psalm. 21.
My strength is dried like an earthen pott, and my tongue has cleaued unto my
jaws, and thou have brought me into the dust of death; that is, thou have
made me like to dry ashes. Consider fourthly, why the Scriptures, that spoke
of this thirst, were fulfilled last, after all the rest: to wit, First, that
the first sin committed in the wood by intempera^ce, which infected all
mankind, might as the greatest prouoker of all the rest, be last of all washed
away and abolished upon the wood of the Cross. Secondly because this thirst
proceeced from the decaying of his strength, and from the loss of all natural
moisture; that our Lord might declare unto us, that he had with a liberal
hand bestowed all his benefits upon us. Consider fifthly, why being inwrapped
and compassed with so many torments and pains on every side, he complained
only of thirst. First, to show, that he did truly and sharply feel the
torments of the Cross: for Christ uses not to complain lightly, but only in
matter of great moment. Secondly, to commend temperance by his example above
all other virtues, which does both lift up the mind to God, and brings a
most certain remedy for sins. 3. That he, which had shed all his blood for
us, and had given us all his goods, and had prayed for the sins of all men to
his Father, might understand, what sign of a thankful mind men would show
unto him, when he was ready to depart out of the world. I desire ye not (says
he) to take me from the Cross, nor to give me my clothes to cover my
nakedness, nor to heal my wounds; but only to give me one drop of water to
quench my thirst, which is denied only to the damned in Hell: I desire ye
only to refresh my drynes: I require this favor only of you for all my
labors. Fourthly, that he might be understood to speak not of his bodily
only, but specially of his spiritual thirst. He thirsted indeed for our
amendment, our perfection, and our salvation; wc thirst he had ever from the
beginning of his life most burning and to quench the same he left nothing
unattempted, but did all things most liberally, and suffered all things most
constantly, and both showed it always by his deeds, and declared it often by
his words. Therefore he said to the Samaritan woman: Joan. 4.
Give me to drink: And he said to his Apostles: I have to be baptized with a
baptism, Luc. 12.
and how am I straightened till it be dispatched? Also he admonished Judas, that
which thou do, do quickly. And here also at the hour of his death he
showed his thirst more clearly; both because his love did then shine more
bright upon us, like unto a candle, which oftentimes gives more light
immediately before it goes out, and to a Swan, which before his death sings
more sweetly; and also to show that he was ready, to suffer more for our
salvation if need were. I thirst (says he) that is, rests there any thing
for me to do to my vineyard, which I have not done? Isa. 5.
Behold whilst I have time, I offer my self to suffer more and greater
things; neither can my thirst be satisfied by reason of the heat of my love,
except I drink abundantly of the cup of my Passion, and transfer the fruit
thereof to my members (that is) to my Disciples. And he speaks to his
Father, who knew the inward desires of his Son. Admire here the love of
Christ, which in this his Passion sent forth a sweet savor unto us, like unto
precious spices, which do then yeilde forth the sweetest sent, when they are
most bruzed and broken into powder. Fifthly to leave this thirst unto us by his
last will and testament. The world thirsts after riches, honors, pleasures,
and other vain delights, which put them to a great deal of travail, and yet
never satisfy their thirst and desire, but like strong poison kill them
presently as soon as they have drunk thereof, as it happened to the Captain
Sysara, being killed by a woman after he had drunk milk. Iudi. 4.
Christ would have thee to thirst after God, the fountain of the water of
life, and not to dig broken Cesternes, which cannot hold water. I would thou
did thirst after thine own salvation, as Christ thirsted after it, or as
the Devil thirsts after thy perdition. Be thou the heir of the thirst of
Christ, and pray him to satisfy thee with the breasts of his grace.

Then a vessel of vinegar was set, Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Joan. 19
and presently one of them running, filled a sponge, which he had with vinegar,
and set it upon a reed, and Hysope, and gave him to drink.
COnsider first the pronenes of men to mischief, who upon the least occasion
offered, make have to sin; and also the help of the Devil, who presently
affoordeth them means to sin. Here were all things prepared, a vessel,
vinegar, a sponge, and a reed. Mark what sinners brought into Mount Caluary,
and into the Church, to wit, instruments for the death of our Lord.
Contrariwise holy men with Nichodemus and Joseph of Aramathia bring thither
instruments to take down the body of our Lord from the Cross. Think thou
with thy self what instruments thou do use in holy Church, whether to kill,
or to save souls. Consider secondly, that Christ at ye hour of his death had
no comfort, neither in word nor deed, but was denied even a drop of water.
Perhaps according to the custom there wanted not wine, which the
executioners themselves had spent through their cruelty and wantonness,
according to the prophecy of Amos: They sat upon the pleadged garments hard
by the Altar (of the Cross) and they drank the wine of the condemned in the
house of their God; Amos. 2.
which was the Mount Caluary. Consider thirdly, ye sponge was filled with
vinegar, and fastened to a branch of Hisope, according to the custom in their
ancient sacrifices, Leuit. 4.
and set upon a reed, and so put to the mouth of our Savior to suck thereof;
which being done with a Soldiour-like rudeness, many drops fell into the
wounds of him that was crucified, and with the sharpenes thereof afflicted his
flesh. Was this the reward of that mouth, which opened so often for our
salvation, and of that tongue, which gave us so many good lessons, cured so
many diseased, and wrought so many miracles? But Christ who had already
satisfied God the Father for thy other sins with his other pains, curing thy
pride with his great shame thy covetousness with his exceeding poverty, thy
lust with his most bitter torments, thy wrath with his incredible patience, thy
sloth with his diligent alacrity; would now also apply a medicine for thy
gluttony and intemperance, and by this bitterness, as by a contrary medicine,
purge and wash thy mouth, which was infected by eating the apple in Paradise.
Behold what drink thou use to drink unto thy Lord, to wit, vinegar, and the
bottom, and dregs of wine. To the world thou give sweet wine; for her sake
thou labourest earnestly; thou seek to win her favor by all diligence,
and sparest neither industry, strength, wealth, nor any thing, which thou have:
but to Christ, thy God, thou minglest all thy worst things, thy sloth, thy
theft, thy hatred, and thy other sins, for which our Lord complains: I
expected that he should make Grapes, Isa. 5.
and he made the wild Vine. And the world again for thy sweet wine reaches
unto thee vinegar upon a reed, that is, cold and bitter delights in a broken
and vain soul: for the world has not, nor cannot give any true comfort or
sweetness. Therefore do thou rather drink sweet wine unto Christ, and
earnestly from thy heart consecrate thy self, and all that thou have unto him:
and even as thou will not offer to thy loving Father a withered, but a fresh
and sweet smelling flower; so do thou offer unto Christ the flower of thy age,
and thy sweetest labors; and he will exhibit himself again to thee, as a
sponge, fastened to the reed of the Cross, full of grace and truth, out of
which thou may suck sweet water; and he will communicate unto thee the
gift of understanding, whereby thou may understand, and be partaker of the
delihgts of thy spouse.

And he said, let be, Mar. 15 Mat. 27.
let us see whether Helias come to take him down: and the others said, let be,
let us see, whether Helias come to deliver him.
COnsider first, the words of the executioners. One of them reaching him
vinegar, which being drunk by the crucified person, hastneth his death, says:
let be, let us see whether Helias come: that is, Helias shall not come, for I
will prevent him by this deadly cup, and rid this man out of the way. Others by
the same words persuaded him to stay the cup, that they might see by
experience, whether Helias would come, and so reprove him as a false Prophet,
of vanity, in calling upon shadows, and those which were dead. Learn thou
here, first, what those executioners thought of our Lord, being even then
ready to dye; that thou may esteem better of him in thy soul. Secondly,
that he departed out of this world with great thirst, and carried that thirst
of thy salvation into heaven with him, where with an ardent, though not
troublesome desire, he works the means of thy salvation. Thirdly, that this
cold and piercing cup of vinegar brought death unto our Lord: for through
sin death entering into the world, killed all, and spared not the very Son
of God, for whom it was necessary to taste of death, that he might overthrow
death. Resolve thou therefore to fly sin, least having gotten power to kill
thy body, it creep farther, and kill thy soul also. Consider secondly, two
kinds of men: for some without faith do by their sins deride the patience
of God: 1 Pet. 3
Where (say they) is his promise, or his coming? Others have faith, but
prevent the sting of conscience with have of sinning, Whose feet run to
evil. Take thou heed of both; and pray unto God not to forsake thee in the
hour of death, to be mocked by the Devil.

The 42. Meditation of the sixth word of our Lord on the Cross.
Joan. 19.
When Jesus had taken the vinegar, he said.
COnsider 1. that this word above all the rest brought admirable comfort to all
sinners. For hitherto all that he said, pertayned for the most part to the
executioners, to the Thief, to his Mother, etc: but this he speaks to us
all, declaring, that now our debts are paid, and all things perfected, which
seem necessary to our salvation. Consider secondly, who he is, which says, it
is co^summate: to wit, Christ God and man; for as man he offers this payment,
and as God he receives it. For even as he that draws wine, and he for whom
it is drawn, says there is good measure, we ought to credit them: so we ought
to believe Christ our Lord, saying: all things are consummate. Consider
thirdly, where he spoke it: as first, upon the Altar of the Cross, in which
the price was paid unto God. Secondly, in a high and eminent place, yt like
unto a crier, he might publish these new tidings unto the world. Listen thou
unto it, and be assured that the price is paid. Consider fourthly, when he
spoke it: which was when he had drunk the vinegar, and was now ready to dye:
that thou should know, that he being nothing moved with our ingratitude,
did confirm his last will and testament unto us, wc shall never be infringed
by any wickedness of man, but whosoever will be partaker of this blood, it
shall remain whole and holy unto him. Consider fifthly, why he spoke it:
namely, for our comfort, who know the offense of sin to be so great, that
no creature was able to redeem the same. Our Lord therefore affirms, that
the enorinity of our offenses is not so great, nor the number of our sins so
many, nor our debts so infinite, but that he has fully satisfied for all. Pray
thou unto him, to comfort thee at thy death with this word, least thou be
affrayd to appear before God thy creditor thorough the greatness of thy debts.

It is consummate.
COnsider first, he said not, this or yt is consummate; but absolutely, it is
consummate: that thou may know, that by this passion of Christ all things
are consummate, and made perfect in Heaven and in earth; as well those things,
which portain to God, as those, which belong to man. For even as sin violated
all things; so the blood of Christ restored all things again: that thou may
learn to seek all things in the passion of Christ, and with the Apostle to
glory in nothing, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. Gal. 6.
Consider secondly, how those things, which belong to God, are consummate by
Christ. For first, he perfectly observed all the commaun-of God the Father, and
never transgressed any of them, no, not in thought. Secondly, he carefully
fulfilled all things committed to him in charge by the holy Scriptures;
neither did one lot or title pass, which was not fulfilled. Mat. 5.
For he had received from his Father a double charge; one delivered in Heaven
to himself, another committed to writing and communicated to us. Thirdly, he
ended all figures, ceremonies, and shadows of the old Testament, and
commanded all things to cease, which signified the death of the Messiah, and
the future mysteries of the Church. Fourthly, whatsoever was imperfect in the
old sacrifices, he perfected and fulfilled in one sacrifice of the Cross.
Fifthly, by this his death he repaired the ruins of Heaven, which were opened
by the sins of Lucifer, ^oan. 1.
and gave power to men to be made the sons of God, to those, which believe
in his name, and after this life spent in the service of God, to replenish
again the seats of those Angels, whom their wickedness and sin had thrown
down into hell. Behold how thy Lord, ready to go to his Father, does glory,
that he has left nothing in this world vnconsummate, but that he has executed
all things to the full, which he was commanded. I would thou also at ye hour
of thy death, according to the example of thy Lord, could glory, that thou
have left nothing imperfect in thy self. Saint Paul said: I have fought a good
fight, I have consummate my course, 2 Timothy 4
I have kept the faith: And Saint Peter in the name of the Apostles: Behold, we
have left all things and have followed thee: Mat. 19.
what therefore shall we have? What will thou say when thou art ready to dye,
who have violated Gods commandments, and have received thy good in this life?
What can thou offer unto God for the reward of eternal glory? Think
earnestly of these things, that thou may diligently execute the
Commandments of our Lord. Consider thirdly, that by Christ his Passion, all
things likewise are consummate, wc belong to us. 1. Sin received his end; as
Daniel foreshewed: All debts are paid, Dan. 9.
the price of all the sins of the whole world is fully numbered to God the
Father. 2. To the faithful all their goods are gotten, that nothing is wanting
to us in any grace. 1 Cor. 2.
3. He has perfected his Church a new Common wealth, and a chosen vineyard:
for whereas indeed it was begun to be planted from the beginning of the
world, but for want of good manuring did not prosper; Christ by his Passion
prepared al things necessary for it he instituted a Sacrifice, and Sacraments,
he ordained Pastors he made new laws he divided offices to every one, he sent
the holy Ghost into ye hearts of ye faithful; to be short, he perfected it in
such manner, as he had spoken before: Hiere. 31
I will consu^mate my new Testament upon the house of Israel, and upon the
house of Judah. He began to write this Testament many ages past, which now with
this word, as with the subscriptio^ of his hand, and with his blood and
passion, as with his seal, is signed by him. 4. He fulfilled the desire of the
Saints, and heaped abou^dantly his gifts upon all ye faithful, whom he would
have consummated into one, joined together in perfect charity, and replenished
with ye 7. gifts of the holy Ghost. Joan. 17
Do thou therefore, who have received so many benefits from thy spouse, never
leave to do his will, because his will is thy sanctification: 2 These. 1.
and be thou careful to keep whole and inviolate the white garment, and
grace of the holy Ghost, which thou did receive in the Sacraments. Consider
4. that many things are consummate by this passion of Christ even in wicked
men. First, the hate of the Jews, wc could not further be extended. 2. The
malice of ye Devils, who could do no more against Christ. 3. The Kingdom of
the Devil, the Prince of this world was ended, his forces broken, his spoils
taken away, and he himself bound in hell with a chain never to be feared more,
but to be laughed at, even by little children. Apoc. 11.
Fear not then ye assaults of the devil, who can only counsel and threaten;
but cannot compel nor hurt. Consider 5. that Christ himself is also
consummate for us, as the Apostle says: Being consummate, Heb. 5.
he was made to all that obey him cause of eternal salvation. 1. His blood is
consummate, all wc he powered out of his veins for thy sake; his strength is
consu^mate, which he exhausted for thee; all his goods are consummate, both
within and without, wc he offered for thee. 2. His pains are consu^mate; an end
is come of all his evils; and glory only remains. Therefore in this sense, It
is consummate, is a word of rejoicing, that his labors are overcome. Now
(says he) all things are perfect; Winter is done, Cant. 1.
the shower is past, and gone; there is an end of all evils, and the beginning
of good: For his very Sepulcher shall presently after his death be glorious.
Isa. 35.
Be thou careful whilst thou live, that thy death may end all evils, and
open the way to good. Thirdly this mortal life is consummate: O Father (says
he) I now leave the world, and come unto thee. This word one day shall also be
spoken unto thee: It is co^summate: thy life must be ended, and thou must leave
all things, wc thou have, thy riches, thy honors, thy parents, thy wife, thy
children, and thy friends. For I have seen an end of all consummation: and
we, Psalm. 118
who brought nothing into this world, 2 Timothy 6.
without doubt cannot carry away any thing. Therefore if with Christ thou have
nothing but troubles and crosses, if all things in the world be bitter and
sower unto thee, the voice of Christ calling thee will not be unwelcome: It is
consummate: because the hour of thy redemption draws nigh. Mat. 24. Eccle. 4.
But O how bitter is the remembrance of death to a man having peace in his
substance!

It is Consummate.
COnsider first, that Christ had spoken something before of his consu^mation, as
in Luke: Behold we go up to Jerusalem, Luc. 18.
and all things shall be consummate, which are written by the Prophets of the
Son of man. He gave also some beginning to this co^summation, when he said
in his last supper: Joan. 15
I have consummate the work, which thou gave me, that I should do. But in
the altar of the Cross all things are consu^mate; neither could any thing be
consu^mate before his passion on the Cross, because without shedding of blood
there is no remission of sins, Heb. 9.
and a testament is not confirmed, but by the death of the testator. Consider
secondly, the manner of his consummation; to wit, the notable constancy of thy
Lord, and his invincible courage. First, he perfected all things alone: I
have trodden (says he) the press alone, Isa. 6.
and amongst the people there was not a man with me: that thou should never
give over the study of piety and devotion, though thou were forsaken of all
men. For God sees and helps thy endeauours; who because he would not be
wanting to thee in thy labors, denied his help and assistance to his Son.
Secondly, he submitted all his members, and filled them with torments; that
thou should spare no labor for the service of thy spouse. Thirdly, he
perseuered even to the end of his work. Thou oftentimes conceiuest a good
work, but thou do seldom begin it, and more seldom proceed in it, and
scarce ever bring it to an end. Pray our Lord, to grant thee the gift of
fortitude, that thou never faint in the study of virtues. Consider thirdly,
with what liberality he inuiteth thee to those things, which he has
consummated by these his labors. My Bulls (says he) and my Fowls are
killed, Mat. 22.
come to the marriage. For in this passion, First, Sap. 17.
All spiritual daintyes are found for every man his taste, and necessity; as
the Scripture recites concerning Manna. Secondly, it is the medicine of all
diseases. Thirdly, it is the payment of all debts. Do thou therefore enjoy this
liberality of Christ, and being wholly melted into his love, desire to know
nothing else, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. ^ Cor. 2.
Consider fourthly, yt by this word It is consummate: God ye Father is asked by
Christ, whether any thing be wanting to our perfect salvation; and that also
all creatures* yea even our enemies, are as it were iudicially cyted, to
consider what is wanting, and to speak it before the death of Christ. For our
Lord professes, that he will pay to the full, if there be any punishment yet
remaining. Behold the liberal mind of thy Lord. Pray him then, that, laying
aside all covetousness, thou may be endued with this bountiful liberality.
Consider fifthly, that these great riches of Christ are so provided for thee,
that thou ought to make application of them to thy self. Thy dinner indeed
is ready, but thou must go to the table, and put the meat in thy mouth: thy
medicine is made, but it is kept in the shop of the Church enclosed in seven
boxes, to wit in the seven Sacraments: the price is paid for thee, but not
yet applied unto thee. Do not thou think, that only Faith (as some
Heretics would have thee believe) is sufficient for thee; thou must go with
thy feet to dinner; thou must take thy meat, and medicine with thy hands;
thou must put them into thy mouth, and receive them into thy stomache: that is,
thou must frequent the Sacraments and be diligent in the exercise of virtues,
that that, wc was effected and given for all mankind, may be accepted for
thee, applied to thee, and profit thee. Pray thou our Lord that he, who spent
and consummated all his days with infinite merits of good works will never
suffer thee to spend and pass away thy days idly and in vain.

The 4^. Meditation of the seventh word of our Lord on the Cross.
And crying again, Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luc. 23.
he said with a loud voice.
COnsider first, that as often as Christ spoke for himself unto his Father,
he cried with a loud voice; but when he spoke to others, or for others, he
used a lower voice, to teach thee, First, that thou must always deal with God
with great affection. To others thou openest thy griefs with tears, but when
thou speak with God, thou art so dry, that thou have scarce any feeling of
devotion. Secondly, what grievous pains the Son of God suffered, who with the
violence thereof was forced to cry out. Consider secondly, that Christ for
diverse causes cried out in his prayers, when he was ready to dye. Joan. 11.
First, to show that he was Lord of life and death; having power to yield up
his soul, and to take it again, at his own will and pleasure. Therefore he
called for death (as Nazianzen says) which durst not come, In Christo patiente.
except it had been called. Secondly, to move God the Father to mercy: For
seeing all mankind, being oppressed with grievous sins, was far off from
God, he, who carried the person of all men, ought to call upon God with a loud
voice, being so far absent. Do thou therefore knock at our Lords ears, not
so much with loudnes of voice, as with affection of heart. Thirdly, that this
voice, being sent through the whole world, might move men's hearts, and that
hearing of the death of God for their sins, they might be penitent for their
offenses. For at this voice the Earth was shaken, the Rocks were cleft in
sunder, and the Monuments were opened; that thy stony heart might also be
broken by the force of this word of God. Not without cause did Mark say, (his
voice being sent forth) that thou should understand that being sent into the
world it works still in the hearts of men. Fourthly, that Hell should
tremble at this voice: and even as at the cry of our Lord, calling Lazarus, ye
soul of Lazarus returned without delay into his body; so now every one there
should prepare himself to receive their Lord, being ready instantly to come
unto them. The holy Fathers therefore in Limbo rejoiced at this voice: and the
Devils in Hell trembled. Fifthly, to teach thee how to meditate on death, not
remisly, or negligently, as of a thing little pertaining to thee; nor slowly
and dully, as of a thing a far off; but often and earnestly, and of a thing
most certain, and at hand, and so much the more fervently, because it is the
only gate to salvation. Consider thirdly, that in the ninth hour our Lord
brake forth into this clamor: in the hour (I say) of prayer, and of the
evening Sacrifice. For then the true host was sacrificed upon the Cross, and
being cut into two parts, that is, into body and soul, was immolated to God
the Father by the high Priest with a loud voice and great labor. Join thou
thy prayers with Christ his prayer, that with his voice they may pierce the
Fathers ears.

Luc. 23.
O Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit.
COnsider first, that Christ prayed not unto his Father upon the Cross, but
in the words of the Scripture. First, because he knew, that these words
were most acceptable to his Father, being written by the holy Ghost, to teach
us to pray. Secondly, to teach thee to worship God not according to thy own
fashion and understanding, but in such manner, as the Church endued with the
holy Ghost has appointed thee. Consider secondly, that Christ used this word,
Father, only twice upon the Cross, in his first, and in his last prayer, but
in his middle, that is, in his fourth prayer, he called him not Father, but,
God. First, yt thou should like a Son, willingly accept that punishment,
which thy Father sends, and in thy punishment confess thy own baseness, who
art not worthy to be called the son of God, and like a poor creature call
upon God thy Creator (for tribulation and adversity do teach good men their
own frail estate, and unworthiness, and thereby persuade, or rather enforce
them to mend their lives,) and that in the end, having overcome all
adversities, thou should take courage and rejoice as a Son: For probation
works hope, Romans 5.
which confounds not. Secondly, because the beginnings of Gods word do most
sweetly affect the mind; the progress is hard to sensuality; but the fruits
which are gathered, are most pleasant. The book was in ye mouth of John
sweet as honey, Apoc. 10.
but being devoured it made his belly bitter. Thirdly, because in his first
prayer, when he prayed for sinners, he was to gain authority to his prayer
through the love of a Son, for none but a son could be heard for so great
wickedness: In the middle, he complained as a man: And in this last, having
fulfilled his embassage, he desires as a Son to be called home to his Father.
Consider thirdly, that Christ made this petition to his Father, not for fear
of judgment, for now his Father had committed all judgment to him; nor for
fear of the Devil, whose forces he had already broken; nor for fear of the
pains of Hell, which now he came to take from good men, and to carry away the
spoils of Hell. But first, to teach thee, never to remit or slack thy
invincible spirit from prayer. Secondly, that thou should know, with what
confidence he went unto his Father. For he says not anxiously after the
manner of a suppliant, I pray thee, Father, but as it were of mine own right
and authority, I commend my spirit. Consider fourthly, and mark every word of
this last prayer, which before had bin made by the holy Ghost to this purpose,
Psalm. 32.
and is now recited by the Son to the Father, with addition only of this word,
Father. Father: First, I have remained thy Son in all these so great torments,
I have remitted nothing of my devotion, and love to thee. Secondly, I thy Son
am returned to thee from this hard embassage, from this bloody battle I carry
away the victory, and I bring the spoils. What reward will thou give me, what
glory will thou prepare for me, what triumph will thou assign me? The Roman
Emperors triumphed with the victorious Army. Poor Lazarus, Luc. 16.
wc was denied cru^mes from the rich man's table, was carried in a triumphant
Chariot, that is, in Angels hands into Abraham's bosom. What glory then will thou give to me thy Son? I am more honorable, because I am thy Son: I have
labored more then the rest, for I have spent my blood; I have undergone more
danger, for I have fought alone with the enemy; I have endured more want, for a
drop of water has been denied me; I have overcome more strange enemies, for I
have subdued the Prince of this world, broken his forces, and thrust him out of
possession; and to be brief, I have taken more noble spoils, having
delivered so many thousand souls from the bondage of the Devil, and subdued
all the whole world unto thy government. What then will thou prepare for so
great a conqueror? Into thy hands: First, as sacrifices are offered into the
hands of God, so I, as high Priest, do offer my soul, as a most fatt
sacrifice into thy hands. Secondly, hitherto the souls, which departed out of
this world, went not into the hands of God, but into Abraham's bosom in the
places below: but now I desire first to be received into thy hands, and my
Disciples hereafter to be received also. Thirdly, this my spirit, which is now
descending into Hell, to deliver the Fathers, shall not want the divinity; but
even as the divine nature took the humane nature into the same person, so it
shall remain both with the body in ye sepulcher, and with the spirit in Hell.
Fourthly, I commend it to thy hands; that thou should endowe it with glory,
and adorn it with rewards. I commend, or as the Greek text says, I will
commend, that is, even now I will send it to thee. First, hitherto neither this
body, nor my soul has seemed to be greatly commended unto thee, because both
the body has remained in the hands of enemies, and my soul being sorrowful
even unto death, was always in my own hands subject to many miseries, Psalm.
118.
and death it self. Hitherto thou have seemed to have care only of thy
bondslaues, and to neglect thy Son: for thou have delivered up thy Son, to
redeem thy servant: do thou now at last receive my spirit commended unto
thee. Secondly, I commend, that is, I leave it with thee, to have it again
after three days. Thirdly, no man takes it from me, for I am not compelled
to dye against my will; but I willingly yield it, and deliver it to thy
custody. My spirit, he says not my soul, which beasts possess as well as
men, but, my spirit, because the sensual man ((...)) perceives not those
things, which are of the spirit of God, In Christ, the spirit, 1 Cor. 2.
that is, the higher part, had as it were converted the soul into it self, so
as the inferior man desired, nor coueted nothing, but according to the rule of
reason. Pray thou unto God the Father, that he will receive thy soul, always
commended, with the spirit of his Son.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit.
COnsider first, that though the spirit of Christ needed not to be commended to
ye Father, yet it was commended to him; that all faithful and holy men should
know, that they are commended unto God by this prayer of Christ. For God
calls those by ye name of Spirit, which are endued with his spirit. That
(says he) which is borne of the spirit, Joan. 3.
is spirit: even as they which are ruled by the spirit of the Devil, are
called the spirits of Devils. Do thou look into thy self, what spirit
reigns in thee, 1 Timothy 4
whether of Christ, or of the Devils: And again, whether thy soul has
changed the spirit into it self, so as thou seem little different from a
brute beast, or whether the spirit of our Lord has thy soul wholly subject and
obedient unto it. Heb 4.
For the word of God being lively and powerful, reaches even to the division
of the soul and of the spirit: And therefore in ye hour of death diligent
inquiry shall be made what the spirit has done, and what the soul; and they
only shall be commended unto God, Romans 8.
which have wrought by the spirit of God. Consider 2. if Christ commended us to
God the Father, then we ought to be careful to commend our souls unto him
in good works. Therefore let us provide, First, yt what the grace of the holy
Ghost has wrought in our souls, Pet. 4
may be preserved, framed, and perfited, as it were by his divine hands.
Secondly, that our spirit be often conversant in Heaven, and adhere not too
much to any worldly things. For (says St. Augustine) if our minds be there
we shall have rest here. Ser. 175. de temp.
Thirdly, that God will hold us in his hands, according to that: Sap. 3.
Joan. ^0
The souls of the just are in the hands of God: neither can any man take the^
out of his hands. Fourthly, that our spirits, when they go out of this world,
may be delivered to the hands of God to be crowned; and be commended to his
keeping till the future resurrection of our bodies. Consider thirdly, that the
Church of God, which is directed and guided by the spirit of Christ, is so
commended to God the Father by this prayer of her spouse, That the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against her. Mat. 16.
Therefore do thou never separate thy self from her, except thou would
fall into thy enemies hands; but defend the life and safety of thy soul by
the spirit, faith, grace, and Sacraments of the same. Consider fourthly, that
there is commended unto thee by his prayer: First, the gift of the fear of
God; and next diligent devotion against the vice of sloth. For if Christ the
Son of God did with such earnest prayer commend his spirit to his Father: it
behooves thee not only to pray, but also to work thine own salvation with
fear and trembling. Phil. 2.
Pray then unto our Lord, to take care of thy soul and to bestow rather
heavenly gifts upon thy spirit, then earthly benefits upon thy body.

The 44. Meditation of the death of Christ.
Luc. 23. Joan. 19.
And saying this, bowing his head, gave up the ghost.
COnsider first, in what manner the Spouse of thy soul ended his life. The
standers by use to observe the countenance, gesture, and words of those, which
are to dye: and mothers also use to mark the eyes, and countenance of their
children, when they go far from them, and to remember often in their minds
the manner of their departure. Do thou likewise, for whose sake the Son of God
suffered death, come near unto the Cross; behold all things diligently with
the eyes of thy soul, and let thy speech be often times thereof: Consider
secondly, that crying he bowed his sacred head: first, because he would call
thee, both by his voice and beck, to learn the profit of the Cross, and to
receive the merits and benefits of the same. Secondly, to speak in thy ear,
to communicate his secrets unto thee, and to teach thee his commandments and
counsels. Thirdly, to signify his consent to all thy petitions and prayers,
which depend upon this his holy passion. Fourthly that thou might the better
view his head, and mark every thing diligently, his thorns, his spittinges,
his blood, his eyes now shutt to thy sins, his mouth silent from revenge, and
his face pale with death. Consider thirdly, that the Evangelists wrote this
death of our Lord in diverse words. John says, he delivered up his spirit:
Mathewe, he sent forth his spirit: Mark and Luke, he breathed out: that thou
should know, that Christ died, not like unto other men, but in a singular,
and peculiar manner; neither did he against his will, or by compulsion, but of
his own free accord render up his spirit. This word, he delivered,
signifies: first, that he gave his spirit into his Fathers hands to be kept
three days, and that from thence all merits, all virtues, all justice, and
grace should be gathered for mankind. Secondly, that as he had already given
his body to the executioners, so now also he would deliver his soul for us,
because nothing should be wanting to our felicity and happiness. He had given
his garments, he had given his honor, he had given his body, he had given his
blood: and now there remained nothing, but to give his soul, that according to
the prophecy of Isaias, Isa. 9.
the whole Son might be given. 3. That he delivered up the full price of our
redemption. For hitherto something was wanting, and he had paid as it were but
in part: but now he made an absolute and full payment: that thou may know,
that now thou art not thine own man, but Christ's, who has bought and redeemed
thy members with his, thy powers with his, thy honors and riches with his, thy
body with his, and thy soul with his. If thou do consider these things
rightly, thou shall learn, first, not to abuse thy self, and thy goods to thy
own pleasures; nor to spend them according to the will of the Devil; no nor
yet to use them as thine own, but to refer all to the honor of Christ, to
whom all things belong and appertain. Secondly, seeing thou have gotten
Christian liberty, and art delivered out of the power of the Devil, never to
yeilde to him again. For he has no right to thee, whom Christ has so
dearly redeemed with his blood. Do thou give thanks unto thy Lord, and offer
up thy self, and all that thou have, freely unto him.

He breathed forth. Mar. 15. Luc. 23

COnsider first, that by this word is signified, that Christ breathed forth
his last spirit: by which spirit and holy breathing, first he purged the
air, being infected with devils; by virtue whereof the Devils also are driven
away in exorcismes and exsafflations. Therefore as the earth is sanctified by
the holy body of our Lord, and the element of water, and all lyquors, by the
holy blood and water yssuing from his side: so by the divine spirit of Christ
the air is sanctified, yt it may the more profitably carry and inspire into
our senses the word of God, and his holy mysteries. Secondly, he communicated
unto this world his inward gifts and graces, not only through the holy wounds
of his body, but also by his mouth. Consider secondly, that Christ for many
causes would suffer, not only pain and torments, but also death. First, to
offer up himself by his death as a sacrifice and Holocaust vnro God. Secondly
to redeem eternal death, due unto thee, through this his death of infinite
value. Thirdly, to confirm by his death all his Sacraments, and the new
Testament. Fourthly, that by this his death as by the death of the high Priest,
according to the old figure, Number. 15.
he might recall thee into thy heavenly country. Fifthly, to let thee know, yt
thou ought to be his, who dyed for thee, and not to submitt thy self to
the Devil, who suffered neither death, nor wound for thy salvation. Sixthly,
that thou should account thy self dead to the world with Christ, and
mortify: thy vices and affections: For if (says the Apostle) one dyed for
all, 2 Cor. 5.
therefore all are dead. Consider thirdly, that Christ dyed in his flourishing
age, being three and thirty years old, when his senses were freshest, his heat
greatest, and his strength best to endure labor. First, because he was willing
to bestow all his most flourishing things upon thee, to preserve the heat of
his love in thee, and with great forces to prepare many benefits for thee.
Secondly, that thou should not prolong the change of thy life, till thy
withered and decayed old age, but consecrate thy youthful years and strength
unto Christ. Consider fourthly, that our Lord was nailed to the Cross in the
sixth hour; and in the nynth hour, when the day began to grow to an end, he
dyed. First, because he, which in the precedent ages had been immolated in the
figures of the sacrifices, did in this fourth age of the world dye truly for
us. Secondly, that thou, who hitherto perhapps have spent the rest of thy life
unprofitably and wickedly, may at the least in the end of thy life fly to
the death of our Lord. A great comfort is here given unto sinners, who
languishing, either with age, with sickness, or in mind, are not able, by
exacting grievous punishment of themselves, to satisfy for their sins, may
have the pains, blood, and death of Christ to offer for their offenses. Give
thanks unto God, and despise not so great a treasure.

Joan. 19
He sent forth his spirit.
COnsider, that here also mention is made of the liberty and freedom of
Christ to dye. For even as in former times Noe sent the Dove out of the Arc,
Genesis 8
which after a few days returned, bringing in her mouth a boughe, with green
leaves: So Christ sent forth his spirit, to return again after three days,
with an army of flourishing Saints. Emisit (says he,) he sent forth; and
not, Amisit, he lost: that thou should not loose thy spirit amongst the
wicked. Consider secondly, how the Devils expected this spirit, being ready
to come forth, that by the common law of all it might be joined to other
souls in Hell. For the Evangelist seems to signify so much, when he said,
the Devil went from him for a time, as though at this time of his death, he
would return again. But because the Prince of this world had nothing in
Christ, Luc. 4.
he was bound by Christ the Conqueror with most strait chains, and carried
into Hell, to be condemned to eternal prison. Consider 3. the glorious
company of Angels, which did not so much carry, as follow the soul of Christ
descending unto Hell. Consider 4. that by Christ his coming to Hell, those
fearful dark places were endued with a new light, that the holy Fathers came
flying to meet him, and to give him thanks for themselves, and for their
ungrateful children; that the^ they were all clothed in a new garment, and
admitted to behold the divine nature; and that Hell was filled with blessed
souls, before Heaven, the seat of the blessed. Consider fifthly, what thy Lord
did here these three days. He began to exercise the power (which he
received from his Father both in Heaven and Earth,) in the lowest part of the
world. First, he inflicted worthy punishment upon the Devil, with the rest of
his enemies, whom he had overcome with great wisdom and power. Secondly, he
made new laws to Hell, and provided, that none of the Saints should ever be
carried thither again. Thirdly, he stopped the mouth of that stinking place,
and shut it so close that none of that deadly savor should breath unto mortal
men. Fourthly, he brought salvation, promised so many years before to the holy
Fathers, 1 Pet. 3
and preached to those Spirits, which were in prison, That is, brought tidings
of peace, even unto the^, who being punished by the deluge, and other miseryes,
for their incredulity and sin, were seriously converted before their death.
Pray thou our Lord, that at the time of thy death he will subdue the Devil,
and bring to thee true peace and comfort.

The 45. Meditation of the signs in the death of Christ.
And behold the veil of the Temple was slut in two pieces, Mat. 27. Mat. 15.
Luc. 23.
even from the top to the bottom.
COnsider first, that when Christ sent forth his spirit with a loud cry, all
creatures, rejoicing with their Creator for his noble victory over his enemy,
made great noyses and shoutings for joy; in like manner as we use to show
public joy by discharging great gunns and ordinance of war. Consider
secondly, that by this noise all things were opened; the Tabernacle, the
Earth, and the stones were resolved, Lib. de in carnatione verbi.
and (as St. Athanasius says) the very Mountains were cleft in sunder. 1.
Because the sack of grace, being opened by so many wounds, did by our Lords
death poor out his guiftes most abundantly and invited all men to open the
vessels of their hearts. Look thou therefore to thy self, and withdraw not
thy self out of this holy shower. 2. Because all creatures, showed themselves
ready to be revenged upon the wicked, and offered even their bowels unto God.
Consider thirdly, that the veil of the Temple was rent. 1. Because by this
death of our Lord all the mysteries of the old Testament, shadowed and covered
so diversely until this time, did now at last (the veil being taken away)
shine most clearly, and were manifested and fulfilled by the 7. wounds of
Christ, of his hands, feet, side, head, and whippings of his whole body; and
that the Temple it self, and all the legal Sacrifices, remained profane, and
destitute of all holiness and sanctity. 2. Because now was opened the way into
Sancta sanctorum, that is, the kingdom of Heaven. 3. To signify, yt the
Temple it self, for the Synagogue, lamented the death of Christ, and detested
the great blasphemy of the Jews; and, to show her grief and anger, cut her
veil or garments. 4. That thou, remembering the death of thy spouse, should
remove the veil of all excuses from thy heart, and open thy inward thoughts
to our Lord, without any veil or color, hiding nothing from the Priest in
confession, nor covering thy sins with the pretense of piety. For most
certainly the veil of thy body shall shortly be broken by approaching death,
and thy wickedness shall be revealed to the whole world.

And the Earth was moved, and the Rock^s were cleft a sunder. Mat. 27.

COnsider first, that at the death of our Lord ye earth was moved and
trembled. 1. For the horror of so great a sin. 2. Because the Prince of the
world, who was wont to shake the earth with seditions and wickedness, was with
great violence thrown headlong into Hell. 3. Because God of infinite Majesty
entered into the bowels of the earth, at whose coming into the Mount Syna, the
mountain it self (as it were honoring him) trembled and smo^ked. Ex 19.20
4. Because by the death of our Lord all the earthly hearts of men were to be
moved, and carried out of their places unto Christ. 5. Because the new Law of
the Gospel was to be brought into the world. If thou therefore, when the
whole Earth shakes, art nothing moved by the death of Christ, thou art more
dry and cold, then the earth it self Consider secondly, the Rocks were
cleft. Ephe. 2. 1 Cor. 10.
1. Because Christ the corner stone, who was also signified in the old rock,
was now cut a sunder, his soul being pulled from his body, and his body being
torn with diverse wounds. 2. Because men's hearts, being more hard then the
very stones, were to be molified in ye blood of Christ, the true Goat,
prefigured in the typical Goat; even as the hardness of an Adamant is said to
be molified and made soft by the blood of a Goat. Consider 2. that ye state
of sinners is fitly declared by stones. For even as the earth is cold, filthy,
and base, and without the labor and industry of men, becomes barren and
bears nothing but weeds; and as a stone is likewise hard, heavy and
troublesome: so sinners polluted with diverse crimes are grievous and
troublesome to all men, yea even to themselves. Pray thou our Lord, to open thy
heart to bring forth fountains of tears, and to dissolve it into very dust,
that it may be framed according to the will of God and drink in the liquour
of his divine grace.

Mat. 27.
And the Monuments were opened, and many bodies of Saints which had slept, rose:
and going out of the monuments after his resurrection, entered into the holy
City, and appeared to many.
COnsider first, that by this sign, being the greatest of all other, is
signified: First, that Christ thy Lord, opening by his death the gates of Hell,
did set at liberty the holy Fathers there imprisoned, and brake hell-gates, so
as never any Saint hereafter should be detained there. Secondly, that by the
same death the stinking closets of our hearts are to be opened, that all the
stinche of sin and death may vapor out, and be dispersed. Thirdly, that the
bodies of the just should rise again, and live for ever. Consider secondly,
that though the Sepulchers were opened, yet the Saints did not rise before
Christ, who is the first begotten of the dead: for, as the Apostle says, Our
Lord was delivered up or slain, Col. 1. Romans 4.
for our finnes; and rose again for our justification: That is, by his death
he has paid the price of our sins; but rising again he has applied this
price unto us, by the preaching of the Apostles, by our faith of his death and
resurrection, and by the Sacraments and other means left unto us after his
resurrection. Consider thirdly, that these Saints, whether being to dye again,
as the ancient Doctors thought, or to live for ever with Christ, as many late
writers do think, assumed their bodies again, and appeared to many, that
they might be true witnesses of the resurrection of our Lord who was able as
easily to restore his soul to his body being lately dead; as to raise up the
bodies of the Fathers being consumed to ashes so many ages before: that thou in
all thy difficulties should have confidence in God, to whom nothing can be
impossible. Consider fourthly, yt they appeared not to all, but to many: for
all are not worthy of ye fellowship of Saints. Consider fifthly, that they came
into ye holy City (for the dead were buried abroad) that is, Jerusalem,
sanctified by the religion of the Temple, and of sacred things: for now
through Christ the way unto the heavenly Jerusalem was opened unto them.
Consider sixthly, that in these five signs are contained the five effects and
fruits of our Lords passion, which the word of God works in the soul of a
sinner. For first, the veil being broken, and the darkness of ignorance being
driven away, ye truth appears more plainly, the severity of the judgment to
come is set before our eyes and the most cruel and everlasting torments of
Hell are seriously and frequently thought upon. Secondly, the earth is shaken,
when the mind of man is terrified, and stricken with fear through the
remembrance and meditation of these things. Thirdly, the stony heart is made
soft unto penance. Fourthly, by confession of sins all the evil savor does
euaporate and vanish away out of the opened Sepulcher. Fifthly, the mind is
restored to a spiritual life, which is outwardly seen by the goodness of his
actions, to the comfort, of all good men, who with the Angels of Heaven rejoice
at the conversion of sinners. Pray thou our Lord, that thou may rise with
him, and that he will not suffer thee to dye in sin.

The 46. Meditation of the conversion of the Centurion.
And the Centurion, which stood over against him, and they which were with
him, Mat. 27. Mar. 15 Luc. 23.
keeping Jesus, seeing that thus crying he dyed, and having seen the
earthquake, and those things which were done, they feared greatly.
COnsider 1. how quickly the blood of Christ showed forth his forces,
especially being offered with so effectual prayer to God the Father, in which
he prayed for his crucifiers. For such things as were signified by the
earthquake and by other signs, were here fulfilled in the minds of men. Thou
may therefore be well assured that he will never forsake thee, which recalled
even his executioners to repentance. Consider secondly, who were the first,
which were converted to the faith by our Lords death. 1. The Gentiles,
worshippers of Idols: for even then our Lord began to love the Church of the
Gentiles, to the which, forsaking the Jews, he resolved to transfer his
mysteries. 2. Executioners, Soldiers, infamous men, to show unto thee, that
no man commits so great a sin, which our Lord is not ready presently to
forgive; and also to let thee know his great mildnes; who as he showed no sign
of anger against his enemies, so with gteat love and affection he drew them
first of all unto him. Thirdly, the Romans; for because the Roman faith and
religion was hereafter to rule and govern the universal Chuch, it was
convenient that it should be consecrated under the Cross of our Lord by the
blood and death of Christ. Fourthly, The Centurion standing over against him,
with the people, which kept Jesus; for the Roman Princes and Emperors, as in
the beginning they indeauored by most grievous persecutions to suppress the
Faith of Christ; so after they had once received it, they enlarged it by their
Authority, and defended it by their Arms. Consider thirdly, the causes and
manner of their conversion. First, standing over against him, they kept Jesus.
Secondly, they heard his cry, when he yielded up the ghoast. Thirdly, they
saw the Earthquake, and other testimonies of Gods power. Therefore if thou will
be converted, First, mark diligently the ma^ners, gesture, life, and words
of Christ: For all things, which are written, Romans 15
are written for our learning. Secondly, admire his most fervent love, who
took all this pain and labor for thee, and for thy salvation, in hope only,
that thou would follow him to beatitude, calling thee so earnestly.
Thirdly, consider his omnipotency, and majesty, to whom all creatures obey,
that thou may be moved to pe^nance at least through fear. Consider
fourthly, that the Centurion was converted with his people, that thou may
understand of how great moment the example of a Superior is, to the conversion
of those yt are under his charge. Consider fifthly, that all of them were
afraid: For the fear of our Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Pro. 1.
and the beginning of our conversion proceeds most commonly from fear. Pray
thou our Lord to reduce thee by their example to a better course.

Luc. 23. Mat. 27.
And they glorified God, saying: Verily this man was just: verily this man was
the Son of God. Mar. 15.

COnsider first, that the first fruit of our Lords cross was, that God was
glorified in perfect faith, even by his executioners. Great was the virtue and
goodness of God, which so suddenly changed the cruelty of his tormentors into
mildnes, and would have his praises, being the office of Angels, to be
celebrated by his executioners. Consider secondly, that those Romans did
believe in their heart to justice, Romans 10.
when through true faith, they were much afraid; and with their mouth they
confessed to salvation, that Christ was true man, without spot of sin and
true God, the Son of the true God: because afterward it was to be the
office of ye Roman church, to keep and preserve the whole and entyre faith, and
to spread it over all the world. Consider thirdly, the great miracle, that in
this infamous and most cruel death the Gentiles should acknowledge him to be
God, who for his deformity scarce seemed to be a man. For the blood of Christ
induces us to believe those things which exceed all humane capacity. Pray
thou our Lord to confirm and increase thy faith through the merit of his blood.

And all the troop of them, which were present at this spectacle, Luc. 23.
and saw what things were done, returned, knocking their breasts. But all
his acquaintance stood a far off, and many women looking on him a far off,
Mat. 27.
which followed Jesus from Galile, ministering unto him: Mar. 15.
among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary Mother of James the less, and of
Joseph, and Salome, Mother of the sons of Zebedee, and many other, which came
together to Jerusalem.
COnsider first, the goodness of God, who conuerteth the evil intentions of
men to their own profit. They came to behold, to mock, and to blaspheme; but
changing suddenly their minds, they returned sorrowful, and striking their
breasts. Have thou confidence, that thy good works through his goodness shall
turn to thy salvation, since their evil acts through his mercy were
profitable unto them. Consider secondly, that whilst the Roman soldiers
praised Christ the Jews were silent; because hereafter the Gentiles should
govern the Church of Christ, and the Jews should hold their peace. Consider
thirdly that they stroke their breasts; because he, that will draw the fruit
of the Passion unto himself, must undergo some penance. For even as ashes,
being moistened with some liquor, do make a greater quantity, then if being
dry they were powered into the water: so he, who like unto Christ, suffers
some labor and penance, shall reap the greater profit by his Passion.
Consider fourthly, that these Jews did know the dignity of Christ, and the
greatness of their own sin; but yet they would not confess it in their words.
For there are many, which feel indeed the prick of conscience; but being
hindered either by pride or malice they refuse to confess their sins.
Consider fifthly, that his friends and acquaintance stood a far off, and those
women, which had served our Lord in Galilee. That thou should know: First,
that Christ rewards alms with this benefit, that they shall persevere even
unto the Cross. Tob. 4.
For Alms adds confidence, and suffers not the soul to go into darkness.
Secondly, by what means Christ rewards his friends in this world: to wit,
that through many tribulations they should enter into the Kingdom of God. But
they stand far off: for that which they suffer is very small, Actor. 14.
if it be compared to the Passion of Christ. Pray thou unto Christ, to sign
thee with his Cross, and to join thee to ye number of his friends.

The 47. Meditation of the opening of Christ's side.
Joan. 19.
Then the Jews (because it was the Paraseeue) that the bodies might not remain
upon the Cross on the Sabbath (for that was a great Saboth day) entreated
Pilate, that their legs might be broken, and they might be taken away. The
Soldiers therefore came, and indeed they brake the legs of the first, and of
the other, which was crucified with him.
COnsider first, that by the commandment of the Law, such as were hanged on ye
tree, Deuteronomy. 21
were wo^t to be buried at night, when as such, as were put to death by any
other means, were (as unworthy of burial) either covered with stones, or left
to be devoured by beasts. First because God, the sovereign Lawmakers, knew,
that his Son should dye that death. Secondly because God in his mercy would
not, that guilty persons should be punished twice for one and the same fault:
For, because every one was accursed which hanged on the Tree, he ordained that
at least after their death they should have the honor of burial. Thirdly, that
all such as suffer the Cross (that is the punishment of Christ) in this life,
may be assured, that there is great glory reserved for the^ with Christ in the
next life. Consider secondly, that the Jews were not moved by this Law, but
by the solemnity of the next day: for wicked men do often times many things
well, not because they desire to obey God, and to serve his honor; but to
preserve their own fame and estimation. Consider thirdly, that the dead bodies
ought not to be left on the Cross on the Sabbath day; that thou should
never carry a dead soul about thee, but at the least on the Holy days thou
should purge it from all sin and wickedness. But thou notwithstanding do
not only carry a dead soul, but also do defile it more upon Holy days,
consecrated to the service of God, then upon any other days. Consider
fourthly, that the Jews, under pretense of serving God, desired another
matter; to wit, that they might take away the life of Christ, (whom they knew
not to be yet dead) with more grievous torments: that thou may learn, First,
that the impiety of wicked men (who maliciously are separated from God) is
daily increased according to the Apostle: But evil men, and seducers shall
prosper to the worse. 1 Timothy 3
Secondly, how cruel the enemy of mankind will be in his own kingdom
against wicked men, which rages so much in another kingdom by his Ministers.
Do thou therefore take heed of his tira^ny, wherein there is neither measure,
nor end. Consider fifthly, that the good and the evil Thief did not both
suffer one punishment: For the one wiped away his sins by his pains, and
obtained glory to himself; the other changed his temporal punishment with the
everlasting torment of Hell. Learn hereby what reward the world, and the Devil
do give to their servants, to wit, grievous pains, and everlasting torments
in Hell. For this Thief who to please the Jews blasphemed against Christ, was
as much tormented by them, as if he had praised him. See that thou adhere unto
Christ, and according to the example of the good Thief receive all thy
torments in full satisfaction for thy sins: and pray unto God, to afflict
thee here, and not to punish thee everlastingly.

But when they came to Jesus, and saw him already dead, they did not break
his legs; but one of the Soldiers with a spear opened his side, and
presently issued forth blood and water.
COnsider first, that the Soldiers, as soon as they had received commandment
from the President, made have to the Cross, and diligently observed, whether
there was as yet any sign of life in Christ: for if they had perceived any,
they would have inflicted the same torment upon him. Consider secondly, what
manner of wound this was. For the Scripture says not, he stroke his side, or
he wounded his side; Tract. 120 ^n loan.
but he opened his side, (as St. Augustine notes) that the cruelty of ye
wound might be signified thereby, Joan. 20
which opened his side so much, that St. Thomas was bidden by our Lord to put
his hand into it. Consider thirdly, why our Lord would receive this wound,
being now dead for us. First, that he might show that by his death he abated
nothing of his love toward us, and offered himself ready to suffer again and
again for us, if it were thought necessary for our salvation. Secondly, that
according to St. Ciprian, Ser. de duplici martirio.
he might power out all the moisture remaining in his body and all the blood
residing in his heart, and reserve nothing to himself. Thirdly, that he might
ingraue the sign of thy love in his heart, and never blot thee out again.
Fourthly, that as out of the side of Adam sleeping, Eua was taken; so out of
the side of our Lord sleeping, the Church should be deduced. For out of his
side issued blood and water, by which both Baptism is signified, whereby the
faithful are regenerate, washing their body with water, and purging their soul
with blood; and also the Sacrament of ye Eucharist, by which the faithful,
being regenerate in Christ, are as it were strengthened with meat, and
preserved alive. Fifthly, that thou might enter into the inmost part of his
heart as it were by a gate in the side of a Tower. For by this wound only is
the way opened into the Church, Genesis 6
and into the wine Cellar, that is, into the secret mysteries of Christ.
Sixthly, yt hereafter we should make no more doubt of the humanity of Christ,
seeing we find here the 4. Elements, and the 4. vital Humors, plainly showed
by the blood and water. For there are three, (says the Apostle) which give
testimony in the earth, of ye humanity of Christ, 1 Joan. 5.
the Spirit, the Water, and Blood. Seauenthly, that his Resurrection might be
the more admirable, when he should come to live again, whose breast and heart
the Soldiour had pierced with his lance; and that thou should not doubt of
the resurrection of thy own body. Come thou hither, and, according to ye
council of the Prophet, draw the flowing springes of water from this mystical
and true Rock; and suck good nourishment, as from thy Mothers breasts: and
pray our Lord to wash thee with the water of his side, and to strengthen and
maintain thee with his blood.

And he which saw it has given testimony, Joan. 19
and his testimony is true; and he knows, that he says true; that ye also
may believe: for these things were done that the Scripture might be fulfilled:
Exo. 12.
Ye shall not break a bone of him: and again another Scripture says: They
shall look on him, Zach. 12
whom they pierced.
COnsider first, that these three things spoken of before, to wit, that the
legs of our Lord were not broken; that his side was opened; and that there
issued forth blood and water, are proved by a threefold testimony of Moses,
of the Prophet, and of the Apostle, who declares by many words, that he was an
eye witness hereof; that thou should know, that this was a matter of great
weight, from the meditation whereof thou should not easily depart, Consider
secondly, that the Commandment given in Exodus touching the paschall Lamb, is
fitly applied in this place unto Christ. For he is the true Lamb; who being
so cruelly sacrificed, took away the sins of the world, with whose flesh
thou ought to satisfy thy self with all speed and desire. Therefore those
things, which are commanded about the eating of the Lamb in the figure, ought
also to be observed diligently in the holy Communion. And first we must take
heed, that we break not a bone; that is, that we search not into his divine
power, nor break our brotherly charity. For even as the divine nature and
Majesty (which is signified in a bone) suffered no evil upon the Cross: so in
the Communion of this most holy Sacrament, nothing, concerning the Divine power
ought to be curiously searched into, or doubted of. And as by the passion of
our Lord the power of the Church was not broken, or taken away, but augmented
and increased: so by receiving of the Eucharist, the forces of the Church ought
to be united and strengthened, and her charity not to be abated and weakened.
Consider thirdly, that Zacharias the Prophet, here cyted by the Evangelist,
spoke of the future coming of Christ to judgment. For then shall all the
wicked see the Judge coming marked with his holy wounds, showing to the good
his bowels of charity powered out for them; and vpbrayding to the wicked the
manifold sins, wherewith they had wounded him, together with the number of
benefits, which he had bestowed upon them. Pray thou our Lord to open, and
show unto thee his wounds, to the comfort and salvation of thy soul.

The 48. Meditation of his taking down from the Cross.
When the evening was come, because it was the Parascheue, Mat. 27.
which is before the Sabbath, behold there came a certain rich man from
Aramathia, Mar. 15.
a City in Jury, Luc. 23.
called Joseph, who was a Senator, Joan. 19
a good man and a just, who himself also was a Disciple of Jesus, but secret,
for fear of the Jews.
COnsider first, that Christ our Lord, who about the nynth hour of the day,
that is, about three in the after noon, had yielded up ye ghost, did hang at
the least 2. hours dead upon the Cross: that thou with the eyes of thy soul
should continually meditate upon him both alive and dead; and should
never forget this so great a benefit of his death. Consider secondly, by whom,
and by what manner of man he would be taken down from the Cross: to wit, by
him, whose riches, nobility, and authority, gave courage to demand the body of
Christ, (for he was rich, noble, and a Decurion, that is, a Senator of
Jerusalem) and whose integrity of life commended him unto God. Consider
thirdly, the power of the blood of Christ, which gave courage to a noble man,
and one that was timorous, to confess Christ openly, and to take him down
from the Cross with his own hands. Pray thou our Lord to confirm thy
strength, to perform those things courageously, which seem hard and difficult
to nature. Consider fourthly, what manner of man Christ would have thee to be,
that he might commend his body unto thee, and that thou might preserve it
profitably in the sepulcher of thy heart. First, Rich, not to the world, least
thou fall into the snare of the Devil, but having thy treasure laid up in
Heaven. Secondly, Noble, a worthy Son of God. Thirdly, a Decurion, which word
in this place signifies not a man of war, but a Counsailor, or Senator,
that thou should order thy life according to the wholesome counsels of God.
Fourthly, of Aramathia, a City of Jury, which was the country of the
Prophet Samuel. Aramathia signifies high; and Iudaea, or Jury confession
and praise: that thou should always be conversant with thy mind in the high
Heavens, that is, in the country of the Saints, and confess thy sins unto
God, and sing his praises unto him with his holy angels. Fifthly, Joseph, which
was the name of that Patriarch, who long before prepared with great pomp the
funeral of his Father Jacob; and the name also of the Virgins spouse, who was
the first man, that took the infant Jesus in his arms, and cherished and
brought him up. This name signifies increase: for God would have thee to
increase in virtues, to proceed in devotion, and with great charity always to
help thy neighbors. Sixthly, a good man, that in thy self thou should be
endued with grace, and lead an unspotted life. Seauenthly, just, and upright
toward thy neighbor. Eighthly, the Disciple of Christ, to whose doctrine and
rule thou must conform thy life. Ninthly, secret, that for fear of the
Devils, who always lie in wait against good works, thou do never vaunt
of thy good deeds, nor seek vain glory by them. Pray thou our Lord, to indue
thee with these ornaments, yt thou may worthily receive his holy body.

He had not consented to their counsel and acts, Luc. 23. Mar. 15. Mat. 27.
Joan. 19.
for he also expected the kingdom of God. He boldly went into Pilate, and
demanded the body of Jesus: but Pilate wondered, if he were already dead: and
having sent for the Centurio^, he asked him if he were already dead: and when he
knew of the Centurio^, he was content, and commanded the body of Jesus to be
given him.
COnsider first, four other quallities of Joseph, wc it is necessary for thee
to imitate, if thou will have the body of Christ profitably committed unto
thee. 1. Not to consent to the council and acts of the wicked. 2. To expect
ye kingdom of God, and to think long for the Heavenly country. 3. To
perform those things constantly, which advance the glory of God. 4. To
require the body of Jesus, that is, never to be separated from the Church, the
mystical body of Christ, and to come with great devotion to the holy
Eucharist. Consider secondly how much it does profit a man to avoid the
society and company of wicked men; for he, which flies evil, shall easily be
brought to do good. Consider thirdly, that he, wc expects the kingdom of
Heaven, ought most of all to fly wicked company. Therefore if thou seek
this Kingdom, forsake quickly the world, and all that is in the world. For the
blessed Apostle teaches, that Nothing is found in it, 1 Joan. 2
but concupiscence of the flesh, and of the eyes, and pride of life. Consider
fourthly, that Pilate maruailed; whereby thou may understand that our Lord
suffered much more grievous torments, the^ either the Evangelists did express,
or our understanding can conceive. For whereas the crucified persons lived
three whole days, and Christ lived little above three hours upon the Cross;
it appears plainly, that more torments were inflicted upon him, then commonly
was upon other crucified persons. Give thou thanks to thy Spouse for his great
bounty, and offer up thy self likewise freely to his love and service.
Consider fifthly, that the holy body of Jesus was required of Pilate being a
Heathen; that thou may not marvel, if in the Church the same sacred body,
and other holy mysteries be committed sometimes to the distribution of wicked
men. Pray thou our Lord, so to deliver his body unto thee, yt through any fault
of thine it may never be taken from thee.

But Joseph having bought a clean piece of linen, Mar. 13 Mat. 27. Luc. 23.
Joan. 19
took down the body of Jesus, and laying it down, wrapped it in the clean
linen.
COnsider first, with what reverence this holy Senator came to the Cross, and
pulled out the nails with his own hands, took down the holy body from ye
Cross, Saint John perhaps and the women, but specially our Lords Mother,
running to help him: who coming all near, and beholding his sacred
countenance, upon which the Angels desire to look, what words do they
utter? what sighs do they send forth? what tears do they power out? Behold
then his Mother, lifting up her hands, and earnestly begging her sons body of
Joseph, and receiving it reverently: Come thou to the virgin and comfort her,
who lamented every wound. For although, contrary to the custom of Parents,
she refrayned from unseemly crying, and womanish gestures; yet she felt the
inward grief of mind, and a most sharp sword piercing her heart. Consider
secondly, that Joseph bought a clean piece of linen, wherein the body of
Jesus should be wrapped: in stead whereof thou ought to have a clean
conscience, bought with the price of penance, and made sit to receive the body
of Christ. Consider thirdly, that here is no mention made of the servants,
because holy men do those things themselves, which pertayne to the service of
God, and by their servants they dispatch their worldly business: whereas
contrariwise wicked men do Gods service by their deputies, applying themselves
wholly to temporal affairs. But let such men take heed, least by their
deputies they obtain eternal glory, and by themselves be thrown into
everlasting fire. Pray thou our Lord to make thy conscience a worthy shroud to
receive his sacred body.

The 49. Meditation of the burial of our Lord.
And Nichodemus also came, who had come first to Jesus in the night, Joan. 19.
bringing a mixture of Myrrh, and Aloes, about a hundredth pounds. And they
took the body of Jesus, and bound it in linned, with spices, as the custom of
the Jews is to bury.
COnsider first, how much Nichodemus profited by this blood of Christ, Joan. 3.
which was shed. He came before to Jesus in the night; now openly: then he
brought nothing but questions and words; now he brings precious spices, and
helps to bury him: that thou may learn to increase in virtues, and to
shake off all base and servile fear. Consider secondly, that neither of them
came without their guiftes. For Joseph bought a linen sheet, and a noble
sepulcher. And Nichodemus brought Myrrh and Aloes in great plenty for the use
of the dead body. First, Mat. 26.
that thou should not say with Judas, why is all this loss? when thou see
much spent about the honor and service of God. Secondly, that thou by their
example should bring thy guiftes to Christ, who dyed for thee, and offer up
all thy labors to his honor. Consider thirdly, what manner of duty they did
to the holy body of our Lord. First, when it was taken down, all of them
together, with the Mother of our Lord, stood reverently beholding, and
contemplating the same body with their eyes, and minds. And here again
ponder with thy else what tears they shedd, what words they spoke, and what
thoughts they had; and casting away al vain fear, come near and join thy
words and prayers unto theirs. Behold this chincke of the Wall (the wound, I
mean, of his side) behold the holes of the Rock (the four wounds of his hands
and feet) behold the crown of Thorns, remaining yet upon his holy head,
wouen with many boughs (as it may be seen in Paris in the Kings chapel,
where it is kept with great reverence) behold likewise his whole body, blewe
with stripes, and torn with wounds. Pray our Lord, first, to hide thee in
these holes of the Rock, and in this chinck of the Wall, that thou never
think, nor desire any thing, which tends not to the glory of him
crucified. Secondly, that he never look upon thee, but through these wounds,
or windows of his hands, feet, and side, nor have any other prospect, but
through these crannies, that is, these wounds of his whole body and head,
through which he cannot see but with the eyes of mercy. Secondly, they took
off his crown of thorns from his head, and perhaps being tangled in his hair
and sticking in the flesh and joints of the bones, they hardly plucked out the
thorns entyre: and taking a basin, they reverently washed off the spittings,
blood, and filth, which stuck unto the same. Thirdly, with great honor they
washed, according to the custom of the Jews, the holy body of our Lord, and
gathered together all the foulness, as most holy and sacred relics, and
kept them with great care; which in continuance of time waxing hard, and being
reduced into a bloody substance, mingled here and there with a watery color,
was sent by Baldwin King of Jerusalem from Palestina, to Bruges in Flaunders
by the Abbot of St. Bertins, where it is kept, and reverenced most devoutly by
the Brugeans, and has been preserved by Gods help, and their singular care
from the fury of the Genseoms. Fourthly, they wrapped the body in the sheet,
and after the manner of the Jews covered it over with spices. Mark thou every
thing, and convert it to thy own benefit. Thy Lord is bound, who loses thee
bounden: his hands are bound, least they punish thee: his feet are bound,
least they run to revenge: his face is covered, least he see the foulenes of
thy sins. Pray unto him, to season thee with the spices of virtues, and to
bury thee together with him.

And there was in the place, where he was crucified, a Garden, Joan. 19. Luc.
23. Mat. 27. Mar. 15.
and in the garden, a Monument, which Joseph had cut out in a Rock, in which
never any was yet laid. Therefore, for the Parasceue of the Jews, they laid
Jesus, because the Monument was hard by. And Joseph rolled a great stone to the
mouth of the Monument, and went his way.
COnsider first, that Christ our Lord was not left without Sepulture, but was
buried like unto others: First that he might seem to have omitted nothing,
pertaining unto men. Secondly, yt thou being buried with him, should neither
regard nor know those things, which are done in the world. Consider secondly,
that the Prophet foretold, Isa. 11.
that the Sepulcher of our Lord should be glorious. This Sepulcher may be
taken three ways. First, for this whereof we now speak, which being cut out
in the Rock was reserved for an honorable man. Which was made more glorious,
because two Senators being Noble men, and one of them, a Master in Israel,
and a Doctor of the Law, Joan. 3
executed the office of burial with their own hands; and because none but
just and holy men touched the sacred body of Christ, which with great cost they
anointed, and seasoned. Secondly, for his Sepulcher in the Church, where the
true body of Christ, being thought indeed living, yet like unto his dead body
is reserved under the form of dry and immovable bread, the silver and golden
vessels being as it were a Sepulcher, wherein it is kept. And this Sepulcher is
glorious, because it is reason, that we exhibit to this body; that once dyed
for us, as much honor and glory, as lies in the power of man to give.
Thirdly, for the Sepulcher of our hearts and bodies, wherein communicating we
receive the holy host. 1 Cor. 12
For as often as we receive this Heavenly bread, by this very action, we show
and declare the death and buryall of our Lord. Let therefore this Sepulcher be
also glorious, to wit, illuminated with the grace of God, and adorned with all
virtues: for All the glory of the Kings Daughter is from within; Psalm. 44.
and our Lord by his coming adds a greater brightness unto our soul.
Consider thirdly, with what funeral solemnity our Lord was carried to his
Sepulcher, when the holy men did bear him, and his Mother and the Holy women,
and his Disciple John followed him. Therefore as often as thou shall see the
holy Host carried in procession, imagine that thou do follow this body of
Christ to buryall; and remembering his passion and death, commend thy self and
the necessities of the whole common wealth unto him by the same. Pray also thy
Lord, to give unto thy heart the strength and constancy of a stone or rock,
and to prepare a sepulcher therein for himself Where he may lie in the midday,
Cant. 1.
and graciously suppress the heat of thy temptations.

And Mary Magdalene, and Mary of Joseph were sitting there against the
Sepulcher, Mat. 27.
and the women which came with him from Galilee, Mar. 15.
and followed him, beheld where the body of Jesus was laid; Luc. 23.
and returning, they prepared spices and ointments: and on the Sabbath they
rested for the Commandment.
COnsider first, the sorrow both of the other women and also of the Mother of
Christ, when they must be drawn from the sight of so sweet a Lord. There
seems to be no mention made of the Virgin Mary, not because she was absent,
but because she wc stood by him at his death, could not be absent herself
from this office and duty. Consider secondly, these women sat over against the
Sepulcher, and diligently marked, what was done. First that thou in all thy
needs should fly unto the holy Eucharist of Christ, and sitting as it were
by the Sepulcher of our Lord, meditating and pondering upon his death and
passion, should show forth all thy griefs and receive remedy and comfort
for thy afflictions. Secondly, that thou with these women should mark, where
the body of Jesus was laid. First, in a Garden, both because by the death of
our Lord the way is open to the garden of delights, from whence we were
excluded by the sin of Adam; and also that thou should not lay up thy Lord
in any other place then in the flowers of virtues. Secondly In a new monument,
both because he desires all things to be new in thee. Mat. 9.
For New wine is not powered into old vessels; and also because he came to make
all things new. Thirdly, In which never any was laid, least perhaps not
Christ, but some other might be said to have risen from death; and that thou
should suffer no other to rest in the s^pulcher of thy heart. For he
teaches, that our Lord alone will possess thee wholly, and that he will
suffer no companion of his Kingdom in thy soul. Fourthly, In a Stone, both to
take away all suspicion of the stealing away of his body; and also because from
thence-foorth he had determined to pierce the stony hearts of Gentiles and
sinners. Fifthly, In another Monument, that by his death he might commend that
poverty, which he had so often praised in his life: for he, whose Mother had
no place wherein to lay her Son, when he was borne; and he who had not where
to rest his head, when he lived; was buried in another man's Sepulcher, when he
dyed. Besides, it was convenient, that he, which dyed not for his own fault,
but for others, should be buried not in his own, but in another man's
Sepulcher. Sixthly, In a place hard by, both because no man should say, he was
stolen away, if the place had been far off; and also because both alive and
dead our Lord would not be far from his servants, but always remain amongst
his people. Seauenthly, In the Sepulcher of a just man, both because he dyed,
that he might indue us with Justice; and also because no man ought to receive
him in the holy Communion but a just man. Consider thirdly, that the women
rested the next day, and ceased from their work and duty by reason of the
Commandment: whereby the virtue of obedience is commended unto us, which
teaches us, that for God even the service of God sometimes is to be omitted;
that is, that many works of devotion, and Heavenly comforts are to be
pretermitted, when the Superior so commands. Pray thou our Lord, that he,
who exercised obedience even till his death, will grant thee the perfection of
that virtue.

The 50. Meditation of the keeping of the Sepulcher.
And the next day, which is after the Parasceue, the chief Priests and the
Pharisees came together to Pilate, saying: Master we remember, that this
seducer said, whilst he lived: after three days I will rise again: Command
therefore that the Sepulcher may be kept till the third day; Mat. 27.
least perhaps his Disciples come and steal him away, and say to the people
he is risen from death: and the last error will be worse then the first.
COnsider first, what the care of these men was upon the Sabbath, and upon this
Sabbath also, being the solemnity of their Pasch: to wit, to obscure the glory
of Christ: and that day, wherein they should speak with God, they spend in
business with a profane man: whom thou do often imitate, spending thy time
in worldly business, when either the Sacraments ought to be handled, or some
other thing to be done with God. Consider secondly, that the Sabbath is not
named the next day after the Parasceue: First, because the true solemnity of
the Saboath and of the Pasch was to be transferred to the next day by the new
resurrection of Christ. Secondly, because holy days, being profaned by sin,
are not feastiuall and profitable to sinners, but rather hurtful and profane.
Theoph. in Mat. 27.
Consider 3. Master, they, which refused the Messiah for their Lord and
Master, are worthily compelled to accept a vile Idolater for their Master.
For the Devil and the world shall rule over him, over whom Christ rules not.
Consider fourthly, that Christ was called by the wicked a seducer: For the
Devil even at this day indeauoreth by his servants to persuade, yt Christ is a
Seducer, and that they are seduced to errors and wickedness, whom Christ does
either convert to the true faith, or exhort to a better kind of life; whereas
Christ does seduce no man, but leads them from the wide way of Hell to the
strait and narrow pathe of eternal life. Consider fifthly, that the wicked
feared Christ being dead; how much more then ought he to be feared being
living, and coming with Majesty to judge the quick and the dead? Here thou
feast two kinds of the fear of God; one in the Centurion, and the rest which
went away, striking their breasts, and for fear of future evils thinking of
the amendment of their lives; the other of wicked men, who labor to infringe
the counsels of God, and this fear is proper to the devil, and to all the
enemies of God. Consider sixthly, that the great care and diligence of these
wicked men did much increase the glory of Christ. For by this diligent
carefulnes of them, the rumor of the foresaid resurrection of Christ was the
more published, and caused very many to hope and expect the same, and also
took away all suspicion of stealing him away, seeing there was with such
diligence a company of soldiers appointed to watch him. Consider seauenthly,
that they feared, least the Disciples of Christ should steal away his body.
Do thou receive it openly, for it is given to thee, borne for thee, and
crucified for thee: and pray our Lord neither to depart from thee himself, nor
to suffer any creature else to take him from thee.

Pilate said to them, ye have a guard, go, and keep him, as ye know.
COnsider first that Pilate, who had once consented with the Jews to the death
of Christ, did now assign them a guard, to wit, the Garrison soldiers,
appointed for the watching of the City. For whosoever does once yield to the
will of the wicked, shall hardly withdraw himself after from their will and
importunity; whereof they have experience, who entangle themselves with the
unlawful love of women: and the Devil also, having once got the upper hand;
brings men into miserable bondage. Consider secondly, that Pilate who before
had diligently defended the cause of Christ, does now conspire with the Jews
against the glory of Christ. Go (says he) keep him, as ye know; that is,
be diligent in watching him: for a man does so easily fall out of one sin
into another, that he also becomes an author and prouoker of sin in others.
Consider thirdly, that Pilate, when he heard mention made of his resurrection,
waxed afraid, both of the inconstant people, and also of Caesar, without whose
commandment he had condemned an innocent man to death. For this is the fruit
of sin, that it brings fear, care, and disquiet of mind. Therefore do
thou avoid sin, and with a secure and quiet Conscience be thankful unto God.

And they going away guarded the Sepulcher, Mat. 27.
marking the stone with Watchman.
COnsider first, the diligent watching of the Sepulcher. For First, they marked
the stone with a seal, least the Soldiers should use any subtlety or
deceit. Secondly, they appointed a Guard, that is, a sufficient number of
Soldiers, both because the favorers of Christ should be able to offer no
violence, and also least a few might fall asleep, and in the mean time, be
stolen away. Consider secondly, that Christ permitted them to use all this
diligence and industry, that his resurrection might be more published and
known, being proved even by the testimony of his enemies. Thou see first,
that there is an admirable treasure of goods hidden, in Christ's Sepulcher,
which by all means thou ought to endeavor to keep. Secondly, that thy
heart, in which our Lord does rest, ought to be kept most carefully. Thirdly,
that thou need not to fear the wicked, who by their persecutions do nothing
else, but keep and watch the hidden treasure of thy soul; least by any vanity
or pride it should be stolen from thee. Consider thirdly, that the marks of
the wicked are nothing but impure spots, whereby they labor to infect and
pollute the clean creatures of God. Do thou mark thy heart with Christ his
seal and pray him to guard and preserve thee with his Angels in his true faith
and service: which Almighty God grant unto me also through thy intercessions
and Prayers.

Laus Christo, Virginique Matri. Ad maiorem Dei gloriam.
FINIS.

